THREE HEAVENLY TREATISES UPON THE EIGHT Chapter to the Romans.

Viz.

1 Heaven opened. 2 The right way to eternal Glory. 3 The Glorification of a
Christian.
Wherein the Counsel of God concerning Man's salvation is so manifested, that
all men may see the Ancient of days, the Judge of the world, in his general
Justice Court, absoluing the Christian from sin and death.

Which is the first benefit we have by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Come and see.

Written by Mr. William Cowper, Minister of Gods word.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand, and John Budge, and
are to be sold at his shop at the great Southdoore of Paul's. 1609.

TO THE MOST SAcred, Christian, truly Catholic, and mighty Prince James,
King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
SIR, The Apostle S. Paul, that chosen vessel of God, Act. 9. 15.
and his ambassador sent forth into the world to bring in the house of Iapheth
into the tents of Sem, Genesis 9. 27.
having in his peregrination (undertaken for preaching) from Jerusalem unto
Illyricum, Romans 15. 19
seen the most pleasant parts of the world, and in an ecstasy transported from
earth into the third heaven, seen also the pleasures of Paradise, 2. Cor. 12.
as one who knew both, not by naked speculation but experience, gives out his
judgment of both, Philip. 3. 8.
that the most excellent things of this world were but dung, in respect of the
Lord Jesus, and that whatsoever pleasure on earth, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
may delight the eye, or ear (...) they have unto others, it shall be no small
comfort unto me, and my greatest thankfulness shall be declared in my daily
prayers unto the Lord God for your Majesty, that the name of Jacobs God may
defend you from all evil, and the Lord may send you help out of his
Sanctuary in all your need, Psalm. 20. 1.
according as he has done. O King beloved of God, Psalm. 21. 1.
hated of none but for Gods sake, keep still your heart in the love of God,
and his truth, Rejoice in the strength of your God, Psalm. 56 4.
and fear not what flesh can do unto you. Is it not the Lord, who set your
Highness on the throne to be a feeder of his people Israel? Psalm. 18. 43
Is it not the Lord who has delivered your Majesty from the contentions of
the people, and secret snares of your cursed enemies? Genesis 49. 23.
though the Archers grieved you, hated you, and shot at you, were not the hands
of your arms strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob? Genesis 49.
25.
Is it not the almighty, who has blessed your Majesty with heavenly blessings
from above, Psalm. 21. 3.
with blessings of the depth that lies beneath, with blessings of the breast
and womb?

Sir, let his liberal blessings wherewith the Lord your God has prevented
you, Psalm. 18. 50
be so many obligations binding your Highness to honor the Lord, Genesis 12. 1
who has honored you. Let his forepast manifold deliverances be as so many
confirmations, that if your Majesty rest in him, Psalm. 68. 20
and not in man, he will still be a buckler unto you. Let Abaddon the King of
the Locusts that Romish usurper rage, Revel. 9. 11.
Unto the Lord belongs the issues of death. Can Balaam curse, Numb. 23. 8
where God has blessed? yea, can Satan hurt the man, Job. 1. 10.
who is hedged by the Lord? Let the Ambassadors of new Babel more shameless
than Sennacherib his Rabsache, 2. Kin. 18.
rail at good king Ezekiah ruling in Jerusalem Esa, 37. 29.
the Lord has yet a hook for his nosethrils, and a bridle for his lips. Do
not the eyes of the Lord behold the whole earth, to show himself strong with
them that are strong, 2. Chr. 16. 9
and of a perfect heart toward him? Esa. 8. 12.
Therefore fear not their fear, but sanctify the Lord God of hosts, let him
be your fear, and he shall be a Sanctuary unto your Majesty. Psalm. 69. 9.
Count it a part of your high glory, and no small matter of your Majesty's
joy, that with Christ you bear this piece of his cross, Psalm. 21. 7.
that the rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, are fallen upon you; and trust
still O King, in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most High, and so your
Majesty shall never fall. Long may your Highness live and reign over us, as
a faithful servant to your God, and a happy King of many blessings to your
people,

Your Majesty's most humble Subject and daily Orator William Cowper, Minister
at Perth.

works of God, Some books of holy Scripture meeter for us, then others are
August de temp. ser. 49.
there is a difference, and some of them more clearly then others declares the
glory of God, so it is also among his holy writs, they breath all out one
truth by a most sweet harmony, divine enim lectiones ita sibi connectuntur,
tanqnam vna sit lectio, quia omnes ex vno ore procedunt: yet ye shall find
that in some of them the Lord comes near unto us, as it were, with the face
of a man, talking familiarly unto us; in others again he mounts high above
us, as it were with the wings of an Eagle. And the Lord has left it free, to
delight our selves most in those places of holy Scripture, wherein for our
estate we have most edification, and to seek in this Apothecarie shop of that
sweet Samaritan the Lord Jesus, pharmaca morbo nostro conuenientia, such
medicines as are meet for our malady.

Among all the books of the old Testament, Why among the Epistles this to the
Romans is first.
most frequent testimonies are brought by our blessed Savior and his holy
Apostles, out of the book of the Psalms. Jerome called it a treasury of all
learning: And among all the Epistles of the Apostles, Ierom. epist. ad Paulin.
no marvel this to the Romans have the first place, not that it was first
written, but because above the rest, it contains a most perfect compend of
our Christian faith. And this middle Chapter thereof has in it an Abridgement
of all these comforts and instructions, (one excepted) which otherwise are
dispersed throughout the whole Epistle, and is (so to call it) a pleasant k^ot
of the garden, and Paradise of God, and therefore shall it not be unprofitable
for us, by Gods grace to delight our selves for a while in it.

As to the connection of this Chapter with the former, Two parts of this
Chapter, the first contains comfort against sin: The second, comfortagainst
the cross.
we are to know that it is a conclusion of the foregoing treatise of
Justification. Wherein the Apostle summarilie collects the excellent state of a
Christian, justified by faith in Christ Jesus, declaring it to be such, that
there is no condemnation to him, that nothing, were it never so evil is able
to hurt him, yea by the contrary, that all things works for the best unto him.
And because there are only two evils which grieve us in this life, to wit,
sin that remains in us: and affliction that follows us in the following of
Christ. Against both these the Apostle furnishes the justified man, with strong
consolations. Comforts against the remanents of sin, we have from the 1.
verse to the 18. Comforts against our afflictions, we have from the midst of
the 18. verse, to the 31.

That this is the very purpose and order of the Apostle, This order of the
Apostle is manifest out of his own conclusion.
is evident out of his own conclusion, set down from the 31. verse, to the
end: wherein he draws all that he has spoken in this Chapter to a short
sum, containing the glorious triumph of a Christian over all his enemies. The
triumph is first set down generally, verse 31. Romans 8. 31.
What shall we then say to these things, if God be with us, who can be
against us, etc. This general incontinent he parts in two, there is (says
he) but two things may hurt us, either Sin, or Affliction. As to Sin, he
triumphs against it, verse 33. and 34. verse. 33. 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God his chosen? it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ, who is dead, or rather, who is
risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.
As to Affliction, he triumphs against it, from the 35. to the end, Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, ver. 35.
anguish, or persecution? shall famine, nakedness, or peril? yea shall death
do it? or that which is much more, shall Angels, principalities, or powers do
it? No, In all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him that
loved us. Thus does the Apostle like a faithful steward in the house of God,
take by the hand the weary sons and daughters of the living God, that he may
lead us into the Lords winesellers, there to refresh, Cant. 2. 4.
and stay us with the ^lagons of his Wine, Cant. 5. 1.
to comfort us with his Apples, to strengthen us with his hid Manna, and to
make us merry with that Milk and Honey which our immortal husband Jesus
Christ, has provided for us, to sustain us, that we faint not through our
manifold tentations that compass us in this barren wilderness.

We come then to the first part of the Chapter, Subdiuision of the first part.
wherein the Apostle keeps this order. First, he sets down a general
proposition of comfort belonging to the justified man. Secondly, he subioynes a
confirmation thereof. Thirdly, he explanes his reason of confirmation, and
fourthly, applies i^first by commination of them who walk after the flesh,
secondly, by consolation of the godly against the remanents of the flesh,
thirdly, by exhortation of both not to walk after the flesh. In the
proposition again set down, Proposition.
first, he points at the comfort; Now then there is no condemnation: secondly,
he sets down a limitation, restrayning this comfort; To them who are in
Christ: thirdly, he subioynes a clearer declaration of those persons who are
in Christ, to wit, they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Verse 1. Coherence of this Chapter with the former.
Now then. This is a relative to his former discourse, and is (as I have said)
a Conclusion inferred upon that which goes before. Seeing we are justified by
Faith in Jesus Christ, and are now no more under the Law, but under Grace;
seeing we are buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, that like as he
was raised from the dead by the glory of his Father, so we also should walk in
newness of life, having received that spirit of Christ, whereby we fight
against the Law of sin in our members, which rebelleth against the Law of our
mind: seeing it is so, we may be sure that the remanent power of sin in us,
shall never be able to condemn us.

We see then that these words contain the Apostles glorying against the
remanents of sin, The Apostles former lamentation turned into a triumph.
the sense whereof, in the end of the last Chapter made him burst out in a
pitiful lamentation, and cry; O miserable man, who will deliver me from the
body of this death, but now considering the certainty of his deliverance by
Jesus Christ, he rejoices and triumphs. Wherein for our first lesson, we
mark the diversity of dispositions, to which the Children of God are subject
in this life, sometime so full of comfort that they can not contain
themselves, but must needs break forth into glorious reioycings: at other
times so far dejected in mind, that their joy is turned into mourning; and this
arises in them from the variable change of their sight and feeling. The
Disciples on mount Tabor, Math. 17. 2.
seeing the bright shining glory of Christ were ravished with joy, but
incontinent when the cloud ouershadowes them, they become afraid. If the Lord
let us feel his mercies, we are alive, but if he hide his face, Psalm. 50. 21.
and set our sins in order before us, we are sore troubled. The life of a
Christian is a mixed web, wrought of trouble and comfort.
As the troubles we have in this life are not without comforts; blessed be
God the Father of our Lord Jesus, the Father of mercies, and God of all
comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation: so our joy, says Saint Peter,
is not without heaviness, the one arising of the knowledge of that undeserved
inheritance, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
reserved for us in heaven: the other of our manifold tentations, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
to which we are subject here upon earth; it is these vicissitudes and changes
which wrought in David such different dispositions, as appears in him in the
Book of the Psalms, and which all the godly may be experience find in
themselves, Bernard.
Pascimur hic and patimur: for here we are so nourished with the comforts of
God, that we are nurtred with his crosses. It is the Lords dispensation, and we
are to reverence it, resting assured that the peace and joy which once the Lord
has given us, may be interrupted, but can never utterly be taken from us, the
Lord who will not suffer the rod of the wicked for ever to lie upon the back of
the righteous, Psalm. 125. 3.
least they put out their hand to wickedness, will f^rre less suffer his own
terrors continually oppress our consciences, least we faint and despair,
though he wound us, Hose. 6. 2
he will bind us up again, after two days he will reuine us, and we shall
live in his sight; Weeping may abide in the Evening, but joy shall come in the
Morning. The chosen vessel of God shall not always lament, and cry woe is me,
sometime the Lord will put a song of thanksgiving in his mouth, Chrisost. in
Mat. hom.
and make him to rejoice, thus de aduersis and prosperis admir abilivirtute
vitam Sanctorum contexuit Deus. The life of a Christian may be compared to a
web, so meruailously mixed and wouen of comfort and trouble, by the hand of
God, that the long thread thereof reaching from the day of our birth to the day
of our death, are all of trouble, but the weft interiected, manifold comforts,
and this have we marked upon the coherenee of the beginning of this Chapter,
with the end of the former.

Now in these words it is to be observed, Papist wrongfully collect here, that
there is sin on, or damnable act in them who are in Christ.
the Apostle says not, there is no sin in them who are in Christ, but he
says, there is no condemnation to them: he has confessed before that he did
the evil which he would not, and that he saw a law in his members rebelling
against the law of his mind, but now he rejoices in Christ, that sin in
him is not able to condemn him. It is then a false exposition of these words,
which is made by Caietane and Aquinas: Nihil est damnabile in illis, Aquinas,
Caietane on this place.
qui sunt in Christo, nullus actus quo mereamur damnari, that in them who are
is Christ, there is nothing worthy to be damned, no act that merits damnation:
for the Apostle condemns these motions of sin, which he found in himself,
as evil and repugnant to the Law of God: and if the holy Apostle was not
ashamed to confess this of himself, what blind presumption is this in them,
to exempt themselves, or others from such motions, as are worthy to be damned,
we shall still confess our guiltines, there remains in us of our own which
the Lord might condemn, if he would enter into judgment with us, and shall so
much the more praise his mercy, who has delivered us from condemnation: and
further comfort then this the Apostles words do not afford unto us, (...).
There is no judgment, no sentence to be given against them who are in Chrst.
Surely our righteousness in this life, consists rather in the remission of
sins, then in the perfection of virtue. Cypriain orat. dom.
Ne quis sibi, quasi innocens placeat, cum innocens nemo sit, and se extollendo
plus pereat, instruitur and docetur, peccare se quotidie, dum quotidie pro
peccatis iubetur orare, that no man (says Cyprian) should flatter himself, as
though he were innocent, when as indeed no man is innocent, and so by extolling
himself, should perish so much the more, he is instructed and taught that he
sins, while as every day he is commanded to pray for remission of sins, but
this error we shall God willing further improve hereafter.

In the mean time for our comfort let us consider, Reasons why the Lord
suffers sin to remain in the justified man.
that albeit the Lord, when he justified us, might have utterly destroyed the
life of this sinning sin in us, yet for weighty causes has he suffered some
life thereof to abide in us for a time: For the exercise of our Faith.
the first is, for the exercise of our faith, Peccata these sins (says
Augustine) the guiltiness whereof God has loosed, that they should not hurt
us in the life to come, Aug. in Joan. tract. 41.
he will have to remain for the exercise of our faith. No man is crowned,
except he strive as he ought, 2. Tim. 2. 5.
and therefore the Lord who has prepared for us a crown, and has put upon us
his complete armor, has also suffered some enemies to remain, against whom
we may fight, for the trial of our faith, patience and perseverance, even as
the Cananites were left in the Land, that the Lord by them might prove the
Israelits, whether if or not, they would keep the way of the Lord to walk
into it.

Secondly, For our instruction that we may know what benefit we have by Christ.
some life of sin is left in us for our instruction, Nulla quidem est
condemnatio his qui sunt in Christo, tamen ad humiliandos nos peccatum adhuc
patitu^ vi^tere in nobis, and grauiter nos affligere, vt sentiamus, Bernard.
quid gratia nobis praestet, and semper ad illius auxilium recurramus. It is
true indeed (says Bernard) that there is no condemnation to them who are in
Christ, yet for our humiliation the Lord suffers sin to live in us, and
oftentimes afflict us, that we may know the benefit we have by Grace, and make
our recourse for help unto it continually, and indeed, except by experience
we felt how powerful sin is of it self to over rule us, we could never have
known that vile bondage and servitude of sin, under which we lay by nature,
nor that excellent Grace of Christ, by which we have gotten deliverance. And
therefore so often as we are troubled with our inhabitant corruption, we are to
consider, that if the remanents of the old man breed us such strong and
restless tentations, how would it tyrannize over us, if it were living in the
full vigor, and strength thereof? that so we may praise and magnify that
saving Grace of the Lord Jesus, which has freed us from so intolerable a
tyranny.

For the greater glory of God, and Satan's greater confusion.
the Lord has done this for his own greater glory, like unto those Victors in
battle, who albeit they may, yet will not put all their enemies to the edge
of the sword, some of them they take Captives, and reserues for a while alive
against the day of triumph, to be put then to death, to their greater shame,
and the greater honor of their Conquerours. Josh. 10. 23.
When Joshua had discomfited those five Kings, who made war against Gibeon,
he would not slay them in the battle, but enclosed them in a cave, that the
battle being ended, he might put them to death in sight of all his people: and
then for their further confirmation, he caused his Captains and chief men of
war, to tread upon the necks of these Kings, to assure them that after the
same manner the Lord should subdue all the rest of their enemies under them.
And so our Captain and mighty conqueror, the Lord Jesus, has by himself
obtained unto us victory over all our enemies, these Kings which besieged
Gibeon are turned to flight, these inordinate affections, which held us
Captives before, are now by his power captiued of us, they are closed up
within us (as in a Cave) where they remain with some life, but restrained
of their former liberty and power. And we rest assured, that when the
battle shall be finished, our Lord Jesus shall altogether spoil them of
their life: Romans 16. 20
The God of peace shall shortly tread Satan under our feet: then Goliath being
overcome, his army of the Philistines shall fly, and no inordinate desire
shall be left within us. Thus we see how the Lord permits his enemy to live,
and will not (fully) torment him before the time, it is not because he wants
power to subdue him, Ciril. catech. 8.
Set vt ^o magis confundatur, but that so much the more he may confound him.
When as all the warriors of God, as well those who are to come in the last age
of the world, as those who were in the forefront of the battle, have foughten
against him, and overcome him, 1 Cor. 15. 25
then shall the Lord Jesus put all his enemies under his feet. Yea, even now
in the very time of the conflict is Satan wonderfully confounded in this, How
Satan is daily confounded in the godly.
that notwithstanding the Serpent keep his sting, yet there is no deadly power
in it. This uncircumcised Goliath has that same sword in his hand, by which he
has slain many one, the Lord permits him also to strike the Christian man
therewith, but he sees himself it is in vain. O how does he return ashamed
and confounded, when having gotten leave to shoot out his sting, and to strike
with his accustomed sword (of sin) those whom he hates unto death, he
perceiues that for all he can do, there remains in them a seed of life which
cannot be destroyed?

But that the greatness of this benefit which we have by Jesus Christ,
Christians are not exempted from the condemnatory sentence of men.
may the better appear, let us see what a condemnation this is, from which we
are delivered. In the Scriptures there is ascribed to man a judging, by which
he absolueth or condemns; there is also ascribed to God a judging, by which
he absolueth or condemns, As to man's condemnation, we are not exempted from
it. Daniel condemned for a Rebel, Joseph condemned for an Adulterer; Job
condemned of his friends for an Hypocrit; our Savior condemned for an Enemy
to Caesar; his Disciples condemned and judged worthy of stripes, stand as so
many examples to confirm us, that we faint not when we are condemned of men:
yea, with the Apostle we must learn to pass little from man's judgment, and
strive in a good conscience to be approved of God, for sure the Lord will not
pervert judgment, it is far from the Judge of all the world to do
unrighteously, he will at the last plead the cause of his Servants, and bring
their righteousness to light.

This condemnation then, But from the condemnatory sentence of God.
from which we are delivered, is the sentence of God the righteous Judge, by
which finding man guilty of sin, for sin he ad^^dgeth him unto eternal
damnation, from this all they, who are in Christ are delivered: John. 5. 24.
He that believes in him who sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. In this
condemnation the Lord proceeds at three sundry dyats against the wicked. Three
sundry dyats the Lord keeps against the wicked in the process of their
condemnation.
First, he condemns them in the Court of Conscience. Next, in the day of
their particular judgment. Thirdly, in the day of general Judgment. First,
(I say) the Lord holds a Justice Court against the wicked in his own
Conscience: For the Lord judges The first is kept against them in the justice
court of their own Conscience.
and him that contemns God every day. After sin committed by him, there
arises in his Conscience accusing thoughts, and there is a sentence within
him, given out against him. The Apostle speaks it of Heretics, one sort of
wicked men, and it is true in them all, Psalm. 50. 5.
they sin, being damned of their own selves, (...), by themselves Judgment
is given out against themselves: which sentence albeit every wicked man do
not mark the voice of their disordered affections, sometime being so loud,
that they hear not the condemnato^ie voice of their Conscience, so clearly as
it is pronounced, yet do they hear as much, as makes them inexcusable, and
breeds in them a certain fear and terror, which is but a forerunner of a
more fearful judgment to come, which howsoever in time of their security
they labor to smoother, and quench by external delights, yet at the length
affection shall be silenced, and Conscience shall pronounce sentence against
them with so sh^ill a voice, that their deafest ear shall hear it. This I
have marked, that we may learn not to esteem lightly the Judgment of our
Conscience, but that so often as we are condemned by it, we may make our
refuge to the throne of Grace to seek mercy; ^ Ioh. 3. 20
For if Conscience condemn us, God is greater then the Conscience, and will
much more condemn us, Aug. hom. 50
Ascendat itaque homo tribunal mentis suae, si (...) illud, meminerit, quod
oportet eum, ante tribunal Christi exhiberi. Let therefore a man (says
Augustine) go up to the tribunal of his own mind (in time) if he fear it,
let him remember that he must be presented before a greater tribunal.

The second dyat of judgment, which the Lord keeps The second is kept against
them in the hour of death
is in the hour of death, wherein the Lord does not only repeat their former
sentence of condemnation, and that in a more fearful and judicial manner,
but proceeds also to execution, adiudging their bodies (until the day of last
judgment) to the prison of the grave, to underly that curse pronounced on man
for his Apostasy, and condemning their spirits to be banished from the
presence of God, and cast into utter darkness. Let not therefore the wicked
man nourish himself in sin, with a vain conceit of the delay of judgment,
wherefore will thou put far from thee the evil day? what, suppose the day of
general judgment were not to come for many years, is not the day of thy
particular judgment at hand? unto which thou shall be drawn suddenly, and
perforce in the midst of thy deceiving imaginations, thou shall be taken away
in an hour wherein thou thought not to dye, more miserable than that rich
glutton, who having stored his head with false conclusions, dreaming of many
days to come, when he had not one, was that same day taken away to judgment.
And this shall move us the more, if we do remember, that such as we are in the
day of death, such shall we be found in the day of judgment. Aug. epist. ad
Hesych.
In quo enim quemque invenerit suns nouissimus dies, in hoc eum comprehendet
mundi nouissimus dies, quia qualis in die ifto quisque moritur, talis in die
illo iudicabitur, and every man in the last day shall be judged to be such, as
he is when he dies. It would waken us all more carefully to think upon our
end, that so we might prepare our selves for this second dyat of judgment.

The third dyat shall be kept against them in the day of general judgment.
when all the wicked being gathered together in one shall be condemned, in
that high and supreme court of justice, which the Lord shall hold upon all
that ever took life, then shall the full measure of the wrath of God be
powered upon all those who are not in Christ Jesus, both in soul and body,
they shall be punished with everlasting perdition. This judgment shall be
most equitable, for when that Ancient of days, shall sit down upon his white
throne, before whose face heaven and earth shall flee away, Dan. 12. 6.
and when the Sea, and the Earth, has rendered up their dead, then the books
shall be opened, Revel. 10. 8.
according to which he shall proceed unto judgment. This judgment shall
proceed, by the books of Law, and Conscience.
And the books are two, the book of the law, which shows to a man what the
should do; and the book of Conscience, which shows him what he has done;
by those shall the wicked man be judged, and he shall not be able to make
exception against any of them: against the book of the law, he shall be able
to speak nothing, Psalm. 19. 9.
for the Commandments of the Lord are pure, and righteous altogether. And as
to the book of conscience, thou can not deny it, the Lord shall not judge
thee by an other man's conscience, but by thine own; that book thou have had
it always in thine own keeping, who then could falsify it? neither is any
thing written in it of things thou have done, but that which thine own hand
has written, how then can thou make any exception against it?

Thus the books being opened, How the wicked shall be convicted by the book
of the Law.
the judgment shall proceed in this manner. The Law shall plead for
transgression of her precepts, requiring that the wicked may be put to death,
for their most unreasonable disobedience, her commandments for number being
but ten, and so not burdenable to the memory; for understanding plain,
written in the heart of every man; for equity not contradictable, for the Law
craves nothing of man, but that which by the holiness of his nature received
by Creation, he was able to perform, neither does the law command any thing
profitable to God, who gave it, but unto man, who received it. And for
holiness every precept of the law, when God proclaimed it on mount Sinai, was
assisted with a thousand of his Saints, as witnesses of the holiness thereof:
all these circumstances do aggrauate the weight of that judgment which the
law shall give out against the transgressors thereof. How they shall be
convicted by the book of conscience.
Then from the Law judgment shall proceed to Conscience, and Conscience shall
witness against them of their transgressions against every precept of the law;
wherein they shall be so clearly convinced, that their particular sins with
the circumstances thereof, time, and place, though now they have cast them
behind their backs, shall then be set in order before them; and so justly every
manner of way shall judgment go out against them. Eliphaz spoke it falsely to
Job, Job. 15. 6.
thy own mouth and not I condemns thee, but most justly shall the ruler of
the world lay it upon the wicked, Luke 19. 22.
out of thy own mouth I judge thee, O thou evil and unfaithful servant, the
voice of thine own conscience, and no other shall condemn thee.

And as this condemnation will be most righteous, This judgment shall also be
most terrible.
so shall it be also most fearful, not only in regard of the manner of the
Lords proceeding in that last judgment, but chiefly in regard of that
irrevocable sentence of damnation, Exodus 19. 16.
which shall be executed without delay. The Law was given with Thunders and
Lightnings, Moses trembled for fear at the giving of the Law what will the
wicdoe at the execution thereof?
and a thick cloud upon the mount, with an exceeding loud sound of the
Trumpet, so that all the people were afraid; yea so terrible was the sight,
that Moses said I fear, and quake. The laws of mighty Monarchs are executed
with greater terror, then they are proclaimed; what then shall we look for,
when the God of glory shall appear, to judge the world according to his law?
Revel. 6. 14.
the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Elements shall melt with heat,
the Earth with the works which are therein shall be burnt up, the Archangell
shall blow a Trumpet, at the voice whereof the dead shall rise. If Moses the
servant of the Lord, quaked to hear the first Trumpet, how shall the wicked,
condemned in their own conscience tremble, and quake to hear the second? Reu.
6. 15.
Then shall the Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, hide themselves in the Dens, and
among the rocks of the Mountains: (for what strength is there in man, who is
but stubble, to stand before a consuming fire?) and or ever their doom be
given out, they shall cry Mountains and Rocks fall upon us, and hide us from
the presence of him that sits on the Throne, but when they shall hear that
fearful sentence, Mat. 25. 41.
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels* O how shall the terror thereof confound their spirits, and press
them down to the bottom of hell. O fearful sentence! ( depart from me) what
shall the creature do, when the Creator in his wrath commands it to depart,
and by his power banishes it from his presence? O man will thou consider in
time, Remembrance of this last judgment is a preser^atiue against sin.
who shall receive thee when God casts thee out from his face; or who shall
pity and be able to comfort thee, when God shall persecute thee with his
wrath? assure thy self every creature shall refuse her comfort to thee, if a
drop of cold water might be a relief unto thee thou shall not get it. Happy
therefore are they who in time resolves themselves with Peter, Math. 10.
Lord whether away shall we go from thee, thou have the words of eternal
life. For they who do now go a whoring from the LORD, wandering after lying
vanities, shall in that day receive this for a recompense of their error, Iud.
10. 14.
go to the Gods whom ye have served. Mat. 25. 41.
Your whole life was but a turning back from me, now therefore depart from
me, and whether? into fire, and what fire? everlasting fire, and with whom?
with the Devil and his Angels: thou have forsaken, me, thou have followed
them, go thy way with them, a companion of their torment. O fearful
sentence! quae cum it a sint been nobiscum ageretur, Augustine.
si iam nunc sic nos paeniteret super malis nostris, quomodo tunc sine vllo
remedio paenitebit. It were good therefore says Augustine, if now all men
could so repent of their sins, as it is certain in that day they shall
repent without any remedy, for then the wicked will shed tears abundantly,
but they shall be fruitless.

And if yet all this cannot waken thee to go to the Lord Jesus upon the feet
of faith and repentance, The day before the last judgment Mercy shall be
offered, but none after it.
that in him thou may be delivered from this fearful damnation, yet
remember that seeing this judgment is supreme and the last, from which will
be no recalling, most foolish art thou, if in time thou do not foresee and
provide, how thou may stand in it. Now if thy conscience condemn thee, thou
may get if thou, seek absolution in Christ, but in that day if the Lord
condemn thee, thou shall never be absolved; the day before the Trumpet sound,
mercy shall be preached to the penitent and believers by the Gospel, but from
the time that once the sentence is given out, there shall never be more
offering of mercy; the door shall be closed, though the wicked cry for mercy,
and with Esau seek the blessing with many tears, yet shall they never find
it.

Of all this now it is evident, By Christ we have deliuer^ce from this three
fold condemnation.
what an excellent benefit we have by Jesus Christ, in that we are delivered
from this threefold condemnation. For first being justified by faith we have
peace with God in our consciences, that holy spirit of adoption testifying
unto us that our sins are forgiven us: whereof arises in our heart an
unspeakable and glorious joy, which joy notwithstanding cannot be full nor
perfect until the former sentence of our absolution be also pronounced, in the
other two judgments, that in the hour of death we hear that joyful
sentence, Mat. 25. 21.
Come to me thou (...) (...) (with the Apostle) the terror of that day, but
surely when the Lord shall set us on mount Sion among those thousands which
follow the Lamb, and we shall see the smoke of the damned ascending
continually; when we shall stand at the right hand of the Lord Jesus, and shall
hear that fearful sentence pronounced on the wicked, and see the speedy and
terrible execution thereof, the earth opening incontinent to swallow them, then
shall we perfectly know, how greatly the Lord has magnified his mercies
toward us, in delivering us from so fearful a condemnation.

Last of all, How miserable are they who are not in Christ?
as this is the happy estate of them who are in Christ, that now there is no
condemnation for them, so is it the contrary miserable estate of the damned,
do what they will, every action of their life makes out the process of their
most just condemnation, for to the unclean all things are unclean, yea, even
their consciences are defiled, and their prayer is abominable and turned into
sin, but thanks be to God through Jesus Christ, who has delivered us from
this most unhappy condition.

To them who are in Christ. Deliverance by Christ pertains not unto al men
only to them who are of the household of Faith.
Albeit the former mentioned deliverance from the wrath to come, be most
comfortable, yet this which is subioyned should waken every man to take heed
unto himself when we hear that this deliverance is limited and restrained
only to them who are in Christ. It is true that by the offense of one man the
fault came on all to condemnation, but by the obedience of one all are not made
righteous, only they who receive the abundance of grace, and gift of
righteousness shall reign in life through one Jesus Christ. As therefore we
have received within our selves by nature the sentence of death, knowing that
we are borne heirs of the wrath of God by disobedience, so wisdom craves,
that we never rest nor suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber,
but that we should recount our former sins in the bitterness of our heart,
and water our couch with tears in the night, and call upon the Lord without
ceasing in the day, continually, until we find that we are translated from
darkness to light, taken out of nature and planted in Christ, and that first
sentence of absolution be pronounced to our conscience by the spirit of
adoption, Mat. 9. 2.
go thy way, thy sins are forgiven thee. For the Apostle uses here this
limitation of the comfort to certain persons, thereby to declare, that it
appertains not unto the remnant of the world. As none were saved without the
arc, the family of Lot, and house of Rahab.
When the original world was overwhelmed with waters, none were saved but such
as were in the Arc: when Sodom was burnt with fire, none were saved but those
of the family of Lot: when Jericho was destroyed, Genesis 7. 33.
none were preserved but such as were in the Family of Rahab, Genesis 19. 16.
all these are figures shadowing unto us, that when the Lord shall come to cut
down the wicked with the sword or hook of his justice, Josh. 2.
to cast them for ever into the wine press of his wrath, salvation shall
belong only to those who are of the household of faith, even that whole family
whereof God in Jesus Christ is the Father, which number is indeed exceeding
small, if they be compared with the remnant and great multitude of the world,
therefore let not their evil example deceive us, but remembering the kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11. 12.
let us cast away these burdens and impediments, Heb. 12. 2.
specially this sin which hangs so fast on, that we may enter in time into
the ark of God, and Family of Rahab, that so we may be saved.

We have here then first to observe a certain distinction of mankind, A
threefold distinction of mankind.
whereof some are in Christ, these are vessels of honor reserved to mercy,
others out of Christ, and these are vessels of dishonor, Made in God his
eternal counsel.
ordained unto wrath. This Made in this life by effectual calling, of those who
are chosen
and this is only known unto himself. It begins Revel. 3. 12.
who are effectually called, for that now name, which (...) (...)

To them that are in Christ. The Apostle excludes not himself from that
natural misery whereunto others are subject.
The Apostle you see changes the manner of his speech: when he spoke of the
power of sin remaining in our nature, he spoke of it in his own person, but
when he speaks of our deliverance by Jesus Christ, he speaks of it in the
person of others. Thus the Apostle by an holy wisdom does order his speech
for the comfort of the children of GOD, for least that other weak christians
might be discouraged by reason of their sins, he speaks of remanent
sinful corruption in his own person, to declare that none, no, not the holy
Apostles are exempted from it. Of deliverance again he speaks in the person of
others, Neither excludes he others from that mercy which he himself has
received.
least any should think that the grace of Christ were restrained only to such
singular persons, as holy Apostles, and were not also extended to others.
Commonly these wh^ are of such a tender Conscience, makes exception of
themselves, as if the comfort of other christians belonged not to them; the
Apostle therefore includes within the communion of this benefit, all
whosoever, Pastors, people, learned, unlearned, poor, rich, weak and strong,
providing that they be in Jesus Christ. Men who are truly godly, in the
matter of misery chiefly contemn themselves, therefore the Apostle calls
himself the chief of all sinners, 1 Timothy 2. 15.
but they never exclude others from the same communion of mercy, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
I know says the Apostle that there is laid up for me a crown of glory, and
not only for me, but for all them who love the second appearing of the Lord
Jesus.

It is far otherwise with natural men, Naturalists blinded with presumption
do far otherwise.
blinded with presumption, they extol their own righteousness above others,
and in their conceit with the proud Pharisee, condemns every other man as a
greater sinner than himself; they carry in their bag two measures, by the
one they take to themselves, making much of the smallest good which is in them,
by the other they give, setting that by for light, which is most excellent in
another. Our Savior properly expresses their corrupt judgment, when he
compares it to the light of the eye, which can see any other thing better than
it self, and can espy a moate sooner in another, than a beam in it self.
After this manner hipocrites look out, curiosi ad cognoscend^m vitam alienam,
Aug. confess. lib. 10.
d^sidiosi ad corrigendum suam, curious searchers of the life of others,
careless correcters of their own. Basil. hexam. hom. 9.
Men's peracute perspiciens alienos errores, tarda est ad proprios cognoscendos
defectus, the mind that sharply looks to the faults of others, does but
slowly consider her own defects: but let us learn by the precept of our
blessed Savior, and practice of this holy Apostle, rather to look to our
selves, searching out our own sins, then neglecting our selves to prattle
vainly of the sins of other men.

That are in Christ. Our union with Christ expressed by five similitudes in
holy scripture.
But now to come to the matter. The spirit of God in holy Scripture expresses
our union with Christ, by five sundry similitudes: first by a marriage, wherein
Christ is the husband, and we the spouse. Secondly, by a body, whereof Christ
is the head, and we the members. Thirdly, by a building or house, wherein
Christ is the foundation or ground stone, and we the upper building upon him.
Fourthly, by the similitude of ingrafting, wherein Christ is compared to the
Vine, and we to the branches grafted into him. Lastly, by the similitude of
feeding, wherein Christ is compared to the food, and we to the body which is
nourished.

As for the similitude of Marriage, As Eve was to Adam, his wife his sister,
and his Daughter, so are we unto Christ.
the strongest bands of conjunction that ever was between two creatures, was
between Adam and Eve, for Eve was his Wife, his Sister, and his Daughter: his
Wife being joined with him in marriage by God, she became one flesh with him:
she was his Sister, made immediately by the hand of that same Father who made
Adam, and that without Adams help: she was also his Daughter, for of him she
was made, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. All these ways are we
alyed unto Jesus Christ; we are his spouse in respect of that mutual contract
and covenant which is between us, he has married us to himself in
righteousness, judgment, mercy, and compassion. We are his Sons and
Daughters in respect of regeneration, which is our new creation: we are also
his brethren and sisters in respect of the spirit of adoption, by whom we
acknowledge God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ to be our father also in
him, and his son Jesus to be our elder brother.

Yet is our alliance with Christ so near, Yet this expresses not our alliance
with Christ, and therefore other similitudes are used.
that all these whereof we have spoken can not express it, and therefore ye
shall find, that there is not a way, by which in nature two things are made
one, but from it the spirit of God borrowes similitudes to declare how Christ
and we are one in him, as the branch in the tree; we are of him, as Eve was of
Adam, we are of him, as the house is built on the foundation, we are one with
him, and that many manner of ways, one with him, as brother with brother, as
husband and wife, as the body, and the head; as meat and that which is
nourished, what marvel the^ considering all these, that the Apostle with
boldness breaks out in this glorious triumph, there is no condemnation to them;
who are in Christ, seeing we are in him, as branches in the tree, it is not
possible that we can wither or decay for want of the sap of Grace, so long as
he does retain it, and that shall be for ever: seeing we are built on him like
an house upon a sure foundation, what storm can ouerblow us, let the wind
rise, and the rain fall, we shall not be overthrown, because we are the
building of God standing upon a sure foundation, seeing we are his spouse, who
can have action against us, our debts fall to be paid by our husband, he lives
to make answer for us: seeing we are his conquered inheritance, who will take
us out of his hand, Ioh. 10. 28.
My sheep can no man take out of my hand (says our blessed Savior.) Most
happy then, and sure is the estate of all those, who are in Christ Jesus.

But leaving other similitudes, In the similitude of ingrafting four things
considered.
let us consider that this phrase to be in Christ, is borrowed from planting or
ingrafting. Our Savior uses this same similitude, John. 15. And in it we have
these things to consider. First, who is the stock, or root: secondly, who are
the grafts or branches ingrafted: thirdly, what is the manner of the
ingrafting: fourthly, some comfors and instructions arising hereof.

The root or stock whereinto this ingrafting is made, The stock or root.
is the true Vine: by the Apostles, the true Olive: by the Prophets, the root
of Iesse, and the righteous branch, John. 15. 1.
this root that great husbandman the eternal God prepared to be as a stock
of life, Romans 11. 17
wherein he ingrafts all of Adams lost posterity, Isaiah. 11. 1.
whom he has concluded to save, to the praise of the glory of his mercy.
After that in the fulness of time God has sent him into the world, clad with
our nature, and he has done the work for which he came, the Lord laid him in
the grave, and as it were set him in the grave, but at once like a lively root
he sprang up, and rested not till his branches spread to the uttermost ends of
the earth, and till his top mounted up unto heaven, for there now he sits and
reigns in life, who before was humbled to death.

The branches or graftes ingrafted in him are of two sorts: The branches
whereof some are only externally ingrafted these may be cut off.
first, all the members of the Church visible, who by if thou continue not in
his bountifulness, thou shall also be cut off. For they have not the sap of
grace ministered to them from the stock of life, Romans 11. 22
but are as dead trees, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
having leaves without fruit, they have a show of Godliness, but have denied
the power thereof, these are no better then Esau, who lay in the same womb
with Jacob, borne and brought up in the same Family of Isaac, which was the
Church of God, marked also with the same sacrament of Circumcision, Aug. de
bap. cont. Donatist lib. 10. ca. 10
Na^ sicut ille ex legittima matre natus gratiam superbe spreuit, and
reprobatus est, it a qui in vera Ecclesia baptizantur, and gratiam Dei non
amplectuntur, cum Esauo reijciuntur. For as he being borne of a lawful
Mother, proudely despised Grace, and was cast off, so they who are baptized in
the true Church of God, and embrace not the grace of God, shall be rejected
with Esau, neither shall it avail them, that by an external kind of
ingrafting, they have been adjoined to the fellowship of the visible Church.

The other sort, Others internally ingrafted, and to these belongs this comfort.
are they who beside the outward ingrafting whereof we have spoken, are also
inwardly grafted by the holy Ghost in Jesus Christ, in such sort that Christ is
in them, and they in Christ, and can say with the Apostle, Now I live, yet not
I any more, but Christ Jesus lives in me; these have in them that same mind
which was in Jesus, Gal. 2. 20.
the only sure argument of our spiritual union with him, for if any man have
not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, and they who are quickened and
ruled by this spirit, are assuredly his.

The manner of the ingrafting, it is made by the word and spirit.
it is spiritual, wrought by the holy Ghost, who creating faith in our heart by
hearing of the Gospel, makes us to go out of our selves, and tranfire in
Christum, and so to rely upon him, that by his light we are illuminated, by
his spirit we are quickened, by the continual furniture of his grace we
persevere, and increase in spiritual strength; in a word, so we live that in
our selves we dye. Every lamp of the golden candlestick has his own pipe,
through which these two olives, that stand with the ruler of the whole world
empty themselves into the gold, that is every member of the Church of Christ,
receives grace from that fullness of Grace which is in him, through the secret
conduits of the spirit, whereby he causes us to grow, and preserves our
souls in life.

Though he be in heaven and we on earth, Distance of place stays not our union
with him.
no distance of place can stay this union, for seeing the members of the body
howsoever scattered through sundry parts of the world, so far that many of
them have never seen others in the face, are notwithstanding knit together by
the band of one spirit, into one holy communion, why should it be denied, but
that the head and members of this mystical body, are also one by the same
Spirit? suppose the head be in heaven, and the members on earth, or what need
is there to enforce for effecting of this union, such a corporal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, as cannot stand with the truth of Gods word?

Now the comforts that arises unto us of our communion Comforts arising of
this our union with Christ.
for first we have with him a communion of natures, he has taken upon him
ours, and has communicated his nature unto us. Of the first (after a sort) all
mankind may glory, Communion of Natures.
forasmuch as pertakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
before he assumed our nature, he sanctified it, and now having by his own
spirit joined us to himself, we may be out of doubt he shall not cease till
he has fully sanctified us.

It is a notable comfort that the work of our perfect sanctification is not
left unto us to do, A notable comfort, the Lord who sanctified our nature that
he might assume it, will also sanctify us seeing he has united us to
himself.
the Lord Jesus has taken it into his own hand to perform it, what then
shall hinder it, I am persuaded that he who has begun this good work in
you, will perform it against the day of Jesus Christ. He who at his pleasure
turned water into Wine; he who made the bitter waters to become sweet; he
who makes the wilderness a fruitful land, and the barren woman to become the
mother of many children; Phil. 1. 6.
in a word, he who calls things which are not, and causes them to be, is
he not able to make sinners become Saints? or shall he not perfect that work
of the new creation which he has begun in us? As for man he may bege^
children but cannot renew their nature; he may marry a Wife, but cannot change
her conditions, Ber. sermon. de mutatione aquae in vinu^.
no more than Moses, qui Aethiopissam duxit sed non potuit aethiopissae mutare
colorem: who married an Ethiopian woman, but could not change her color. But
the Lord Jesus has so loved his Church, that he shall make (...) (...) head,
and remanent members, evidently shows that this spiritual life is but weak
in us.

Last of all, By our union with Christ we are made sure of perseverance
by our ingrafting in Christ, we have this comfort, that we are sure of the
benefit of perseverance, and that because (as the Apostle says) we bear not
the root the root bears us, our salvation depends not upon us (for that were
an unsure foundation) it depends upon him, because we are in him, we grow and
increase, yea, the older we be in Christ, the more we fasten our root and
flourish, for they who are planted in the Courts of the Lord flourish in their
old age and bring forth fruit: Psalm. 146.
and whereas other branches may be pulled away from their stock, either by
violence of wind, or force of the hands of men, or at least consumed by length
of time, it shall not be so with them, who are in Christ, Esa. 40. 24.
they keep not him, but are kept by him, because I am not changed, therefore
ye are not consumed, O ye sons of Jacob, but as to those who are not
planted in Jesus, be who they will, they shall be pulled up, they shall not
continue in honor. Psalm. 49. 14.
The Princes of the earth, their breath shall decay, they shall return to
their earth, and their thoughts shall perish, the Judges thereof shall be made
as vanity, as though they were not planted, nor sown, or as if their stock
took no root in the earth. The Lord shall blow upon them, and they shall
wither, the whirlwind shall take them away like stubble. O silly glory of
worldlings, which dies to them oftentimes before themselves, at least with
them, their be^utie consumes when they go from the house to the grave, and
their pomp does not descend after them. Only happy and sure is the state of
that man who is in Christ: neither life nor death, things present nor things to
come shall separate him from the love of God.

Now the lessons of instruction are chiefly two: The who are planted in Christ
should be humble, the root bears the^ not they the root.
first is a lesson of humility; seeing it is so that in Christ we have life
let us be humble in our selves, forasmuch as that which we have, we have of
another, so taught the ancient fathers agreeable to holy scripture, eleauen
hundred years before us, which I mark the rather to point out the agreement in
one truth between us and the Fathers of the primitive Church. Ita sunt in vite
palmites: Consil. ^.
vt illi nihil conferant, sed inde accipiant, Arausicanu^ ex Carranza
vnde viuant, sic quippe vitis est in palmitibus, vt vitale subministret illis,
non sumat ab ijs, ac per hoc and manentem in se habere Christum, and manner in
Christo, discipulis prodest, non Christo: the branches are so in the vine that
they give nothing unto it, but receives from it that sap of grace whereby they
live, but the vine is so in the branches, that it ministers life unto them, and
receives nothing from them, that therefore Christ abides in us, and we in him,
is profitable to us, who are his Disciples, but not unto himself. Thus they
learned from our Savior, who in his speech to his Disciples denies that man is
able to do any good thing without him, as the branch can bear no fruit except
it abide in the root, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, for without me ye
are able to do nothing. And that which is subioyned does yet more humble us,
Ibidem.
praeciso palmite potest de viuae radice alius pullulare, qui autem praecisus
est non potest sine radice viuere, though a branch be cut off from the root,
another may spring out, but the branch which is cut off cannot live, without
the root it withers, and is meet for nothing but the fire: he that falls
away from Christ shall perish like a withered branch, but the Lord Jesus shall
not want another who shall grow up in him; Romans 11. 16
we stand by faith, let us not be high minded but fear.

The second is a lesson of thankfulness, They who are planted in Christ bears
fruit so soon as they are planted.
we who profess that we are in Christ should be fruitful in good works,
herein (saith^our Savior) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.
There is such a lively power in this stock of life, that they who are planted
in him flourish incontinent. Proof hereof we have in Lidia, and in the Thief
crucified with Christ, and converted by him. Aarons rod was no sooner changed
from a withered stick into a flourishing tree, then is he from a barren
malefactor into a fruitful professor; for see what a fruit he bears in an
instant, he confesses his own sins, he rebukes the sins of his companion,
he gives a good testimony unto Christ, and earnestly prays that Christ
would remember him, (...) (...) concupiscence proceeds from sin and ^endeth
unto sin, but is not sin, which he labors to express by this similitude* he
that hears (says he) another man speking filthy language, and consents not
unto it, but rather is angry at it, and reproues it, sins not, but merits a
greater reward: even so, when our concupiscence send^ out any sinful motion,
if we consent not unto it, we sin not. And the Fathers of that counsel of
Trent, which have as many curses as Canons, have decreed in this manner, Conc.
trident
this concupiscence which sometime the Apostle calls sin, the holy Synod
declares that the Catholic Church did never understand it to be called sin,
because it is truly and properly sin in the regeuerate, but because it
comes of sin, and inclines to sin.

Now because this is a mother error which brings forth and strengthens many
other errors, Their error disprooued.
we will shortly disprove By Scripture.
even when consent is not given unto them, for he protests of himself that he
resisted these motions of sin, but was oftentimes sore against his will
captiued by them, he condemns them as evil, albeit he gave no consent unto
them; for the Law (as I have said) does not only condemn sin in the branch,
but also in the root, there shall not be in thee an evil thought against the
Lord thy God.

By Reason.
if that whereunto I consent be good, my consent is good, but if it be evil my
consent is evil: if the first motion of sin be not an evil thing in it
self (as they say) then it is not an evil thing to consent unto it: for that
which is not evil in it self, by my consenting cannot become evil. It is not
then the consent following, that makes the preceding motion to be evil, but
it is the preceding evil motion, that makes the subsequent consent evil.
Costers similitude makes against himself.
Now as for Coster his similitude, it makes plainly against himself, for it
is true indeed, that he who hears evil spoken and reproues it, is worthy of
praise, but it is also true, that he who spoke the evil has sinned, even so,
albeit we do well when we consent not to the motions of concupiscence in us,
yet concupiscence is not the less to be condemned, because it has sent out in
the ear of our soul, that voice of a filthy desire, which is not agreeable to
Gods most holy Law.

And of this same judgment with us are also the ancient By ancient Fathers.
Cum concupisco, quamuis concupiscentis assensum non praebeam, Aug. ser. 5.
fit tamen in me quod nolo, and quod etiam non vult Lex. When I lust (says
Augustine) albeit I consent not to my lust, yet that is done in me, which I
will not, and which also the law will not. Aug. ser. de Temp. 45.
And again, desiderium tuum tali debet esse ad Deum, vt omnino non sit ipsa
concupiscentia cui resistere oporteat, resistis enim, and non consentiendo
vincis sed melius est hostem non habere* quam vincere: thy desire should in
such sort be upon God, that there should not be in thee at all, so much as a
concupiscence which has need of resistance, for thou resists, and by not
consenting thou ouercommest, but it were better not to have an enemy then to
overcome him: with him agrees also Bernard, Bernard.
Genus illud peccati quod toties nos conturbat, reprimi quidem potest, and
debet per gratiam Dei (concupiscentias loquor and praua desideria) vt non
regnet in nobis, nec demus membra nostra arma iniquitatis peccato, and sic
nulla est damnatio his, qui sunt in Christo, sed non eijcitur ni^i in morte.
That kind of sin (says he) which so often troubles us, (Concupiscence and
evil desires I mean) may and should be repressed by the grace of God, so that
it reign not in us, and that we give not our members weapons of
unrighteousness to sin, and this way there is no damnation to them who are
in Christ, yet is it not cast out but in death. Thus does Bernard clearly
agree with us in the exposition of this place. Of all which is evident, that
the motions of concupiscence are evil and sinful, even when they are
repressed, and no consent given unto them.

But now leaving further improbation of this error, we (...) (...) toler
abilius enim lingua qua^ vita ment^tur, Aug. contra Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 21.
the lie (says Augustine) which is made by the tongue, is more tolerable then
that which is made by the life: where the tongue professes Christ, and the
heart is given to impiety, this is not professio, sed abnegatio Christi, a
profession, but a denying of Christ.

It is a great sin to bear false witness against our neighbor, Only
apostate Angels and men bear false witness against God.
but a greater sin to bear false witness against the Lord. Every creature
in their kind gives a true testimony unto God, the heavens declare his glory,
the earth, and all that therein is sets forth his goodness, yea the little
Emmet proclaims his providence: he must be a prouiuident father, that has
put so great providence in so small a creature; only apostate Angels, and men
are false witnesses against the Lord. Satan has wyles continually against his
mercy, as when he says to the penitent and believing man, God will not
forgive him, vvyles against his justice, when he bears the wicked in hand
that God will not punish him, wyles against his providence, when he would
persuade the afflicted that God cannot deliver them. And as for the Apostate
man, he is also a false witness against God, he calls himself the child
of God, and behold he carries the image of Satan, as if the Lord begat
children to another image and not to his own. An evil life of aprofessor
says in effect, there is no virtue in Christ.
Certainly the sinful life of one professing Christ, is a public testimony,
falsely proclayming to the world (as I have said) that there is no virtue in
Christ, and that he is such a Savior as can neither sanctify nor save from
sin such as are his; a fearful blasphemy.

All Christians are not honored with the second marti^dome, A godly life is
the first martyrdom, without suffering for Christ which is the second,
martyrdom is not acceptable to him.
that is, to be Christ's vvitnesses, by suffering of death for his truths sake;
yet all are bound by a godly life to be vvitnesses of his saving and renewing
power, showing forth his marvelous virtue, who has translated us from
darkness into his light. Tota vita martyrium esse debet, hoc est testimonium
deo reddere, etc. the whole life of a Christian should be a martyrdom, Cyp. de
duplici martirio.
that is, a continual witnessing of the truth of God: and this is so
necessary that without it the second martyrdom, that is, the testimony
which thou bear to the truth of God by shedding of thy blood is worth
nothing; it availes not to give thy body to be burnt in the fire, unless that
first thou mortify thy earthly members, Col 3. 5.
and by reasonable service offer up thy body a lively and an acceptable
sacrifice to God. Romans 12. 1.
And hereunto also tends that which be subioynes. Efficacius est vitae quam
linguae testimonium habent etiam opera suam linguam, etc. The testimony of the
life is more effectual than the testimony of the tongue, works have also
their own language, yea and their own eloquence, though the tongue be silent:
therefore our blessed Savior in the Gospel says, the works which the
Father has given me to do, Ioh. 5. 36.
the same works that I do bear witness of me. Like as ( Cyprian says)
good works professes that there is a God, so evil works say in their own
kind that there is no God, nor knowledge of the most high. Thus it is a most
fearful sin for them to walk after the flesh, who professes that they are
in Jesus Christ.

For no sin can be committed of them without horrible sacrilege, Sins of
men professing Christ are not committed without sacrilege.
every work of the flesh, though done by a Pagan is a transgression of Gods
law, which shall be punished unto death: but the same committed by Christians
are not only sins, but sacrilegious sins, and that of the highest degree:
Dan. 5. 1.
then came the sins of Belshazar to the height, when to all his former sins
he joined the abuse of those vessels which were holy: to have drunk
intemperately for the honor of his Idol in any vessel, was a fearful sin,
but to do it in the vessels dedicated to the honor of the true God was a
double sin: More fearful tha^ Belshazars.
Yet is this sacrilege small, if it shall be compared with thine, who
professing Christ lives profanely, he abused dead vessels of gold and silver
but thou erects a temple for the living God, in a temple for Idols, thou
defilest the sanctuary of God with all uncleanness, those vessels which by
Baptism (...) (...) O what need have we therefore in all the actions of our
life to walk circumspectly? Seeing there are in us two parties, let us help
that which we would have to prevail.
we have need of eyes within, and without us, that we may discern the inward
desires of the Spirit, from these of the Flesh; and may look rightly on those
outward objects which may cherish the one, and suppress the other. In a
battle between two, every man assists that party, which he would feign
have to be victorious, Ba^il sermon. 2. de ieiunio.
for the help of the one, (says Ba^il) is the overthrow of the other, so is
it in this combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, the Flesh being
strengthened by outward allurements and carnal exercises, quenches the
Spirit, and brings it in subjection, but the more the body be subdued by
moderate discipline, the stronger waxes the man of God. Happy were we if our
care were continual to strengthen the one by all spiritual exercises, that we
might daily weaken the other.

For the greatest perfection whereunto we can attain in this life, Our best
estate in this life is fighting.
is to fight against these lusts of the Flesh, which fight against our souls.
Our life says Job in the earth is a warfare. Bellum est, non triumphus, it is
a battle, not a triumph (says Augustine:) though after many particular
victories the Lord put that voice of triumph many times in our mouths, August.
de temp. ser. 45.
thanks be to God, who always makes us to triumph in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
yet let us remember, that incontinent we must fight again; so long as we are
in this mortal body wherein the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, we cannot be
free from carnal and evil desires, if thou dissemble not, thou shall always
find within thy self some thing which has need to be resisted, for our
sinful superfluities (says Bernard,) Bernard.
are such, putata repullulant, effugata redeunt, and reaccenduntur extincta,
that being cut off they spring out again, chased away they return again,
being quenched they are kindled again. Velis, nolis, intra fines tuos
habitabit Iebusaeus, will thou, nill thou, the Iebusit shall dwell within thy
borders, Subi^gare potest, exterminare non potest, he may be subdued, but
cannot be rooted out.

And this again do we mark for the comfort of weak consciences, Christ's
members militant and triumphant are not to be tried by one rule.
it is Satan's subtlety, whereby commonly he disquiets many, that because
carnal corruption is in them, he would therefore bear them in hand that they
are none of Christ's. In this he plays the deceiuer, he tryes us by the wrong
rule, when he tryes us by the rule of perfect sanctification, this is the
square which ought to be laid to Christ's members triumphant in heaven, and not
to those who are militant here upon earth: Sin remaining in me will not prove
that therefore I am not in Christ, (otherwise Christ should have no members
upon earth) but grace working that new disposition which nature could never
effect, proves undoubtedly that we are in Christ Jesus.

Let this therefore be our comfort, There is fleshly corruption in the
Christian militant, but he follows it not.
that albeit there be in us a fleshly corruption, yet thanks be to God we
walk not after it, that is, we follow not willingly the direction and
commandment thereof. It is true, and alas we find it by experience, the
regenerate man may be led captive (for a time) to the law of sin, he may
be pulled perforce out of the way of Gods commandments, wherein he delights
to walk, and compelled to do those things which he would not, yet even at
that same time he disclaymes the government of the flesh, mourning and lamenting
within himself that he should be drawn from the obedience of his own Lord
and governor, the spirit of Jesus.

And indeed it is worthy to be marked that what ever service the regenerate
man gives unto sin, Any service the Christian gives to sin, is thrown out
by oppression, like that which Israel gave to Pharaoh.
it is like the service that Israel gave to Pharaoh in Egypt, thrown out by
oppression, and therefore compelled them to sigh and cry unto God: but the
service which the regenerate man gives to the Lord is voluntary, done as unto
his most lawful superior, with gladness, joy and contentment of mind.
Happy is that man who can make this reply to his spiritual adversary, when
he is challenged of his sins. It is true (O enemy) that I have done many
things by thy entisement, yet herein I rejoice, that whatsoever service I
(...) (...) God as David did. O happy ^ourney, wherein Christ is both the end,
Ber. in paruis Sermonibus Sermon. 23.
the way and the guide. Eamus post Christum, quia veritas, per Christum, quia
via, ad Christum, quia vita, Let us walk after Christ, because he is the
truth, let us walk in Christ, because he is the way, let us walk toward
Christ, because he is the life. If ye look to the companies of men in the
world, ye shall see some in stead of following Christ, flying from him, Qui
enim male facit, odit lucem, for he who does evil hates the light: Others
where they should follow him, run before him, not waiting upon his light and
direction in matters of his worship, follows their own spirit, doing that
which is good in their own eyes, they run with zeal, but not in the right
way.

And we have so much the more to take heed unto the way, For he that walks
after the flesh, shall at length encounter with death.
because every man's course declares what kind of man he is, whether carnal
or spiritual, and what will be his end, he that sows to the flesh, of the
flesh will reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. I am persuaded there is no man among us, who
will not say he would be at the best end, which is eternal life, but here
is the vvonderfull folly of men, the proposed end of their pilgrimage vvhereat
they would be is heaven, but the way wherein they walk, is the way that
leads close into hell. Who will not esteem him a fool, who in word says
his journey is toward the South, and yet for no man's warning will refrain
his feet from vvalking toward the North: but more foolish is he, who
professing himself a pilgrim travailing toward heavenly Jerusalem, keeps
notwithstanding a contrary course, having his back upon heaven, and his face
toward hell, vvalking not after the Spirit but after the Flesh. O pitiful
blindness and folly, how many witnesses of God have forewarned thee, in thy
life, all crying to thee with a loud voice, this way wherein thou walk (O
sinful man) is the way of death: he who lives after the Flesh, shall dye
assuredly, yet will thou not return, nor change the course of thy life, to
walk after the living God, that thy may be saved.

And having once found the right way which may lead us unto God, Three
profitable helps of a godly Life.
let us strengthen our selves to walk in it, by those three most notable
helps of a godly life, delivered to us by David in three verses of 119 Psalm.
verse. 57. Psalm. 119.
O Lord I have determined to keep thy word. 58. I have made my supplication in
thy presence with my whole heart. 59. I have considered Determination.
Determination is the first, Supplication.
it is a good thing by settled resolution Consideration.
Consideration is the third, and it is profitable

And fourthly, Our life should be a daily progress in godliness.
by this metaphor of walking, that in our Basil) the steps (...) (...) other
thing, but the life of Christ, like that Revel. 11. 11. Again, the law of the
spirit of life in Christ, is no other thing but that forcible working lively
power which is in Christ: for it is customable to the holy Apostle to use the
word law to express any thing, wherein there is a commanding or working
power; so he has ascribed a law to sin, a law to his members, a law to
death, and now very properly he oppones unto them a law of the spirit of life
in Christ, which is more lively and powerful to save, to free, and to
quicken, then any law that has contrary power, can be able to destroy,
captive, or slay them who are in Christ.

Thus the words being expounded, Our adversaries Satan, sin and death, are
strong, but our Savior is stronger.
the first lesson will arise out of the Apostles manner of speech* who
ascribing to sin and death a law, which may condemn and destroy, ascribes
to Christ a more powerful law, to justify and preserve. Most sure then is our
estate who are in Jesus Christ, for there is a power in our Lord, which shall
bring every contrary power of man and Angel in subiecton to him, that tyrant
sin has indeed oppressed and ouer-ruled many a one, but our Lord Jesus the
valiant conqueror has a mighty power able to disanull the law of sin: and
Satan is that strong one who by nature possesses the heart of man, as his own
house, but Jesus is that stronger one, who will dispossess him and cast him
out of the hearts of all such as are his: The God of peace shall shortly tread
Satan under our feet, Romans 16. 20
and therefore suppose we be vveake in our selves, yet we will rejoice in
the strength of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, In what a vile bondage we lived by nature
we learn here that without Christ we lived in a vile servitude and bondage,
of all servants those are in vvorst case who are sold, and of those who are
sold, they are vvorst who must do service in prison, and of them who are in
prison, most lamentable is their estate who are chayned and bound in prison,
yet such servants were we by nature before Christ made us free, we were not
only the servants of sin, and sold under sin, as witnesses the Apostle,
but more also we were, as says Esaias, captiued and bound with chains in
prison, the Iaylour whereof is infidelity, for we were all shut up under
unbelief, a Iaylour so strait and tyrannous, as permitted us not so long as
we were in his keeping, so much as ^o lift up our head or look up to heaven
for deliverance from him from whom only comes our help. Our oppressers in
this bondage, are Satan and Sin, and sins of so many sorts, as do
miserably distract the soul. Pride one while usurping dominion over us;
Avarice another while vendicating a seat to her self with power to command
us; Concupiscence most commonly challenging us to do her service, as our
sovereign. Sic certant in me de me ipso cui^s potissimum esse videar, Ber.
hom. 4.
thus do they strive within me (says Bernard) about me to which of their
dominion I should appertain. That which he confessed of himself all the
Godly may feel in their own experience, innumerable are those tyrants that
strive among themselves, but all of them strive against us to have domination
over us, but indeed these are uncouth Lords, and such as can claim no title
nor right unto us, we are the workmanship of God, the redeemed of the Lord,
and are bound to do service to none but to him alone. O Lord therefore come
down and possess thine own kingdom, erect a throne to thy self in our
hearts, that thou by thy Spirit may reign in us as our King, and make us free
from these tyrants that would oppress us.

But that we may the better perceive how abominable this servitude is, Three
things to be considered in this bondage.
let us out of the Apostles words mark these three things: first, how this
dominion is tyrannical: Secondly, how the Commandments of these tyrants are
all wicked: and thirdly, are all deadly; these three he touches shortly, when
he says that Christ has freed us from the law of sin and death. How a Law
is ascribed unto sin.
First then he ascribes unto sin a Law, not as if sin proceeded by a Law,
(properly so called) or that there were any lawfulness in sin, but only to
point out the tyranny thereof: for as Rulers ordained by (...) (...) the image
of God, invested in this dignity to be Lord, and ruler over the creatures.
Basil hexam. hom. 10.
Animal es O homo principatu decoratum, vt quid seruis affectionibus, quamobrem
tuam ipsius dignitatem abijcis, teque ipsum seruum peccati constituis, quare
tcipsumfacis captiuu^ diaboli, Princeps creaturarum constitutus es, and
dignitatem naturae tuae proijc^s. O man thou art a creature adorned with
princely power (by thy first creation) why then seruest thou affections, why
do thou cast away thine own dignity, and makes thy self a captive of
Satan? thou wast placed Lord of the creatures, thou wast appointed to rule
over the fish of the Sea, and every beast of the field, what shame is it then
that thou should be ouerruled with those beasts which are within thee?

What we hope to be after this life.
consider what thou hopest to be after this life, do thou not hope to reign
as a King in the heavens, and will thou now live as a slave to Satan upon
earth? Is any man crowned except he strive as he ought? or does he receive the
price, who runs not the race, or ca^ he obtain the victory, who never
wrestled? why then fightest thou not? why runnest thou not? why beginnest thou
not to reign in earth as a king over thy lusts, seeing thou hopest to reign
as a king in heaven in glory? Do not deceive thy self, that crown is for
conquerours not for captives. Non sperare potest regnum coelorum, Ber. de
persecutione sustinenda. cap. 11* 1 John. 3. 2.
cui supra propria membra regnare non donatur: he cannot look for that
heavenly kingdom, to whom it is not given to reign over his own earthly
members. We know that when Jesus shall appear we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is, and he that has this hope in himself, purges
himself even as he is pure. Certainly, if the Lord through Grace prepare
thee not for his Heavenly Kingdom, thou can never say with a warrant, that
the Lord has prepared that kingdom for thee.

What presently we may be.
the consideration of the present occasion should waken us to go out of this
house of bondage, for now the Son of God offers to make us free, a Prince of
greater power, is content to enter in confederacy with us, he promises to
restore us to all the privileges we lost in Adam; yea to give us much more
than ever we had in him, and shall we neglect so fair an occasion? When Cyrus
king of Persia proclaimed liberty to the Jews to go from Babell, the place of
their captivity, homeward to Jerusalem, it is said, that all those went
forward whose spirit God had raised up: and now when the Lords anointed
proclaymes liberty to the captives, and the opening of the door to them that
are in prison, I know that none shall follow his calling but such whose spirit
the Lord has raised up, the rest being miserably blind, delight to lie still
in captivity, thinking their bondage liberty. The Lord give us grace that we
may discern the time of our visitation, that with David we may advance our
eyes toward the Lord, who has begun to pluck our feet out of the net, and
that still we may lift up, and stretch out our hands unto him, till he have
delivered us fully from the power of the enemy.

This being spoken of the bondage, Our deliverance from this bondage is to be
ascribed unto Christ only.
we are now to consider that our deliverance from it, is here ascribed to
Jesus Christ. Thy perdition is of thy self O Israel. But our salvation belongs
to the Lord, and to the Lamb that sits upon the throne. Let no man therefore
be so unthankful as to ascribe any part of this glory to another, Heb. 13. 9.
my glory will I not give to an other, Re^. 7. 10.
says the Lord: Isai. 42. 8.
the glory of a temporal deliverance God will not give it unto man; he would
not save Israel under Gideon, with thirty two thousand, and why? least
Israel should vaunt against the Lord, and say my right hand has done it. Or
ever he entered his people Israel into the land of Canaan, he forewarned them
that they should not say it was for their righteousness, and will he then
think ye give the praise of this most notable deliverance to the Creature?
No, the whole book of God witnesses that it is not for our righteousness,
but for the praise of the glory of his rich mercy, that we are entered into
heavenly Canaan. Did Peter, James and John help the Lord Jesus, in that agony
which he suffered in the garden? no surely, he bad them watch with him and
pray, but when he was sweating blood, they were sleeping; when he was
buffe^ed in Caiphas hall, did not Peter deny him? when he went to the Cross,
did not all his Disciples forsake him? and those who loved him most dearly,
did they not stand a far off from him? Certainly he alone troad the
winepresse of the wrath of God, he alone bare the punishment of our sins in
his blessed body on the Cross, to him therefore alone pertayneth the glory of
our salvation.

As for the persons to whom this deliverance pertaines, Mercies of god showed
upon others should confirm us if we repent, to look for the like to ourselus.
the Apostle names himself among them; has freed us, not to exclude, but
rather to confirm all others who are in Jesus Christ. For he confesses of
himself that he was received to mercy, for this end, that God might show upon
him an example of long suffering, to them who shall in time to come bele^ue in
him unto eternal life: 2 Timothy 1. 16.
therefore is it that he speaks of this deliverance in his own person, for
the confirmation of others, who having been before, as he was, notorious
sinners, are now become such as repents, and believes. And indeed every
example of GODS mercy showed unto others, should serve to strengthen us.
Audientes Christum non horruisse confitentem latronem, Bernard.
etc. when we hear (says Bernard) that the Lord Jesus abhorred not the
penitent Thief on the Cross; that he despised not the sinful Cananitish
woman, when she made supplication; nor the woman taken in Adultrie; nor him
that sat at the receipt of Custom; nor the Publicane, when he sought mercy;
nor the Disciple that denied him; neither yet the persecuter of his Disciples:
in odore horum vnguentorum curramus post eum, in the sweet smell of these
ointments, let us run after him.

Always we see that the Apostle does so speak unto others of a deliverance
obtained by Christ, Preachers not pertakers of that mercy, which they
as being also pertaker thereof himself. As he was a Preacher of Christ, so he
was a follower of Christ, he beat down his body by discipline, least that
preaching unto others he should have been a reprobate himself: pronounce to
others are most miserable
and therefore he now speaks as one who is sure that he also has his portion
in Christ. Otherwise what comfort can it be, either to Preacher or professor to
speak of that life and grace, which comes by Christ Jesus, they themselves
in the mean time being like to that miserable Atheist Simon Magus, to whom
Peter gave out that fearful sentence, Acts. 8. 21.
thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business, or like those Priests
in Jerusalem in the days of Herod, who directed others to Bethleem by the
light of the word, to worship Christ, but went not themselves; or those
builders of Noah's Arc, who helped to build a vessel for preservation of
others, but perished in the deluge themselves; or like Bilhah and Zilpah, who
brought forth and nourished freemen unto Jacob, but remained themselves in the
state of bond women: from this unhappy condition the Lord deliver us, and make
us pertakers of that mercy and grace, whereof he has made us Preachers and
professors.

From the Law of sin and death. Here the Apostle shows from what it is that
we are delivered. Psalm. 18. 51.
David says, many deliverances gives the Lord to his anointed, he spoke it
of himself, and it is true of all the Children of God. By a great deliverance
he saved Noah in the deluge; Lot in the burning of Sodom; Israel out of
Egypt; Joseph in the prison; Daniell in the den; the three Children in the
fiery furnace, but all these are small if they be compared with this
deliverance from sin and death.

Where first we learn how the Apostle conioynes these two, Sin and death God
has conjoined, who shall separate them?
sin and death, if we be delivered from the first we shall also be
delivered from the second, but if we abide in the first we shall be sure not
to escape the second: if therefore Satan say unto us as he did to our first
parents, though you cate of this forbidden tree ye shall not dye, let us
answer him, he has proved already a shameless liar, and we are not any more
to credit him; that same penalty lies upon every sin, which was laid upon
the first, if ye do it, ye shall die. God has conjoined them, and who shall
separate them? though the Lord speak not instantly to every sinner, as he did
to Abimelech, Genesis 20. 3.
behold thou art but dead, because of this sin, yet is it true of every
sin, when it is finished it brings out death. Chris. hom. 5 ad popu. Ant.
So soon as Jonas entered into the Sea (says Chrysostom) the storm rose, to
teach us that Vbi peccatum, ibi procella, where there is sin, specially
committed with rebellion, there will not fail to arise a storm of the wrath
of God.

It is true indeed the sinner in committing of sin does not perceive this,
What a deceiuer Satan is in tempting to sin.
being blinder than Balaam he walks on in an evil course, and sees not the
sword of Gods vengeance which is before him, but imagines always to reap some
good either of profit, or pleasure, by committing of sin; for these are Satan's
two baits, under which he couers his deadly hooks. It is therefore a point
of singular wisdom to decerne between the deceit of sin present, and the
fruit of sin to come, between that which Satan promises, and that which we
find in experience performed. He promised to our parents that they should be
made like unto God, but in very deed he made them miserable like himself.
And if thou will also observe that which thou find in thy own experience,
what fruit have thou of a sin, when thou have committed it? does not
darkness arise in thy mind? heaviness in thy heart? terror, fear, and
accusing cogitations in thy conscience? Every man may find it, who list to
mark it by more then a thousand experiences in himself, that Satan is a
shameless deceiuer; yea more deceitful then Laban, Genesis 34.
who promised to give to Jacob beautiful Rahel, but in the dark he gave him
blear^-eyed ^eah: be assured he will change thy wages, promise thee one thing
and pay thee with another. As Hamor spoke to his Sichemi^es, so does Satan to
his blindfolded citizens, he persuaded his people that if they would be
circumcised all Jacobs substance and cattle should be theirs, but indeed the
contrary ensued, for the goods of the Sichemits befell to the house of Jacob,
and they themselves perished by the sword. Let us therefore beware of the
inuenomed tongue of the Devil mentitur, Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 8.
vt fallat, vitam pollicetur, vt perimat: he lies that he may deceive, he
promises life, that he may inflict death: say he what he will, let us
believe the word of the Lord, confirmed by doolefull daily experience, the
wages of sin is death. God has knit them together, and who shall separate
them?

So often then as Satan by the deceit of sin would beguile thee, Sin seems
sweet but the fruit thereof is bitter.
remember that though sin seem to be sweet, the fruit thereof is exceeding
bitter, if thou fear not sin, fear that end whereunto sin leads thee,
dulce peccatum, sed amara mors, sin is sweet, but death is bitter: remember
that the wages which Satan promises and man would have, he shall not get,
but the wages which God threatens, and man would not have, shall assuredly be
paid him: for this is the misery of those who walk in their sins, illud
propter quod peccant, Aug. hom. 42
hic dimittunt, and ipsa peccata se cum portant, that for which they sin,
they leave it behind them, and carries their sins away out of the world with
them. So that in the end, when they shall gather the profit of all their
former sins into a sum, they shall find no other, Romans 6. 21.
but that foretold by the Apostle, What profit have ye now of all these things
whereof ye are ashamed? surely there is no fruit but shame and death to be
plucked from the forbidden tree of sin.

But here it may be objected by the weak conscience of the godly, Comfort for
the godly who are troubled with the tentations of sin.
how can this comfort be ours, that we are freed from sin, who find our
selves so continually assaulted, yea oftentimes oppressed of sin? For
answer, let us mark that the Apostle says not we are fully freed from sin
in this life, but we are freed from the law of sin, that is, both from the
commanding and condemning power thereof. Sin does not now reign in our
mortal bodies as before, neither has it power any more to detain us under
death. But as for the temptations of sin, there is no sort of men more
troubled with them, then they whom God has begun to deliver from the Law of
sin: for Satan being impatient of his loss, seeks daily to recover his
forme^ dominion. From the time that once the Gibeonits made peace for
themselves with Joshua, Joshua. 9.
all the rest of the Kings of Canaan made war against them, and so soon as
we enter into a covenant with the Lord Jesus, Satan shall not fail the more
fiercely to assault us, seeking to recover his old possession; yet if as the
Gibeonits did, we send speedily messengers to Joshua, to show him how we are
troubled for his sake, he shall not withdraw his helping hand from us.

Our deliverance from sin is begun now, Our begun deliverance from sin,
the Lord shall perfect.
but not perfected, but we know that our God is faithful, by whom we are
called, he shall also confirm us to the end. Even he who has begun this
good work in us, 1 Cor. 1. 8.
will perform it until the day of Christ. Phil. 1. 6.
As the Angel who delivered Peter out of prison, appeared to him with a
shining light in the dark prison, smote him upon his side, and wakened him out
of his sleep, made his chains to fall from him, and caused him to arise and
follow him, went still before him, to lead him in the way through all
impediments, and departed not from him till he had entered him within the
City of Jerusalem: so the spirit of our Lord Jesus who has once come down
upon us in this prison, and has lightened our darkness, wakened us out of our
dead security, and loosed the chains of our sins wherewith we were bond,
shall abide continually with us, governing us with his light and truth, till
he have entered us within the ports of heavenly Jerusalem. Blessed be the
Lord, where before we were the captives of sin, now the course of the
battle is changed, sin is become our captive through Christ, it remains in
us not as a commander, but as a capti^e of the Lord Jesus: it is true, the
boltes of sin are yet upon our hands and feet to admonish us of our former
miserable thraldom, we draw as yet the chains of sin after us, which makes
us indeed go forward the more slowly, but are not able to detain us in that
bondage, wherein we lay before.

And as concerning our deliverance from death, How we are delivered from death
both first and second.
we are to know that death is twofold: the first, and second, the first is a
separation of the soul from the body: the second is a separation of them both
from the Lord, Mors prima pellit animam nelentem de corpore, Aug. de ciuit.
dei. li. 21. ca. 3
mors secunda detinet anima^ n^lentem in corpore. The first death expels the
soul against the will out of the body, the second death compels the soul
against the will to abide in the body, for unto the greater augmentation of
their pain, as they were companions of sin, so shall they be compelled to
abide companions of punishment.

This second death has three degrees, Second death has three degrees.
the first is when the soul by sin is separated from the Lord: the second
is, when the body by the power of that curse due to sin, is turned into dust
and the soul is sent to hell: the third is, when both soul and body being
joined together again in the resurrection, shall be banished from the presence
of the Lord, and cast into utter darkness. And it is called the second death
because it is executed upon the wicked after their first death, otherwise the
first death that ever came in the world, Aug. de verb.
was the first degree of the second death, Mors anim^ pr^cessit, Apost. ser. 33
anima deserente Deum, and mors corporis sequut^ est, anima deserente corpus,
de^eruit Deum vole^s anim^, and coacta est deserere corpus nolens, the death of
the soul went before, the soul departing from God, and the death of the body
followed the soul, How Christians are exercised with terrors of conscience
which in the own nature are forerunners of the second death.
departing from the body, the soul departed from God willing, and therefore
is compelled unwillingly to depart out of the body.

Now from both these de^^hs we are delivered by the Lord Jesus for our souls
being freed from sin, are reconciled with God, and so exempted from that
wrath which is to come. For albeit the dear children of God be sometime
exercised with inward terrors of conscience, which in their own nature are
forerunners of these pains prepared for the wicked, and are as the smoke of
that fi^e which afterward shall torment them: yet unto the godly their nature
is changed, they are sent unto them, not to separate them from the Lord, but to
draw their har^s neere^ unto him, and to work in them a greater conformity
with Christ.

And as for the first death, The nature of the first death changed to the
Christian.
we are so delivered from it, that albeit in the own nature it be the Center
of all miseries, and a fearful effect of Gods curse on man for sin, Yet to
the godly the nature thereof is also changed, so that now it is not the death
of the man, but the death of sin in the man: Amb. de bono mort. cap. 4.
mors est sepultura vitiorum, death (says Ambrose) is the bu^iall of all
vices. As the worm which is bred in the tree, says Chrysostom, does at last
consume it, so death which is brought out by sin, does at the length consume
and destroy sin in the children of God. Finally, death is the progress and
accomplishment of the full mo^tification of all our earthly members, wherein
that filthy ^luxe of sin is dried up at an instant. It is a voluntary
sacrificing of the whole man soul and body to the Lord, the greatest and
highest service we can do to him in the earth: for where in the course of our
life we are continual^y fighting against our inordinate Iustes and affections,
to bring them in subjection to Christ, by death as it were with one stroke they
are all smitten and slain, and the soul is offered up to God in a sacrifice
of full and perfect obedience.

Verse 3. For that that was impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weak,
because of the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and that for sin, cond^mned sin in the flesh.
THE Apostle having set down in the first Explication of the confirmation.
belonging to them who are in Christ, and confirmed it in the second, Here
follows an explication of the confirmation of his general proposition.
he proceeds now to the explication of the Confirmation: Declaring how it is
that Christ has freed us from the law of sin, and first he shows how Christ
has freed us from the condemning power of sin, in this verse: namely, that
he taking upon him our nature, and therewithal the burden of our sins, has
condemned He snews how we are freed from the condemning power of sin.
and so disanulled it, that it has no power to condemn us. And this benefit
he amplyfies, showing that by no other means we could obtain it: for where
without Christ there is but one way for men to come to life, The law could not
save us.
namely, the observance of the law, he lets us see it was impossible for the
law to save us: and least it should seem that he blamed the law, he
subioynes, that this impotencie of the Law to save us, proceeds from our
selves, because that we through ^leshly corruption which is in us cannot
fulfill that righteousness which the law requires.

This impotencie of the law appears by these two things; Impotencie of the
law to save us appears in two things.
first it craved that of us which we had not to give, namely, perfect obedience
unto all the Lords commandments, and that under pain of death: which albeit
most justly it be required of us, It craves that which now our nature can not
give.
considering that by creation we It gives not that which our est^te now craves.
the law could not give that unto us of transgressions, which we had contracted
should be forgiven unto us: this I say the law could not do, for the law
commands obedience, but promises not pardon of disobedience; yea rather it
binds the curse of God upon us for it. And again we stood in need of a
supernatural grace to reform deformed nature, and this also the law could not
do, it being a doctrine that shewe^ us the way to life, but ministers not
grace unto us to walk therein, but all these which the law could not do,
Jesus Christ by whom comes grace and life, has done unto us.

Where first we have to mark the pitt^full estate of those who seek life in
the observance of the law, Miserablle blind are they who seek life in perfect
observance of the Law.
which here the Apostle says is impossible for the law to give, they seek
life where they shall never find it. The Apostle in another place calls the
law the ministry of death and condemnation, and that because it instantly
binds men under death for every transgression of her commandments, so that
he who has eyes to see what an universal rebellion of nature there is in man
unregenerate to Gods holy law, yea what imperfections and discordance with the
law are remanent in them who are renewed by grace, may easily espy the blind
presumption of those that seek their lives in the ministry of death. Yet such
are all the children of Adam by nature.
Yet so universal is this error, that it has ouergone the whole posterity
of Adam, nature teaching all men who are not illuminated by Christ, to seek
salvation in their own deeds, that is, to stand to the covenant of works. But
the supernatural doctrine of the Evangelist teaches us to transcend nature, to
go out of our selves, and to seek salvation in the Lord Jesus, and so to use
the law, not that we seek life by fulfilling it, which here is impossible, but
as a schole-maister to lead us unto Christ, in whom we have remission of our
sins, sanctification of our nature, acceptance of our imperfect obedience,
benefits which the law could never aford unto us.

Inasmuch as it was weak because of the flesh. The Apostle does in such sort
ascribe to the law an impotencie to save us that he blames not the Law, The
impotencie of the law comes not of the law which is good, but of our own
corrupted nature.
but the corruption of our fleshly nature, being not able to fulfill that
righteousness which the law requires: yea as the Apostle has taught us
before, so far is our nature perverted by our Apostasy from God, that we are
not only unable to do that which the good and holy law of God requires, but
also we become worse by the law: for by the commandments of the law, sin
reuiues in our nature, and takes occasion by the law to become more sinful,
and so like a desperate disease it conuerts that medicine which is ministered
to cure it into a nourishment and confirmation of the sickness it self. Our
nature becomes worse by the law.
It is the nature of contraries, that every one of them intends the self to
expel another; whereof it comes that there is greatest cold in the bosom of
the earth, even then when the Sun with greatest vehemency shines on it, to
callifie and heat it: even so our corrupted nature does never show it self
more rebellious and stubborn, than when the law of God begins to rectify
it. As an unruly and untamed horse, the more he is spurred forward the faster
he runs backward: so the perverse nature of man, nititur semper in vetitum,
is so far from being reformed by the law, that by the contrary sin that was
dead without the law, is revived by the law, and takes occasion to work in us
all manner of concupiscence. The Apostle is not ashamed to confess that he
found this in his own person; August. lib. 2 confess. cap. 4.
Augustine also examining his former sinful life, does hereby aggrauate his
corruption, that in his young years he was accustomed to steal his
neighbors fruit, not so much for love of the fruit, for he had better at
home, as for a sinful delight he had to go with his companions to commit
evil: so that where the law should have restrained his sinful nature, it was
so much the more provoked to sin by the law. Let therefore the Semipelagians
of our time say to the contrary what they will, let them magnify the arm of
flesh, to diminish the praise of the grace of God, and dream that man's nature
unregenerate can bring forth merits of congruitie, or works of preparation,
yet does the Lord herein greatly abase man, when he tells him, that not
only he cannot do that which the law requires, but that also the more he is
commanded the more he repines, until Grace reform him.

God sending his own Son. How Christ has done that which the law could not.
The Apostle proceeds and let us see how the Lord by Christ has wrought that
salvation which the Law could not. Wherein first it is to be marked, that the
Apostle says not we sought from the Lord a Savior, but that the Lord sent
him unto us unrequired. Surely neither man nor Angel could have ever thought
of such a way of Salvation, the Lord has found it out himself, in his
incomprehensible wisedome^ a way so to save man, that the glory both of his
mercy and justice shall be saved also. Most properly therefore is he called,
Pater non indiciorum, sed misericordiarum, Father not of judgments but of
mercies, Why God is called father of mercy not of judgments.
for both the purpose, and the means of our salvation are from himself: he
has found causes without him, moving to execute his justice, he has been
provoked thereunto by the disobedience of apostate Angels, and man; but a cause
moving him to show mercy is within himself, this praise is due to God, it is
the greatest glory, that can be given unto him. Abominable therefore is that
error of foreseen merits by which the adversaries do what they can to
obscure the praise of the bright shining glory of Gods mercy.

His own Son. How Christ is Gods own son
Jesus Christ is called Gods own Son, to distinguish him from all others who
are his sons by adoption, only Christ is the Son of God by nature, by that
divine inutterable generation, whereof Esaias says, Who can express it. Thus is
he Gods own son, that is, coeternall and coessentiall, begotten of the
Father before all time, by the full communication of his whole essence unto
him, in a manner that cannot be expressed. And in the fullness of time he
became man, God being manifested in the flesh, and in regard of his humane
nature, which was conceived of the holy Ghost, and united in a personal union
with his divine, he stands in the title of Gods own son, after so singular
a manner, that he admits no companion.

The last of these two, Christ's divine generation a great mystery.
the Apostle makes the first point of the mystery of Godliness. God
manifested in the flesh, wherein he bridles our curiosity, for if his
manifestation in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
that is, his incarnation be a mystery, that goes beyond our understanding,
what shall we say of his divine generation? a mystery indeed to be adored not
to be enquired, an article proposed to be believed, Man's curiosity restrained
from searching it.
not to be disputed. The Arrians seeking to search out this unsearchable
mystery with natural reason, by infinite degrees more foolish then if they
had presumed to number the stars of heaven, or measure with their fist all
the waters in the Sea, they stumbled and fell, being never able to comprehend,
how the son that was begotten should be coeternall and coessentiall to the
Father who begot him: therefore the worthy Fathers of the primitive Church to
express the presumption of these arrogant spirits, drew them down from the
dangerous speculation of these high mysteries far above their capacity, to
consideration of things which are in nature. Si in Creatura genitum inueniri
potest, August.
coaeuum genitori, an non aequum est conced as posse ista in creatore coaeterna
inueniri? if in things created, that which is begotten may be found equal in
time to that which begat it, why should it be denied that in the Creator, the
begetter, and begotten are equal in eternity? When a candle (says Augustine)
is first lighted, at once there are two things, the fire and the splendour, or
light: if it be enquired whether the fire come from the light, or the light
from the fire, all men will agree that the splendour or light comes from the
fire: but if again it be demanded which of them is first or last in time, it
cannot be determined. But wherefore shall we use these similitudes? as the
Creator is above the creature, so is that mystery above all the secrets of
nature; no similitude can be found in nature so much as shadow that most high
and supernatural mystery, yet is the endeavor of these godly fathers
commendable, who have labored to bring down men to the exercising of their
wits in things which are below, like unto themselves, leaving curious
inquisition of higher secrets, which as I have said, are to be received with
faith, reverenced with silence, Romans 11. 20
not searched out by curiosity. O man be not high minded but fear.

In the similitude of sinful flesh. Christ came like a sinful man, but
without sin.
We must not so understand these words, as if Jesus had only the similitude
of a natural body, no, he was very man, made of the seed of David, he has
taken on our flesh indeed, yet was he not a sinful man, but separated from
sinners. A holy One, from the first moment of his conception, conceived of the
holy Ghost. Dan. 2. 45.
A Stone cut out of the mountain without hands. The Flower of the field, that
grows without man's labor or industry. 1 Cor. 15.
The second Adam, very man as was the first, but not begotten of man. So then
the word (similitude) is not to be joined with the word (Flesh) but with the
word (sinful.) He took on man's nature without sin, yet subject to those
infirmities, mortality and death, which sin brought upon us, he appeared like
a sinful man, being indeed without sin; in the shape of a Servant, content
to be made inferior not only to Angels, but to men of the vilest sort; sold
for thirty pieces of silver; not so worthy to live as Barrabas; ranked with
Thieves on the Cross, and reputed as a Worm of the earth: thus being void of
all sin, yet was he handled as a sinner and most wicked malefactor.

Wherein we are to consider so far as we may, How dearly the Lord loved
us, perceive by the price he has given for our ransom.
though we cannot comprehend it, that vvonderfull love which the Lord has
shevved us in this work of our salvation, how dear and precious our life
has been in his eyes, perceive by the greatness of that prise which he has
given for us, for who will give much for that whereof he esteems but
little? it was not with gold nor silver nor any corruptible thing, that the
Lord has redeemed us, but with the precious blood of his own Son Jesus, as
of a Lamb unblemished and unspotted. If David considering the goodness of God
toward man in the work of creation, fell out into this admiration, Psalm. 8.
O Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou
do visit him? how much more have we cause so to cry out, considering the
riches of God, his vvonderfull mercies showed us in the work of redemption. It
was a great kindness which Abraham showed to Lot, when he hazarded his own
life, and the lives of his family, to recover Lot out of the hands of
Chedarlaomer, but not comparable to that kindness which our kinsman the Lord
Jesus has showed unto us, who has given his life to deliver us out of the
hand of our enemies. The Lord shed abroad in our hearts more and more
abundantly the sense of that love, that we may endeavor to be thankful for
it, by this threefold duty, first of thanksgiving: secondly, of service:
thirdly, of love toward those who are beloved of him.

As for the first, Our thankfulness again should be testified by this threefold
duty.
our life should be a continual thanksgiving, and worshipping before him, who
has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. When the children of
Israel had passed the red sea, suppose they had a wast wilderness between
them and Canaan, yet they praised God with a song of thanksgiving, Continual
thanksgiving.
and the Lord appointed

As for the second, which is service, Service.
Zachary teaches Luke. 1. 74.
that all our days we should serve him in righteousness and holiness, the
reason why the Israelites bound themselves to give subjection and obedience to
David, 2 Samuel 19. 9
was that he had delivered them from the hand of the Philistines, the same
reason Ezra used to the Jews returned from captivity to make them obedient to
the Lord, Ezra. 9. 13.
Seeing thou O Lord has given us such deliverances, shall we return any more
to break thy Commandments? but much more should it bind us to do service
to our Lord Jesus, seeing he has made us free by his blood, shall we again
make our selves the servants of sin? Professors convinced that serve him not.
The Lord never showed a greater mercy on man, then this that he gave his
son Jesus Christ unto the death for us, and there can be no higher contempt
done to God by man, then if after so great a love showed us, we shall still
refuse to be his servants: much will be required of him, to whom much is
given, those Gentiles to whom the Lord revealed himself in goodness only as
their Creator, because they did not glorify him, the Apostle says that the
wrath of God was revealed from heaven upon them, and what wrath then may thou
look for, to whom the Lord has manifested himself in mercy also, as thy
Redeemer in Christ, and yet thou will not glorify him: thou receiuest not him
whom thy Father has sent unto thee, neither will thou live unto him, that gave
himself to dye for thee, but by thy wicked life thou crucifiest again the
Son of God, and treadest under thy feet the blood of the new covenant:
certainly Sodom and Gomorrha shall be in an easier estate in the day of
judgment, then the wicked of this generation. For in this last age the Lord
has spoken to us by his Son, he has none greater to send after him: those
laborers of the vineyard that slew the Servants of the great King, were not
for that instantly punished, but when the Son came, and they had murdered
him also, then was their judgment no longer delayed. It was not written for
the Jews only in whom it was first accomplished, but for us also to whom the
Father in this last age has sent his own Son, and by whom he has spoken
unto us from himself, if we despise him there remains no more but a violent
looking for of judgment.

The third duty is, Love to those whom he has bidden love for his sake.
that for Christ's sake we love unfeignedly those whom he has recommended
unto us, our goodness cannot extend unto the Lord, neither have we him
vvalking with us upon earth, that we may minister unto him, may wash his
feet, and annoint his blessed body with precious ointments, therefore should
our delight be upon these his excellent ones that are upon earth. When
Jonathan was dead, David for Ionathans sake showed kindness to Mephibosheth:
our Jonathan is not dead, he lives, and reigns in heaven, yet can we not
declare our kindness to himself, let us seek some Mephibosheth, some of
Christ's little weak and impotent children, of whom he has said, what ye do
to one of these little ones for my sake is done to me, and let us show
kindness unto them, for the great love which the Lord Jesus has showed unto
us.

And that for sin. Christ came to destroy sin, cursed are they who nourish
it.
These words contain the end of Christ's manifestation in the flesh, which is,
that in our nature he might bear the punishment of our sins, satisfy the
justice of God, and so abolish sin. Saint John makes this clear, when he
says, that he appeared to destroy the works of the devil, that is, sin:
for sin being removed there is nothing in man, but the workmanship of God. By
this it is evident how highly they offend God, who abuses the death of Christ,
to nourish themselves in their sin, being the bolder to commit sin, because
Christ dyed for them: surely this is to turn the grace of God into
wantonness. The Lord came to abolish sin, not to nourish it, Christ once
suffered, 1 Pe^. 3. 18.
the just for the unjust (not that we should still abide unjust) but that he
might bring us to God. Thou therefore who continuest unjust, may say, as thou
have heard, that there is a Savior come into the world, but can not say in
truth, that there is a Savior come to thee. For where Christ comes he works
that work for which he came, namely, he destroys the work of the devil,
that is he enfeebles, and abolishes at the last the power of sin.

Condemned sin. How Christ has condemned sin.
Sin by a metaphor is said to be condemned, for as they who are condemned
are deprived of all the liberty, power, and privileges they had before, and
has no more any place to appear in judgment, so has the Lord Jesus
disanulled sin, that it has now no power to command, and condemn us, he
has spoiled principalities and powers, Colos. 2. 24.
and triumphed over them in the Cross, and has nailed unto it the obligation
of ordinances which was against us, Ambrose in hunc locum.
and so sustulit illam quasi authoritatem peccati, qua homines detinebat in
inferno, has taken away that power and authority of sin, whereby it
detayned men under damnation. This has he done most lawfully, and in
judgment, as we shall hear, bearing our sins in his blessed body on the
Cross, he has suffered that punishment which the law required to be
inflicted on man for sin, and that in the flesh, that is, in the same nature
of man which had offended.

For, Two head or chief justice Courts holden by God.
this word of Condemnation imports a just, and lawful proceeding of a Judge in
judgment: which that we may the better understand, let us consider that there
are two general and head justice Courts, which the Lord has set unto men,
the one is holden already, the other is to be holden: In the first the sins
of all Gods elect are condemned.
that themselves may be absolved; in the second the persons of all the
reprobate shall be iusty condemned. In the first by the ordinance of God the
Father, our sins were laid upon the back of Jesus Christ, and a law imposed
to him which was never given to any other, neither Angel or man, to wit, the
law of a Mediator, that he should make up peace between God and man; love God
in such sort, that he should by suffering preserve the glory of his Fathers
justice, and yet make manifest the glory of his mercy; that he should love his
brethren in such sort, that he should take the burden of their transgressions
upon him, which as by the Father it was enjoined unto him, so did he
willingly undertake it. And therefore having our sins imputed unto him, he
presented himself for us upon the Cross, as upon a pannell before the Judge,
to underly the law, which craved that our sins should be punished to the
death. The decree according to the law is executed, death yea an accursed
death, as the punishment of sin, is laid upon Christ: whereupon there
follows of equity an absolution of all those for whom the Lord Jesus suffered
as Cautioner, In the second the persons of all the wicked shall be condemned.
their sin is condemned and made of no force to Ioh. 5. 24.
He that hears my words, and belieues in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life,

And lastly we may observe here what a powerful Savior we have, Christ did
greatest works when to man's judgment he was weakest.
when to the judgment of man he was weakest, then did he the greatest work
that ever was done in the world: he was powerful in working of miracles in his
life, but more powerful in his death; for then he darkened the Sun; he
shook the earth; he made the rocks to cleave; he rent the veil of the
temple a sunder; and caused the dead to rise: Cyp. de duplici martirio.
Mortuum Caesarem quis metuat, sed morte Christi quid efficacius, if Caesar be
once dead who will fear, Christ even when he is dead is terrible to his
enemies: nothing can be more effectual then his death. By it he did a greater
work than was the creation of the world; by it he brought in new heavens; and
a new earth; by suffering death he destroyed him who had the power of death;
when he was condemned of man, he condemned sin that it should not condemn
man: August. de temp. ser. 7.
passus est vt infirmus, operatus vt fortis, ^e suffered as a weak man, but
wrought as a strong one. Sicut serpens mortuus, M^car. hom. 11.
etc. As that Serpent without life (erected by Moses in the wilderness)
overcame the living Serpents that stung Israel: so the Lord Jesus by suffering
death has slain that serpent, that living in us had slung us unto death.
Chris. hom. 2 in Math.
Hic vides mortem morte peremptam maledictum maledicto extinctum, and per quae
Diabolus iam antea valebat, per ea ipsa tyrannidem ipsius esse destructam, here
thou see (says Chrysostom) death slain by death, and the tyranny of
Satan destroyed by these same means by which before most of all he prevailed.

O wonderful work! Christ a power full Savior, stronger then Samson, yea,
stronger then that strong one
surely the weakness of God is stronger then man: he is that strong One
indeed, stronger then Samson. When the Philistines thought they had him sure
within the ports of Azzah, he arose at midnight, and took the doors of the
gates of the City, and the two posts, and carried them away with the bars
thereof on his shoulders up to the top of the mountain, which is before
Hebron; but our mighty Conqueror and deliverer the Lord Jesus, has in a more
excellent manner magnified his power, for being closed in the grave, clasped in
the bands of death, and a stone rolled to the mouth of the grave, the Sepulcher
sealed, and guarded with soldiers, he rose again the third day before the
rising of the Sun, he carried like a victor the bars and posts of death away,
as upon his shoulders, and upon the mount of Olives he ascended on high
leading captivity captive.

Like as therefore we received before great comfort through the consideration
of Christ's incomprehensible love toward us, Christ's power yields us great
comfort.
so is it now confirmed by the meditation of his power Let Satan boast like
Rabsache that the Lord is not able to deliver Jerusalem out of his hands, 2
Kin. 18. 35
he is but a blasphemous Liar, the Lord will rebuke him, and will shortly
tread Satan under our feet: it is the curse of the wicked, Deuteronomy. 28. 29
he shall be oppressed, and there shall be none to deliver him, but blessed
be the Lord who has provided a strong deliverer for us, who certainly shall
set us free from our enemies, Psalm. 143. 12
and destroy all the oppressors of our souls. Glory therefore be unto him for
ever.

Verse 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.
THe Apostle having taught us in the former verse, Here follows the second
member of the explication, wherein he shows how we are delivered from the
commanding power of sin.
that Christ gave himself to the death for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 26.
that he might sanctify it, and make it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blame. This is the end which Christ has proposed unto himself, and
whereof he cannot be frustrate, as he has begun it, so he shall finish
it, he shall conform us to the law, the righteousness thereof shall be
fulfilled in us, there shall not be left in our nature so much as a sinful
motion or desire, but he shall at the last present us pure and without blame
to his Father.

This righteousness of the law, How the righteousness of the law is fulfilled
in us.
I understand to be that perfect obedience to the Commandments thereof, which
the law requires flowing from the perfect love of God and our neighbor: and it
is fulfilled in us two manner of ways, first by application or imputation of
Christ's righteousness unto us, he is our head and we his members, and are so
united with him, that now we are not to be taken as sundry but as one body
with him. By virtue of the which communion it comes to pass, that that which
is ours is his, and that which is his, is ours, so that in our head we have
fulfilled the law, satisfied Gods justice for our sins. Secondly, it will be
fulfilled in us by our perfect sanctification, though now we have but begun
obedience and in part, the Lord Jesus at the last shall bring it in us to
perfection.

The Jesuits of Rhemes in their marginall notes on this Verse, The Jesuits
collect here that the Law is fulfilled in this life.
collects a note which the word here renders not unto them. We see (say they)
that the Law which is Gods commandments, may be kept, that the keeping thereof
is justice, and that in Christian men that is fulfilled by Christ's grace, which
by the force of the Law could never be fulfilled: that the law may be
fulfilled, and also shall be fulfilled by the grace of Christ, who has
delivered us from the Law of sin, is evident out of the Apostles words, This
place proves no such thing.
we confess it, and are comforted in it, this is an end which Christ has
proposed unto himself; that he may make us perfectly answerable to that
holiness, which the Law requires, and in his own good time he shall bring it
to pass: but that the Law is fulfilled of men in this life, cannot be proved,
neither out of this place, nor any other place of holy Scripture, Damnatum est
pecatum, Caietane.
non extinctum, Sin is condemned (says Caietane, one of their own) but not
extinguished.

And hereunto beside infinite testimonies of holy Scripture agrees also the
suffrages of pure antiquity. That the law is not fulfill^d in us, nor by us in
this life is proved.
Non dicit familia tua sana sum, medicum non requiro, sed sana me Domine, and
sanabor. It is not (says Ambrose) the voice of thy family, Amb. de paeniten.
li. 1. cap. 6 Ierem. 17.
I am whole, and needs not a Physician, but heal me O Lord, and I shall be
healed, Tu audes Nouatiane mundum te di^cre, qui etsi operibus mundus esses hoe
solo verbo immundus fieres. Ambrose spoke it to the Nouatians Heretics of his
time, and it may be fuly turned over to the Jesuits of our time: Dare thou O
Jesuit call thy self clean and holy? albeit thou were clean in regard of thy
works, this one word were enough to make thee unclean, With him also agrees
Augustine, Aug. de verb Apost. ser. 29
Sunt quidam infl^ti vtres spritu elationis pleni, non magnitudine ingentes,
sed superbiae morbo tumentes, vt audeant dicere inuen^ri homines (...) peccato.
There are some (says he) like unto vessels blown up with wind, filled with
a hautie spirit, not solidly great, but swelled with the sickness of pride,
who dare be bold to say, that men are found in earth without sin? Of such as
these he demands in that same place: Ibidem.
Interrogo te, O homo sancte, just, sine macula, oration ista, dimitte nobis
debita nostra, fidelium est, an catechumenorum? certe regeneratorum est, immo
filiorum, nam si non est filiorum qua front dicitur Pater noster, qui es in
coelis, vbi ergo estis, O iusti, sancti, in quibus peccata non sunt. A question
for Papists.
I demand of thee (O man) thou who art just and holy, this prayer, Forgive us
our sins, whether is it a prayer to be said by Catechists only, or to be
said also of such as are believers and converted Christians? surely it is the
prayer of men regenerated, yea, it is the prayer of the Sons of God, for they
call God their Father, in heaven; where then are ye, O ye just and holy ones in
whom are no sins? If the regenerate and sons of God have need to crave
remission of sins, what are ye who say ye have no sin? 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
If we say we have no sin, we lie, and the truth is not in us, and our
blessed Savior to let us see how far we are from doing that which we
should do, says: When ye have done all that ye can do, Luke. 17. 10.
yet say ye are unprofitable Servants. Where because they have a silly
subterfuge, that albeit we were never so righteous, yet for humilities sake,
we should say we are unprofitable: I answer them, as Augustine answered the
same objection in his time, Aug. de verb.
propter humilitatem ergo mentiris, Apost. ser. 29
then for humilities sake, thou lie, but it is certain, Christ never taught
man to lie for humility, this is but a forged falshoode of their own.

And to join the third witness with the former two. Bernard who lived in a
very corrupt time, yet retained this truth, Ber. in annu^. Mariae.
Quis melior Propheta? de quo dixit Deus, inueni virum secundum cor meum, and
tamen ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo: Ne intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo, who
is better then the Prophet David? of whom the Lord said, I have found a man
after mine own heart, yet had he need to say, Lord enter not into judgment
with thy Servant. Ber. in Cant. Sermon. 23.
And again, Sufficit mihi ad omnem iustitiam solum habere propitium, cui soli
peccaui: non peccare Dei iustitia est, hominis iustitia indulgentia Dei, It
suffices me for all righteousness to have him only merciful to me, whom I
have only offended, to be without sin is the righteousness of God, man's
righteousness is Gods indulgence, pardoning his finne: we conclude therefore
with him. Ber ser. cont. vitiu^ingrati.
V^ generationi huic miserae, cui sufficere videtur sua insufficientia, immo
inopia tanta, quis enim ad perfectionem illam, quam Scripturae tradunt, vel
aspirare videtur? woe to this miserable generation, to whom their own
insufficiency seems sufficient, for who is it that has so much as aspired to
that perfection, which the holy Scripture commands us?

But to maintain their error, Places of scripture wherein godly men are called
Saints and righteous, makes not for their error of perfect observance of the
Law.
they enforce these places of holy Scripture, wherein mention is made of
innocence, justice and perfection in the Godly, whereupon they simply infer
that the Law is fulfilled. Their paralogismes shall easily be discovered, if we
keep Augustines rule: when the perfection of any man is mentioned, we must
consider wherein, for a man may be righteous in comparison of others, so Noah
was a righteous man in comparison of that generation wherein he lived, yet was
he not without sin. A man may be also so called in comparison of himself,
the Lord judging a man according to that where unto the greater part of his
disposition is inclined: for the Lord does repute and account his Children not
after the remanents of the old man, but according to the new workmanship of his
grace in them; whereof it comes to pass, that albeit in a great part they
be sinful, yet the Lord gives unto them, the names of Saints and righteous
men.

Again, In what sense Godly men are called perfect in holy Scripture.
in handling of the Apostles words Philippians 3. let us as many as are perfect
be thus minded, he moves the question, seeing the Apostle has said
immediately before, that he was not perfect, how does he now rank himself
among those who are perfect? how agrees these two, that he is perfect, and not
perfect? He answers, the Apostle was perfect, August. in Psalm. 38.
secundum intentionem, non secundum peruentionem, that is, perfect in regard of
his intention and purpose, not in regard of peruention, and obtaining of his
purpose. And hereunto agrees that of Bernard, Ber. in Cant. sermon. 49.
Magnum illud electionis vas perfectum abnuit, profectum fatetur, that great
chosen vessel of election graunts profection, that is, a going forward, but
denies perfection, for (...) is not only he who has come to the end, but he
also who is walking toward it, we are so perfect in this life that we are yet
but walking to perfection: Ambros. in Romans cap. 8. ver. 9.
therefore says Ambrose, Apostolus aliquando quasi perfectis loquitur,
aliquando quasi perfecturis, hoc est aliquando laudat, aliquando commonet: the
Apostle speaks unto Christians sometime as unto men that are perfect,
othertimes as unto men who are to perfect that which is required of them, that
is, sometimes he praises them for the good they have done, and otherwhiles he
admonishes them of the good they have to do. We conclude therefore with
Augustine, August. de temp. ser. 49.
perfectio hominis est, inuenisse se non esse perfectum, this is the perfection
of man to find that he is not perfect.

And as for that place of Saint Luke, How Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all
the commandments of God.
where it is said that Zachary and Elizabeth walked without reproof in all
the Commandments of God because the Jesuits of Rhemes in their observations
would wrest it to confirm their error, we will shortly make it manifest.
Luke. 1. 6.
That it makes not for them, Augustine has two reasons, whereby he proves out
of that same Scripture, that Zachary was not without sin, first because he
was a Priest, and was bound to offer as well for his own sins, as the sins of
the people. Secondly, in that the Evangelist says, Heb. 5. 3.
he walked in the commandments of God, it is an agreement, that as yet he
had not attained to the mark: to the which we may add the third out of that
same place, the dombnesse inflicted upon him for his misbeleeuing, evidently
proves he was not so perfect as to be without sin. Beside this, he
customably distinguishes between peccatum and crimen, sin and a crime, that
is, some grievous offense that gives slander and is worthy of crimination.
Sanctorum hominum vitam inveniri posse dicimus sine crimine, Aug. Enchi.
we affirm that the life of holy men may be found without a crime. And again,
nunc been viuitur si sine crimine, sin^ peccato autem, qui se viuere existimat,
non id agit vt peccatum non habeat, sed vt veniam non accipiat: now men live
well if they live without crime, but he who thinks he can live without sin,
does not thereby make himself free of sin, but debarres himself from the
pardon of his sin. And so much for refutation of their error.

Now for our instruction we mark again here, The end of Christ's death is our
sanctification, therefore it should not be abused to give liberty to sin.
that seeing the end of Christ's death is our sanctification, it cannot be but a
mocking of the son of God, and a treading of his holy blood, under the
unclean feet of men, to make the death of Christ a nourishment of sin: let
such thoughts be far from us, that we should take liberty to sin, because
we have a Savior? this is to make Christ a minister of sin, and as was said,
to build up that which Christ came to destroy. O thou who love the Lord
Jesus, be it far from thee to take pleasure in that which made his blessed
soul heavy unto death, let us never nourish that life of sin, which was the
cause of the death of Christ, but let us daily cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God.

For albeit by Christ we be delivered from the curse of the Law, Christ has
freed us from the curse of the law not from the obedience thereof.
yet are we not exempted from the obedience thereof. In respect of the one, the
Apostle said, We are not under the Law but under Grace: in respect of the
other, he has said that the Law is good: and our Savior protests he came not
to destroy the Law, Romans 6. 15.
but to fulfill it, both in himself and his members, Romans 7. 12.
not only by righteousness imputed, but also inherent. Romans 5. 17.
For the law stands to us a rule of our life, we love the holiness thereof,
and strives to conform our selves unto it: Ambrose in Romans cap. 8.
iustificati enim amici leges efficiuntur, for men when they are justified,
become lovers of the law, which before they hated. Romans 7. 22.
So that hereby we are to try whether we be in Christ, if we delight in the
law of God, if we be grieved when our sinful nature transgresses the precepts
thereof, if we find a begun harmony between our affections, actions, and
her commandments, by these and the like effects may we know that in Christ we
are justified.

Lastly, We are sure our begun sanctification shall be perfected.
we have this comfort that seeing our sanctification is an end which the Lord
Jesus has proposed unto himself, we may be sure he shall attain unto it.
In the first creation what he commanded was done, he made light to shine out
of darkness, no impediment could stay the work of the Lord: so is it in the
second creation, neither Satan's malice, nor the deceitful allurements of the
world, nor the sinful corruption of our own nature, shall stay that work of
our perfect sanctification, which the Lord Jesus has not only begun, but also
taken upon him to accomplish.

Verse 5. For they who are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but
they who are after the spirit savor the things of the spirit.
HItherto we have heard the proposition of comfort; Application of his former
doctrine, containing first a Commination of the wicked, wherein is declared
their miserable state who walk after the flesh.
who walks after the spirit, not after the flesh: now in this third member of
the first part of the Chapter, he subioynes an exhortation. Wherein by sundry
reasons he disswades us for walking after the flesh, and exhorts us to walk
after the spirit: wherein he keeps this order. First he oppones these two, to
walk after the flesh, and after the spirit, as contraries, which cannot
consist. He lets us see the miserable estate of them who walk after the one,
and illustrates it by the happy estate of those who walk after the other, and
then concludes that they who are in the flesh cannot please God, verse. 5. 6. 7.
8. Secondly he comforts the godly, least that they considering (...) (...)
upright, and can look to heaven, the soul which is from above, has forgotten
her original, is crooked to the earth, and like a Serpent creeping on many
feet, so walks it after the dust with all her affections, sauouring only
those things which are carnal. This is man's miserable estate by nature. The
Lord open our eyes, that we may see how far we are fallen by our apostacy,
how deadly we are wounded, that in time we may make our recourse to the
Physician of our souls, who now offers by Grace to restore us.

But to return, The diverse disposition of the Christian and carnal man flows
from the diversity of their generations.
this diversity of dispositions in the man natural and spiritual, the
Apostle designs to flow from the diversity of their generations, they who are
after the flesh, that is as our Savior expounds it, that which is borne of the
flesh, is flesh: so then the cause why they are carnal and savors only the
things of the flesh, is because they are only pertakers of a carnal
generation. Every creature, as ye may see, John. 3. 6.
has an inclination to follow the own kind, some lives in the earth, some in
the water, every one of them by instinct of that nature, which they received in
their generation, following so earnestly their own kind, that a contrary
education cannot make them to forsake it. The Foul whose kind is to live in
the waters, though she be brought up under the wings of another damme, whose
kind is to live in the earth, so soon, as she is strengthened with feathers,
forsaking her education, follows her kind: so also in every man the
disposition of his affections and actions is answerable to the nature of his
life. If he have no more but a natural life, his cogitations, counsels,
resolutions, and actions are only carnal, but if he have also a spiritual
life, then shall he be able to mount above nature, having an inclination to
heavenly things, for every one who is risen with Jesus, seeks those things
which are above.

Now this difference of there dispositions, The contrary disposition of the
christian and carnal man appears.
flowing from their different kinds, shall appear the more clearly, if ye
compare the affections, words, and actions of the one with the other. In their
understanding.
And first to begin at the understanding, it is certain Nicodemus of
regeneration, John. 3. 4.
and Nicodemus shall conceive that he speaks of a natural generation. Act.
26. 24.
Let Paul speak before Agrippa of the heavenly vision, and Festus shall count
him a fool. Genesis 19.
Let Lot speak to his Sons in Law of the judgment to come upon Sodom, and
they shall esteem him as a mocker: thus Naturalists can neither understand the
words of mercy nor judgment, to be allured with the one, or terrified with the
other, for he minds only earthly things; but as for the spiritual man, he has
received that new mind, Whereby he knows him that is the true one, 1 John. 5.
20.
he is endued with new senses, whereby he perceiues things which are
excellent, Aug. de verb Apost. ser. 17
habet enim oculos interiores, quibus videt iustitiae lumen, he has those
natural eyes whereby he sees the light of righteousness.

And if from the understanding we proceed to the affections, In their
affections.
Math. 8.
and naturalists make more of their smallest earthly commodities, than of those
things which are above at the right hand of God; (...) the Christian accounts
the testimonies of the Lord sweeter unto him then all the treasures of
worldlings, he finds ^ore joy in the lightsome countenance of God, then in
all abundance of Wheat and Wine; the best things of this earth he accounts but
doung; the pleasures of the world are loathsome unto him, Aug. ibid.
her glory is despised in his eyes, habet enim olfactum interius, de quo dixit
Apostolus Christi bonus odor ^^mus Deo in omni loco; estque verbum illi odor
vitae ad vitam^ for he has that internal sense of smelling, whereof the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ in every place, this makes the
word of God unto him (...) (...) either reason which should rule is ouer-ruled
by the will, or at least the crooked is led by the blind, In the soul of a
carnal man the blind leads the crooked.
that is, a blinded understanding directs the crooked will and perverse
affections a wrong way; and what marvel then if both fall into the ditch: for
where the eye which is the light of the body is darkness, how great must be
the darkness of the whole man? and seeing the understanding faculty of the
soul gives no counsels nor conclusions, but such as are deadly, what can the
will and affections do, but run headlong into the ways of death?

This is that increase of knowledge, The most excellent knowledge of the
natural man brings out death.
which we have gotten by our Apostasy from God, this is the fruit we have
plucked from off the forbidden tree, we have a wisdom, which brings out
death, the most excellent knowledge whereunto the quickest ingines could ever
attain by the light of nature, profited them not unto salvation. Lanctantius
compared all the learning of Philosophers to a liuelesse body wanting a head,
in seeing they were blind, in hearing they heard not, understanding they
understood not, while they professed themselves to be wise they became fools.
As the senses are in the head, Neither natural nor moral philosophy could
profit men to salvation.
so all spiritual understanding of the way of life is in Christ Jesus, by
natural philosophy they attained to the knowledge of the creatures, but
learned not to know the Creator; by natural reason they learned to discern the
sophistry of men, but not to resist the sophistry of Satan. By practice also
of Moral philosophy they attained to a show of those virtues which they
called cardinal, to a show I say, but as for true Prudence, Justice,
Temperance and Fortitude, they attained not unto them, without faith it is
impossible to please God, neither can there be without it any thing which
deserves the name of virtue, quid enim illis cum virtutibus, qui Dei virtutem
Christum ignorant, for what have they to do with virtue who are ignorant of
Christ, the virtue and power of God?

All the light that is in nature is like to the sight of blinded Sampson,
Naturalists are all blind like Sampson.
for as he without a guide could not find one pillar of the house; no more can
natural understanding find out so much as one of the articles of our faith:
nascimur vniuersi viae ciuitatis prorsus ignari, we are all borne altogether
ignorant of the way that leads to the city of God; Wisest among them cannot
prevent their miserable end, more then Achitophel, far less the wrath to
come.
(...), as the Apostle calls us, without a mind to know any thing pertaining to
our own salvation. Whatsoever wisdom man has without grace, may lead him
forward to evil, but cannot teach him to eschew evil. Achitophell was counted
wise in his time, and his wisdom and counsel as the oracle of God, but he
had no wisdom to foresee nor prevent his miserable end, 2 Samuel 17.
he hanged himself in his impatiencie: yet is the wit of naturalists in our
time no better than his, they are wise in their own eyes, and glories within
themselves that by their subtle wits they have gone through dangerous courses,
wherein others have fallen; yet they know not their end, neither are sure that
the politic devise wherein they have placed their confidence shall not at
length be a snare to themselves. Therefore the spirit of God vouchsafes not
upon the men of this world the (...) of wise men, but calls them wise with
arestriction, they are wise (says Jeremy) to do evil. Iere. 4. 22.
Wiser (says our Savior) in their own generation than the children of God.
Luke. 16. 8.
Basil properly compares them unto Howlets, Compared to Howlets.
which see something in the night, but nothing in the day: such are worldlings,
they have some understanding of the works of darkness, Basil hexam. hom. 8.
but no judgment how to approve themselves to the light of God, wise to
compass things present, but careless for those which are to come.

Where if it be demanded why then does the Apostle attribute wisdom to them
who walk after the flesh? it is answered, Prudentia dicitur cum res stulta
sit, quia sic ipsis videtur, it is called wisdom because so it seems to them
who have it, The carnal man and the Christian either of them judges other to
be foolish.
albeit in very deed it be foolishness. The judgments of the carnal and
Christian man are so different, that either of them esteems another foolish,
but the one judges with a warrant, the other not so: the spiritual (...) (...)
Spirit they have not. As the waves of the Sea are stirred with every wind, so
are their minds perturbed through the tumultuous desire of their variable
affections. And as for peace of Conscience, which arises of the sense of Gods
mercy toward us in Christ, how can they have it whose life is a continuance in
inimitie with God? Psalm. 8 5.
for righteousness and peace do kiss one another, where there is no
righteousness how can there be peace, August. de tem. ser. 200
pax est haereditas Christianoru^, peace is the heritage of Christians. The
wicked have their own carnal security, they bless themselves in their
heart, when the word of the Lord does curse them, but the false conclusions of
peace and safety which they have laid in their own hearts, shall not preserve
them from that sudden destruction, which (as travail upon a woman with
child) shall come upon them: their security is like the security of Jonas,
Their security is like the security of Jonas.
who slept most soundly, when he had most cause to watch and pray, for the Lord
was pursuing him as a fugitive servant, the officers of God gathered about him
to lay hands on him, the winds commoned against him, the raging waves of the
Sea refusing all other satisfaction, offered by the Mariners, rolled with
violence about the Bark wherein he was, determining not to rest till they
apprehend him, all his companions were afraid and compelled to cry every man
unto his God, only Jonas was sleeping: what think ye? was this true peace? no
indeed, but false security. It fares even so with the wicked, the Lord stands
offended with them, the heavens above closed upon them, hell beneath opened to
receive them, Satan the devouring Lion hungring for them, waiting when they
shall be given him for a pray; but they are eating, drinking, making merry in
the depth of a dead Conscience, but certainly their security will end in a
fearful wakening, they shall be taken out of their bed of ease wherein they
lie, and shall be cast into that bottomless deep of the wrath of God, wherein
their worm shall never dye, and their fire shall never be quenched.

But to leave them and return to the Christian, A Christian has peace with
God, and himself, and his brethren, but not perfect in this.
it may be demanded, how is he pertaker of peace? whose crosses are so
continual as his? who more exercised with inward terrors then he? Is not his
battle without intermission? where then is his peace? To this I answer we
have indeed peace with God, with our selves, and our Christian brethren, Greg.
moral. in Job. lib. 6.
but our peace is not perfect, Pax nostra ex disiderio creatoris inchoatur, ex
manifesta autem visione perficitur, a begun peace we have arising of that
fervent desire we have toward our God: but it is the manifest vision and
clear sight of God that must perfect it: we attain to the beginnings of this
peace, cum mentem Deo, and menti carnem subiugamus, when we subdue the mind
to God, and the flesh to the mind, but it cannot be perfect, quamdiu men's
ignoratione caecatur, and carnis suae impugnatione concutitur, so long as the
mind is darkened with ignorance, and disquieted with the assaults of the flesh.
And to the same purpose says Augustine, Aug. in Joan. tract. 77.
Est nobis pax aliqua, quia condelectamur Legi Dei secundum interiorem hominem,
sed non plena, quia videmus aliam legem in membris nostris repugnantem legi
mentis nostrae, we have some peace within our selves, when we find that our
inward man delights in the Law of God, but it is no perfect peace; because we
see an other Law in our members rebelling against the law of our mind, neither
can our peace with our brethren here be perfect, cogitationes cordis nostri
inuicem non videmus, Ibidem.
and quaedam de nobis, quae non sunt in nobis, vel in melius inuicem, vol in
deterius opinamur; thus have we a peace but not perfect, not without
interruption.

Yet our comfort stands, Inward and outward troubles may interrupt our peace
but cannot take it away.
that how ever our peace be interrupted by outward troubles and inward terrors
of conscience, yet it cannot be taken from us, albeit no trouble for the
present be sweet, yet it works in us good effects: by it we are made more
humble, more fervent in prayer, more abundant in tears, the hard heart by this
holy hammer of God being made soft: so that sanctified trouble by the Lords
wonderful working becomes a mean to establish our peace. Greg. moral. in Job.
lib. 2.
Corda electorum aliquando concussa melius solidantur, the hearts of the elect
are best settled, after they have been shaken with crosses. All the children of
God finds this by experience, that their inward troubles are preparatiues to
inward consolations: as he who goes to build a house the higher he intends to
raise it, the deeper he lays the foundations thereof, so the Lord humbles them
lowest with his terrors, to whom he purposes to communicate the highest
measure of his consolations. As his sufferings abounds in us, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
so shall our consolation abound through him, we will therefore that peace
which we have in Christ, and which he has left us, none shall be able to
take from us.

Verse 7. Because the wisdom of the flesh is inimitie against God: for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be.
THe Apostle proceeds, and gives the reason why he called the wisdom of the
flesh, death: because it is inimitie with God. He proves it is inimitie with
God* because neither is it, nor can it be subject unto the law of God.

Of this manner of reasoning used by the Apostle we first learn, Our life
stands (...) with God.
that our life consists in our peace with God, and that our death is procured
by our inimitie with him. Compare sinful Adam, with innocent Adam, and this
shall be made manifest: so long as he stood at peace with God* he lived a
joyful life, familiar with his maker: but from the time he began the
inimitie by transgression of the commandment, not only was the presence of
God (joyful to him before) terrible now, but he became such a ^e^rour to
himself, that it was a death to him to live in that state of life. Oh that
always we could remember this, that we cannot offend the Lord, unless we
slay our selves: all our rebelling against the Lord, is but a kicking of our
heel against the prick, the loss is our own, we deprive our selves of
life, but cannot spoil the Lord of his glory.

It is written of the Sidonians, How foolish man is when he entertaines
inimitie with God.
that when Herod intended war against them, they made friendship with
Blastus Herod's chamberlain, and besought him to make peace for them: the
reason is because their lands were nou^ished by the king, therefore they were
not able to bear his inimitie. Alas that we cannot be as wise in a greater
matter, both our lands and our selves are nourished by the king of heaven, we
are not able to endure his anger: if he please he can make the heaven above us
as brass, and the earth beneath us as iron; if he take his breath out of our
nosthrils we fall like clay to the ground and are turned into dust: how then
is miserable man so bewitched, that he dares live in that state of life which
is inimitie with God? 1 Cor. 10. 22
Do ye provoke the Lord unto anger, are ye stronger than he? No, no
assuredly if thou walk on in thy sins, the Lord shall crush thee with a
scepter of iron, and break thee in pieces like a potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 9.
so unequal shall thou find the match, if thou contend with thy maker: Oh
consider this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50. 22.
least he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver. Shall the
Sidonians entreat for peace when Herod^ proclaymes war, and shall man
continue in inimitie, when God from heaven proclaymes his peace? far be it
from us, that we should so do. Away with this wisdom of the flesh, which is
inimitie with God.

Perceive again, No good in man's nature before it be renewed, against the
Semipelagians of our time.
how the spirit of God in such sort describes the nature of man vnrenued by
Grace, that no good is left in it, out of which the Semipelagians of our time,
may draw their works of preparation or merits of congruitie, for where as in
the Soul of man* there are but two faculties: the Understanding and the Will,
the spirit of God so describes his Understanding, that not only he says, the
natural man understands not the things that are of God, but as if that were
not suff^cient to express man's miserable estate, A mind that neither sees nor
can see.
he adds, neither indeed can he understand them, because they are
spiritually discerned. And again, his will he so describes it, that it is
not subject unto the Law of God, and he adds this (neither indeed can it be)
what more can be said to abase the natural pride of man, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
he has such a mind as neither understands nor can understand the things of
God; A will that neither is subject to God nor can be.
he has such a will as neither is subject, nor can be subject to the Law of
God. This is the judgment of gods spirit concerning the corruption of our
nature, we set it against the vain opinion of all those, who to magnify
the arm of flesh, and the merits of man, dreams of a good in our nature
without grace, which cannot be found in it.

Neither let any man inferring more of the Apostles speech then himself
concludes, The praise of Gods power and grace is the greter because it reforms
nature it being so far perverted.
think it impossible that our rebellious will should be made obedient: the
Apostle takes not away this hope from man, only he denies that nature* is able
to do it. Nature without grace may increase the inimitie, but cannot make
reconciliation, but that which is impossible to man, is possible to God. The
nature of beasts, birds and creeping things has been tamed by the nature of
man (says Saint James) but the tongue of man, Iam. 3. 7.
though the smallest member in the body* yet so vn^uly an evil, that no man is
able to tame it. We cannot change one hair of our head, Mat. 5. 36.
to make that white which is black, far less can we change our hearts to
make them holy which are unclean. What then shall we be out of all hope?
that which we are not able to do, shall we think it shall never be done?
Let us not so conclude, though no man can tame the nature of man, the Lord can*
Paul who was a ravening Wolf in the Evening, the Lord made a peaceable Lamb
in the Morning. Naturalists have written that the blood of the Goat causes the
hard Adamant to break, but the holy Scripture has more surely taught that the
blood of Jesus has virtue to turn a stony heart into a soft, where it pleases
the Lord of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. There is nothing colder
than ice, yet says Augustine, it is melted and made warm by the help of fire.
A thornie ground (says Cyrill) being well manured becomes fertile, Ciril.
catec. 2
and the Lord (says the Psalmist) turns a barren wilderness into a fruitful
land: Psalm. 107.
he rayses the dead; he makes the blind to see; Psalm. 103.
and the lame to walk; he causes the Eagle to renew his youth; shall we then
close his hands, and think it impossible for him to make the sinner, conceived
and borne in sin, to cast the old slough of nature, and become a new
creature?

And this have I marked to keep us from that presumptuous judging as to
conclude any man's reprobation, Judge not rashly of any man's reprobation.
because of his present rebellion, thou know not what is in the counsel of
God, though in regard of his conversation for the present he be a stranger
from the life of God. And again for our selves, that we may magnify the
mercy of the Lord our God, who has done that unto us by grace, which nature
could never have done, that is, has made our rebellious hearts subject unto his
holy law, and we are sure he will also perform that good work which he
has begun in us.

The word which the Apostle uses here to express man's natural rebellion
(...), The rebellion of the wicked against God, exempts them not from his
dominion.
notes such a rebellion of man's corrupt nature, as is not subject according to
order: we are not to think that any rebel were he never so stubborn, can
exempt himself from subjection; do what he can he bides under the Lords
dominion; but a natural man (says the Apostle) gives not orderly subjection
unto God. Jeroboam shook off the yoke of his lawful Lord, and Rehoboam was
not able to control him. But let man repine as he will, can he cast off the
yoke of the Lord? No, no if man refuse to declare his subjection by an humble
submission of his spirit to the Lords obedience, the Lord for all that shall
not lose his superiority, but shall declare his power upon man by controlling
him; he shall bruise (...) (...) coutrary to Gods most holy will, Isal. 45. 9.
Woe be to him that strives with his maker. If the will of God be not done by
us, assuredly it shall be done upon us, Miserable is that man who maintains a
contrary to Gods.
de his qui faciunt quae non vult, facit ipse quae vult, the Lord (says
Augustine) in a marvelous manner does his will on them, who do that which he
will not; and therefore woe shall be unto all which are opposite to God his
most holy will. Aug. de cor. and gra. ca. 14
Quid tam paenale quam semper velle, quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle quod
nunquam non erit? what greater punishment can there be then this, evermore to
desire that which never shall be, and always to dislike that which forever shall
be: a wicked man shall never obtain that which he desires, but shall suffer
for ever that which he dislikes. For remedy of this rebellion our Savior has
taught us daily to pray, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: so we
pray, and the Lord give us grace that we may practice it, that in every action
of our life, denying our selves, we make look to our heavenly Father, enquire
for his will and follow it, saying with our blessed Savior, Mat. 26. 39.
not my will O Lord, but thine be done.

Verse 8. So then they that are after the flesh, cannot please God.
HEre the Apostle concludes the miserable estate of them who walk after the
flesh: He concludes the miserable estate of them who walk after the flesh.
affirming that do what they will they cannot please God. To be in the flesh,
sometime is taken in a good part, for it is all one with this (to live in the
body,) but here it is taken in an evil part: for to be in the flesh, and to
be in Christ, are opposite one to another, so that to be in the flesh, is to be
in the state of nature unregenerate, a stranger from the grace of Christ: and
the phrase is very significant, for it imports an universal thraldom of man's
nature unto the lusts of the flesh. That speech of the Apostle to Simon Magus,
Acts. 8. 23.
I see that thou art altogether in the gall of bitterness, signifies much more
than if he had said, the gall of bitterness was in him: and the spirit of God,
when he says that man is in his sin, What it is to be in the flesh.
or in the flesh, does thereby express a far greater corruption of his
wretched nature, then if he did say that sin and fleshly corruption is in him.

Syricius Bishop of Rome expounds this place of married persons, Syricius
expounds this of the state of marriage wrongfully.
affirming that they are in the flesh, and so cannot please God, flatly against
the Apostles own commentary, for he wrote this Epistle to the godly Romans,
among whom were many married persons, such as Aquila and Priscilla, whom
afterward he commends for godliness, and of whom he says, verse 9. ye are
not in the flesh, because the spirit of God dwells in you: so does the Apostle
expound it himself, and therefore the Pope is but a perverse interpreter of
the Apostles mind, and his favorers are but seducers, who will have us to
seek out of the box of his breast the true sense and meaning of all scripture.

Always leaving them, The best actions of wicked men please not God.
let us mark again here the miserable estate of such as are strangers from
Christ. What an unhappy condition is this, that a man should live in that state
of life, wherein do what he will he cannot please God? Genesis 4. 5.
Let Cain sacrifice with Abel, the Lord shall not accept it; Genesis 27. 38.
let Esau his tears seeking a blessing from his father, be shed as abundantly
as Jacobs were, Heb. 12. 17.
when he sought a blessing from the Angel, Genesis 32. 26.
yet shall he not prevail, he shall not be blessed; Hos. 12. 4.
let the Pharise pray in the Temple with the Publicane, Luke 18. 11.
he shall not go home justified; and for worldly glory let him be never so
high among men, Luke 16.
he is but abomination unto God, yea oftentimes worldlings to whom waters are
wrung out of a full cup, are counted blessed and happy, yet is it but
ignorance that makes men account much of them that are despised in the eyes of
God. Aug. in Joan. cap. 7. tra. 28
Ideo malus foelix putatur, quia quod sit foelicitas ignoratur, for this cause
is an evil man counted happy, because men know not what happiness is. But
what ever men be thought of by others, either for his show of Godliness, or
his show of worldly glory: under which two shadows, the most part of men
deceive the ^emanent; it is certain that he only is blessed, with whom the
Lord is pleased. If the tree be not good, it cannot bring forth good fruit,
and if the person be not Godly, his actions cannot be acceptable unto God. It
is in Christ Jesus only that the Father is well pleased, except we be in
Christ neither can our persons nor actions please the Lord. The Lord translate
us yet further out of this unhappy estate of nature, the Lord root us and
ground us in Christ Jesus, and stablish us to abide in him for ever.

Verse. 9. Now ye are not in the flesh, The second part of his application
contains consolation for the godly and that twofold.
but in the Spirit, because the Spirit of God dwells in you: but if any man
has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.
THE Apostle having discou^sed of the miserable estate of them who walk after
the flesh, Consolation against the remanents of carnal corruption that are in
us.
to comfort them, least they should be discouraged with that remanent ca^nall
co^ruption which they find within themselves, he shows them, that what he
has spoken of the unhappy condition of carnal men, does no way concern them,
for they are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. In this verse the comfort is
first set down, and then a caution annexed unto it; the comfort is for the
weak Christian: the Caution for the presumptuous professor: the Apostle so
terrifies the wicked, that he reserues comfort for the Godly, and he so
comforts the Godly, that he confirms not the wicked in their sins. No sort
of men are sooner moved with the sharp speeches of the word of God, then are
the children of God. He has said before, they who are in the flesh cannot
please God, least this should terrify the Godly, he subioynes: But as for you,
ye are not in the flesh, for the Spirit of God dwells in you Again no sort
of me^ are more ready to appropriate unto themselves the comforts of God, then
they to whom they belong not, and therefore for their sakes the Apostle
subioynes the Caution: If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his.

Where first we may learn that the word of God ought so to be handled and
received, The word of God should so be handled, that it be applied.
that it should be applied to the comfort of those who are the sons of
consolation, and to the conviction of others: the Apostle does now ye see
apply his former doctrine, letting them to whom he writes see the comfort and
admonitton which out of it rises unto them: so ought we always to handle and
hear the word of God, as considering what is our part and interest in it, for
this word is written for us, and does so nearly concern us, that as Moses
says, It is our life: it gives sentence either with or against every man
that hears it, being to the one the savor of life, to the other the savor of
death. When John the Baptist preached that word of judgment, Math. 3. 10.
Now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree that brings not out
good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, his hearers so
received it, as a word which touched them nearly, and therefore both People,
Publicanes, and Soldiers came to him and asked, Luke 3. 10. 12 14.
What shall we do then? So the Jews in like manner asked Peter being pricked
in their hearts at the hearing of his Sermon, Act. 2. 37.
What shall we do then? the same was the voice of the Iaylor to Paul and
Silas, and it should be the voice of every man as often as he hears the word of
God condemning his sins, Acts. 16. 30.
What shall I do then, that I may be saved? As meat brought to the table
cannot nourish unless it be applied to the mouth, and from thence sent down
into the stomach: so the word of God cannot profit us unless we so hear it:
vt traijciatur in viscera quaedam animae nostrae, Bernard.
and transeat in affectiones nostras, that it be sent into the bowels of our
soul, and enter into our affections. If in this manner thou receive the word
of God, out of doubt thou shall be saved by it, but in this part most part of
men hears the word of God, as they would hear an Indian story, or some other
such discou^se as did not concern them: whereof it comes that at this day,
after long planting and watering, there is so small a spiritual growth in
grace and godliness among us,

Now ^or the words, How the Apostle gives judgment of others that are
spiritual.
ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, that is, as ye heard it before
expounded, ye are not carnal men, but spiritual. Here it is to be inquired
seeing no man knows the things of a man but the spirit of a man, how could
the Apostle know that these Romans were spiritual? 1 Samuel 1.
Was not Eli deceived in judging of Anna? she sought the Lord in the affliction
of her spirit, and he judged that she had been a wicked woman: and may not
godly men be deceived on the other extremity, to think well of them who are
evil indeed? I answer, the Apostle does here write unto a Church and a
public fellowship or company of men, separate from the remanent of the world
by the heavenly vocation, called to be Saints, and therefore might undoubtedly
write unto them as unto Saints, and spiritual men, it being always most sure
that where the Lord gathers by his word a Church, he has always in the midst
thereof a number that belong to the election of grace.

But to proceed further, A threefold judgment, first of our selves by faith,
secondly by fruits, thirdly by revelation
and to see how far we may go in judging of a private man, we must know
that first there is a judgment of faith; secondly a judgment of fruits;
thirdly a judgment of extraordinary revelation. By the first we can only
judge our selves, and know our own salvation, according to that of the
Apostle, prove your selves if ye be in the faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5
know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? By the judgment of fruits we may also proceed and judge of others,
according to that rule of our blessed Savior, Ye shall know them by their
fruits, Math. 7. 16
no man gathers grapes of thorns or figs of thistles. Every good tree
brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. These
first two are common to every Christian, the judgment of fruits being helped
by the judgment of Charity. Concerning the third, Simon Peter knew by
extraordinary revelation, Acts. 8.
that Simon Magus was a reprobate, a child of perdition: by it the Apostle Paul
knew that the same unfeigned faith dwelt in Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 5
which dwelt before in his grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice: and by
it John the Evangelist knew that the Lady, 2 John. 1. 1
to whom he wrote was an elect Lady; but as for us we are not to presume the
election or reprobation of any man by such extraordinary revelation.

Again we have to mrke for our comfort, Comfort that the Lord calls them
spiritual in whom remained carnal corruption.
how the Apostle calls them spiritual men, in whom notwithstanding remained
fleshly corruption. The judgment of the Lord and Satan are contrary: there is
in you (says the deceiuer to the weak Christian) fleshly corruption,
therefore ye are carnal: there is in you (says the Lord through my grace) a
spiritual disposition, therefore ye are spiritual. Satan is so evil that
his eye sees nothing in the Christian, but that which is evil: the Lord is so
good, that he sees no transgression in Israel, The Lord esteems of hi^ his
children ^cording t^ his new (...) in them, (...) after their corruption
he judges not his children by the remanents of their old corruption, but by
the beginnings of his renewing grace in us. One dram of the grace of Christ in
the soul of a Christian, makes him more precious in the eyes of God, than that
any remanent corruption in him can make him odious: therefore is it that the
Lord gives unto them the names of his beloved, his servants, his Sons, his
Saints, 1 Ioh. 3. 9
who are so only in part and by a beginning. Both these are true, 1 Ioh. 1. 8
he that is borne of God sins not, and again, if we say we have no sin
we deceive our selves: Augustine.
Illud ex primimitijs noui hominis, istis ex reliquijs veteris, the one we
have of the first fruits of the new man, the other of the remanents of the old
man. Let us therefore be so continually displeased with our inhabitant
corruption, that we despair not, nor be discouraged, neither let us so
complain of our sins that we become false witnesses against the grace of God
which is in us. If there were nothing in us but that we have by nature our
estate were most miserable, but seeing beside nature the^e is in us a new
workmanship of grace, from the which the Lord accounts us new and spiritual
men, we have (thanks be to God) matter of comfort.

As Satan is a liar in denying the name of spiritual men to men regenerate,
Papists will have none called spiritual men but their Clergy.
so his supposts, adversaries of the truth of Christ, are lying deceivers and
unjust robbers, when they restrain this name to such as are of their Clergy,
which here the Apostle makes competent to every man in whom the spirit of
Christ dwells, Fer^^s.
Spiritualem non facit vestis, locus, officium, opus, sed Spiritus, it is
neither garment (says one of their own) nor place, nor office, nor external
work, that makes a man spiritual, but the holy Spirit, dwelling in him.

Because the Spirit of God dwells in you. The spirit of God where he dwells,
works; where he works he works not in vain, therefore they cannot but ^e
spiritual in (...) he dwells.
He subioynes here the confirmation of his former comfort, he has said unto
them: ye are not in the flesh, he proves it, the Spirit of God dwells in you,
therefore ye are no^ in the flesh, not carnal, but spiritual. The necessity
of the consequence depends upon this midst, that the spirit of God where he
dwells, is not idle but works; where he works, he works not in vain, but
effectuates that which he intends, he transforms them, in whom he dwells into
the similitude of his own Image, he is compared to fire that gives light even
to them who are far of, and heat to them who are near hand, but
transchangeth those things into the nature of fire, which are cast into it,
with so marvelous a virtue, that iron which is cold by nature being put into
the fire becomes hot and burning: so does that holy Spirit illuminate every one
who comes into the world, but he changes all those in whom he dwells, he
transformeth them into his own similitude, and endueth them with an holy and
heavenly disposition, then his argument is sure, the Spirit of God dwells in
you, therefore ye are not carnal, but spiritual.

In the end of the last Chapter the Apostle said, Strange that two guests of so
contrary naturs, as sin and the holy spirit should dwell in one man.
that sin dwells in the man regenerate, it is not I but sin that dwells
in me, and here he says that the spirit of God dwells in the man
regenerate: this is strange that two guests of so contrary natures, should both
at one time have their dwelling in man. I compare the soul of man regenerate
to the house of Abraham, Romans 7. 17
wherein there was both a free woman Sarah, The soul of man regenerate
compared to the house of Abraham.
and a bond woman Hagar, with their children, Ismael the son of the bond
woman borne after the flesh, is older and stronger then Isaac, the son of the
freewoman borne after the spirit, that is, according to the promise; he
disdaines little Isaac as weaker, and persecutes him, yet the comfort of Isaac
is, that though Ismaell dwell in the house of Abraham for a while, he shall
not remain: the son of the bondwoman shall be cast out, and shall not
inherit the promise with the son of the free woman: such a house is the soul
of a Christian, there dwells in it at one time both old nature and new grace,
with their children, the old man at the first being older and stronger than the
new man, does persecute him, and seeks by all means to oppress him, but at
the last he shall be cast out.

This metaphor of dwelling, Marvelous that the inhabiter is larger tha^ the
habitation.
does also yield unto us exceeding great comfort: in all other habitations the
lodging is larger than the inhabiter, but this is maruailous that the lodging
here is so little and the inhabiter so great: that infinite majesty, whom the
heaven of heavens cannot contain, who has the heaven for his throne, and the
earth for his footestoole, has chosen for his dwelling and place of rest, the
soul of him that is poor, contrite, and trembles at his word A wonderful
mercy, that the highest majesty should so far dim^t the self, as that
passing by all his other creatures, he should make choice of man to be his
pleasant sanctuary.

From this it is evident that this dwelling does design some special presence
of God with his own children, The special glory of a Christian is that God
dwells in him.
which he shows not unto others, it is true he is present in every place,
bounded within no place; he contains all things, vncontayned of any; where he
dwells not as a Father, there he sits as a Judge, and is a terror: which
manner of way the damned are continually vexed with his presence, but in the
Christian he dwells as a master in his own family, as a Father with his
children, quickening, ruling* and preserving them, Worldlings may exceed him in
woridly gifts, but can not match him in this.
Worldlings may match the Christian in external gifts, but cannot compare with
him in this internal glory, though without he be but an earthen vessel, yet
has he within an heavenly treasure, for he is the habitation of God, in whom
the Lord dwells by his spirit. It was Benjamin his glory, that the Lord should
dwell between his shoulders; Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
and the glory of Jerusalem, that there the Lord dwelt between the Cherubins;
but most of all the glory of a Christian, that the Lord dwells between the
secrets of his soul: let worldling rejoice in their outward privileges, and
in their presumptuous minds leap like the mighty mountains, esteeming
themselves high as mount Basan, yet this is the glory of a Christian, that God
delights to dwell in him.

Let us therefore make much of them who fear the Lord, They should be honored
in whom Christ dwells.
though in regard of their outward estate, they were never so base, we should
not be asham^d to do them honor for his sake who dwells in them. Dan. 6.
Dari^s preferred Daniell because the spirit was excellent in him; and Pharaoh
honored Joseph because the Spirit of God was in him, Genesis 41. 42
yea the Angels are content to be Servants and Ministers to them who fear the
Lord, they honored Shepherds for Christ's sake with their presence, which they
did not unto King Herod for all his glory, and shall not we delight in Gods
excellent ones upon earth? Psalm. 15.
surely he shall dwell in the Tabernacle of God, in whose eyes a vile person
is contemned, but he honors them who fear the Lord. Hereby we know that
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethr^n.

Not only does this Metaphor of dwelling import a familiar presence, The
Metaphor of dwelling imports a continuance of gods presence with his children.
but also a continuance thereof, for he soiourns not in us as a stranger that
lodges for some days, or Months in a place, but has settled his residence, to
dwell in us for ever, howeuer by temporal desertions he humble us, yet shall
he never depart from that soul, which once he has sanctified to be his own
habitation, Three arguments to prove that the regenerate are sure of
perseverance in Grace.
and this comfort is confirmed to us by most sure arguments. The first is taken
from the nature of God, He is faithful (says the Apostle) by whom we are
called to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, he will confirm
us to the end, that we may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus. From
the nature of God who begets us.
And again, I am persuaded that he who has begun this good work in you
will perform it, until the day of Christ. That word which the Lord spoke to
Jacob, stands sure to all his posterity, Phil. 1. 5. 6.
I will not forsake thee till I have performed that which I promised thee. The
covenant of God is perfect and everlasting, and therefore with David will we
give this glory unto God, that he will perform his promise toward us, From the
nature of that life communicated to us.
and bring forward his own work in us to perfection. We know that Christ
being raised from the dead, Romans 6. 9.
dies no more, this life I say is communicated to us, for it is not we that
lives, but Christ that lives in us. And the third is taken from the nature of
that seed whereof we are From the nature of that seed whereof w^ are begotten.
for as the seed is, so is the life, that comes by it, now the seed (says the
Apostle) is immortal, we are borne of new not of mortal seed, but immortal,
our life therefore is immortal. 1 Pet. 1. 23.


But against this is objected, How the spirit of God is said to depart from
Saul.
that the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and that which David prays,
take not thine holy Spirit from me. To this I answer, that the spirit is taken
sometime for the common and external gifts of the spirit, 1 Samuel 16. 14.
such as are bestowed as well upon the wicked as upon the godly, Psalm. 51. 11.
as the gift of Prophecy, government, working miracles, and such like, and
these once given may be taken again: in this sense it is said, that God took
the spirit that was upon Moses and gave it unto the seauentie Elders, and so
also it is said that the spirit of God departed from Saul, there it is put for
the gift of government: sometime again it is taken for the special and
internal gift of sanctification: this spirit once given is never taken away,
for this gift and calling of God is without repentance, that is, they never
fall under reuocation.

To the second, How David prays that God would not take from him his holy
Spirit.
when David says, take not thine holy spirit from me, and restore me again to
the joy of thy salvation, this impo^^s not a full departure of Gods spirit from
him, otherwise he could not have prayed; but that his sin had diminished the
sense and feeling of that operation of the spirit in him, which he was wont to
feel before: and so is it with others of Gods Children, that either the
neglect of the spiritual worship, or the commission of some new sins does so
impair the sense of mercy in them, that to their judgment the spirit of God
has justly forsaken them. This I confess is a very heavy estate, and more
bitter to them that have felt before the sweetness of Gods mercy than death
it self, yet even in this same estate wherein no comfort is felt, In
spiritual desertio^s we must distinguish between that which is, and which we
feel.
let patience sustain men, let them learn to put a difference between that
which they feel, and that which is, and remember that this is a false
conclusion, to say, the spirit of grace is not in thee, because thou can not
feel him, for as there is a substance in the Oak or Elm, even when it has
cast the leaves, Esa. 6. 13.
so is there Grace in the heart many times when it does not appear, and these
desertions which endure for a while, are but means to effectuate a nearer
communion, Chri. in Mat. hom. 14.
(...), etc. he turns away from thee (says Chrysostom) for a short while,
that he may have thee for ever with himself.

Now it remains that we consider of these benefits we have by the dwelling
of Christ's Spirit in us, What great benefits comes to the soul by the dwelling
of Christ's spirit in us.
and of the duties which we owe again unto him. The benefits are many and
great, Si enim tanta sit vis animae in massa terrae sustinenda, mouend^,
impellenda, quanta erit vis Dei in anima, quae natura agilis est mouenda? for
if the soul be of such force to give life and motion to this body which is but
a mass of earth, what shall the spirit of God do unto our soul which
naturally is agill? the wonderful benefits that the body receives by the
dwelling of the soul in it, may lead us some way to consider of those great
benefits which are brought unto the soul, by the dwelling of the spirit of God
in us.

But of many we will shortly touch these two only: He repaires the whole
lodging of soul and body.
the Isai. 13. 21.
lying under the curse of Babel, the Iim and Zijm dwelling in it, What ugly
guests dwelt in us before he came to possess us.
the Ostriches lodging, the Satires dancing, the Dragons crying within her
palaces, that is, defiled with all sorts of vile and unclean affections, the
Lord Jesus has sanctified it, to be a holy habitation unto himself. And as to
the reparation of our bodies, it consists partly in making all the members
thereof weapons of righteousness in this life, and partly in deliverance of
them from mortality and corruptibilitie, which shall be done in the day of
resurrection; which for the same cause is called by our Savior the day of
regeneration, for then shall he change our mortal bodies, and make them like
unto his own glorious body: thus by his dwelling in us have we the reparation
both of our souls and bodies. He prouides all necessaries where he dwells.


The other benefit we enjoy by his dwelling in us, is the benefit of Provision;
where he comes to dwell, he is not burdenable after the manner of earthly
Kings, but his reward is with him: for he has not chosen us to be his
habitation for any need he has of us, Iren. cont. val lib. 4. cap. 28.
sed vt haberet in quem collocaret sua beneficia, but that he might have some
on whom to bestow his benefits, non indiget nostro ministerio vt domini
seruorum, sed sequimur ipsum vt homines lumen s^quuntur, nihil ipsi
praestantes, sed beneficium a lumine acc^pientes, he has no need of our
service, as other Lords have need of their servants, but we follow him as men
follow the light, giving nothing to it, but receiving a benefit from it.

It falls commonly out that where men of mean estate receive to lodge those
that are more honorable, Not like kings of the earth who often times are
burdenable to them with whom they lodge.
they disease themselves to ease their guests, but if thou receive this rich
spirit of the Lord to lodge, non angustaberis sed dilataberis, thou shall not
be straited but shall be enlarged, says. Augustine: he knew the comfort he
reaped by this presence of God, Ang. de verb Apost. ser. 15
and therefore could speak the better thereofvnto others; quando hic non eras
angustias patiebar, nunc implesti cellam meam, and non meam exclusisti, sed
angustiam meam, when thou Lord dwelst not in me, much anguish of mind
oppressed me, now thou have filled the cellers of my heart, thou have not
excluded me but excluded that anguish which troubled me. In a word, the
benefits we receive by him, do not only concern this life, but are
stretched out also to eternal life. David comprises all in a short sum, the
Lord is a light and defense, he will give grace and glory, Psalm. 84. 11.
and no good thing shall be withholden from them that love him.

The greater benefits we have by the dwelling of Christ in us, What duties of
thankfulness we owe to our Lord who (...) in us.
the more are we obliged in our duty to him. O how should that house be kept
in order, wherein the King of glory is resident? what daily circumspection
ought to be used that nothing be done to offend him? not without cause are
these watch-words given us, Ephesians. 4. 30.
grieve not the spirit, quench not the spirit. 1 These. 5. 19
There are none in a family, but they discern That we discern the voice of
our Master and obey it.
and follows it, they go out and in at his commandment: if he say unto one
Go, he goes, if to another Come, he comes: if the Lord be our master, let
us hear every morning his voice, and inquire what his will is we should do,
Math. 8. 9.
with a promise to re^igne the government of our hearts unto him; for it is
certain he will not dwell where he rules not: as he will admit no unclean
thing within his holy habitation, so will he not dwell with the vncircumci^ed
in heart; the Lord will not take a wicked man by the hand, no^ have fellowship
with the throne of iniquity. Macar. hom. 12
If holy men when they see brothels abhor them, and goes by them, how much
more shall we think that the most holy Lord will despise and pass by their
souls which are polluted, rather like to the filthy stews of Sodom, than
the holy sanctuary of Sion, for the Lord to dwell in?

And if hereby the weak conscience be cast down, That every day we sweep and
water his chamber with the besome and tears of repentance.
reasoning within the self, alas how can my beloved dwell with me, who am so
polluted and defiled; remember that the more thou art displeased with thy
self, the more thy Lord is pleased with thee: for thy daily pollutions he
has appointed daily washings, in that fountain which he has opened to the
house of David for sin and for uncleanness. Zach. 13. 1.
Sweep out thy sins every day by the besome of holy anger and revenge, and
water the house of thy heart with the tears of contrition, Cyprian.
quoniam sine aliquo vulnere esse non possumus, medelis spiritualibus vulnera
nostra curemu^, seeing we cannot be without some wounds of Conscience, let us
daily go to the next remedy, that with spiritual medicines we may cure
them, chastising our selves every morning, and examining our selves upon our
bed in the evening.

And again, That in his Temple there want not morning and evening sacrifice.
seeing we are made the Temples of the holy Ghost, there should be within us
continual sacrifices offered unto God of prayer and praising, together with a
daily slaughter of our beastly affections. Among the Israelites Princes were
known by the multitude of their sacrifices which they offered unto God, but
now they who sacrifice most of their vnclea^e affections, are most approved as
excellent Israelites of the Lord, who can best discern an Israelite. From the
time the Lord departed from Ierusalems Temple, the daily sacrifice and oblation
ceased, and where there is not in man, Macar. hom. 28
neither prayer nor praising of God, nor mortification of his beastly lusts,
but the spiritual Chaldeans has come in, and taken away this daily sacrifice,
it is an evident argument that the Lord dwells not there.

Last of all, Bastard professors lodges this holy spirit in a wrong room.
let us mark here that the Apostle says this dwelling of the spirit is in us,
it is not without us, the kingdom of God is within us, if he dwell he will
dwell in our hearts by faith, for he himself requires the heart. As for them
who lodge him in their mouths by professing him, Ephesians. 3. 17.
in their eyes by advancing them to heaven, in their hands by doing some works
of mercy, and not in their hearts, these are carnal men not spiritual,
pretend what they will, hipocrits who draws near the Lord with their lips,
but their hearts are far from him, accursed deceivers who having a male in
their flock, vows and sacrifices a corrupt thing unto the Lord: which I do
not speak as if I did condemn the outward service done in the body to the
Lord, provided it flow from the heart. Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your body, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
and in your spirit, for they are Gods.

And this also is to be marked for the amendment of two sorts of men among us,
Humble gestures of the body in public exercises of divine worship prophanly
scorned by some.
who are in two extremities: we have some who are become scorners of the grace
of God in others, neither can they be humbled themselves in the public
assemblies of the Saints, nor be content to see others express their inward
motion by outward humiliation, they sit down in the throne of God, and
condemns others for hypocrisy, not remembering that sin is to be reserved to
the judgment of God, who only knows the heart, and that those same things
which they mislike in their brethren, the Lord has allowed in others. The
Apostles precept commands us to lift up to the Lord pure hands in prayer.
David's practice teaches us to advance our eyes to the Lord: shall not thy
brother lift up his hands and his eyes to the Lord? shall he not sigh to God,
nor mourn in his prayers like a Dove, as Ezekiah did, but thou incontinent
wilt tax him of hypocrisy? We read that Jacob sought a blessing from the
Lord with tearrs, and obtained it, Esau sought a blessing from his father with
tears and crying, and obtained it not: were the tears of Jacob the worse,
because Esau also shed tears? Judge not least thou be judged, the judgment
of Hypocrisy (as I have said) belongs to the Lord. Superstitiously abused by
others.


On the other extremity are they who think they have done enough when they
have discharged some outward exercises of religion, though they take no pain
to sanctify the heart to works of divine service. On the Saboth they come to
the house of God, they bow their heads like a bulrush with the rest, they pray
and praise the Lord in the external forms with the rest of the congregation,
but considers not whether or no they come into the temple by the motion of the
Spirit as Simeon did, if they pray and praise the Lord with prepared hearts as
David did; neither t^ye they when they go out, whether or no they have met
with the Lord, found mercy, and returns home to their houses justified as the
Publican did. It is true we are to glorify God with ou^ bodies because they
are his, but most of all with our spirits, because God is a spirit, he loves
truth in the inward affections, and delights to be worshipped in spirit and
truth.

We are called by the Apostle, Seeing we are the temples of God we should be
more beautiful within, then without.
the Temples of God, Salomons Temple the further it was, the finer: in the
outward Court stood an Alter of brass, whereupon beasts were sacrificed: in
the inward Court was an Altar of gold, whereupon incense was sacrificed; but
the Sanctuary or most holy place did far exceed them both, in it was nothing
but fine gold, in it the Lord gave out his oracles from between the Cherubins,
in it stood the Arc of the covenant, wherein was the Tables of the Law. And so
indeed the Christian ought to be holy without, his looks, his words, his
ways should all declare that God dwells in his heart, he should have
engraven, as it were, on his forehead, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36
as Aaron had, but much more should he be holy within: between the secrets
of his Soul should the Lord have his residence, and in his heart the
testimony of God, which is the word of God should dwell plentifully.

But as for the wicked, But the wicked are compared sometime to open, and
sometime to pa^nted Sepulchers.
they are either compared to open sepulchers, their mouth being like that gate
of the Temple called Shallecheth, out of which was carried all the filth of the
temple, the abomination of their heart being made manifest by their mouth, or
then in their best estate they are compared to painted Sepulchers, Mat. 23. 27.
beautiful without but within full of rottenness, Psalm. 32. 2.
having a show of godliness, wanting the power thereof, But the man is blessed
in whose heart there is no guile, Ioh. 1. 47.
he is a Nathamell indeed, a true Israeli^e who is one within, Romans 2. 29.
whose praise is not of men but of God.

But if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, The secondary great question in
religion is this, who are Christians.
the same is not his. The Comfort being ended, now follows the Caution. Every
man (says Solomon) boasts of his own goodness, but the Lord (says the
Apostle) knows who are his. As the first great question in Religion is
concerning the Savior of the world, Mat. 11. 3.
Art thou he who is to come, or shall we look for another? so the second is
concerning them who are to be saved: if the judgment be referred to man, now
every man among us accounts himself a Christian: If judgment be sought from
the Lord, here he gives one answer for all: If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ the same is not his.

Albeit among men there be an allowable difference of estates, A sovereign
rule whereby Christians of all estates must be tried.
yet concerning Christianity, both King and Subject, rich and poor, learned
and unlearned comes all to be tried by one rule. It is a common thing among men
to esteem somewhat more of themselves for the privilege of their estate,
wherein they excel others, but the Apostle destroys the pride of all their
glory with one word, If any man, so he speaks without exception, be what
thou will beside; were thou never so noble, never so rich, never so learned, if
thou have not the Spirit of Christ thou art none of his, all the privileges of
men without Jesus are nothing, that which is high among men is abomination to
God. Man in his best estate is altogether vanity, the glory of flesh is but as
the flower of the field: the Spirit of the Lord judges of all the glory of man
as of the pomp of Agrippa, Acts. 25. 23.
he came down says S. Luke, (...), it is all but fantasy and vanishing
shows: nothing commends us to God, but this one, to have the spirit of Christ
dwelling in us.

Again we see here that Christ and his Spirit cannot be sundred, Christ and
his Spirit are not sundred.
except men will crucify again the Son of God. Let no man therefore say
that he has Christ, unless he have the Spirit of Christ. As he is not a man
who has not a Soul, so he is not a Christian, who has not the spirit of
Christ: no man counts that a member of his body, which is not quickened by his
Spirit; no more is he a member of Christ, 1 John. 4. 13
who has not the spirit of Christ: hereby we know that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And as Christ and his spirit
are not sundred, so cannot the spirit be sundred from the fruits of the Spirit:
Gal. 5. 22. 23
now the fruits of the Spirit, are Love, Joy, Peace, Long Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. If the Spirit of Christ
dwell in us, and if we live in the Spirit, 24
let us walk in the Spirit: this is the conviction of carnal professors, that
while they say the spirit of Christ is in them, they declare none of his
fruits in their conversation, but to insist somewhat more in this same purpose.

We are to know, Operations of the spirit are twofold.
that the effects and operations of the Spirit are twofold: the one is a
general and common operation which he has in the wicked, for he illuminates
every one who comes into the world. External common to al men.
Neither can any man say, Jesus is the Lord but by the Spirit: every spark of
light, and portion of truth be it in whom it will, John. 1.
flows (out of doubt) from this holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
That Caiaphas and Saul can Prophecy, that Judas can Preach, all is from him:
but of ^his manner of operation is not here meant, for this way he Internal
and proper to the godly.
not for any good to them, but for the advancement of his own work. The other
kind of the holy Ghosts operation is special, and proper to the godly, by the
which he does not only illuminate their minds, but proceeds also to their
hearts, and works this threefold effect in it, Sanctification, Intercession,
and Consolation.

First he is unto them a spirit of Sanctification, Three effects wrought by the
special operation of the spirit in the godly.
renewing their hearts by his effectual grace, he first rebukes them of sin,
he wakens their conscience with some sight of their iniquities, and sense of
that wrath which sin has deserved: whereof arises heaviness in their hearts,
sadness in their Sanctification.
lamentation in their speech, and such an alteration in their whole behavior,
that their former pleasures become painful unto them, and others who knevv
them before wonders to see such a change in them. From this he proceeds and
leads them to a sight of Gods mercy in Christ, he inflames their hearts with a
hunger and thirst for that mercy, and works in their hearts such a love of
righteousness, and hatred of sin, that now they become more afraid of the
occasions of sin, then they were before of sin it self: this resistance
made to the ^entations, this care to eschew the occasions of sin, is an
undoubted token of the spirit of Christ dwelling in thee.

This is the first operation of the spirit, but it is not all, he proceeds yet
further by degrees: for the kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed
into the earth, which grows up and we cannot tell how, first it sends out the
blade, secondly the ears, and then the corns; so proceeds the Intercession.
In the second place the holy spirit becomes to the godly a spirit of
Intercession, so long as we are bound with the cords of our transgressions we
cannot pray, but from the time he once loose us from our sins, he opens
our mouth unto God, he teaches us to pray not only with sighs and sobbes
that cannot be expressed, but also puts such words in our mouths as we our
selves who spoke them are not able to repeat again. Consolation.


And thirdly he becomes unto them the spirit of Consolation, if he be unto
thee a sanctifier, and an intercessor, he shall not fail at the last to be
thy comforter: If at the first after that thou have sent up supplications, thou
find not his consolation descending upon thee, be not discouraged, but be the
more humbled; for alas our sins shortens his arm, and the hardness of our
hearts holds out his comforts: we must fall down with Mari^, Math. 26.
and lie still washing the feet of Christ with our tears, before he takes us
in his arms to kiss us with the kisses of his mouth^ and if we find these
effects of his presence going before, humiliation of our heart, and the grace of
prayer, we may be out of all doubt that his consolations shall follow after.

Of this it is yet further evident against all those who deny that the
Christian may be sure of his salvation, That a Christian who has Gods spirit
knows that he has him.
that he who has the spirit of Jesus knows that he has him, as he who
has life feels sensibly that he has it, and is able truly to say I live:
^o he who has the spirit of Jesus knows by feeling that he has him, and is
able to say in truth, Gal. 2. 20.
Christ lives in me* Know ye not: (says the Apostle) that Christ Jesus is
in you, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
except ye be reprobates?

This shall be further confirmed by considering those three names which are
given to the holy spirit, And therefore may be sure of salvation, is proved by
three names given to the holy spirit.
from his operation in us: he is the Seal, the Earnest^ the witness of God:
the use of a Seal is to confirm and make sure. One of these two therefore
must the Papists say, that ^yther none are sealed by the holy Spirit, or else
they must confess, that they who are sealed are sure. 1 He is Gods Seal.
If they say that none are sealed by this Spirit, they speak against the
manifest truth of God, grieve not the holy spirit, by whom ye are sealed
against the day of redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30.
And if they deny that they who are se^led by him are sure of that salvation
which God has promised, and he has sealed, they blaspheme, calling him such a
seal as makes not them sure who are sealed by him: he who has the seal of a
Prince rests assured of that which by the seal is confirmed to him, and shall
not the seal of the (...) God, the Spirit of promise, confirm that man in the
assurance of salvation, who has received him? Neither Gods earnest.
but he is also the earnest of our inheritance and the witness of God, he
that believes in the son has a witness in himself: 1 Ioh. 5. 10.
what will the adversary of Christian comfort say to this? if ye say that
there are none to whom Gods spirit witnesses mercy, from God ye speak against
the Apostle, the spirit bears witness to our spirit, Romans 8. 16.
that we are the sons of God: or if ye say that those who have this
testimony of the spirit are not sure of mercy, Gods witness.
and speaks yet manifestly against the Apostle, who says that the witnessing
of this spirit unto our spirit, makes us to cry Abba father. But we will
speak more of this hereafter.

But now to conclude this verse: Sin causes the Lord deny his own creature.
seeing he who has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, whose then shall
he be? certainly he is the vassal of Satan, the Lord shall deny him, the
Lord shall disclaim him, as not belonging to him, Luke 13. 27.
depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know not whence you are. O the
bitter fruit of sin! which causes the Lord to deny that creature to be his,
which once he made to his own image. Let us therefore hate our sin unto
death, let us in time make have to depart from iniquity, which shall at the
last draw on that sentence upon the wicked, depart from me. The Lord deliver us
from it through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but
the Spirit is life for righteousness sake.
HItherto has the Apostle comforted the Christian Consolation against the
fruit of sin, specially against death, whereunto we are subject.
now he comforts him against the fruits and effects of sin which he finds
in himself. The godly might have objected, ye have said before the f^uite of
carnal wisdom is death, are we not subject unto death, and so of the
fruits and effects of sin? what can we judge but that we are carnal? To
this he answers, first by a confession, it is true that the body is dead
because of sin, but if Christ be in you, the spirit through his
righteousness is endued with life: ye are not therefore to conclude, that ye
are carnal because death through sin is entered into your bodies, as to
confirm your selves in this, that life through the righteousness of Christ is
communicated to your soul; and so the sum of his comfort will be this, The
death whereunto we are subject is neither tot^ll nor perpetual.
the death whereunto you are subject, is neither total nor perpetual: that it
is not total, he declares in this verse, for it strikes not upon the whole
man, but upon the weakest part of man, which is his body, as for his most
excellent part, which is his soul, it is pertaker of a life that is not
subject unto death. That it is not perpetual he declares in the next verse,
our bodies shall not bide for ever under the bands of death, the spirit of
Christ that now dwells in them shall at the last raise them up from death, and
cloth them with immortality and incorruptibili^ie.

If Christ be in you. The Comforts of God are not common to all men
indifferently.
Before the Apostle bring in his comfort, he premits a con^^tion, to teach us,
that the comforts of God belong not indifferently unto all men, he who is a
stranger from Christ, has nothing to do with these comforts. Mat. 10. 12. 13.
When our Savior commanded his Disciples to proclaim peace unto every house
they came to, he foretold them, it should abide only with the sons of
peace: he fo^bad them in like manner to give those things which were holy unto
dogs, Mat. 7. 6.
or to cast pearls before Swine. This stands a perpetual Law to all
Preachers, that they presume not to proclaim peace to the impenitent and
unbelieving, but as Ieh^ spoke to Iehorams horseman, What have thou to do with
peace: 2. Kin. 9. 18.
so are we to tell the wicked, who walk still on in their sins, that they
have nothing to do with that peace preached by the Gospel.

Secondly, Christ dwelling in us is by his spirit: no carnal presence required
to make our union with him.
if we compare the former verse with this, we shall see that the manner of
Christ's dwelling in his children is by his Spirit. To make up our union with
Christ, it is not needful that his humane nature should be drawn down from
heaven, or that his body should be every where, as the Vbiquitaries affi^me; or
that in the Sacrament the bread should be transubstantiate into his body, as the
Papists imagine: his dwelling in us is by his spirit, and our union with him is
spiritual; neither yet by so saying, do we divide his two natures, for they
are inseperably united in one personal union, which union does not for all
that import, that his humane nature is extended over all, as his divine nature
is, Act. 3. 21.
The heavens must contain him, till he come again, Noli dubitare, Aug.
epist. 57 ad^ Dar^^n.
ibi esse hominem. Christum, vnde venturus est: Put it out of doubt, that the
man Christ Jesus is in that place, from which he shall come: Keep faithfully
that Christian confession, He is risen from the death, ascended unto Heaven,
and sits at the right hand of his Father, and that he shall come from no other
place, but from Heaven to judge the quick and the dead: and he adds that
which the Angel said to his Disciples, Act. 1. 11.
this Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have
seen him go into heaven, that is (says Augustine) in eadem carnis forma,
atque substantia, cui profecto immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit: that
is, in that same form and substance of flesh, to the which he has given
immortality, but has not taken away the nature thereof, Secundum hanc non est
p^tandem, quod vbique est diffusus, vbique per id quod Deus, in co^lo autem per
^d quod hom^, according to this nature we are not to think that he is in
every place, it is true that as God, he is every where, but as man he is in the
heavens: and this for the condition.

Now to the comfort: The comfort of Ethnikes against death, not comparable to
ours, and our courage inferior to theirs.
we have by Jesus Christ a threefold comfort against death, whereof two only
here are touched. The first that the death whereunto we are subject is not
total. The second, that the nature and quality of our bodily death is
changed. The third that it is not perpetual, the body shall not for ever lie
under death. The Ethnicks had also their own silly comforts, but nothing
comparable to ours. Nazianzen records that Cleopatra Queen of Egypt,
demanding of certain learned men, what kind of death was without the bitter
sense of pain, received this answer: there is no death without dolor, but
that death was most gentle which was brought on by the Serpent Aspis, and
namely that kind thereof which is called Aypnale, because they whose flesh is
enuenomed with the poison thereof, do incontinently sleep unto death: for
which cause also she made choice of it. And Sene^a being by Nero to be
executed to death, got it left to his own pleasure, (as great favor showed
unto him) to make choice of any death he pleased, he chose to bleed to death
in hot water: others among them that offered themselves to most fearful
deaths, such as Curtius, Regulus, and others had no comfort to sustain them,
but a silly hope of immortal fame of their affection to their country. It was
(says Augustine) the silly comfort of the Gentiles against the want of
burial, Coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam, and as comfortless is the comfort
of many bastard Christians, which stands only in a fair Sepulcher, provided
before hand for themselves, in an honorable burial commanded and expected of
them before death, and in abundance of worldly things which they leave to
theirs behind them, all which as says the same Father, viuorum sunt solatia
non mortuorum, are comforts to them that live behind, but no help to them who
are dead. I note this, that considering the magnanimity of these Ethnicks in
suffering of death, notwithstanding the weak and small comforts which they had
to sustain them, we may be ashamed of our p^sillanimitie, who having from
Christ most excellent comforts against death, are afraid at the smallest
remembrance thereof. Tit. 1. 16.
An evident argument that albeit many profess him, yet few are pertakers of
his power, life, and grace, and that many has him dwelling in their mouths in
whose hearts he dwells not by his spirit.

The body is dead. Our bodies are not only mortal but dead.
He says not the body is subject to death, but by a more significant manner
of speech, he says the body is dead. There is a difference between a mortal
body and a dead body: Adams body before the fall was mortal, that is, subject
to a possibility of dying, but now after the fall, our bodies are so mortal,
that they are subject to a necessity of dying: yea, if we will here with the
Apostle esteem of death by the beginning thereof, our bodies are dead already.
The officers and sergeants of death, which are dolours, The officers of death
has bound us already
infirmities and heauie^ diseases, has seized already upon our bodies, and
marked them as lodgings, which shortly must be the habitation of death, so that
there is no man, who is not presently dead in some part or other of his body.
Not only is the sentence given out against us, thou art dust, Genesis 3. 19.
and to dust thou shall return, but is begun to be executed: our carcasses
are bound with cords by the officers of death, and our life is but like that
short time which is granted to a condemned man, between his doom and his
execution; all which the Apostle lively expresses when he says the body is
dead.

Therefore should we live in the body under fear.
and first, what great need we have (as we are commanded) to pass the time
of our dwelling here in fear, working out our own salvation in fear and
trembling: seeing our sins have cast us into the hands of the first death, 1
Pet. 1. 12.
shall we Phil. 2. 12.
not cry without ceasing, that we may be delivered from the power of the
second? Alas it is pitiful that man should so far forget himself, as to
rejoice in the time of his misery, to pass over the days of his mortal life
in vanity and wantonness, not considering how the first death is already
entered into his carcass, nor foreseeing how he may be delivered from the
second, The pitiful security of carnal professors.
but lives careless, like to the Apostates of the old world, who in the
midst of their sinful pleasures were suddenly washed away with the waters of
the wrath of God, and their spirits for disobedience sent unto the prison where
now they are: and like those Philistims, who banqueting in the platform of
the house of Dagon their God, having mind of nothing but eating, drinking, and
sporting, not knowing that their enemy was within, were suddenly
otherthrowne, and their banqueting house made their burial place: so shall it
be with all the wicked, who living in a dead body cares for nothing but how to
please themselves in their sin: the pillar of their house shall be pulled
down, Psalm. 58. 9.
destruction shall come upon him like a whirlewinde, Psalm. 73. 19.
and in a moment shall sudden desolation overtake them.

And let this same meditation repress in us that poison Death entered into the
body should repress our natural pride.
the first sin that ever sprung forth of our nature, next to infidelity, and
last in rooting out. Will thou consider O man, that thou art but dead, and that
thy body be it never so strong or beautiful, is but a lodging of death? and
what cause shall thou have to wax proud for any thing that is in the flesh?
Bernard.
quid ^u superbis terra and cinis? si superbientibus Angelis non pepercit deus,
quanto minus tibi putredo and vermis? what have thou to do to be proud O dust
and ashes? if God spared not the Angels when they waxed proud, will he spare
thee who art but a rotten creature? yea Vermis crastino moriturus, Aug ser. 21.
a worm that must dye to morrow. If so was done to an Angel (says Bernard)
what shall become of me? ille intumuit in coelo ego in sterquilinio, he was
puffed up in heaven, and therefore was cast down from the place of his
habitation, if I wax proud lying in a dou^g-hill, shall I not be punished
and cast down into hell? So often therefore as corrup^ nature stirs up the
heart of man to pride, because of the flowers of beauty and strength that grow
out of it: let this humble thee; thy flowers O man, cannot but wither, for the
root from which they spring is dead already.

Should learn us temperance and sobriety.
what avails it to pamper that carcass of thine with excessive feeding which
is possessed by death already? if men took the tenth part of that care to
present their spirits holy and without blame unto the Lord, which they take to
make their bodies fat and beautiful in the eyes of men, they might in short
time make greater progress in godliness then they have done: but herein is
their folly, Carnem pretiosis rebus impinguant, Bernard
etc. they make fat their flesh with delicate things, which within few days
the wo^ms shall devour, Animam vero non adornant bonis operibiu, but
beautifies not the Soul with good works, which shortly is to be presented
unto God. Let us refrain from the immoderate pampering of this flesh, Meats
are ordained for the belly, 1 Cor. 6. 13.
and the belly for meats, but God will destroy them both.

We have here moreover discovered unto us, Satan's shameless impudency
discovered.
the shameless impudency of Satan, who daily tempting man to sin, promises
unto him some good by committing of it, as boldly* as if he had never
falsified his promise before. He promised to our Parents in Paradise, that if
they did eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree, they should become like unto
God* but what performed he? in stead of making man like unto God, he made him
like unto himself: yet as I said, so shameless is that lying Spirit, that
he d^re as boldly promise vantage by committing of sin this day, as he did
the first day to Adam in Paradise, notwithstanding that we see through
miserable experience, that death because of sin is en^^ed into our bodies. Is
he not a deceiuer indeed? that did first steal from us our birthright, and
now would also take from us the blessing, all those benefits we got by our
first creation, he has stolen them from us with his lying words, and now he
goes about by lies also to steal from us that blessing of restitution by
Christ offered, and exhibited unto us. Genesis 31. 7.
Jacob justly complained of Laban, that he had deceived him, and had changed
his wages seven times, but more justly may we complain of Satan, who
innumerable times has beguiled us, he has changed our wages, how often has
he promised us good things, and behold what evil is come upon us?

Happy were we if in all our tentations we did remember this and reply to
Satan in this manner. A good answer to be given Satan in all his tentations
to sin.
The Lord rebuke thee, thou shameless Liar from the beginning, with what face
can thou speak that unto me, wherein thou have been so often convinced by so
manifold witnesses to be a manifest Liar. Of the fruits of sin, which we
have seen, we are to judge of the fruits of sin which are not seen: if
sin has made us so miserable in this life, how miserable shall it make us in
the life to come, if we continue in it? This is that wisdom which the
Apostle recommends to us in that worthy sentence, happy were we if it were
sounded continually in the ears of our mind, as often as we are tempted unto
sin, Romans 6. 21.
What fruit have ye then of those sins, whereof now ye are ashamed? He that
will search within himself the fruit of his fo^mer transgressions shall easily
perceive there is no cause, Seeing he has deceived us so often, let us believe
him no more.
why he should commit sin upon hope of any better fruit in time to come. It
was Samsons destruction, that notwithstanding he found himself thri^e deceived
by Dalilah, Judge. 16.
yet the fourth time he hearkened unto her deceitful allurements: and it shall
in like manner be the destruction of many, who notwithstanding they have found
themselves abused by Satan in time past, yet will not learn to resist him, but
gives place unto his lying entisements, and are carried headlong by him into
the ways of death: he was a lying Spirit in the mouth of Achabs Prophets, 1
King. 22.
to draw him forward in a battle, promising him victory, in the which he knew
assuredly that he should dye: so is he a lying spirit in the hearts of all the
wicked, promising unto them gain, glory or pleasure, by doing those works of
sin, whereof he knows well enough they shall reap nothing but shame and
everlasting confusion.

Again, How they who live in sin are murderers of themselves.
that we may yet see how foolish they are who live still in their sins, we
may mark here that they are murderers of themselves, the malice of the
wicked shall slay themselves, Psalm. 34. 21.
his own sin which he has conceived, brought forth and nourished shall be
his destruction. Every man judges Saul miserable that dyed upon his own sword,
but what better are other wicked men? are not their sins the weapons by which
they slay themselves? Thus are they twice miserable: first because they are
subject to death: secondly, because they are guilty of their own death. Oh
the pitiful blindness of men, albeit in their life they fear nothing more
then death, yet do they entertain nothing better than sin which causes
death. In bodily diseases men are content to abstain even from ordinary food,
where they are informed by the Physician that it will nourish their sickness,
and this they do to eschew death, only herein they are so ignorant that
notwithstanding they abhor death, yet they take pleasure in unrighteousness,
which brings on death.

And lastly, Strange death and diseases comes upon men through the groth of
their sins against God.
seeing we are taught here that sin brings death upon the body, what
me^uaile the Lord strikes the bodies of men by sundry sorts of diseases, and
sundry kinds of death, seeing man by sundry sorts of sins p^ouokes the Lord
unto anger? he frames his judgment proportionable unto his sins. If ye
walk stubbornly against me, and will not obey me, Leuit. 26. 25
I will then bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to your
sins. He has famine to punish intemperance, and the abuse of his creatures;
he has the devouring sword to bring low the pride of man; he has burning
fevers and unclean consuming goutes, to punish the fiery and unclean lusts
and concupiscence of man. If now the Lord after that he has stricken us with
famine and pestilence, come among us to visit us also with unaccustomed
diseases, what shall we say? but the despising of his former fatherly
corrections, and our stubborn walking against the Lord our God has procured
this unto our selves. Quid mirum in poenas generis humani crescere iram dei,
Cypri, ad Demet.
cum crescat quotidie quod puniatur? what marvel the wrath of God increase
every day to punish men, seeing that increases among men, which deserves that
God should punish it?

But there are two impediments which suffers not these warnings of God to
enter into the hearts of men. Delay of judgment confirms the wicked in evil,
and it is the first impediment which stays them from repenting at Gods
threatenings.
The one is albeit they find within themselves sins condemned by the word of
God, yet the plagues threatened against those sins has not light upon them.
This is that root of bitterness, whereof Moses warned Israel to beware:
that they should not bless themselves in their hearts, when God does curse
them, thinking they shall escape judgment, notwithstanding they do those
things which God has forbidden them. Deu. 29. 18.
Solomon marked this to be a great cause of iniquity, because judgment is not
executed speedely upon the wicked, Eccles. 8. 11.
therefore the heart of the children of men is set within them to do wickedly.
But O man do thou not know that the judgment of God is according to truth
against all that commit such things? Romans 2. 4.
Why despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and patience? because the
Lord holds his tongue and spares thee for a while, think thou that he will
spare thee for ever?

Every judgment of God executed upon another malefactor, But they who are
spared should learn wisdom by judgments ex^cuted upon others.
may tell thee that thou shall not escape, dies poenae nondum aduenit, the day
of punishment, of judgment, of retribution is not yet come: though in this
life the Lord should not come near thee, yet thy judgment is not far off,
and thy damnation sleeps not. Interim plectuntur quidam, quo caeteri
corrigantur, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
tormenta paucorum exempla sunt omnium: In the mean time some are punished
that the rest may be Cyp. de lapsis sermon. 5.
corrected, the torments of a few are the examples of all. As the Lord Jesus
set those eighteen men, on whom the tower of Siloam fell, Luke. 13.
for examples to all the rest of the people: so every one punished before us
stands up to us as a preacher of repentance, and an example to warn us, that
unless we repent, Aug. de ciuit.
we shall perish in like manner: Si nunc omne peccatum manifesta plecteretur
poena, Dei. cap. 8,
nihil vltimo iudicio reseruari putaretur, and si nus^um nunc peccatum puniret
Deus, nulla putaretur esse prouidentia; Why some wicked men are punished in
this life and not others.
If in this life every sin were punished with a seen judgment, nothing
should be reserved to the last judgment, and if no sin were punished in this
life, it might be thought there were not a providence to regard it. The Lord
therefore punishes some sins in this life, Psalm. 58. 11.
to tell there is a God who judges righteously in the earth, other sins
again in his wise dispensation he punishes not in this life to assure all
men that there is a judgment to come.

And least yet the wicked man should flatter himself by his escaping of
present judgment, It is a great judgment not to be corrected by God.
let him remember that a sinner walking in his sins, is sore punished when he
is spared: for I pray thee, is not this a judgment threatened against the
apostate Israelites? Hos. 4. 14.
I will not visit your Daughters when they are Harlots, nor your Spouses when
they are Whores. Ber. in Cant. hom. 42.
Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur: Certainly then is God
most angry, when he seems not to be angry at all. Misericordiam hanc nolo,
for my own part (says Bernard) I will not have such a mercy. Insignis poena
est, Philo. lib. de confus. linguarum.
and vindicta impietatis conniuere Deum, ac indulgere peccantibus, and non
solum impunitatem, sed and longam concedere prosperitatem: It is a notable
punishment and revenge of ungodliness, when God wincks, and ouersees sinners,
not only granting unto them impunitie, but also long prosperity. It was good
for me (says David) that the Lord afflicted me, Psa. 119. 71
The wicked because they have no changes fear not God, Psalm. 73. 4.
And the prosperity of fools destroy them. Prou. 1. 32.
He is happily conquered and overcome (says Augustine) from whom the liberty
of sinning is taken away, Aug. Marcellino epist. 5
Nihil enim infoelicius foelicitate peccantium, qua poenalis nutritur
impunitas, and mala volunt as velut interior hostis roberatur; There is nothing
more unhappy then the happy estate of a sinner, whereby penal impunitie is
nourished, and their wicked will as an inward and domestike enemy is
strengthened, thus are the wicked fearfully plagued, when they are most spared,
when they are given up to their own hearts desire, and their iniquity has
dominion over them; when the Lord hedges not in their way with thorns, but
gives them loose reins to go where they will to their own destruction, this
is terribilis lenitas and parcens crudelitas: from which unhappy condition the
Lord deliver us.

The other impediment that stays the Atheists of our Impediment. Wicked men
repent not because they see the Godly subject to the same outward evils which
come upon them.
is because they see the same condition befalls to the Godly, which is
threatened to the wicked. Daniell goes with the rest into captivity; Josias no
less then the greatest sinners among the people, is slain with the sword;
Ezekias also stricken with pestilence; and many Godly ones among our selves
fall under the same external plagues, which are threatened against the wicked,
therefore do they despise Religion, and harden their hearts against the
judgments of God. But herein also are they pitifully blinded; for the Godly
and wicked differs far one from another, The actions and pas^^ons of the
(...) and wicked different in one and the self same thing.
even when they are both doing the same external actions. Cain and Abel
sacrificing together; the Publicane and the Pharisee praying together, yet are
as far unlike one another, as light and darkness: so when they suffer the
same external crosses, yet there is a wonderful difference between them, non
idcirco vobis aequales sumus, Cyprian ad D^met.
quia in isto adhuc mundo constituti, carnis incommoda vobiscum pariter
incurrimus. A very good answer for men of this world, who thinck they are in
no worse case then the Children of God: think not that we are in as evil
case as ye are, because that so long as we are in this world we are subject to
the same bodily inconveniences, (...) (...) because he was made to rule over
them; and in respect of his soul, he is a companion to the Angels: for this
cause the Naturalists called man a little world; and Augustine counted man a
greater miracle than any miracle that ever was wrought among men: where other
creatures were made by the simple commandment of God, before the creation of
man the Lord is said to use consultation, to declare says Basile, Basil.
hexam. hom. 10.
that the Lord esteems more of man, than of all the rest of his creatures:
neither is it said that the Lord put his hand to the making of any creature,
save only to the making of man; Tertull. de resur. carnis.
and this also says Tertullian, to declare his excellency.

Yet is not man so marvelous in regard of his two substances, As also of their
marvelous conjunction.
as in regard of their conjunction. Among all the works of God the like of this
is not to be found again, a Mass of clay quickened by the spirit of life, and
these two vn^ted together to make up one man. Commonly says Bernard, the
honorable agrees not with the ignoble, the strong over goes the weak, Bern. in
die natal. dom. sermon. 2.
the living and the dead dwells not together: Non sic in opere tuo domine, non
sic in commixtione tua, it is not so in thy work O Lord, it is not so in thy
commixtion.

This is a doctrine commonly talked of, This doctrine known but not considered
that man consists of a soul and a body, but is not so duly considered, as it
should. It is a fearful punishment which by nature lies upon the soul,
seeing she turned her self willingly away from God, she is so far deserted
of God, that she regards not her self: though it be a very common proverb in
the mouths of men, I have a soul to keep, yet have thou such a soul as can
teach thee to keep any other thing better than it self: a fearful plague,
that because as I have said the soul continued not in the love of God, it is
now so far deserted, that it regards not the own self. This have I touched
only to waken us, that we may more deeply consider of that doctrine which men
think they have learned and know sufficiently already, namely, that man is a
compound creature, consisting of a soul and a body.

But to return, How that harmony which was between the soul and body by
creation is now turned into disagreement.
seeing at the first these two, the soul and body, were conjoined together by
the hand of (...) creator, and agreed together in one happy harmony among
themselves, whence comes this disagreement, that the soul being pertaker of
life, the body should be possessed by death? I answer we are to consider these
four estates of man's soul and body united. The first is their estate by
creation, wherein both of them concurred in a happy agreement to serve their
maker. Four estates of man's soul and body united.
The second is the estate of Apostasy, wherein both of them in one cursed band
conjoined, fell away from God, the faculties of the soul rebelling against
God, and abusing all the members of the body as weapons of unrighteousness to
offend him. The third is the estate of grace, wherein the soul being
reconsiled with God by the mediation of Christ, and quickened again by his holy
spirit, the body is left for a while under the bands of death. The fourth is
the estate of glory, wherein both of them being joined together again, shall
be restored to a more happy life than that which they enjoyed by creation As
for the first estate, we have lost it; as for the second, the reprobate stands
in it, and therefore miserable is their condition; as for the third, it is the
estate of the Saints of God upon earth; as for the fourth, it shall be the
estate of the Saints of God in heaven.

Let not therefore the children of God be discouraged, Comfort, our estate in
this life is neither our last nor best estate.
by looking either upon the remanents of sin in their soul, or the beginning
of death in their body, for why? this estate wherein now we are, is neither our
last, nor our best estate: out of this we shall be transchanged into the
blessed estate of glorious immortality, our souls without all spot or
wrinckle shall dwell in the body, freed from mortality and corruption, made
like unto Christ's own glorious body; which the Lord our God who has
translated us out of our second miserable estate into this third, shall not
fail to accomplish in his time.

Again it comes to be considered here, seeing by Jesus Christ life is
restored to the soul presently, why is it not (...) (...)

Last of all, Comfort, we (...) which no death can extingui^h.
there is here a notable comfort for all the children of God, that there is
begun in us a life, which no death shall ever be able to extinguish, albeit
death invade the natural vital powers of our bodies, and suppress them one
after one, yea though at the length he break in upon this lodging of clay, and
demolish it to the ground yet the man of God who dwells in the body shall escape
with his lif^: the Tabernacle is cast down (that is the most our enemy can
do) but he who dwelt in it remoues unto a better: as the B^^d escapes out of
the snare of the Fowler, The prison of the body being broken the soul that was
prisoner escapes
so the soul in death flighte^s out and flies away with joy to her maker: yea
the dissoluing of the body to the man of God, it is but the unfolding of the
net, and breaking open the prison, wherein he has been detayned, that he
himself may be delivered. Phil. 1. 21.
The Apostle knew this well, and therefore desired to be dissolved, that he
might be with Christ As in the battle between our Savior and Satan, G^n. 3.
Satan's head was bruised, and he did no more but tread on the heel of our
Savior, so shall it be in the conflict of all his members with Satan: by the
power of our Lord Jesus we shall be more then conquerours, The God of peace
shall shortly tread down Satan under our feet: Romans 16. 20.
the most that Satan can do unto us, Amb. de poem lib. 1. cap. 13.
Manducet terram meam, and dentem carni infigat, conterat corpus, let him lick
the dust, let him eat that part of me which is earth, let him bruise my body;
this is but to tread upon the heel, my comfort is that there is a seed of
immortal life in my soul, which no power of the enemy is able to overcome.

It is true that so long as we enjoy this natural life with health of body,
Wicked men dye either uncertain of comfort,
the loss that comes by the want of the spiritual life is not perceived, no
more then the defects of a ruinous house is known in time of fair weather;
but when thy natural life is wearing from thee, if thou want the other, how
comfortless shall thy condition be, when thou shall find in thine own
experience, thou had never more but a silly natural life which now is to
depart from thee? In this estate the wicked either dye, being uncertain of
comfort, or then most certain of condemaation. Those who are strangers from
the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.
through the ignorance that is in them, having no more but the light of nature,
the best estate wherein they can dye, is comfortless, if for want of light
they know not that wrath which is prepared for the wicked, and so are not
greatly terrified, yet far less know they those comforts which after death
sustaines the Christian, that they should be comforted. The Emperor Hadrian,
when he dyed made this faithless lamentation, Animula, vagula, blandula, quae
nunc abibis in loca? O silly wandering Soul, where away now will thou go? and
that other Seuerus proclaiming the vanity of all his former glory cried out,
(...): I have been all things and it profits me nothing: the one says, he
found no comfort of things that were before him; the other says, he found no
comfort of things that were behind, thus the wicked dye comfortless, good
things to come they neither know nor hope for, good things past profit them
not. Or most certain of condemnation.
Or if they have been such wicked men, as by the light of the word, have
known the will of their master, and yet rebelled against their light, they go
out of the body, not only comfortles, but certain of condemnation, having
received sentence within themselves, that they shall never see the face of God;
and such was the death of Judas: let us not therefore rest contented with the
shadow of this vanishing life; let us provide for that immortal seed of a
better life within us, which receives increase but cannot decay, it waxes
stronger the weaker that the bodily life is, but cannot be weakened, far less
extinguished by bodily death. He that finds it with in himself shall rejoice
in death, he shall dye in faith, in obedience, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
and in spiritual joy, Committing his Soul unto God, as unto a faithful
Creator, he rests in him whom he has believed, being assured that the Lord
will keep that, which he has committed unto him. The Lord work it in us for
Christ's sake.

(...) (...) is that which the Lord promised to Jacob, when he bad him go
down to Egypt, Fear not to go, for I will go down with thee, Genesis 46. 4.
and I will bring thee up again. He forewarned him that he should dye in
Egypt, and that Joseph should close his eyes, but he promises to bring up
again his dead body unto Canaan. O what a kindness is it, O what a kindness.
that the Lord will honor the dead bodies of his Children. The praise of the
canuoy of Jacobs corpse, the Lord will neither give it to Joseph, nor to
Pharaohs Servants with their Chariots, who in great number accompanied him, the
Lord takes it unto himself, I will bring thee up again (says the Lord,) the
like kindness and truth does the Lord keep for all the remanent of his
servants. Is thy body consecrated, is it a vessel of honor, a house and
temple, wherein God is daily served? he shall honor it again, he shall not
leave it in the grave, neither cast off the care thereof, but shall watch over
the dust thereof, though it taste of corruption, it shall not perish in
corruption.

The holy Spirit who dwelt in the body, He is a holy balm whereby the body
shall be preserved immortal.
shall be unto it as a balm to preserve thee to immortality, this same flesh
and no other, for it (though it shall be dissolved into innumerable pickles of
dust) shall be raised again and quicned by the omnipotent power of this
Spirit. It is a pity to see by what silly means natural men seek the
immortal conservation of their bodies, and cannot obtain it: there is no
help nature may yield to prolong the death of the body but they use it, and
because they see that death cannot be eschewed, their next care is how to keep
it in the grave longest from rottenness and corruption, and how when
themselves are gone, to preserve their names in immortal remembrance with the
posterity: thus by the very instinct of nature, Worldlings seek immortality
the wrong way.
are men carried away with a desire of eternity, but herein are they foolish,
that they seek it the wrong way, they lay out their silver but not for bread,
they spend their labor, Esaias. ^5. 2.
and are not satisfied, immortality and life is to be sought there where the
word of the Lord directs us, let the Spirit of Christ dwell in thee, and thou
shall live, otherwise though thou were the greatest Monarch in the world,
though all thy meat were sovereign medicines, though thy body were laid in
grave with as great external pomp as worldly glory can afford to any
creature, and thy flesh were embalmed with the costliest ointments; these are
but miserable comforts, perishing preservatives, thou shall lie down in
dishonor, and shall be raised in greater dishonor to everlasting shame and
endless confusion.

Now as we have these three degrees of eternal life by the Spirit dwelling in
us, Life is first restored to the soul and then to the body.
so are we to mark the order by which he proceeds in communicating them
unto us, first, he restores life to the soul, and secondly, he shall restore
life unto the body (says the Apostle) where the one is done, be assured the
other shall be done, the one is the proper end of his first coming, therefore
his Heralds cried before him; John. 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world: In his second
coming shall be the redemption of our bodies, Phil. 2. 21.
when he shall appear he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to
his own glorious body. Let this reform the preposterous care of men; art
thou desirous that thy body should live? be first careful that life be
communicated to the soul: for surely the redemption of thy body shall not
follow* unless the restitution of thy soul go before. Ber. de adue^. dom.
ser. 4.
Oportet cor nostrum conformari humilitati cordis Christi, priusquam corpus
conformetur glorioso corpori eius, our heart must first be conformed to the
humility of Christ's heart, before that our body be configurated to his
glorious body, this is the first resurrection, blessed are they that are
pertakers of it, for upon such the second death shall have no power. But it is
out of doubt qui non resurgit in anima, resurget in corpore ad poenam, he that
rises not now in his soul from his sins, shall rise hereafter in his body
to judgment.

But now leaving the condition, to come to the comfort, he that raised up
Christ from the dead, says the Apostle, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies. What necessity is here that he who raised Christ shall also raise us?
What necessity is there here that he who raised Christ shall raise us? yes
indeed the necessity is great, the head and the members of the mystical body
cannot be sundred: seeing the head is raised from the dead, no member can be
left under death: the Lord works in every member according to that same
mighty power, Ephe. 1. 29.
by which he wrought in the head; his resurrection necessarily imports ours,
seeing he arose not as a private man, but as the head of all his members, full
of power to draw the body after him, and to communicate that same life to every
member, which he has declared in himself: Christ in risen from the dead, 1
Cor. 15. 20
and is made the first fruits of them that sleep: the first fruit is ^isen,
the after fruit shall in like manner follow. Vexit in coelum carnem nostram
tanquam arhabonem and Tertul. de resur. carnis.
pignus totius summae illuc quandoque redigendae: the Lord Jesus has carried
our flesh into heaven, as an earnest and pledge of the whole sum, which
afterward is to be brought thither; he has not thought it enough to give his
spirit unto us here on earth, as the earnest of our inheritance, but to put us
out of all doubt he has carried up our flesh into heaven, and possessed it in
the kingdom, in the name of all his members.

Who raised up Jesus from the dead. Seeing our Lord was among the dead let us
not fear when God calls us to lie down among them also.
Then we see that our Lord was once among the dead, but now is risen from them;
let us not then be afraid when God shall call us to lie down among the dead
also: shall the servant be ashamed of his Masters condition? or will the patient
refuse to drink that potion which the physician has tasted before him? No, we
must follow our Lord through the miseries of this life, through the dolours of
death, through the horrors of the grave, if we look to follow him in his
resurrection, in his ascension, to be amongst those hundred forty and four
thousand in mount Sion, who having his fathers name written in their foreheads,
Re^. 7.
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, singing that new song which none can
sing but they whom he has bought from the earth.

When those women came to seek the Lord Jesus in the Sepulcher, What comfort
Christ's re^urrection gives us against death.
all the fear they had conceived concerning Christ's death, the Angels remoues
it by sending them to meditate on the resurrection, Mat. 28. 5. 6
Why seek ye him that lives among the dead? he is not here but he is
risen. We are not yet laid down among the dead, but or ever we go to the
grave we have this comfort, that the Lord by his power shall raise us out of
it; where the head grows through the members will follow. Per angustum
passionis foramen transiuit Christus, vt latum praeberet ingressum sequentibus
membris: Our Lord is gone through the narrow passage of death, that he might
make it the wider and easier to all his members, who are to follow him. We see
by experience the body of a man drownes not though it be under the water, as
long as the head is borne above: many of the members of Christ are here in this
valley of death, tossed too and fro in this sea of tribulation, with continual
tentations, yet our comfort is we cannot perish, for our head is above and a
great part of the body living, and reigning with him in glory, there is life in
him to draw forth out of these miseries, all his members, and he shall do it
by that same power, by which he raised himself from the dead.

For we are taught here, Resurrection is a work of God and not of man.
that our resurrection is a work not to be done by man, nor the power of
nature, but by the power of God: we are not therefore to hearken to the
deceitful motions of our infidelity, which calls in doubt this article of
our Faith: we must not consider the imbecillitie and weakness of nature,
neither measure heavenly and supernatural things, with the narrow span of
natural reason, Romans 4. 19.
but as it is Abraham's praise the father of the faithful, that when God
promised him a son in his old age, he was not weak in the faith, he
considered not his own body, which was dead, neither the deadness of Sarahs
womb, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being fully
assured that he who had promised was also able to do it: so should we
sanctify the Lord God in our hearts, (...) (...) Of these figures shadowing the
resurrection many more are to be found in holy scripture.

As for examples, Examples of the Resurrection
in every age of the world, the Lord has raised some from the dead, to be
witnesses of the resurrection of the rest. Genesis 5.
Before the flood, he carried up Henoch alive into heaven, and he saw no
death: under the law, Elias was transported in a fiery chariot: 2 Kings. 2.
and in the last age of the world, not only has our Lord, blessed for ever,
risen from the lead and ascended into heaven, as the first fruits of them,
which rise from the dead, but also by his power he raised Lazarus out of the
grave, even after that stinking rottenness had entered into his flesh: and upon
the Cross, when he seemed to be most weak he showed himself most strong;
he caused by his power many that were dead to come out of their graves, and to
enter into the city. Yea, his servant Peter by the power of the Lord Jesus,
raised the damsel Dorcas from death, Acts. 9. 40.
and in the name of the Lord Jesus made him that was lame of his feet to arise
and walk: Acts. 3.
when we see such power in the servant of Christ working in his name, shall we
not reserve the praise of a greater power to himself?

Gods working both in our selves and the creature co^firmes the Resurrection.
for the Apostle himself brings arguments from them to confirm the
resurrection. He first propones the question of the Atheist, how are the dead
raised up, and with what body come they forth? and then subioynes the answer,
1 Cor. 15.
O fool that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye, it is sown in
the earth bare corn, and God raises it with another body at his pleasure:
seeing thou beholdest this daily working of God in nature, why wilt not thou
believe that the Lord is able to do the like unto thy self? Aug. de verb.
Qui illa reparat quae tibi sunt necessaria, quanto magis te reparabit, Apost
ser. 34
propter quem illa reparare dignatus est? Seeing the Lord for thy sake repaires
those things which are necessary to maintain thy life, will he not much more
restore thy self, and raise thee up from death unto eternal life?

And to insist in these same confirmations, A twofold meditation to confirm
the resurrection.
which we may have from the working of God in nature, both in our selves and in
other creatures: if either with Justin Martyr, we consider of how small a
beginning, or then with Cyrill how of nothing God has made up man, we shall
see how justly the Apostle calls them fools who deny the resurrection of our
bodies. The Lord (says Justin Martyr) of a little How of a little drop God mad^
us that which now we are.
which (as Job says) is powered out like water, builds up daily this
excellent workmanship of man's body: who would believe that of so small a
beginning and without form, so well a proportionate body in all the members
thereof could be brought forth? Just. Mart. ^pol. 2. ad Senate. Romans
nisi aspectus fidem faceret, were it not that daily sight and experience
confirms it; why then shall it be thought a thing impossible to the Lord to
reedifie the same body, after that by death it has been dissolved into dust
and ashes? And again, if with Cyrill we will search out our beginning and
consider what we were this day hundred year, How God has made us of
nothing to be that which now we are.
we shall find that we were not: seeing the Lord of nothing has brought
out so pleasant and beautiful a creature as thou art this day, shall thou
think it impossible to him an hundred years after this, or longer or shorter,
as it pleases him, to restore thee again, Ciril catech. 4
and raise thee from the dead? qui potuit id quod non erat producere, vt
aliquid esset, id quod ^am est, cum ceciderit, restituere non poterit? he that
could bring out that which was not, and make it to be something, shall we
think that he cannot raise up again that which now is, after that it has
fallen?

Which of these two I pray thee, It is easier to restore one that has been,
then to make one that never was
is the greatest and most difficult work in thy judgment, (for unto the Lord
every thing, that he will is a like easy,) whether to make one who never was,
or to restore again one who has been? Doubtless to make a man in our
judgment is a greater thing then to raise him. In the work of creation the
Lord made that to be which was not, in the work of resurrection the Lord
shall make that to be which was before; the one thou (...) (...) honorable
manner in this life, seeing they are to be raised up as vessels of honor and
glory in the life to come.

Again, when the Apostle says, Ou^ bod^es shall be raised with new qualities.
that the Lord shall raise up our mortal bodies, we are to know that so he
calls them in respect of that which they are now, not in respect of that
which they shall be then. For in the resurrection the Apostle teaches us in
another place, that our bodies shall be raised immortal, honorable,
glorious, spiritual and impassionable. First, I say the body shall be raised
immortal, not subject any more to death, nor diseases, nor standing in need of
these ordinary helps of meat, drink, and sleep by which our natural life is
preserved.

They shall be honorable.
our body shall be raised honorable, now it is laid down in dishonor: for
there is no flesh were it never so beautiful, or beloved of man, but after
death it becomes loathsome to the beholder; so that even Abraham shall desire
that the dead body of his beloved Sarah may be buried out of his sight: but in
the resurrection they shall be raised more honorable then ever they were, they
shall be redeemed from all their infirmities, every blemish in the body that
now makes it unpleasant shall be made beautiful in the resurrection, Members
lame shall be restored
and every defective member thereof shall be restored to integrity: Membri
detruncatio vel obtusio nonne mors membri est, Tertul. de resur. carnis.
si vniuersalis mors resurrectione rescinditur, quanto magis portionalis? for
the perishing of the member is no other thing but the death of the member, if
the benefit of resurrection cut off the universal death of the body, shall it
not also take away the portionall death of a member in the body? if the whole
man shall be changed to glory, shall he not much more be restored to health?
Out of all doubt the bodies of Gods Children shall be raised perfect, comely,
and every way honorable; hoc est enim credere, resurrectionem integram credere.

They shall be glorious.
the body shall be raised a glorious body, When he shall appear, he shall
change our vile bodies, and make them like, Phil. 3. 2^.
to his glorious body. They who convert many to righteousness shall shine like
the stars in the firmament: yea, the just says our Savior, shall shine like
the Sun in the firmament. A shadow of this glory we have in Christ's
transfiguration on mount Tabor, Mat. 17.
his face shined as the Sun, and his clothes were white as the light. Moses
after forty days talking with God on the Mount, came down with so bright a
shining countenance that the Israelites might not behold him; what then may we
think shall be the glory of the children of God, when they shall be
transchanged with the light of Gods countenance shining upon them, not forty
days only, but for ever and ever. And if every one of their faces shall shine
as the Sun in the firmament, O how great light, and glory shall be among them
all? and if their bodies shall be so glorious, what shall be the glory of their
soul? surely no heart can conceive it, no tongue is able to express it.

Fourthly, our body shall be raised spiritual, which is not so to be
understood as if our bodies should loose a They shall be spiritual.
and receive a spiritual substance, but then shall our bodies be spiritual,
as now our Spirits by nature are carnal: which are so called because they are
subject to carnal corruption, pressed down and carried away after earthly and
carnal things: so shall our bodies then be spiritual, because without
contradiction they shall obey the motions of the spirit: the body shall be no
burden, no prison, no impediment to the soul, as now it is; the soul shall
carry the body where it will without resistance: where now it is earthly,
heavy, and tends downward, it shall then be restored so lightsome and quick,
that without difficulty it shall mount from the earth, to meet our Lord in the
air. As our head ascended on the mount of Olives, Acts. 1. 11.
and went through the clouds into heaven, so shall his members ascend, that
they may be with the Lord, they shall follow the Lamb where ever he goes. Let
us believe it, and give glory unto God, for he who is the worker of our
resurrection, is also the worker of our ascension. If the wit of man be able to
frame a vessel of sundry mettels that (...) (...) our Resurrection is put
between the Article of the remission of sins, Resurrection is a benefit when
remission of sin goes before it, and eternal life follows after it
and that other Article of eternal life; to ^each us that then only the
Resurrection of the body is a benefit, when remission of sins goes before
it, and eternal life follows after it, whereof the Lord of his great mercy
make us pertakers through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 12. Therefore Brethren we are debtors not to the flesh, Exhortation.
to live after the flesh:
AS it is true concerning us, What fruit we should gather of the Apostles
former doctrine
that a necessity lies upon us to preach, and woe will be to us if we preach
not, so it is true concerning you, that a necessity lies upon you to hear,
and woe will be to you if you hear not. It is commanded to us that when we
speak we should speak as the oracles of God, and it is also required of you,
that ye receive this word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the
word of God: therefore take heed how ye hear, for as Moses said to the
Israelites, so say we unto you; It is no vain word concerning you, it is your
life. Ye have heard that maine proposition of Comfort, there is no condemnation
to them which are in Christ: ye have heard it confirmed, explaned, and
applied: the miserable estate of them who walk after the flesh has been
showed unto you, as likewise the happy estate of them who walk after the
Spirit, and what comforts the godly have both against the remanents, as also
against the fruits of sins, has been declared unto you. Examine your
selves, and see how far forth these comforts belong unto you. If ye be such
as think with those scornful men in Jerusalem, that ye have made a covenant
with death, and it shall not come near you, then go on in your security, and
do that which is good in your own eyes: but if ye find by experience that
death is already entered into your mortal body, be wise in time, see that thou
have this only sovereign comfort against death, the spirit of Christ dwelling
in you: otherwise (flatter your selves in your security as you will) miserable
shall your end be.

Now the Consolation being ended, Consolation and exhortation both necessary
for us.
the Apostle subioynes the Exhortation, both these two, consolation and
exhortation, are needful for us in the course of this life: the one to keep
us that we faint not through the remanents of sin left in us, and beginnings
of death, which already have seized upon us: exhortation again to stir us up
when we linger in the way of godliness. For it fares with us as it did with
Lot in Sodom, the Angels warned him of the imminent judgment, and exhorted
him to escape for his life, yet he delayed and lingered, he could not be
gotten out of Sodom, till they (as it were) violently thrust him out. And
allbeit the Lord admonish us early and late by his messengers of that wrath
which is to come upon the children of disobedience, and warn us in time to
fly to the mountain of his salvation, yet alas so loath are we to forsake
our old finnes, that the Lord is forced to double his exhortations unto us, all
which yet shall not avail us, if the Lord lay not the hands of his grace upon
us, and by his holy Spirit make us obedient to the heavenly vocation. Let us
therefore take heed to the exhortations made us by the Lord, and that so much
the more, because it is most certain, that the sweetness of Gods consolation
shall not be felt of them who are not moved with his exhortation,
Contemplationis enim gustus non debetur, Ber* ser. 46. in Cant.
nisi obedientiae mandatoru^: the taste of Gods mercy by contemplation is only
due to them who make conscience of the obedience of his commandments.

Therefore. Every benefit of god is a new obligation b^^ding us to serve him.
This particle is relative to the words preceding: seeing it is so that by the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, we have such excellent benefits, we are
debt* bond not to live after the flesh but after the Spirit. Of this we have
first to learn, that every benefit we received from God is an Obligation
binding us debtors of service to God, (...) (...)

Debtors. Christ has freed us from all other service that we might be bound to
his own.
Of this it is evident that the doctrine of grace proclaims not liberty to men
to live as they will, but rather binds them to live godly: there can be no
higher contempt done to the Lord, than to turn his grace into wantonness.
Certainly the iniquities of Pagans does not hal^e so much offend him, as the
licentiousness of bastard Christians, who will sin the more freely because
Christ has suffered for sin: they hear that a man is not justified by good
works, and therefore being deceived by Satan's sophistry, they cease to do
well, not considering that good works must prove we are sanctified, and
sanctification must prove that we are justified. In the second verse, the
Apostle said that Christ has freed us from the Law of sin; and here he
says, that he has made us debtors to righteousness: these are not contrary,
they agree very well together, he has loosed us from the service of all other
Masters, that he might bind us the more straightly to serve himself.

And indeed if Christ command us, He is a servant of servants, who is not the
servant of Christ Jesus.
as he ought, no other thing shall command us beside him; otherwise if we be
not servants to him, we shall be slaves to every thing beside him. O quam
multos dominos habet qui vnum non habet? O how many Lords has that man who
has not Christ to be his Lord? assuredly there is no thing which will not
usurp superiority over thee, who lives not as a bound servant to Jesus
Christ: either thy belly shall become thy God, and for a mease of pottage with
Esau, thou shall sell thy birthright and blessing, or a wedge of gold shall
become thy confidence, and thou shall not care for gain to loose a good
conscience: or then some other uncouth Lord who has no title to thee shall
tyrannize over thee. Thus we see that the Christian liberty we have by
Christ, makes us free from the servitude of sin, as the Apostle teaches us,
and not free to commit sin, as the carnal Atheist conceiues it.

But seeing we are debtors, let us see with what bonds we are bound, surely
the obligations are many, by which we are bound debtors to the Lord, We are
bound to do God service by two great bands especially.
but specially now we will shortly consider these two, Creation and
Redemption. It is a principle received among all men, that the fruit and
vantage of a man's own workmanship should redound to himself: Who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not of the fruit Creation.
or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? 1 Cor. 9. 7.
No man begets sons and daughters but he will be honored of them, he that
hyreth servants, requires service of them; It is a shame that man craves that
of his inferiors, which he gives not to his superior.
yea Balaam will be offended if his beast serve him not according to his
pleasure: this is the measure wherewith men mete unto themselves, what reason
then is there, we should refuse to do that duty unto the Lord our Superior,
which we crave to our selves from our Inferiors. The Lord has made us, we
made not our selves; his hand has formed and shaped us; the life we have we
hold it of him; we can not abide a moment longer in this house of our earthly
tabernacle, than the Lords thinks expedient, his will makes the last day: yea
as we said before all our necessary maintenance for this mortal life, is
furnished out of his hand: seeing we our selves crave service of those to whem
we give the smallest things, shall we not much more give service unto GOD,
from whom we receive the greatest?

The other is the bond of Redemption. Redemption: here consider first, that we
are bought servants.
Wherein we are Ye are bought (says the Apostle) with a price, therefore
glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, for they are Gods. And
again, we are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as gold and silver, from
our vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
unspotted and undefiled: we should not therefore live as servants of men, far
less as servants of Satan and sin, That which cost Christ full dear, men
sels good cheap.
but as servants of that Lord who has redeemed us. Of all fools those are the
greatest who sels their life for the silly shadows of sinful pleasures, which
Jesus Christ has bought with the greatest price that ever was paid.

Not only are we bought to be Christ's servants, Secondly, Swor^ servants
but also we are sworn, for baptism as on the part of God, it is a seal of
the covenant of grace, to confirm that promise of remission of sins, which
God has made to us in the blood of Jesus Christ: so on our part it is a
solemn resignation of our selves, and our service to the Lord, wherein we give
up our names to be enrolled among his soldiers and servants, swearing,
binding, and oblieging our selves to renounce the service of the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh: and this oath of resignation we have renewed so often as we
communicated at his holy Table. Whereof it is evident that they who has given
their names to Christ, and yet lives licentiously, walking after the flesh, are
for-sworne Apostates, guilty of perfidie, and of foul apostasy and desertion
from Jesus Christ.

And thirdly, Thirdly, we have received wages before hand for service to be
done
not only are we bought and sworn, but we have received wages and payment in
hand, which should make us ashamed if we have so much as common honesty, to
refuse service to the Lord, whose wages we have received already. It may be
said to every one of us, which Malachie in the name of the Lord, Mal. 1. 10.
spoke to the Leuiets of his time, who among you shuts the door of my temple,
or kindles a fire upon my alter in vain: and who among us can stand up and say
that he has done service to the Lord for naught? Consider it when ye will,
for every piece of service ye have done to the Lord, ye have received wages,
more then ten times? who has called aright on his name, and has not been
heard? who has given thanks for benefits received, and has not found Gods
benefits doubled upon him? who has given alms in the name of the Lord, and
not found increase? I speak not now of rewards which God ^ath promised us, I
speak only of that we have received already, the least of Gods mercies showed
upon us already does far exceed all that service that we poor wretches have
done unto him: as therefore we are content to receive the Lords pay, let us
never refuse to give the service of our bodies and spirits unto him.

But alas, But many receive that from the true God, which they return no^ to
him but sacrifice to Idols.
is not this the common sin of this generation, to receive good things out of
the hand of God, and with them to sacrifice unto other Gods, to whom they owe
no service at all. A horrible sacrilege, a vile idolatry: for this the Lord
complains of the Jews, they have received my gold, and my silver, and made up
Baal to themselves: and the same complaint stands against the profane men of
this age. Hos. 2. 8.
The covetous man as riches increase does he not set his heart upon them,
though with his tongue he deny it? does he not say within himself, that
which Job protested he would never say to the wedge of Gold, thou art my
confidence? The glutton when he has received from God abundance of Wheat,
Oil, and Wine, though he know the commandment, Ephesians. 5. 18.
be not filled with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit, yet
how often takes he in superfluous drink, and spares not for love of it to
grieve the Spirit, sacrificing to his belly as unto God those things, which
binds him to do service unto the Lord? thus neither are the benefits of God
returned to do honor unto him from whom they come, but sacrilegiously also
abused to the making up of B^al, or some other Idol abominable to God, for
which it it most certain that the more wages these A^heists have received for
doing service to God, which they never did, the more fearful plagues and
stripes from God shall be doubled upon them.

Again we mark here that there is a double debt lying upon us, A double debt
lying upon us, the one the debt of sin which ^e must seek to be forgiven,
the other the debt o^ obedience, which we must seek to perform.
the debt of sin, and the debt of obedience: we are freede of the one by a
humble seeking and craving of the remission thereof through Jesus Christ, for
the debt of sin the Lord Jesus has taught us daily to seek Gods discharge,
Lord forgive us our debts: and indeed as every day we contract some debt, so
it is great wisdom by daily repentance to sue the discharge of it; for they
who neglect to do it, their debt multiples upon them, it stands uncancelled in
the register of God, written as it were with a pen of iron, and the point of a
Diamond, and they shall at length be cast into that prison for non-payment,
wherein will be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever. But as for the debt of
obedience, whereof the Apostle here speaks, we cannot with a good conscience
desire the Lord to discharge it, nor exempt us from it, but we must in all
humility crave Grace of God, that we being enriched by him, who of our selves
are poor, may be able in some measure to pay and perform it.

Where if the weak Children of God object and say, A threefold comfort for
the godly for the debt of obedience.
how then can we but drown in this debt, seeing no day of our life we can
pay to the Lord that debt of obedience which we owe unto him? To this there is
given a threefold The Lord to whom we owe it, gives us wherewith to pay it.
first the Lord deals with us as a loving liberal man deals with his
debtor, who knowing that he has nothing of his own, wherewith to pay him, and
not willing to put him to shame, stops privately into his hand, that which
publicly again he may give unto him, so the Lord conuaies secret grace into
the hearts of his children, whereby they are in some measure able to serve him:
but as David protested, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
so may we all, whatsoever we give unto the Lord, we have it of his own
hand. Secondly, the Lord He accepts for a time part of payment.
till we be able to do better, if our faith be but like the grain of
Mustard seed, yet if it be true, the Lord will not despise it; though our
repentance be not perfect and absolute; though our prayers be weak; though
we cannot do the good that we would, yet the good that we do is accepted
at his hands through Jesus The more we pay of this debt the more we are able
to pay.
the more we are able to pay. In other debts it is not so: for if the more be
paid out by him that is indebted, the less remains behind unto himself,
but here the more we pay, the richer we are; the doing of one good work of
service unto the Lord makes us both more willing, and able to do an other, the
talents of spiritual Graces being of that nature, that the more they are used
the more they are increased, and these should work in us a delight to pay that
debt which we owe unto the Lord.

Last of all, Good works are debts, therefore not merits
we mark upon this word, that the good we do is debt and not merit. When
one of your servants (says Jesus has done that which he is commanded, will
one of you give him thanks because he has done that which was commanded him?
Luke. 17. 7. 8 9. 10.
I believe not; he applies the Parable to his Disciples and in them to us
all: so likewise when you have done all those things which are commanded you,
say that ye are unprofitable Servants. Our Savior commands us plainly to
do well, but as plainly forbids all presumptuous conceit of our merit, when
we have done well. To speak against good works is impiety, and to presume
of the merits of our best works it Antichristian pride. No penman of the holy
Ghost did ever use the word of merit.
No man led by the Spirit of Jesus did ever use this word of merit; it is the
proud speech of the spirit of Antichrist, search the Scripture and ye shall see,
that none of all those who spoke by divine inspiration, did ever use it: yea,
the Godly Fathers who have lived in dark and corrupt times, have always
abhorred it.

If a man could live (says Macarius) from the days of Adam to the end of the
world, The Fathers thought it smelled of presumption*
and fight never so strongly against Satan, yet were he not able to deserve
so great a glory as is prepared for us, Mac hom. 15
how much less then are we able to promerit it (that is his own word) who so
short a space are militant here upon earth: Ber* in Psalm. qui habitat.
Praetendat alter meritum, sustinere se dicat aestus die^, ieiunare his in
Sabbatho, mihi adhaerere Deo bonum est; Ser. 1.
let another man (says Bernard) pretend merit, let him boast that he suffers
the heat of the day, and that he fasts ^wise in the Sabbath; it is good for me
to draw near the Lord, In Cant. ser. 61.
and put my hope in him: Meritum en^m meum miseratio Domini, non sum plane
meriti inops, quamdiu ille miserationum non fuerit: for my merit is Gods mercy*
I shall not altogether want merits as long as he wants not compassion: Sermon. 66.
And again, sufficit ad meritum scire quod non sufficiant merita, this is
sufficient merit, to know that merits are not sufficient: this he makes more
clear in that Sermon of his, de quadruplici debito: wherein he declares how
man is so many ways debtor to the Lord, that he cannot do that which he
ought, why then shall any man say that he has done enough, De quadruplici
debito.
cum nec millissim^^, imo nec minimae parti debitorum suorum valeat respondere,
seeing he is not able to answer the thousand part, no, not the least part of
that debt which he owes unto God?

To live. Our life should declare whose Servants and debtors we are.
We have heard that we are debtors: now have we to see wherein we are
debt-bound. We owe to the Lord not only these things which are ours, but (as
says Paul to Philemon we owe him our selves also Every man's life must declare
who it is whom he acknowledges for a Superior, Philem. v. 19.
and unto whom he submits himself a debtor. Iam. 2. 18.
Show me (says Saint James) thy Faith by thy works, show me (says Malachie)
thy Father by thy Sonly reverence toward him, Mal. 1* 6.
let me know thy master by thy obedience and the attendance thou give him. As
Caesar's money is discerned by his image and superscription, so the Christian is
known by his conversation; he walks after the Spirit, and by his deeds
more then by his words, he disclaimeth the government of the flesh. But
surely as Chrysostom complained of bastard professors in his time, so may we
in our time of many to whom we are ambassadors in Christ's name, An accusation
of the careless Christians of our time.
we have more then cause to fear we have bestowed labor upon you in vain:
for I pray you, what part of your lives gives sentence for you and proves that
ye are Christians? shall we judge by the place which ye delight most to
frequent? are there not many among you oftener in the Tavern then in the
Temple, filling your belly intemperately at that same time wherein the Sons
and Daughters of the living God, are gathered together into their fathers
house, to be refreshed with his heavenly Manna? shall we judge you by your
garments? do they not in many of you declare the vanity of your minds? if we
estimate you according to your companions, what shall we think but that ye
are such as those are with whom ye delight to resort? ye sit in the seat of
scorners, if thou see a thief thou must with him, and art pertaker with the
adulterers. If we try you by your language, ye shall be found uncircumcised
Philistims, and not holy Israelites: for ye have learned to speak the
language of Ashdod, Nehe. 13. 24.
ye speak (as Micah complained of the wicked in his time) out of the
corruption of your soul, Micah. 7. 3
making your throat an open sepulcher, ye send out the stinking breath of your
inward abominations, by your evil and unclean speeches, ye corrupt the minds
of the hearers. And thus seeing every part of your life gives sentence against
you, as a cloud of many vvitnesses testifieng that ye are unclean: what have
ye to speak for you, to prove that ye are Christians? shall your naked word
be sufficient to do it? no certainly, for against it the Lord Jesus has made
exception before hand, Math. 7. 21.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into my kingdom: your works
must be your witnesses, and your deeds must declare who it is to whom ye
acknowledge your selves servants and debtors.

Not to the flesh. Is is a difficult thing so to nourish the body, that we
nourish not sin in the body.
Sometime the flesh signifies the body, and in that sense we are debtors unto
it: for the covenant (says Bernard) which the Lord has bound up between the
soul and the body, is not to be broke at our will, but at the Lords will; and
in the mean time we are bound to nourish it: but the flesh here is put for
the sinful lusts of the flesh, Romans 13. 14.
and so we are not debtors unto it: Take no thought for the flesh to fulfill
the sinful lusts thereof. But alas the corruption of our nature is so great
that without great circumspection we cannot nourish the body, unless we also
nourish sin in the body: many under pretense of doing duty to the one fails
in the other; so they pamper the body, that they quench the spirit, overcome
with gluttony they are not able to pray. We are with the godly to keep a
mean (...) (...) of a shaking sword, Not like that Cherubin a minister of
justice to hold Ad^m out of paradise.
to keep Adam from the way of the tree of life, so the Apostle stands here
between us and death, with a sentence like a two edged sword in his mouth, to
keep the sons of Adam as far as he can from the way of death: the one
stood as a minister of Gods justice, the other stands as a messenger of mercy.
The Lord has sworn by himself, E^e. 18. 32.
as I live I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he should returns and
live: he iustifies his word by his deed, Both the word and deed of the Lord
declares that he craves not the death of a sinner.
in that in all ages of the world he has sent out messengers to warn them to
go by the way of death: so that now if any man perish it is because he
stoppes his ears, at the warning of the watchman of God: for thou can not
say but Moses and the Prophets, Jesus Christ and his Apostles and Preachers,
have met thee in the way of thy sin, and warned thee many a time, by the word
of the Lord, that if thou walk on that way, thou shall assuredly dye, where
thou passing by them all, rushest headlong after the lusts of thy flesh, and so
thou perishest, and thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

As the Apostle to the preceding exhortation annexed an argument a debito, from
that which we are bound to do, so now he subioynes another argument, partly a
damno, from the loss we incur if we do it not, in these words, if ye live
after the flesh ye shall dye, and partly a commodo, from the vantage we shall
reap if we do it, in these words, if ye mortify the deeds of the body by
the spirit, ye shall live. If we were such men as we should be, That the
spirit of God uses threatenings is an argument of our rebellious nature.
the former exhortation taken from honesty and duty were sufficient to move
us, but in that the spirit of God does also threaten us with death, is an
evident argument of the froward rebellion of our nature. The word of God is
compared not only to milk, but also to salt: we have need of the one because
of our infancy, that being nourished therewith we may grow, The word should be
used as milk to some as salt to others
and because of our corruption we have need to be seasoned with the other, to
both these ends should Preachers use the word of GOD, to some as milk for
their nourishment, to others as salt for their amendment.

But these are the times foretold by the Apostle, But now men cannot abide the
rebuke of Gods word.
wherein the itching ears of men cannot abide wholesome doctrine, they hate
him that rebukes in the gate, as Achab hated Micaiah to the death, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
because he prophesied no good unto him, Amos. 5. 10.
that is, he spoke not according to his fantasy, but warned him faithfully
of the judgment which afterward came upon him: 1 King. 22. 8
so the hearers of our time can abide no teachers but such as are after their
own lusts; but alas, they are foolish, Micah. 2. 7.
for are not my words good to him that walks uprightly (says the Lord. Aug.
ser. 1.
) Aduersarius est nobis, quamdiu sumus and ipsi nobis, quamdiu tu tibi inimicus
es, inimicum habebis sermonem Dei; the word of God is an adversary to none,
but such as are adversaries to themselves, neither does it condemn any but
such as assuredly shall be condemned of the Lord, Zach. 7. 11.
unless they repent. Stop thine ear as thou will from hearing of the
threatenings of the word, yet shall thou not stop that judgment which the word
has threatened against thee. There is a cry that will come at midnight, and
will waken the dead, but blessed are they who in time are wakened out of the
sleep of their sins, by the cries of the watchmen of God, for undoubtedly a
fearful and painful consumption shall torment them for ever, who now cannot
suffer that the salt of the Word should bite their sores to cure them.

The opposition made here by the Apostle vvarnes us that a necessity lies
upon us to mortify our sinful lusts, Either we must slay sin, or sin shall
slay us.
it stands upon our lives, unless we slay sin, sin shall not fail to
slay us. It is like a Serpent in our bosom, which cannot live but by sucking
out that blood vvherby we live: here is a wholesome preservative against
sin, if at every occasion we would carry it in our mind, we would make
no doubt to put sin to the death, that our selves might live. For alas, what
pitiful folly is this, we hate them that pursues our bodily life, Aug. de
temp sermon. 29.
we eschew them by all bodily means, we hate the oppressors that spoil
us of worldly goods: only we cannot hate Satan to the death, who seeks by
sin to spoil us of eternal life.

That same Commandment which was given to Adam and Euah, Every sin is to us
the forbidden tree.
if ye eat of the forbidden tree ye shall dye, is in effect here given to us
all: if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, let us not make an exception
where God has made none: every sin to us is as that forbidden tree to Adam,
if we meddle with it, we shall find no better fruit then that which Adam
found on it before us; Men seek on it that fruit which they shall not find,
and find on it that fruit which they would not have.
there is a fruit which man seeks upon the tree of sin, and he shall not
find it, to wit, profit, or pleasure, and there is another fruit which God
has threatened, and Satan says it grows not on the tree of sin, but man
assuredly shall find it. Bitter death grows upon the pleasant tree of sin,
for the wages of sin is death, albeit there came no word from the Lord to
teach this, former experience may confirm it: for what fruit have we this day
of all our former sins, but a guilty conscience, which breeds us much
terror, accusing thoughts, and anguish of Spirit.

It is therefore a point of great wisdom to discern between the deceit of
sin, Great wisdom to discern between the deceit of sin, and fruit of sin.
and fruit of sin: before the action, Sin is Inimicus blandiens, a flattering
and laughing enemy: in the action, it is dulce venenum, sweet poison, but
after the action, it is Scorpio pungens, a pricking and biting Serpent. He
that would rightly discern the face of sin, when it stands before him to
tempt him, let him look back to the tail of a sin which he has committed
already, and of the sting which that sin has left behind it, let him learn
to beware of the smiling countenance of the other, which will no less vvound
him the second time unto death, if so be he embrace it. Sinful lusts compared
to the stream of Jordan.
Most properly may the pleasures of sin be compared to the streams of the
river Jordan, which carries away the fish swimming and playing in it,
delighted with such pleasures as are agreeable to their kind, even til it
deuolue them into the salt sea, where incontinent they die: even so in the
wicked inordinate concupiscence is as a forcible stream which carries away
with it impenitent men, playing and delighting themselves in their lusts, till
at length they fall into that lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, out
of the which there is no redemption for them.

The perishing pleasures of sin are paid home with everlasting perdition, And
to the locusts with woman's hair, lions teeth, Scorpions tail.
it is done in a moment, but when it is finished it brings out death, and
breeds the worm that will never dye: paruum ad horam peccatum, longaeua autem
est ex eo, Basil in verb.
and aeterna verecundia: it is the deuoring Locust of the bottomless pit, Mos.
attend tibi.
which has hair like a woman, teeth like a Lion, and a tail like a Scorpion:
miserable are they who are blinded with it, Cirill. catech. 2.
they may sleep in their sin, but their damnation sleeps not, though their
heads be laid down, like the Kine of Bashan to drink in iniquity like
water, yet their judgment is not far off, and they are but like unto Oxen
fed for the slaughter.

We perceive here further, that every man's state and condition in this life,
is a prediction of that state and condition which abides him when this life is
gone: He that sows to the flesh, Gal. 6. 8.
of the flesh shall reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, This
life is a thorow-way or middle passage, either to heaven or hell.
shall reap immortality and life. As no man comes either to a Palace, or a
Prison, but by the entry thereof, so no man goes either to heaven or hell, but
by the way thereof. A wicked life is as a thorow-way to that prison and place
of darkesse; he who goes on in it without returning, shall out of all doubt,
when he has passed the pathway enter into the prison: and a godly life is
the very way to heaven, he that walks in it, perseuering to the end, shall
enter at last into that Palace of Glory, which is the paradise of God. Eccles.
11. 3.
Solomon says that where the tree falls there it lies, and experience teaches
us that it falls to that side on which the branches thereof grow thickest, if
the greatest growth of our affections and actions spring out after the Spirit,
out of doubt we shall fall to the right hand, and shall be blessed: but if
otherwise thy affections grow downward, and thou walk after the flesh, then
assuredly thou shall fall to the left hand, and die in sin under the cu^se of
God.

But seeing they who walk after the flesh are dead already, They who live in
sin are dead, and yet a worse death abides them in hell.
how says the Apostle they shall dye? To this I answer, both are true,
presently they are dead, and yet a more fearful death abides them. That they
who live in their sins are dead already we shewde before: for sin is
that unto the soul of man, which fire and water are to the body, that is to
say, an unkindly Element, in the which it cannot live, but certainly a more
fearful death abides them, which the spirit of God calls the second death,
wherein they shall not only live depriu^d of life, wanting all sense, yea and
all hope of the mercy of God, but shall also feel the full measure of his wrath
due to their sins powered out upon them. Now albeit they be dead in sin,
and deprived of the favor of the Creator, yet the vain comforts of the
creatures does so bewitch and blind them, that they know not how vvretched and
miserable they are, but when the last sentence of damnation shall be
pronounced upon them, they shall not only be banished from the presence of
God into everlasting perdition, where the fi^e of the Lords indignation shall
perpetually torment them, but also the comfort of all Gods creatures which now
they have shall forsake them. The least degree of their punishment shall be a
fearful famine of vvorldly comforts, The least degree of their punishment
shall be a fearful famine of all worldly comforts.
The Pomegranat Tree, the Palm Tree, the Apple Tree shall wither, The Apples
after which now their soul lusts shall depart from them, they shall find
none of them: yea, if a cup full of cold water might comfort them it shall
not be given unto them: thus you see how they are dead, Ioell. 1. 12.
and yet a more fearful death abides them. Reu. 18. 14.


Therefore the spirit of God to express the fearefulnes of that second death,
Why that second death is called a wrath, and a wrath to come.
he calls it a wrath, and gives it these two ^ules: first, he calls it a
wrath prepared by God. Solomon says the wrath of a king is the messenger of
death, what then shall we say of the wrath of God? Secondly, he calls it a
wrath to come, to teach us that it far exceedes all that wrath that we have
heard of seen. The drowning of the original world, the burning of Sodom a
great wrath, but nothing comparable to the wrath which is to come.

Beside this, The place of the damned shows the greatness of their judgment.
both the place, the universality and the eternity of their punishment,
serves to let us see, if we look to them how horrible this death is, which
here is threatened against them who live after the flesh. As for the place, it
is called the winepresse of the wrath of God, Reu. 21. 8.
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Esa. 30. 33.
Tophet prepared of old, deep and large, the breath of the Lord, like a river
of brimstone, does kindle it. It is that great deep which the damned spirits
themselves abhor, they know it to be the place appointed for their torment,
all that they crave was only that the Lord would not send them thither to be
tormented before the time. It it is called (...), a place wherein is no light
to see, therefore Jude called it blackness of darkness, Jude verse 6.
and our Savior called it utter darkness, Mark. 9. 48.
there is in it a burning fire, but without light, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
a gnawing worm without rest. Saint Peter calls it a prison, Math. 5. 22.
and our Savior calls it Gehenna, for the horrible scrieches of them who are
brunt in it, and the vile, and stinking filthiness wherewith it is
replenished.

And as for the universality of their pain. The universality of it: Nothing
in man shall be without pain, and all Gods plagues shall concur to punish him.
It is certain that as every thing in them sinned, so every thing in them
shall be punished. No power of their soul, no member of their body shall be
free from that wrath: Surely it should astonish man to consider this; for if
now any one of Gods ordinary plagues inflicted upon any one member of the body,
be so insufferable, how intolerable will that pain be? he who now is
payned with the tooth ach, takes some comfort when he sees another tormented
with the collicke, and he also if he see another burnt up with Anthonies
fire, bears his own cross the more patiently, because he sees a greater laid
upon another. No man in this life suffers all things, one cries with the
Shunamites son for excessive dolor, alas my head, my head: another with
Antiochus, my belly: the third with Asa, my feet, my feet: but what are all
these comparable to that pain wherein head and belly and feet, yea the whole
man shall be racked upon the torments of Gods wrath, and that not with one
plague only but with manifold: for as all the waters of the earth run into
the great Ocean, so all the plagues of God shall concur and meet together in
hell for punishment of the damned.

But yet the eternity of that pain does still increase the horror thereof,
The eternity of it.
their shall be no end of their punishment, their fire shall never be
quenched, their worm shall never dye, they shall seek death as a benefit,
and shall not find it. The fire of Sodom was ended in a day, the deluge of
water that drowned the original world, lasted but a year, the famine that
plagued Aegipt lasted but seven years, the captivity of Israel was ended in
seauenty years, but this wrath of God upon the damned shall endure for ever
and ever. Thus we see what a horrible death the Apostle threatens here,
while he says, if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye. The Lord give us
wise and understanding hearts, that we may ponder it according to the weight
thereof, and it may be to us a lively voice of God, to provoke us to flee from
that fearful wrath which is to come.

But if ye mortify, In the most regenerate there is some thing that needs to
be mortified.
etc. Here follows the other member of the argument, taken from the great
vantage we receive by mortifying the lusts of the body, if we do so we
shall live. Here also we have first to consider that albeit the Apostle
affirmed before verse 9. that these godly Romans were not in the flesh, yet
now he exhorts them to a further mortification of the lusts of the flesh, which
were superfluous if there were nothing in them that needed to be mortified:
then we see clearly, which we may also feel in our selves, that so long as
we live in the body, there is ever some remanent life of sin, which we
have need to mortify and put out. In this battle we must fight without
intermission, till we have gotten the victory: for who can say that he has in
such sort cut away his superfluities, that there remaynes nothing in him, which
has need of reforming: believe me when they are cut off they spring, For out
of the stony rock springs noisome weeds.
when they are chased away they return, when they are once quenched they
kindle again, except thou dissemble, thou shall always find within thy self
something that has need to be subdued. There is nothing harder (says Cyrill)
than the Rock, Cyrill.
yet in the seames and clifts thereof the noisome weed fasteneth her root,
and springes out: and albeit there be no man in the world stronger than a
Christian, yet is he oftentimes buffeted by Satan and sin, which has
fastened their root in him, sends out her inordinate motions and affections,
against which he has need to fight continually.

But here it is inquired, That which God works in us he calls it our work.
how does the Apostle require this of them, that they should mortify their
lusts? lies it in the power of man to do it? To this I answer, first that as
man gave life to sin, so is he bound to put out the life thereof upon no
less pain than condemnation, and therefore justly is it required of him.
Secondly, these same good works which the Lord works in us, he is content
to asscribe them to us, and calls them ours. Of our selves we must say with
the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think so much as a good thought,
Therefore we should be humble and give God the glory
our sufficiency is of God, and it is he who works in us both the will and
the deed: so he works in us that he makes us through his grace vvilling
workers with him, through him that strengthens us we are able to do all
things, and therefore the praise of all the good we can do should be ascribed
unto God. When David had offered to God abundance of silver and gold, and
other mettels which he had prepared for the house of God, he concludes in
the humility of his heart, What am I O Lord, 1 Chro. 29. 14
and what is my people, that we should be able to offer willingly after this
sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own hand have we given thee.
But much more when we do any work of sanctification, for the building of
our selves up into a spiritual Temple to the Lord our God, we may say, O Lord
all the good we can do is of thee, and of thine own hand we have given
back unto thee, for except thou Lord had given unto us grace, we should
never have given to thee obedience.

Let therefore the presumptuous conceit of Merit yet again be far from us,
Presumptuous opinion of Merit damned.
seeing the good which we do is debt, and is done also by the spirit of the
Lord in us, let us reserve the glory thereof unto him. Aug. de verb.
Quare dona mea, non merita tua, Apost. sermon. 2
quia si ego quarerem merita tua, non venires ad dona mea: seek my gifts
(says Augustine, speaking in the name of the Lord) not thy merits, for if I
should seek thy merits, thou should never be pertaker of my gifts. When the
Apostle Saint Paul had reckoned out how he had labored more abundantly in
the work of the ministry, 1 Cor. 15. 10
then all the rest of the Apostles, he subioynes as it were by correction, yet
not I but the grace of God in me: learning us when we have done all the good
we can to be humble in our selves, and give the glory to God: if he promise us
a crown, Aug. hom. 14
nihil aliud coronat nisi dona sua, he crowns no other thing but his own
gifts, if by promise he binds himself a debtor unto us to give us a reward,
Aug. de verb.
debtor factus est nobis, Apost. ser. 14.
non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ille placuit promittendo, he is
become a debtor unto us, not by receiving any thing from us, but by promosing
freely to us that which pleased him: and therefore when we are exhorted to
mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, let us first turn this and the
like of the precepts into prayers, that the Lord would enable us by grace to
do that which he commands us, and then when in some measure we have done it,
that we return the praise and glory to the Lord.

Mortify, A trial of our Mortification.
etc. Seeing the first part of our sanctification is called mortification, we
are to consider how in this word there lurkes a rule, whereby every man may
try how far forth he has profited in sanctification, we see by experience
that the nearer a man draws to death, the less motion is in him, but after
he is once dead he moves not at all; present him pleasant objects, they
delight him not, praise him, yet he is not puffed up, speak evil of him, yet
he is not offended: even so is it with the spiritual man, the greater
progress he makes in sanctification, the motions of sin are ever the weaker in
him, the pleasures of the world moves him not, as they were wont, if thou
praise him, the breath of thy mouth cannot lift him up, if thou offend him, the
more he is mortified, the less he is grieved. As a man (says Basile) being
dead is separate from those with whom he was conversant before, so he who is
mortified is instantly sundred in his affections from those who before were his
familiar companions in sin: yea those actions wherein he delighted before,
are a grief unto him now, it is a vexation of his soul to hear and see the
unrighteous deeds of the wicked, which were wont to be unto him the matter of
his sport and laughter.

Therefore does he wish, Death to sin takes not life away but restores it.
and so should we, that we might always die this kind of death, foelix mors
quae alienum facit hominem ab hoc saeculo, certainly it is a happy death which
alienates, and turns away the heart of man from the love of this world. Bona
mors quippe vitam non aufert, sed transfert in melius, for it is a good kind
of death, which does not take life away, but changes it into a better. But alas
how far are we from this spiritual disposition? does not the angry
countenance of one in wordly authority terrify us? the disdainful words of
men do they not put us out of the state of patience? if the world flatter us
are we not puffed up? if she frown upon us, are we not cast down? and this our
great weakness proceeds only from the strength of sin in us: this lets us
see what cause we have to be humbled, considering that having lived long in
this time of grace, yet have we profited little in the mortification of our
sinful lusts and affections.

Again, out of this same word of Mortification, we learn that the work of
our Sanctification is a work of difficulty, Sanctification is a work of
difficulty, for it is a birth, a death, a circumcision, etc.
not accomplished without labor, pain, and dolor, for it receives these
three names, as to be called, Mortification, Regeneration, and Circumcision.
As no birth, no death, no cutting off the flesh can be without dolor and
sorrow; so the conversion of a sinner is not wrought without inward pain and
sorrow. The Infant that has laid but nine Months in the womb of the mother,
is not delivered without great pain, suppose she conceived it with pleasure:
and shall thou think to part with sin, which in thee was conceived with
thee, and which since so often thou have nourished with pleasure, and not to
prove the dolours of the New Birth? No assuredly. In the work of man's
conversion, there is the contrite spirit, the humbled heart, the mourning
weed, the melting eye, the pale countenance, the voice of lamentation; let not
such as feel them, if they find therewith a rending of their affections from
their old sins, be troubled; for these are but the dolors of their new birth;
and for others who know not these inward humiliations and wrestlings of the
Children of God, they have just cause to suspect themselves, that they have not
so much as the beginnings of Mortification, Regeneration, and spiritual
Circumcision.

By the Spirit. The knife by which beastly lusts are slain to be sacrificed
Nature will not destroy our sinful lusts, they are mortified by the Spirit of
Christ, and therefore we are to nourish and entertain this Spirit, by the
means before prescribed. As those Beasts which sacrificed to God under the
Law, were first slain by the knife of the Leuite, and then offered to God upon
the Altar; so the Lord Jesus must mortify our affections by the power of his
word and Spirit, Mac. hom. I.
before they can be presented acceptable sacrifices to the Lord our God.

Ye shall live. Temporal life is not the recompense of righteousness, and
why?
As I spoke of death which is threatened, so speak I of life here promised:
this temporal life cannot be the recompense of righteousness, for it is
common both to the Godly and the wicked. If in this life only we had hope, 1.
Cor. 15. 19
of all men we were the most miserable, but the life here promised is eternal
life, the beginning whereof presently we enjoy by the Spirit of our Lord, who
has quickened us, so that we may say, Gal. 2. 20.
now I live, yet not I, but Christ Jesus lives in me, the accomplishment
thereof we look for hereafter. Thus has the Apostle set before us both life
and death, he has showed us the way how we may eschew the one, and attain to
the other: the Lord grant that according to his counsel we may make choice
of the best.

Verse. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.
IN this Verse the Apostle subioynes a Confirmation of his preceding argument:
He proves the last part of his preceding argument.
in the last part thereof he has said, If ye mortify the deeds of the body
by the Spirit ye shall live: now he proves it. They who mortefie the deeds of
the body by the Spirit, or they who are led by the Spirit of God, (for these
phrases are equivalent) are the Sons of God, therefore they must live; the
necessity of the consequence is evident of that which follows, the Sons of
God are the Heirs of God, heirs annexed with Jesus Christ, and the heritage
whereunto they are borne is eternal life, therefore of necessity they must
live.

Here first we have to consider what action and operation of the spirit this
is, The operation of the Spirit is either universal extending to all his
creatures,
which distinguishes the Sons of God from other men. The operations of the
Spirit are diverse; he has an universal operation, by which he works in all
his creatures, conseruing, leading, and directing them to his own determined
ends, for in him every thing that is, has the being, living, and moving, as
every creature is made by God, so is it ruled and led by the Spirit according
to his appointment.

He has again a more special operation in man, and (...) (...) them back
again; seven mighty nations of the Canaanits are gathered before them to
resist them and hold them out of Canaan, but the shepherd and leader of
Israel steps over all these impediments, as if they had not been in the way,
and places his people in the mountain of his inheritance: and afterward when
he concluded to bring his people from Babell homeward to Canaan, he prepared a
way for them in the Wilderness, he commanded the mountains to be made low,
and the valleys to be exalted, he commanded the crooked to be straight, and the
rough places to become plain, Comfort.
and it was done. This is for our comfort, the Lord who has taken us by the
hand to lead us into his holy habitation, shall remove all impediments that are
before us; though Satan like a Lion spoiled of his pray snatch after us,
though he double his tentations upon us, and with manifold afflictions compass
us, though terrible death and the horrible grave stand before us, threatening to
swallow us by the way, yet shall we see the goodness of the Lord in the land
of the living, and over all our enemies shall be more than conquerors, through
him that loved us, and has taken us into his own hand, to lead us to that
inheritance which he has prepared for us.

For it is manifest, The beginning progress and perfection of our salvation is
from him.
that both the beginning, progress, and perfection of our salvation is
ascribed to the spirit of God in holy scriptures: when we were dead in sin he
quickened us, when he has quickened us, he gouernes and leads us, and works
continually in us till he perfect us. Thus is he the author and the finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12. 2.
and all the glory of our salvation is his: as we cannot begin to do well
without him, so we cannot continue in well doing without him: if he lead us
not, we wander from him, and weary our selves in the way of iniquity. In
that we can not walk without a guide, we ^re warned that we are but babes.


It should serve to humble us, that we are pointed out here to be but babes
and children, such as cannot go by our selves, unless we be led by another.
As that Eunuch answered Phillip, Act. 8. 30. 31
when he asked, understand thou what thou read? how can I (says he)
understand without a guide? so may we answer the Lord when he commands us to
walk in his way, It is good religion to turn Gods precepts into prayers.
how can we O Lord that are but children and newborn babes, walk in thy way
without a guide? It is a point of good religion, to turn the Lords precepts
into prayers: Send out Lord thy light and thy truth, Psalm. 43. 3.
let them lead me, Psalm. 143. 10
let them bring me into thine holy mountain, and to thy tabernacles. Let thy
good spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness. When the Lord threatened
that he would no more go before the Children of Israel, to lead them as he
had done, Moses took it so deeply to heart, that he protested he would not
go one foot further except the Lord went with him: and certainly if we knew
the manifold inconveniences, whereunto we shall fall if the Lord forsake us,
we would never enter our feet into that way, wherein we saw not the Lord
going before us in mercy to lead us.

Our life on earth should be ordered as was the life of Israel in the
wilderness, We ought to follow our guide as Israel did the Lord in the
wilderness.
the Lord went before them by day in a cloud, by night in a pillar of fire:
when the cloud removed, they removed, what way so ever it went, they followed,
where the cloud stood, they camped: thus the Lord led them by two and forty
stations, forty years in the Wilderness, though Canaan was not far from
them, yet they entered not into it till the Lord directed them. The Lord has in
like manner (praised be his name for it) brought us out of the land of our
bondage; he might if he had pleased long ere now have entered us into our
Canaan, but it pleases him for a time to exercise us, and to have us walking
up and down this Wilderness. Let us possess our hearts with patience, and
reverence the Lords dispensation: in the mean time, take heed that the Lord
go before us, that his word shine unto us, as a lantern to our feet, and
that his holy spirit be our guide to lead us in his righteousness: then shall
we be sure of a happy end of our journey, when we live not as we list, but
under the government of the holy spirit; when our rising and lying down, our
(...) (...)

Verse. 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear again,
but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
THe Apostle to strengthen his former argument, A threefold operation of the
spirit in the Sons of God.
sets down a short description in this and the subsequent verse, of a
threefold operation which the spirit makes in them whom he leads: for first,
he is unto them a spirit of bondage, working fear: Secondly, he is a Spirit of
Adoption, working love through the sense of Gods mercy, for he not only makes
them whom he leads the Sons of God, but intimates unto their spirits Gods
love toward them, which otherwise was unknown unto them: and thirdly, he is
a Spirit of intercession, making us to go with boldness to the throne of
grace, and call upon God as upon our Father. Of the which the first part of his
argument is made clear, that they who are led by the spirit of God are the
Sons of God, yea, by the testimony of the Spirit they themselves know that
it is so, and therefore in most homely and humble manner acknowledge him for
their Father. This the Apostle propones in such a manner that he applies it
particularly to the Godly Romans, unto whom he writes, Ye have not (says
he) received again the Spirit of bondage unto fear, as ye did in the time of
your first conversion; ye have proceeded further, and have experience of his
other operations, then ye felt him casting you down with the sight of your
sins, but now ye feel him comforting you and raising you up with the sense
of Gods love and mercy toward you in Jesus Christ.

The spirit of God is called a Spirit of bondage unto fear, Why in his first
operation he is called a spirit of bondage to fear
not as if he made them in whom he works slaves or bondmen, but because in
his first operation he rebukes them of sin, in whom he works, and lets
them see that bondage and servitude under which they lie, which works in them
an horrible fear, but in his second operation he is a spirit of Adoption,
making them free who were bound before; comforting them with the sight of Gods
mercy, whom before he terrified with the sight of their own sins, to the one
he uses the preaching of the Law, which discouers our disease; to the other
the preaching of the Gospel, By the preaching of the Law he discouers sin and
wrath due to it, which causes fear.
which points out the Physician. As the proclayming of the Law wrought a
terror in their hearts who heard it, so does the preaching thereof: for who
can hear himself accursed and condemned by the mouth of God and not tremble?
John the Baptist began at the preaching of the Law, Mat. 3. 10.
Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree, every tree that brings not
forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire: then he
proceeded and poynted out the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world; by the first he prepared a way to the second: for his auditors being
cast down in themselves with the threatening, enquired earnestly what shall we
do then that we may be saved? and were glad to hear of a remedy. It is out
of doubt, that they who are not touched with a remorse for their sins, nor a
fear of the wrath to come, and into whose hearts never entered that care, what
shall I do that I may be saved? have not known as yet so much as the very
beginnings of salvation.

We are not then to think here, He is not here comparing the godly under the
Law with the godly under the Gospel.
that the Apostle is comparing the Godly under the Gospel, with the Godly
under the Law, but he is comparing the Godly under the Gospel with
themselves; their second experience of the operation of the Spirit with the
first, it is true that once (says he) ye received the Spirit of bondage
working fear, this was his first operation in you, but now ye have experience
of another, and are made pertakers of a more excellent operation, he is become
unto you a Spirit of Adoption, by whom ye call upon God as upon your Father.

For the Godly under the Law were pertakers of this (...) (...) deny that Sarah
was his Wife; made Peter deny that Christ was his Lord; this fear made Jonas
refuse to go to Niniue, and made that worthy Prophet Samuel unwilling to
anoint David, for he feared least Saul should slay him: yet are A servile
fear.
The third sort is servile fear, the object whereof is the judgments of God
only: and this is proper to the wicked, they fear the plagues of God, but so
that they love their sins, and hates and abhorres every A filial fear.
The fourth is filial, so called because it is proper to the sons of God;
they do not only fear him for his judgments, Psalm. 130. 4.
but love him and fear him for his mercy: mercy As for the Diabolical fear,
A Diabolical fear.
Saint James says the Devils know there is a God, therefore they fear and
tremble; they have received within themselves the sentence of damnation, James.
2. 19.
they know it shall never be recalled, they seek no mercy, nor shall they
obtain it: and the servile fear of the wicked shall at the last end in this
desperate fear of the damned, finding themselves condemned, without all
further hope of mercy, they shall tremble and fear continually.

Of this it is evident that the fear whereof here he speaks is the first part
of filial fear, From what sort of fear are we exempted?
namely, a fear of that punishment which is due to sin, and to the godly is
an introduction, to work in them fear of God for his mercies, conjoined with
love: so then his meaning is clear, albeit in the time of your first
conversion you were stricken with a fear of that wrath which is the recompense
of sin, yet now the spirit of adoption has not only released you of that
fear of damnation, which you conceived at the first, through the knowledge of
your sins, but has also made you certain of salvation, and assured that God
is become your father in Christ Jesus.

In the wicked the fear of Gods wrath once begun increases daily, till it
proceed as I spoke, to that desperate fear of the damned, In the godly fear
prepares a place for the perfect love of God, and then departs it self.
but in the godly the fear of Gods judgments is but a preparation to the love
of God, fear shall not always abide in their hearts, for when God shall crown
them with his mercies, and his love in them shall be perfect, then perfect love
casts out fear: therefore Augustine compares the fear of Gods judgments in
the godly to a Needle, that goes through the seame, and prepares in it a place
for the thread, which is to remain: so does the fear of Gods judgments go
through the secret seames of the heart, and prepares a place for the love of
God, which shall abide and continue for ever in the godly, when fear shall be
away. The Lord at the first deals hardly with his children, Mat. 15.
as our Savior dealt with the woman of Canaan, whom he comforted at the last;
and as Joseph entreated his brethren roughly, whom at the last for tender
compassion he embraced with many tears: but all these terrors and fears
wherewith God humbles his own, are but preparatiues to his consolations; at
the length he shall make it known to them, that he is their loving father:
as for the wicked, though they have not suffered from their youth the terrors
of God, it is because they are reserved for them.

Neither are they even now exempted from their own fears, But in the wicked
fear of wrath once begun increases till it proceed to desp^rate fear.
for albeit there were none to reprove them, their own consciences sends out
accusing thoughts to terrify them; and if at any time they shall hear the
word of God faithfully, and with power delivered unto them, then do they much
more tremble and fear: for the word strengthens the conscience to accuse and
terrify them, but fear is both the first and last effect it works in them;
and therefore is it that being so often disquieted with hearing of the word, as
Felix was with the preaching of Paul, they are no more desirous to hear it,
but rather hates it and abhors it, because it testifies no good unto them, more
than Micaiah did to Achab, and so they never attain to his other operation of
the spirit, they are not transchanged by hearing, into the similitude of the
sons of GOD, neither receives that (...) (...) but (...), that is, not like
the strong blood of God, but the blood of man. But as for the Children of God,
they can not be deceived of their generation, they know that God is their
Father, and with greater homeliness and more freedom of spirit, yea and surer
knowledge they call God their Father, then any son in the world is able to call
on his earthly Father.

Whereby we cry. No prayer to God without the spirit of God.
The Apostle here does teach us that it is by the spirit of Adoption we pray
unto God: without that Spirit men may speak of God, but without him they
cannot speak unto God: Prayer is a proper action of the sons of God. The
Apostle describing them who are Saints by calling, says, they are sanctified
by Christ; and call upon the name of the Lord Jesus: he ioynes these two
together, to tell us that they who are not called by God, and sanctified in
Christ, cannot call upon him; as for profane men it is certain they cannot
pray, though they repeat that prayer Our Father which art in heaven, what else
do they but multiply lies as they multiply words?

Only the spirit of Adoption teaches the Children of God to pray: How the
godly sometime are transported in Prayer.
Prayer is unto them like that fire Chariot in the which Eliah was carried from
earth to heaven; by it they are transported to have their conversation with
God, 2 King. 2.
and speak to him in so familiar a manner, that they know not those things
which are beside them, neither see they those things which are before them;
being in the body, they are carried out of the body, they present to the Lord
sighs, which cannot be expressed, and vtters to the Lord such words as they
themselves are not able to repeat again: and that all this proceeds from the
operation of the Spirit who bends up their affections and teaches them to
pray, is evident by this, that when this holy Spirit intermits or relents his
working in them, they become senseless and heavy hearted, more ready to sleep
with Peter, Mat. 26. 38.
James and John, than to watch and pray with Jesus, yea suppose it were in the
very hour of tentation.

We cry, The godly should cry together, not one against an other.
etc. The Apostle you see reckons himself among others who cries by this
spirit of Adoption; though the children of God be many yet seeing they all are
led by one spirit, they should all cry for one thing unto God: the assemblies
of the Church militant on earth should resemble as near as they can, the
glorious assemblies of the Church triumphant in heaven: many are they who
follows the Lamb, their voice is like unto the voice of many waters, yet they
all sing but one song; so should there be among us that are Christians, but one
voice, specially when we meet in the public assemblies of the Church, though
we were never so many yet our affections and desires should concur in one,
Union of desires in prayer commended.
and all of us send up one voice to the Lord. We see that in nature
conjunction of things which are of one kind, makes them much stronger; many
flames of fire united in one, are not easily quenched; many springs of water if
they meet together in one, make the stronger river, but being divided are the
more easily overcome. James. 5. 16.
Saint James says, the prayer of one righteous man auailes much, if it be
powered out in faith, what then shall we think of the prayers of many? Oh what
a blessing might we look for, if we could join in one to call upon God? but
now alas, where one with a contrite heart cries to God for mercy, how many by
continuance in sin cries to him for judgment? what marvel then the arm of
the Lord be shortened toward us, and he do not help us?

As they who resolve to lift any heavy burden join their hands together
under it, As many hands lift a burden importable to one, so
and so by mutual strength makes that easy to many, which were impossible to
one: so when we are assembled together to lift from off our heads, by unfeigned
repentance, that burden of the wrath of God, which our sins has brought
upon us, if there be among us no deceivers, but that every man in the
sincerity of his heart, join his earnest supplication with the prayers of his
brethren, what a blessing may we look for? Take heed therefore how you
behave your selves in the holy assemblies (...) (...) though they should never
be brought forth by speech of the mouth, and this for their comfort, who
through extremity of sickness, or otherwise are not able to use their tongues
in prayer to God.

Father we learn here, The Parents of Prayer.
that the Parent which begets Prayer is the Spirit of adoption, the mother that
conceiues it is the humble and contrite heart, for no proud, unclean and hard
heart can pray unto God, The wings whereby prayer ascends.
the wings whereby it ascends are feruencie and an heavenly disposition;
feruency is noted in the word of Crying, for as in crying there is an
earnestness of the powers of the body to send out the voice, so in prayer
should there be an earnestness of the powers of our soul to send up our
desires. As incense without fire makes no smell, and therefore the Lord
commanded it to be sacrificed with fire in the Law: so prayer without
feruencie sends up no sweet smell unto the Lord. Our heavenly disposition
required in prayer is collected out of this, that he to whom we speak is our
Father in Heaven, if our minds be earthly, we can have no communing with him
that is in heaven; we must therefore ascend in our affection, enter within
the veil, if we would speak familiarly with our Father: Prayer this manner
of way sent up, and presented to our advocate and intercessor the Lord Jesus,
out of the hand of Faith, cannot but return a favorable answer, if not at
the first, as in the very time of Prayer, Daniell received his answer, Dan. 9.
22. 23.
yea at the beginning of his supplication, as the Angel Gabriell informed him,
the commandment came forth to answer him, yet shall not the Lord fail in his
own good time to fulfill the desires of them who fear him.

Manifold examples of holy Scripture lets us see that Prayer this way powered
out unto God is most effectual. Efficacy of prayer, every petition returns
with profit.
At five sundry petitions did not Abraham bring the Lord from fitie to ten?
every petition returns to Abraham some vantage, Genesis 18.
feign would Abraham had Sodom preserved for Lots cause: at his first request
he got this answer, that the Lord would spare it for fifty righteous men's
sake, if they might be found in it, but at the last from fifty he brings him
to ten; as long as Abraham prayed the Lord answered, and for every petition he
yielded something to Abraham: and most comfortable is it that the Lord ceases
not from answering, Acts. 10.
till Abraham ceased from asking any more. When Peter prayed upon the house top
he fell into a trance, and saw a heavenly vision; Mat. 17.
when Jesus prayed upon Mount Tabor he was transfigured; and if at any time the
children of God be transformed from an earthly disposition to a heavenly, they
find in their own experience that it is in the time of prayer.

Satan for this cause is a most troublesome enemy to the exercises of the
word, Satan an enemy to the Word and Prayer.
and of prayer: because the one is the mother, the other is the nurse of all
the graces of God in us; either he makes men lightly to esteem the exercise
of prayer, or then does what he can to interrupt them in it: as that Pithonisse
interrupted Paul while he was going to pray, Acts. 16. 16
so has that adversary a thousand wiles, whereby either before prayer, he
seeks to divert them to some other business, or in the action to trouble them
and divide the powers of the soul by uncomely and profane motions: If
Iehoshua stand before the Lord, Zach. 3. 1.
Satan shall stand at his right hand to resist him. Genesis 15.
Unless therefore with Abraham we drive away the ravening birds from our
sacrifice, unless with the Israelites we stand on Ierusalems wall, with a weapon
ready in our hand to repel the adversary as often as he comes to stay the
work of God, it is impossible that our hearts can continue in fervent prayer to
God.

Yet the restles opposition of the adversary should not make us to break off
this exercise of prayer, but the more we find Satan angry at our prayers, the
more should we be provoked to pray; if he felt not himself hurt, and his
kingdom weakened by our prayers, he would not so busily trouble us in prayer:
ye see he troubles us not in such exercises as troubles not him; speak as
long as you will of (...) (...) taught of God: we cannot says the Apostle call
upon him in whom we believe not. As for the Angels we believe that they are,
which the Saduces did not, but we believe not in them, and therefore will not
pray unto them. In all the old Testament we read no prayer made to Abraham, In
all the scripture no prayer to Abraham, Moses, etc. nor to Cherubin, nor
Seraphin.
albeit he was the father of the faithful, none to Isaac, or Jacob, or Moses,
or any other of the fathers departed. In a hundredth and fifty Psalms, no
prayer is made to Cherube or Seraphin, though they in their psalter of the
Virgin, have turned over all the praises and petitions made to our Lord into
petitions to our Lady, Psalm. 6. 1.
as if where David says O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, we were also to
say, O Lady rebuke me not in thine anger, Psalm. 4. 1.
and O Lord thou art my righteousness, O Lady thou art my righteousness, and
so forth in the rest: but we may boldly say with Bernard, libenter certe
gloriosa virgo tali honor carebit, the glorious Virgin is willingly content to
want such a honor. The Angel would not suffer John to prostrate before him,
do it not (says he) I am but thy fellow servant: Reu. 19. 10.
this one of those blessed spirits witnesses to us in name of all the rest,
that it is the will of the Saints of God in heaven, that we who are upon earth
should reserve to the Lord his own worship, and give no part thereof to
creatures, yea they are offended when that honor is offered to them which is
due to their Lord.

Where if that common objection be brought which Ambrose did obuiate in his
time, It is not in the court of heaven as in the courts of earthly kings.
posse nos per istos ire ad Deum, sicut comites peruenitur ad regem, that men
by such mediators may go to God, as they go to Kings by those who are
honorable in their courts; to them we answer with him, hoc est misera vti
excusatione, this is to pretend a miserable excuse: for men go to kings by
courtiers, because the king is but a man, and ad Deum autem quem nihil latet
promirendum, suffragatore non opus est sed mente deuota, but as for the Lord
from whom nothing is hid, there needs no such procutor to make him favorable
unto us, only there is required a devout mind, for in whatsoever place he who
is truly godly speaks unto God, the Lord shall answer him.

And lastly, Every tongue and language is sanctified for prayer if we
understand it.
that the Apostle here joins two words of sundry languages, Abba Father, it
is to teach us that every tongue is sanctified to the use of Gods children, and
that it is lawful for us to pray in any language, if so be we understand it;
but to bind people to pray in a language they understand not, or for him that
should be the mouth of God, in the exercise of divine worship, to speak to the
people in a strange language which they understand not, is a sacrilegious
tyranny. They are builders of Babell who speak to the people in a language
they understand not
That which God powered out as a cruse on the first Babell, that one of them
understood not what another said, and the people knew not what the builders
craved, in the second Babell is received as a blessing. The Caldeans a fierce
and cruel nation were sent against the Jews, speaking to them in a language
which they understood not, to punish in them the contempt of the voice of God,
which they would not learn nor understand: and now the messengers of
Antichrist, a cruel and merciless people, are come out speaking to the world
in an uncouth language, for punishment of them that received not the love of
the truth. A faithful servant of the Lord had he never so many languages, had
rather speak in the Church five words with understanding, that others might be
instructed, than ten thousand otherways: he is but an hireling and a false
Apostle, that purposely speaks to a people in a language they understand not.
We give thanks to God, who has delivered us from this most fearful
captivity and confusion of Babell.

(...) (...) thou art but a liar against the holy Ghost, and a wilful
murderer of thine own soul, by faithless presumption.

The other sort of men are the Children of God, A comfort for weak Christians
who are moved by their wants to doubt of this testimony.
who because they find not always within themselves this testimony of the
Spirit in a like measure, are therefore cast down and made oftentimes to think
they never had it: for as none are more ready to boast of the spirit then they
who have him not; so none complains more that they want him, then they who
possess him. The Children of God in this being like unto rich worldlings, who
suppose they be possessours of much, yet the great desire of more which is in
them, causes them to esteem that which they have as nothing, and therefore
comforts not themselves with the lawful use of that which they have, but vexes
their spirits with restless thoughts for that which they want: even so it is
customable with the Children of God, albeit they have attained to a good
measure of faith and love of God, and are even become rich in the grace of the
Lord Jesus, yet are they so desirous of more, that many a time they esteem
nothing of that which they have, but go about mourning and complaining that
they have no faith, no love, no grace, no life; in which extremity we see that
many in their weakness offend the Lord their God. A necessary admonition so to
mourn for that which we want, that we give thanks for that mesure of grace
which we have
Herein therefore is the Christian to be admonished that he keep
mediocritie; to lament thy wants and to thirst for more grace, is a sure token
of a spiritual life, but let us so complain for that which we want, that
we be comforted in God for that beginning and little measure of grace which
we have; remember that the same mouth of God which commands thee to mourn,
commands thee also to rejoice, we want not matter of both; matter we have of
mourning for which we may lament with the Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
matter of joy we have also in our God, for which we may rejoice with him
and say, Ibid. ver. 25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ: surely it cannot be without
unthankfulness unto God so to mourn for our wants, that we give not praise
to God for the beginnings of grace we have.

And for this same effect, This testimony of the spirit is not always perceived
in a like measure of them who have it.
let us yet further consider that this testimony of the Spirit is not at all
times enjoyed in a like measure, for that were to enjoy heaven upon earth. The
Lord therefore does in such sort dispense it, that sometimes he lets his
children feel it for their consolation, and again with-drawes it from them
for their humiliation: when they feel it, they so abound in joy that all the
terrors and threatenings of Satan, all his promises and allurements are
despised of them, and trodden under their feet; they sing within themselves
that glorious triumph of the Apostle, Romans 8. 35.
who shall separate us from the love of God, but this joy proceeding from the
fullness of faith, continues not, the voice of the Spirit of adoption waxing
somewhat more silent, fears and doubts succeedes in that same heart which
before abounded with joy, and this for our humiliation.

But now in this estate least the Children of God be discouraged by the silence
of the testimony, Comfort against spiritual desertions.
let them first of all have recourse to the forepast working of God in them,
let them call to mind with David the days of old, remember their joyful
songs by which they have praised GOD, their humble prayers by which many a time
they have gotten access to the throne of grace, and these heavenly motions
which have replenished their souls with joy, and so of the former footesteps
of his grace, let them discern his presence even then when they cannot
perceive him. And next let them consider that the godly in the time of their
desertion, which is their spiritual disease, are evil judges of themselves,
for they perceive not that which they possess: there may be an invincible
hope of mercy in that soul wherein for the present there is no hope of mercy;
and this all the Children of God may make in their own experience; for whereof
I pray thee has it come, that thou a weak man have foughten so long against
principalities and powers? (...) (...) the Lord had reserved mercy for us, we
should be made like unto Sodom or Gomorrha, Isai. 1. 9.
but now the lots are fallen to us in pleasant places, and we have a fair
heritage. Blessed be the God of our salvation from henceforth and for ever.

If we be Children. The Sons of God cannot but live because they are the
heirs of God.
As for the Apostles order in these words, we are to remember that the Apostle
here insists in the confirmation of that part of his reason, that they who are
the Sons of God shall live. Now he lets us see the necessity thereof, the
Sons of God are the Heirs of God, and the heritage whereunto they are borne
is eternal life, therefore of necessity they must live.

We have here first to consider that high preferment whereunto we are called
in Christ, Gods goodness is showed to all his creaturs, but his inheritance is
res^^ued to his Sons.
not only to be the Sons of God, but declared also to be the Heirs of God.
The heir in a family has this prerogative, that albeit the hand of his
Father be not closed from giving good things unto others, yet the inheritance
is reserved for him. As Abraham gave gifts to the Sons of Keturah, Genesis 25.
but kept his best things for Isaac, so the Lord our God shows his great
bountifulness, Mat. 5. 45.
in that he makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall down upon the
unjust, no less than the just, yet herein stands the comfort of his children,
that he reserues his best and most excellent things for them. Neither is it
his creatures that he gives to them in a portion, he gives himself unto
them; as he promised to Abraham, so he perfermes it to all the seed of Abraham;
I am thy exceeding great reward: and therefore do the godly so crave him, that
without him nothing can content them, O Lord thou art my portion (said David.
Psalm. 119. 57
) My Soul says to the Lord, thou art my portion (said Jeremy. Lam. 3. 24.
) But as for them, who can content themselves with the gifts of God, suppose
they never enjoy himself, they declare they are but Servants, who are not to
bide in the house for ever, and not the Sons of God.

Again, All the sons of God are his heirs and yet the inheritance is not
diminished.
we have to mark here, that albeit the Lord have innumerable sons yet are
they all his Heirs. No Monarch in the world can beautify his children with
this privilege, as to make them all his heirs, and not diminish his Empire;
but the Lord herein declares the riches of his glorious inheritance, that all
his sons are his Heirs, and yet the inheritance inioyed of many is not the
less. Neither are we to think this impossible, for seeing the Lord has
endued the Sun in the firmament with this property, that albeit the light
thereof be communicated unto many, Aug. de verb dom. in Euan.
yet is it not the less in it self: plurium oculos pascit, and tamen tanta
est, quanta erat and illi pascuntur, and illa non minuitur: Joan. ser. 64.
it feeds the eyes of many, they are nourished, and it is not diminished: may
we not much more think that the heavenly light communicated to many, shall
for all that not be impared? In earthly inheritances it is so the more be
pertakers of them, the less they are, but it is not so in the heavenly, there
needs no strife among the brethren for division of the inheritance, for the
rich portion of one shall be no prejudice to another.

Neither shall we that are called to be the sons of God in this last age of
the world, They who were born in the first age of the world shall not be
perfected without us.
suffer any prejudice that many hundred years before us, some have been entered
heirs of that kingdom, God providing a better thing for us, that they without
us should not be perfected. Adam the first that ever was made the son of God
by creation, Heb. 11. 40.
and afterward the first son of God also by regeneration, together with the
rest of those faithful Patriarchs that followed him, has in regard of years
long before us inherited the promises, yet shall it not prejudice them who in
the last age of the world are called to the fellowship of the faith of Christ;
yea, he that shall be the last borne son of God in the earth by
regeneration, shall also be pertaker of this privilege of the inheritance.
And this should greatly encourage us to serve our God, considering that how
ever many of our brethren be entered before us, whose example should confirm
us, yet the portion prepared for us, shall not be the lesser.

There is also another difference: In earthly inheritances the father dies or
the son inherit, but here the son must dye, or else he cannot inherit.
for in the earthly inheritances the father must first die, before the son come
to the full possession thereof; but in the heavenly we our selves must die,
that we may possess the inheritance. For our father is the ancient of days:
the heavens are the works of his hands, they shall perish, but he does
remain: they shall wax old as does a garment, but he is the same, and his
years shall not fail. Psalm. 102. 26
He is the father of eternity, in whom there cannot fall so much as a shadow
of change, far less is he subject to death: but as for us, by suffering
death we must enter into our kingdom; we cannot see him so long as we live,
nor be satisfied with his image, till we awake: therefore should the day of
death be a joyful day unto us, because it is the day of our entrance to our
inheritance. Unnatural worldlings rejoice at the death of their Parents, Psalm.
17. 15.
because by it they come to the heritage, they carry merriest hearts within
them, when they put on their blackest garments; but as for us, we should
rejoice at the day of our own death, it is not the day of our sorrow as
natural men accounts it, but the day of our delight, in the which we enter
into the fruition of our heavenly inheritance.

He calls us not only the Heirs of God, Theophilact.
but annexed Heirs with Jesus Christ, that so he may show, Nos grandes futuros
haeredes, Christ's twofold right to the inheritance and how in the second only
we are annexed with him
that we are to be great heirs. The Lord Jesus has a twofold right to his
fathers inheritance: one by his eternal generation, and so he is the heir of
God, in a manner proper and peculiar to himself only: the other he has by
conquest, for by the merit of his death he has conquered eternal life for all
his brethren: and this right he communicates unto us, whereby we also become
heirs, annexed with him: in the first he admits no companion, in the second,
he calls us to be pertakers with him.

And this serves unto us, How all these great mercies should provoke us to
walk worthy of our heavenly vocation.
not only for a special comfort in the hour of tentation, and day of death,
as we marked before, but should also provoke us to answer the heavenly
vocation by a holy disposition: seeing we are the sons of God, shall we not
resemble his image? seeing we are called to be heirs of an heavenly
inheritance, shall we any more mind earthly things? Far be it from us, that
we should be profane like Esau, Genesis 25. 2 Timothy 4.
who sold his birthright for a mease of pottage; or like Demas we should
forsake the fellowship of our brethren, Phil. 3. 8. 9.
and embrace this present world: but let us rather with the holy Apostle,
account all things to be but doung, in respect of the excellent knowledge and
fellowship of our Lord Jesus. Seeing Christ must be our comfort in death, when
all other comforts will fo^sake us, let us make him our joy and pleasure in
life, that so both in life and death he may be an advantage unto us: for these
things, for which miserable worldlings forsake their God, shall in the end
forsake them. Let a covetous man see in the hour of his death, those treasures
of Gold and silver which he fought in his life more than God, and they shall
be no more pleasure to him, than was those thirty pieces of silver to Judas,
which he took in exchange of Jesus Christ. Present a spoonefull of Wine to
the drunkard, whose belly was his God in his life time, and he shall not be
able to receive it. Let the harlot stand at that time in the sight of the
whoremonger, she may increase his sorrow, and terrify his conscience, but
shall not render him comfort. Yet these are the strange Gods after which most
part of the world goes a whooring: but let us not cast in our portion among
them; we are pertakers of the heavenly vocation, called to be the sons and
daughters of the living God; blessed shall we be if we walk worthy of our
calling. For Satan's silly offers are not to be compared to these high mercies
whereunto God has called us in Christ


For we see here whereunto we are called, by adoption we are made the sons of
God, and brethren of Christ: of rebels, we are made the servants of God, yea
more than that, the friends of God, Ioh. 14. 15.
hence forth call I not you servants but friends, yea more than friends, he
has made us brethren, he that sanctifies, Heb. 2. 11.
and they who are sanctified are all one, wherefore he is not ashamed to call
them brethren: O wonderful comfort! the Father cries from heaven, Mat. 17. 5.
this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him: the Son
again speaking to us on earth says, Ioh. 20. 17.
I go up to your Father, and my Father, he that is my Father is also your
Father, therefore go ye unto him, and call upon him as your Father. O qualis
ille dominus, qui omnes seruos suos facit amicos suos, and quod multo maius est
fratres suos: O what a sweet Lord is he who makes all his servants his
friends, and which is much more his brethren. Surely the yoke of Christ is
easy, Mat. 11. 30.
and his burden is light, we are called to be annexed pertakers with him of
all the good that is in him. The Lord therefore more and more confirm us, that
despysing all the subtle offers of Satan, whereby he would steal us away
from the love of Christ, and delighting in that high dignity, whereunto we are
called, our hearts may cleave to the Lord for ever, without separation.

THE RIGHT WAY TO Eternal Glory.

Wherein the counsel of God concerning Man's salvation is so manifested, that
the Christian effectually called may hear himself after the Cross ordained
to the Crown, and read his own Name written in the book of Life.

Being the second benefit we have by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Come and see.

Written by Mr. William Cowper, Minister of Gods word at Perth.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand, and are to be sold
at his shop in Pope's Head Palace. 1609.

^^ the welfare of your Highness royal children, the terror of your enemies,
and common benefit of all your Majesty's well affected subjects. A good so
much the more carefully to be keept, because Satan out of all doubt
spitefully does envy it, as being the very fountain, out of which does flow
that great and common good, both of your royal posterity, and loyal people,
the aspect of your Highness favorable countenances looking in love one of you
to another, and both of your majesty's in coniunct compassion to your people,
sweeter than the influence of the undivided Pleiades, bringing to Church and
common wealth, under your happy reign a flourishing spring of innumerable
blessings. We do therefore bless the Lord who has confirmed your royal
hearts, and set it in the foremost of your godly cares, how to keep and
increase this holy and happy band of love which keeps you both. For the
continuance whereof, as after my weak measure, I stand up a daily supplicant
unto the Lord, among others your Highness loyal subjects, so do I humbly
crave that your Highness impute it not to me for presumption, that I have
conjoined your majesty's in the participation of this small propine of the
first fruits of my labors, whom I do wish for ever to be conjoined in the
communion of al good present, and to come: but that rather according to your
Highness wonted favor and clemency toward me, your majesty would graciously
accept it, as a testimony of my earnest and unfeigned affection toward your
Highness name and honor in this life, and everlasting welfare in the life to
come.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject and daily Orator William Cowper, Minister
at Perth.

THE RIGHT WAY TO Eternal Glory.
THE SECOND PART OF THE CHAPter, containing Comforts against the CROSS.
Verse 17. If so be we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him.
THE mortification of a Christian, The mortification of a Christian consists in
two things.
whereunto the spirit of GOD so frequently exhorts us, consists in these two,
first in a subduing by a holy Discipline our inordinate lusts, which naturally
rebel against the law of God: secondly, in a patient bearing of the Cross of
Jesus. In the first part of the Chapter, the Apostle has exhorted us unto the
one, and now in the second, by many arguments he strengthens us against the
other: unless we make some profit in the first point of mortification, it is
certain we shall never proceed to the second. For the life of one affection is
far less (...) (...) preuailes most to make man impatient, and so drive him to
blaspheme God. And therefore most of all we are to confirm our weakness
against the cross, since in it the enemy of our salvation places his
principal strength. Let us hearken to the Apostle, who as a minister of Jesus
indeed, and a heavenly Physician, sent to us from the Lord our God, does here
temper the bitter waters of Marah, and make them sweet unto all the Israel of
God.

The first argument of comfort is set down in this latter end of the 17. The
first principal argument against the cross is from the end of our afflictions.
Verse, and it is taken partly from the nature of out sufferings, they are
sufferings with Christ, and partly from the end thereof, which is to reign
with Christ in glory. Here first we learn that suffering must go before
glory: the husbandman must labor before he receive the fruits, 2. Tim. 2. 8.
neither is he that strives for a maisterie crowned, except he strive as he
ought. The prince of salvation was consecrated by affliction, it behooved him
first to suffer and then to enter into his kingdom. All that profess him are
desirous with the sons of Zebedeus, to sit some at his right hand, and some
at his left, but are not so content to drink of his cup, and be baptized
with his baptism. Volunt omnes te frui, Bernard
at non ita and imitari, conregnare cupiunt, sed non compati, they would all
enjoy thee, knowing that pleasures for evermore are at thy right hand, but are
not content to follow thee, they all desire to reign with thee, but not so to
suffer with thee: but this is a preposterous way, it is to divide those things
which the Lord here has joined together, except first we suffer with him, we
shall not hereafter reign with him.

Secondly, Different courses of the Christian and worldling.
let us mark here the different courses of the Christian and worldling, the
Christian by temporal trouble goes on to eternal glory, the worldling by
temporal glory goes on to eternal shame. If ye go to the School of Jesus,
the first ABC of religion taught you there, will be this, Mat. 10. 38.
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself take up his Cross and
follow me: if ye go to the School of Satan, the first ABC of Atheism
taught there is this, All the kingdoms of the world will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The Lord Jesus through light and momentanie
afflictions, leads his children to an infinite weight of glory; but Satan
through the present perishing pleasure of sin, leads his miserable captives
to everlasting pain: Mat. 5.
therefore it is said of our Savior of the one, blessed are ye that mourn
for ye shall be comforted, and of the other, Luke. 6. 25.
w^e be to you that laugh now, for ye shall wait and weep.

As there is no comparison between these two, The end of the Christian is
better than his beginning, not so with the worldling.
so blessed shall we be if we make choice of the best. Moses esteemed the
rebuke of Christ, greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; because he had
respect to the recompense of reward: and shall not we rejoice in our present
afflictions, considering they are the way unto our glory? if we sow in
tears, we shall reap in joy. The end of the godly is better than their
beginning, for the light of the righteous increases more and more, like the
Sun unto the noone day, they begin with tears, and they end with joy: but
the light of the wicked is like unto the light of a candle, it shines for a
while, and incontinent ends in stinking smoke: as Beltasars banquet was
concluded with a cup of wrath, so all the pleasures of the wicked ends in
pain. At that banquet in Cana, the Lord Jesus brought in the finest wine
hindmost, but Satan does with his miserable banquetters, as the governors of
that feast speaks, he presents his best first, and after when they have well
dronken, brings in that which is worse; in the entry he presents the deceitful
pleasures of sin, but doolefull and lamentable is their end: for what better
portion can he give unto them, than is prepared for himself? he is reserved to
blackness of darkness, tribulation, and anguish of Spirit, terror and
horrible wrath, shame and endless confusion is prepared for him, and all those
who are portioners with him.

(...) (...) own blood, that fruitful Vine which has sprung out from that
blessed stock Jesus Christ, the more it was cut by the bloody kni^e of cruel
persecuters, the more has it flourished.

Again, The wicked have crosses, but not Christ's Cross.
we have here this comfort, that the sufferings of the godly are sufferings
with Christ. There is no man in the world, who wants his own cross; even they
who have their fattest portions in earth have it not without many sorrows, by
virtue of that curse, in the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat bread, G^^. 3.
19.
till thou return to the earth: and herein they are but miserable, Barn. apol
ad Abbat Clun.
vae portantibus Crucem and non sequentibus Christum, woe is unto them, who
bear the cross and follow not Christ; comfortless, fruitless and endless
will their sufferings be* But as for the Godly, they are sufferers with Christ,
they suffer not alone; if Joseph go to the prison, the Lord shall go with
him; if the three Children go to the fire, the fourth like the son of God
shall go with them. The three persons of the Trinity are said to suffer with
the Godly.
God the Father protests that in all the troubles of his Children he was
troubled, and that he has such a tender feeling of their afflictions, that he
who touches them, touches the apple of his eye: and the Lord Jesus the son
of God, when his Saints at Damascus were persecuted, cried from heaven to the
persecuter, Saul, Saul, why perse^cutest thou me. Acts 9. 4.
And as concerning the holy Ghost, the Apostle testifies, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Blessed are ye if ye be railed upon for the name of Jesus, for the Spirit of
God and of glory rests on you: which on their part is evil spoken of, but on
your part is glorified. Cir. ^atec. 16
Thus we see, quam magnos habeamus commilitones, how great and strong
fellow-warriours we have to assist; the Lord being so present with us, Cip.
lib. 2. epist. 6.
non vt seruos suos spectet tantum, sed vt ipse luctetur in nobis, that he
does not only behold his servants in their conflicts, but he himself also
does wrestle in them.

Where for our further comfort, Three things required to make our sufferings
sufferings with Christ.
if any man be desirous to know, whether if his sufferings be sufferings with
Christ, or not, let him consider these three things: first, how Jesus received
the Cross as a cup given to him out of his Fathers hand, neither looking to
Judas that betrayed him, nor to the Jews that pursued him. Secondly, he
received it not grudgingly nor impatiently, but with an humble submission of
his will, to the will of his Father. Thirdly, he suffered for this end, that
he might abolish sin, and destroy him who had the power of death. If these
three concur in thy sufferings, thou may be sure they are sufferings with
Christ: first, if passing by the instrument of thy trouble, thou look to the
hand of God, tempering and giving it unto thee: secondly, if thou receive it
with a humble submission of thy spirit to him who is the Father of Spirits: and
thirdly, if it work in thee a mortification of thy sinful lusts and
affections.

And of this we have to make our use in all our afflictions inward, Comfort
against inward Afflictions.
or outward: and first concerning inward afflictions, if at any time it please
the Lord to exercise us with fearful agonies of Conscience, let us look unto
GOD, who killes and makes alive, who casts down and raises up; let us for a
while bear his indignation, he abides but a moment in his anger: if we find
that by them we are more humbled, wakened out of security, and stirred up
more fervently to pray, and that the life of sin is weakened in us, let us be
out of all doubt, that these inward troubles are sufferings with Christ; whose
soul for our sins was heavy unto the death, and his body did sweat blood,
through the vehement anguish of his spirit. Comfort against outward Afflictions
which we suffer either in name,
And as for outward sufferings, they are either such as concerns our Name, our
goods, or our persons. As for those which concern our name: it is a singular
policy of Satan, to bear down the children of God, in the estimation of
others, vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus
sordidentur, Ambrose.
that they who are glorious in the light of their own conscience, may be made
filthy by the false reports of others, and so made unprofitable to do others
the good that they would: but let us in such tentations learn from David, to
look unto God, and not to Shimei, using the vndes^rued contumeli^s of men, as
profitable means to work in us that inward humiliation, which our man^fold
sins, though not against man, yet against God requires of us: so shall we
suffer with him, who being the innocent Lamb of God, sustained nevertheless
great contradiction of sinners, reproched to be one possessed with a Devil,
notwithstanding that he was the very son of God, filled in his manhood with
the holy Ghost.

And as concerning the loss of worldly goods, Or in our goods.
who ever be the instrument, learn thou to take it as a cup out of the hand
of thy heavenly Father, after the example of Job, who passing by the Sabeans
and the Caldeans, looked to the hand of God, the Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, Job. 1. 21.
(says he) blessed be the name of the Lord. It is not for lack of love that
the mother withdrawes from the Child the use of the pappe, but that she may
acquaint him with stronger meat: and if the Lord take from us these transitory
things, it is not because we are not beloved of him, but that we may set our
hearts upon those things which are more weighty and permanent; which if we do
then are our sufferings, sufferings with him, who being rich became poor, that
in all things we might be made rich in him.

And the same are we to do in those troubles which we sustain in our bodies:
Or in our persons.
for if (as the Apostles says) we have had fathers of our bodies who have
corrected us, Heb. 12. 9.
and we have given them reverence, should we not much rather be in subjection
to the father of Spirits, that we might live? and if we can yield our bodies to
physicians to be cut or burnt at their pleasure, how much more should we
submit them to the Lord in all humble contentment to be chastised, as he will?
seeing he protests himself he does it not, but for our singular profit, that
we might be pertakers of his holiness.

We shall reign with Christ. In trouble it is expedient to look unto the end
thereof.
Worldlings wrestles for their corruptible crown, as uncertain whether they
shall obtain it or no, but it is not so with the Christian, we run not as
uncertain, we are sure that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign
with him: though for the present no trouble be sweet, yet is the end thereof
most comfortable; and we are by the eyes of faith to look unto it, least our
present manifold tentations drive us unto impatience, for as he that going
through a strong running river is in danger to fall and drown by reason of the
dissinesse of his brain, unless he fix his eyes upon the bancke; so shall we
be ready to faint in affliction, unless we look to the comfortable end
thereof. If we shall look to Lazarus upon the dunghill, and Joseph in the
prison, what can we judge them to be but miserable men? but if we consider
their end, we shall see the one in Abraham's bosom, and the other reigning in
great glory under Pharaoh in Egypt; then shall we say, verily there is fruit
for the righteous, and we shall find it true, which here the Apostle says,
that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him.

Verse 18. For I count that the afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory to be revealed.
THe Apostle here subioynes an amplification of his first argument:
Amplification of the first principal argument.
we shall not only (says he) reign with Christ, but reign in such a
glory, as does so far surmount all our present sufferings, that if they be
weighed together in a balance, the one shall be found but light in regard of
the other.

For I count. He that tasted both of present sufferings and of glory to come,
gives his judgment here of both.
The word the Apostle uses here, imports thus much, after reasoning I
conclude, or, after just reckoning this is the sum which I collect and
gather: here then are two circumstances which great^y amplifies his purpose,
one that he sets not down this as an uncertain opinion, but as a most sure
conclusion gathered out of good reason. And again that it is the conclusion of
such a one, as by experience knew both: what experience the Apostle had of our
present suffering, he tells us, 2. Cor. 11. what experience he had of the
glory to be revealed, he tells us, 2. Cor. 12. so that his words we are to
consider this way, let other men count and reckon as they will, this is my
reckoning, who have proved them both, there is no comparison between them.
What knowledge he had of the weight of our present sufferings, he tells you by
a threefold universality: first, that he had suffered all kind of crosses,
hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, rods, stonings, imprisonnings: secondly, that
he suffered in all places, in the sea, in the land, in the city, in the
wilderness, where ever he came to preach the Gospel, there was he persecuted,
by some one sort of trouble or other: thirdly, that he suffered of all sorts
of persons, both of the Gentiles, and of his own nation, both of open enemies,
and of false brethren. Again, as for his experience of the glory to be
revealed, he tells you how he was taken up into Paradise, and there heard such
words as cannot be revealed. The one he tasted in his journey from Jerusalem to
Illiricum, the other in his journey from earth to heaven.
This conclusion therefore is the more to be esteemed of us, because he who
gives out this judgment of the excellency of the one above the other, is such
a one, as had experience of them both, he made a journey on earth from
Jerusalem to Illiricum, all which way preaching the Gospel, he suffered many
afflictions; he made another journey from earth to heaven, whether in the body
or out of the body he could not tell, and there he saw that inutterable glory:
and comparing with himself these two together, he gives out this for a final
sentence, that all our present afflictions are but light, in respect of that
infinite weight of glory to be revealed. As for worldlings we are not to
stand upon their testimony, for as he cannot give ou^ right sentence between
two parties that hears not both their causes, so cannot the worldling who
knows something both of the pleasures and sorrows of this life, but nothing of
the joys which are to come, consider how far the life to come is to be
preferred before this: and therefore albeit in the conclusions of his heart he
give out sentence in favors of the life present, we are not to regard it,
because he has not heard nor considered, that which tends to the commendation
of the other.

We see then here, How the certainty of the glory to come mittigates our
present trouble.
how that our strength in trouble is greatly increased by the sight, at least
by the certainty, of that glory which will be the end of our trouble: this
sight made the Apostle count light of his present sufferings: let Stephen have
his eyes in prayer to see the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, and he shall not be moved with the stones which the Jews
violently throw at him: let Moses see him who is invisible, and he shall not
fear Pharaoh; let him see that recompense of reward, and he shall be better
contented to suffer rebuke with the people of God, than to enjoy the treasures
of Egypt: this is that which made the Martyrs stand exulting and rejoicing,
even then when Infidels tormented their bodies. If they had been in the body,
they had felt the pain, and it had disquieted them, Ber. in. Cant. ser. 61.
nunc vero non mirum si exules a corpore, dolores non sentiant corporis, but
now no marvel that being out of the body, they felt not the dolors of the
body: and where think ye was then the soul of the Martyr? certainly in a
sure place, even in Petra, in the rock of invincible, in the bowels of Christ,
non sua sentit, dum Christi vulnera intuetur, he feels not his own wounds,
while as steadfastly he fixes his eyes upon the wounds of Christ, neither will
he be afraid for the loss of this life, who has laid hold upon eternal
life, and is made sure of a better.

Let us therefore pray unto God diligently, It should make us despise both the
threatenings and allurements of men.
that our eyes may be opened, to see the riches of that glorious inheritance,
that as we speak and hear of it, so in like manner we may see and feel it,
for the sight thereof makes all trouble easy, yea causes the bitterness of
death to pass away if: the world threaten us with her terrors, let us
remember they are not comparable to Gods terrors; Mat. 10. 28
let us not fear them who kills the body and are able to do no more, (...)
(...) faint under trouble, Can ye not suffer with me one hour? It was the
comfort that Athanasius gave to the Church in his time, that Julian should be
but Nubeculo cito transitura, a stormy little cloud, that would quickly pass
by; and it is certainly true both of our troubles, and of all the instruments
thereof, let us wait a while on our God with patience, and we shall see them
no more,

This shortness of our afflictions depends upon the brevity and vanity of
our life, How our life is but the life of a moment.
which in the estimation of Gods spirit is so short and vain a thing, that he
vouchsafes not the name of life upon it, without some restriction. Indeed it
bewitcheth us so, that in our false imagination we conceit there is more
soliditie and continuance in one year that is before us, then in ten that
are past by us; the time which is past is gone away like a thought, and that
which is to come we think it longer, then indeed by experience we shall
find it. But the spirit of God, who best knows it, gives unto it the name of
life as I said with a restriction, he calls it a momentanie life, it is but a
moment wherein we live, if we judge aright we have no more: for as for the
moments which are past, they are dead to thee, and thou to them, and as for the
moments which are to come, they are uncertain, and thou can not be said to
live in them; so that no more is left to thee wherein thou can truly say I
live, but a moment, and this also must shortly go away and give place to
another, that so by succession of moments one unto another, thy silly life may
be prorogued for a while.

But this shall yet better appear, Sacred similitudes, by which the holy Ghost
shadows the vanity of our present life.
if we consider those similitudes by which the spirit of God describes the
vanity of this our mortal life. Patient Job compares the life of man unto the
weauers shuttle, which scarce is in at the one end of the web, when it is out
at the other, and he that looks unto it, Job. 7. 6.
can hardly perceive it. He compares it also to the wind, Job. 9.
that quickly flies by us; and to the cloud, which speedely vanishes; to a
Post that runs diligently and rests not till he come to his end; to an hungry
Eagle in the air, who seeing her pray a far off flies speedely upon it;
Job. 14.
to a flower that flourishes at once, but withers incontinent; and last of all
to a ship sailing in the sea before the wind, which for the present is seen,
but within short space appears no more, yea does not leave behind her any
footstep or token that any such thing was there; and as it is with them who
sail in her, that how ever they change their action, yet go they on in their
course toward their wished haven: so is it with us, do what we will, whether
we eat, or we sleep, we are hasting always toward our ends. The Psalmist
again compares our life to a spanne or hand breadth: Psalm. 90.
to the grass which grows up in the morning, and is cut down in the
evening: to a sleep which slippes away before we can know what were doing in
it: to a dream, which of all things is most fickle and vain: to a thought,
which is not well begun, when it is ended: and last of all to a declyning
shadow, as is the shadow of the Sun in the setting, which a man shall see on
the top of a mountain less and less, vanishing till it be no more. The
Apostle S. Paul compares our life to a race, and S. James compares it to a
smoke or vapor.

Thus we see how little the spirit of God esteems of that, The pleasures of
this life are worme-eaten.
whereof all the sons of Adam accounts so much. Our sin has shortened our
days, and made them miserable; the pleasures of this life are worme-eaten, and
the glory of flesh is but like the gourd of Jonas, which the one day grows up,
and the next day is consumed by the worms. If Solomon who proved all the
pleasures this life could yield, after trial of them, cried out all is
vanity; if Job when his wealth had worn from him, looking to his forepassed
days was compelled to conclude, Job. 14. 5.
I have had for inheritance the months of vanity: what, shall we look to
find more comfort in this wretched life, than those men of God before us have
found? let us not think it, if we seek our comfort in her perishing gain or
glory, we shall lament at the last; we have fished all night, and have taken
nothing; we have (...) (...) former seven years of plenty, so shall the
endless sorrows of the wicked, make all their former pleasures to be
forgotten: the days shall come upon them, in the which they shall say, I have
no pleasure in them. Oh that men could consider this double loss they incur
by continuing in their sins; Esau sold his birthright for a mease of
pottage; and Adam lost paradise for an apple; and thou more to be lamented,
that becomes not wise by their example, looses like a fool that glory to be
revealed, for a flower: for what better are the best things of the world, than
the flower of the Rose, which wants not the own thorns, and vermin;
being plucked in the garden it vvithers in thy hand before thou can bring it
home to thy house; and yet for the like of these thou do forgo those things
which are above, and more then that redeemes those shadows, by bringing upon
thy self that infinite weight of wrath, which is to be revealed upon all the
children of disobedience.

Of the glory. The end of our present sufferings here we see it is glory. Ye
shall weep and lament (says our Savior) and the world shall rejoice, John.
16. 20.
ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Sometime God gives
his children notable comfort before trouble, Comfort comes sometime before
trouble, sometime in trouble, but always after trouble, to the godly.
as Elias received a double portion before his forty days fasting; Peter,
James and John saw the glory of Christ transfigured on Mount Tabor, before they
saw his fearful and bloody sweat in the garden; it pleased the Lord by the
sight of the one to confirm them, that the sight of the other should not
confound them. Sometime again the Lord in the midst of trouble gives his
children such comfort, as deuoures all their present sorrows; to Peter in the
prison there appeared an Angel, and a light shining round about him; and Jacob
banished from his fathers house, sees a more comfortable vision at Bethel, than
any that ever he had seen at home: but albeit the Lord deals not always with all his children, as he did with these, yet are they all sure of this comfort,
glory shall be the end of their sufferings.

To be revealed. Our glory is prepared but not reveled.
The Apostle calls it a glory to be revealed, he tells us in another
place, that it is prepared already, yea, it was prepared before the foundation
of the world, Aug. de Sanctis. ser. 46.
but it is not yet revealed: beatitudo illa comparari hic potest, possideri non
potest, that felicity may be obtained here, but cannot be possessed here. Ne
itaque quaeras in via, quod tibi seruatur in patria, seek not therefore that
in the way, which is keept for thee, till thou come to thy country: let us
possess our Souls in patience, waiting for that, which in this life is
neither revealed, nor can be possessed. Moses besought the Lord to show him his
glory, Exodus 33. 18
and he received this answer, No man can see it and live: and when that glory
filled the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 34.
it is said, that Moses could not enter into it. Seeing it is so that our
wretched nature can not abide that glory, and we cannot live and see the Lord,
let us prepare our selves with joy and contentment to dye, that we may see him.

And in the mean time, Yet by the glory revealed we may judge of that glory
which is not revealed.
by that glory which God has revealed in his works, let us judge of that which
is not revealed; if these works of God which we see, be so beautiful, what
shall we think of those we see not? out of all doubt, among all the works of
God, those which are invisible, Aug. de temp. ser. 99.
are most excellent, as the body of man is a beautiful workmanship, but not
comparable to the soul. This glory I account it the highest degree of eternal
life: the first is, Righteousness; the second, Peace; the third, Joy; the
fourth is Glory: Righteousness breeds Peace, and Peace breeds Joy, and our Joy
shall be crowned with glory: if the doing of the works of righteousness bring
such comfort to the mind, as the Godly find in experience, how shall our
comfort abound when we receive the reward of righteousness, which is Glory?
Ber. in Cant. Ser. 47.
Si sic bonus es quaerentibus te, qualis es assequentibus? if thou Lord be so
good to them who seek thee, what shall thou be to them who find thee? God is
good to them who seek him, much more unto the^ who find him.
we may be assured that these first fruits of the Spirit, and the earnest of
our heavenly inheritance, wherein now stands our greatest (...) (...) the Lord
face to face, and shall in such sort behold his glory, that we shall be
transformed into it. This change as witnesses the Apostle, is begun by that
sight of God which we have in the Gospel, for even now we beheld as in a
mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed from glory to
glory by the same image, by the spirit of the Lord, but in heaven this change
shall be perfected, and we shall be fully transformed into his holy
similitude, so that nothing shall be left in us, but that which is his own
workmanship. O how has the Lord magnified his mercy toward us! he has
raised our honor from the dust, and delivered our souls for the lower hell,
and has made us to sit with himself in the highest places, where we shall be
filled with the joys which are at his right hand; we shall drink of the
rivers of his pleasures; in his light we shall see light, and be transchanged
by the light of his countenance.

Moses was forty days with God upon Mount Sinai, Forty days company with
God changed the face of Moses, how much more, etc
and his face shined so brightly, that when he came down the people of
Israel might not behold him; if forty days remaining with God did so
transchange him, how shall we be changed, who shall for ever abide with him,
and never any more come down from him? Our Savior Christ says, that the face
of the just shall shine in that day, like the Sun in the firmament. O what
glory shall be among them all, when the glory of one shall be like the
brightness of the Sun? et qualis tunc erit splendour animarum, Aug. ad frat.
in Erem.
quando solis habebit claritatem lux corporum? and when the light of their body
shall be like unto the light of the Sun, how great think ye^ shall be the
shining light of the soul? If our bodies shall shine as the Sun, what shall
our souls be?
Those three disciples that were with our Lord upon Mount Tabor, were so filled
with joy, at the little glance of his glory which they saw, that they wished
they might bide therefore ever; how then shall we be ravished, when we shall see
that full manifestation of his glory? we shall never desire to remove out of
that mountain of God: another heart shall be given us, and we shall become
other men then we are: so that as a little drop of water powered into a great
vessel full of wine, loses both the taste and color of water, and becomes
wine, or as iron put into the fire takes on after a sort, the nature of fire,
and as the air illuminated with the bright shining Sun, seems not so much
to be illuminated, as to be light it self: so our souls and bodies, when the
glory of God shall shine upon them, shall be so wonderfully transchanged, that
after a sort, we shall become pertakers of the divine nature.

Beside this the excellency of that glory shall yet better appear, All the
companions in that glory, are fir^^ borne, all no^le me^, of s^^ength and
dignity.
if we consider the companions with whom we shall be glorified: there is the
congregation of the first borne, all of them are men of excellent strength, and
dignity, not of base lineage, but noble indeed; for by their second birth they
are the Sons of God, and brethren of the Lord Jesus. The Citizens of Tyrus
are discribed by Esau to have been companions to Princes; but in that heavenly
Jerusalem, every Citizen is a crowned King, and none but Kings are freemen of
that city, knit among themselves by the band of one Spirit, into so holy a
communion, that every one of them accounts the joy, and glory of his brethren,
an increase of his own joy. The glor^ of one of them augments the Glory of
another.
It is not there as here upon earth, where the joy of one is the cause of
sorrow to another: the light of the Sun darkneth the Moon, and the light of
the Moon obscureth the light of the Stars; if the one half of the earth be
illuminated, the other is left in darkness: but there the light of one
augments the light of another, the glory of one shall be the glory of all,
every one of them rejoicing, not only because the lightsome countenance of God
shines upon themselves, but also because they see their brethren admitted to
the fruition of that same glory.

But among all those, Specially the sight of Jesus Lord of that family shall
increase our joy.
with whom we shall be glorified, there is one companion of our glory, who
above all the rest shall breed us exceeding delectation, Jesus Christ the man:
O with what boldness and spiritual rejoicing, shall we stand in among the
holy Angels, when we shall see (...) (...) see it replenished with variety
of all necessary and pleasant things, no sense wanting innumerable objects,
that may delight thee; and yet all the beauty and pleasure of this earth is as
far inferior to that which is above, as it is superior to that which the
infant had in the mothers belly. The firmament which is the seeling of our
second house, The seeling of our second house is but the pauement of our third
house.
beautified with the Sun, Moon, and Stars, set in it by the hand of God,
and shining more gloriously, than all the precious stones in the world, shall
be no other thing, but the nether side of the pauement of our Palace. John
the Baptist sprung for joy in the belly of his mother Elizabeth, Luke 1. 14
when the Lord Jesus came into the house, in the womb of his mother Mary, but
afterward when he saw the Lord Jesus more clearly face to face, and pointed
him out with the finger, John 1. 36.
behold the Lamb of God; when he stood by him, as a friend, and heard the
voice of the Bridegroom, he rejoiced in another manner: so in very truth all
the rejoicing that we have in the house of our pilgrimage, is but like the
springing of John Baptist in his mothers womb, in comparison of those infinite
joys wherewith we shall be replenished, when we shall meet with our
bridegroom in our Fathers house, wherein we shall see him face to face and
abide with him for ever.

It is written of Ahashuerus that he made a great banquet to his Princes and
Nobles, Ahashuerus banquet not comparable to our marria^e banquet.
which lasted for the space of an hund^ed and fourscore days, and when he
had done with that, he made another banquet to his Commons, for the space of
seven days; the place was the outmost court of the kings Palace; the
Tapestry was of all sorts of colors, white, green, and blew, fastened with
cords of fine linen and purple, through rings and pillars of silver, and
marble; the beds were of gold and silver, the pauement of porphire, marble,
alablaster, and blew color, the vessels wherein they drank were all of Gold;
all this he did, that he might show the glory of his kingdom, and the honor
of his majesty. If a worm of the earth has done so much for declaring his
begged glory, as ravished men into admiration thereof, how I pray you shall the
Lord our God the great King, declare his glory? when he shall make his
banquet, cover his Table, and gather his Princes, that is, his Sons,
thereunto, not for a few days but for ever; not in the outmost Court, but in
the inner Court of his Palace? Surely no tongue can express it: If the
outward court of Gods palace be so furnished as we see, what is the inner.
for seeing he has decked this world wherein we soiourne, and which I have
called the outmost Court of his Palace, in so rich and glorious manner, that
he has ordained lights both by day and night to thine in it, and has prepared
a storehouse of Fowls in the air, another of Beasts in the earth, and the
third of Fishes in the Sea, for our necessity; beside innumerable pleasures
for delectation; what glory, and variety of pleasures may we look for, when
he shall separate us fully from the children of wrath, and assemble us all
into the inner Court of his own Palace, into the chamber of his presence? we
may well think with the Apostle, that the heart of man is not able to
understand those things, which God has prepared for us; and therefore will
rest with David, Psalm. 65.
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to come unto thee, he shall
dwell in thy Courts, and be satisfied with the pleasures of thine house.

This being spoken as concerning the excellency of that The eternity of it.
the next thing to be considered here, is the eternity thereof: for there is
here a secret opposition between our present sufferings, of which the Apostle
here says, they are but for now, and between that Glory which 2 Cor. 4. he
calls eternal, but herein we insist not, having spoken of it before.

The third thing concerning this Glory here touched, The claritie and
perspicuity of it Col. 3. 3.
it shall be revealed, and not obscured any more, as now it is. Now our life is
hid with Christ in God. Now are we the sons of God, but it appears not what
we shall be. 1. John. 3.
As our head, being the God of glory, came into the world in the shape of a
servant, so his members (...) (...) yea, and to rejoice in our present
afflictions, under hope of that glory to be revealed in us. There is no man we
see that will refuse to change for the better, he exchanges silver for gold,
and gives lead for precious stones, though the better he gets be but in
opinion: and shall not we be content like the wise men of God, to forgo the
earth, and the pleasures thereof, What taste worldlings have of the joys to
come.
that we may enjoy heaven. As for worldlings, it is no marvel to see them
take a dunghill of earth in their arms, and say unto it, thou art my joy and
my portion, for they not being illuminated with the light of the living, make
choice of that which according to their light they esteem to be best; or if at
any time they have tasted of the powers of the life to come, yet are they like
those Merchants, who having tasted wines which pleases them well, refuse to
buy them, being scared with the greatness of the price which must be given for
them: even so have they their own joy at the hearing of the word, and has
also their own desires, to be glorified with Christ; but when they hear that
before they enjoy that glory, they must suffer with Christ, deny themselves,
for sake their sinful pleasures, and cease from their gainful trade of
wickedness, they give over the bargain, they stumble and fall back to the
former course of their ungodly life.

But assuredly if we all knew those things which belong to our peace, The only
cause why we walk slowly toward that glory is because we know it not.
but now are hid from our eyes, ten thousand worlds could not keep us back
from them; and therefore seeing all the cause of our slow running toward that
price of our heavenly calling is in the darkness of our minds, let us pray
continually, that the Lord would lighten the eyes of our understanding, that we
may know the riches of his glorious inheritance prepared for the Saints: and
again, Lord remember us with the favor of thy people, and visit us with thy
salvation, that we may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice with the
joy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance; which the Lord grant unto
us for Jesus Christ's sake.

Verse 19. For the fervent desire of the creature wayteth when the sons of
God shall be reueiled.
WE have heard hitherto the Apostles first principal argument of comfort
against the Cross, The Apostle insists in the amplification of this glory.
taken from the end of our afflictions, set down in the end of the 17. verse.
If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with Christ. He proves the
greatness and certainty of that glory, by two arguments
This argument he has amplyfied in the 18. verse. We shall be glorified with
such a glory as for weight and eternity shall far exceed our present
sufferings. Now he insists still in the same amplification, and he proves that
glory must be both a great and a From the fervent desire which the creature
has to it by the instinct of Nature.
First, because the creature by that instinct of nature which God has put into
it, waits for the revelation of that glory. Secondly, because the sons of
God who have received the first fruits of the spirit, by instinct of grace,
wait also for it. Now it can neither be a small thing nor yet uncertain,
which God has taught his creatures From the fervent desire which the godly
have to it by the instinct of Grace.
but it must be some excellent and most certain good, whereupon God has set
the instinct and desire of his creature.

This being the Apostles purpose, the order of his proceeding is shortly this,
verse 19. he sets down a proposition of the creatures fervent desire, The
order of his proceeding in the first argument.
to see that glory reueiled: thereafter he assigns two reasons why they are so
desirous of it. The first is verse 20. taken from the present hard estate of
the creature. The next is verse 21. taken from their future better estate, unto
the which they shall be restored, when the sons of God shall be revealed: and
then he concludes this argument verse 22. And this purpose he handles at the
greater length, because in all the book of God this subject is not handled
save in this place only. A proposition of the fervent desire of the
creature-exprest by four phrases.


For the fervent. Here as I have said, he sets down a proposition of that
fervent desire, whereby the creature waits for the revelation of the sons of
God: and this earnest (...) (...) that day of our redemption, notwithstanding
that exhortation belongs unto us, that we should look for that day and have
unto it. 1 Pet. 3.
As the creatures were not made for themselves but for us, so they shall not be
restored for themselves but for us, for the greater augmentation of our Glory,
and if they who shall have but the second room, long for that day, how should
we long for it, for whom that glory chiefly is prepared?

When the sons of God shall be reueiled. The sons of God now are not
reueiled.
The sons of God are now said, not to be reueiled in two respects: first,
because their persons are not reueiled: secondly, because In regard of their
persons, which now are not known.
As for the persons of elect men, it is true the Lord knows who are his, and
makes themselves also after their effectual calling, to know that they are
his, his Spirit bearing testimony unto their spirits, that they are the sons
of God, he gives unto them that new Name, which none knows, but they who have
it; but now they are not so reueiled, that they are known of the world: John.
15. 20. 21.
For this cause the world knows you not, because it knows not him. The good
wheat of the Lord is now so covered with chafe, and his excellent pearls are
locked up in earthen vessels, the vessel is seen and contemned for the
baseness thereof, the pearl is not seen, and therefore not esteemed
according to the excellency thereof: beside this, there are many of the sons
of God not yet come into the world, and many already gone out of it, whom we
know not, but in that gen^rall assembly all the Saints of God shall be
gathered together into one, at the right hand of the Lord Jesus, and shall be
clearly manifested, that the wicked their enemies shall know them, and be
confounded to behold them.

And of this arises a warning to us all, This learnes us not to despise other
men, because we know not what they are in Gods election.
that none of us despise another, but that even those who for the present are
evil, and contrary minded, we wait upon them patiently, proouing, if at any
time God will give them repentance, that they may come out of the snare of the
Devil. The sons of God are not yet revealed, he that presently is an enemy in
regard of his rebellious conversation, what know thou whether in the
counsel of God he be one of Gods chosen children or not? and if he be so,
thou may be sure, that ere he dye, the Lord shall convert him, if not of a
persecuter to make him a Preacher, as he did Paul, yet at least a Professor of
that same truth which thou have embraced.

Secondly, In regard of their glory which now is obscured.
not only are the persons of Gods sons unknown, their life is hid with
Christ, they are accounted the off-scowrings of the earth, and entreated in the
world, as if they were the only men to whom shame and ignominy did
appertain: Col. 3. 3.
yea, their glory is not known unto themselves, even those who have received
the new Name, and the testimony of the Spirit recording to them, that they are
the Sons of God; when they look to their contemptible bodies, and abundant
corruption in their souls, they seem unto themselves to be nothing less than
the sons of God. The sons of God should not judge of themselves by their
present state.
I mark it, that we may learn to beware of Satan's policy, whereby he
carries us to judge of our selves by our present estate, which cannot but
breed in us horrible fear and doubtings. To this craft let us oppone that
comfort of the Apostle, 1 John. 3.
dearly beloved, now are we the Sons of God, yet does it not appear what
we shall be, it is but the beginnings, and and not the perfection of grace and
glory which we have in this life, by the beginnings let us know that we are the
sons of God, and where we find no perfection, let us not be discouraged,
remembering this is the time wherein the glory of the sons of God is not yet
revealed.

We are here again further to consider, Comfortable, that where the Lord
calls the rest of his works his creatures, he calls us his sons.
that where the Lord gives unto the rest of his works, the name of a creature,
he vouchsafes upon us the names of sons, showing us, that albeit in regard of
creation we are his creatures, and come under that same name with the rest of
his works, yet now in regard of his grace communicated unto us, we are (...)
(...)

The sin of man has brought this curse upon the creature, And as sin
increases, so the curse increases.
and the daily increase of man's sin, makes a daily increase of the curse. The
first man that sinned was Adam, and for his sake God cursed the earth: the
second notorious sinner we read of was Cain, and for his sake God cursed the
earth the second time: and albeit the Lord does not always tell in express
words, how every abominable sinner that has succeeded Cain, has in like
manner drawn on a new curse upon the creature, yet that one serves for all,
to teach us, that as sin grows so grows the curse, and the multiplication
of the curse, brings with it a daily diminution of that original virtue and
beauty, which the creature had in the beginning.

The other part of the vanity is a threefold abuse of the creature.
which is threefold: first, concerning God: secondly, concerning the godly: and
thirdly, concerning the wicked. Concerning God, this is a fearful abuse, that
the creature which God made for his glory, is abused to his dishonor;
Concerning God.
and made up of it Baal to themselves; or when the Persians worshipped the
Sun; and the Egiptians beasts insteade of God: for his vanity and bondage,
the creatures in their own kind, they sigh and groan, complaining they
should be abused to another end then that whereunto the Lord did make them, and
wheeat by their natural inclination they would be also themselves.

Concerning the godly.
the creature is abused as concerning the godly, when they are compelled to do
evil to those to whom they would do good: for every creature in the own
kind, is naturally bent to be a comfortable instrument, and a servant to the
servant of God; but otherwise, where the fire is forced to burn them, or the
water to choke them, or that they are in any such sort abused by the wicked, to
trouble the servants of God, it is against their will, a vanity and servitude,
whereof they feign would be delivered.

Concerning the wicked whom against their will they serve.
the creatures are abused when they are compelled to serve the wicked rebels
and enemies of God, sore against their will. The Sun is weary of shining to
the wicked, who having their eyes open to see the works of God, had never
their hearts nor mouths open to glorify him; the Earth in like manner is
wearied of the heavy burden of sin, which daily increases upon her; she
cries unto God, and desires to be relieved of this bondage, yea, if the Lord
did not restrain her, she would open her mouth and swallow the wicked, as she
did Corah, Dathan and Abiram: and in very deed when once the creature shall be
set at liberty, and no superior power shall hold them under this servitude,
then shall the creatures declare that they served the wicked sore against their
will, for no creature shall render any more service unto them; the Sun shall
shine no more upon them, the Earth shall bear them no longer, and the water
shall not give so much as one drop out of her treasures to refresh them.

To clear this, The creatures being restored to the liberty shall all concur
to plague the wicked.
out of that one temporal judgment inflicted upon the stife-necked Egiptians,
we may take some notice how fearful that last and universal wrath shall be,
that shall be powered out upon all the wicked, being assembled into one. Out of
the third heaven came his Angel to fight against them, and slew their first
borne. In the second heaven the Sun withdrew his countenance from them, as
from a people of darkness, not worthy of his light. In the third heaven the
elements by course fought against them, the Fire flashed out terrible flames
into their faces; the soft Water gushed out of the bowels of the clouds, and
was turned into hard stones, to strike them, who in the hardness of their
hearts rebelled against God: the Air became pestilentious to them, and
corrupted their bodies with Biles and Botches: the waters beneath were turned
into blood; the earth was poisoned with venomous flies, which made it ^ot,
abominable Frogs made their land stinck, for the lothsomnesse of their sins:
their sensitive creatures which served them were horribly plagued: their
flocks by land consumed with murr^ine: their Fish in the Sea rots and d^es:
their vegitatiue creatures are also destroyed: their Vines and Fig Trees are
blasted: the flax that should have clothed them; the Barley that should have
fed them are smitten, and there is nothing belonging to them, were it never so
small, but the wrath of God seized upon it. This was but a temporal and
particular judgment, yet does it make unto us some representation of that
universal judgment, wherein all the creatures of God shall concur and lend
their helps to torment the wicked, when the full cup of Gods wrath shall be
powered out upon them.

Not of the own will. This is (as we said before) figuratively spoken of the
creature, How a will is ascribed to the creature.
that it is said to have a will. For the will of the creature is no other
thing, but the natural inclination of the creature; and the meaning is, that
the creature of the own nature is not subject to this vanity, but that it is
subdued under it, by the superior power of God, for the sin of man. Where if
it be asked how stands this with justice, How stands it with justice that the
creature is punished for man's sin?
that the creature which sinned not, should be subjected to vanity for the
sin of man? The question is easily answered, if we consider that the
creatures were not made for themselves, but for the use and service of man, and
that whatsoever change to the worse is come upon them, is not their punishment,
but a part of ours. If earthly Kings without violation of justice may punish
their rebels, not only in their persons, but by demolition of their houses, or
otherwise in their goods and substance, how shall we be bold to reprove the
Lords doing, who having convinced man of a notorious treason, has not only
punished himself, but defaced the house wherein he set him to dwell? seeing
he has violated the band of his service unto God, what reason is it that Gods
creatures should continue in the first course of their service to him? surely
it stands with the righteous judgment of God, that his creatures should become
comfortless servants to man, seeing man of his own free will is become an
unprofitable servent to his God, yea a wicked rebel against him.

And again, The fall of Angels, of man, and of the creature compared.
that the Apostle says the change which is made in the creature, is against
the will of the creature, it serves greatly for our humiliation. The fall of
Apostate Angels was a fall by sin, but with their will, and without a Tempter
to allure them, or without any hope that ever they shall be restored. The fall
of man was also a fall by sin of his own free will, but not without the
tempter, neither without hope of recovery and restitution. But the fall of the
creature, was neither a fall of sin, nor of their own will, but a casting of
them down against their will from their original state, yet not without hope
to be delivered. Miserable in the highest degree are Apostate Angels, who of
their own free will without an exterior tempter, have deserted their first
habitation, and cast themselves into remediless condemnation. Miserable in the
second degree are reprobate men, who have fallen of their own free will,
suppose provoked by an exterior tempter, and shall never be pertaker of the
restitution of the sons of God. But herein has the Lord magnified his mercy
toward us, that where we fell with Angels, and reprobate men, yet we are
restored without them. The consideration of our fall should humble us, for in
it we are worse than the creatures; they have fallen from their glory, but not
with their own will; we are fallen from ours, and we cannot excuse our selves,
but it was with our will: Again, the hope of our restitution should greatly
comfort us, considering that the Lord has vouchsafed that mercy unto us, which
he has denied unto others.

Further we are taught here, We should blame our selus when we are cross^d by
the cr^ature.
so often as we are crossed by the creature not to murmr against God, nor to
blame the creature, but to complain upon our selves. If the heavens above be
as brass, and the earth as iron, if the sea rage* and the air wax turbulent,
if the stones of the field be ^ffences whereat we stumble and fall, if the
beasts we have bought or hired for our use, serve us not at our pleasure, let
us not foolishly murmr against them, as Balaam did upon his Ass; what
marvel they keep no covenant with us, seeing we have not kept covenant with
our God?

Under hope. Man and the creature for man's ^^ke are restored to hope, which
neither Apostate Angels, nor reprobate men have.
Herein has the Lord wonderfully magnified his mercy toward us, that he has
not only given to our selves a lively hope of full deliverance, but also for
our greater comfort has extended the same toward the creature for our cause.
The Apostate Angels are not pertakers of this hope, as we said before, that
restitution promised in the Gospel, was never preached unto them: we read
that sometime they have given this confession, that Jesus is the son of God,
but they never sent out a petition to him for mercy; for they have received
within themselves an irreuocable sentence of condemnation, and they know
certainly that merciless judgment abides their wilful and malicious
Apostasy; and reprobate men in like manner, have no hope of any good thing
abiding them after this life: and therefore we are so much the more to
magnify Gods mercy toward us, who by Grace has put a difference between us
and them, where there was none by Nature, and has not only given to us our
selves a lively hope of restitution, but also for our sakes has made the
creatures that were cursed for our sin, pertakers of the same deliverance
with us.

Verse 21. Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
HEre follows the second reason, The second reason of the fervent desire of
the creature taken from their better estate which is to come.
wherefore the creature fervently desires the day of the revelation of the
sons of God, and it is taken from that glorious estate into the which the
creature shall be translated in that day. Where first we have to see what
creature this is which shall be delivered, and secondly what the deliverance
is. The word creature, is a general name of all the works of God, but here
it is put for those creatures which being made by God for man, were hurt by
the fall of man, What creatures shall be restored.
and shall be restored with him. And so under this name we comprise not
reprobate Angels and men, neither those excrements of Nature, which are bred of
doung and corruption, neither thorns, thistles, or such like, which are the
fruits of Gods curse upon the creature for our sin, and are in that day to be
destroyed, not restored: but by the creature we understand the heavens and
earth, with the rest of the elements and works of God, therein contained, made
for the glory of God, and the use of man.

And this is to declare that excellent deliverance we have by Jesus Christ,
Jesus the restorer heales every wound that Satan has inflicted upon man.
there is no wound which Satan has given man by sin, but the Lord Jesus by
his grace shall cure it: he shall not only purge our souls from all sin,
and deliver our bodies from the power of the grave and corruption, but shall
deliver the creatures our servants from that curse, which our sins brought
upon them. To make this yet more clear, Three objects of Satan's malice: first
God: secondly man: thirdly the creature.
we are to know that there are three objects of Satan's malice. The first is
God and his glory: the second is man and his salvation: the third is the
creature, made for Gods glory and man's good. The principal object of Satan's
malice is God and his glory, he hates the Lord with a deadly and
irreconcilable hatred, so that if it lay in his power he would undo that most
high and holy majesty: but because rage as he will, he cannot impair his
sacred Majesty, he turns him to the secondarie object, which is man, and
troubles him by all means, not so much for man's own cause, as for the Lords,
whose glory he seeks to deface that shines in man. And if here also he cannot
prevail, by reason that the Lord has made a hedge round about man, he turns
him to the third object of his malice, which is the creature; against which he
is so insatiable, that if he can be licensed to do no more, yet does he
esteem it some pleasure to him, to get leave to enter into Swine, that he may
destroy them: and this he does, not that he accounts a beast his pray, for
all the beasts of the earth cannot satisfy this roaring Lion, but that
destroying the creature, he may drive man to impatience, and provoke him to
blaspheme the Lord, as by these same means he made the Gadarens murmr
against Jesus Christ, and put him out of their land; and this has been the
course of Satan ever since the beginning.

But blessed be the Lord our God who ouer-shootes Satan and all his
intentions, God ouershooteth Satan in all his machinations.
that same man whom Satan wounded has the Lord restored, and shall set his
image more glorious in him, than it was before: and those creatures which
Satan defaced, for the hatred he carries to Gods glory and man's good, the
Lord shall restore again: the glory of God increases as it is impugned, every
new declaration of Satan's malice shall end in a new declaration of Gods glory:
neither is that enemy able to give a wound to any of Gods children, but the
Lord shall make it whole, and shall at the length confound Satan by his own
means.

And here because it is commonly demanded, To what use the creaturs will serve
in the day of restitution we shall know best, when we see it.
unto what use can these creatures serve in that day, seeing we shall have no
need of the Sun, nor of other natural means whereby now our life is
preserved? To this I answer, that if the Lord will have these works of his
hands to continue and stand as everlasting monuments of his goodness, and
witnesses in their kind of his glory; who is it that can contradict it? It is
enough for us that we know they shall be delivered and transchanged into a
more glorious estate, but for what use, we shall best know in that day, when
we shall see it: in the mean time reuerencing the Lords dispensation, let us
rather endeavor to be pertakers of that glory, than curiously to move thorny,
and unprofitable questions concerning it.

Now as for the manner of their deliverance. How the Apostle says, the
creatures shall be delivered, seeing the Psalmist says they shall perish.
Seeing the Apostle says that the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and
the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works therein shall
be burnt up with fire; and seeing the Psalmist says, that they shall perish,
how is it that here the Apostle says, they shall be delivered? This doubt
shall easily be loosed if Scripture be made interpreter of Scripture. The
Psalmist in that same place expones the word of perishing, by the word of
changing, what this changing shall be, the Apostle here makes it manifest,
while he calls it the delivering of them from one estate into another: so that
we are not to think that they shall perish as concerning their substance, but
as concerning those qualities of vanity, servitude, and impotencie, whereunto
they have been subjected by the fall of man. As silver and gold is changed by
the fire, the dross perishes, but the substance remains; so shall these
creatures be changed in that day, for which cause also they are called, Reu. 21.
new heavens and new earth.

And out of this we may perceive the necessity of that exhortation given unto
us by the holy Apostle, Seeing the glory of that kingdom requires that the
creature be changed, how much more should we be changed?
Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? seeing the simplest
servant who shall have any place in that kingdom, must be changed, and receive
a new liuerie, how much more ought we our selves to be changed, who are the
sons and heirs of that kingdom? let us not deceive our selves, no unclean
thing can enter into that heavenly Jerusalem, 2. Pet. 3. 11.
without sanctification we cannot see the Lord, unless we be purged from our
dross, and pu^ified and fined, by the spirit of the Lord, we shall not dwell
in those new heavens wherein dwells righteousness.

Verse. 22. For we know that every creature groneth with us also, and
trauaileth in pain together unto th^s present.
THe Apostle in this Verse concludes this purpurpose with some amplification
thereof, The same purpose further amplified by groaning and sighing of the
creature.
for he ascribes to the creature a groaning with us, and a travailing together
in pain, whereby he does yet more express the vehemency of their desire: for
as he that goes under an heavy burden groans, and longs to be eased thereof,
or as the woman which travails with child, has a most earnest desire to be
delivered thereof, so the creature weary of this servitude longs to be eased.

This groaning of the creature is not to be neglected, Sometime God complains
to the creature, sometime the creature complains to God upon man: miserable is
man if he complain not on himself.
seeing in holy Scripture we find, that sometime God complains to his
creatures upon the sin of man, and sometime the creatures complains to God;
miserable is man if he do not complain upon himself. In the first of Esaias,
there the Lord complains to his creatures upon man, Hear O Heavens, hearken O
Earth, I have nourished and brought up Children, but they have rebelled against
me, etc. and here again the creature is brought in, Esaias. 1.
groaning, and complaining to God upon man. The first blood that ever the earth
received into her bosom, sent up unto God a crying voice for vengeance, and
the Lord heard it, and now the earth meruailes in her kind that having
received so much blood of the Saints of God into her bosom, the Lord should
delay to require it: she wonders again that the hand of the Lord stablisheth
her, and makes her bear up such a number of wicked men, as are a burden to
her, considering that once he caused her to open and swallow up Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram: and has many a time since shaken her foundations, and destroyed by
earthquake notable cities, making the houses of the inhabitants thereof, their
burial place, the burden of sin being now wonderfully increased, she
meruailes that the Lord causes her to bear it; and for this cause she cries
and groans unto the Lord: and this complaining of the creature, we are not to
neglect it, (as I said) for seeing they sigh and groan for the vanity under
which our sins has subdued them, should not we much more sigh and groan for
our own sins? assuredly, if we do not, we are convinced to be more
sensles, then the senseless creatures themselves.

Concerning this metaphor of travailing, Travailing two manner of ways
ascribed to the wicked in the Scripture.
it is two manner of ways ascribed to the wicked in holy Scripture, and one
manner of way to the godly. For first their concupiscence is compared to a
mother that conceiues and travails continually without rest, till it bring out
sin, and sin being finished, is compared in like manner to a mother that
brings out death. And secondly, the imagination of their heart is compared to
a mother, which conceiues cruel counsels and mischievous devices against the
godly, all their days they travail with this birth, and would fain have it
brought out to perfection, but at length they bring forth a lie: for the malice
of the wicked shall slay himself, Psalm. 7.
his mischief shall turn upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon
his own pa^e. One manner of way ascribed to the Godly.
But as for the children of God, they travail in pain of the monstrous birth
of sin that is within them; not that they are desirous to perfect and finish
it, but to destroy and abolish it, as being a monster within them which they
abhor, and adulterous birth begotten by a most unlawful copulation between
Satan and their corrupted will; the father that begot this monster being
Satan, and the mother that conceived it, their corrupt Nature: for this they
sigh, and cry unto God with the Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
O miserable man, who shall deliver me from this b^dy of death? This was his
voice unto God, and should much more be our continual lamentation, seeing in
sins we are more abundant, and in grace far inferior to that holy Apostle.
The Lord therefore work it in us for his Son Christ's sake.

Verse 23. And not only the creature, but we also who have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption,
even the redemption of our bodies.
NOw follows the Apostles other argument, The second argument proving the
greatness and certainty of that glory, is the fervent desire the godly have
to it by instinct of Grace.
whereby he proves the greatness and certainty of that glory to be reueiled,
and it is taken from that fervent expectation which the sons of God have of
it. It can neither be a vain nor a small thing, but by the contrary both great
and certain, vvhereupon God has set the desire of his best creatures, by
instinct of the Spirit of Grace. So that we have here first a description of
Gods children; they are such as have received the first fruits of the spirit:
secondly, a twofold effect which this holy Spirit works in Gods children;
first a weariness of their present bondage, and servitude of sin; secondly,
a waiting by a constant expectation for a better. And this does very much
confirm the Apostles purpose, there being none on earth who can better judge
the excellency of that glory to come, than they who have received the first
fruits thereof. Out of all doubt the testimony of any one, who has tasted of
that joy to come, is more worth to commend it, than is the contrary judgment
of a thousand others to disprove it.

And not only the creature. The sons of God and the creature groan together,
and shall be restored together.
The Apostle proceeds from the testimony of the creature, to the testimony
of the sons of God; when he spoke of the creature he said, they sigh and
groan with us, they travail together in pain with us, and when he speaks of
the godly, he says, we sigh in our selves, As man was not made for himself
but for the Lord, and therefore should wait upon him, so the creatures were not
made for themselves but for us: and therefore where they are at covenant with
us, they in their kind wait upon us, they go with us, they groan with us, are
grieved with us, and shall never rest till we be delivered; let licentious men
living in their sins mark this: they sigh not in themselves with the godly,
yea they scorn their sighings, and therefore shall not be restored with the
godly, they groan not with the creature, and shall not be delivered with the
creature. The wicked mourn not with them and shall not be pertakers so much as
of the delivery of the creature.
O miserable man, how unhappy is that end, whereunto thy vvanton and hard
heart which cannot repent does lead thee? thou shall not stand in judgment
with the godly, where they go there shall not thou go, thou did not mourn
with the children of the marriage chamber, and therefore shall not enter with
them into it to be comforted; thou shall go to another place, and mourn
without them: the burden of thy sins which now thou feel not, shall press
thee down to hell, and confound thee for ever: the creature that groned with
the godly shall be restored with them, and thou shall not be restored. O how
shall thou be cast down, when the earth whereupon thou treadest shall be
delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and shall as a
servant stand in the day of restitution but thou as a rebel shall be cast into
utter darkness, and shall not be so much as pertaker of the deliverance of the
creature.

But we also who have received the first fruits of the Spirit. A description of
the godly.
In this description of the godly, let us consider these three things. First,
that whatsoever grace we have we received it. Secondly, that grace we have
received is not full, but in part; for we have only received the first fruits
of the Spirit. And thirdly, that the first fruits which we have are sufficient
pledges to us of the plenitude and fullness, which afterward we shall receive.

The first of these learnes us humility: Learning us hum litie, thankfulness,
and diligence in Prayer.
what have thou O man which thou have not received? The Lord dispenses grace to
every one according to his pleasure, and we are but vessels filled and emptied
as he will. Secondly it learnes us thankfulness: whatsoever Grace we have
received we should return both the praise and the use of it to him who gave
it; as the waters by secret conduits come from the Sea, return again openly
into it, through the troughes, so that all men may see the returning, albeit
they saw not the coming: so that Grace which the Lord by his Spirit secretly
conuayes to the godly, does again publicly return unto him by praise and
well doing. And thirdly, it does teach us diligence in prayer; if we desire
increase of Grace, we should seek it from him of whom we have the
beginning, and use all the means, such as hearing, reading, praying, keeping
of a good conscience, by which Grace may grow, and be intertayned in us.

The next thing we observe is, No plenitude but first fruits of the Spirit have
we now.
that in this life we receive not the plenitude and fullness of Grace, but
only the first fruits thereof. The use of this is, first to comfort the
children of God, who are oftentimes discouraged with the sense and feeling of
their own wants. It is one of Satan's stratagems to try those by the rule of
perfection, who are yet but in the state of proficients, Therefore are we not
to think that we have no grace, because we have but beginnings
and we had need to beware of it. Shall I give that vantage to the adversary,
as to think I have no faith, because it is weak? or I have no love, because
it is little: or no sanctification, because it is but in a beginning? No, but I
will so hunger and thirst for more grace, that I will still give thanks for
the grace I have received; for here we have no fullness, our greatest measure
is as the first fruits, in respect of that which is to come.

On the other side, This comfort vainly abused by profane men.
because every comfort which is given to the godly, is turned by profane
contemners and mockers, into an occasion and nourishment of sin: they are to
know this comfort belongs not unto them: It is a common thing to them to excuse
the want of all Grace. O it is but a small grace which in this life is
communicated to the best, and they think their sins are well enough covered,
by this that all men are sinners, as if there were no difference between sin
tyrannizing in the wicked, and captiued in the the godly, or as if beginnings
of Grace in the regenerate did not separate them in regard of conversation from
the unregenerate who are void of all Grace. Let them therefore know that the
Spirit of God whom the godly receive, is not only called the first fruits,
the earnest, and the witness of God, but also the seal and signet of the
living God. As a seal leaves in the wax that similitude and impression of the
form which is in it self; so the Spirit of God communicates his own image to
all those whom he seals against the day of redemption, he makes them new and
holy creatures. And this conuinces carnal professors of a lie, who say they
have received the first fruits of the Spirit, notwithstanding that their
works be wicked and unclean: they may rather if they would tell the truth,
say as those who being demanded whether they had received the holy Ghost or
no, answered we know not whether there be an holy Ghost or no: so may they
instead of bragging of the first fruits of the Spirit, say in truth we know
not what ye call the first fruits of the Spirit.

And thirdly, Why the Lord gives us not in this life the principal, as well as
the earnest.
out of this description we may gather, that albeit we have no more but the
first fruits of the Spirit, yet are they sufficient to assure us, that
hereafter we shall enjoy the whole Mass. In two respects it is customable to
men to give an earnest penny in buying and selling, either when the sum is
greater than they are able to pay for the present, or when the thing bought is
of that nature, that it cannot presently be delivered: but between the Lord
and us there is no buying nor selling, he gives freely unto us, both the
earnest and the principal, but first the one, and then the other; not that the
Lord is unable to pay presently all that he has promised, but because the
principal is of that nature, that it cannot be received, till we be prepared
for it. As the husbandman must sow and tar^y with patience till the harvest
come, wherein he may sheare: as the warrior must fight before he obtain the
victory; and the wrestler receives not his crown till he have overcome,
neither does he that runs in a race obtain the prise, till he have finished
it: so must the Christian, in all these be exercised, before that the Lord
possess him in the promised kingdom of his son Christ Jesus. What comfort
we have now in the earnest and first fruits of the Spirit.


And though payment of the principal for a time be delayed, yet for our
comfort, the earnest and first fruits are presently delivered unto us, the Lord
so dealing with us as he dealt with Israel in the Wilderness* when he caused
the twelve spies to bring with them from the river of Eschol, a branch of the
Vine tree, so full of the clusters of grapes, that it was borne between two
upon a tree, together with the figs, and pomegranats, and other fruits of
that land: for no other end, but that Israel tasting of the first fruits of
Canaan might be provoked to a more earnest desire thereof, as also to assure
them that the Lord who had given them the beginnings, would also put them in
possession of the whole, according to his promise: even so the Lord Jesus who
has gone before us to our heavenly Canaan, not to view it only, but to take
possession thereof in our name, has sent down unto us some of the first
fruits thereof, that we may taste them, such as peace of Conscience, and joy
of the Spirit, that by proof of the small beginnings, we may know what
excellent comfort is laid up in store for us. Two effects which the Spirit
works in the godly, first a sense of their misery for which they sigh.


We sigh in our selves. Here follows now the two effects of the Spirit, which
he works in them who have received it. The first, is a sense of their
present misery, which causes them to sigh unto God for deliverance, and he
says, they sigh within themselves, to teach us that it is not an hipocriticall
and counterfeit, but an inward and godly sorrow, which the Spirit works in
the children of God. Which I do not so speak as if I did condemn those
sighs which break forth without; for sometime the grief of heart is so
abundant in the godly, that not only it breaks out in sighing and mourning,
but in strong crying to God also, but to restrain the hypocrisy of others,
who make a fair show of that in the flesh, which is not in the Spirit. True
religion strives rather to be approved of God, than seen of men: one sigh
proceeding from the heart, is a louder crying in the ears of the Lord of
hosts, and more forcible to move him, than the noise of all the shooting
Priests of Baal, when they are gathered together into one.

We are therefore more deeply to consider this, Sighing and mourning go
before comfort
that the Spirit of God first teaches us to figh and mourn for our present
misery, before he comfort us with a constant hope of deliverance. If now we
mourn not, we shall not rejoice hereafter: it is only mourners whom God has
marked in the forehead, to save from the wrath to come: such a continual
mourner was David, Psalm. 6. 6.
who protests that in the night he watered his couch with tears, and in the
day mingled his cup therewith: Job. 3. 24.
Job in like manner, my sighing (said he) comes before my eating. The Saints of
God are not ashamed to profess that of themselves, which the mockers of this
age esteem a womanly affection; there is nothing to be found among them, but
eating, drinking, singing, and a contracting of one sin after another, with
carnal rejoicing; but woe be unto them that now laugh, Luke 6. 25.
for assuredly they shall weep, M^t. 5. 4.
the end of their joy shall be endless mourning and gnashing of teeth, Genesis 27.
38.
they shall shed tears abundantly with Esau, but shall find no place for
mercy.

Let us therefore go to the house of mourning with the Godly, Mary's tears
pleased Christ better than the Pharisees delicates.
rather than to the banqueting houses of the wicked, rejoicing in their
sinful pleasures. At one time Simon the Pharise gave our Savior a dinner, and
Mary who had been a sinner, Luke. 7. 38. verse. 44.
brought him the sacrifice of a contrite heart, and the Lord esteemed more of
her tears, than of the Phari^ies delicates. No banquet pleases the Lord Jesus
so well as a banquet of tears, poured from a truly penitent heart. The Lord
is said to gather the tears of his children, and keep them in a bottell,
thereby to tell us that they are precious in his sight: for he is not like
fools who gather into their treasures, things which are vain and needless.
But alas, how shall he gather that which we have not scattered? where are our
tears, the witnesses of our unfeigned humiliation before God. The deplorable
hardness of heart in this age, that cannot mourn
The hardness of heart has ouergrowne this age, that albeit there be more then
cause, yet there is no mourning. The sons of Cain learned without a teacher
to work in brass, Genesis 4. 22.
and iron, and the wit of man can make the hardest metal soft, to receive an
impression, but cannot get their own stony heart made soft; yea, the children
of God find in experience how hard a thing it is to get a melting heart. Number.
20. 11
The rock rendered water to Moses at the third stroke, but alas, many strokes
will our hearts take, before they send out the sweet tears of repentance:
this I mark that knowing our natural hardness, we may learn without
intermission to fight against it.

For herein is our case so much the more pitiful, Seeing we have so many
causes of mourning: without us, the troublesome estate of Gods Church.
that having more than matter enough of mourning, yet we do not mourn:
without us, should not the troublesome estate of the Church of God, be a matter
of our grief, though our private estate were never so peaceable? Godly
Nehemiah being placed in the honorable service of King Artashashte the Monarch
of the world, Nehem. 1. 4
was not so much comforted with his own good estate, as grieved at the
desolation of Jerusalem. Decay of Religion, and increase of Idolatry, 1. King.
29. 4
made Eliah weary of his life: the Ark of God captiued, and the glory
departed from Israel, drove all comfort out of the heart of the wife of
Phinees: 1. Sam. 4. 19.
these and many more may teach us, Amos. 6. 6.
that the affliction of Joseph should be matter of our sorrow.

The causes of mourning within us, Causes of mourning, within us, our manifold
sins.
are partly our sins, partly our manifold tentations. As our sins are
contracted with pleasure, so are they dissolved with godly sorrow. It is the
best medicine, which is most contrary to the nature of the disease: our sin
is a sickness, wherein there is a carnal delight to do that which is
forbidden, and it is best cured by repentance, wherein there is a spiritual
displeasure and sorrowing for the evil which we have done: this mourning for
sin lasts in the godly so long as they live in the body, Romans 7. 24.
yea, those same sins which God has forgiven, and put out of their
affection, are still in their remembrance for their humiliation, 2 Kin. 20. 23
so that with Godly Ezechia they recount all their days, and their former
sins in the bitterness of their heart: so long as sin remained in their
affection, it was the matter of their joy, but now being by grace removed out
of the affection, And our manifold tentations.
it becomes the matter of their sorrow.

The other cause of our mourning, is our manifold tentations: for this world is
no other thing but a stormy Sea, wherein so many contrary winds of
tribulation blows upon us, that we can hardly tell which of them we have most
cause to fear. On every side Satan besets us with tentations, on the right
hand and on the left, vt quatuor angulis pulsata domus, al^qua ex part ruinam
faciat, that the house being shaken at all the four corners, may fall down in
one part or other; no rest nor quietness for us in this habitation, terrors
within, Act. 20. 19.
fightings without. Propter quod vno consilio migrandum est Christianis, For
the which, it is best for us with one advise to conclude, that we will remove;
and in the mean time send up our complaint to our Father in heaven, Joshua.
10. 6.
as the Gibionites did to Joshua, showing him how we are beseiged and environed
for his sake, and praying him to come with have and help us.

Waiting for the Adoption. The other effect the spirit works in us, is a
waiting for deliverance.
Now follows the other effect of the Spirit, for he not only causes us (as
we have heard) to sigh and mourn for our present miseries, but also comforts
us with the hope and expectation of deliverance, though in this life we have
trouble, yet have we no trouble without comfort. 2. Cor. 1. 3. 4
Blessed be God who comforts us in all our tribulations, and beside that which
we presently have, it is yet much more which we look for. The men of this
world have no joy without sorrow, Prou. 24. 13
even in laughter their heart is sorrowful, pretend what they will in their
countenance, there is a heaviness in their conscience, arising of the weight
of sin, but it is far otherwise with the Godly, for even in mourning they do
rejoice, and under greatest heaviness they carry a lively hope of joyful
deliverance.

Again, The day of death and day of resurrection earnestly waited for by the
godly.
we are to mark that the Godly are described in holy Scripture, to be such as
do not live content with their present estate, but waits and longs for a
better: and specially there are two days, for which the Children of God are
said to wait; the first, the day of death, wherein they go to the Lord: the
second, the day of appearing wherein the Lord shall come unto them: they
soiourne in the body, more weary of it, then David was of his dwelling in the
tents of Kedar: they wait with patient Job, till the day of their change come,
Job. 14. 14.
and do desire with the Apostle to be dissolved, that they may be with
Christ: they pray for it so often, Mat. 6. 10.
as they use that petition, Let thy kingdom come, seeking death so far as it
is a means to abolish sin vtlerly, Luke. 11. 3.
that Christ their King may alone reign in them: but as for the wicked, the
remembrance of death is terrible unto them, and in their thought they put it
far from them, and when it comes, Death comes on the wicked as I^hu came on
Iehoram.
it comes upon them unlooked for. As Iehu furiously came upon Iehoram, and he
made with all his speed to his chariot, thinking to fly away, but in vain
for the arrow of Iehu ouertooke him; 2 King. 9. 23. 24.
so death comes upon the wicked in a day, and place wherein they looked not for
it, and they being terryfied with it, runs with all the speed they can to
their chariots, that is, to their refuges of vanity, but the dart of death
surely ouer-takes them. Miserable are they whose comfort stands rather in an
uncertain delay of death, than in any certainty which they have of eternal
life.

But let us be prepared for it, We should not soiourne in the body like Jonas
in the sides of the ship, but like Abraham in the door of the tabernacle.
as the good Israelites of God, with our loins girded up, and our staves in
our hands, ready to take our journey from Egypt to Canaan, whenever the Lord
our God shall command us. As fowls desirous to fly, stretch out their wings,
so should man desirous to be with the Lord, stretch out his affections toward
the heavens. Abraham sat in the door of his Tabe^nacle when the Angel
appeared unto him, Exodus 12. 11.
Elias came out to the mouth of his Cave, Genesis 18. 1.
when the Lord appeared to him, 1. King. 19. 9
and we must also rejoice to come out of the cave and tabernacle of this
wretched body, if we would meet with the Lord, yea, even while as we dwell in
the body, if in our affection we come not out, and stand as it were in the
door of our tabernacle, Jonas 1. 5.
but like Jonas sleeping in the sides of the ship, we lie down in the hollow
of our heart, sleeping in careless security, it is not possible that the Lord
can be familiar with us.

The other day for which the godly are said to wait, The day of Christ's second
coming longed for.
is the day of Christ's second coming. The Apostle gives this as a token of the
rich grace of God bestowed on the Corinthians, that they waited for the
appearance of Christ, and to the Philippians he says, 1 Cor. 1. 7.
our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for our savior the Lord
Jesus, Philip. 3.
yea he gives it out as a mark of all those who are to be glorified, when he
says, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, and not for me only but
for all them who love Christ's second appearing: Heb. 9. 28.
And again, Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
salvation.

These and many more places proves that there is great scarcity of Faith and
spiritual grace in this generation, As the Jews waited for the year of
Jubilee so should we for the day of Christ, but alas few do so.
there being so few that unfeignedly longs for the day of his appearance:
suppose every man in word mumble up that petition, let thy kingdom come, yet
are they few who when Jesus testifies surely I come quickly, can in truth
answer with the godly, Reu. 22. 20.
Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus: and all because we are neither weary of our
present misery, nor certain of that glorious deliverance to come, otherwise
we would long for it, and rejoice at the smallest appearance thereof. The
woman with child reckons her time as near as she can, and albeit others have
no mind of it, yet is it always in her remembrance, because that then she
hopes for deliverance. Among the Jews as the day of their Iubilied awes near,
Leuit. 25. 10.
so the joy of them that were in prison increased, being assured that then they
were to be relieved; and should not we much more rejoice, the near that the
day of our eternal Jubilee draws unto us, wherein all tears shall be wiped
away from our eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away for ever.

Where, The wounded conscience even of the godly de^ires not death.
for the comfort of the weak Christian, we are to consider, whether the Godly
be always in this estate, that they dare lift up their heads with joy, and pray
for Christ's second appearance or not? To this I answer, that their disposition
herein is according to the estate of their conscience: as the eye being hurt is
content to be covered with a veil, and desires not to behold the light,
wherein otherwise it rejoices; so the conscience of the Godly being any way
wounded, is afraid to stand before the light of the countenance of God, till
the time that it be cured again. And this made David to crave, that the Lord
would spare him a little, Psalm. 51. 9.
and give him space to recover his strength; but after mourning and earnest
calling for mercy, Psalm. 86. 3.
the conscience being pacified, then do the Godly say with Simeon. Now Lord
let thy Servant depart, Luke. 2. 29.
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

For the Adoption. Adoption is either begun as now: or accompished as we look
for it.
He said before, that we have received the spirit of Adoption, and now he says
that we wait for Adoption: but we must understand that there is a begun
Adoption, whereby we are made the sons of God, and that we have received
already: there is in like manner a consummate Adoption, whereby we are
manifested to be the sons of God, and entered into the full possession of our
fathers inheritance, and that we wait for.

The redemption of our bodies. There is also a twofold redemption: first, of
the soul from sin: secondly, of the body from death.
As there is a twofold adoption, so also a twofold redemption: the first is
defined by the Apostle to be the remission of our sins, and that we have
received already: the second is called in that same Chapter, the redemption of
the possession, and here the redemption of our bodies, and this we look for to
come. As the soul was first wounded by sin, and then the body with
mortality and corruption: so the Lord Jesus the restorer, who came to repair
the wound which satan inflicted on man, does first of all restore life to the
soul by the remission of sins, which he has obtained by his suffering in the
flesh: and therefore the Herald of his first coming cried before him, John. 1.
29.
behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: Reu. 20. 5. 6
This is the first Resurrection, blessed are they who are pertakers of it, for
upon such the second death shall have no power: but in his second coming we
shall also be pertakers of the second redemption, he shall redeem our bodies
from the power of the grave, wherein now they lie captiued, and deliver them
from the shame of mortality and corruption.

Let this comfort us against the present base and contemptible state of our
bodies, Comfort against the present base estate of our bodies.
now they are but filthy sinckes of corruption, and vessels so full of
uncleanness, that the Lord has appointed in the body five conduits to purge
the natural filth thereof, and after this they are to be laid down in the bed
of corruption, the worms spread under them and above them, 2 King. 19.
(as it is said of the King of Ashur) shall devour and consume their flesh,
the earth shall eat up their bones, and turn them into dust; the brain which
was the seat of many proud and vain imaginations, becomes after death
oftentimes the seat of the ugly ^oads; the reins that were the seat of
concupiscence, engenders serpents; and the bowels which could never be gotten
satisfied with meat and drink, shall be replenished with armies of crawling
worms: but against all these we have this comfort, that as presently we have
obtained remission of our sins, so are we assured of a glorious redemption of
our bodies, qui enim resurgit in anima, Bernard.
resurget in corpore ad vitam, for he that rises now in his soul, shall
hereafter rise in his body to eternal life.

And of this every man is admonished, He who has the first redemption shall be
sure of the second.
that if he love his body, he should in time take heed to the estate of his
soul, see that it be pertaker of the first redemption, which is the remission
of sins, and be sure thy body shall be pertaker of the second redemption. It
is a pitiful thing to see what preposterous care is taken by men for
conservation of their bodily life; there is nothing they leave undone, vt
differant mortem quam auferre non possunt, Bernard
that they may at the least prolong and delay death, which they cannot cut
away: but if men take so much pains, and suffer so strait a diet of body, and
bestow so great expenses that they may live a short while longer upon earth,
what should men do that they may live for ever in heaven?

Verse 24. For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that which he sees?
IN this verse and the subsequent, An objection answered.
the Apostle answers an objection: seeing he said before that we have
received the Spirit of adoption, how has he said now that we are still waiting
for adoption? He does therefore teach us, that both these are true, we are
saved now, and we look for a more full salvation hereafter; we are adopted
now, and we look for the perfection of our adoption hereafter: and that it is
so he proves here by this reason; the salvation that now we have is by hope,
therefore it is not yet come, nor perfected. The necessity of this consequence
depends upon the nature of hope, which is of things that are not seen, nor as
yet come to pass.

This place is abused by the adversaries, This verse abused to impugn
Justification by Faith.
to impugn the doctrine of justification by Faith: we are saved say they by
hope, and therefore not by faith only. That we may see the weakness of their
reason, we will first compare Faith and Hope, in that relation which they have
to Christ: secondly in that relation which they have mutually among
themselves. For we deny not, that Faith, Hope, and Love, each one of them has
a place in the work of our salvation, but the question between us and them
is, concerning the right placing of them. Faith and hope compaired in their
relation to Christ.
First, then it is certain, that both faith and hope look unto Christ; Jesus
Christ and that which he has conquered unto us, is the object of them both,
but diversely: for faith enters us into a present possession of Christ and his
benefits, John. 3. 36.
he that believes in me (says our Savior) has eternal life, he says not
only he shall have it, but also that presently he has it: Hope again
looks for a future possession of Christ, which shall be much more excellent,
than that which presently we enjoy; for the possession of Christ which now I
have by Faith is imperfect and mediate; 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10.
by Faith I know Christ but in part, by Faith I apprehend him but in part also:
and this possession I have it mediately, to wit, by the means of the Word and
Sacraments; but my hope directs me to look for a mroe excellent possession of
Christ, within a short while, in whom I shall enjoy much more than now by the
knowledge of my Faith I can see in him, or yet by apprehension of my Faith I
can comprehend of him. And this is that perfect and immediate possession of
Christ which by Hope we look for.

Now as for their mutual relation among themselves, Faith and hope compared in
their mutual relation between themselves.
Faith is of things past, present, and to come; Hope is only of things to
come: Faith is more largely extended than Hope: we hope for nothing which we
believe not, but something we believe for which we hope not: we believe that
the pains of hell abide the wicked, but we hope them not; for hope is an
expectation of good to come, they may fall under fear, but come not under
hope. Again, Faith is the mother of Hope; for of that imperfect knowledge, and
apprehension of Christ which I have by Faith, there arises in me an hope and
expectation of a better: Hope again, is not only the daughter of Faith, but
the conseruer and nourisher of Faith, the pillar that underprops it, when it
faints; for in this life we are beset with so manifold tentations, the work of
God seeming oftentimes contrary to his word, and things appearing to fall out
otherwise than the Lord has promised, that our Faith thereby is wonderfully
daunted, and therefore has need to be supported by Hope, which teaches
always with patience to depend upon Gods truth, and to look for a better. As
for example, Psalm. 50. 15.
the Lord says, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, I will hear thee, and
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, according to this promise the
Christian calling upon God and yet not finding deliverance, his Faith begins to
faint, but then Hope comes in, and succoureth Faith, and her counsel is,
Habak. 2. 3.
the vision is for an appointed time, at last it shall speak and not lie:
though it tarry, wait, for it shall surely come and not stay: and this Faith
being strengthened by Hope, continues her prayers to God, until she obtain
her promised and desired deliverance.

And of this it is evident, The right place assigned to every one of these
three, Faith, Hope, and Love, in the work of salvation.
in what sense it is that the Apostle says, we are saved by Hope, to wit,
because by it we are vpholden in trouble: for he is not here disputing of the
manner of our Justification (which he has done before) but discoursing of
those comforts which we have to sustain us in affliction. If ye ask by which
of these three, Faith, Hope, and Love, we are justified, that is, by which of
them we apprehend Christ's righteousness offered to us in the Gospel, the
Apostle has answered already, we are justified by Faith? If ye demand which
of these three chiefly sustaines us in affliction: the Apostle here tells
you, that when Faith is weak, Hope saues us that we despair not: and if ye
demand which of these three declares us to be men justified by Faith in
Christ, the Apostle tells you, we must declare our Faith by good works; for
Faith works by Love: these are the right places, which these three excellent
graces of the Spirit has in the work of our salvation, and they go so
jointly together, that they cannot be sundred.

When we say that a man is justified by Faith only, we do not therefore make
the justified man to be without Hope and Love. The doctrine of Justification by
Faith only, takes not away Hope and Love.
For albeit in the action of the apprehending and applying of Christ's
righteousness, Faith only works, for which we say truly we are justified
by Faith only, yet Hope and Love have other actions pertaining to salvation,
necessarily requisite in the justified man. And this does clear us of that
false calumny wherewith the adversaries do charge us, Calumny of the
adversary concerning this confuted.
as if we did teach, that Faith might be without Hope or Love, because we
affirm that we are justified by Faith only. I say most truly, when I say
that among all the members of the body, the eye only sees, but if any man
collect of my speech, that the eye is only in the body, without ear or hand,
he concludes wrong. For albeit in the faculty of seeing I say the eye only
sees, yet do I not for that separate it from the communion of the rest of the
members of the body. In the Sun heat and light go inseperably together; of
these two it is the heat only that warmes us, do I therefore say that the
heat is without the light? Among all the graces of the Spirit, when I say that
Faith only iustifies, I do but point out the proper action of Faith, but do
not therefore separate it from Hope and Love. So far injurious are the
adversaries of the truth unto us, when they accuse us for maintayning a Faith
which is without Hope, and does not work by Love, which we never affirmed.

Of this now it is evident, Hope of a Christian is a strong thing, depending on
sure warrants.
that the Hope of a Christian must be very strong, seeing it sustaines him in
trouble; it is a pillar that sustaynes the whole building, and a most sure
anchor, which being fastened upon the rock Christ Jesus, holds us so fast,
that we who are weak vessels, tossed too and fro with restles tribulations,
cannot be overcome; it leanes upon most certain warrants, whereof now we will
only consider a few.

The first warrant of our hope is the word of God: The first wararant of our
Hope is the word of God.
whereof now only we will touch these two comfort able places. The Apostle
says, there is reserved for us in heaven an immortal inheritance, 1 Pet. 7. 4.
unto the which we also are kept by (...) (...)

But hope that is seen is not hope. A short description of the Nature of Hope.
The Apostle to confirm his reason subioynes a short description of the nature
of hope, that it is of things which are to come, and not yet seen, for that
which is present, and a man sees, he cannot be said to hope for it: yea, then
shall hope cease, when we shall enjoy that which we hope for. August.
Spes tunc non erit quando erit res. In the first of these words Hope is put
for the thing Hope; in the second, for the virtue of Hope it self; and thus
much of Hope.

Verse. 25. But if we hope for that which we see not, we do with patience
abide for it.
THe Apostle here concludes not only this his last purpose, The conclusion of
his first principal argument of comfort against the cross
wherein he has taught us, that the very nature of hope leads us to look
for some better thing which is to come, but also he concludes his first
principal argument of comfort; making this to be the end of all, that it
becomes us with patience to abide our promised deliverance. And albeit for
memories sake we have reduced all that he has spoken, into one principal
argument, yet may we see how under this one, many particular reasons are
heaped up together, tending all to this one conclusion; that we should abide it
with petience. Six several reasons of comfort, lurking under this one.
First, we have heard that the nature of our sufferings are so changed, that
they are now made sufferings with Christ. Secondly, that the end of them is to
be glorified with Christ. Thirdly, that the glory to come does far exceed in
weight and eternity our present sufferings. Fourthly, that the creatures have
a fervent desire of the revelation of that glory. Fifthly, that they also who
have received the first fruits of the Spirit, are weary of their present
misery, and wait for there edemption to come. And last, that in all our
troubles we are saved, and sustained with the hope of that which is to come,
and not with a present possession of that which we would have. In all these
respects, it becomes us not only to be of good comfort for the present, but
also patiently to look for a better. The Apostle brings in his conclusion upon
his last argument, but we are to consider that it has an eye unto all that
goes before, and that every one of those reasons aforesaid, serves to
strengthen this conclusion, that if we hope for that which is to come, then
will we with patience abide for it.

We have first to mark a difference between the Christian and the Worldling:
The worldlings comfort is in things that are seen, the Christians not so.
the Worldling has his affection on things which are seen, he cannot mount
above them; he has received his consolation on earth; his portion is here,
and he possesses his best things in this present life. It is far otherwise
with the Christian, for in his affection he transcends every thing which is
subject to sense, he is not now a possessor, but an expectant by hope of his
best things, he has them not in re, but in spe: therefore may he say to the
Worldling, as our Savior said to his Kinsmen, your times is always, but my
time is not yet come. The Christian is that good husbandman, who has more
comfort in that seed, which he has sown, and covered with earth that he sees
it not, than he has in that, which he sees lying before his eyes in the barn,
for he knows that the one, at the last, shall render him manifold greater
increase, than the other.

It is not an unpleasant Allegory which Augustine makes upon these words of
our blessed Savior. Augustines Allegory on the words of Christ.
If a Some ask bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a stone?
or if he ask a fish, Luke. 11. 11.
will he give him a Serpent? or if he ask an egg, will he give him a
Scorpion. The Lord Jesus being the highest Doctor that ever taught, does teach
in the lowest, applying himself to our capacity; by homely similitudes of
earthly things, he labors to bring us in all his doctrine to the knowledge of
things heavenly: I know that the end of these parables is to confirm us in
this assurance, that if we seek good things from the Lord, we shall obtain
them, (...) (...) day of death, which will be to thee a day of darkness, and
doleful displeasure, which shall swallovv up with one gape, not only the
sense, but also the remembrance of all thy former delights?

Where then are your pleasures O worldlings, Worldlings have no present
pleasures: such as are gone are lost, such as are to come or uncertain.
wherein ye rejoice? present pleasures ye have not, those which are past
are vain and comforts you not, and those which are to come are uncertain: in
the smallest things how often are ye deceived? ye look for a fair day and a
foul comes upon you: ye look for continuance of health, and sickness unawares
seases upon you: ye comfort your selves with the hope of a good success of
your affairs, and an evil success ouerturnes incontinent all the counsels of
your heart: thus the good for which ye look to come, in your own experience
you find it deceiues you. Call not therefore any more upon us to follow you,
and to drink with you of your perishing pleasures, we have had a proof of
yours, and found them to be vanity; but if ye will, come and take a proof
of ours, will you taste of those delicates whereunto God has called us? will
you eat of the fruit that grows upon the tree of life, discovered by the
Gospel, under the shadow whereof we delight to sit? righteousness shall breed
you peace, and peace shall breed you joy in the holy Ghost, and these shall in
such sort delight you, that in regard of them, your soul shall loath all your
former vain pleasures wherein you delighted before.

Of this we may see further, that as Faith procreates hope, Impatience in
trouble proceeds from the want of Hope.
so hope procreates Patience: so that the want of Patience in trouble bewrayes
the want of Hope, What made Saul who in his first beginning drove Witches out
of the land, in his latter end to make his refuge to them? surely because all
hope had failed him that the Lord would answer him any more. When Samaria was
besieged and straited with Famine, as long as Iehoram had any hope he waited
with patience upon the word of Elisha, that there should be great plenty
shortly in Samaria, but when by the woman's complaint he understood that the
Famine was encreast to that height, that his subjects were forced to eat their
children, his hope failed him, and he concludes to attend no longer upon the
Lord, but vows in his impatience to cut off the head of Elisha. Thus the cause
of all impatience in trouble, that drives men to seek deliverance by wicked
and unlawful means, is only the want of hope.

Again, Licentiousnes in prosperity proceeds from the want of hope.
if ye look to those who in prosperity lays down the raynes of their
affections with all licentiousness to go after their desired pleasures, ye
shall find the only cause thereof is the want of hope, he that has (says
Saint John) this hope in himself that he shall see God purges himself, even
^s God is pure. And this our Savior teaches us more clearly, in the Parable
of that servant who because he thought within himself that his Master would
not come, began to beat his fellows instead of feeding them. So that the
ground of all the Atheism of our time, is pointed out to be the want of hope:
there is no sin committed but through impatience, all proceeds of this, that
man's unregenerate and proud nature cannot contain the self within the limits
prescribed unto it by the Lord: he that is governed with patience is easily
kept both in peace and war from extremity of affection. If any man profane
like Esau sell his birthright for a mess of pottage, that is, forgo eternal
life for the perishing pleasures of this life, it is because he has no hope;
and therefore no marvel if with patience he abide not for a better, but
rather in impatience break after his affections, to embrace those things which
are present.

Among all the graces of the Spirit, Without patience no grace can be preserved.
this praise may be given to Patience, that it is the keeper of the rest: if
our patience be not first broken, we cannot be induced* to the committing of
any sin. Sinful concupiscence proceeds from the impatience of continency;
covetousness from this that we are impatient of our sober estate. Therefore
did Tertullian call patience such a governor of the affairs (...) (...)
behavior may convince the unbridled affections of many professed Christians.
Ethnicke philosophers excluded from the praise of true Patience.
In which sense Basile commended Socrates: yet cannot their patience deserve
the praise of true virtue; for neither did their suffering proceed from the
Spirit sanctifying their hearts by Faith, without which it is impossible to
please God, nor was the end thereof directed to his glory; albeit as says the
Apostle, after a sort they knew him, yet did they not glorify him, and though
they seemed omni virtutum genere praeclari, to excel in every kind of virtue;
yet herein are they convinced to be unjust, quod dona Dei non retulerunt ad
suum authorem, that they returned not the gifts of God to the author thereof,
but rather abused them to their own vainglory; and so failing both in the
beginning, as also in that end whereunto they should have been directed, they
cannot have the praise of acceptable virtues to God, but are rather to be
accounted shadows of virtues, than virtue indeed. Quid enim illis cum
virtutibus, qui Dei virtutem Christum ignorant? what have they to do with
virtue, who are ignorant of Christ the true virtue of God? Certe verus
philosophus est amator Dei: but the most excellent thing that ever they did,
flowed rather from a love of themselves, and their own glory, than from any
love of God.

The second sort of persons excluded from the praise of true patience,
Worldlings sustyning great distress for gain, are also excluded from the
praise of true Patience.
are worldlings: who howsoever they endure very much, and sustain great
distress in their bodies, and restless cares in their minds, yet have not
this end proposed to them, that by the good which presently they seek they may
attain unto better. Our Savior has recommended to us that patience whereby
we possess our souls; he counts not of those sufferings, which men endure
that they may possess things which are without them: for what is that
possession worth whereby men possess those things which are without them, they
themselves being possessed within of worse than themselves? They are called
Lords, and are the servants of servants; have Villages, Cities and multitudes
of men under their commandment, and they themselves are captiued slaves under
the servitude of Satan: but that Patience is praise worthy, whereby we
possess our souls in patience, even then when we sustain greatest loss of
things that are without us: yet certainly all those cares of worldlings, which
causes them to endure the necessities of hunger and thirst, the heat of the
day, and cold of the night, seems to be but licitae quodammodo insaniae, that
is, lawful and tolerable furies, if they be compared with others.

This definition does also exclude from the praise of this excellent virtue
those miserable Atheists who sustain great stresse and painful labors,
Atheists who pine themselves to commit evil excluded from the praise of true
Patience.
that they may commit evil. These are they of whom Solomon says, they cannot
rest unless they have done wickedly. And of this sort were those Jews who
vowed they would neither eat nor drink, till they had the Apostles life; and
those pharasaicall spi^its, of whom our Savior says, they compass both sea
and land to make one of their own religion, and when they have done, makes him
ten times more than himself the child of Satan; this is wicked Patience.
Vera enim patientia est amica bonae conscientiae, non inimica innocentiae: as
in like manner, that loss of goods, want of rest, and enduring of shame, which
men suffer to obtain the sinful pleasure of their lusts. For Patience is not
famula concupiscentiae, the handmaid of inordinate concupiscence, but comes
sapientiae, the companion of godly wisdom. And last of all here is secluded
that Patience, by which men in the hardness of heart, endure most stubbornely
the punishment inflicted upon them for their sins, which is miseranda* potius
durities, quam miranda aut laudanda patientia, rather miserable hardness to be
pitied, than patience worthy to be praised: for then is patience good when the
cause for which we suffer is good: it is not poena sed causa quae facit
Martyrem, every strong suffering of torment makes not a man a Martyr, but the
good cause for which he suffers: therefore are we (...) (...) In a Godly man
his desires are better than his deeds, he cannot do the good that he
desires, as the Apostle plainly confesses of himself: but the wicked have
their desires worse than their deed^; for when they have done most wickedly,
yet have they still a desire to do more, till their tormenting conscience
waken them: and so whereas the one sins of weakness, The Christian is freed
from wickedness not from weakness.
the other sins of wickedness. Certainly they who are truly Godly are so
far from wickedness, that if they were such men as they desire to be, and
could possibly perform that good which they prease to do, there would not be
such a thing as a spark of the life of sin left remaning in them. Always we
live under this hope, that the Lord who has already by his grace delivered us
from wickedness, will also in his own good time deliver us from our weakness:
he shall make our deeds answerable to our desires, and we shall become such
as may say, Now thanks be to God, for I do the good which I would.

These infirmities after our regeneration are left in us, Why infirmities are
left in us after our regeneration.
partly as Antidotes against our natural presumption, as we may see in the
holy Apostle, who least he should have been exalted out of measure, was
buffe^ed with the Angel of Satan: and partly for our provocation to prayer,
that having experience of our own weakness, we might run to the Lord who
is the strength of our soul, and seek his help by prayer, whereunto
otherwise we are very slow by nature, notwithstanding it be the best and most
acceptable service that we can give unto God upon earth. We have marked this in
experience, that as they who find not themselves bodily diseased seek not the
Physician, so he that feels not the spiritual infirmities of his soul,
cannot pray unto God to remedy them: the Lord has used the infirmities of
many as holy means to make them truly religious, who were profane before,
and for these causes are infirmities left in us.

Infirmities. Our infirmities are manifold.
So the Apostle speaks in the plural number, because not one, but manifold
are the infirmities whereunto we are subject: whereof there arises to us a
twofold warning. First, that we take heed unto our selves, and see where we
are weakest, to the end that there we may strengthen our selves. The
Philistims were very careful to know wherein Sampsons strength lay, to the end
that spoiling him of his strength they might spoil him of his life: but Satan
by long experience knows our infirmities, and sets upon us there where he
knows that we are weakest. As therefore they who are besieged look not so
much unto the stronger part of the wall, We should strengthen our selves most
where we are weakest.
as unto the weaker, that they may strengthen it: so wisdom craves that we
should look most narrowly to our greatest infirmities. He that has children
albeit he love them all, yet has he most respect to the most infirm among
the; and he that has many tenements of land, hastes soonest to repair that
which is most ruinous; and among all the members of the body, we care most for
those that are weak or wounded. Seeing Nature has taught us to take heed to
those things which are ours, shall we not much more take heed unto our selves?
It is even a point of holy wisdom to consider where we are weakest, and what
those sins are unto which we are most subject, and by which Satan has
gotten greatest vantage against us, that so we may take the more pains to make
our selves strong against it.

And after that by prayer and spiritual exercises, Yet so that we remember
that the enemy repulsed at one place will assault another.
thou have made thy self strong there where thou wast wont to be weak, yet
take heed unto thy self, it is not one but many infirmities whereunto we are
subject, and the crafty enemy can very well change his tentations upon thee,
if he be repulsed at any one part, whereat he was wont to enter, he will go
about and seek vantage at an other: and therefore seeing our enemy is
restless, and the matter he works upon is our manifold infirmities, let us
walk circumspectly, and pray continually, standing with the whole (...) (...)
grace, the grace of Prayer is, we should not so vainly profess in our words,
that we can pray, as earnestly beseech him with the Disciples that he would
teach us to pray. As that Eunuch professed that he could not understand
without a guide, Acts. 8. 31.
so may we that we cannot pray without a guide, it is easy to speak of God,
but not so easy to speak unto God; he that will speak to God (says
Ambrose) must speak to him in his own language, that is, in the language of
his Spirit.

Prayer is not a communing of the tongue with God, Prayer is a communing of the
soul with God
but of the soul with God, and of such a soul only as is taught by the holy
Spirit how to pray: it is true the Lord understands the thoughts of every man's
heart, but the language acceptable to God, are those motions of the heart which
are raised by his own Spirit, and he that wants this Spirit, can not speak
unto God in Gods language. Let this serve to reform the corrupt judgment of
many, who thinking themselves able enough to pray, pass over their days
without the grace of Prayer, a fearful punishment of carnal presumption.

This natural inabilitie to pray consists in these: Our natural inabilitie to
pray is, either in our corrupt understanding, by which we seek things unlawful,
sometime the fault is in our understanding, fallimur putantes prodesse quae
poscimus, cum non prosint, we are deceived, thinking those things to be
profitable for us which are not: so the Jews not content to be fed with Manna
according to the Lords dispensation, will have flesh, which the Lord gives
them, but in his anger: and their posterity not content with the Lords
government, will have a King like other nations, which the Lord gave them, but
in his wrath. Of this sort are they, who send out in stead of lawful prayers,
unlawful imprecations against their brethren, crying for the plagues of God
upon their neighbors, for every small offense, in stead of the blessings of
God: these are like the Disciples that prayed for fire from heaven to burn up
Samaria, not being led by a right spirit; or rather like unto Corah, Numb. 16.
Dathan, and Abiram, who sent up to the Lord strange fire, which at length
brought down a strange judgment upon themselves.

Sometime again we seek that which lawfully may be sought: Or in our corrupt
affection, by which we seek things lawful for the wrong end.
the fault is not in the understanding, but in the affection? as when men seek
lawful things for the wrong end, or in the wrong place. Of the first (says
Saint James) ye seek and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may
consume it upon your lusts. James. 4. 3.
Of the second (says our Savior) seek first the kingdom of Go, Mat. 6. 33.
and other things shall be cast unto you: the Lord is greatly dishonored when
we seek any thing before himself: for remedy let us remember these rules.
First, that the thing we seek be good. Secondly, that we seek the greatest
good in the first room. And thirdly, that the secondary gifts we seek them
for the right end, namely, that they may be servants to us in our serving of
God only, and that we abuse them not as occasions of sinning against our God.

And further we may learn here how little cause either the Pelagian had of
old, What good can we do by Nature, seeing we cannot do so much as pray for
our selves.
or the semipelagian Papists have now, to magnify so far the arm of flesh,
as to affirm that man unregenerate has power of his own free will, to make
choice in things spiritual, of that which is good: for seeing we cannot know
what is good for us, till the Spirit teach us, what power have we of our
selves to make choice of it? It is true that men by the quickness of their
natural wit, have found out many arts and trades, profitable for this
natural life; so Iubal was the first Father of them who play on Harpes and
Organes, Genesis 4. 22.
and Tubal-cain the first inuenter of cunning working in brass and iron: but
as for spiritual things which concern the life to come, man is not able by
any power of Nature to help himself therein: for what can he do, seeing he
does not understand those things that are of God?

But the spirit it self makes request. How the Spirit requests for us.
The Apostle to the Galathians has a commentary for these words, when he
says that God has sent down his Spirit into our hearts, by (...) (...) and
again, Chris^an Mat hom. 10.
tardius dando quod petimus, instantiam nobis orationis indicit, the Lord when
he is slow to give that which we ask, does it only that he may commend his
gifts unto us, and make us more instant and earnest in prayer.

For the better understanding of this, If the Lord refuse that which we will, it
is because it is not for our weal.
let us distinguish our petitions: sometime we seek those things which are
not so expedient for our selves to be granted as refused unto us; and in these
non audit nos ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad salutem, the Lord regards not thy
will, but thy weal. The Apostle buffeted by an Angel of Satan, besought the
Lord to remove that tentation from him, but obtained not his vvil, the Lord saw
it was not for his weal: and not only do we read that men beloved of God
have been refused in mercy, but others have had their petitions granted in
anger: which we may see not only in the Israelites, who obtained flesh when
they sought, but in his anger; but also in those damned Spirits, who sought
license of the Lord Jesus to enter into Swine, and obtained it, but to the
greater augmentation of their wrath.

If therefore thy petition unto God be for a thing absolutely necessary to thy
salvation, And the refusal of anything to his own, is not without the grant
of a better.
be assured that howeuer the Lord delay it, he shall not simply refuse it: and
if otherwise thou crave a thing not absolutely necessary for thee, if the Lord
refuse to satisfy thy will therein, it is that he may do according to thy
weal. When the Disciple asked Jesus of the resurrection, Acts. 1. 6.
Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? he satisfied them
not in that which they craved; It is not for you (says he) to know the times
or seasons which the Father has put into his own hand: but another thing
meeter for them, and less craved of them, he promised But ye shall receive
power of the holy Ghost, when he shall come upon you, and ye shall be
witness unto me. A comfortable answer indeed, an exchange most profitable for
us, and we rest content with it, So be it, even so be it, O Lord, give us
thine holy Spirit, and deny us any other thing thou will.

And of this again we learn, Prayer which obtaines all other gifts is also a
gift of God, therefore the praise of all is due to the Lord
that we live only by mercy, for not only those things which we obtain by
prayer, are begged by us, and given by God, For what have thou O man that thou
have not received? but we see here that prayer it self, whereby we get all
things, is also a gift of God: if we wanted not of our own, we would not seek
of another by prayer, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
and if we could also pray of our selves, we needed not another to teach us,
Etiam ipsa Oration inter gratiae munera reperitur, it is the Lord who commands
and works in us both the will and the deed: unto him therefore belongs the
praise of all,

We have here also to consider a great comfort for the Godly, Comfort for the
godly, when no man will speak for them they want not Intercessours.
who are often times redacted to that estate, that there is none among men to
speak for them: Jeremy cannot find one Ebed-melech, neither have the
Prophets of the Lord one Obadiah to hide them: Daniel has none to speak for
him, al stands up that had credit, to procure that he may be cast into the
den: those that should be friends, oftentimes become foes to the servants of
God, but even at this time their comfort is, that not only they have Jesus the
Just an Advocate for them at the right hand of his Father, but have also the
Spirit the Comforter within them, an Intercessor for them.

Miserable therefore must they be who bend their tongues to speak against
those, Miserable are those who bend their tongues against them, for whom the
holy Spirit makes request.
for whom the holy Ghost makes request unto God: that rebuke which the Prophet
gave to Iehosaphat, when he went out to help wicked king Achab, will thou
help them that hate the Lord? we may turn to those in our time, that are
enemies to the Children of God, Will ye hurt them, 2. Chron. 18.
whom the Lord helps? The Children of God in all their infirmities have the
holy Spirit for their helper, what ever man speaks against them, he makes
request unto God for them. It cannot then otherwise be, but in the end comfort
must be to them, and confusion unto their enemies. That oracle which Zeresh
gave to Hamans husband, shall assuredly prove true upon all the enemies of
(...) (...) in all our ways principally to look unto it. It is in the most
part of men an argument of their Atheism, that they look curiously to the
decking of the body, which falls under the eye of man, Let not man therefore
sin under hope of secrecy.
but regard not the hid man of the heart, which falls under the eye of God.
And again, we learn here, that it cannot be without great contempt to God, to
sin against him under hope of secrecy; it is with thy sin, to join a
mocking of God: for in effect thou say with the Atheist, The Lord sees not.
A most high sin against his Majesty, whereby thou do all thou can to
pull out the eyes of the Lord, that he should not see, or at least thinks so
of him in the false conclusion of thy darkened mind. No marvel therefore, that
against such as thou art, the Prophet threaten that fearful curse: Esaias 29.
15.
Woe be to them that seek in deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, their
works are in darkness, and they say, who sees us? or who knows us? your
turning of devices shall it not be esteemed as the potters clay? for shall the
work say to him that made it, he made me not? or the thing formed, say of him
that fashioned it, he had none understanding? Psalm. 94. 89 10. 11
Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise?
He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that formed the eye,
shall he not see? he that teaches man knowledge, shall he not know?
Certainly, the Lord knows the thoughts of the heart of man, that they be but
vanity.

Let us therefore sanctify the Lord God of hosts in our heart, But let the
eye of the Lord be an awband, euenin secret to keep us from sin.
let us never seek to hide our ways from heaven, for that is impossible: let
us learn of Henoch to make our lives a walking with God; and with David, let
us always set the Lord before our eyes: so in the midst of our own house,
we shall walk in the innocence of our heart: where there is no eye of man to
make us ashamed, the reverence of God shall keep us from sin. The fear of
earnall men, is the countenance of men: what restrained Abner, and made him
unwilling to slay Asahel? If I do it (said he) how shall I hold up my face to
thy brother Ioab: 2 Samuel 2. 22.
but the awe of spiritual men is the countenance of God: Genesis 42. 18.
this restrained Joseph that in secret he durst not commit adultry, and it was
his reason to persuade his brethren, I fear God, and therefore dare do you no
evil. Certainly this is only true godliness, when we live so as under the
eye of God, and the reverence of his invisible majesty, restraynes us from
doing those sins, which otherwise we might do unknown, or at least
uncontrolled of men.

And so much the more let us endeavor to attain to this holy disposition, The
sons of Adam seek to hide themselves from the Lord,
because how so ever our corrupt Nature cannot hide her crooked ways from the
Lord, yet she desires and preases to do it, and if her deeds and thoughts be
brought unto the light, it is sore against her will: but the children of God
renewed by grace, willingly presents their hearts to God, that he should look
upon them. And this the Apostle points out here, when he says, that not only
God knows the heart, but that he searches the heart. Searching, is the
inquisition of a thing which is hid and covered, and imports the contrary
corruption of our Nature, which seeks to hide and obscure it self from the
Lord. As Adam presently after his fall sought to cover his nakedness with
fig tree leaves, so has he transmitted this heritable evil to all his
posterity, that when they have done wickedly, But in vain.
they do what they can to cover it: but in vain, for the Lord is such a
searcher, from whose eyes no man can hide that for which he makes inquisition.
Laban searched the Tent of Jacob for his idols, and could not find them though
they were there: but what the Lord searches he shall find out. If Saul hide
himself the Lord can tell the people that he lurkes among the stuff. As a
light where it comes makes things to be seen which were hid in darkness, so
the Lord when he searches, says he will search with lights; to tell thee that
were thy deeds never so secret, he will make them manifest. Let us not
therefore like the profane Atheists seek to hide our secrets from the
searcher, but let us live as in the sight of God.

Neither is it without great cause that the Lord passing by other things, The
heart only makes the difference between the true christian and counterfaite.
looks only to the heart, the heart being the essential difference that
distinguishes a true Christian from a counterfaite: for outward exercises of
godliness the hypocrite in appearance may match the holy one. Ye shall see
Cain sacrificing no less then Abel: ye shall see Esas seeking the blessing
with greater crying, and more tears, than Jacob: and Saul shall confess his
sin no less than David: and Ahab shall humble himself in dust and ashes,
more penitent like than Ezechiah: the Pharisee shall be more abundant in
fasting and giving of alms, than the Publican. As he that does paint a fire,
may paint the color and the form of the bowing flame thereof, but can no way
paint the heat thereof: so an Hypocrite can look like a Christian, speak
like a Christian, and in outward actions counterfeit the Christian, but can
never attain to the Christians heart: therefore is it that the Lord most of
all delights in the heart, and we also most of all should take heed unto it,
to keep it holy.

Beside this, It is in great wisdom that God has locked up the heart of one
man from another.
that the Lord has locked up the heart of one man from another, and has
reserved the knowledge of the heart to himself only, the Lord has done it in
great wisdom: for seeing that man divided himself by sin from God, their
hearts by nature are so discordant among themselves, that if their hearts were
as manifest to others, as their faces, there could not be a fellowship nor
society entertained among men. Look how many men are in the world, there are
as many sundry judgments and wills, every man having a kingdom in his breast,
and so carried away with a desire of his own super-excellencie, that he
seeks the advancement of his own will with the overthrow of all others,
whose will is not agreeable to his, if he might attain unto it. Again, the
heart of man is such a bottomless fountain of wickedness, that if it were
manifested, the world should be infected with viler abominations, than any
that yet are known in it: for if the tongue which is but a little member of
the body, when it fomes out but a small part of that filth which abounds in the
heart, be so forcible as to corrupt the honest minds and manners of the
hearers, what should be done if the heart it self were laid open, which is by
nature but a stinking puddle, and filthy storehouse of all iniquity?

And further for the comfort of the whole Church of God, The sovereignty of God
over man appears in this, that he is upon the secrets of their hearts.
and every member thereof, let us mark the sovereignty of our God over all
his creatures in these two, that not only he is upon their secrets whether
they will or not, for he sits in their hearts, but also has soueraign
commandment over them, so that he can when he will, and will when his glory
requires, either take their hearts utterly from them, or turn their own
hearts against themselves, as domestic enemies to torment them. And as for the
first, it is manifest out of this place, that the Lord sits upon the secret
counsel of the wicked; for he searches the heart. It was a great
discouragement to Benhadad King of Aram, that the secret conclusion, which he
laid with his captains in his cabinet counsel, concerning the ordering of his
battles against Israel, were discovered as they were concluded, by Elisha the
Prophet, unto the King of Israel, and who reueiled them to Elisha^ but the
Lord our God, who sits as moderator in the counsel of the wicked, whether they
will or not to ouerrule their determinations, and direct them to his own end,
which is his glory, and good of his Church. Let our enemies then take counsel,
and conspire together as they will, he that does sit in the heavens shall have
them in derision. The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and what he has
decreed shall only come to pass: let us therefore rest in him.

It were good for men to consider this, Man has but his heart to hold him up,
and God can take it f^o^ him, when he will.
that albeit man be sustained and vpholden by his own heart, so that no other
thing can help him if it fail him, yet it is in the Lords power to do with it
what he will: how often have we seen that the Lord being angry at man, passing
by all the members of his body, and leaving them whole and sound, has stricken
the heart with such terrors, that most valiant men having eyes could not see,
having a tongue could not speak, having hands could not strike to defend
themselves, and having feet could not do so much as run away, their heart
being taken from them by God, they are left in a strait and comfortless
estate. But far more miserable are they, when the Lord turns their own
hearts against themselves, and makes them a terror to themselves. A fearful
example whereof we have in Belshazzar, Dan. 4. 6.
who seeing nothing without him, but the figure of a hand which stirred him
not, was so stricken and pursued with his own heart within him, that his flesh
trembled, his countenance waxed pale, his knees smote one against another. If
man considered this, he would be loath to provoke the Lord unto anger, seeing
he can neither sustain the wrath of God nor eschew it.

Moreover we are taught here, We have need of great reverence in prayer,
seeing we speak to him who searches the heart.
seeing our Prayer is a conference with him who searches the heart, that we
should always pray with our heart, for otherwise if we draw near him with our
lips our heart being far from him, he will curse us as deceivers, that
having a male in our flock, do sacrifice a lame thing unto the Lord: that is,
in stead of the service of our hearts, do offer unto him the service of our
lips. The Lord has no delight in the sacrifice of fools, who are rash with
their mouth to utter a thing before him, not considering that he is in heaven,
and they are upon earth, the mouth may reach to men who are beside us, the
heart only may reach to God who is above. It was a very godly protestation
that David made, Psalm. 139. 23
Try me O Lord, and prove my thoughts in the night, and see if at any time I
have spoken that to thee with my mouth, which I have not thought with my heart:
and albeit we have not as yet atteyned unto it, yet is it that holy sincerity
whereat we should aim in all our prayers, so to speak unto God that our
conscience may bear us record that we lie not, and that we have spoken nothing
with our mouth, which we have not thought with our heart.

We are therefore for the right ordering of our prayers, Three things to be
observed in Prayer.
to take heed to these three things. First, preparation before prayer.
Secondly, attention in prayer. Thirdly, reverent That preparation go before it.
As for the first, as Moses and Joshua put off their shoes before they came
near the Lord, so are we to remove out of our hearts unclean cogitations, and
affections, whereby we have trod in the filth of sin, before we pray; for
those are never lawful, but most unlawful in the time of prayer. As for
worldly cogitations they are sometimes lawful, but never in the time of
prayer. As Abraham used his Asses to serve him for the journey, but when he
came to mount Moriah, the place of the worship, he left them at the foot of the
hill: so the thoughts of the world are sometime tolerable, if we use them as
servants, to carry us through in our journey, from the earth to heaven, but we
must not take them with us into the holy place wherein the Lord is to be
worshipped.

To help us to the preparation before prayer, Motives to preparation.
let us consider; first that he to whom we speak is the Father of light, and
we are by nature but the children of darkness: call therefore upon him in the
sincerity and uprightness of thine heart; for he loves truth in the inward
affections. Secondly, he is the Father of glory, come therefore before him with
fear and reverence, for thou art but dust and ashes. Thirdly, he is the Father
of mercy, repent thee therefore of thy sins, and then draw near with a true
heart, in assurance of Faith.

The second thing requisite, is attention in Prayer: the Lord That there be
attention in prayer.
and therefore we should beware that we speak nothing to him with our mouth,
which our heart has not conceived. For it is a great mockery to the Lord to
desire him to consider those petitions which we have not considred our selves;
we scarcely hear what we say our selves, and how then shall we crave the Lord
may hear us? We find by experience that it is not an easy thing to gather
together in one, and keep united the powers of our soul in prayer unto God.
Satan knows that the gathering of our forces is the weakening of his
kingdom, and that then we are strongest, when we are most fervent in prayer,
and therefore does he labor all that he can to slack the earnestness of
our affection, and so to make us more remiss in prayer, by stealing into our
hearts if not a profane, at least an impertinent cogitation, so that unless
we fight without ceasing against the incursion of our enemy, like Abraham
d^iuing away the ravening birds from his Sacrifice, unless we expel them
speedely, as often as they come upon us, it is not possible that we can
intertaine conference with God by prayer.

That after prayer therebe thanksgiving to God.
after thy prayer thou should come away with reverent thanksgiving. It is the
fault of many careless worshippers, they go unto God as men go to a Well to
refresh them when they are thirsty; they go to it, and their face toward it,
but being refreshed they return with their back upon it: even so do they sit
down to their prayers without preparation, power them out without attention
and devotion, and when they have done, goes away without reverent thanksgiving:
whereas indeed every access to God by prayer, should kindle in our hearts a
new affection toward him, if we consider that when we pray, and gets any
access, so often we are confi^m^d in this, that he who has the keys of the
house of David, and opens and no man shuts, has opened to us an entrance to
the throne of grace, which shall never be closed again upon us: whereof their
should arise in our hearts a daily increase of joy, which should make us to
abound in thanksgiving.

Makes request for the Saints. The curse of Moab is upon profane men, they
pray and preuailes not.
We have further to learn that none are pertakers of the grace of Prayer, but
men sanctified in Christ Jesus: the Spirit requests for Saints, not for
profane and impenitent men, howsoever sometime they babble for themselves, yet
are their prayers turned into sin. The curse of Moab is upon them, they pray
and preuailes not. As without sanctification we cannot see God, so without
sanctification we cannot pray to God: every one that calls on the name of the
Lord, should depart from iniquity. Do we not feel it by experience, that the
further we go from our sins, the nearer access we get unto the Lord: and on
the contrary, does not the Lord protest against his people the Jews? Esaias. 1.
15.
albeit ye make many prayers yet I will not hear yo^, Ierem. 7. 9.
for your hands are full of blood. Will you steal, murder, and commit
adultrie, and come and stand before me in this house, where my name is called
upon, before your eyes? behold even I see it, and will for this cause cast you
out of my sight.

But here seeing it is for Saints only that the Spirit requests, Seeing the
spirit requests for Saints only, how shall we know that he requests for us who
are sinners?
what shall then become of me may the weak Christian say, who am the chief
of all sinners? To this I answer, that in us who are militant here upon earth
both of these are true; we are sinners, and we are Sai^ts, but in sundry
respects. If we say we have no sin we lie, and the truth of God is not in
us. 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
And if our adversary say that there is nothing in us but sin, he is also a
liar. That therefore we may know how these are to be reconciled, let us
consider that the Evangelist Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
he that is borne of God sins not: and in the same Epistle speaking also of
men that are regenerate and borne of God, he says, if we say we have no sin
we deceive our selves. The Apostle Saint Paul speaking of himself in one and
the self same place, affirms that he did the evil which he would not, Romans
7. 15. 17
and yet incontinent he protests that it was not he but sin dwelling in him.

The resolution of this doubt will arise by considering that in the Christian
man are two men, In the christian man are two men, the new and the old.
the new man, and the old; the one the workmanship of God, the other the
workmanship of Satan; the one but young, little and weak in respect of the
other, like little David compared to the Giant Goliath. Yet the new man who is
weakest has this vantage, that he is daily growing, whereas the other is daily
decaying; the life of the new man waxes stronger and stronger, the life of the
old man weaker and weaker, the one tending to perfection, the other wearing to
a final destruction.

Now the Lord in judging of the Christian looks not to the remanents of sin
in him, God judges of the Christian by the new man, and not by the old.
which are daily decaying, but to the new workmanship of his own grace in him,
which is daily growing; according to it he esteems, judges, and speaks of the
Christian: from it he gives us these names, as to call us Saints, righteous,
etc. not counting with us what we have been, neither yet weighing us by the
corruption of sinful nature which remains in us, but according to the new
grace which in our regeneration he has created in us, Number. 23. 21
He sees no iniquity in Israel, and it is his praise to pass by the
transgressions of his heritage. But the Christian by the contrary in judging of
himself, he looks most commonly to that whereunto the Lord looks least, his
sins are ever before him, the old man is continually in his sight, as a
strong, and mighty Giant, whose force he fears, whose tyranny makes him to
tremble, and by whom he finds himself detayned under miserable thraldom
far against his will, and therefore all his care is how to subdue this
tyranny, how to quench his life, and shake off his dominion in this warfare:
he sighs, complains, and cries unto God with the holy Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
O miserable man who shall deliver me from this body of sin. But because so
long as this old man has a life, he never rests to send out sinful motions
and actions, which do greatly greiue the child of God, therefore is it that
he esteems himself a miserable creature, yea, and the chief of all sinners.
Thus ye see how it is, that God accounts his children Saints, and they account
themselves Sinners.

Where again Saint John says, How it is to be understood that he who is borne
of God sins not.
that he who is borne of God sins not, and yet that he who says he has no
sin is a liar, both of these is true. He that is borne of God, that is, the
new man, sins not: for sure it is that all the sins which are committed by
man, are either done without the knowledge of the new man, his understanding
being as yet so weak that he does not know every sin to be sin, or then if
he knows them to be sins, they are done without his consent or approbation,
yea they are done sore against his will, so that the new man in the sins
which are done in the body is a patient not an agent.

So that as an honest man captiued by violence, The new man lives in the body
like Lot in Sodom:
and against his will compelled to behold wicked and abominable deeds, which
he would not so much as look to if he were free: so is the new man detayned
in the body as a captive, and compelled to look unto that which he loves not,
that is, to the sinful motions, unruly lusts and affections of his corrupt
nature, whereunto he consents not, but protests against them, and for their
sake becomes weary of soiourning in the body, so that Joseph was not more weary
of his prison, nor Jeremy of his dungeon, nor Daniel of the company of Lions,
Psalm. 120. 5.
nor David more weary of his dwelling in the tents of Kedar, than is the new
man weary of his abiding in the body. He is like Lot in Sodom, whose
righteous soul was vexed day by day, by hearing and seeing the unclean
conversation of the Sodomites: he is like Israel in Aegipt, kept in most vile
slavery by the tyranny of Pharaoh, sighing and crying: he is like the godly
Jews holden in captivity in Babell, many things they saw there done to the
dishonor of God, which they no way approved, and many things they would have
done, that they had no liberty to do. So this new man perceiues many
sinful motions and actions brought in upon him by a superior power, which
are a grief unto him, and vexation of his spirit.

And this is the greatest comfort of the new man, Rejoicing when he does good,
grieved when he does evil.
that whatsoever good he does, he does it with joy: and on the contrary, evil
that is done in the body it is a grief to him to see it, yea he protests
against it, O Lord this is not I, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7. 15.
thou know I like it not, I allow it not, I wish from my heart there were not
done in me any thing that might offend thee. Only happy, and thrice happy is
the man, who with the holy Apostle is able to say so. Thus ye see in what
sense the Godly are said by the Evangelist in one place not to sin, and in
another not to be without sin. The Lord work this holy disposition in us,
that the life of sin may daily be weakened in us.

According to God. (...) should not p^^sent petitio^s to God, which are not
according to his will.
We have last of all to mark here, that those petitions which flow from the
Spirit, are according to Gods will, and therefore as concerning temporal
things, because we know not absolutely what is the will of God, whether
health, or sickness, riches, or poverty be most expedient for us, we are to
pray with a condition, if it be his will^ but as for those things which are
directly against his will, it is a great mockery, if it be done with knowledge,
or otherwise a gross impiety to seek them from him. It is written of
Vitellius that one of his friends asking from him a certain thing which he
refused, and being impatient of the refusal, did say to him, What avails thy
friendship to me, if I cannot obtain that which I crave? returned back to his
friend this answer, And what avails to me thy friendship, if for thy sake I
must do that which becomes me not? If such equity be in a mortal man that
he will not grant an unlawful thing, even to his tender friend, how much
more are we to think that it is in the Lord our God: Away therefore with these
cursed and abominable sacrifices, as to present unto the Lord petitions which
are not agreeable unto his holy will.

And last to conclude this, A Christian has access to the privy chamber of
the great king ever when he pleases.
that we may be encouraged to prayer, let us consider what excellent
privilege this is, that the Christian as often as he pleases, has liberty to
speak unto the Lord his God. The Persians thought it a piece of their silly
glory not to grant access easily unto their subjects, yea, not to those of
most noble rank; therefore ye see how afraid Hester the Queen was to go in
unto the King unsent for. But the Lord our God King of Kings, proclaims unto
us free access, as often as we are disposed to call upon him, ready at all times
to extend the scepter of his peace toward those who seek him in spirit and
truth. Yea, though with David thou prevent the morning, and rise at midnight
to call upon him, thou shall find him, even then waiting upon thee, Inuenire
potes, praeuenire non potes, come when thou vvilt thou may find him, but
can not prevent him. Let us therefore use our liberty well, and see we
neglect not to begin in time our acquaintance with the Lord, by frequent
speaking unto him, if so be we look hereafter for ever to remain with him.

Verse 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best to them
who love God, even to them who are called according to his purpose.
NOw follows the Apostles third and last principal argument of comfort, The
third principal argument of comfort, is from the providence of God, working
all things to the good of his own.
taken from the providence of God, which so ouer-ruleth all things that fall
out in the world, that he causes them to work together, and that for the
best unto those who love him: and among the rest our afflictions are so far
from being prejudicial to our salvation, that by the providence of God, which
is the daily executer of his purpose, vvorking all things according to the
counsel of his will, they become means helping us forward to that end,
namely, conformity with Christ, whereunto God has appointed us. The comfort
is summarily set down in these words, All things work together for the best
to them who love God: the confirmation thereof is broken up in these words,
even to them who are called according to his purpose; and the explication is
subioyned in the two subsequent Ve^ses.

Also. Manifold blessings of God are upon the Godly.
That is, beside all the comfort which I have given you before, I give you yet
this further: not one but manifold are the comforts which the Lord has
discovered for his children in holy Scriptures. Psalm. 34. 19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them
all: that is, for every trouble the Lord has a several deliverance. 1 Cor.
10. 13
Every tentation (says the Apostle) has the own issue: every horn that
rises against us to push us, Zach. 1. 2^.
has an hammer attending upon it to repress it (says the Prophet.) Esau
mourned on Isaac, albeit he was profane, yet he cried pitifully, Have thou
but one blessing my Father? but we, with the holy Apostle may bless our
heavenly Father, who does so comfort us in all our tribulations, that as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolations abound through Christ.
The storehouse of his consolations can never be emptied.

The Lord our God has not dealt niggardly nor sparingly with us, If the first
fruits of our comfort be so sweet, what shall the full mass be?
but a good measure of consolation, pressed down and running over, has he
given us in our bosom, his holy name be praised therefore. And yet how little
is all this, which now we receive, in comparison of those inestimable joys
prepared for us, the like whereof the eye never saw, the ear never heard, the
heart did never understand? Surely the greatest measure of comfort we have in
this life, is but the earnest penny of that principal, which shall be given us
hereafter: if the first fruits of heavenly Canaan be so delectable, how shall
the full mass thereof abundantly content us, when we shall behold the face of
our God in righteousness, and shall be filled with his image, and with that
fullness of joy which is in his presence, and those pleasures which are at his
right hand for evermore?

We know. None but a Christian can know the mysteries of the Gospel.
If ye ponder the Apostles words, ye shall find that by an Emphasis he
restaines this knowledge to the Children of God, excluding worldlings and
naturalists from it: The spiritual man discerns all things, but he himself
is judged of no man. 1 Cor. 9. 11.
A natural man cannot understand the things that are of God. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The Gospel is wisdom indeed, but wisdom in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 5. 6.
and wisdom among them that are perfect. Every article of our Faith, and
point of Christian doctrine, every privilege of a Christian is a mystery: no
meruail therefore that the Gospel be foolishnes to the natural man who
perishes; the excellent things of christianity can be known of none, Pearls
which none know but they who have them.
but those who possess them: the value, or rather vanity of earthly Jewels
has been better known of some who never had them, than of others who have
enjoyed them: but the Jewels of God Children such as Peace, Righteousness, and
Joy in the holy Ghost, can be known of none, but of him who ^oth possess
them: the new Name none can know but he who has it, neither can any man know
the sweetness of hid Manna unless he taste it.

If you go, Worldlings speak of them like birds counterfaiting the voice of
man.
and speak to a Worldling of inward peace, and spiritual joy, or of the
privileges of a Christian, ye shall seem to him a Barbarian, or one that
speaks a strange language, which he does not understand: or if he himself
speak of them, as he has learned by hearing, or reading, yet shall he
speak like a Bird, uttering voices, which she understands not. As the brute
beast knows not the excellency of man's life, and therefore does delight it
self with Hay and Prouender, seeking no better, because it knows no better:
so the natural man knows not the excellency of a Christian, and therefore
does disdain him, and esteem him a fool, a mad man, and the off-scowring
of the world; he takes the doung of the earth in his arms for his
inheritance: if he can obtain the portion of Esau, that the fatness of the
earth may be his dwelling place; if his wheat, and his oil abound to him, he
cares for no more; he knows not what it is to have his soul made glad
with the light of the countenance of God. This is your miserable condition, O
ye wretched Worldlings, ye are cursed with the curse of the Serpent,
Worldlings cursed with the curse of the Serpent.
ye creep as it were, upon your bellyes, and ye lick the dust of the earth
all the days of your life, ye have not an eye to look up unto heaven, nor an
heart to seek those things which are above. Most fearful is our estate, we
warn you of it, but it is the Lord who must deliver you from it.

This resolute knowledge is the mother of spiritual courage, constancy, and
patience: for why shall he fear in the evil day, Sure knowledge of Christian
comfort is the mother of patience.
yea, though the earth should be removed, and the mountains fall into the
midst of the sea, who sees the Lord sitting on his throne, and the glassie
sea of the world before him, governing all the waltrings, changes, and events
of things therein, to the good of them who love him? Oh that we had prof^^ed
so much in the school of Christ all our days, that without doubting or making
any exception we could believe this which here the Apostle lays for a most
sure ground of comfort, that so we might change all our thoughts and cares into
one, namely, how to grow in the love of God: that in a good conscience we might
say to the Lord with Peter, Ioh. 21. 15.
Lord thou know I love thee: casting the burden of all the rest of our
fears, griefs, and tentations upon the Lord who cares for us, and has given
us this promise for praemunire, all comes for the best.

The Soldier with courage enters into the battle under hope to obtain the
victory; Other men hazards under hope, but the Christian runs as sure to
obtain.
the Mariner with boldn^sse commits himself to the stormy seas under hope of
vantage; and every man hazards in his calling, yet are they all uncertain
venturers, and knows not the end: but the Christian runs not as uncertain,
but as one sure to obtain the Crown; Romans 16. 20
for he knows that the God of peace shall shortly t^ead Satan under his
feet. What then? shall not he with courage enter into the battle, wherein he
is made sure of the victory before he fight, knowing that all the warriors of
Christ shall be more than conquerours through him? if we will only stand still
we shall see the salvation of the Lord. Gideon with his three hundred fought
against the great host of Midian without fear, 2 Chronicles. 20. 17
because he was sure of victory. David made have and ran to encounter with
Goliath, because he was persuaded that God would deliver him into his hands.
The Israelits were not afraid to enter into the River of Iordane, because they
saw the Ark of God before them dividing the waters. And shall only the
Christian stand astonished in his tentations, notwithstanding that the word of
God goes before him to resolve him that whatsoever falls out, shall come for
the best to him? The Lord increase us and make us to abound more and more in
the love of our GOD; for perfect love casts out fear: the Lord strengthen our
faith, that through these mistie clouds of affliction which now compass us,
we may see that comfortable end which God in his word has discovered unto us.

And to this effect we must beware of the subtle slights of Satan, One of
Satan's slights is to cause us to judge of the works of God by their beginnings.
who to the end that he may spoil us of this comfort in trouble, endeauours by
all means either to quench the light of God utterly in our minds, or at least
to darken and obscure it by precipitation of our unbelieving hearts: carrying
us headlong to judge of the works of God by their beginnings, and to measure
our selves in trouble by our present estate and condition, not suffering us to
tarry while we see the end: What inconveniences arise from this precipitation.
whereof it comes to pass that our hearts being tossed too and fro with
restless per^urbations, like trees of the forest shaken with the wind, we
hasten in our necessities to be our own prouisors, in our dangers we will be
our own deliuerers, and every way we become the caruers of our own
condition. We have so much the more need to beware of this precipitation,
because the dearest servants of God have fallen through it into fearful
sins against the Lord: As we may see in David, who being in extreme danger
in the Wilderness of Maon, said in his fear that all men were liars. Is not
this a great blasphemy, to say that the promises which the Lord made to him by
Samuel were but lies? and in his other extremities he is not ashamed to
confess that he thought that God had forgot to be merciful, Psalm. 39. 9.
and had shut up his tender mercy in displeasure: but when he saw the end, then
he was compelled to accuse himself, Psa. 116. 10
and give glory unto God. I should have been dumb, and not opened my mouth,
because thou did it: and again I said in my fear all men are liars, for
notwithstanding all Samuels promises, I looked for nothing but death, but now
considering the deliverance, Psa. 116. 13.
I must say precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints.
Seeing this precipitation made David to stumble and fall, He that will judge of
Lazarus on the dunghill, shall think him more miserable than the rich Glutton.
may we not fear least it carry us to the like inconvenience unless we
learn to beware of it in time? let us not therefore judge of the works of God
before they be ended. If we should look to Lazarus on the doung-hill, full of
byles and sores, having no comfort but from the dogs, and compare him with the
rich Glutton clothed in purple, and fairing daintely every day, what can we
judge but that Lazarus is the most miserable of the two? yet if we tarry till
the Lord have ended his work, and Lazarus be conuayed to Abraham's bosom, and
the rich Glutton be gone to his place, then shall the truth appear manifestly,
All things work together for the best to them that love God. Let us therefore
learn to measure the event of things, not by their present condition, But we
shall best judge of the works of God, if we tarry till they be ended.
but by the prediction of Gods word; let us cleave to his promise, and wait on
the vision, which has his own time appointed, it shall speak at the last and
shall not lie, though it tarry, let us wait for it, it shall surely come and
not stay: let us go into the Sanctuary of God and consider the end, Esaias 48.
22.
there shall we learn that, There is no peace to the wicked, howsoever they
flourish for a time and that it cannot be but well with them who love the Lord:
Psalm. 37. 37.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, the end of that man is peace, but
the transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall
be cut off. Thus both in the troubles of the Godly, and prosperity of the
wicked, we should suspend our judgment, till we see the end.

All things work together. Gods wonderful wisdom in causing things of so
contrary qualities to agree to do one work.
Mark the singular privilege of the Christian, not only afflictions, but all
other things whatsoever work for the best unto him, and not only so, but they
work together. Many working instruments are there in the world, whose couse is
not one, they communicate not counsels; yea, their intentions oftentimes are
contrary, yet the Lord brings all their works unto this one end, the good of
those who love him: where ever they be in regard of place; what ever in regard
of persons; yea, howsoever disagreeing among themselves, yet are they so ruled
by the provident power of the supreme governor, our heavenly Father, that all
of them works together unto the good of them that love him. God has rested
from the work of creation, not of gubernation.
For albeit the Lord rested the seventh day from the works of creation, so
that he made no new kind of creature after that day, yet did he not rest
from the works of providence or gubernation: whereof our Savior says, Ioh.
5. 17.
my Father works hitherto and I work. When man has finished a work he
resignes it to another to be governed: as the Wright when he has builded a
ship gives it over to the Mariner to rule it; neither is man able to preserve
the work of his hands, neither yet knows he what shall be the end thereof:
It is not so with the Lord: as by the work of creation he brought them out,
so by his provident administration he preserues them, and rules even the
smallest creatures, directing them unto such ends as he has ordained them for
in the counsel of his will.

How ever some Ethnicks have been so blind, His providence extends to the
smallest things.
as to think that God did neglect the smaller things upon earth, scilicet is
superis labor est: and Epicures also whose false conceptions of the divine
providence are rehearsed by Eliphaz. Job. 22. 13. 14.
How should God know? how should he judge through the dark cloud? the clouds
hide him that he cannot see, and he walks in the circle of heaven: yet it is
certain he rules not a part only but all; Psalm. 113.
he is not as they thought of him, a God only above the Moon: No, though he
dwell on high yet he abases himself to behold the things that are on earth;
he is not only a God in the mountains, 1 King. 20.
as the Syrians deemed, but a God in the valleys also. There is nothing so
great, nothing so small, but it falls under his providence, yea he numbers
our hayres, and keeps them, not one of them can fall to the ground without his
providence. Si sic custodiuntur superflua tua, Augustine.
in quanta securitate est anima tua? if he so keep thy superfluities, how
much more will he keep thy soul?

Let it therefore content us in the most confused estate of things we can see
fall out in the world, In greatest confusion of things, let us keep our
comfort, the end of them shall be our good.
that the Lord has said, All things shall work for the best unto us. Let us
not question with Marie, how can this be? nor doubt with Sarah, how can I
conceive? nor with Moses, where shall flesh be gotten for all this multitude?
but let us says Augustine consider the author, and such doubts shall cease. As
he has manifested his power and wisdom in the tempering of this world,
making Elements of so contrary qualities agree together in one most pleasant
harmony, so does it appear much more in governing all the contrary courses of
men to the good of his own children. One notable example whereof we will set
down for all. Genesis 37. etc.
Jacob sends Joseph to Dothan to visit his brethren, his brethren casts him
into the pit, Reuben releeues him, the Midianites buys him, and sels him to
Potiphar, his Mistress accuses him, his Master condemns him, the Butler
after long forgetfulness recommends him, Pharaoh exaltes him. O what
instruments are here, and how many hands about this one poor man of God? never
a one of them looking to that end which God had proposed unto him; yet the Lord
contrary to their intention makes them all work together for Joseph's
advancement in Aegipt.

But now to the particulars. The end of all the ways of God, is our good.
There is nothing in the world which works not for our weal: all the works
of God, all the stratagems of Satan, all the imaginations of men, are for the
good of Gods children; yea, out of the most poysonable things, such as sin
and death, does the Lord draw wholesome and medicinable preservatives unto them
who love him. All the ways of the Lord (says David) are merry and truth:
Psalm. 25. 10.
mark what he says, and make not thou an exception where God has made
none, All, none excepted: therefore be thou strengthened in the Faith, and give
glory unto God, resolving with patient Job, albeit the Lord would slay me, Job.
13. 15.
yet will I trust in him.

Sometime the Lord seems to walk in the way of anger against his children,
Yea even when he seems to be most angry with his children he is working their
good.
which has moved many of them to pour out the like of these pitiful
complaints, the arrows of the almighty are upon me, (said Job) the venime
whereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against me,
thou set me up as a mark against thee, and makes me a burden to my self.
Job. 6. 4.
Thy indignation lies upon me (said David) yea from my youth I have suffered
thy terrors doubting of my life. Isa. 38. 17. 13. 14
For felicity I have had bitter grief (said Ezekiah) for the Lord like a Lion
brake all my bones, so that I did chatter like a Swallow, and mourn like a
Dove. I am troubled on every side (said the Apostle) having fightings without
and terrors within. 2 Cor. 7. 5.
Yet in all this dealing the Lord has a secret way of mercy, in the which he
walks for the comfort of his children: it is but to draw us unto him, that he
shows himself to be angry with us, Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 14
aduersatur tibi deus ad tempus, vt te secum habeat in perpetuum, the Lord is
an adversary to thee for a while, that he may for ever reconcile thee to
himself. And this albe^t for the present we cannot perceive, and can see no
other but that the Lord has taken us for his enemies, yet in the end we shall
be compelled to acknowledge and confess with David, it was good for me O Lord
that ever thou correctedst me, for the Lord is mernailous in his saints: Romans
11. 13
O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out? His glory is
great when he works by means, his glory appears greater when he works
without means, but then his glory shines most brightly when he works by
contraries.

It was a great work that he opened the eyes of the blind man, For the
working of God with his children is by contraries.
but greater that he did it by application of spittle and clay, means meeter
to put out the eyes of a seeing man than to restore sight to a blind man. So
he wrought in the first creation, causing light to shine out of darkness; so
also in the work of redemption, for by cursed death he brought happy life, by
the cross he conquered the crown, and through shame he went to glory. And
this same order the Lord still keeps in the work of our second creation,
which is our regeneration, he casts down, that he may raise up; he kills and
he makes alive, he accuses his children for sin, that so he may chase
them to seek remission of sinness; he troubles their consciences that so he
may pacify them. And in a word, the means which he uses, are contrary to
the work it self, which he intends to perform in his Children. He sent a
fearful darkness on Abraham even then when he was to communicate unto him
most joyful light; he wrestled with Jacob and shook him too and ^ro, even then
when he came to bless him; he struck the Apostle Paul with blindness at
that same time, when he came to open his eyes; he frowns for a while upon
his beloved, as Joseph did upon his brethren, but in the end with loving
affection shall he embrace them; he may seem angry at thy prayers, as he
put back the petitions of that woman of Canaan, but at length he will grant
a favorable answer unto them. Let us not therefore murmr against the Lord,
by whatsoever means it please him to work: It is enough we know that all the
ways of God, even when he deals most hardly with his children, are mercy,
and tends to the good of those who love him.

And as for Satan's stratagems, Satan's stratagems are directed to the good of
the godly.
it is also out of doubt, that they work for the best to them who love the
Lord, not according to his purpose indeed, but by the Lords operation, who
directs all Satan's assaults to another end then he intended, and trappeth
him continually in his own snare. If under the Serpents shape he deceived
Adam, under the Serpents name shall the Lord curse him, and all those weapons
whereby he seeks to destroy the work of Gods grace in us, does the Lord
turn to destroy the workmanship of Satan in us: I mean that whole bastard
generation of perverse affections, which Satan has begotten upon our mutable
nature, Ambr. lib. 1. de paeni. ca. 13
by a most unhappy and unlawful copulation. De veneno eius fit spirituale
antidotum: of this poison the Lord makes a spiritual preservative.

The experience of all the Saints of God proves this, Satan's accusations for
sins past are unto the godly preservatives against sin to come.
that Satan by his restless tentations does destroy himself: which is most
evident both in his tentations for sin committed, tending to desperation, as
also in his tentations unto sin, tending to presumption. Every accusation of
the conscience for sin past, is unto the Godly man a preservative to keep
him from sin in time to come, he reasoning with himself after this manner:
If mine enemy do so disquiet my mind with inward terror, for those sins
which foolishly I did by his entisement, why shall I hearken to him any more,
and so increase the matter of my trouble? for what fruit have I of all those
sins which I did by his instigation, but terror and shame? and shall I look
that this forbidden tree can render unto me any better fruit hereafter? O what
a faithless traitor is Satan, he entiseth man unto sin, and when he has
done it, he is the first accuser and troubler of man for sin. When he comes
first unto us he is a tempter; when we have finished his work (which is
sin) he is an accuser of us unto the Judge; and when he returns, he
returns a troubler and tormenter of us, for those same sins which he
counseled us to do. Stop thine ear therefore O my soul, from the voice of
this deceitful enchanter.

His tentations again unto sin, And his tentations to sin chases them to
the throne of grace.
are unto the Godly man prouocations that spur him forward unto the throne of
grace: for while as we find his restless malice pursuing in us that little
spark of spiritual life, whereby the Lord has quickened us, and our own
weakness and inabilitie to resist him, then are we forced with Israel in
Egypt, to sigh for the thraldom, 2 Chronicles. 20. 13
and to cry with Iehoshaphat, O Lord our God, we know not what to doc, but our
eyes are toward thee. And who feels not this, that the grace of fervent
prayer, wherein otherwise we faint, our heart being more ready to fall down
than the hands of Moses, unless they be supported, is greatly intended in the
Children of God by the buffets of Satan as is manifest in the holy Apostle.
Magna certe potestas, Ambr. ibid.
quae imperat Diabolo, vt se ipse destruat, a great power of God this is
certainly, which commands Satan to destroy himself; Se enim destruit cum
hominem, quem tentando supplantare studet, ex infirmo fortiorem efficit, for
then does he destroy himself, when the man whom he seeks to overthrow by
his tentation, of a weak man is made stronger, by those same means. Thus the
Lord our God over shootes Satan in his own bow, and cuts off the head of
Goliath with his own sword: his holy name be praised therefore.

Now as concerning outward afflictions, As the Philistims understood not
Samsons riddle, how sweet came out of the sour, so cannot worldlings that
comfort is in the cross.
it is true that as the Philistims could not understand Sampsons riddle, how
sweet came out of the sour, and meat out of the eater, so cannot Worldlings
understand, that tribulation brings out patience, and that our light and
momentanie afflictions cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight
of glory: but the Children of God have learned by experience, that albeit no
visitation be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit
of righteousness unto them who are thereby exercised, Judge. 14. 14.
and that there is more solid joy in suffering rebuke with Christ, Romans 5. 3.
than in all the pleasures of sin, which endure but a season. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
As Moses the typycall Mediator of the old Testament made by his prayer the
bitter waters of Marah become sweet, Heb. 12. 11.
so Jesus the true Mediator by his passion, has mittigated to his children the
bitterness of the cross, yea, has made it profitable unto them.

The prodigal son concluded not to return home to his Father till he was
brought low by affliction. Afflictions profitable to the children of God
Hagar was proud in the house of Abraham, but humble in the wilderness: Jonas
sleeps in the ship, but watches and prays in the Whales belly: Manasses
lived in Jerusalem as a libertine, but bound in chains in Babell, he turns
his heart unto the Lord his God. Corporal diseases forced many in the Gospel
to come to Christ, where others enjoying bodily health would not acknowledge
him. The earth which is not tilled and broken up, bears nothing but thorns
and briars; the Vines wax wild in time, unless they be pruned and cut: so
would our wild hearts ouergrow with the noisome weeds of unruly affections,
if the Lord by sanctified trouble did not continually manure them. Lam. 3. 27.
It is good therefore (said Jeremy) for a man to bear the yoke in his youth:
Psalm. 119. 71
and David confesses, it was good for him that he was afflicted: Ioh. 15. 2.
yea our Savior says, every branch that bears fruit, my heavenly Father
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

No work can be made of gold and silver without fire, The wicked putrify and
rots in their prosperity.
stones are not meet for palace work unless they be pollished and squared by
hammering, no more is it possible that we can be vessels of honor in the house
of our God, except first we be fined and melted in the fire of affliction:
neither can we be as living stones to be placed in the wall of heavenly
Jerusalem, except the hand of God first beat from us our proud lumps, by the
hammer of affliction. As standing waters putrify and rot, so the wicked fears
not God because they have no changes: Iere. 48. 11.
and Moab keeps his sent because he was not powered from vessel to vessel,
but has been at rest ever since his youth. And therefore O Lord rather than
that we should keep the sent of our old natural corruption, and live in a
careless security without the fear of thine holy name, and so become sit fasts
in our sins, no, rather O Lord change thou us from estate to estate, waken us
with the touch of thine hand, purge us with thy fire, and chastise us with thy
rods, always Lord with this protestation that thou keep toward us that
promise made to the sons of David, 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15.
I will visit them with my rods if they sin against me, but my mercy will I
never take from them: So be it, O Lord, even So be it.

The same comfort have we also against death, Death works also the good of
Gods children.
that now in Jesus Christ it is not a punishment of our sins, but a full
accomplishment of the mortification of our sin, both in soul and body: for
by it both the fountain and the flux of sin are dried up, all the conduits
of sin are stopped, and the weapons of unrighteousness broken. And though
our bodies seem to be consumed and turned into nothing, yet are they but sown
like graynes of Wheat in the field and husbandry of the Lord, which must dye
before they be quickened, but in the day of Christ shall spring up again most
glorious. And as for our souls, they are by death relieved out of this honse
of servitude, that they may return unto him who gave them: therefore have I
compared death to the red sea, Death compared to the red Sea: Egiptians drown
in it.
wherein Pharaoh and his Aegiptians were drowned, and sancke like a stone to
the bottom, but the Israelits of God went through to their promised Canaan: so
shall death be unto you O miserable infidels, whose eyes the God of this world
has blinded, that no more then blinded Aegiptians can ye see the light of God
shining in Goshen, which is his Church, though ye be in it; to you I say your
death shall be the very center of all your miseries, a sea of the vengeance of
God, wherein ye shall be drowned, and shall sincke with your sins heavier
than a millstone about the neck of our souls to press you down to the lowest
hell.

But as for you who are the Israelits of God, But the Israelits of God shall
go through it.
ye shall walk through the valley of death and not need to be afraid, because
the Lord is with you, his staff and his rod shall comfort you: albeit the
guiltiness of forepassed sins, yet remaining in the memory, the terror of
hell, and horror of the grave stand up on every side like mountains
threatening to ouerwhelme you, yet shall ye go safely through to the land of
your inheritance, where with Moses and Miriam and all the children of God, even
the congregation of the first borne, How the enemies of Gods children against
their will procures their good.
ye shall sing praises joyfully to the God of your salvation.

Now in the last room, concerning the imaginations of men against us, we
shall have cause to say of them in the end, as Joseph said to his brethren, ye
did it unto me for evil, but the Lord turned it to good. Genesis 50. 20.
The whole history of Gods book is a cloud of manifold witnesses concurring
together to confirm his truth, therefore among many we will be content with
one. When David was going forward in battle against Israel, 1 Samuel 29.
with Acish King of Gath, under whom he soiourned a while in the time of his
banishment, the remanent Princes of the Philistims commanded him to go back,
and this they did for the worst to disgrace him, because they distrusted him,
but the Lord turned it unto him for the best: for if he had come forward he
had been guilty of the blood of Israel, specially of Saul the Lords
anointed, who was slain in that battle: from this the provident mercy of God
does in such sort deliver him that no offense is done by David to Saul, or his
people, because David came not against them, neither yet could the Philistims
blame him, because he went back by their own command. So a notable benefit
David did receive by that same deed wherein his enemies thought they had done
him a notable shame.

And where otherwise it pleases the Lord to suffer wicked men to lay hand on
the bodies of his children, Death of the body to a Christian is but as the
renting of Joseph's garment from him.
yet all they are able to do is but like the renting of Joseph's garment from
him. As he does sustain small loss whose garment is cut if his body be
preserved: so the Christian when his body is wounded unto the death, yet has
he lost nothing which he strives to keep, for he knows it is but a
corruptible garment, which would decay in it self, albeit there were no man to
rent it. Chrysostom.
Non sunt itaque timenda spiritui, quae fiunt in carne, quae extra nos est
quasi vestamentum: let not therefore our soul be afraid for those things which
are done to our bodies, for it is without us as a garment that does but cover
us. Thus have we seen how that their is nothing so evil in ^ self which by
the provident vvorking of God is not turned to the good of his children.

Whereof arises yet unto us this further comfort, that seeing it is the
privilege of every one who loves the Lord, it must much more be the privilege
of the whole Church, that promise made to the Father of the faithful, Since to
every Christian all things work for the best, much more are we to think that
this is the privilege of the whole Church.
I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, we may
easily think belongs also to all his seed, even to that congregation of the
first borne. The Lord will be a wall of fire round about Jerusalem, and the
glory in the midst of her, he will keep her as the apple of his eye, and
make Jerusalem a cup of poison to all her enemies, and a heavy stone, which
whosoever strives to lift shall be torn therewith, Genesis 12. 3.
though all the people of the earth were gathered together against it, the
weapons made against her shall not prosper, and every tongue that shall rise
against her in judgment shall be condemned. This is the heritage of the Lords
servants, and the portion of them that love him: for the Church is that Arc
which mounts up higher, as the water increases, but cannot be overwhelmed: the
bush which may burn, but cannot be consumed: the house built on a rock, which
may be beaten with wind and rain, but cannot be overthrown.

The Lord who changes times and seasons, A warning for Kings and such as are
in authority.
who takes away Kings, and sets up Kings, has reproved Kings for his Churches
sake, yea, he gouernes all he kingdoms of the earth in such sort, that their
fallings and risings, their changes and mutations are all directed to the good
of his Church. In one of these two sentences all the Judges of the world may
see themselves, and foresee their end, for either that shall be fulfilled in
them, which M^rdecay said to Ester, who knows if for this thou art come to the
kingdom, Hester. 4. 14.
that by thee deliverance may come to Gods people? or else that which Moses in
Gods name said to Pharaoh, the oppressor of the Church in her adolescencie,
Exodus 7.
I have set thee up to declare my power, because thou exaltest thy self
against my people.

May we not behold here how unsure their standing is, They who rise to
authority and not to the good of the Church shall assuredly fall.
and how certain their fall, who when they are highest, abuse their power
most, to hold the people of God lowest; what else are they but objects whom the
Lord has raised up to declare his power and justice upon them? If we shall
mark the course of the Lords proceeding, ever since the beginning of the world,
we shall find a blessing following them whom he has made instruments of good
unto his Church, and that such again have not wanted their own recompense of
wrath, who have continued instruments of her trouble.

When the Lord concluded to bring his Church from Canaan to soiourne in Egypt,
Examples ^^ewing how God has altered the state of worldly Empires for the good
of his Church.
he sent such a famine in Canaan as compelled them to forsake it, but made
plenty in Egypt by the hand of Joseph, whom the Lord had sent before as a
prouisor for his Church, and by whom Pharaoh was made favorable to Jacob: but
when the time came, that the Lord was to translate his Church from Egypt to
Canaan, then he altered Pharaohs countenance, and raised up a new King who
knew not Joseph, he turned the Egyptians hearts away from Israel, so that
they vexed Israel, and made them to serve by cruelty. In Pharaoh king of
Egypt.
Thus when the Lord will bring them to Egypt he makes Pharaoh favorable,
which also brings a blessing upon Pharaoh, and his people; but when the Lord
will have them to go out of Egypt, he makes another Pharaoh an enemy unto
them, whereby both they are made willing to forsake Egypt, and Pharaoh prepares
the way for a fearful judgment on himself and his people.

Again, In the Monarch of Babell and Persia.
when the sins of Israel came to that ripenes, that their time was come, and
their day drew near, the Lord stirred up the King of Babell, as the rod of his
wrath, and staff of his indignation: He sent him to the dissembling nation,
and gave him a charge against the people of his wrath, to take the spayle and
the pray, and to tread them under feet like mire in the streets, and to this
effect, that the Lord might be avenged of the sins of Israel, he subdued all
the kingdoms round about them under the King of Babell, that no stop nor
impediment should be in the way to hold back the rod of Ashur from Israel.
But yet again when the Lord had accomplished all his work upon Israel, and
the time of mercy was come, and the seauentie years of captivity expired,
then the Lord visited the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and for his
Churches sake he altered again the government of the whole earth, translating
the Empire to the Medes and Persians, that so Cyrus the Lords anointed might
perform to his people the promised deliverance.

All which should learn us in the greatest changes and alterations that fall
out in the world, Therefore in our greatest mutations our heart should not be
moved from confidence in God.
to rest assured that the Lord will work for the good of his Church: though
the earth should be moved and the mountains fall into the midst of the sea,
yea, though the waters thereof rage, and be troubled, yet there is a river,
whose streams shall make glad the city of our God in the midst of it; yea,
if they who should be the nourishng Fathers of the Church, forsake her, and
become her enemies, they shall assuredly perish, but comfort and deliverance
shall appear unto Gods people out of another place. The Lord for a while may
put the bridle of bondage in the Philistims hand, to humble Israel for their
sins, but it shall be taken from them, at length his Church shall with joy
draw water out of the Well of salvation, and praise the Lord, saying: though
thou were angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest me,
yea Sion shall cry out, and shout for joy, for great is the holy One of Israel
in the midst of her. And therefore in our lowest humiliations let us answer
our enemies: Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, Job. 19.
though I fall I shall rise, when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord is a
light unto me. I will bear the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me, he will
bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness: then he that
is mine enemy shall look upon it, and shame shall cover him who said to me,
where is the Lord thy God? now shall he be trodden under as the mire in the
streets? yea, so let all thine enemies perish, O Lord.

For the best. What is a christians best.
This good or best, is no other thing, but that precious salvation prepared to
be showed in the last time, reserved in the heavens for us, and whereunto we
are reserved by the power of God through Faith. Of this it is evident that our
best is not yet wrought, it is only in the vvorking, and therefore we are
not to look for it in this life.

There is a great difference in this, A wicked man is at his best when he is
first borne, for the longer he lives the more sins he multiplyes.
between the Godly and the wicked: the one enioyes their best in this life,
the other not so, but looks for it. If if should be demanded when a wicked
man is at his best, I would answer his best is evil enough, but then is be
at his best, when he comes first into the world, for then his sins are
fewest, his judgment easiest: it had been good for him that the knees had not
prevented him, but that he had dyed in the birth. For as a river which is
smallest at the beginning, increases as it proceeds, by the accession of other
waters unto it: so the wicked the longer he lives, Ierem. 9. 3
waxes worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, proceeding from evil to
worse, till at length he be swallowed up in that lake that burns with fire
and brimstone.

And this the Apostle expresses most significantly, A man continuing in sin
compared to one gathering a treasure.
when he compa^es the wicked man unto one gathering a treasure, wherein he
heapeth up wrath unto himself against the day of wrath: for even as the
worldling, who every day casts a piece of money into his treasure, in few
years multiplyes such a sum, that he himself is not able to keep in mind
the particulars thereof; but when he breaks up his box, he finds in it
sundry sorts of coin, which were quite out of his remembrance: Even so it is,
and worse with thee, O impenitent man, who not only every day, but every hour
and moment of the day do multiply thy transgressions, and defile thy
conscience, by hoording up into it some dead work or other, to what a
reckoning think thou, shall thy sins amount in the end? though thou do
forget them, as thou committest them, yet the Apostle tells thee that thou have
laid them up in a treasury.

Yea not only have thou laid up in store thy sins, With every new sin he
gathers a new portion of wrath.
but with every sin have gathered a portion of wrath proportionable to thy
sin, which thou shall know in that day wherein the Lord shall break up thy
treasure, and open the book of thy conscience, and set thy sins in order
before thee, then shall thine own wickedness correct thee, and thy turning
back shall reprove thee, then shall thou know and beh^ld that it is an evil
thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Thou shall be
astonished to see such a multitude of witnesses standing up against thee, those
sins which thou have cast behind thy back, thou shall see them set in the
light of the countenance of God: woe then shall be unto thee, for the Lord then
shall turn thine own ways upon thi^e head, the Lord shall give thee to
drink of that cup which thou have filled with thine own hand, when thou
shall have accomplished the measure of thine iniquity, and he shall double
his stripes upon thee according to the number of thy transgressions.

But as for the children of God if ye do ask, A Christians best begins in
the day of his conversion
when they are at the best: I answer, praised be God, our worst is gone, our
good is begun, our best is at hand. As our Savior said to his kinsmen, so
may we say to the worldlings, Ioh. 6. 3.
your time is always, but my time is not yet come. We were at the worst
immediately before our conversion, for our whole life till then was a walking
with the children of disobedience in the broad way that leads to perdition,
then we were at the worst, when we had proceeded furthest in the way of
unrighteousness, for then we were furthest from God. Our best began in the day
of our recalling, wherein the Lord by his word and holy spirit called upon us,
and made us change our course, turning our backs upon Satan, and our faces
toward the Lord, and so caused us to part company with the children of
disobedience, that where they went on in their sins to judgment, we came
home with the penitent forlorn unto our fathers family. That was a a happy
day of division between us and our sins; in that day with Israel we entered
into the borders of Canaan to Gilgall; The day of our conversion was a day of
diu^si^ between us and our old sins which we should not forget.
there were we circumsised, and the shame of Egypt taken from us, even our
sin, which is our shame indeed, and which we brought with us even from our
mothers womb. The Lord grant that we may keep it in thankful remembrance,
and that we may count it a double shame to return again to the bondage of
Egypt, to serve any more that Prince of darkness in brick and clay, that is,
to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkn^sse, but that like the
redeemed of the Lord we may walk from strength to strength, till we appear
before the face of our God in Sion.

Always this difference of estates between the godly and wicked, Seeing our
best is not in this life, let us possess our ^oules in patience.
should learn us patience, let us not seek that in the earth, which our
gracious father in his most wise dispensation has reserved for us in heaven,
Let us not be like the foolish Jews who loved the place of their banishment in
Babell, better than their home. Now our life is hid with God in Christ, and we
know not yet what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear we shall be
like him, the Lord shall carry us by his mercy, and bring us by his strength
into his holy habitation; he shall plant us in the mountain of his
inheritance, even the place which he has prepared, and sanctuary which he has
established, then everlasting joy shall be upon our head, and sorrow and
mourning shall fly from us for ever. And now till the Lord have accomplished
his work in us, let us not faint because the wicked floorish: how ever they
prosper they are to be pitied more than envied; let them eat, and drink,
and be merry, sure it is they will never see a better life, then that which
presently they enjoy, they have received their consolation in this life, and
have gotten their portion in this present world.

Surely, How they are to be pitied who rejoice in things present, as in their
best things.
no tongue can express their misery: and yet as Samuel mourned for Saul when
God rejected him, and Jeremy wept in secret for the pride of his people, that
would not repent of their sins: how can we but take up a bitter lamentation
for many of you, whom in this time of grace we see to be strangers from grace?
we wish from our hearts ye were not like the kinsemen of Lot, they thought he
had but mocked, when he told them of an iminent judgment, and therefore for
no request would go out of Sodom, but tarryed till the fire of the Lords
indignation did consume them: but that rather as Sarah followed Abraham from
Caldee to Canaan, so ye would take us by the hand, and go with us from hell
to heaven: but alas, the lusts of the flesh hold you captive, or then the love
of the world does bewitch you; but all of them in the end shall deceive you:
for all the labor under the Sun is but vanity and vexation of Spirit, when
you have finished your task, you shall be less content than you were at the
beginning; you shall be as one wakened out of a dream, who in his sleep
thought he was possessor of great riches, but when he awaketh behold he
has nothing: or not unlike that rich man who said in his security, Now my
Soul thou have much goods for many years, Luke. 12. 19.
and even upon the next day redacted to such extreme necessity with that
other who despised Lazarus, that he had not so much as a drop of cold water to
cool his tongue withal: then shall you lament and say, Wisd. 5. 7.
We have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity, and it did not profit us.

Alas, Miserable worldlings who take more pains to get and keep any thing than
Jesus Christ.
how shall I learn you to be wise? Is not this a pitiful blindness? the
Lord when he created man, made him Lord above all his creatures, and now
unthankful man sets every creature in his heart above the Lord. O fearful
ingratitude, Do you so reward the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? There is
nothing which ye conceit to be good, but when ye want it you are careful to
seek it, when you have it, you are careful to keep it; only you are
careless of the Lord Jesus, though he be that incomparable jewel, which
brings light in darkness, life in death, comfort in trouble, and mercy
against all judgment: ye should set him as a signet on your heart, as an
ornament on your head, and put him on as that glorious attire which gets you
place to stand before God. But what pains do ye take to seek him? what
assurance have ye that ye are in him? or what mourning do ye make, for
that ye do not possess him? can you say in truth, that the tenth part of
your thoughts or words have been bestowed upon him? No, no, it is the shame of
many that they have taken more pains to keep a signet on their hand, than
ever they did to keep Jesus in their heart; they wander after vanity and
follow lies, they forsake the fountain of living waters. Oh consider this ye
that forget God, Psalm. 50. 22.
least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

The last lesson we observe in this part of the Verse is this: How all things
work for the worst to the wicked.
as all things works for the best to them who love the Lord, so all things
works for the vvorst unto the wicked; there is nothing so clean which they
defile not, nothing so excellent which they abuse not. Make Saul a King, and
Balaam a Prophet, and Judas an Apostle, their preferment shall be their
destruction: if they be in prosperity they contemn God, and their prosperity
becomes their ruin: if they be in adversity they blaspheme him, and like
raging waves of the sea cast out their own dirt to their shame; yea what
speak I of these things? even their table shall be as^are unto them, Jesus
Christ is a rock of offense unto them, the Gospel the savor of death unto
them, and their prayer is turned into sin; and what more excellent things
then these? As a foul stomach turns most healthful food into corruption: so
their polluted conscience turns judgment into gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into wormwood. And all this should provoke us to a holy care to
become good our selves, or else there is nothing were it never so good can be
profitable to us.

To them that love God. The persons to whom the former comfort belongs are
described to be such as love God, and are called by him.
We have heard the Apostles last argument of comfort, which is that the Lord so
rules all things by his providence, that those things which seems to be
against his children, are made to work together for the advancement of their
good. Deus enim adeo bonus est vt nihil mali esse sineret, nisi etiam adeo
esset potens, vt ex quolibet malo possit elicere bonum, for God is so good that
he would suffer no evil to be, were it not he is also so powerful that of
every evil, he is able to draw out good. Now we proceed to the persons to
whom this comfort belongs: who are first described to be such as love God:
secondly, as are called according to his purpose. Three things inseperably
knit, 1. Gods purpose concerning us, 2. his calling of us, 3. our love toward
him.
Here are three things conjoined together, every one depending on another.
First, the purpose of God, which is no other thing but his eternal and
immutable decree concerning our salvation. Secondly, our calling, flowing from
this purpose. Thirdly, a love of God, wrought in our hearts by this effectual
calling. These three are so inseperably conjoined together that from the lowest
of these we may go up to the highest: of that vn^ayned love of God which is in
thee, thou may know that he loved thee, and in his unchangeable purpose has
ordained thee to life. This is the greatest comfort that can be given to men
upon earth, to let them see that or ever the Lord laid the foundations of the
earth, he first laid the foundation of thy salvation in his own immutable
purpose, which being secret in it self and obscured from us, is now manifested
unto us by our effectual calling. But of this we will speak more God willing
hereafter.

The love of God then is set down here as a principal effect and token of our
calling: None can love God but such as he has chosen and called.
As the Lord calls none effectually but those whom he has elected: so none
ca^ love him but those who are effectually called by him; yea thou thy self
who now loves the Lord, before thy calling louedst him nod, thy heart went a
whooring from God, and thou preferredst every Creature before him, and for the
smallest pleasure of sin thou caredst not to offend him. It is thought among
the multitude a common thing, It is thought a common thing to love God, but
none can love him who are not beloved of him.
and an easy to love the Lord, and every man abhorres in word to be counted
such a monster as has not the love of God, but they are far deceived; for
man till he be called by grace cannot love the Lord, herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that he loved us. If now we do know him and know him so
that we love him, 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
it is because we were first known of him, and so known that we were beloved
of him: not that there is any equality between these loves, or that we are
able to match the Lord in affection; non enim pari vbertate fluunt hi duo
amores, for these two loves flows not in a like plenty: as the running of a
little strand is nothing in comparison of the great Ocean, so is our love to
God as nothing, if it be compared with his incomprehensible love toward us, yet
is it most certain, amor Dei amorem animae parit, it is Gods love to us which
begets in the soul a love to God: Nemo itaque se amari diffidat, qui iam amat,
let no man therefore who loves God distrust that he is beloved. It is very
comfortable, that among all the penmen of the holy Ghost none do speak more
of love than John, even he who was Christ's beloved Disciple, whom he loved
above the rest: for it does teach us that whosoever is greatly beloved of God,
shall also become a careful practiser of love toward others.

That therefore we may know the heart of God toward us, He that would know Gods
purpose toward him, let him go down to his own heart, and not up to Gods
counsel.
it shall not be needful that we enter into his secret counsel, but let us
go and enter into our own hearts, and there we shall find resolution, albeit
the Lord send not now to you that are men, an Angel to witness, as he did to
Daniel, that he was a man greatly beloved of God, or to testify to you that
are women, that which he did to Mary, that she was freely beloved of the Lord,
yet so many of you as upon knowledge in sincerity can say with Peter, Ioh. 21.
15.
Lord thou know that I love thee, have here a testimony no less certain,
to wit, his own Oracle in his word, to make you sure that ye are beloved of
him.

And that the comfort may be the more sure unto us, Love the first affection
that Satan perverted.
seeing love is the principal token of our calling, we will speak a little
of Love, that so we may know whether we be endued with this most excellent
grace of the spirit or no. Naturally the affection of Love i^ man is so
inordinate, that not improperly Nazianzen called it dulcem tyrannum, a sweet
tyranny, that by deceitful allurements compels the whole man to follow it:
and it is not only in it self distemperated, but altogether set upon wrong
objects, our love being so set upon the creature that we neglect the Creator: a
fearful ingratitude, that where in the beginning the Lord set up man as
Prince and ruler over all his creatures, putting all the works of his hands in
subjection under him, that man should meet the Lord with such unthankfulness
as to set in his affection, every creature before the Lord, Do ye so requite
the Lord O ye foolish people and unwise?

But as this was the first affection which Satan through infidelity
perverted, And the first which in our regeneration is rectified by the spirit
of grace.
turning it from the Lord and setting it upon the forbidden tree: so it is the
first affection which in the regeneration is rectified by Faith, and by which
fai^^ works in the sanctification of the rest, turning it from the creature
and setting it upon God. Where we are to consider of the lawful objects of our
love, and of the due measure of love we owe unto every one of them. The objects
of our love are three: the first is God: the second is our self: the third is
our neighbor.

The first and principal object of our love is the Lord our God, The first
object of reformed love is God.
whom we ought so to love that we love him above all things, and that for no
other thing more than for himself: in love the Lord will not suffer a
companion, neither Father, nor Mother, Wife nor Children, nay not thy own life
should be so dear to thee, as that for any of these thou should offend thy
God, otherwise he tells thee himself that thou art not worthy of him, and he
will not reckon thee among those that love him: August. de temp. ser 223
Non amat Christum qui aliquid plus quam Christum amat, he loves not Christ who
loves any thing more than Christ, and then do we love something more than
him, if from him we seek any thing more than himself. This is a mercinarie
love, when man loves God for his gifts. It was objected by Satan unto Job but
falsely* for even then when he was spoiled of all the earthly comforts, which
God had given him, yet the love of God continued in him, from which he blessed
the Lord. As the woman which loves her husband because he is rich, is rather
to be called a lover of his riches, than of himself: so the Worldling, who
with the carnal Israelite, does worship God for his wine, and his oil, and
the rest of those good things which God gives men, is but an hyreling, not a
sincere worshipper, nor a chaste lover of the Lord his God.

The second object of our love is our selves: The second object of reformed
love is our selus
for in that the Lord requires that I love my neighbor as my self, it is
manifest, that first of all I ought to love my self. He that loves not God
cannot love himself; He cannot love his brother who loves no^ himself.
and he who loves not himself, cannot rightly love his neighbor: without
the love of God, all the self love which is in man is but self hatred. As the
frantic man who in his fury wounds his own body is pittyed of all men, as
one that has no pity of himself: so the profane man, who by multiplying
transgressions slays his own soul, is more justly to be accounted an hater
of himself: it is the holy love of God that first teaches thee to take heed
unto thy self, to preserve both soul and body from the wrath to come, and
that works in thee an holy care to conform thy self to the Lord whom thou
love, and with whom thou desire to remain for ever. Thus being taught to
love our selves, we shall also learn to love our neighbor; the ordered love
of our selves being (as I said) that pattern, according to which we should
love our neighbor. Prius itaque vide si nosti diligere teipsum, Augustine.
and tunc committam tibi proximum, quem diligas sicut teipsum, Learn therefore
first of all to love thy self, and then will I commit thy neighbor to thee
that thou may love him as thy self. Si autem nondum nosti diligere te, timeo
ne decipias proximum sicut te, but if otherwise thou have not learned to love
thy self, I fear that as thou deceiuest thy self, thou will also deceive thy
neighbor, loving him so that thou draw him into the s^are of sin with thy
self, to both your destructions: this is not love but hatred; for he who
loves any thing truly, hates every thing that would destroy it; as he that
loves a garment, hates the moth that consumes it; and he that loves a
tree, hates the worm that eats it up: so he that loves a man will also
hate the sin that slayes the man, otherwise if thou cherish that which
destroys him, thou hate him indeed, and love him not.

It is commonly thought a needless lesson to teach a man how to love himself,
Man has need to learn how to love himself rightly.
but in very deed it is most needful, it being a common disease among men,
^mare res suas magis qua^ seipsos, Aug. ad frat. in Eremo. ser. 30.
to love any thing which is theirs better than themselves, and quis
vtilem^iudicet vitae alienae, quem videt inutilem vitae suae? and who can judge
that he can be profitable unto other men, Amb. lib. 2. offi. cap. 12.
whom he sees unprofitable, yea, hurtful unto himself? Though it be
principally said to Preachers, ye are the light of the world, and salt of the
earth, yet does it also (says Chrysostom) appertain to every Christian: but
he that has not so much light as to shine to himself, how shall he shine
unto others? how shall he guide them, except it be as the blind leads the
blind, and both of them at length falls into the ditch? and he that has no
salt to powder his own speeches, nor to eat up the corruption of his own
heart, how can he effect the reformation of others? Thus you see how the
spirit of grace reforming our affection of love sets it upon God, Love to our
selves and our neighbor ^^uld be measured, but our love to God should be
without measure.
our s^lues, and our neighbor.

Now as for the measure of our love toward these, we are to know that the love
of our selves and our neighbor is bounded and limited, but the due measure of
the love of God is to love him without measure. Three conditions are required
in our love to God: to wit, that we love him with all our heart, with all our
mind, and with all our strength: we must love him earnestly, that other love
draw us not from him, but his love may be so strong in our heart, as to banish
out of it all other unlawful love, Bern. in Cant ser. 20.
and vincat dulcedo dulcedinem, quemadmodum clauus clauum, that so the
sweetness of Christ may overcome in us all sweetness of the creature, as one
nail drives out another.

The Apostles loved Jesus with an hearty affection, Three conditions requisite
in the love of God.
we have (said they) forsaken all things to follow thee: yet had they not
learned to love him with all their mind, that is, wisely, Mat. 19. 27.
with knowledge and understanding; for they loved him so that they liked not
his sufferings, and had no will that he should dye; the speeches given out
before hand by our Savior of his death, they could neither conceive them nor
approve them: therefore did our Savior rebuke them, If ye loved me, John. 14.
21.
ye would certainly rejoice that I go up to my Father: out of doubt their
affection was toward him, but they did not yet understand how good it was for
the glory of God and man's salvation, that Jesus should dye, and therefore could
not rejoice in it. And the Apostle Peter when he heard that Jesus behooved to
suffer, because he loved him, Mat. 16. 22. 23
said to him, Master pity thy self, but received this answer, Go behind
me Satan, for thou understand not the things that are of God: culpans in
vtroque non affectum sed consilium, blaming in them both, not their affection,
but their understanding: yet afterward when Peter was better informed, that
Jesus behooved to dye, and rise the third day, he dissuaded him no more, but
rather promised that he would dye with him; he had now learned to love Jesus
not only with his heart, but also with his mind; not earnestly only, but
also wisely; yet when it came to the point, he denied his Master at the voice
of a Damsel, because he had not learned to love him with strength, as he did
afterward: when he had received the holy Spirit in greater measure, he loved
Jesus even to the very death, with so strong an affection, that before the
Counsel he choosed rather to dye for Christ, than to deny him, Licet vitam
tunc minime posuit, deposuit tamen, in so much that albeit he lost not his
life, yet he freely laid it down for Jesus.

These are thee three, In this life we are far from that measure of the love
of God which should be in us.
whereunto we are to aspyre in all our life, to love the Lord heartely; to
love him wisely; (for inconsiderate zeal, and temerarious precipitation does
not please him) and to love him with so strong an affection, that we chose
rather to suffer death than to forsake him. But alas, how far are we from
this holy disposition? who can say he has attained to that measure of holy
Love which the Law of God requires in him? and therefore should we endeavor
to grow daily in love, earnestly praying the Lord, that he would breath by
his Spirit upon that little spark of heavenly life which he has created in
our hearts, that it be not extinguished with the ashes of our corruption, but
may increase, and become a great flame to burn up our affections with such a
love of God, as may carry up all the powers of our soul toward him.

To this effect let us meditate frequently upon these four causes for which
we should love the Lord: Four meditations helpful to increase in us the love
of God.
first, for that which he is in himself, to wit, the fountain of all
goodness, the greatest and supreme good; if it be good that We should love
him, because he himself is the supreme good.
let him love the Lord to whom there is none like in goodness, inuenito si
potes aliquid pretiosius Deo, and dabitur tibi, find out if thou can any
thing more precious than God, and it shall be given thee. The Platonists by
the light of nature saw that all the pulchritude and beauty which shines in
the creature was but spendor quidam summi illius boni, which should transport
us in our affection toward him from whom it came, Pulchrum coelum, pulchra
terra, sed pulchrior, qui fecit illa, the heaven and earth are beautiful, but
more beautiful is he who made them: and therefore as often as any good in the
creature begins to steal our heart after it, let us in our affection go up
to the Creator, considering that the Lord has not made these beautiful or
profitable creatures that we should go a whooring after them, but that by them
as steps we should climb up to him that made them, and rest in him.

The second cause that may breed the love of God in us, Because he has first
loved us.
that the Lord has first loved us: Inuenimus eum, sed non praeuenimus, we have
found him, but we did not prevent him; we know him now, but were first known
of him; he found us first, and that even when we were enemies unto him:
Bernard.
dilexit non existentes, imo resistentes, he loved us when we were not, yea
when we were rebels against him, and shall we not now being reconciled by
the death of his son endeavor to love him again.

Thirdly, He has declared his love by innumerable gifts already given us.
the Lord by his continual gifts has testified

And fourthly, He has yet greater things which he has prepared for us to
give us.
it shall waken in us the love of God, if we Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 10. c. 18
and in a word, he shall then give us a blessed life, non de his quae condidit,
sed de seipso, not of those things which he has made but of himself. Our
love to God must be tried by the effects thereof.


But to return to our former purpose, that we may know whether this holy love
be created in our hearts by the spirit of grace or no, we must try it by the
fruits and effects of love, Property of Love, it longs to obtain tha^ which is
beloved.
whereof now it shall content us to touch a few. First, remain as yet
disordered by Satan. The affection which Christ has sanctified will follow
upward, seeking to be there where he is. Every thing naturally returns to the
own original; as the waters go down to the deep, from whence they came: so
carnal love powered out like water, returns to Satan who begat it, and
carries miserable man captiued with it downward to the bottomless pit: but holy
love being as a spark of heavenly fire kindled in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, ascends continually and rauishes us upward toward the Lord, from whom it
came, not suff^ing us to rest till we enjoy him.

Let this then be the first trial of our love, We love not God if we use not
the exercises of the word and prayer, seeing by them only we have familiarity
with God upon earth.
if we use carefully those holy means by which we keep and entertain
familiarity with our God, it is an argument that we love him: and what other
means is there by which man upon earth is familiar with God, but the exercises
of the word and prayer? Godly David who protests in some places that he loved
the Lord, proves it in other by the like of these reasons, O how love I thy
law? it is my meditation continually: Psalm. 119. 97
and again, I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where
thine honor dwells. Psalm. 26. 8.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 2.
that I may dwell in the house of my God all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy temple. As this does serve for
the comfort of those who delight in the exercise of the word and prayer, so
does it serve for the conviction of those, to whom any other place is more
amiable than the labernacles of God: an evident proof they have not the love
of God, because they neglect the means even when they are offered, by which
familiar access is gotten unto the Lord.

And again, We love not God if we long not to be with him in heaven, where he
shows his most familiar presence.
because the fight we have of God in this life, is but through a veil, and the
taste we get of his goodness is but in part, and that in the life to come the
Lord will fully embrace us in the arms of his mercy, and kiss us for ever
with the kisses of his mouth: therefore is it that the soul which unfeignedly
loves the Lord cannot rest content with that familiarity which by the Word and
Prayer it has with God in this life, but does long most earnestly to be with
the Lord, where she knows that in a more excellent manner she shall embrace
him: whereof proceeds these and such like complaints, Psalm. 42. 1.
As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee O
God, O when shall I come and appear before the presence of my God? Psalm. 143.
My Soul desires after thee as the thirsty land, Phillip. 1.
For I would be dissolved and be with the Lord, Revel. 22.
Therefore come, even so, come Lord Jesus.

But alas, How by this trial it is found that many are void of the love of God.
here are we taken in our sins, thou say thou love the Lord, but how is
it then that thou longest not to see him, neither desire thou to be with him?
yea, a small appearance of the day of death, or mention of the day of
judgment, does terrify and afray thee: where as otherwise if thou did love
him, they would be joyful days unto thee: seeing in the one we go to him,
and in the other he comes to us to gather us, and take us thither where he
is. Surely, those men who contenting themselves with the gifts of God in this
life, think not long to enjoy himself, are but like an adulterous woman, who
if so be she possess the goods of her husband, regards not albeit she never
see himself. I confess indeed, we may rejoice in all the gifts which God
has given us, as in the tokens and testimonies of his love, but we are
always to use them with this protestation, that nothing given us in this life
be allowed unto us for our portion and inheritance, and that no contentment
ever come unto our hearts till we get himself who gave them. If the love of
the Corinthians made the Apostle to say, I seek not yours but you, how much
more should the love of God compel us to say unto him, It is not thy gifts O
Lord but thy self I long for, thou art the portion of my soul? if thou
would give me all the works of thine hands, yet shall I never have comfort
nor contentment, except thou do give me thy self, Cant. 1. 6.
Therefore O thou whom my Soul loves, show me where thou feedest, where thou
lie at noone, and do rest, for why should I be as she that turns aside
to the flocks of thy companions! Blessed is he that hungers and thrists for
thy righteousness, for he shall behold thy face, and be filled with thine
image, for in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

The second trial of our love is Obedience, The effect of true love is
obedience, and a care to please the Lord.
and an holy Peter, love thou me? feed my flock. Governors and
Counselors must be tried by this, Can ye say in truth with the Godly
Governor David, John. 21. 15.
I love the Lord? then will ye also say with him, what shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits? how shall I show my love toward him? and what shall
I do in my time for advancement of his glory? If thou do love the Lord, then
will thou be a nourishing Father to his Church, a careful aduancer of his
kingdom, a wise prouisor to remove those stumbling blocks which hinder the
course of the Gospel: If ye love the Lord, then will ye stand up with David,
and say, Psalm. 139. 21
Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? do not I earnestly contend with
them that rise up against thee? surely I hate them with unfeigned hatred, as if
they were mine utter enemies.

If ye honor the Lord as David did, What great blessing belongs to them, who
in their calling seek to honor God.
the Lord shall bless you as he blessed David. David swear unto the Lord,
that he would not rest, till he found out a place for the Lord, even an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. And the Lord swears again unto
David, that of the fruit of his body, he would set up one to reign after him.
But if otherwise there be nothing in you but a care to stablish your selves and
your houses, with the neglect of the glory of God, then remember that the
curse of Shebna, and not the blessing of Eliakim shall be upon you, Esaias. 22.
23.
Ye shall not be fastened as a nail in sure place, but shall be rolled and
turned away like a ball: the Lord shall drive thee from thy station, and out of
thy dwelling place shall he destroy thee: For the wicked shall not have his
desire, his thoughts shall not be performed, neither shall he be established
on the earth, Psa. 140. 11
but evil shall hunt him to destruction, Psalm. 52. 5.
The Lord shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy Tabernacle, and root thee
out of the Land of the living.

And generally all of you in your callings remember that the value of your
Christian love must be tried by the same touchstone, But this age in word
calls Christ their King, but casts off his yoke.
not by your words but by your works. If any love me (says Jesus) let him
keep my commandments, but here also the hypocrisy of this age is discovered:
as the Jews called Jesus their King, John. 15. 10.
and bowed their knees before him, but spat in his face and buffetted him: so
the bastard Christians of this age call Christ their Lord, and bow their knees
before him, yet by their sinful life they crucify him, and tread his blood of
the covenant under their feet: they kiss and betray him with Judas, it is but
a Scepter of reed they allow him, for they give him no commandment over their
affections, wherefore great is the controversy which the Lord has this day
with the men of this generation.

The third trial of love is Bountifulness, The property of love is
bountifulness.
the Apostle Love is bountiful: experience proves that every lover bostoweth
bountifully on that which he loves: ye love your bodies, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
and therefore largely bestow upon them to feed them, and cloth them, yea,
with excessive apparel; ye love your Children, and lets them want no
needful thing for them; yea, ye love your beasts, and spares not to bestow
largely upon them: only you say you love the Lord, but wherein are ye
bountiful toward him? It is true that in nothing can a man be profitable to
the Almighty, but are there not works commanded us, which should so shine
before men, that by them our heavenly Father may be glorified? though works
can be no merits, yet are they your witnesses, and what have ye done to
remain when ye are dead as witnesses of your love toward the Lord? Though
your goodness extend not to the Lord, yet where is your delight that should be
on his Saints and excellent ones upon earth? where is your compassion and love
toward the brethren? are not the men of this age like unto that fig tree which
had fair leaves, but not so much as one fig to give unto Jesus in his
hunger, having the show of godliness but have denied the power thereof,
yielding words enough but no fruits to adorn the glorious Gospel of our Lord
Jesus. Of these and many more if we might insist in them, it is manifest that
all have not the love of God in their hearts, who this day pretend it.

The last trial of Love which now we bring, The last is readiness to suffer
for his cause.
is readiness Rahel seven years of hard servitude seemed unto Jacob but a
short space. For the love of Dinah Sichem willingly sustained the circumcision
and cutting of his flesh: much more to him in whose heart abounds the love of
the Lord, will bitter things become sweet, and hard things easy. This Love
has made the holy Martyrs step out of their own element into the fire, with
greater joy and willingness, then worldlings have when they fit down to their
banqueting tables to refresh them, or lies down in their beds to rest them.
The Apostle who suffered all sorts of affliction for the Gospel, gives this
for a reason, that the love of Jesus constrained him. Thus much concerning the
effects of holy love, by which we are to make sure our calling, and
consequently our election, for our everlasting comfort.

Euen^to^them that are called according to his purpose. A confirmation of his
third and last argument of comfort.
Hitherto the Apostle has summarily set down his third principal argument of
comfort: and now in the end of this verse he shortly breaks up the
confirmation thereof, which is this: they who love God are called according to
his purpose, therefore all things must work for the best unto them. The
necessity of this reason shall appear if we consider that the Lord cannot be
frustrated of his end. Those whom the Lord in his immutable purpose has
ordained to glory, and whom according to that purpose he has called in time,
how can it be but all things must work unto their good? for the working
providence of God which is the executer of his purpose, does so overrule all
incidents which fall out in the world, and does so govern all secondary and
inferior causes, that of necessity they are directed to that end, whereunto
the supreme cause of all, to wit, the purpose and will of God has ordained
them. This is shortly set down in these words, and more largely explaned in
the two verses following. It is the last reason of comfort, and the highest:
for now the Apostle leads us out of our selves, and sets us upon that rock
which is higher than we, he carries us by the hand as it were out of the
earth up into heaven, and lets us see how our salvation is so grounded in Gods
eternal purpose, that no accident in the world can change it.

We have here then three things, Comfort, that the ground of our salvation is
in God, the tokens thereof in our selves.
every one of them depening upon another: the love of God, flowing from the
calling of God, and the calling of God, coming from the purpose of God: unto
which the Apostle here draws us, that we casting our anchor within the veil,
and resting in the Lords immutable purpose, may have comfort in all our present
tentations. It is most expedient for the godly to mark this, that our manifold
changes do not interrupt our peace: let us consider that the Lord has in such
sort dispensed our salvation, that the ground thereof is laid in his own
immutable purpose, but the marks and tokens thereof are placed in us after our
calling: the marks and tokens are changeable, like a we our selves in whom
they are, are changeable; but the ground holds fast, being laid in that
unchangeable God in whom falls no shadow of alteration, Esaias. 46.
I am God and am not changed: Ioh. 10.
My sheep none can take out of my hand: 2 Timothy 2.
The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and his foundation remains sure. It is
true that the tokens of election cannot be fully taken away from any that is
effectually called; nay not in the greatest desertion, yet have they in us
their own intention and remission. And this should comfort us against our
daily vicissitudes and changes, when we feel that our Faith does faint, our
life languishes, our hope houers, and we are like to sincke in the tentation
with Peter, and our feeble hands fall down with Moses, yet let us not
despair; no change in us can alter Gods unchangeable purpose, he who has
begun the work in us will also perfect it. Mal. 3. 6.
Because I am not changed (says the Lord) therefore is it that ye O sons of
Jacob are not consumed.

This purpose of God is called otherwise the will of God. Our calling and
conversion flows from Gods purpose and therefore all the praise of it belongs
to the Lord.
and the good pleasure of his Will. In that the Apostle says our calling is
according to his purpose, it teaches us to ascribe the whole praise of our
salvation to the good pleasure of his will, and not to our own foreseen
merits. That poison of pride which Satan poured into our first parents, and by
which they aspyred to be equal with God, does yet break forth in their
posterity, the corrupt heart of man ever aiming at this, to seek unto
himself either in part or in whole, the power and praise of his own salvation.
This is to start up into the room of God, and to usurp that glory which
belongs to the Lord, and he will not give to any other: than the which no
greater sacrilege can be committed against the Lord. O man content thee with
that which the Lord offers thee, and let that alone which he reserues unto
himself: My peace (says the Lord) I give to you, my glory I will not give to
any other. The first Preachers of the Gospel were Angels, they proclaimed
glory and peace, but glory they gave to God which is on high, and peace they
cried to the children of his good will which are upon earth. It is enough that
peace and salvation is given to be thine, but as for the glory of salvation let
it remain to the Lord.

He is for this called the father of mercy, For this cause he is called the
Father of Mercy and not of Judgment.
because mercy bred in his own bosom. He has found many causes without
himself moving him to execute justice, but a cause moving him to show mercy
he never found, but the good pleasure of his will: 2 Timothy 1. 9.
therefore the Apostle says, the Lord has called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace. Surely except
the Lord had reserved mercy for us, we had been like to Sodom and Gomorrha:
but it pleased him of his own good will of the same lump of clay to make us
vessels of honor, whereof he made others vessels of dishonor. And who is
able sufficiently to ponder so great a benefit? and therefore howsoever the
blinded Pharisee sacrifice to his own net, and make his mouth to kiss his
hand, as if his own hand had done it, yet let the redeemed of the Lord praise
the Lord; let them cry out with a louder voice than David did, O Lord what are
we that thou art so mindful of us? Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to
thy name give the glory, for thy loving kindness and thy truth: for our
salvation comes from God that sits upon the throne, and from the Lamb. To thee
O Lord be praise, and honor, and glory for ever.

Now as for the calling; Our calling is twofold, and the inward calling is a
declaration of our election.
we are to know that the calling of God is twofold, outward and inward. He
speaks not here of the outward calling, of which our Savior says, many are
called but few are chosen, but he speaks of the inward calling, which is the
first intimation and declaration of our election. For the decree of our
election is always hid and secret unto us, till the Lord by calling reueile
it, and make it known unto us that we are of the number of those whom he has
appointed to life. As in his secret counsel he made a distinction of the
elect and reprobate: so by his calling he^ begins the execution of this
decree, seperating the one from the other in this life in manners and
conditions, who are to be separated in the life to come for ever in estate and
place.

He that will take a right view of all mankind, All mankind are considered
standing in three circles, and they only are blessed who are within the third.
shall find them standing as it were, in three circles, they only being happy,
who are within the third. In the outmost circle are all those on whom the Lard
has not vouchsafed so much as an outward calling by his Gospel; and here
stands the greatest part of the world. In the middle circle, which is much
narrower, stand they who are pertakers of an outward calling by the Word and
Sacraments. In the third circle, which yet is of smaller compass than the
other two, stand they who are inwardly and effectually called; these are
Christ's little flock; the communion of Saints; the few chosen; Zach. 13. 9.
the Lords third part, so to speak with Zachary: the other two parts shall be
cut off and dye, but the third will the Lord fine as silver and gold: the Lord
will say of them, this is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my God. It
is a great step indeed that we are brought from the first circle into the
second, but it is not sufficient to salvation, yea, rather they who stand in
the second circle, hearing the voice of God calling them to repentance, and yet
harden their hearts and will not follow him, may look for a more fearful
condemnation then they who are in the outmost rank of all. Double stripes are
for him who knows his Masters will, and does it not. Sodom and Gomorrha
shall be in an easier estate than they. Content not therefore your selves, that
ye are brought within the compass of the visible Church, that ye have been
baptized in the name of Jesus, and have communicated at his holy Table, Mat. 7.
21.
Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into his kingdom: except
ye find also his inward and effectual calling, that the arm of his grace
has drawn you within the compass of the third circle, and has set you down
among those, whom he has chosen to be his own peculiar people.

And again, that the calling of God is according to his purpose yields unto us
this comfort, that seeing his calling is extended toward us, we may be sure
that from everlasting he has had toward us a purpose of love. Where ever the
Gospel is preached to call men there God has toward some a purpose of love.
Certainly he had not sent his Gospel among us, were it not that he has
here a number belonging to the election of his Grace; he has lighted a candle
among us, and set it in an eminent candlestick, to assure us that he is
seeking here some pieces of money which were lost, and he will not rest till
he find them. When the Apostle Paul should have gone to Bythinia, the Lord
commanded him to go to Macedonia, what the purpose of God was, the event
declared, namely, Acts. 16.
that it was to convert Lidia and the Iaylour. Who may not see here Gods
marvelous mercy toward his own, that for the conversion of a few, will have
his Gospel to be preached to a whole kingdom? which does yet more clearly
appear, in that when he commanded his Apostle Paul to tarry at Corinthus,
he gave this reason, because (says he) I have much people here: Acts. 18. 10.
showing unto us, that the greater harvest he has, the longer does he
continue his Laborers among a people. This is the very work of God which he
is working in the midst of you, and for which he continues among you the
preaching of his glorious Gospel, it is because toward many of you, he has a
purpose of love: some has he called already, whom he will have confirmed;
others not yet inwardly called, he will convert by the Gospel, before he
remove it. Let every man look to himself, whether he have part in that grace
which comes by the Gospel, or no; for woe will be to him that shall be found
in darkness, after that the light has shined unto him.

Good were it yet for us all, If this were considered, it would work a greater
reverence of the Gospel.
if we could more deeply consider this, that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus is
come among us, not by accident, nor by the means of men, but by the purpose of
God: that in these days we hear that voice, which many of our Fathers heard
not, that in some places of the world this Gospel is preached, and not in
others, that it is continued with us, notwithstanding of the manifold
machinations of the Children of darkness to subvert it, yea, that by such and
such persons the Gospel has been preached unto us, if we did consider that
all these fall out according to Gods determinate purpose, it would waken in us
a more reverent hearing of the word of Grace, and a greater care to take heed
to the smallest occasion of grace, when it is offered: but all the contempt
thereof which now is among men flows from this, that they do not look unto
the hand of God sending out such a message to them, by such persons, at such a
time, in such a place, as he in his eternal purpose has concluded with
himself. But as Samuel before he knew the Lord, thought the voice of God to
be but the voice of Eli, and therefore went again to his rest: so the great
multitude of them who hear it, not as the word of God, but as the word of men,
esteeming that it comes by the means of men, and not according to the
determinate purpose of God, it is no marvel if still they return to their
old sins, and remain disobedient to the heavenly vocation.

And further out of the ground laid already, A fearful token of Gods
departure, when he cease to call a people any more.
that the calling of God is according to his purpose, we are taught, that the
least intermission of Gods calling should be unto us a great matter of our
humiliation; seeing the Lord calls men to be Preachers, and has them in his
hand as stars, holding them out sometime to one part of the world, and
sometime to another, that he may communicate light to them who are sitting in
darkness; the removing of them from a people is a fearful token of the Lords
departure, For no husbandman will want laborers in his field, as long as the
harvest is not ended.
and translating of his kingdom. The Husbandman calls not his Laborers out
of the field in the midst of the day, unless the harvest be done: and if the
Lord remove his Servants from a people, it is because his purpose is finished;
for the ground is sure, that his calling is according to his purpose: but the
Lord forbid that the term of the ending of this calling should ever come in
our days.

And to the end that we haste it not upon our selves, we are to know that as
the Gospel comes not to a Land by man's procurement, As the Gospel comes not
by man's procurement, so no power of man can remove it.
so no power of man is able to remove it. The Lord who set the Sun in the
Firmament, and gouernes it in such sort, that it gives light to one part of the
world when another is in darkness, and no malice of the evil doer is able to
obscure it, howeuer he hates it, has also set his Gospel in the firmament of
his Church, to give light to Goshen, while as Egypt is in darkness; and all
the courses of politikes, though they were filled with Achitophels wisdom,
are not able to stay it: only our own unthankfulness, and abuse of the time
of Grace is to be feared; if therefore we love the light let us cast away the
works of darkness, and walk in the light while as yet we have it: let us
welcome those messengers of peace, that come to us in the name of the Lord,
endeavoring by all holy means to transfer this Kingdom of God to our
Children after us, that they also may see the beauty of the Lord, (which we
have seen) to their everlasting salvation.

Verse. 29. For those whom he knew before, he also predestined, to be made
like unto the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren.
THe whole Book of God is full of heavenly consolation, What a treasure of
comfort is to be dug out of this Verse.
every parcel thereof has in it the words of eternal life; but this place of
Scripture wherein now we are travailing, may be called above the rest a
treasure of comfort, for here the Apostle leads up the Christian to the
register of God, and lets him see his own name written in the book of life,
his salvation established in Gods immutable decree, exhibited now by Gods
effectual calling, to be performed and perfected to him by his endless
glorification. So that in all the book of God, there is not so clear and
certain a sight of salvation given to the Christian as in this place. Not so
clear a sight of salvation in all the book of God.
It comforted Stephen when he was in the valley of death, that he saw the
heavens opened, and the Lord Jesus standing at the right hand of his Father:
and it should no less comfort us in all our tribulations that the Apostle here
lets us see the third heavens opened unto us, to make known unto us the will
of God concerning our salvation. The linckes of the Chain of salvation:
Election: Calling: Justification: Glorification, are knit inseperably.


This comfort the Apostle brake up shortly as we heard in the end of the last
verse, and now more largely explanes it in these two verses: in the which he
sets down in order the causes of our salvation, and lets us see how our
present effectual calling is so inseperably knit with our election and
glorification by the hand of God, that no power in earth nor in hell is able to
sunder them: whereof the certainty of his former comfort appears clearly,
that of necessity all things must work together for the best unto them that
love God, even to them that are called according to his purpose. Which shall
yet be more manifested if we consider how that this golden Chain of our
salvation reaches (so to speak it) from eternity to eternity; the beginning
of it, albeit without beginning, is our Election; the end of it, albeit without
end, is our Glorification. And these two ends of the chain the Lord keeps
them sure and secret in his own hand, but the two middle linckes thereof, to
wit, our Calling and Justification, the Lord lets them down from heaven to the
earth, that we for our comfort might gripe and apprehend them, and being sure
of the two middle linekes, we might also be sure of the two ends, because the
Lord has knit them inseperably together.

Thou then who would be comforted with the assurance of thy salvation, He
that has a sure hold of the middle linckes, Calling and Justification, is sure
of the other two, Election and Glorification.
make it first known to thy own conscience, by breaking off the former course
of thy sins, and by well doing for the time to come, that God has called
thee and justified thee. Gripe sure as it were with the one hand the lincke of
Calling, and with the other the linck of Justification: fasten both thy hands
upon the middle linckes of this Chain, that by them thou may be pulled out
of this dungeon and raised up to heaven to see that thou art one of them who
was elected before time, and after time shall be glorified. To make this yet
more plain we are to know that this mortal life of ours is a short
interiected point of time, Our present life is a point of time between two
eternities.
between two eternities (so to call it,) in the which some in fear and
trembling working out their salvation passes from Gods eternal election to
endless glorification: others again in wantonness and careless security,
drink in iniquity with greediness, and so steps from the decree of
reprobation, that most justly they procure their own condemnation: So that
every man has to consider of his everlasting weal or woe by his present
disposition in this life.

Oh that we had sanctified memories, If in this life we fall we may rise
again, but if in death we step downward we shall never mend it.
always to remember this: so long as we are here, if of weakness we fall
we may rise again, and if in one day we have not learned well to repent, we
have leave of the Lords patience, to learn it better another day: but he who
in the day of his transmigration steps the wrong step, will never get leave to
amend it: where the tree falls it shall lie there: Eccles. 11. 3.
the wicked who die in their sins, step downward to the deep pit and gulf,
out of the which there is no redemption. Let us therefore be well advised
before we leap; let us fasten the one foot upon the border of that Canaan,
before we go out of the body; let us make sure that we shall be received into
those everlasting habitations. This shall be done if we make our whole life a
proceeding from election to glorification, and that through calling and
justification, which two have inseperably following them the sanctification and
renouation of the whole man. The Lord make us wise in time that we may consider
the course of our life, and think of the end whereunto it leads us: for as
Moses protested to Israel, so do I unto you, I have laid this day life and
death before you: Deu. 30. 15.
the Lord give you grace to make choice of the best.

In these causes of our salvation linked together in this Chain, Prescience
and Predestination how they are here distinguished.
we have first to look unto Gods decree, consisting in his foreknowledge and
predestination: secondly, to the execution thereof, which is made by his
Calling, Justification, and Glorification. The decree has in it these two acts
or preordinances (so to call them) Prescience and Predestination, which this
manner of way are to be distinguished: by foreknowledge the Lord sets before
him the whole number of mankind, whom of the good pleasure of his own will he
purposed to save: so that the first preordinance is this, these are they whom I
will save: by predestination again he concluded to save them by such and such
means; so that the second preordinance of the decree is this; those whom I
have decreed to save I will save this manner of way; so that prescience looks
to the person to be saved, predestination to the means whereby they are to be
saved. Where we must consider that this decree of God is thus distinguished by
the Apostle in these two words for our capacity, who being but mortal
creatures endued with reason, conceiues, understands, and discernes one thing
after another, and cannot do otherwise: but it is not so with the Lord our
God, who being himself a most perfect understanding, by one act without
prioritie or posterioritie, knows, conceiues, and discernes all things.

We come first now to speak of Gods foreknowledge: Prescience improperly
ascribed unto God.
the properties of God are either absolute, as namely, that he is a Spirit,
simple, and infinite, or else such as have a relation to the creature. And of
this sort is foreknowledge, which improperly is ascribed unto God: for properly
there is no fore not after in God, nothing past, nothing to come: but
foreknowledge is ascribed to God in respect of the creature, because he knew us
before that we were. This foreknowledge is two ways considered: Prescience
two manner of ways considered, generally, and specially.
first, generally, as it is extended to all his creatures, and so it is
compared to a common book of register, wherein the Lord has written all
things which were afterward to be: and of this speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.
15
My bones (says he) are not hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place
and fashioned beneath in the earth, thine eyes did see me, when I was without
form: for in thy book were all things written, which in continuance of time
were fashioned, though they were not before. Of it also speaks the Apostle,
Heb. 4. 13.
All things are manifest in his sight with whom we have to do. This manner of
way foreknowledge is Gods universal eye, by which with one look he knows
all his creatures within and without, their nature, their shape, their
actions, their beginnings, their ends, but foreknowledge this manner of way
considered, is not a lincke of this Chain, it being certain that there is not
one of these lincks more patent, not largely extended than another, as ye
shall afterward hear.

Foreknowledge then in this Chain of Salvation, In this Chain it is specially
considered as it looks to the Elect only.
is specially considered, as it is conjoined cum (...), with the love and
liking of God, as it is all one with Election, extended to none but unto the
children of his good will: this way it is affirmed of the Godly, John. 13. 18.
the Lord knows who are his, but denied of the wicked, Mat. 7. 23.
depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, that is, albeit I
know your persons, yea, your most secret actions, yet your selves I know not,
so that I love you: and this way foreknowledge specially considered, is called
the book of life, wherein the Lord has written the names of those whom he
has ordained to life.

Predestination is also two manner of ways considered, Predestination is also
two ways considered.
first, as it is generally extended to all his creatures, for as he knew them
all before they were, so he appointed them by mids unto their own end; other
artificers when they have made a work, know not what will be the end of it;
he that builds an house, knows not how long it will stand, whether fire
shall consume it, or the wind ouer-turne it, or the earthquake undermine it;
but the Lord as he has made his creatures, so has he appointed them to an
end, which he knows himself: but here Predestination is specially
considered, and is no larger than Election, respecting the Elect only, whom he
has ordained unto life by his own mids: for the word (...), here not only
signifies to ordain to an end, but also to appoint all the limits, borders,
and mids, within and by which thou art to come to that end.

Where, Foreseen merits falsely collected out of this place.
before we come to the doctrine of instruction, we will shortly encounter
with our adversaries, who read these words in this manner; that the Lord
predestined those whom he fore-knew to be conformed to the image of his
Son, that so they may establish here out, their error of foreseen merits.
It were sufficient to bring against them the best learned of their own side,
some wherofread these words no otherwise then we do; as the Iesui^s of
Rhemes: others plainly impugn that reading, and the error of foreseen
merits founded upon it, for so Caietane writes upon this place. This error is
improued by their own men as Caietane.
Ad confutandum dogma illorum, qui primum salutis nostrae locum, tribuunt
diuinae praescientiae futurorum, qui praescientiam meritorum ponunt rationem
definitionis diuinae ad confutandum inquit haec, primum nostrae salutis locum
tribuit diuino proposito, dicendo ijs qui secundum propositum vocati sunt. To
confute (says he) the doctrine of those, who give the first place of
salvation to Gods foreknowledge of man's merits, which he was to do, and so
puts his prescience as a reason and cause of his predestination; to confute
these I say, he gives the first place of salvation to the purpose of God,
while he says, to them that are called according to his purpose. and Aquinas.
Aquinas in like manner writing upon this same place, says: Ponere quod
aliquod meritum ex part nostra praesupponatur, cuius praescientia, sit ratio
praedestinationis, nihil est aliud quam ponere gratiam dari ex meritis nostris,
and quod principium bonorum operum est ex nobis, and consummatio ex Deo. To
affirm that any merit upon our part must be presupposed, the prescience
whereof was the cause of predestination, is no other thing but to affirm that
grace were given of our merits, and that the beginning of good works were of
our selves, and the consummation thereof were of God: therefore (says he) the
words are to be read this way more coueniently, whom he fore-knew them he also
predestined to be made like unto the image of his Son, vt ista conformitas
non sit ratio praedestinationis sed effectus, that so this conformity be not a
cause of predestination but an effect.

But beside these, Sanctification is an effect of predestination and therefore
not a cause of it.
this error is convinced by manifold proofs of holy Scripture: the Apostle
says, he has chosen us in Christ, therefore not in our selves: he says
again, that we should be holy and without blame, he says not, he chose us
because he foresaw that we would be holy; so he sets down sanctification as
an effect of Predestination. Ephesians. 1. 4.
Now it is certain that one effect of Predestination may well be the cause of
an other posterior effect, as the preaching of the word is a cause of faith,
and faith is a certain cause of instification, but no effect of Predestination
can be cause of it. Again he says, 2. Tim. 1. 9.
The Lord has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, here ye see, that in our calling our works and Gods purpose are
manifestly opponed, so that the putting of the one is the removing of the
other: thus neither in our Election before time, not in our calling in time,
has the Lord regarded our works, or foreseen rectitude of our will, but the
good pleasure of his own will.

And I pray you what other thing could the Lord foresee in us, The calling of
God sinds every man in an evil estate.
than that which he foresaw in the Israelites? I knew that thou art obstinate,
and thy neck an iron sinew, and thy browe brass: Esaias. 48. 8.
I knew that thou would grievously transgress, therefore I called thee a
transgressor from the womb, yet for my Names sake will I defer my wrath, and
for my praise will I refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off: yea, in so
many places of holy Scripture does the Lord plead the cause of his own glory,
that it cannot be but a most fearful sacrilege against so clear a light for
a man either in part or in whole, to make his own merits a cause of salvation.
When the Lord called Abraham, he found him an Idolater: when he called Paul,
he found him a persecuter: when he called Matthew, he found him a Publican:
when he called Mary, he found her possessed with Devils; all that ever
received grace, stand up as so many witnesses of his glory. Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the praise.

And to these objections which the brain of man has brought out against this
truth of God, Objections of men against Gods predestination, answered.
to clear themselves and charge the Lord with unrighteousness, they are all
sufficiently answered by the Apostle, that the Lord by reason of his absolute
authority over all his creatures, has power of the same lump to make one
vessel of honor, Romans 9. 20.
for to show the glory of his mercy, and an other vessel of dishonor, to show
the glory of his justice: seeing this power is not denied to the potter over
his clay, how dare man speak against it in the Lord over his creature? O man
who art thou that pleadest with God? Woe be to him that strives with his
Maker. If I dispute with thee O Lord, thou art righteous, how ever I judge of
thy counsel and of the manner of thy working, Aug. in Joan. tract, 26.
thou art always righteous. Si non vis errare, if thou will not err, says
Augustine, judge not the Lord: why one is saved the Apostle tells you, I have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, Aug. Epist. 59 ad Paulin.
Misericordia eius misericordi^ causa: why another is rejected, Causa potest
esse occulta, iniusta esse non potest, the cause may be secret, but cannot be
unjust: qui in factis Dei rationem non videt, Gregor. in Job. cap. 9.
infirmitatem suam considerans, cur non videat, rationem videt, he that sees
not a reason of the Lords doing, let him look to his own infirmity, and he
shall see a reason why he sees it not. The Lord has hid even from most
wicked men the purpose of their own reprobation till it come to the execution,
and then shall they receive an answer from their own consciences, to stop
their mouths, which now they will not receive from man. Every one of the
damned shall be compelled to acknowledge, that the judgment executed upon them
is righteous.

But now to return to the doctrine, Predestination takes not away the second
causes and means of salvation.
we have first to observe out of the signification of the word which I marked
before, that the Lords determinate counsel and predestination takes not away
the nature, properties, nor necessities of secondarie causes and means of
salvation, but rather establishes them: for those whom God has appointed to
salvation, he has also appointed to those means which may bring them unto
it. It is therefore a blasphemy which is frequent in the mouths of carnal
professers, if I be elected howsoever I live I shall be saved, and if otherwise
I be a reprobate, live as I will I cannot mend it: this is no other thing but
Satan's divinity: Satan's divinity teaches Atheists to despise the means of
salvation.
if thou be the son of God cast thy self down from the Temple: thou shall
not dash thy foot against a stone: as if the sons of God were licensed to
despise the second and ordinary means, and not rather bound to use them: but
in very deed as it is against the nature of fire to be cold, so is it
impossible that the elect man effectually called can reason after this manner,
yea the more he hears of election, the more he endeauours to make it sure by
well doing, knowing that no man can attain to the end of our Faith, which is
the salvation of our soul, but by the lawful and ordinary means.

Both temporal and spiritual blessings the Lord will have us to seek them by
the lawful and ordinary means: God gives his blessings by means, therefore
they should not neglect the means who seek the blessing.
the Corns cannot serve Israel except the earth bear them; the earth cannot
bear them except the heavens give rain; the heavens can give no rain except
the Lord command them. Therefore when the Lord promises a blessing, In that day
(says the Lord) I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, Hos.
2. 21.
and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Israel. And that he keeps the the same order in bestowing
spiritual blessings we are taught by the Apostle, Romans 10. 13
when he says, that before we be saved we must call on the name of the Lord,
before we call on his name we must believe, before we believe we must hear,
before we hear there must be preaching: whereof it is evident that they who
neglect and contemn the ordinary means of salvation, do give out a very hard
sentence against themselves, which is, that if they so continue they do not
appertain unto election.

And again for our further comfort we have here to mark the certainty and
soliditie of our salvation: Comfort, our election before time cannot be
disanulled by any creature made in time.
it is neither to day nor yesterday that the Lord concluded to be merciful
unto us; our election began not with our selves: before the mountains were
made, before the earth and the world were formed, even from everlasting to
everlasting the Lord is our God. What creature then is able to disanull that
which God has willed, before that ever a creature was? only let us labor
that as our election is sure in it self, so we may make it sure unto us, by
walking in a good conscience before the Lord, and then we shall not care what
man or Angel say to the contrary against it; they are but posterior creatures,
and what intrest can they have to gain say that which God has done before
that they were? Happy are they who are rooted, grounded, and builded upon this
rock; no stormy wave of the sea shall ouerturne them, no rage of tentation,
nor power of the gates of hell shall prevail against them.

Lastly, Saving grace is communicated to few, and therefore should be the more
esteemed.
we are taught here by the holy Apostle that all men are not foreknowne, all
are not predestined to life, otherwise there were not an election: there is
only a certain and definit number which belong to the election of Grace; a
fullness both of Jews and Gentiles; a number not known to us, but known to
the Lord; not one more nor one less shall be pertakers of salvation. Many
(says out Savior) shall come from the East and from the West, and shall sit
with Abraham, Mat, 8. 11.
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God: he says not all the children of the
East shall come, but many shall come. This should waken in us a holy care so
long as the calling of God continues among us, to take heed to our selves,
striving to thrust in at the door of the kingdom of heaven: for it suffers
violence, and the violent take it; the fewer there be to be received into that
kingdom, the more we should about to be of that number. So is it in nature
that rarest things are most regarded.
We see that in nature, things that are common were they never so excellent are
not esteemed: the Sun because common to all, is regarded of few, though it be
a very excellent and profitable creature; but parcels of the earth possessed by
men in property, are much more remembered and regarded by those to whom they
belong; riches and honor are in greater account among men because few attain
unto them: and if we were as wise in spiritual things, that grace of Christ
which brings salvation would be more precious and dear unto us, because it is
communicated to few. The Lord give us grace to consider rightly of it in time.

To be made like to the image of his Son. Predestination is unto glory by a
conformity with Christ in our present life.
The Apostle insists not in the rest of the linckes of the Chain; having
touched them he leaves them, only he insists in this lincke of Predestination:
teaching us that he uses not here the word of Predestination generally, but
restraines it to Predestination unto life; as also that we cannot step from
election to glory but by a conformity with Christ, which is most necessary for
us to mark: for albeit there be great comfort in the consideration of Gods
immutable purpose ordayning man to life, as also in the consideration of that
glory whereunto we are ordained, yet neither of them can comfort us unless we
be sure that our life is a proceeding from election to glorification by the
right means.

The first and nearest end of election in regard of man, is his sanctification:
Ephesians. 1. 4.
for the Lord has chosen us that we should be holy: As Christ is the life, so
is he the way, neither can we come to life but by the way
the second and furthest end is man's glorification. The same Lord Jesus who
said I am the life, said in like manner I am the way and the verity: if thou
would be at life, lie not still in thy sins, but rise and walk in the way,
and if thou know not the way, learn it from him who is verity. Ioh. 14. 6.
Let not presumption which slayes the wicked overtake thee; they pass over the
matter of their salvation with a wanton word; their hearts are profane, yet
they boast with their tongues that they are sure to be saved; but this is a
vain rejoicing: for he that walks not in the way, how is it possible that he
can come to the end? assuredly he shall never come where Christ is to live with
him, that walks not after Christ in newness of life.

This conformity with the Lord Jesus whereunto we are predestined,
Conformity with Christ wherein it stands.
is partly in this life, partly in the life to come. Our conformity in the
life to come shall stand in living and reigning with Christ, which is our
glorification, whereof he speaks hereafter. Our conformity in this life
stands in living and suffering with Christ, and of this he speaks here; to
live godly after the rule of Christ, to suffer patiently after the similitude
of Christ, are the two parts of our present conformity with him. The Lord
Jesus is given us of the Father both to be a Savior, and an example, unless
we make him an example to follow him in our doing and suffering, he shall not
be unto us a Savior.

Here we are to mark that the works done by Christ in our nature, Works done
by Christ are threefold: 1. personal works of Redemption: 2. Miracles: 3.
works of a godly life.
are threefold: first, his personal works of Redemption; as that he was borne
of the Virgin; that he suffered the cursed death of the Cross, for the
expiation of our sins; that he rose the third day for our justification;
that he ascended triumphantly into Heaven, leading captivity captive.
Secondly, his works of miracles; as that he fasted forty days; gave sight to
the blind; life to the dead, and such like. Thirdly, his works of godliness
and sanctification; as that he was subject to his parents; loving to his
brethren; painful in his calling; perseuering in prayer. To practice to
follow him in his personal works of Redemption is blasphemy, or in his
works of Miracles is impossibility, but to follow him in the works of a
godly life, is true piety. In the first Papists are blasphemous, that on good
Friday makes a play to the people, In the first and second Papists are apish
imitators.
by counterfaiting the sufferings of Christ. In the second Papists are
ridiculous, that practice to counterfaite him in his forty days fasting, as
if that might ordinarily be done of men, which once Jesus did for a Miracle. In
the third let all those who are truly religious strive to follow him: as
Children looking to their copy learn to mend their letters; so let us by
looking daily to our example, learn to amend our lives.

Imitation in the first two Jesus did never require, In the third only should
we follow the Lord Jesus.
only he craves that we should follow him in the third: there is his voice,
Learn of me that I am lowly and meek, he did not bid thee (says Augustine)
learn at him how to make the world, John, 13. 15.
or how to raise the dead, but how to be lowly and meek, for this cause did
our blessed Savior wash his Disciples feet, that he might give us an
example, how one of us should serve another, John, 15. 12.
as I have loved you (said Jesus) so love ye one another: yea, in that upon
the Cross he prayed for his enemies, he has also taught us how to practice
that precept, Mat. 5. 44.
Pray for them who persecute you. In patience likewise he is proposed unto us
for an example, for so are we exhorted, Heb, 12. 1.
Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our Faith: these and such like are the works
wherein we are commanded to conform our selves unto him.

We must also follow the Lord Jesus in suffering.
The other point wherein stands our conformity with him, is in patient
suffering with him for righteousness, which we shall not be able to do, except
we live first after the similitude of his life: what liker suffering to the
suffering of Christ, than the suffering of that reprobate thief, who dyed with
Jesus at the same time, the same kind of death? yet because his life was never
like the life of Christ, his sufferings shall never be accounted the sufferings
of Christ. Similis in poena, Augustine.
dissimilis in causa. But as for the other whom the Lord Jesus converted upon
the Cross, to declare to all the world that even in death, he retained the
power of a Savior, able to give life to them who are dead, he brought out in
the last hour of his life, the first fruits of amendment of life; he lived
long a wicked malefactor, but short while a converted Christian; yet in that
same space he abounded in the fruits of Godliness, confessing his sins,
giving glory to the justice of God, rebuking the blasphemies of the other, and
pleading the cause of his innocent Savior; thus being turned from his sin,
he began, even on the Cross to live with Jesus, and therefore heard that
joyful sentence, Luke. 23. 43.
This night thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Now that we may be moved to embrace this conformity with Jesus, Reasons
moving us to a co^formitie with Christ.
let us remember that the image of God, by which we were created conform unto
him, is the most The Image of God is our most ancient glory, stolen from us
by Satan and which we should seek to recover.
and therefore if there be in us any piece of manhood and spiritual wisdom,
we ought to endeavor to recover it, which our enemy craftily and maliciously
has stolen from us. O what a pity is it to see that man cannot do that in
the matter of salvation, which he can do in the smallest things pertaining to
this life? There is no man among us who knows that any tenement of land, or
portion of earth possessed now unjustly of another, did of old pertain to his
Fathers, but if he can, he will seek to recover it; seeking by justice to
bring that home to himself, which oppressors unjustly had taken from him. Is
it not then most lamentable, that where the Lord Jesus the King of
righteousness, and Prince of peace, offers to restore us to our most ancient
glory, which is his own image, that we will not call the oppressors of our
soul before him, nor seek to be restored to that glory, which most
deceitfully our aduers^ry has stolen from us? but this comes also upon man
by the subtlety of Satan, that having once spoiled us of the image of God,
he does what he can so to blind us, that we should never seek it again,
nor do so much as receive it when it is offered unto us.

Jacob complained of Laban that he had deceived him, Satan a double deceiuer.
and changed his wages ten times; and Esau complained of Jacob, as of a
supplanter, who first had stolen from him his birthright, and then the
blessing also: but more cause have we to turn these complaints upon Satan,
who has not only stolen from us the Image of God, but daily steals away
the blessing, whereby it is restored unto us. Oh that we had wise and
understanding hearts, that we might be stirred up to an holy anger against the
enemy of our salvation, seeking in despite of him to be restored to that
right, which by creation belonged to our fore father. But alas, what a beastly
stupiditie is this, that man will not do so much for recovery and maintenance
of the image of God, as he will do for preservation of his own portraiture
drawn on a piece of timber? if any man pollute it, incontinent he is
offended, and stomachs it, as an iniu^ie done to himself, but as for man who
is the image of God: he lies down like a beast, content that Satan should
tread upon him, pollute, and defile him with all kind of abomination, all
which proceeds from a pitiful ignorance of his own glory.

The second reason which should move us to conform Jesus Christ has first
conformed himself unto us.
is that he has first of all conformed himself unto us, he was not ashamed
to take upon him the shape of a servant, and to become man like unto us in all
things, sin excepted; and shall we refuse to conform our selves unto him?
let it be far from us, but rather putting from us that foolish emulation, by
which we strive to conform our selves unto this world, let us consider
whereunto we are called, even to be pertakers of the divine nature, and may
think it our greatest glory to be like unto our head and husband the Lord
Jesus.

Thirdly, We cannot be saved except we be comformed to him.
necessity so craves, seeing we cannot be saved Caesar's money which has
not upon it Caesar's image and superscription; he is not the Son of God who
carries not the image of his Father: for whom the Lord begets in the
regeneration, he communicates to them his own spirit, which transformes them
into the similitude of his own Image. No unclean thing shall enter into
heavenly Jerusalem, neither shall any man see him in his glory, who by grace is
not made like unto him.

That he may be the first borne among many brethren. The Apostle insists here
in the explication of his former purpose, adding that it is necessary we
should conform our selves unto him, for ratifying that superiority and
privilege of the first borne, which God the Father has estabished unto his
Son the Lord Jesus Christ; and he makes it very properly to serve his
purpose: for seeing it is so that Jesus our elder brother, and Prince of our
salvation, has been consecrated by affliction, and by suffering has entered
into his kingdom, shall we refuse to follow him in his tentations, if so be
we desire to sit with him in his glory?

The name of the first borne is ascribed unto Jesus Christ three manner of
ways: The name of the first borne three ways ascribed to Christ: 1. as God:
2. as man: 3. as a mediator
first, as he is God: secondly, as he is man: thirdly, as he is both God and
man, our mediator, and the head of his mystical body, which is his Church. As
he is God, he is called by the Apostle, Primogenitus omnis creaturae, the
first begotten of every creature; and that by such a generation as none (says
Esaias) are able to express. Col. 1. 15.
Now before the creature was, what could there be? surely nothing but the
Creator. Secondly, as he is man S. Luke calls him the first borne that
opened the womb of the Virgin. Luke. 2. 7.
Thirdly, as Mediator and head of his mystical body, as Prince of that
kingdom which is the communion of Saints: he is here called the first borne
among many brethren, 1. Cor. 15. 20
and in an other place the first fruits of them who rise from the dead.

The privileges of the first borne were two: Privileges of the first borne
are two: 1. excellency of strength: 2. excellency of dignity.
first, excellency of strength, for he had a double portion: secondly,
excellency of dignity, for he was the Prince and priest of the rest of his
brethren: now both these most properly appertains to our eldest brother Christ
Jesus. Excellency of strength is his, he has received the double portion:
for he received not the Spirit in measure as we do, but the plentitude and
fullness thereof was communicated unto him, and the comfort thereof redounds
unto us: for he received it not for himself but for us, that of his fullness
we might all receive grace for grace. Excellency also of dignity is his; for
beside that glory which he had with his Father from the beginning, Mat. 28. 18.
he is also as our head crowned with glory and dignity; all power in heaven
and earth is given him, and he is set over his brethren, as the only high
Priest of the living God, who makes atonement for the sins of his brethren;
as the only Prophet and teacher of the whole family of God, Mat. 3. 17.
for so has the Father authorized him: This is my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him.

Let us therefore submit our selves unto him, Miserable are they in this age
who do not acknowledge Christ's prerogative.
seeing God the Father has set him over us, let us not be disobedient to that
heavenly proclamation ( hear him.) Woe be to them that subscribes not unto the
excellency of his dignity. But alas, if the world proclaim such pleasures as
she has to give by any sport or play, or such profits as she can yield at her
fairest fayres and markets, O what a frequent concourse of people is made unto
her? but if the Priests of the Lord stand as they did of old in the west part
of Ierusalems temple, on their several turrets, to blow their two silver
Trumpets, and warn the people to resort unto the house of the Lord, or if now
any other manner of way signification be made unto them to enter into the
courts of the Lord with praise, how few shall he find flocking unto the house
of God in respect of them who abides without, and follows the world; and which
is yet more to be lamented, there are many of those who hear the word of
Christ, and yet does not change the manner of their conversation for any
commandment he can give them; speak what he will, they do what they like:
they come to the holy assemblies of his Saints, but are like those unclean
beasts which entered into the Arc of Noah, they came in unclean, and went out
unclean. Neither of these unless they amend, shall be pertakers of that
salvation which Jesus the first borne has purchased to the rest of his
brethern.

But to let them alone, and to return to the instruction of Gods children;
Whatsoever excellency our elder brother has it is for our benefit.
though aposta^e Israel fall from him as a people that have no portion in
Ishai, nor inheritance in the son of David, yet let Judah cleave to their
king; let us acknowledge his supereminent excellency, and reverence him for
our first borne and elder brother. Among other brethren the more the elder
has, the less remains to the younger; whereof it falls out that many a time
there is strife among them for division of the inheritance: but here the more
our elder brother has, the greater is our good, seeing whatsoever he has
received as mediator, he has received it to be communicated unto us: he has
received strength not to subdue us, or ouergoe us, but to protect us from our
enemies, which he has also done; for he has broken the gates of hell, and
carried them away more triumphantly upon his shoulders than Sampson did the
gates of Azzah. We who are poor in our selves are made rich in him: we who
are weak are in him more than conquerours, and therefore let us resolve for
ever to abide in him.

Among many brethren. Brethren in Christ are many ways knit together.
This brotherhood of our with Christ consists not in the communion of the same
flesh and blood, for so every man were Christ's brother, but it stands in our
spiritual union with him by regeneration: those are the sons of God, and
consequently the brethren of Christ, who are borne not of blood, Ioh. 1. 13.
nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, by the operation
of his Spirit, and immortal seed of the word. In the carnal brotherhoode
though the parents be one, yet the inheritance is not one; though the seed of
flesh be one, yet the soul that quickneth the body in both is not one: but in
the spiritual brotherhood the parents are one, the inheritance one, the seed
whereof they are begotten is one, and the spirit which quickneth them all is
one. It is not then Baptism nor external profession which proves a man to be
the kinseman and brother of Christ; it is the spirit of Jesus, which whosoever
has not, the same is not his, and whosoever has him, it is certain they
become new creatures.

Great is that dignity certainly whereunto we are called; The greatness of
Christ's love toward us in making us his brethren.
and matchless is that love which the Lord Jesus has carried toward us; who
not content to make us his servants, has made us his brethren. If he had
showed us no more kindness then Abraham did Lot his kinseman, yet even for
that had he been worthy to be loved for ever: but behold what a greater love
our Lord has showed unto us, we forsook him more unkindly than Lot did
Abraham, yet did he still retain his kindly affection toward us, when we were
carried away captive by spiritual Chedarlaomer, he did not only hazard, but
laid down his life of our Redemption. Moses is greatly praised for that when
he was honorable in Aegipt, he left the court of Pharaoh to visit his
brethren, esteeming the rebuke of Christ in his people, greater riches than all
the treasures of Aegipt: and Joseph is also commended, that being second person
under Pharaoh in the kingdom of Aegipt, yet he was not ashamed of his Father
and brethren, albeit they for their trade being sheepekeepers, were
abomination to the Aegiptians. But all these are not comparable to that love
which the Lord Jesus has borne toward us, in that notwithstanding our base
estate, he has not been ashamed to call us his brethren. The Lord make us
thankful, and shed abroad in our hearts the sense of that love which he has
borne toward us, that we never be ashamed of him for no Cross that for his
sake can be laid upon us.

Verse 30. Moreover whom he predestined, them also he called, and whom he
called them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.
THere is no part of holy Scripture which is not stored with the words of
eternal life; What a clear sight of salvation is here discovered to the
Christian.
but as that part of earth which is rich of minerals of gold and silver, is
more esteemed than other land, were it never so fruitful; so ought this place
of holy Scripture to be accounted of us all, as containing in it a most rich
mineral, not of gold, silver or precious stones, but of a more precious
salvation, wherein the deeper thou art able to dig, the stronger, clearer,
and greater sight of salvation arises unto thee: there is not in all the book
of God a place of holy Scripture, which presents to the child of God so clear
and certain a sight of his election and glorification, as this place does,
wherein now we are travailing: for the holy Apostle in this golden chain of
Salvation does in such sort knit our effectual Calling with our Election and
Glorification, that the Christian upon earth may evidently see what God in the
heavens has decreed toward him: we have spoken of the first two lincks of the
Chain, Prescience and Predestination: now we proceed to speak of the third,
to wit, our Calling.

Where first of all for our greater comfort, The prerogatives of a Christian
are far more honorable than any that worldlings can claim to.
let us stand and consider how great and glorious are the benefits which God
has bestowed on the Christian: before time the Lord has chosen him; after
time the Lord will glorify him; in time the Lord does call and justify him.
Worldlings also have their^owne prerogatives wherein they place their glory:
those among them that have most ample and ancient inheritances are counted
most honorable: but thou who art named a Christian, if thou be so indeed,
look to thine own privileges, and thou shall see that the glory of a
Christian does far exceed the glory of the most honorable Worldling: as the
Psalmist spoke of Jerusalem, so may we of the Christian, Psalm. 87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou man of God.

Election is the first and most ancient charter of the right of Gods Children,
The most sure and ancient Charters of a Christian to his inheritance
to their fathers inheritance: Calling is the second, by it we are known to
be the Sons of God, and our Election secret in it self, is manifested to us
and others: Justification is the third, by it we are infeft in Jesus Christ,
and made pertakers of all that is his: Glorification is the last, by it we are
entered heirs to our Father, and fully possessed in his inheritance. No King
upon earth, can produce so ancient a right to his Crown: though with the
Egyptian thou should reckon thy beginning so many years before the creation
of the world, yet can thou not match the Christian: he has the most ancient
charter of the most ample inheritance: neither can any man upon earth be known
his Fathers heir upon such sufficient warrant as the Christian; for in the
regeneration, the Father communicates to him his Image, his Nature, his
Spirit, whereby he begins from feeling to call God his father, and in life
and mauners to resemble him. No freeholder so surely infeft in his lands, nor
has received so many confirmations thereupon, as the Christian justified, who
upon his gift of righteousness and life, has also received the earnest, the
pledge, the seal, and the witness of the great King. And last of all, the
Christian shall be entered to the full possession of his Fathers inheritance,
with such joy and triumph in the glorious assembly of the Saints, as the like
was never seen in the world, no not in Jerusalem, that day wherein Solomon
entered heir to his Father David, then the earth rang for joy but nothing
c^mparable to that joy, wherewith the heavens shall ring, when all the Sons
of God, shall be caught from the earth into the air, to meet the Lord Jesus,
and to be invested in the Kingdom of their Father.

But now we are to speak of this Calling, wherein consists all our comfort:
Calling is the first manifestation of our Election, and forerunner of our
Glorification.
for it is the middle lincke of this indivisible Chain; he that has it is
sure of both the ends. Our Calling is the first manifestation of our secret
Election, and and it is a sure forerunner of our Glorification, being in effect
the voice of God, foretelling us that he will glorify us. As the best way in
a maine land to find the sea, is to walk by a river which runs into it; so
he that would proceed from Election to Glorification, let him follow this
Calling, which is (so to call it) a river flowing out of the brazen mountains
of Gods eternal Election, running perpetually upward till it enter into the
heaven of heavens, which do altogether ouerflow with that great and unbounded
Ocean of divine Glory: but we are still to remember that we speak now of
the inward Calling: for the linckes of this Chain are so comely framed by that
most skillful Artificer, that they are all of a like compass, none of them
larger nor narrower than another: so that this Calling does extend to no more
nor fewer, than those whom God has chosen.

This inward Calling is the donation of Faith, What the inward calling is.
by the preaching of the Gospel, or communication of the saving grace of
Jesus, by which we are moved to answer the Lord, and follow the heavenly
vocation: for as the Lord by the preaching of the Gospel offers unto all, that
are in the Church visible, righteousness and life by Christ, if they will
repent and believe: (wherein consists the outward Calling) so by his holy
Spirit, he gives to his Elect children justifying Faith, by which he opens
their hearts as he did the heart of Lidia, to receive the grace offered by the
Gospel, and herein consists the inward Calling.

The word (...) whereby the Apostle expresses it, In this Calling there is a
taking of some, and leaving of others.
signifies to euocate and chose out some from among others: this shall make
the greatness of Gods mercy toward us appear the more clearly, if we do
consider that we and the reprobate were alike by nature, borne blind rebels,
and transgressors from the womb, and did walk on with them in the same course
of disobedience, which leads to damnation: but it pleased God to call us out
of their fellowship, and enter us in a better course that we might be saved. A
notable example where of we have in the calling of Lot out of Sodom: the Lord
having concluded to consume Sodom with fire, for her abominable fil^hinesse,
he first of all sent two Angels to call Lot out of it; but Lot not knowing the
danger, lingered and delayed to follow their calling, till at the length they
put hands unto him and forced him to go out; but when he was set upon the
mountain, and knew the fearful destruction of Sodom, then no doubt he
acknowledged the wonderful mercy which God had showed upon him: God has taken
us out from among the children of wrath, as he took Lot out of Sodom
it is even so with us, we are here soiourning in a Sodom which God will
destroy, and we have our conversation among those whose portion shall be in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone from which the Lord being purposed to
save us, has sent his Angels to us, not two but many Ministers of the Gospel
of Grace, exhorting us to fly from the wrath which is to come: but alas,
because we know not the danger, we fly slowly, and delay to follow the
heavenly vocation, but in that day wherein we shall be set upon the mountain
of Gods salvation, and shall stand at the right hand of Jesus, and hear that
fearful condemnation of the wicked, Depart from me, etc. when we shall see
the earth open and swallow them, then shall we rejoice and praise the mercy of
our God: O happy time wherein the Lord sent his messengers among us, to call
us from the fellowship of the damned.

There is no difference by nature between the Elect and reprobate, No
difference by nature between elect men and reprobate, till our calling make it
neither in inward nor outward disposition till God make it by grace. Paul as
bloody a persecuter as ever was Domitian or Julian. Zacheus as unconscionable
and covetous a Worldling, as was that rich Glutton damned to hell. The elect
and reprobate men, before Grace make a difference, are like two men walking in
one journey, with one mind and one heart, like Eliah and Elisha, walking and
talking together, when a chariot of fire did incontinent separate them, and
Eliah is taken up into heaven, Elisha left upon the earth: not unlike is it
when the unlooked for calling of God comes and seperateth those two who
before were walking together, yea, running in the same excess of riot; the one
changing the course of his life, returns back again to the Lord, from whom
he had stolen: whereas the other not touched with the same Calling, meruailes
that his former companion has forsaken him, and walks still on stubbornely
in the former course of his sins to his condemnation. Apply this unto your
selves and see whether this effectual Calling has separated you in your
conversation from the wicked or not, an evident argument that ye shall be
separated from them in their condemnation: Blessed is he, that walks not in
the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the
seat of the scornful.

And if we find after trial that the Lord has called us, The time of our
calling is to us as the deliverance from Egypt, or the year of Iubily to
Israel.
then should we always show forth his praises, who has translated us from
darkness into his marvelous light. The Lord showed a great mercy to Israel
when he delivered them out of the house of bondage; he set the remembrance of
that benefit in the forefront of his law, as a bond ever oblieging them unto
thankfulness: but their bondage was not so horrible as ours. Pharaoh oppressed
their bodies and compelled them to work in brick and clay, yet their spirits
were free to sigh and cry to God for the bondage: but here so long as we were
the slaves of Satan, he compelled us to work the abominable works of
darkness and uncleanness, and therewithal did so captive our spirits that we
could not so much as cry and sigh unto God for the bondage, and therefore our
deliverance should never go out of our remembrance, and our hearts and mouths
should ever be filled with the praises of our redeemer, when we think of this
year of Jubilee, wherein he has opened the door of the prison, and set us at
liberty as the freemen of God, who were the captiued and bond slaves of Satan.

The author of this calling is the Lord, Calling being a new creation is only
wrought by God.
even he who calls things which are not, and makes them to be. Ca^ling is a
new creation and the first resur^ection. The Lord that commanded light to shine
out of darkness, is he who has given to our minds the light of the knowledge
of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ. It is he who creates in us a new
heart, and puts in our bowels a new spirit, that we may walk in his statutes. As
man when he was not, could not help to create himself; and Lazarus when he
was dead helped not to raise himself: so a stranger from Grace helps not to
call himself to the fellowship of Grace: the Lord who makes the barraine womb
a mother of many children, makes also the barraine heart to be fruitful. The
praise of our calling belongs to the Lord only. August. de verb. Apost.
Nemo dicat id^o me vocauit, quia col^i Deum, quomodo coluisses, si vocatus non
fuisses, let no man say therefore has God called me because I worshipped him,
for thou could not have worshipped him unless he had called thee.

The calling of God finds every man either vainly or wickedly exercised. Man
has not so much as mind of it when it comes to him.
When God called Paul to be a Preacher, he found him a persecuter: when he
called Matthew he found him sitting at the receipt of custom: when he called
Peter and Andrew they were mending their nets, no such mind had they as to be
fishers of men. As Saul was seeking his Fathers Asses, when Samuel came to call
him to the kingdom: and as Rebecca had no errand to the well but to water her
fathers goods, when Eliezer came to seek her in marriage unto Isaac: so if we
do enquire at our own consciences how we were exercised when God called us,
we shall find our hearts were set upon the trifling things of this world, and
that we had no mind of his kingdom: let the praise therefore of our calling
ber^s^rued to the Lord only.

As this work of calling is the Lords only, so he extends it to none but
unto those who are chosen: it makes a particular separation of a few from the
remanant, None are called by this calling but they who are elect.
and does so distinguish between man and man in all ranckes and estates, that
of two brethren as Jacob and Esau, of two Prophets as Moses and Balaam, of two
Kings as David and Saul, of two Apostles as Peter and Judas, of two thieves the
one is taken, the other is rejected. The first distinction between man and man
was in Gods eternal counsel, and this is secret: the last distinction will be
in that last day wherein the one shall stand at the right hand of Jesus, the
other at the left, and that shall be manifest: the middle distinction is
presently made by this calling of God; his Gospel is the arm of his Grace,
being extended sometime to one corner of the world, sometime to another,
according to his own dispensation, to sever out his own from among the
remanent of the world.

Whereof it comes to pass, What a wonderful distinction this calling makes
among men.
that this saving grace of the Gospel enters into a land, but not into every
City; it enters into a City, and not into every family; it enters into a
family, but comes not on every person of the family. Of Husband and Wife, of
Masters and Servants, of Parents and Children, of Brethren and Sisters, the
one is taken, the other rejected. It came to Jericho and chose out Zacheus: it
came to Philippi and chose out Lydia and the Iaylour: it entered at Rome into
the Court of Nero, but lighted not upon Nero: it entered into the Family of
Narcissus, but not into the heart of Narcissus. As the Lord so gouernes the
clouds that he makes them rain upon one City and not upon another: so does
he dispense the dew of his grace, that he makes it drop upon one heart, and not
upon another. The Gospel is preached to many, but the blessing that comes by
the Gospel abides only upon the children of peace. Let every one among you
see to himself, this preaching of the Gospel among you assures us that the
Lord has a harvest here, that is, a number that belongs to the election of
Grace: but who they are that are his the Lord knows, but as for us we may
lament as Augustine did of the hearers of his time, In aperto est vnde doleam,
etc, the matter of our grief is manifest: for we see many of you who hitherto
have received the word of grace in vain: but the matter of our comfort is not
so apparent; yet do we not doubt but that among this chafe the Lord has
some good Wheat, whom he will perfect by our Ministry, and gather into his
garner, to his glory and our comfort, when we shall see that fruit of our
labor, which now we^ cannot see.

Always of this which we have spoken we exhort you who as yet stands strangers
from grace, Miserable are they whom this calling has not separated.
to consider how miserable your estate is. It should pierce thy very heart for
grief, to consider that the grace of God has converted so many in the city,
yea perhaps in the family wherein thou dwell, and has not lighted upon
thee, but left thee in thy old sins. If the Lord should so do to you as he
did to Israel in the days of Achab, cause it to rain for three years and a
half upon all the land about you, and not upon your land, would you not take
it as a token of Gods anger aganist you? O hipocrite that can discern the face
of the sky, and can mark the tokens of his anger in the creature, can thou
not discern the state of thy own soul? nor consider this sensible curse of
God, that these thirty or forty years the showers of his saving grace has
descended upon othe^^ round about thee, but never upon thy self: thou
possessest still a hard, a barraine, and fruitless heart. What shall I say
unto thee? to cut thee off from hope of mercy, and to send thee to despair, I
have not that in commission, there is ever some hope of a better as long as God
calls upon thee: but of this one thing I can certify thee, that for the
present thy estate is lamentable, and if this grace go by thee in time to
come, as it has done for the time forepassed, it had been better for thee
that thou had never been borne.

The time of our calling is but short and limited, let it not go by us without
grace, but let us strive to redeem it It is called sometimes an acceptable
year, The time of our calling is called a year, a day, to tell us it is but
(...).
and sometimes a day of salvation: some days are longer and some are shorter,
but they have all an end. The jews had a fair long summer day of Salvation,
sixteen hundred years did the Lord offer grace to the house of Sem: but now
the bright shining Sun of righteousness has gone down upon them, and
darkness is unto them instead of divination; and other sixteen hundred years
has the Lord been offering grace to the house of Iapheth, persuading them by
the Gospel to come and dwell in the tents of Sem, and that by their several
families: he began at the Churches of the East; they had their own day,
although but a short winters day compared with that of the Jews. From them in
the East the light is now come, praised be God, to us in the West; now is our
day, how long it is to continue with us who can tell? Ioh. 12. 35.
While therefore the light is with you walk in the light, least darkness
come upon you. Romans 13. 11
Let us consider the season, for if once the day of grace go by us, we shall
never find it again.

For suppose this day of salvation were to shine upon this land still on to the
worlds end, No Grace will be offered to us after this life.
yet what is it to thee, seeing the day of grace ends to thee in the day of
thy death? after that, the Lord shall never any more offer mercy unto thee: in
that the Apostle wills us to do good while we have time, he tells us that after
this there is no time; let us not think quod apud inferos ad faciendos fideles
atque liberandos, Aug. Euodio. Epist. 99.
euangelium praedicatum sit, vel adhue etiam praedicetur quasi and ibi sit
Ecclesia constituta, that the Gospel ever has been or yet is preached in hell,
to work Faith in men there for their deliverance, as if there also were a
constitute church in it. Here by preaching grace is offered to thee, that if
thou will believe thou may be saved; but if now thou despise it there
remains nothing but a fearful looking for of judgment. And no less
deceitful is that opinion, that by suffering hereafter thou may redeem that
life which here thou have not obtained: Vita hic aut amittitur, aut tenetur,
cum istinc excessum fuerit, Cyprian.
nullus paenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus, Now life is either
kept or lost, for when we go out of the body there is no place of repentance,
no effect of satisfaction.

It is a principal policy of Satan to steal away from man the time of
Grace: Satan's principal policy is to steal away from men the time of grace.
he will not simply say to any man, ye need not to repent at all* he knows
the most profane man will abhor that, he seeks only a delay; thou need
not (says he) to repent as yet, and so steals away one day after another,
till the day of Grace be gone. When Pharaoh was stricken with Frogs, and
Moses offered to him, that when he would bid him, he would pray to God that
he might be delivered from them, it was but an unwise answer he gave him,
Exodus 8. 10
Pray for me to morrow, it had been better for him to have said, Pray for me
presently: but more miserably blinded are they, to whom the Lord presently
offers salvation, they delay not till to morrow only, but till the next year,
yea, for many years; they are called upon in their youth, but they refuse to
repent till they be old, seeking first leave to kiss their father, that is, to
follow their own pleasures, before they will resolve to follow the Lord Jesus;
and so lets their days one after another, be stolen away from them, till at
length they be taken away in their sins, and the day of Grace be closed upon
them.

And whom he Called, Justification posterior to Calling in order, not in time
them also he Justified. Having spoken of our Calling, we come now to speak
of our Justification. This is a new benefit different from the former benefit
of our Calling, posterior to it in order of working but not in time: for in the
same moment wherein the Lord by effectual Calling gives us faith to believe,
he does also justify us.

That we may understand what a benefit this is, The word of Justifying three
ways taken.
we are to know that the word of Justifying has three principal
significations. First, to justify is all one with this, to sanctify, seu
motus ad Iustitiam, as Dan. 12. They who justify many, shall shine as Starre^
for ever; and in this sense the Papists take it in this question, Luke. 7. 29
Secondly, to justify, is to acknowledge or declare one to be just: so it is
said that the Publicans justified God; of force we must expound it, they
acknowledged or confessed him to be just: so S. James says that a man is
justified by works, that is, declared to be just by his works, or as S. James
expounds it himself, his Justification is showed Solomon uses it, He that
iustifies the wicked, and condemns the just, are both alike abhominat^on to
the Lord: and in this sense the Apostle uses it here, for he oppones it to
condemnation.

This right understanding of the word, Justification is opponed to condemnation.
will lead us to know what the benefit of Justification is: for what ever
condemnation be, Justification must be the contrary: they are both judicial
terms, used in judgment holden on matters of life and death. Condemnation (no
man will deny) is the sentence of a righteous Judge, adiudging a malefactor to
death for some capital crime whereof he is found guilty in judgment:
Justification then is the sentence of God, a righteous Judge, absoluing the man
that is in Christ from sin and death, and accepting him to life for the
righteousness of Christ, which is his.

So that it is evident, How the state of the controversy of Justification
stands between us and the Papists
the state of the question in the controversy of Justification will be this:
how is a man justified before God? that is, what is it that a man must bring
before Gods tribunal, for the which he shall be pronounced innocent, absolved
from death, and adjudged to life? whether is it our works of sanctification
inherent in us, or is it the righteousness of Christ given unto us, and made
ours? The question being this way taken up, shall give great light to the
controversy that is between us and the falsely named Catholics of our time:
for we deny not that there is in Gods children an inherent sanctification, and
that they are changed from unrighteousness to righteousness, but this
inherent righteousness (say we) is not able to purchase to us an absoluitorie
sentence from death.

To make this yet more clear, Four names given to that righteousness, by
which we are justified.
let us know that the righteousness by which we are Justified, receives four
names: first, it is called the righteousness of Christ: secondly, the
righteousness of God: thirdly, the righteousness of Faith: fourthly, our
righteousness. The righteousness of Christ, because it is conquered by him,
and inherent in him, as in the proper subject: The righteousness of God,
because he only in his marvelous wisdom found it out: it is called the
righteousness of Faith, because Faith is the instrument by which we apprehend
it: and it is called our righteousness, because it is given unto us of God to
be ours, by imputation on Gods part, by acceptance of it by Faith upon our
part, for these two ways that acquisite righteousness of Christ is made ours.

This we have to mark for our comfort, The consideration that Christ's
righteousness is ours, stops the mouth of all that impugnes our Faith.
against those objections, which either inwardly by Satan, or outwardly by men
of a contrary opinion are objected unto us. If they to trouble our peace, and
weaken our Faith, ask, how can ye be justified by a righteousness which is
not yours? we answer, the righteousness of Christ is ours, and ours by as
great a right as any other thing that we possess is ours, to wit, by the free
gift of God: seeing it has pleased God to give us a garment who were naked,
and to give us, who had none of our own, a righteousness answerable to his
Justice, what intrest can either man or Angel have to resist it?

The euasions and objections, Works not of the unregenerate only, but of the
regenerate also excluded from the act of Justification.
whereby the adversary impugnes this doctrine, are chiefly these: First, the
Apostle (say they) excludes the works of nature, not the works of Grace; the
works of a man unregenerate they confess cannot justify him, but the works
of a man regenerate, say they, do justify him: but this is false, as is
proved first by examples: for Abraham whose example the Apostle brings in to
confirm the doctrine of Justification, was a regenerate man and effectually
called; yet as witnesses both Moses and S. Paul, Proved by examples.
his faith was counted to him for righteousness. David after he had been a
regenerate man yet says, Lord enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for
in thy sight shall no flesh be justified. The Apostle Paul protests of
himself, I have in all good conscience served God unto this day; neither know
I any thing of my self, yet am I not thereby justified: he was more abundant
in good works than all the rest of the Apostles: he did also bear in his
body the marks of Jesus; and was renouned through his manifold sufferings: If
ever any regenerate man could have been justified by his good works, it was
this holy Apostle, yet he tells you himself, for all that I have done, for all
that I have suffered, yet am I not thereby justified.

The same is proved by reason: The same proved by reason.
that which by order of nature follows our Justification before God, cannot be
said to justify us in the presence of God; cannot be said to justify us in
this sense: but so it is, good works by order of nature, follows our
justification before God, Non praecedunt iustificandum sed sequuntur
iustificatum. Augustine.
Again, such works as are not perfectly agreeable to the rule of Legal
justice cannot justify us, but rather falls under that curse, Cursed is he who
fulfilleth not every ^ot of the Law: but so it is, that the works even of men
regenerate, are not able to answer the perfection of the Law. Eccles. 7.
There is no man (says Solomon) just in the earth, that does good and sins
not. If I would dispute with God, I could not (says Job) make answer unto one
of a thousand. All our righteousness (says Jeremy) is but like a menstruous
cloth: and our Savior has taught even regenerate men to pray daily for the
remission of their sins. Quid ergo de peccatis nostris fiet, Bern. in fest.
omniu^. sanct. sermon. 1.
quando ne ipsa quidem pro se respondere poterit iustitia nostra? what then
shall become of our sins, when our righteousness is not able to answer for
it self? Vae hominum iustitiae quantumuis laudabili, si remot^ misericordia
Dei iudicetur: woe to the righteousness of man were it never so lowable, if
God setting aside mercy enter to judge it.

But they insist, How it is that works of men regenerate do not merit, seeing
they are works done in us by the spirit of Christ.
the works of regenerate men are the works of Christ, for it is he who by
his spirit works them in them, therefore they are meritorious and iustifies. I
answer, the works of Christ iustifies, it is true, if ye understand his
personal works, done by himself in his own person; as the Apostle teaches
us, He has purged our sins by himself. But as for those works which he
works in us by his spirit of grace, Heb. 1. 3
he works them not for our justification, that as I have said he has done
already by himself and in his own person, but for our sanctification.
Secondly, the good works of men regenerate are so wrought by Christ in us that
they are also wrought by us, and we have our working in them, and therefore by
reason of our imperfection cannot be perfect: for as the fountains of the
actions are, so must the actions be themselves, the fountains are mixed being
partly good, and partly evil: for our mind is not so illuminated that there is
no darkness in it; neither is our heart so sanctified that there is no
uncleanness in it, and therefore the actions flowing from thence cannot be
perfect works of light and sanctification.

They insist yet further and objects, Faith and works are not simply opponed to
other, for they are inseparable but opponed only in the act of Justification
if the Apostle say they in his conclusion, we are justified by Faith without
the works of the Law, did understand the works of Grace, then it would follow
that he oppones things which are not to be opponed: for works and Grace,
works and Faith, works and Christ, are not opposite but agrees very well
together, as the cause and effect, as the tree and the branch. To this we
answer that Faith and works agrees well together, but there is no thing in
the world which agree so well the one with the other, but in some things they
may be opponed: as for example; the tree and the branch agrees very well
together, but if the question be moved whether the tree bears the branch or
the branch the tree, in this they are opponed; that which is affirmed of the
one must be denied of the other. Again, there is a very sweet harmony between
a natural Father and the son, the one of them cannot be without the other:
for he is not a Father, who never had a son; neither is he a son, who
never had a father: but if this be the question which of them gave beginning to
another, here we must oppone them, affirming that of the one, which we deny of
the other. In like manner there is a very sweet harmony and agreement between
Faith and good works; but if this be the question, for which of them it is
that God does justify us, there we must oppone them, affirming with the
Apostle that we are justified by Faith, and not by works: always the opposition
is not simple, but (...).

Their second evasion is a distinction of the works of the Law, Works not of
the Ceremonial law only but of the Moral also excluded from Justification.
Moral and Ceremonial. It is true say they that the works of the law
ceremonial iustifies not, but the works of the Law Moral iustifies. But the
Apostle in his conclusion excludes from justification the works of the Law
Moral, for these reasons: he excludes those works of which he has proved
both Jews and Gentiles to be guilty, but so it is he has proved them to be
guilty of the transgression of the Law Moral, as is evident out of the sins
wherewith he charges them, therefore, etc. Secondly, he excludes from
justification the works of that law by which comes the knowledge of sin; but
so it is the knowledge of sin comes by the law Moral, therefore, etc. I had
not kn^wne (says the Apostle) that concup^^cence is a sin, except the law
had said thou shall not covet. Now it is evident that this is a p^ecept of the
law Moral.

Their third evasion is by a distinction of the first and second justification,
The distinction of the first and second Justification improued.
the first whereof say they is by Faith, but the second is by works. But this
twofold justification is also forged: for iustificatio est actus indiuidius and
simul totus, there is no first and last in the act of justification: he that
is once condemned iudicially stands so, and he that is absolved stands so.
Again, this distinction confounds two benefits, Justification and
Sanctification distinct benefits.
justification and sanctification* which to them is the second justification.
That they are distinct benefits the Apostle does teach us, Christ is made to us
righteousness and sanctification; but they inconsiderately confound them: for
if these new qualities infused by Grace into the soul of man, and good works
flowing there from be the matter as they say of man's second Justification, then
let them tell us what is the matter of his sanctification.

To conclude this, Justification and Sanctification inseperably conjoined.
these are two inseparable benefits, to whomsoever the Lord imputes the
righteousness of Christ, and gives them Faith to accept it as their own, like
as for it he absolues them from sin and death, and adiudges them unto life;
so also incontinent works he in them by his holy spirit, an inherent
righteousness, by which they become new creatures: so that our justification
has inseperably annexed with it sanctification. But this sanctification of
our^ is so imperfect, that howsoever it be accepted of the Father for the
righteousness of Christ, yet is it not so perfect nor sufficient that for the
merit thereof we dare seek to be absolved from our sins, and received into
favor.

Them he also glorefied. Glorification our last and highest estate out of which
we shall never be changed.
Glorification the last lincke of the chain is the last and highest benefit
that we have by Christ, by which both our soul and body shall be restored to a
greater glory and more happy, than ever we enjoyed in Adam. He had his own
most excellent privileges; he had this inward glory, that he was created to
the image of God, he had also for outward glory a dominion and Lordship over
all the crea^ures of God: the heavens were made beautiful for his sake; the
earth made fruitful; Paradise assigned to him as a special garden of
pleasure, and all the creatures ordained to serve him: but by our second
creation we are beautified with more excellent privileges; that same image is
restored to us; new heavens and new earth created for our sake, and with all
these we shall have the Crown of perseverance, which Adam had no^: for
glorification is our last and highest happy estate, out of which we shall
never be transchanged, and therefore the Apostle goes not beyond it.

And herein appears the Lords wonderful power and goodness, How the
glorification of our bodies shows Gods wonderful goodness and power.
who of the fall of man takes occasion to make man better than he was before
the fall. Our bodies shall not be raised like to Adams body, for even in the
state of innocence he was mortal; but they shall be raised up like to the
glorious body of Christ. Solomon built a Temple, the Chaldeans destroyed it,
and it was never again restored to the former glory, which moved the ancient
men to mourn, when they saw how the glory of the second Temple was not like
the glory of the first; but it shall be the great joy of our ancient Father
Adam, when he shall see how far the glory of the second creation shall
exceed the glory of the first.

Of this Glorification the Apostle speaks in the time past, Three degrees of
eternal life.
partly to declare the certainetie thereof, and partly, because it is already
begun: for there are three degrees of that Glory. The first in this life, and
that is our sanctification, called by S. John, the first resurrection, and by
S. Paul our transformation into the glorious image of God. The second is in the
hour of death, and that is a nearer union of our souls with Jesus. The third
will be in the last day, wherein both soul and body shall be glorified; this is
the highest step of Salomons throne, unto the which we must ascend by the
former degrees. The first degree is in this life, and has in it these three.
1. Righteousness 2. Peac. 3. Joy.
As for the beginning of this glory, which now we have, it consists in these
three; Righteousness, Peace, and Joy: there is a joy which is no presumption,
flowing from a peace which is not security, bred of righteousness which is
not hypocrisy: in these three stands the beginning of eternal life here upon
earth, and in the perfection of them shall consist the perfection of eternal
life afterward in heaven: perseverance in righteousness, peace, joy and glory
being adjoined unto them.

This Joy which is the highest degree of eternal life, A threefold joy we
have in this life.
we can attain to here upon earth, has also these three degrees: first,
there is a Joy which arises of believing, we have not as yet seen^ the Lord
Jesus; yet do we believe in him, 1. Pet. 1.
and rejoice in him with Joy unspeakable and glorious. Secondly, there is a
Joy which arises of feeling and tasting, taste and consider how gracious the
Lord is, and this feeling is much more than believing. Thirdly, there is a joy
which arises of sight and of spiritual embracing; such was the joy of Simeon
when he saw that promised salvation, and embraced the Lord Jesus in his arms.

Hereof arises to us first a lesson of comfort: By the joyful first fruits
of eternal life, we may judge of the fullness thereof.
if the beginnings of this glory be so great, that as S. Peter says, they
bring to us joy unspeakable and glorious, what shall the fullness thereof be?
let this waken in us a loathing of these vain perishing pleasures, and a
longing for that better and more enduring substance, Bern. in cap. i^iun. Ser.
2.
Certe non sunt tibi not a futura gaudia, si non renuit consolari anima tua
donec veniant, thou know not those joys which are to come, if thy soul do
not refuse all comfort till they come unto thee. Basil. ser. in Gord. Mart.
Certe si sempiterna essent haec terrena, tamen prae coelestibus essent
commutanda, Certainly albeit these earthly things were eternal, yet were they
to be exchanged with those that are heavenly. And therefore let the little taste
of that joy which we have now work in us a greater hunger and thirst after
the fulness thereof.

And again we are here to be remembered, This joy is not found but in the depth
of a contr^^e heart.
that as pearls are found in the bottom of the water, and gold is not gotten
in the superfice, but bosom of the earth: so this joy is not to be found but
in the inward parts of a broken and contrite spirit: many speak of this joy
who never felt it. Righteousness is the mother of Peace, and Peace the mother
of Joy: they who have not learned to do well, and cannot morn for the evil
which they have done, how shall they taste of the joys of God? we must pearce
by the hammer of contrition into the very inward of our hearts, or ever we we
can find the refreshing springs of Gods sweet consolations arising unto us. It
deceiues many that they think eternal life is not begun but after death,
but assuredly except now thou get the beginnings, thou shall never hereafter
attain to the perfections thereof, and therefore look to it in time.

As for the second degree of this glory, Of the second and third degree of
eternal Life.
which is a nearer union of our souls with Jesus Christ after our dissolution
by death, it is not my purpose now to insist in it. As for the third degree
which consists in the glorification both of our souls and bodies, we have
spoken of it before, specially in the 18. verse. Now the Tabernacle of God is
with men, but then shall our security be without fear, and our glory
consummated, when we shall dwell in the Tabernacle of God: unto the which the
Lord bring us all for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

THE GLORIFICATION of a Christian.

Where you may see the counsel of GOD concerning man's Salvation more
clearly manifested.

THEY THAT HAVE EYES MAY COME and see the Christian possessed and crowned in
his heavenly Kingdom: Which is the greatest and last benefit we have by
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Come and see.

Written by Mr. William Cowper, Minister of Gods word at Perth.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand, and are to be sold
at his shop in Pope's Head Palace. 1609.

TO THE MOST EXcellent, Virtuous, and Gracious Prince, Henry, by the Grace of
God, Prince of Wales, and Heir Apparent unto the most famous Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: All happiness in this life, and
eternal Glory in the life to come.
THat which the Apostle has severally delivered in the two former Discourses,
dedicated to your most Royal Parents, he now in this last Treatise collects
and conioynes in one, which therefore of right can appertain to none more then
to you Sir, who being by them both the happy fruit of heavenly providence, and
decrest pledge of their mutual love, and joy, may justly challenge interest in
the smallest good over which their names are named. Sir, here is the way to
that Crown of Triumph, which the more you know, the more (I hope) shall you
place your glory in it. Crowns of earthly Kingdoms are indeed the g^fts of
God, but such as bring not so much Honor as they breed unquietness. O nobilem
magis quam foelicem pannum (said Antigonus.) If the cares which dwell in the
Diadem were known, no man would stoop to the ground to take it up (said
Seleucus.) And albeit, it be not given to all to know this in their entry to
Honor, yet are they all compelled to acknowledge it in the end. Seuerus
Mon^rch of the world, found his Crowns but comfortless to him in death,
(...), I have (said he) been all things, and it profits me nothing. Not
only the tears of Xerxes, but the laments of Solomon may witness to all the
world, that the end of the worme-eaten pleasures of this life, is heavy
displeasure: yea, the golden head of Babell had at length worms spread under
him, and worms to cover him. Esa. 14 For all flesh is grass, and the glory
thereof as the flower of the field: Only, The word of the Lord endures for
ever. By which that same God who has called you to be an apparent Heir of the
most famous Kingdoms on earth, does also call your Grace to a more certain
inheritance of a better Kingdom in heaven, which cannot be shaken: whereby
above other Princes, and Rulers of the earth ye are blessed, if so be ye
answer your Calling, endeavoring to be no less than you are named: Principem
te agnosce neseruias affectibus. It is unseemly in any, but most of all in a
Prince, to become as^ruant, either to the corrupt humors of men without him,
who creeping in into the Courts of Kings, like worms into the bosom of
excellent trees, do nothing but consume them: whom Godly Constantine properly
called Tineas and Sorices palatij, subtle peruerters of the good inclination
of Princes in manners and Religion, where they can prevail: or yet to the
disordered affections of his own heart, which if they be not restrained do
quickly turn the glory of a man into shame. What did it profit Cham that he
was the Son of Noah, the Monarch of the world, and Patriarch of the Church in
his time; or that he was the Heir of the third part of the world? Chrisost.
vitia siquidem voluntatis vicerunt priuelegia naturae, his own vndantoned
will bursting out in contempt of his Father, brought upon him that curse, and
shameful name, A Servant of Servants, which was never taken from him. Seeing
God (as says the Apostle) is the glory of man, what honor can make that man
glorious, who caryes not the Image of God, consisting in righteousness, and
true holiness? but especially a King, whom the very Ethnicks called Animata
Dei imago in terris, should carefully keep that Image which keeps his glory.
Naturally facilius alijs, quam nobis imperamus, but in very deed he shall never
be a skillful Ruler of others, who is not first taught of God to rule himself,
Basil.
decet eum qui alijs praefectus est interiora sua decenter adornare.

The best remedy against both these evils, is to embrace that wholesome
counsel given by God to the Governors of his people, Let not the book of the
Law depart from thee, but meditate in it day and night, that thou may do
according to all that is written therein: turn not away from it to the right
hand nor to the left, so shall thou make thy way prosperous, and shall have
good success. Beware of those Lucifugae, haters of the light, because it
discouers the darkness of their errors, Qui cum a Scripturis redarguuntur,
Tertull.
in accusationem Scripturarum se conuertunt. As the wise men following the
Star, were at length led by it to Christ, so if according to Peter's counsel,
ye take heed to the light that shines in darkness, not only shall the day
star arise in your heart, but that clear shining Sun of Righteousness (so
named by Malachie) ever rising and never going down, shall illuminate you with
his brightness. And herewithall take to you the domestique example of your
Royal Father, who stands before you as a pattern of piety, viuum omnis
virtutis examplar: it shall be no small proof of your progress in virtue, and
greatest praise among your godly Subjects, that ye be a follower of him. And
so praying Almighty God that your happy deeds may exceed all that great hope
which is conceived of you, I humbly take my leave.

Your Graces humble Servant and daily Orator William Cowper, Minister at Perth.

THE GLORIFICATION of a Christian.
HERE FOLLOWS BY WAY OF CONclusion the third part of the Chapter, containing
the Christians triumph against all sorts of Enemies.
Verse 31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who
can be against us?
NOW follows the conclusion of the whole Chapter: The conclusion of the whole
Chapter, consisting first of a general, secondly of a particular triumph.
wherein the Apostle breaking off the course of his former speech, gathers up
all that he has spoken into a short sum, he began at the first and lowest
benefit which God in Christ has bestowed upon us, to wit, deliverance from
condemnation: this is indeed the least of his mercies, yet so great that if we
had received no more, we are never able to yield unto the Lord that praise
which is due for it. Yet as I said it is but little in respect of that which
God has done unto us, and therefore the Apostle beginning at it ascends
continually ^ll he comes to the last and highest, which is our estate of
glorification; and so having tun so high in the enumeration of Gods mercies
toward us that he can go no higher, he bursts out into an exclamation, as if
he did say, more cannot be spoken, further comfort cannot be given, but
contents himself to make a brief recapitulation of all that he had said;
wherein first he triumphs generally, verse 31. and 32, thereafter perticularly:
and that first against sin, Who shall accuse, who shall condemn? verse 33.
34. Secondly against affliction, who shall separate us from the love of God?
outward and visible enemies cannot do it, by no sort of trouble, verse 35. 36.
37. Inward and invisible enemies are not able to do it, verse 38. 39. Thus
like a valiant man stablished on Christ, in his own name, and in the name of
the rest of Gods children, he proclaims a de^iance to all his enemies visible
and invisible whatsoever.

The general triumph contained in these two verses consists in these two. The
first part of his general triumph, nothing can be against the Christian to
hurt him.
In the first he glories that nothing can be against the Christian to hurt him,
the reason is, because God is with him. In the second he glories that the
Christian can want nothing that is needful for him, the reason is, seeing the
Lord has given unto us his own son, which is the greatest gift, that can be
given, he will not let us want any of his inferior gifts.

If God be on our side. Worldlings evil judges of Gods presence who measure it
by external prosperity.
His meaning is if God be with us, electing, calling, and justifying us, that
he may glorify us, as has been said, then we may be sure that nothing can be
against us. This I mark because worldlings judge of Gods presence with men by
the wrong rules, to wit, as Abimelech and philoc judged of Abraham, we see say
they that God is with thee, Genesis 25. 22.
because thou prosperest in all that thou do. That which they judged was
true, for GOD was present with Abraham indeed, but the rule by which they so
judged was not sure: for if this rule were sure, how often might the wicked be
judged to be blessed? who prosper in all they put their hand unto: Not by
inward Grace.
the rich glut^on might be thought more happy than poor Lazarus: but the
presence whereof the Apostle speaks is not to be tried by grace, which grace
flowing from thy effectual calling, is a surer argument to prove that God is
with thee, then if he should give thee, as he did Esau, the fatness of the
earth for thy portion, and multiply upon thee in never so great abundance the
things of this world.

And that we should not be deceived to judge otherwise, The presence of God
exempts not his children from trouble both inward and outward.
our blessed Savior has forewarned us both by his word and example, how that
great troubles outward and inward are to follow them which follow him. In the
world (says he) ye shall have trouble, in me ye shall have peace. So soon
as our Savior was borne Herod raged against him, seeking his life; to warn us
says Chrysostom, that so soon as we are borne Christians we should look
for trouble: Jacob gat no sooner the blessing but incontinent Esau persecutes
him. Sosthenes before he was a Christian was a ruler of a Synagogue, but after
that he embraced the Faith of Christ, they deprived him of his office, and
scourged him. Paul a persecuter is in great worldly honor, commissioner of the
high Priest and Elders of Ierulal^m; but when he becomes a Preacher, his former
friends becomes his enemies. The same is also true in inward tentations: when
our Savior began to discharge the public office of the Messiah, satan
began to tempt him: of his two most excellent Apostles, the one was winnowed by
Satan, the other buffeted by the Angel of Satan* and all to tell us that
notwithstanding the Lord be present with us, yet we may be tempted as our
Savior was, winnowed as Peter was, buffeted as Paul was; and therefore let us
despise the judgment of worldlings, and lying conclusions of Satan, who would
make us to esteem our inward and outward tentations to be tokens and arguments
of Gods departure from us.

Again, The whole world consists of two contrary factions
perceive here how in the world are two contrary factions, the one always
militant against the other. This inimitie was proclaimed by God in Paradise,
and has continued since, like as it shall for ever without reconciliation;
only let us take heed upon what side we stand^ if we stand upon that wherein
God is Captain, and all the Saints of Christ are soldiers, we are happy, for
here the victory is certain: Miserable are they who are militant under the
Prince of darkness.
otherwise they who are among the children of disobedience, militant under the
Prince of the air, are most miserable, their end is darkness, shame, and
confusion. It is a comfortable Oration which Abijah King of Iud^, having in his
army four hundredth thousand, made to Jeroboam King of Israel, 2 Chro. 13. 8
and his army of eight hundred thousand, with you (said he) is the multitude,
but with them ye have the golden calves: but with us God is a captain, and
his Priests, to sound with the trumpet an Alarm against you: therefore O Israel
fight not against the Lord God of your fathers, for ye shall not prosper: but
this comfort much more appertains to the true Israel of God, howsoever there
be many which are against us, the golden calves are with the^, that is, strange
gods, which shall be their destruction. As Moses when he was to plead the cause
of God, stood in the gate of the Camp and cried, whosoever pertains to the
Lord let him come to me, so daily by the word of God do we exhort you which
are on Gods ^ide to gather you together into one, not that it is possible ye
can be separate from them in this life in regard of personal conversation, 1
Cor. 5. 10.
for so says the Apostle, ye behooved to go out of the world, but that by
difference of your words and deeds from them, ye declare that ye are not of
their communion.

They who are one the side of Jesus are known chiefly these two manner of
ways: Why all the followers of Christ are pursued of Satan with restless
malice.
First, Satan fights against them: Secondly, they are also warriors against
him: the first without the second is nothing; for man even as he is a natural
man is an object of Satan's malice, but where the grace of God has made the
man a new creature, there Satan doubles his hatred; for he enuies most the
glory of Gods mercy, whereof he knows he shall never be pertaker. As
Nabuchadnezers countenance changed, and his rage increased when the three
Children refused in his face to worship his image, and thereupon commanded to
make his Oven seven times hotter than it was before: so is Satan's malice most
intended against those who plainly refuse to fall down and worship him.

But that the godly be not discouraged with his malice, What comfort christians
have of this that they find Satan an enemy to them.
let us remember that first he was an enemy unto God, or ever he was an
enemy unto us, and that we have cause to rejoice in that we find that
Apostate spirit an enemy unto us, whom God from the beginning has proclaimed
to be an enemy unto himself. Secondly, we are to collect of his invasion and
our resistance that there is in us some measure of the grace of Jesus Christ:
for against those does he multiply his malicious assaults, on whom he sees
that the Lord has multiplied his graces: like to a crafitie Pirate, who
passing by the empty vessel, sets upon that which is loadned. Thirdly,
howeuer he being compared with us has many vantages; as that he is more
subtle in nature, being of greater experience and more ancient, being now
almost six thousand years old: and has also vantage of place; for he is the
Prince of the Air, assisted with armies of spiritual wickedness, who for
their number are legions, for their strength principalities and powers, for
their subtlety serpents, for their fierceness dragons: yet stronger is he who
is on our side, than they who are against us; the serpents head is bruised,
some life remains in him, but he has no power to inflict death on them which
are in Christ.

But what ever inimitie Satan exercise against us, If so be that they also
live at inimity with Satan.
it is not sufficient to comfort us, unless we also live as enemies unto him.
It was a notable speech of Azariah to Prophet to Asa, the Lord is with you,
while ye be with him: if thou stand with the complete armor of God, 2 Chro.
15. 2
pleading the cause of God, fighting against the enemy of God, than may thou
say in a good conscience, God is with thee, and thou art with him. But alas we
see in this generation many wearing Christ's liuerie, and bearing Satan's
armor, professing friendship to Christ yet fighting against him: these two
factions are entered already into the battle pelmell, so that in the smallest
fellowships some ye shall find advancing the kingdom of the one, This comfort
taken from carnal men who profess friendship to Christ, and are servants to
Satan
though very few to fight for the glory of the other. What a shame is this for
us, who say we are on the Lords side, that a wicked man serving Satan shall in
our audience open his mouth to blaspheme God, and we will not open our mouths
to rebuke him? we see carnal men so shameless that they stand upon no
circumstances to dishonor God, and we who profess we love him, for fear we
fail against courtesy, and I cannot tell what circumstances, dare not open our
mouths to praise him. Our coldness in this point has need to be admonished,
that we may be stirred up not by profession only, but by conversation also, to
make it known to the world, that we belong wholly to the Lord Jesus.

Who can be against us? A Christian wants not enemies.
It may seem strange that the Apostle should use any such interroga^orie: what
Christian wants enemies enough against him? yea says not the Apostle of
himself, 1 Cor. 15. 32
that he had beasts at Ephesus with whom he behooved to fight? was there not an
Angel of Satan sent to buffet him? 2 Cor. 12. 7.
did not Nero at length behead him? how is it then that he asks who can be
against him? But we are to know that the Apostles meaning is not that godly
men have no enemies, but that no enemy can take from us that for which we
strive: But none of them can take from us that for which we strive.
it is not for the maintenance of our bodily life that we fight, when our
enemies have taken that from us, they have done no more than Po^iphars wife did
to Joseph, when she pulled the garment from him. There are three notable things
for which we strive, and which the world is never able to take from us: the
love of God which he has borne to us: the grace of God which he has
communicated to us in our calling: the glory of God and eternal life, which
hereafter does abide us: no power of man nor Angel is able to deprive us of
these things.

An example whereof we have in that notable warrior of God, This is declared
in the example of Job.
Patient Job, whom the Lord set up as an object of all Satan's buffets, and
against whom he was permitted to use all the strategems of the spiritual
warfare that possibly he could: he crossed him not only in his goods, in his
children, and in his own body, but also in his mind; by his wife he tempted
him to blasphemy; by his friends to diffidence; yet by none of these could he
overcome him: In his outward troubles his resolution was, Job. 1. 21.
the Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord for
ever: in his inward terrors his resolution was, Albeit the Lord would slay me,
Job. 13. 15.
yet would I trust in him: so impossible is it for Satan by any tentation
whatsoever, to separate from the love of God, his Children, chosen, called, and
justified.

To clear this, The Lord is present with his children to keep them, sometime
from trouble, sometime in trouble
let us yet know that God is many manner of ways present with his children in
trouble: first, he is with them by preventing the danger, so that he will not
suffer the intended evil of the enemy to come near them: so he brought
Senacherib to see Jerusalem without, but suffered him not to shoot so much as a
dart against it within. Sometime again the Lord enters his children into the
trouble, as Daniel into the den, Joseph into the prison, the three Children
into the fire; but delivers them in such sort that both his glory, and their
comfort is greater than if they had not been in trouble at all: Sometime he
suffers his children to end their mortal lives in trouble, and yet is with
them strengthening them by his glorious might to all patience and long
suffering, filling them with such a sense of his love, that in death they rest
under the assurance of life.

The practice of this see in the examples of Eliah and Paul: This also is
declared by examples.
when Iezabel vowed to have the life of Eliah, ye shall see that the Lord is
with him, sometime to hide him, that albeit Achab and Iezabel seek him they
cannot find him: sometime God lets Achabs captains see where he is, but
consumes with fire them that came proudly to take him: Sometime he presents
him to Achab and Iezabel, but bridleth the tyrants that they have no power to
stir him. The Apostle Paul in like manner being sent prisoner to Rome, 2.
Tim. 4. 17.
the Lord assisted him in such sort that he delivered him out of the mouth of
the Lion Nero; and yet the second time suffered him to fall by the sword of the
same tyrant: shall we think that the Lord was not with the Apostle to assist
him the second time as well as the first? let it be far from us. The Lord was
with him indeed to make his death a seal and confirmation of that Gospel
which he had preached in his life. The comfort then remains, that howeuer God
work with his children in trouble, no adversary is able to take from us that
for which we strive, to wit, grace, and glory, they may be unto us as the
sharp rasers of God, to cut away our superfluities, but shall never be able to
bereave us of the end of our Faith, which is the everlasting salvation of our
souls.

Verse. 32. Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all unto death,
how shall he not with him give unto us all things also?
NOw follows the second part of the Apostles general triumph, The second
part of his general triumph, the Christian can want nothing that is needful
for him.
wherein he gloryeth that the Christian can want nothing needful for him; for
seeing the Lord has given unto him, the greatest, and most excellent gift, to
wit, his own Son, is it possible that he will deny him any secondary or
inferior gifts needful for him? Satan who is a liar from the beginning,
accused the Lord of two things: first, of an untruth: albeit the Lord has said
it, yet ye shall not dye: secondly, of Envy. In the first Satan is proved
false and the Lord is found true: for are they not dead to whom the Lord said,
ye shall dye? In the second Satan is found a calumniator: for what good tree
will the Lord refuse to his own, who has given unto them this excellent tree
of life, which brings with it unto them all things needful for them.

To amplify this great love of God, The great love which God has showed in
giving his Son for us.
the Apostle says not simply, that he gave his Son for us, but that he
spared not to give him. O wonderful love! the Natural and only Son of God
is not spared, that the adoptiue sons may be spared: for our sins being
imputed to him by the ordinance of God his Father, and voluntarily accepted by
himself, Esa. 53. 5.
so the punishment of our sins and chasticement of our peace was laid upon
him, that by his stripes we might be healed. The bitter cup due to us was
propined to him, for the which albeit he prayed to his Father, that if it were
his will, Mat. 26. 39.
this cup might pass by him, yet the Father spared him not, but held it to
his head, till he drank out the uttermost dregs thereof. So strait is the
Justice of God, that sin being imputed to the Son of God, who had no sin
of his own, is pursued to the uttermost. The greatest example of Justice that
ever the Lord declared in the world, the drowning of the original world, the
burning of Sodom; the plaguing of Egypt; were terrible proofs of the
straitness of divine Justice, but nothing comparable to this.

Which I mark partly for a comfort to the Godly, Comfort for the Godly that
the justice of God shall not, nay cannot strike upon them.
and partly for a warning to the wicked: it is our great comfort, that the
salvation which Jesus has purchased unto us, he has obtained it with a full
satisfaction of his Fathers Justice, so that now we that are in him, are not
any more to fear it. The great Judge of all the world will not do
unrighteously, to require that again from us, which our Christ, whom he
himself has given unto us, has paid for us.

And as for the wicked who are not in Christ, Miserable are the wicked who in
their own persons bear the punishment of their sins.
how miserable will their state and condition be, for they must bear the
punishment of their own sins in their own persons? If the burden of that
wrath due to our sins, caused Jesus to sweat blood, Mat. 26. 38.
and to say, that his soul was heavy unto the very death. O how shall the
burden of this wrath press down the wicked! it is even a horror to think of
it: their faces shall be confused without, and their spirits oppressed within,
with tribulation and anguish; he that spared not in his own Son sin
imputed unto him, will he spare in thee sin committed by thy self? no, no,
when he begins to smite thee, he shall never lift up his hand from thee,
but double his stripes upon thee, and there shall be no end of thy sorrow. As
the joys prepared for the godly, so the pains prepared for the wicked, are
such as the eye never saw, the tongue cannot utter, nor the heart conceive.
That place of the damned is the great deep, the Ocean of all the judgments of
God, all his temporal plagues are but like little ri^ers and strands running
into it.

If therefore the beauty of Sion does not allure us, How both Sions beauty
and Sinaies terror should move us to repent.
let the terror of Sinai afray us. The Lord proclaimed his Law in a fearful
manner upon mount Sinai, but in a more terrible manner will he execute it: if
Moses who was so familiar with the Lord, trembled when he heard it proclaimed,
what horrible fear shall ouer-take the wicked when they shall see it executed
upon themselves? Let therefore the children of wisdom hearken in time to the
joyful tidings of peace which are daily proclaimed on mount Sion; let us
drink of the still and peaceable waters of Siloh, which flow from it; let us
embrace that mercy which Jesus by the merit of his death has conquered unto
us, that so we may be saved from the wrath which is to come.

His own Son. How Christ is Gods own Son.
Jesus Christ is called Gods own Son both in respect of his divine and humane
natures: for as he is God, he was begotten of the Father by so unspeakable a
generation that as Esaias says, Esaias. 53. 8.
none are able to declare it: and as he is man, he is the Son of God,
conceived by the holy Ghost, made man indeed, but not after the manner of other
men, but of this: see Verse. 3.

But gave him for us all. The price of our redemption tells how much the Lord
has esteemed of us.
This is very often alleged in holy Scriptures, as an argument of the great
love of God toward us, that he gave his son to death for us: and so it is
indeed, for it is not by any corruptible thing, as Gold and silver that he has
redeemed us, but by the precious blood of his own Son, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
the Lamb undefiled, and without spot. There is no man will give much for that
whereof he esteems but little, we measure the price of a thing according to
the worth of it in our judgment: even so of the greatness of that gift which
our God has given for us, we may estimate the greatness of his affection
toward us. Precious indeed in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints:
who to redeem us from death spared not to give his dearest son unto the
death. Genesis 22. 12.
It was the Lords reasoning to Abraham, now I perceive thou love me, because
for my sake thou have not spared thine only son: and have we not much more
cause to turn over the same reasoning to the Lord; now Lord we perceive thou
love us, because for our sake thou have not spared thine only one son. The
Lord shed abroad in our hearts more abundantly the sense of that inestimable
love, that we may be careful to requite the kindness of the Lord, putting his
holy will before all things in our affection, and endeavoring in holy love to
serve him, who has saved us.

Shall he not with him give us all things also? All things belong to the godly
in regard of right, albeit not in regard of possession.
We are to understand all things that are needful for us: And here it is
necessary that we put a difference between our right and our possession. The
children of God have the right and property of all Gods good creatures, for
Christ their Lord is the heir of all, and has made them with himself fellow
heirs: 1 Cor. 3. ^5.
All things are yours (says the Apostle) and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. But as for the possession of them, the Lord gives it or withholds it,
according as he sees may be for the good of his children. We know our father
Abraham had the right of Canaan when he had not the possession of it, and are
not therefore to think it strange that the Lord gives not always possession
of that to his Children whereof they have the right. But as for the wicked they
have possession without a right, and therefore shall be punished as thieves and
robbers, and violent usurpers of Gods creatures, whereunto Jesus Christ who is
the heir of all has never given them a right.

Secondly, Seeing all things are given by God, let us moderate our care, and
take nothing but out of his fatherly hand.
we mark here that the giving and dispensation of earthly things is from God;
if we could remember this it would moderate our care, and make us in our
callings first to seek the Lords blessing, loath any manner of way to take the
things of this world, unless we see they be given us out of the hand of God.
For we are to know that Satan who is a counterfaiter of God, does also
arrogate to himself, though falsely, to be the giver of things: he that durst
say to the son of God, Mat. 4. 9.
all the kingdoms of the earth are mine, I will give them to thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: will he stand in awe to speak it unto
sinful man? No indeed, it is his daily tentation, by which he circumuents
many, intangling their hearts with the love of worldly gain, that to obtain
it they care not to lie, to steal, to swear, to oppress, to deceive one
another: which in effect is to fall down before Satan and worship him.

Thus Satan rules in the kingdom of Babell, Satan another Nabuchadnezer, and
a Balak, offers also gifts to men.
like a spiritual Nabuchadnezar, presenting to his subjects his great image of
gold, accompanied with all sorts of musical instruments, that is, worldly
pleasures, wealth, and prosperity, which bewitch the simple and makes them
fall down and worship, yielding themselves servants to Mammon. But happy are
those children who refuse so to do, and can stand up with their father
Abraham, lifting up his hand to heaven can say, Genesis 14. 22.
I will not have so much as the latchet of a shoe from the king of Sodom: I
will have nothing by any crooked or indirect means, out of the hand of Satan
or any of his instruments: the buddes of Balak shall not hire me to do evil,
neither the wages of iniquity, nor the reward of Sodom for doing good, shall
ever cleave to my hands, I will look for my portion from the Lord.

Again, seeing God is the giver of all things, Seeing God is giver of all let
us stand content and not murmr if others get a more portion than we.
let us learn with the Apostle in whatsoever state we are to be content,
remembering that every man's portion of vvorldly things is measured unto him from
the Lord. We see that a steward in a family ministers not alike unto all that
are in it, the aged and the young, the servant and the Lord receives not a like
portion, yet no man gainsayes it; and shall we not reverence the Lords
dispensation, who is the great steward of his family in heaven and earth,
shall we murmr against him if he give Benjamin a double portion, and bestow
upon some of his children these worldly things in greater abundance than he
does upon others? far be it from us: for he dispenses these perishing things
in great wisdom and love toward us, He has no cause to complain to who^
the father has given his Son for an irreuocable gift.
as he sees may be best for us. Certainly we ought so to rejoice in that
great gift the Lord Jesus, whom the Father has given us, and in whom he has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings, that we take no thought for any
other thing whatsoever which he has thought expedient to hold from us. Oh
that we could give unto the Lord this glory, as to say without grudging, O
Lord Jesus I can want nothing, seeing I have thee to be my portion.

And further seeing all these things are dispensed and given by God, Our care
and labor is but vain without his blessing.
let us (as I said) in our callings above all things seek his blessing. Adam
may make himself a garment, but it shall not cover his nakedness: Jonas may
build himself a booth, but it shall not defend him from the heat of the Sun:
Peter fi^hed all night and he profited nothing till Jesus spoke the word.
Psalm. 127. 2.
Though we rise early and lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, yet
shall we labor in vain unless the Lord give the blessing. Let us therefore so
use the means that with them we join prayer, moderating our care let us
commit the success to the Lord. It is true that Religion allows not
carelessness, yea by the contrary it commands us to be careful for those
whom God has committed unto us: 1 Timothy 5. 8.
If any man care not for his household he is worse than an infidel. This is
(...), a moderate foreseeing of things which are needful: Two sorts of cares.
but there is an unlawful care the daughter of distrust, whereby men are
carried either beyond lawful means, or else if the means be lawful beyond
the measure of a temperate affection; as though a man had not a Father in
heaven to care for him, or were able to compass things by his own wit. This
care is not unprofitable only but full of many perturbations, for which our
Savior compares it to thorns, which are most easily governed when they are
most lightly touched, where as he who gripes them hardly inuolues them and
makes them more perplex; and hurts himself also. Our Savior correcting Martha
for too much care of the worldly part, Luke 10. 41.
ioynes these two, thou art careful about many things, and art troubled:
telling us that which we find in experience, that many worldly cares breeds
many troubles. Let us walk therefore in the right way, using the means in
soberness let us cast our care on the Lord.

Last of all, Christ is the chief gift, all other gifts are but pendicles
given with him
it is to be marked here that the Apostle ^aith that God with Christ gives all
things unto us: so then Jesus Christ is the maine and great gift, and all other
things are but pendicles annexed unto it. Other gifts without Christ have a
show of comfort, but renders no solid comfort in the end: they shall be
deceived at length who glories in other things, were they never so excellent,
while as they are strangers from Christ. When God said to Abraham, fear not I
am thy buckler, G^^. 15. 1.
and thy exceeding great reward: not considering what the Lord offered to him,
he answered in his weakness, Verse 2.
O Lord what can thou give me seeing I go childlesse? Even he who was the
Father of the faithful could not conceive how great good God promised to him,
when he promised himself to be his reward. And therefore let us suspecting
our weakness that it carry us not into the like error, vvatch over our own
hearts, that they be not set upon Gods secondary gifts more than upon himself.
Albeit the Lord should give us pleasant Canaan for an inheritance, and multiply
our posterity as the stars of heaven, yet will we say, O Lord all these
shall not content us, unless thou do give us thy self: It does more rejoice
us, that thou have given us thy Son Jesus to be our Savior, than that thou
have subdued all the works of thine hands under us.

Verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God
that iustifies.
THe Apostle in his general triumph, The Apostles particular triumph, first,
against sin: secondly, against the cross.
contained in the last two Verses, having proclaimed a defiance to all the
enemies of a Christian, does now begin to challenge them perticularly,
triumphing first against sin, Verse 33. 34. thereafter against all sort of
afflictions that come upon us, by whatsoever instruments visible or invisible.
We begun first at his triumph against sin, who (says he) shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? he excepts no person, neither is any
either in heaven, in earth, or in hell able to do it; he reserues no sort of
sin, seek what they will, there is nothing to be found in the Christian to
accuse him and condemn him, his interrogation is plain, his answer is
suppressed, his reason is subioyned, It is God that iustifies, where the supreme
Judge absolues can any inferior judge whatsoever condemn?

Where first we have to consider, A man relieved of the burden of sin, is
filled with joy.
who is he that this manner of way triumphs? Is it not Paul, who before his
conversion was a persecuter, a blasphemer, and an oppresser, who confesses
himself to be the chief of all sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
and the least of all Saints? yea indeed the same is he: 1. Cor. 15. 9.
but mark, such a one he was indeed, but has gotten mercy, and therefore now
like a man relieved of a heavy burden, which before oppressed him, he
reioyces and triumphs. Certainly no greater comfort can come to man, than to
feel his sins forgiven him, this only causes true rejoicing. See this in
David, as long as the burden of his sin lay upon his conscience, it pressed out
the very natural moisture of his body; he had no rest night nor day, but from
the time that once Nathan proclaimed to him remission, and that in his own
conscience he felt his sin forgiven him, then he cried out: Psalm. 32. 1.
O blessed is the man whose wickedness is forgiven, whose sin is covered,
and unto whom the Lord imputes not his iniquity. Luke. 5. 25.
As he that lay sick six and thirty years of the palsy, arose with great
joy when Jesus relieved him: Acts. 3. 8.
and he that was a creple, when he found that his feet, which had failed him
so long, did not serve him, leaped for joy, and followed the Apostles into the
Temple to praise God: so that soul which finds it self freed from the
guiltiness and servitude of sin, of all burdens that ever lay upon man the
heauiest to bear, will with much more abundant joy exult and triumph in that
mercy of God which has made it free.

Secondly, Both by promises and examples does the Lord confirm poor penitent
sinners.
let the Apostle here stand unto us as an example of the like mercy of God to
be showed upon our selves, how great sinners soever we have been, if we
follow him in the like faith and repentance. The Lord our God, is not content
by his word to promise mercy unto penitent ^inners, but also confirms us by
the examples of his manifold mercies showed to others before us: when we look
upon them, let our weakness be strengthened; let us not think that the Lord
will close that door of mercy upon us, if we knock aright, which he has
opened to so many before us; he who has been found of them who sought him
not, will he hide himself form us, if forsaking our sins we seek him in
spirit and truth? Let his mercies showed to others be unto us as cords of Love
to draw us among the rest, Hos. 11. 4.
and like ointments powered out, the sweet smell whereof may delight us to run
after him: for that meekness which is in thee O Lord Jesus, we will follow
thee, we have heard that thou despisedst not the poor sinner; thou abhorredst
not the penitent thief; nor the sinful woman that powered out tears before
thee; nor the Cananitish woman, that made supplication to thee; nor the woman
deprehended in adultrie; nor him that sa^e at the receipt of custom; thou
abhorredst not the Disciple that denied thee; yea, the persecuter of thy
Disciples thou receiuedst to mercy, Cant. 1. 3.
In odore horum vnguentorum curremus post te, In the smell of these thy sweet
ointments we will run after thee O Lord.

But we are to mark that before the Apostle came to this triumphing, The
Apostle fought long before he came to triumph.
he was long exercised with fighting; he confesses to the Corinthians that
his preaching was among them in great fear and trembling, 1. Cor. 2. 3.
that in his personal conversation he was beaten and buffeted with an Angel
of Satan; that he had terrors within and fightings without: and what
terrors are we to think did trouble him? out of doubt the sight of his
sins, the greatness of the judgment to come did terrify him, whereof we
are warned, How can they triumph that have not. fought nor resisted so much as
to shedding of tears, far less to the shedding of blood.
how we must fight before we triumph, and mourn before the Lord comfort us:
if we cannot triumph with the Apostle, it is because we have not foughten with
the Apostle: for let be that we have not yet resisted unto the blood, how many
among us can say that they have resisted unto the tears, that is, who strives
with God as Jacob did with prayers and tears to obtain a blessing? Careless
security has far ouer-gone us, and we are become like those Amalekits, who
returning from the spoil of Ziklag and supposing they were past all danger, 1.
Sam. 30. 16.
cast their armor from them, and spread themselves, abroad into the fields to
eat, and drink, and to sport themselves, when in the mean time the devouring
sword unlooked for came upon them. It fares even so with the multitude of this
generation, they are become so careless in the spiritual warfare, that as if
there were no more battles to be foughten, they walk without the a^mour of
God, and spread themselves abroad in the fields of fleshly pleasures, and so
not only makes themselves a pray to their devouring enemy, but defrauds their
souls of that inward joy arising of spiritual victory, which they who
continue in fighting finds at the end of every battle.

Now to enter into the words. The tongue of the wicked is a furnace of fire
wherein the godly are tried
The Apostle conioynes these two interrogations together very conveniently, Who
will accuse? who will condemn? because howeuer there be many forward enough to
accuse us, there is none who have power to condemn us. It is not the Apostles
meaning that we shall want accusations: for the world, Satan, and our own
conscience shall not cease to accuse us. Laban searched narrowly Jacobs stuff,
For sometime they accuse them publicly and in judgment.
to see if he could get any thing wherewith to charge him, but more narrowly
do worldlings search the words and deeds of the Christian, seeking whereupon
to accuse them, and where they can ^inde none, yet upon shadows of evil they
are bold to publish false reports, or at least by private surmisings seeks to
disgrace them. Moses a man approved of God, yet accused as an usurper: Jeremy
the Prophet, albeit he so loved his country people, that in secret his soul
mourned for their desolation yet did they accuse him of treason, alleging that
he had made defection to the king of Babell: Daniel a man beloved of God,
accused and condemned of Darius his counselors, as a rebel to the King: the
Israelites who returned from captivity accused by Tobie and Sanballat of
sedition: the Christians of the primitive Church oppressed with horrible
slanders. The first weapon wherewith Satan fights against the Godly, is the
tongues of the wicked: for he loses their tongues ^o speak evil, before
he loose their hands to do evil to them: Aug. confess. lib. 10.
therefore said Augustine, Lingua impiorum est quotidiana fornax, the tongue of
the wicked is a daily furnace, wherein the Godly are tried: let no man think
to serve God in a good conscience, but he must be purged in this oven, ye are
not of the world (said our Savior) therefore it is that the world does hate
you, Ioh. 15. 19.
and speak evil of you.

As for their private surmisings they are of two sorts: sometime they charge
Gods children with evil which they have done indeed but whereof they have
repented them, and herein they are malicious, Sometime they speak evil of
them privately* and that either maliciously charging them with sins they have
done, but have repented.
that the sins which God has forgiven they will not forget: but this should
not provoke us to impatience, seeing they blame us for nothing for which we
blame not our selves, why shall we be commoued? let us not think shame to
say with the Apostle it is true, I was such a one, but now I am received to
mercy. I will not so love my self that I will hate him who reproues me for
that which I have reproved in my self, of whatsoever mind he do it, Aug.
cont. lit. Petili. lib. 3. cap. 10.
sed quantum ille accusat vitium meum, tantum ego landabo medicum meum: but
look how far he accuses my fault, so far will I praise my physician who
healed me.

Sometime again their surmisings are most false, Or then falsely charging them
with sins which they never did.
they charge us with things which we never did; but these backbitings should
be disdayned of us like the barking of beasts: he who knows with Job that his
witness is in heaven, and can say with the Apostle, that he has a good
conscience within him, what needs he to care for the judgment of men
without him? Aug. epist. 6. Ital. viduae.
Notitia nostri certior intus est, the surest knowledge of our selves is
within us. Neither are we to be so base minded as to think that there is plus
ponderis in alieno conuitio, Amb. lib. 1. offic. cap. 6.
quam in nostro testimonio? that there is more weight in another man's calumny,
than in the testimony of our own conscience. Augustine being misreported of by
Petilian gave an notable answer, for my self says he, I am not that which
he has called me, if ye think that he knows me better than I know my
self, choose you which of us you will believe.

Let not therefore the detracting speeches of men interrupt our peace, No
speech of man can make us any other thing then that which we are.
remembering their tongues can make us no other thing than we are: it is not
Ventilabrum areae dominicae, the fan of the floor of the Lord that can
separate the chafe from the Corn. Secondly, their evil speaking commends us
to God, Mat. 5. 11.
blessed are ye when men revile you and speak all manner evil of you for my
sake, be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven. Augustine.
Qui volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae: he that with his
will impaires my name, against his will augments my reward. I have spoken the
more of this purpose, partly because it is a common craft of Satan's to
oppress good men with misreports, Ambrose.
vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt alienis rur^oribus sordid^ntur, and
partly because our weakness is easily overcome with this tentation. Seeing
the Lord will have us to sustain the strife of tongues, let us strengthen our
selves, let us so walk through good report that we be not puffed up, and
through evil report that we be not cast down, but that by weapons of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left we may overcome.

Now as for Satan he is styled the accuser of the Saints of God night and day;
Satan styled a calumniator or accuser and why.
sometime he accuses God to man; sometime man to God; and sometime man to
himself. Reave. 12. 10
In Paradise he began and accused God, charging him with envy; He accuses
God unto man
and in the same trade of lying does he still continue: For sometime he lies
against the justice of God, when he says to the licentious liver, albeit ye
sin ye shall not dye, that so he may puff him up to presumption: sometime
he lies against the mercy of God, as when he says to the vveake in faith,
your sin is greater than that God can forgive it, that so he may drive him to
desperation: sometime he lies against Gods providence, as when he says to
them that are in necessity, the Lord has cast you off and will no more
provide for you, that so he may provoke them to put out their hand to
wickedness.

Secondly, He accuses man unto God
he is a restless accuser of man unto God, as ye may see in the example of
Job: he heard the Lord commending him yet he spared not to traduce him; when
he could not gainesay his actions, he gainsayd his intention and affection,
he charged him to be a hireling and not a son, a mercenarie worshipper, who
served God for his gifts and not for himself, albeit after trial he was found
a liar. And herein we are to consider how faithless a traitor Satan is, for
those same sins which man does by Satan's instigation, he is the first
accuser of man for them unto God. A discovery of Satan's ^raiterous dealing.
Oh that man could remember that Satan is ever doing one of these three
against him: first he is a Tempter of man to sin; secondly when sin is
committed he is an accuser of man unto God for those same sins *which he
tempted him to do: and thirdly, he is a tormenter of man for them, unless
they be removed by repentance. But Jesus Christ our Lord is of a plain
contrary disposition: first he disswades us from sin, warning us of the
danger, and then if of weakness we sin, he offers himself an advocate
for us if we repent: 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
These things my babes I write to you that ye sin not, but if any man sin
we have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus the just. These two compared
lets us see what a great difference there is between them, that knowing the
deceitful malice of the devil, we may learn to abhor him; and the hearty
unfeigned affection of Jesus Christ toward us, we may love and follow him.

Thirdly, He accuses man unto himself.
Satan accuses man unto himself: he deceiues the wicked and bears them in
hand that they are the sons of God, and labors to persuade the godly that
they are reprobates, denying that they have Faith or Repentance, or any
spiritual grace. There is nothing so true but Satan dare deny it: he that
durst call it in doubt to Christ himself whether he were the son of God or
no, will that shameless liar spare to do it unto others? Philip. 2. 12.
But let us work out our salvation in fear and trembling, and make sure our
calling by well doing, that we may have within us the infallible tokens of our
election, and as for the rest let us keep this ground; seeing the work of our
salvation is done by God, in despite of Satan; Satan's testimony in it is not
to be regarded, though he would call us as he did Paul and Sylas the servants
of the living of God, yet are we not the better, neither the worse, albeit he
pronounce us to be such as are abject and cast away from the favor of God.

And last, the children of God are accused of their own consciences: these are
either such as proceed from sufficient light, or from wrong information.
Conscience accuses either upon right or wrong information.
If conscience accuse upon light which she has received out of the word of
God, her sentence is divine, and we are to regard it: if otherwise she accuse
upon wrong information, it is the error of conscience, and we are to remedy
it by sending conscience to seek the warrant of her sentence out of the word
of God. It is very expedient that we put a difference between conscience and
the error of conscience: Conscience, and error of conscience to be
distinguished.
where conscience discernes not according to the Law of the supreme Judge it
cannot but err, either in being over large, and then she pronounces those
things lawful which are unlawful, or over strait, and so she declares those
things unlawful which are lawful: for if this be not observed, we shall be
disquieted while we hearken to the errors of conscience, as if they were the
just and lawful accusations of conscience.

Sometime again conscience presents to men sins which they have done many
years ago, Why the Lord leaves remembrance of a sin in the conscience after
that it is pardoned.
and whereof they have repented: for we are to know that albeit the Lord after
repentance forgive the guiltiness of sin, yet he will have the memory
thereof to remain in that conseruing faculty of conscience, called (...),
that it may both serve to humble us for the evil we have done, as also to
preserve us from sin for the time to come. And sin this manner of way
retained in the memory, I compare it to thorns and briars, which in the
midst of a garden are hurtful, and hinder the grouth of good fruit, but
being put in the hedge are profitable to preserve them: Sin evil in the
affection but good in the memory.
so sin as long as it is in the affection is very pernicious; for then it
chokes the seed of the word of God in them, but being taken out of the
affection and set in the memory, is as a hedge to the soul, to preserve it
from wild and raging beasts that would come in and devour it: thus for our
humiliation the Lord keeps in us a remembrance even of those sins which he
has pardoned, but so that with the remembrance of the evil which we have
done, our conscience does also excuse and comfort us with the remembrance of
our unfeigned repentance toward God.

And if otherwise the conscience accuse us for those evil deeds which we have
done, and whereof we have not repented, 1 Cor. 11. 31
it is of Gods great mercy toward us, who by inward trouble wakens us to judge
our selves now, that we should not be judged of the Lord in the world to come.

As this is the comfort of Gods chosen, so does it point unto us the contrary
miserable estate of the reprobate, As no creature has place to accuse the
godly, so by the contrary all shall stand up and accuse the wicked.
for there is nothing in heaven and earth which shall not stand up against them
to accuse them, the Lord himself shall come near them as a swift witness
against them. O miserable are they to whom the Lord is a Party, a Judge, and a
Witness: Malach. 3. 5.
as our Savior said to the Jews, Moses and all the servants of God shall be
witnesses against them; Ioh. 5. 45.
yea, the dust of the feet of those who brought the glad tidings of peace,
Luke. 9. 5.
shall witness against them; Josh. 24. 27.
the stones of the field said Joshua; Deuteronomy. 4. 26.
the heavens and earth said Moses; their motheaten garments said S. James; Iam.
5. 3.
yea, they themselves said our Savior, Math. 23. 3.
shall witness against themselves: woe be unto them, they must be presented to
judgment, but shall have none either in heaven or earth to speak for them,
nothing without them, nothing within them, which shall not be a witness
against them: when they are judged they shall be condemned, and their own
conscience shall say, righteous is the Lord and just are his judgments.

It is God that Iustifies. Of this ye may see clearly, that Justification as
the Apostle uses it here, is a judicial term, for he oppones it to accusation
and condemnation: but leaving that because we marked it before, in the point
of Justification, we will add this more: that the Apostle brings not the
reason of his comfort from his own innocence, but from Gods mercy; The
arguments of our comfort are not brought from our innocence but gods mercy.
he says not, there is nothing in me worthy to be accused or to be condemned,
but his comfort is, that whateuer it be, God has pardoned it. This is it that
breeds unquietness and perturbation in many weak consciences, they seek
within themselves that which should commend them to God, as if they could not
be saved unless they were perfect; this comes of Satan's singular subtlety,
who labors to creep in between us and our warrant, as if our own innocence
were the warrant of our salvation, and not Gods mercy nor Christ's merit. It is
true, it becomes us for our greater comfort to nourish within our selves the
tokens of Grace, but to conclude, that because they are weak, therefore we
cannot be saved, it is Satan's sophistry, with which we should not suffer our
souls to be abused.

Verse 34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ, which is dead, yea or rather,
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us.
THe Apostle insists in his particular triumph against sin, The death,
resurrection, ascension, and glorification of Christ assures us of immunity
from condemnation.
and he demands now who shall condemn? it may be, as we heard there be some
bold to accuse; but is there any (says the Apostle) that has power to
condemn? none at all; and that he proves from the death, resurrection,
exaltation and intercession of Christ: for as all these were done for us; so
do every one of them render unto us the sweet fruit of consolation. Of the
comfort arising from Christ's death we have spoken before.

The next is his resurrection, The great comfort we have of Christ's
resurrection.
we have comfort (says the Apostle) in his death, but much more comfort in his
resurrection: therefore says the Apostle, It is Christ who is dead, or rather,
who is risen again, for if we look to Jesus dying albeit in death he showed
himself a powerful Savior, yet in his death his glory was greatly obscured
under the covering of mortality, which again in his resurrection was more
clearly manifested: for he was declared mightily to be the son of God by
his resurrection, Romans 1. 4.
and has made us sure of the remission of our sins: for he had not come out
of the prison of the grave, if he had not paid the uttermost farthing of our
debt. 1. Cor. 15. 17
If Christ (says the Apostle) be not yet risen, then are we yet in our sins,
thanks be to God we may turn it to our comfort; Jesus is already risen,
therefore we are not in our sins.

As for his exaltation, the Apostle says, he sits at the right hand of God:
Of Christ's exaltation at the right hand of God.
to speak properly, the Lord who is a Spirit has neither right hand nor left,
but by these borrowed speeches the Lord who dwells in light inaccessible, to
whom we cannot ascend by our selves, that we should know him, descends unto
us, and speaks of his unspeakable Majesty unto us, in such manner as we are
best able to conceive it: so that when eyes, and ears, and hands are ascribed
to the Lord, we are to think these he has per effectum non per naturam. And
this may rebuke that bold blasphemy of the Papists, who presume to paint the
incomprehensible Majesty of God, under the similitude of an aged and worn
creature, Papists blasphemous who set out the majesty of God in the similitude
of a corruptible man.
expressly contrary to Gods commandment. In that day (says the Lord) that I
spoke unto thee out of the mountain, thou heardest a voice, but saw no Image,
Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
beware therefore thou make none: and in many places is the same presumption
condemned by the Prophets.

Where if they excuse themselves that they paint the Lord in such a similitude
as he appeared unto Daniell, Their fact not warranded by any apparition of the
divine majesty in the shape of man.
and no otherway. I answer, first this is false, for sometime (which is
horrible to speak) they paint him in the shape of an humane body having three
heads; but albeit it were true, which they say, yet does it not excuse them:
for the Lords extraordinary facts are not to be used as warrants to break his
ordinary and eternal Commandments; neither does it any more excuse them,
than that deed of the Lord, whereby he caused the Israelits to take from the
Egiptians their silver, gold, and Jewels which they never rendered, can excuse
them that do borrow, steal, and rob from others but never restore.

But howeuer they excuse themselves, as long as the word of the Apostle stands
true, they shall not rub off them the blot of idolatry: They are convinced by
the Apostle of Idolatry.
they turn the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a
corruptible man. Heb. 1. 11.
The Majesty of God is eternal, the heavens wax old, but he remains the
same; why then do they paint him under the similitude of a worn creature,
weakened by the length of days? The Jesuits of Rhemes convinced of darkness,
are ashamed of the light that shines in this place of Scripture, and pass by
it without an answer, they excuse the making of the Image of Christ, and of his
Saints, but speak not one word to defend that gross Idolatry, whereby they
turn the glory of the invisible God into the image of a corruptible man. It
had been good for them they had been as dumb in the defense of the rest of
their abominations, as they are in this.

This speech therefore to sit at the right hand of God is a borrowed speech,
the Metaphor being taken from Kings, who use to set on their right hand those
whom they honor most, The sitting of Christ at Gods right hand imports his
high honor and dignity.
as Solomon did his mother Bathsheba: and so the phrase will import that high
honor and dignity, whereunto Christ Jesus as man is exalted, 1. Kin. 2. 19.
being crowned with glory both above Angels and men.

This right hand of God whereat Christ sits is expounded by other places of
Scripture, to be the high and heavenly places: which serves to improve that
paralogisme of the Vbiquitaries, Error of Vbiquitaries improued.
who will have Christ's natural body to be in every place, because the right
hand of God is in every place. Heb. 1. 3.
It is true indeed, Christ sits at the right hand of God, Ephesians. 1. 20.
but so that he sits in the high, and heavenly places. The right hand of God,
that is, the power and glory of God stretches throughout the whole world, but
we are plainly taught that the place of the residence of Christ Jesus the man
is in the heavenly places, and not in earthly places, in the high places to
which he is ascended, and not in the low places in which we soiourne: Act. 3.
21.
for the heavens must contain him, until the day of refreshment come.

And makes request also for us. Christ makes request for us in heaven.
Christ our Lord has entered into heaven not to enjoy for himself a blessed
life only, but to appear in the presence of God for us. As the high Priest
when he entered into the most holy place, had graven in stones upon his breast
the names of the twelve tribes of Israel: so the Lord Jesus presents to his
father the names of all his elect, that by the merit of his death he may
procure mercy unto them.

Here again we are taught that Jesus Christ is descrybed to us in holy
Scripture as our mediator of intercession, No Mediator of intercession but
Jesus Christ.
and that there is no other beside him recommended unto us. In all the old
testament no prayer is made to Henoch, Moses, nor Eliah, who ended their days
not after the common course of men: no prayer to Abraham, albeit he was the
Father of the faithful: yea no prayer to Cherubin nor Seraphin; though now the
Apostate Church of Rome have made as many advocates for us in heaven, as there
are Saints departed, and has framed particular prayers unto them, and which is
more ridiculous, has parted among them the patrocinie of sundry sorts of
sickness and diseases.

It is true indeed that the Saints which are departed have not as yet all their
desires fulfilled, Saints departed have their own desires which they crave to
be fulfilled, but knows not our necessities.
and shall not be perfected without us: wherefore also it is that they long for
the full gathering together of the Saints, and for the restitution of their
bodies, and for the last day of judgment: but that they know the particular
troubles of Gods children, our greatest troubles being inward tentations and
wrestlings of conscience, neither known to man nor Angel but only to God,
who is the searcher of the heart: or that we can in faith use them as mediators
unto God for us, we justly deny it. Where if they take them unto their common
refuge, that there is but one mediator of redemption, but many mediators of
intercession: to this we answer that in the same place wherein the Apostle
says there is one mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
the subject whereof he entreats is Prayer; so that even in prayer he will
have us to acknowledge no mediator of intercession but Jesus Christ.

And beside this Augustine does so define a mediator of intercession, that it
can be competent to none but to Jesus Christ. A Mediator of intercession as he
is defined by Augustine is competent to none but christ. Aug. con. epis Par. l.
2. c. 8.
It is commanded says he that every Christian pray to God for another: Pro quo
autem nullus interpellat, sed ipse pro omnibus, hic vnus verusque mediator est,
but he who requests for all, and for whom none requests is the only one true
Mediator.

And where again they allege that the Saints of God in heaven are not
ignorant of things done upon earth, Three manner of ways are things known 1
by sense: 2 by report of creatures: 3 by revelation from God.
we are to know that things are known three manner of ways: first by hearing
and seeing: Secondly, by reflex, as by looking in a glass those things are
made known to us which are behind our backs: and thirdly by report. This
second and third way say they, there is no doubt but Saints that are in heaven
know those things which are done upon earth, but both of these are false, for
if they say they know our estate by report of Angels, or such as are departed
this life, how can that be? seeing we know that when Hanna prayed in the
presence of Eli, None of these ways do saints departed know our miseries.
yet he knew not her trouble, yea those who live in one family are not privy
to the tentations of others, that which they knew not in their life, how shall
thou make them to know it when they are dead?

If again they say that they have it by revelation from God, then I pray you
consider how that one error of Papistrie dashes against an other, for sometime
in the same controversy they say, that as in earthly courts we must first
communicate our petitions to those who must be our mediators to the King: now
if it be so that they have no intelligence of our estate but such as they
receive from God, wherefore shall we pray to them to commend our cause unto
God who knows it better than they, and pities it more than they: as Augustine
prettily observes out of that Parable proponed by our Savior, wherein he who
knocked at midnight to seek bread from his neighbor, found the whole family
a sleep, only the Master of the house answered, opened, and gave him that
which he craved. Nullus de ianitoribus respondit, Aug. de temp sermon. 171.
quia omnes tenuerat sommus, non Angeli, non Archangeli, non Prophetae, non
Ministri. None of the Porters answered, because they were all asleep, neither
Angels, nor Archangels, nor Prophets, not Servants made any answer: but O Lord
albeit so it be, answer thou me, Psalm. 121. 4.
for at thee I knock, thou art the door, licet pu^ri tui dormiant, tu non
dormis, qui custodis Israel, albeit thy children sleep, yet thou that keeps
Israel sleeps not.

But leaving them let us pray to the Lord in whom we believe: An exhortation
to content us with Christ's mediation.
let us use the mediation of Christ, whom S. John recommends to us an advocate
with the Father, whom Saint Paul calls in this place our intercessor, Ioh. 2.
1.
and in that to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
our only one Mediator. For knowledge, his eyes are like flaming fire, Zach.
4. 10.
and his seven eyes go through the earth: for compassion, he came into the
earth to seek us when we knew him not, and he gave his life for us that we
might live: he speaks perpetually to his Father for us by the merit of his
death, and cries to us by himself in his word, Come to me all you that are
weary and laden, Mat. 11. 28.
and I will refresh you. Let the Papist say what he will, to any other than
Christ, or any other before Christ will I never go, so long he as cries Come
unto me.

Verse 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
We have heard the Apostles particular triumph against sin: now follows his
particular triumph against the Cross: His particular triumph against the
cross: no cross can cut us off from the love of God.
he glories not in this that Christians are without a Cross, yea rather he
shows it is the lot of Gods children to be exercised with all sorts of
crosses; but herein he reioyces, that no cross can separate us from the love
of God. In this quarrel the Apostle prouokes all enemies whatsoever, corporal
or spiritual, present or to come; and against them all he takes up the triumph
in his own name, and in the name of all the children of God: Nevertheless in
all these things we are more then conquerours through him that loved us. Verse.
37.


By the love of Christ we are to understand here, Our love to God cannot fully
nor finally be put out by any trouble, nor yet the sense of his love to us.
that love wherewith God in Christ has loved us, for so he expounds it
himself, through him that loved us. It is true also that the sense of our love
to God once shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost, can never fully nor
finally be taken from us; I say fully and finally because of those inward
tentations wherewith Gods children are so exercised, that the sense of that
love in them is greatly diminished: but in all those spiritual desertions and
oppressions Faith ouercomes at length, and lets us see the face of God our
merciful father shining toward us in Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 9.
we may be cast down but we cannot perish; if Peter be ready to sincke Jesus
Christ shall succor him.

But as I said, But here the Apostle understands the love of God to us which
can never be altered.
by the Love of God I understand that love which he has borne toward us: from
this most constant love it comes to pass, that we who are weak and silly
creatures cannot be overcome, notwithstanding the multitude of mighty enemies
that are against us. If our salvation were in our own custody, and we stood
by our own strength, the smallest tentation would overcome us; our feet are
ready to slide, and then our feeble hands lets go that hold of mercy, which
once we had gotten; but howsoever we loose our hold, the Lord holds it fast
for us: we may change, but he remains the same; because the Lord has loved
us, John. 13. 1.
and whom once he loves, he loves to the end: therefore is it that it cannot
be but well with us; he loved us before we were, yea, before the world was
made. If we search the beginning of Gods Love toward us, we may run up in
our thought to the beginning of the world, but cannot attain to the beginning
of this Love, Psalm. 90. 2.
before the mountains were made, and thou had formed the world, even from
everlasting to everlasting thou art our God.

Likewise we are taught here that the end which Satan proposes to himself
in all tentations, The end of all Satan's tentations is to separate us from the
love of God.
is to separate us from the love of God, which notwithstanding he shall never
effectuate. There is a covenant knit up between God and man, the band whereof
is Jesus Christ, this Covenant Satan does what he can to dissolve it, by
alluring us to sin, and accusing us to God: on Gods part he cannot prevail,
on our part he assaults continually, but in vain also, because the Lord who
has made a covenant with us, keeps us also with him, so that though we be
tempted we cannot be overcome. This is evident in Jobs tentations, it was
neither the affliction of his body, the loss of his children, nor goods which
Satan craved so much as to empty his heart of the love of God* and make him to
blaspheme.

If we remembered this it would make us endeavor to possess our souls in
patience in all our troubles, If we remembered this, it would make us strong in
all tentations.
for so often as those things which we love are separate from us, Satan's end
is to separate us from our God, whom we should love above all things. And in
very deed this is a proper mark of the Children of God, that hovveuer their
outvvard estate change, their heart is never changed from the love of God; they
are Godly in prosperity, but more Godly in adversity, the more they are
troubled the nearer they draw unto the Lord: as fire in not quenched with wind
but made greater, so the love of God waxes stronger in the hearts of Gods
children by tribulation; whereas the wicked not rooted in Jesus Christ, Psalm.
1. 4.
are like unto chafe and the dust of the earth, carried away with every wind;
there is no pleasure so small, nor profit so vain which they prefer not
before God.

Now before the Apostle subioynes the answer, Christians are subject to many
crosses.
he makes an enumeration of some particular crosses, and demands if they will
do it: these crosses do either concern our bodies, our goods, our dwellings,
or our minds; for we are not to think here that the Apostle beats the air,
triumphing against such enemies as we have not. No, we have both crosses of
body and of mind, which we must prepare our selves to suffer; so using all
the helps of this our mortal life, as being content for the love of God to
want them, for this is the trial of true religion, we must not look to our
houses, Our dwelling on earth is not the place of our rest, as the Jews
thought; far less the place of our glory as Nabuchadnezer thought.
as Nabuchadnezer did to his palace of Babell, as a place of his glory, but
remember that which Micah said to the Jews, This is not the place of your
rest: and whatsoever thing else we use for maintenance of this mortal life,
Micah. 2. 10
let us so use them, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
as if we used them not, that we be not found when it comes to the trial
lovers of them more then lovers of God. 2. Tim. 3. 4.
Blessed is the man who loves nothing otherwise but in God, Nam solus is nihil
charum amittit, cui omnia chara sunt in eo qui non amittitur.

Again perceive here in this enumeration, Gods indulgence toward us appears
in that he has not laid on us the greatest crosses.
a gradation of seven steps, by which the Apostle ascends: It is a great
thing to be in trouble, but to be troubled, and in anguish also is yet greater,
and for him that is in anguish to be banished, in banishment to sustain hunger
and nakedness, and with these to be in continual peril, and last of all to
dye by the sword, every one of these last is greater then the former, yet all
of them (says the Apostle) are not able to separate us from the love of
Christ. Our warning is here that when we see unto how many crosses Christians
are subject, and how few of them God has laid upon us, we should acknowledge
the Lords fatherly indulgence toward us, who regarding our weakness has
hitherto dealt tenderly with us. And again it should prepare us for greater
afflictions, so long as we have not resisted to the blood, Heb. 12. 4.
nor laid down our lives for Jesus, we should remember that greater battles
than any which as yet we have foughten are before us, wherein we must fight, if
it please the Lord to enter us into them.

Shall tribulation? Now he comes to the particular enumeration. The first is
tribulation: the word (...), which the Apostle uses signifies a pressing
out, from the effect which it works in the godly, The afflictions of the
Godly and wicked differ in nature.
to wit, that it presses out and makes manifest that grace of God which
before was latent in them, like as in the wicked it presses out their vile
and filthy corruption, which before was secret: for the afflictions of the
godly and of the wicked differs in nature and in effects: the wicked in
suffering communicates with the curse of Adam, cursed is the earth for thy
sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life: but the Godly
in their suffering communicates with the Cross of Christ. For the one in
suffering communicates with the curse of Adam, the other with the cross of
Christ.


They differ also in effects, They differ also in effects: for trouble makes
the one to bless, the other to blaspheme.
for the godly man being pressed by trouble, brings out the fruit of praise
and thanksgiving with patience: Sicut aromata odorem, non nisi cum accenduntur
expandunt, As sweet spices spreads not abroad their smell, till they be burnt
or beaten; or as a grain of mustard seed not stamped seems to be soft,
where otherwise being brayed, Greg. Moral. in Job. lib. 2.
it renders out a strong savor: so the children of God who otherwise seem to
be weak and void of spiritual strength, when they are beaten by affliction,
sends out a sweet smelling savor of rich and manifold graces. Affliction is
Gods wine press.
And therefore I call affliction the wine press of God the great Husbandman,
by which he so presses the berryes of the fruitful trees of his own
vineyard, that out of their juice he may glorify himself and comfort
others, but the wicked are like unto a vile stinking puddle, which the more it
is stirred the worse it smells: for when they are troubled they send out
blasphemy, railing, murmuring, and in their impatiencie foome out their own
shame.

Anguish. The godly are not only troubled but ofttimes straited in trouble.
The word he uses is (...), which properly signifies straitness of place,
wherein a man is so pinched, that he is not able to turn him. Now from the
body it is translated to the mind, to express the straitness of the
afflictions of the children of God, out of which ofttimes they themselves can
see no passage: that which David said to Jonathan, 1. Sam. 20. 3
A^ the Lord lives there is but one step between me and death, so fares it
many a time with the Children of God, but the Lord comes in with unlooked for
deliverance in their most desperate distress, which not only relieueth them
for the present, but does confirm them for the time to come. 2. Cor. 1. 9. 10.
We received (says the Apostle) the sentence of death in our selves, because
we should not trust in our selves, but in God who raises the dead, who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust that
he will yet deliver us.

Persecution. The word (...), signifies that sort of affliction, by which the
Children of God are persecuted and chased from one place to another: They are
persecuted and chased from place to place.
the world has never thought them worthy of a room among them, and therefore
have they been forced to live in caves, and dens, and wildernesses: but our
comfort is, that the Lord has always showed himself most familiar with his
Children, God most familiar with his children, when they are banished by men.
when the world has been most hard unto them, Jacob is banished from his
fathers house by the cruelty of Esau, and his heavenly Father received him
into his house, comforting him by such a familiar revelation of his presence,
as he never had felt before so long as he dwelt at home: and John being
banished by Domitian into Pathmos, found also the Lord reueiling himself unto
him more familiarly than he had done before. What part of the world is there,
wherein Tyrants can banish the Children of God from the acts of their
Comforter? they know that in their own house they are strangers, as Abraham
was in Canaan the Land of his inheritance, and therefore can be the better
content as strangers to live in any other part of the world. Basil being
threatened by Modestus the Deputy of the Emperor with banishment, Nazian de
vita Basil.
Nihil (inquit) horum quae dixisti timeo, I fear none of these things whereof
thou have spoken, nihil possidens ab exilij metu liber sum, vnam hominu^
cognoscens esse patriam Paradisum, Omnem autem terram commune aspicimus naturae
exilium, possessing nothing I am free from the fear of banishment, knowing
that Paradise is the only country of men, and the whole earth is a common
place of banishment to us all.

The fourth is Famine, Famine is one of Gods ordinary plagues, and with it
also the godly are tried.
which of it own nature is one of the Leuit. 26. 19
and the earth beneath as iron, so that albeit men labor and sow, yet they
receive no increase; Deu. 11. 14.
sometime again he gives in dew season the first and latter rain, so that the
earth renders abundance, but the Lord by blasting-winds, or by the Caterpiller,
Cankerworme, and Grasse-hopper does consume them, who comes out as exacters
and officers sent from God to poind men in their goods, Miserable are they
whose gain is to increase Famine, they are Caterpillars in the Land.
because with them they would not honor the Lord: which I mark by the way,
that those unnatural men who do what they can to increase famine in the Land,
may know they are but Caterpillars, scourges, and rods of the wrath of God,
or as Basil calls them Mercatores humanarum calumnitatum, Basil. ser. 1. in
Auar.
making their private gain a common calamity, and using that as a benefit to
themselves, which God has threatened as a plague to the people: assuredly
unless they repent the Lord shall cast them at length into the fire, as the
rods of his wrath.

But we are to know that famine, The lord who changed the Serpent into a
flourishing rod has changed cursed famine into a blessed cross to his
children.
which in the own nature is a curse and plague of God, to the godly is
changed: the Lord who made the bitter waters of Marah sweet, and turned a
biting serpent into a flourishing rod, has changed the nature of all those
evils which sin has brought upon us, now they work for our good, and are
become like Waspes wanting stings, profitable to waken us and exercise our
faith, but not able to separate us from the love of God. Among those famine is
a great tentation, Nature being impatient of the want of necessaries; and
therefore Satan who picks out the time and place of tentations as may be most
for his vantage, tempted our blessed Savior when he began to wax hungry.
Mat. 4. 3.
It is a rare grace in want to praise the Lord and trust in his fatherly
providence. Solomon never felt it, yet he knew it was a rare tentation,
therefore he prayed that the Lord would neither give him poverty nor riches,
Pro. 30. 8.
least the one make him full, and cause him deny God, and the other should
cause him to steal, and take the name of God in vain: yet no extremity of
this tentation can separate them from the love of God, for either in their
greatest necessities the Lord meruailously prouides for them, or then
strengthens them with patience and inward comfort to sustain it.

For sometime the earth has been as iron, How the Lord prouides in famine for
his children.
but the heavens has ministered food to Gods people; as in that barren
wilderness wherein Israel soiourned, the earth yielded no fruit, but the
heavens rayned down Manna and Quails: and sometime the heavens have been as
brass, yet in the earth has the Lord provided nourishment, as he did by the
Ravens and the Widow of Sarepta for Eliah: and if otherwise it please the Lord
by famine to inflict death upon his children, then he strengthens their spirits
with the bread of life, and comforts their hearts with hid Manna, so that they
can say to worldlings as our Savior said to his Disciples, I have bread to
eat that ye know not of: John. 4. 32.
and so no famine can separate them from the love of God.

Nakedness. Christians tried also with Nakedness.
This is also a great tentation, partly for the Basile makes mention of forty
Martyrs who being striped naked were put forth in the night to be pined with
cold, and afterward burnt with fire in the day. Of these it is evident that
nakedness is one of those tentations whereby Satan seeks to trouble our
faith and patience: but he who has put on the Lord Jesus for a garment,
neither shame nor loss of natural life procured by nakedness, can separate
him from the Love of God.

Where we may perceive how different the dispositions of the Christian and the
worldling are. The begged glory of worldlings is in their apparel.
The men of this world esteems nakedness their shame, and places a great part
of their glory in gorgeous garments; and no marvel, quia d^ proprio non
habent decorem, Bern. in cant. sermon. 41.
necesse est vt aliunde mendicent: for having no glory of their own they must
borrow glory from others. From the Beasts of the earth they borrow skins and
wool; from the Fowls of heaven they borrow feathers; from the Worms they
borrow silk; from the Earth silver and gold; from the Waters pearls: and of
these does man make up his begged glory; whose glory in the beginning was to be
clad in the image of God: but what is it? Ber. ad Soph. Virg. epi. 113
decor qui cum vest induitur, and cum vest deponitur, vestis est non vestiti:
that beauty which is put on and put off with the garment, is not the beauty
of the person, but of the garment.

Yet are these but licitae quodammodo insaniae, Under pretense of hiding their
nakedness they show forth their Nakedness.
if they be compared with the madness of others who alter by artifice the
shape and color of the countenance which God has given them. Manus deo
inferunt cum illud quod formauit reformare conantur: for they put hands as it
were into God, Cypri. trac. 2. de habi. virg.
while they prease to reform that which God has formed. Nescientes quia opus
dei est omne quod nascitur, diabeli quod mutatur. I know they excuse their fact
with the couerings of comeliness and necessity, Cyril. catch. 4
but praetextu tegendae turpitudinis in maiorem turpitudinem incidunt, for
worldlings are never so naked as when they are best apparelled. As for men
truly godly they will think shame of wickedness but not of nakedness: Nazian.
sent.
improbum vocarite pudeat non pauperem aut ignobilem: blind Egiptians may
account sheep keepers abomination, but true Israelits will think shame to be
profane, but no shame to be poor: those godly ones in the wilderness clad
with sheep skins, Heb. 11. 37.
and goats skins, were more honorable in the eyes of God, Act. 12. 21.
than Herod in his royal robe of shining silver, glancing the more brightly by
the shining of the Sun upon it, if we will credit Josephus. But what of all
this? our unwillingness to want superstuitie of apparel, argues that we are
evil prepared to endure nakedness for Christ's sake.

Again, we learn here that seeing nakedness is one of those crosses whereby
the Lord tryes the faith and patience of his children, and that then it is time
for us to endure a cross when God lays it upon us, Crosses should not be
assumed by our selves but patiently borne when God lays them on.
it cannot be good religion to impone it to our selves, where God lays it not
upon us. It is a hard thing to keep mediocritie, not to be either too remiss
in religion, or too superstitious. Will Worship what ever show of godliness it
has in the eyes of men, is but abominable idolatry in the eyes of God; and we
are not to place true religion in those things which he has not required: the
false Prophets ware a rough garment, but it was to deceive: False Prophets
wears rough garments to deceive, so they did of old, and so they do still.
the Priests of Baal spared not to lance their own flesh, but it is rejected
by God as blind zeal: to walk bare footed, or wear a garment of hair
without linen or wool next the skin: to carry on our head a Franciscanes
hood, and at last to be buried in it: If these things have in them such
holiness as they pretend, is it not a marvel their holy Father the Pope is
not careful to make himself more holy, by changing his triple Crown with a
Franciscanes hood? or that his Cardinals are so inconsiderate as to redeem by
so excessive prices a Cardinals hat, the hair garment being better cheap, and
much more meritorious of eternal life?

Perils. The Christian in every place subject to perils.
The life of a Christian is full of perils, every palaestra: in the sea, in the
land, in the city, in the wilderness, go where he will he shall encounter
with perils. These are so many probations of our Faith and Patience, 2 Cor. 11.
26
of Gods truth and providence. Our preservation depends on our protector, even
the Watchman of Israel who neither slumbers nor sleeps. Comfort for the
Christian in all perils.
As a Father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord on them who
fear him: and we know that a natural father does never look more pitifully
upon his child, than when he sees him in greatest danger, and shall we expect
less kindness from our heavenly Father? The men of this world when they send
out their servants in commission, goes not with them, themselves knows not
their danger, and are not able to preserve them, but the Lord our God when he
sends out his servants foresees the peril and goes with them to preserve them:
Esaias. 43. 2.
Fear not, for when thou passest through the water I will be with thee, and
through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. The more perils we fall
into the more experience have we of Gods loving preserving us; for the which
we may say, perils may well make us grow in the sense of the love of God, but
cannot separate us from him.

Sword. This is the last, and by it the Apostle expresses The Christian subject
also to violent death.
for unto these also the servants of God and his best beloved Children have
been subject ever from the beginning. The Apostle gloryes that no kind of
death can separate us from Christ; yea as he says in another place, Dan. 3. 25.
it conioynes us more nearly unto him, as Nebuchadnezzans fire loosed the
bonds of the three children, but hurt not their bodies: so death inflicted by
man may loose our bodily bonds, but cannot hurt our souls. Non sunt timenda
spiritui quae fiunt in carne, quae extra nos est quasi vestimentum: let not our
spirit fear those things which are done in the flesh, which is as a garment
without us. Thus we see how no kind of cross can separate us from the love of
God.

Verse 36. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we
are counted as sheep for the slaughter.
THe Nature of man does greatly abhor the cross, That the christian is
subject to these crosses he proves by a testimony of holy scripture.
and therefore the Apostle here is the more abundant in furnishing us with
comforts against it, glorying in this that no cross can separate us from
Christ; a comfort exceeding great indeed: for seeing we know that the Lords
love toward us in unchangeable, having his favor which is better than life,
what other loss should we regard or make moan for? Now because he has made
an enumeration of sundry sorts of crosses, he proves here by a testimony of
scripture, that it is the lot of Gods children to be subject unto them; for
seeing they are not exempted from the greatest which is to be slain by the
sword, why shall we promise to our selves any immunitie from the smallest.

The testimony is taken out of the 44. Psalm, Worshippers of God howsoever
disioyned in time or place yet are of one communion.
wherein the Church of God being heavily afflicted, as some thinks under
Antiochus, complained to God of her heavy trouble, that albeit they had not
fallen away from the pure worship of his name, nor lifted up their hands to a
strange God, yet they were counted as sheep for the slaughter: Psalm. 44. 22.
and this testimony the Apostle applies to the estate of the Church in his
time, wherein the Apostle will teach us that howsoever the true worshippers of
God live in sundry times and ages, yet they are of one communion, maintayning
all one cause: therefore the Apostle uses that which is spoken of the
afflicted Church of the Jews, as competent to afflicted Christians.

As it is written. A pleasant harmony among the writers of holy Scripture.
Albeit the Apostles had their immediate calling from God, and spoke and wrote
nothing of private motion, but by divine inspiration, yet is it their custom
to confirm their doctrine by testimonies of the Prophets. This harmony among
the writers of holy Scripture is no small confirmation of our Faith, that they
who never saw one another in the face, yet all together agrees to breath out
one truth. Ezech. 1. 11
As the Cherubines stretch their wings one to another, so the Prophets and
Apostles reach their testimonies one to another: Luke. 5. 7.
and as the Mariners in Peter's ship having a greater draught than they were
able to hail in, beckned to their companions to help them: so do the Apostles
call on the Prophets, and require their help for confirmation of the truth of
God, that the more may be converted by them. Every Ecclesiastique teacher is
bound to confirm his doctrine by Scripture.
And their fact stands for a rule to teach us that whateuer calling men
pretend, they should confirm their doctrine by that which is written: a
necessary ground to be holden in these days, wherein the name of the Church is
abused to impugn the truth of the Church. The Apostles after the example of
their Master confirmed their doctrine by scripture. Acts. 17. 11.
Saint Paul was content that the Beraeans should try his doctrine by the
Scripture: what pertnesse then is it that the doctors of the Romish Church
challenge to themselves this singular exemption, as not to be judged by the
word: as though they themselves and not that which is written should be the
warrant of their doctrine, and all men were bound to believe them fide
implicita.

Again, No book between Malachie and Matthew to be received for Canonical
Scripture.
we are to mark here how that one place of holy scripture does interpret and
confirm another. Moses lays a ground to the Prophets, the Prophets expounds
them and delivers them clearer to the Apostles, the Apostles builds upon them a
plain and perfect doctrine for the edification of Christ's mystical body. The
two Testaments are as the two lips of the mouth of God, by which he has
breathed out to us his mind concerning his worship and our salvation. And it
is to be marked that out of these books which the primitive Church of old, and
the reformed Church now, has esteemed Apochrypha, neither Jesus our Lord, nor
any of his Apostles have brought out any testimony for confirmation of
doctrine, and therefore those Books interiected between Malachie and Matthew
are to be rejected as an uncouth breath. Malachie ends the old Testament,
Mal. 3. 1.
with a promise of the coming of the Angel: even the new Eliah, who should
go before the face of our Lord to prepare his way, John the Baptist, and
Matthew begins the New Testament, with a narration of the accomplishment of
that Prophecy; but between these two the holy Ghost employed no pene-man of
the holy Oracles.

For thy sake. Three things obseruedin this testimony.
In the testimony we have three things: first, the greatness of the
affliction of a Christian, when he says, we are slain, subject not only to
smaller crosses but to the greatest: Secondly, the continuance of their
afflictions, All the day long, that is, not in one age, but in all ages of the
world has it been our lot: thirdly, the cause of their suffering, for thy
sake.

It is necessary for our comfort that we mark the fountain, The causes for
which God sends affliction should be marked.
and from whence affliction proceeds to the Godly, for the ignorance thereof
makes many to err with the friends of Job, and judge wrong of the godly, as if
they were stricken always for their sins, when indeed they are not: we are
therefore to know that sometime affliction comes to the Godly for sin past;
sometime for sin to come; sometime neither for sin past, nor sin to come,
but that the works of God may be made manifest.

The first way afflictions to them whom the Lord loves are medicinal
restoratiues, Afflictions laid on for sin past are medicinal restoratiues.
by which they are wakened to recover their health by repentance for those
sins through which they have become spiritually diseased: for howsoever the
Lord give loose reins to the children of wrath, Psalm. 81. 12.
and delivers them up to their own hearts desire, Hos. 2. 6.
yet will he hedge in with thrones the ways of those whom he purposes to
save, and will waken them by some sharp rod or other, when he feeth them
sleeping in security; so taught he Miriam by Lepros^e to leave her murmuring;
so wakened he Jonas out of his sleep by casting him into the sea; he cured
Zachary of infidelity by striking him with dumbness; he diuerted Paul from
his evil course by blindness: blessed is the man whom the Lord this way
corrects.

Sometime again the Lord sends affliction, Afflictions laid on to prevent sin
to come are wholesome preservatives.
as preservatives to his children to keep them from sin, whereunto he sees
of their weakness they are ready to fall, if they be not prevented: and so he
sent an Angel of Satan to buffet Paul, 2. Cor. 12. 7.
not for any sin he had done, but for a sin that he might do, least he
should have been exalted out of measure.

And sometime the Lord lays on affliction, But every affliction is not laid
on the godly for sin
neither to correct sins past, nor to prevent sins to come, but that the
works of God may be made manifest, which our Savior plainly teaches us,
when being demanded concerning him that was borne blind, whether it was for
his own sins, or the sins of his Parents: answered it was for neither of
them, John. 9. 3.
but that the works of God might be made manifest in him. And these works of
God manifested by affliction are of two sorts; for not only his marvelous
power and constant truth in preserving and delivering his own Church in all
troubles against the power, falshoode, and malice of the world, are manifested
that all men may see, it is not by the arm of man, but by the power of God
that his Church is continued upon earth: but likewise these manifold graces of
God, wrought secretly by his holy Spirit in the hearts of his children, are
made manifest to the world, such as their constant faith; their invincible love
toward God; their patience in the hardest sort of crosses. And unto these
kinds of afflictions do we refer that which here is spoken.

These afflictions which are for Gods sake, require these two things, comprised
by the Apostle in these words, Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19
that is a good Religion and a good conversation: Two things required in those
afflictions which are suffered for Gods sake.
though thy life be so good that it be unreprovable in the eyes of man, yet if
thou be not found in the faith, thy suffering is not suffering for Gods cause;
and albeit the Religion thou professest be good, if thy conversation be evil,
though thou would give thy body to be burnt for Religion, yet shall not thy
suffering be suffering for Chists cause: 1 Pet. 4. 15.
Let none of you suffer as evil doers, but if any man suffer as a Christian,
Cyprian de duplici mart.
let him not be ashamed. Non suppliciu^ facit martyrem sed causa: it is not the
cross makes the Martyr but the cause.

There has been no Heresy so gross, That Gods Martirs may be known from
Satan's Martyrs.
but some men have been bold to dye for it: which is not Christian fortitude,
but miserable hardness of heart. As the Lord Jesus has his Apostles and
Martyrs, so Satan has his false Apostles and Martyrs. Martires Satanicae
virtutis: and therefore we will conclude with Augustine, Aug. l. 1. con.
Parmen. Epi. cap. 8. and 9.
Non est ex passione certa Iustitia, it is not suffering that makes sure a
cause to be righteous: Sed ex Iustitia gloriosa passio, but it is
righteousness which makes suffering glorious.

For thy sake. It is common to al Christians to suffer with Christ, not so to
suffer for him.
It is common to all the Godly to suffer with Christ as ye heard before: but
to suffer for Christ is not a honor communicated to them all; the rarer that
it is, the more heartely should we welcome it when God sends it. The Apostle
rejoiced in the bonds wherewith he was bound for Christ's cause: the golden
chains of earthly ambassadors are nothing so honorable as chains of iron
which are worn for Christ's cause. The Emperor Constantine honored all the
Fathers of the Counsel of Nice, but made most of those who had suffered for
the cause of Christ; as in particular, he kissed the hole of Paphnutius eye,
which had been put out in time of trouble for Christ's sake, yet did he
reverence it as the most honorable and precious part of his body: no face so
beautiful as that which is deformed; no man so rich as he who has sustained
spoliation of his goods, Heb. 10. 34.
if it be for Christ's sake, neither is any death so glorious, as that which is
sustained for his cause: Si enim beati qui moriuntur in Domino, multo magis qui
pro Domino, for if they be blessed which dye in the Lord, much more blessed are
they w^o dye for the Lord.

But now because no Christian is persecuted without some cause alleged
against him by his persecuters, How causes falsely pretended by the wicked
takes not from the christian this comfort that he suffers for Gods sake.
and that also in every trouble his own conscience says that he has most
justly deserved it; how can he have this comfort that he suffers for Christ's
sake? The first is easily answered if we put a difference between the
pretended and the true cause for which the wicked do persecute us. If Haman
bear malice to Mordecay, for his sake he will forge a crime against all the
people of the Jews: if Amazia can cover his hatred against Amos by pretending
that Amos has conspired against the King: If the Princes of Darius envy
Daniels preferment, they can delate him as a rebel to the kings proclamation:
If Jeremy exhort the Jews to go out to the King of Babell, he shall be
accused as a confederate with the Chaldean. It is a common stratagem of Satan's
to stain the glory of Gods Children in their sufferings with false pretended
crimes, Vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, f^lsis rumoribus sordidentur,
that they who are cleared by the light of their own conscience may be defiled
with false reports. Sed been sibi conscius non debet falsis moueri, nec putare
plus esse ponderis in alieno conuitio, quam in suo testimonio, but hee^ who
has a good conscience ought not to be moved with false things, nor to think
there is more weight in any other man's traducing, than is in his own
testimony. Our comfort does stand sure, Psalm. 96. 4.
if we can say with David: They hate me without a cause. Psalm. 59. 3.
And again, They are gathered together against me not for mine offense, not
for my sin, O Lord. In suffering we must distinguish between that which men,
and that which our own conscience lays to our charge.


As for the other, the accusation of our conscience in trouble charging us with
sins which no man can lay to our charge, if we will distinguish between the
quarrel which conscience has against us, and that wherewith the wicked do
charge us, it shall be manifest that the cause of our persecution is our
disagreement with them in an evil course, and not any sin committed by us
against God, and so shall our comfort still remain that we are sufferers for
Christ's sake.

We are killed. Death cannot hurt the man of God.
How far forth this killing extends our Savior does teach us, when he says
they are able to kill the body and do no more. Mat. 10. 28.
Qui pro Christo moriuntur aliquid mortis accipiunt, Aug. de ciuit. dei. li.
13. c. 8.
ne tot a contingat: they may cast down this earthly tabernacle, but cannot
hurt the man of God.

But here it is enquired seeing these godly ones were alive when they sent up
this complaint unto God, A godly man not troubled in his own person is
pertaker of Christ's afflictions by sympathy.
how is it said they were slain? To this I answer, that two manner of ways
are the godly pertakers of Christ's afflictions, even when they are not troubled
in their own persons: first by lympathie with others that are troubled; for as
the head of the mystical body accounts himself persecuted when his members
are persecuted, so among the lively members thereof the grief and trouble of
one, is the grief and trouble of the rest. Romans 12. 15
If we mourn with them that mournes, and remember them who are in bonds as if
we were in bonds with them, Heb. 13. 3.
we are pertakers of their sufferings: but now the want of this compassion in
many who resting in their y^orie beds sorrows not for Joseph's affliction,
Amos. 6. 6.
proves them to be but dead and rotten members.

Secondly, All true christians are Martyrs in affection.
we communicate with the affliction of our brethren, when in our affection we
are ready to suffer with them, if so it would please the Lord to employ us; as
they are Martyrs in action, so will the Lord accept the others as Martyrs in
affection; Cyprian de dup. Martyr.
Deus enim non estimat quenquam ex euentu rerum sed ex affectu: for God
esteems not one by the event of things, How their ready will is accepted as a
deed, is declared in the example of Aquila and Priscilla.
but by their affection: Non fraudabitur Martyrij gloria per quem non stetit
quo minus Martyrium peregerit: he shall not be defrauded of the glory of
martyrdom, in whose default it was not that he accomplished his Martyrdom:
therefore Aquila and Priscilla are commended, that for the Apostles life they
had laid down their own ^eckes; Romans 16. 4.
their good will being reckoned unto them for a deed. But as Jacob hazarded
some of his family in the hands of Esau before others: so the Lord sends out
some of his servants to trouble before others. For the Lord is not so prodigal
of the lives of his children, that at one time he will hauock them all in the
hands of the wicked: though he send some out to the trial, he will reserve
others to be as it were the seed of the Gospel.

All the day long. Persecuters in this last age are most miserable
If we apply this testimony to the whole Church, then this day shall be the
whole course of time from the beginning to the end thereof. Early in the
morning Cain began to persecute his brother, and ever since bloody persecuters
in all ages have followed his way, but among them all the persecuters of this
last age, which is the evening, are most miserable: for all the blood shed
since the days of Abell shall light upon them. As in a good course his praise
is greatest who is foremost, so in an evil course his judgment shall be
greatest who comes hindmost, because he subscribes to the wickedness of all
those who has gone before him.

But if otherwise we apply this testimony to every christian, The whole time
of our life is but a day of suffering.
then this day must be called the whole time of our life, from our birth to our
death; warning us that in no age of our life we should promise to our selves
immunitie from affliction: Reu. 3. 10.
yet our comfort is, that the time of our trouble is here called a day, Or an
hour of tentation.
and in the Revelation, the hour of tentation, because it is but short. That
rebuke which our Savior gave his Disciples when they were sleeping in the
garden, Mat. 26. 40.
could you not watch with me one hour? may serve as a check unto us when we
faint in tentation; could ye not suffer with me one hour? Again, seeing our
trouble is short let us not in it limit the holy one of Israel, to prescribe
to the Lord the time of our deliverance. With what patience we should endure
in suffering referring the time of our deliverance to the Lord.
O how may we be ashamed of our impatience in trouble, when we look to Noah,
who entering into the Arc at the Lords commandment, after he had tarried a
whole year in it, yet sought not to come put till the Lord commanded him. And
Joseph the nourishing father of our Lord Jesus, when the Angel commanded him
to go to Aegipt, and said further unto him tarte there till I tell thee, Mat.
2. 13.
though Joseph knew not when he should come out of Aegipt the place of
banishment, yet referring the time to the Lord, he yielded himself obedient
to the holy commandment. The Lord work in us the like obedience of Faith.

And are counted. Worldings esteem christians but vile persons, and what
comfort we have against their contempt.
This is added by way of amplification, we are not only slain, but slain as
if we were slaves nothing worth. Wicked men account the godly little worth,
and therefore do handle them in a vile manner; but shall we for that be
discouraged? No, the Prince of our salvation was esteemed among men no more
worth then thirty pieces of silver, and that for our sake: shall we then
think evil for his sake to be counted less than the doung or clay where upon
we tread? Mat. 26. 15.
The Lord give us, 1 Cor. 4. 13.
true humility, that we may be content to be despised of men that we may be
approved of our God; he only has the balance in his hands, what ever weight
worldlings have in the eyes of men, when the Lord begins to weigh them as he
did Beltasar, no honor, no riches, no kingdom, shall help them to hold out
weight.

As sheep for the slaughter. In what respects wickedment account the godly as
sheep.
Wicked men accounts the godly slaughter sheep, because they think nothing is
lost when they are taken out of the way; yea also they reap a benefit thereby:
a proof whereof we may see in the primitive Church; for when Famine,
Pestilence and such like calamities were inflicted by God upon the Empire for
the contempt of his Gospel, the cause thereof was still imputed by men to the
christians, and therefore they were persecuted to death, with no less opinion
than that the putting them out of the way was to put the plagues of God from
the whole Empire; yet did they not this way remedy the wrath due to their
sins, but procured thereby either double stripes to themselves, or then were
handled in the patience of God like unto Oxen fed for the slaughter.

And here it shall not be unprofitable to oppone the judgment of the Lord
concerning his children, How God also compares his children to sheep, but in
far contrary respects.
to the judgment of men. The Lord also compares his little ones to sheep, but
upon plain contrary respects to those which the world has: first for their
innocence and simplicity they are not like other beasts, that have either
teeth in their Cyprian de simp. prael.
The sheep of Christ (says Cyprian) has not the bloody teeth of Wolves,
cruelty is an argument of bastard religion: and thirdly, for

Verse 37. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours
through him that loved us.
HEre the Apostle does now subioyne an negative answer to his former
interrogations with an amplification: these things whereof I have spoken are so
far from being able to separate us from the love of God, that by the contrary
in them all we are more then conquerours, that is, victors out of all doubt.

In all these things. The Christian compared to a rock in the sea*
Then ye may perceive that unto all those crosses enumerated before the
christian man is subject: he is not improperly compared to a Rock in the sea,
which being beaten on every side with waves raised by the wind, yet stands
immovable, unbroken it self, breaks them that assaults it.

Again ye see that the Apostle who speaking of the estate of christians upon
earth, In death christians are conquerours.
said before we are slain all the day long, says now, we are more then
conquerours: strange it is that he who is slain should be a conqueror; but
so it is, the christian battle every way is marvelous, pa^tly because it is
foughten within and against himself, and partly because then is he a
conqueror, when ^ee seems to be vanquished, being the member of that head who
obtained greatest victory when he suffered most shameful death. A christian
is not a single man standing by himself but a man incorporate in Christ.


Through him that loved us. The Apostle does so give comfort to the christian
that he reserues the glory unto the Lord, the strength whereby we prevail is
from him that loved us, not from our selves. It is very comfortable to consider
that a christian is not a man standing or living by himself, he has his being
in Christ, as long as there is life in him we cannot die: it is true that
sometime being deserted and left to our selves we fall away for a time, as we
may see in Peter, who at the voice of a Damsel denied the Lord Jesus; and
this is to teach us that the praise of our standing, perseuering, and
ouer-comming pertaines to the Lord.

Verse 38 For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 29. Nor
height, nor any other creature, etc.
THe Apostle continuing in his triumph, mounts to an higher sort of enemies,
and he also proclaims defiance to them, affirming that neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any other
creature whatsoever, if any other be, are able to separate us from the love of
God.

Of the which we have first to learn, A Christian may be assured of his
salvation in this life, contrary to the doctrine of papists
that a Christian man in this life may be persuaded of his salvation, neither
is it to be accounted presumption, for as much as in so doing he leanes not
upon himself, but upon the word and promise of God, which the Lord has
confirmed by an oath, that he may make sure to the heirs of promise the
stabilitie of his counsel. Where if the adversary object, that the word of the
Lord out of all doubt is true, and that they who believes and repents shall be
saved, but every one who says he believes does not believe, and so cannot be
persuaded of his salvation? To this I answer, that he who repents unfeignedly
and believes, knows as certainly that he has repentance and faith, as he
who has in his hand a jewel knows that he has i^; and therefore may
conclude with himself that the promises of salvation made to the penitent
believers belongs unto him: for albeit it be true, there be many in the Church
like unto those five foolish Virgins, who suppose they have that which they
shall not be found to have in the end, yet is there no reason to conclude that
because some are deceived, all are deceived; because some think they have
faith and have it not, therefore none can be sure that they have faith.

Out of all doubt where the Lord Jesus dwells by his Spirit, he makes
himself known to them in whom he dwells, This is proved from the nature of
the holy spirit whom the Christian has received.
according to that Know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates?
and these names given to the holy Spirit of Adoption does also confirm the
same truth: for he is called the Seal, the Witness, and earnest penny of
God, which names he receives from his effects and operations which he works
in them to whom he is given: 2. Cor. 13. 5.
either therefore must the adversary say, that there are none to whom the Spirit
is given, or they must grant that they to whom he is given are sure: the first
they will not affirm, the second they cannot with reason deny: Romans 8. 16.
for what is this to say that a man has the Seal, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
the Witness, and the Earnest of God given to confirm the promise of God, and
yet all these do not make him who has them sure of salvation?

But here least that which I have said discourage them who are of weak
consciences, Comfort for the godly when they cannot find this assurance.
let them know that this assurance of salvation does not always continue with
the Christian in a like measure: for here we do so believe, that we want not
our own unbelief, and albeit our faith when it is in the full strength
ouer-comes all doubting, yet is it oftentimes so weak, that it is again
disquieted with doubting, for which if we pray instantly with the Father of
that child, Lord I believe, Mark. ^. 24.
but help my unbelief, we may be sure at length Faith shall overcome: and
thus far teach we concerning the assurance which the Christian man has of
his salvation.

But as for that Religion which teaches doubtings, A good religion may have
doubting, but it is an evil religion which leaves men in doubt.
and pronounces them accursed who hold that a man may be assured of salvation,
we accurse it as a doctrine enemy to Faith and Salvation; such as is the
doctrine of the counsel of Trent, Si quis dixerit hominem renatum teneri ex
side ad credendum se certo esse ex numero praedestinatorum, anathema sit. Sess.
6. cant. 15.
It is strange to see that where they teach a man is able to fulfill the whole
Law of God, and by his works to merit eternal life, yet they accurse him, if
he say he is sure to be saved: so directly does one point of their false
doctrine impugn another. But indeed it is no marvel if their Religion can
yield no comfort nor certainty of salvation to the weary conscience, because
they draw men from off the foundation Jesus Christ, in whom only it is
promised that we shall find rest to our souls, Mat. 11. 29.
and would make us to lean upon rotten foundations, such as the merit of
Masses, the virtue of our works, Why Papistry cannot make a man sure of
salvation.
and humane satisfaction; and because all these cannot yet satisfy the
doubting consciences of men, they suspend them with a vain hope of greater
comfort which they shall find in their forged and comfortless Purgatory:
thus do they hold the poor people comfortless both in life and in death. But
as for us we will abide on the rock, renouncing all purgation, but the
purgation of his blood; It is not presumption, but faith to show what we have
received.
we will content our selves with Jesus Christ, in whom the Father is well
pleased, that in him we may find rest to our souls, which neither in our
selves, nor in any other creature shall we ever be able to find. Let them
call it Presumption, Aug. ser. 28.
Non arrogantia est, sed fides praedicare quod acceperis, non superbia est, sed
deuotio, it is not presumption but Faith: or otherwise if we say* unto him who
has begotten us by the lawer of regeneration, Pater, bona praesumptio est,
Father, this said Augustine is a good presumption. Bernard in Septuag.
And to the same effect said Bernard, Propter hoc data sunt signa quaedam
manifesta salutis, vt indubitabile sit ^um esse de numero Electorum in quo ea
signa permanserint, This is the truth of God agreeable to Scripture and
ancient Fathers which we do affirm, howeuer they do accurse it.

That neither life. Vanity of worldly pleasures discovered
By life we are to understand the pleasures of this life, strong tentations
indeed: for in the hearts of many they prevail against the love of God: that
we may learn to despise them, and to count with the Apostle, all things to be
doung in regard of Jesus, let us look unto those two things which discouers
unto us the vani^e of worldly pleasures: The abundance of them makes the^ loath
some.
first, they are most loathsome to them, who have Solomon, who wanted nothing
delectable under the Sun, Eccles. 2. 10.
yet by the very use of them, he found the vanity of them, and was moved to
abhor them. It is far otherwise with heavenly pleasures, the more we taste of
them, the more we esteem of them, hungring still for more, we cannot be
satisfied with that which we have gotten already.

If they be continual they become painful.
worldly pleasures are of this nature, that if they be continued without
intermission they turn into pains; therefore is it that those same things which
now we choose for recreation, incontinently they become wearisome unto us, and
we cast them away, so that it is not so much by themselves, as by the change
of them that we are delighted, Sola vicessitudine recreamur: being weary of
walking, we refresh our selves with sitting; again being weary of fitting, we
rise to refresh our selves with walking, and so fares it with all the
recreations of this life, being continual they become wearisome. So often
therefore as Satan by worldly pleasures would steal away our hearts from the
love of God, let us consider how vain and small a pleasure it is which he
would give us, in respect of that unspeakable joy which he would take from us.

Nor death. Remembrance of death profitable to keep us uncorrupted with the
pleasures of this life
By death we understand not only death it self, but all those pains that
go before it, and terrou^s which accompany it. There was never life so long,
but it has been concluded by death: no life so pleasant but the pains of
death shall swallow up all the pleasures thereof. As the seven lean Kine
devoured the seven fat, and the seven years of famine consumed the fruit of
seven years of plenty: so shall the dolours and terrors of death eat up all
the pleasures and delectations of this vvretched life. If we suffer the
pleasures of this life to bewitch us, be sure the terrors of death shall
confound us. It were therefore good that as Joseph of Aramathia had his
sepulcher in his Garden, so we season all the pleasures of our life with
remembrance of our death, this is summa Philosophia.

Yet our comfort is, Comfort for the godly against death.
that if we live in Christ, no terror of death can separate us from him; yea,
death conioynes us nearer to the Lord Jesus then we were before: we see
ofttimes by experience that the children of God have so triumphed in the very
dolours of death, and rejoiced in the sense of Gods love, that they have forgot
all their bodily pains. As the top of mount Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
was to Moses the place of his death, and the first place, wherein ever he got
a sight of Canaan, so shall death be to the children of God, where we lay down
the sight of this world, there shall we take up the sight of eternal life,
which shall never be taken from us.

Nor Angels. Reprobate Angels how they are God messengers and to what end.
By Angels here I understand not elect Angels, for they are not enemies to us
but ministering spirits for our salvation, but reprobate Angels: for these names
of Angels, principalities and powers are common both to good and evil Angels.
And they are so called partly from the power which God has lent them, and
partly from the message wherein he imployes them: for sometime they are sent
out as messengers of his wrath to punish the wicked; and so an evil spirit was
sent from the Lord to punish Saul: 1 Samuel 16. 14
and sometime to exercise the godly; and so an Angel of Satan was sent to
buffet the Apostle Paul for his humiliation: 2. Cor. 12. 7.
we are not exempted from their tempting, but praised be God, Two sorts of
Satan's operation..
we are exempted from their tyranny and dominion. Their working in regard of
the wicked is (...), the efficacy of error; for the Lord has given them up
into the hands of Satan: but their working in regard of the godly is but
(...), tentation. Always seeing so long as we live we must wrestle against so
strong enemies, let us watch and be sober; Ephesians. 6. 11.
let us stand with the complete armor of God upon us. In Christ we are
restored to a better estate, tha^ that which Adam had in Paradise,


Again we mark here how that our estate in Christ is better than the estate of
Adam by his first creation; for then an apostate Angel drew Adam to an
apostasy also from God, but now no Angel is able to separate us from the love
of God; the reason is, the covenant which God made with Adam was without a
mediator; he had the keeping of his own salvation in his own hand: but the
covenant of grace with us is bound up in the mediator Christ Jesus, John. 17.
12.
to whom the Father has committed us, that he might redeem and save us; he
has taken us into his hand and none are able to take us from him; our
salvation depends not on our selves, it is not in our keeping but in his, and
therefore is it most certain.

Principalities nor powers. How names of power are given to reprobate Angels.
These names are not to terrify or astray us, seeing as I said these reprobate
Angels have no power but that which is lent and limited of God. Therefore Saint
Jude says that they are reserved in chains under darkness: Jude. ver. 6.
and here for our comfort we are to consider how that there are two chains
wherewith they are bound, and other two wherewith they are tormented: the first
chain that binds them is their own nature: the second is Gods providence:
the first restraines them that they cannot do the evil which they would;
Satan bound with three chains.
the second restrains them that they do not the evil which they can: Satan
being a natural creature is bounded within the compass of nature, his
insatiable malice would do much more evil than by nature he is able to
perform, for above or contrary to nature can he work nothing: and again
many evils is he able to do by natural means, which the pr^uidence of God
permits him not to do. The tormenting chains which are upon him, are an evil
conscience, and the wrath of God: for as he grows in evil doing so grows
his conscience worse and worse, and the wrath of God accordingly increases
upon him, with which two he is continually tormented.

Nor things present, nor things to come. In our Christian warfare our greatest
battle is the last.
This is a great amplification of our surety, that neither present evils
inflicted upon us, nor any evil to come, can separate us from the love of God.
And hereof we are warned that all our battles are neither present nor past,
some of them are to come; let us not wax secure because of our fore-past
victories. When Israel came out of Egypt one nation followed them to pursue
them, but when they^passed Jordan seven nations came against them: sure it is
our hindmost battle will be the heauiest, and our last tentation greatest;
the horror of hell, the rottenness of the grave, the conscience of sins
past, the dolours of present death, all standing up at one time to impugn our
faith, but shall not be able to separate us from that love of God wherein
stands our life.

Again we are taught here that Christians are sure of perseverance,
Christians are sure of perseverance.
nothing to come can separate us from the love of God: this is proved first
from the nature of GOD who is faithful, and will confirm us unto the end,
perfecting that which he has begun in us: Philip. 1. 6.
secondly, from the nature of the seed whereof we are begotten again, for it
is immortal: thirdly, from the nature of that life which by that seed is
communicated to us, it is the life of Christ which is not now any more subject
unto death.

Neither height nor depth. Satan has two arms whereby he wrestles, the one
is presumption.
By these I understand Satan has two manner of ways by which he wrestles
against men: some he mounts on the chariot of presumption; others he cast^
down into the deep of desperation: by prosperity he puffes up many to make
their fall the more shameful, those tentations which he used against our
blessed Savior do we think that he will spare them against other men? Mat.
4. 5.
he set him up upon the pinnacle of the temple, How Satan tempts to
presumption.
of purpose if he could to have thrown him down: and again took him up to
the top of an high mountain, where making a show to him of worldly kingdoms,
he promised to give them if he would fall down and worship him: and albeit
with these tentations he did not prevail against our blessed Savior, yet how
many in this world are daily bewitched with them, that without any refusal
they fall down and worship him. But as Simon Magus while he assayed to fly
from the top of the capital up into heaven, was thrown down to his
destruction: so shall the prosperiti^ of those men be their ruin, and their
high estate as a pinnacle whereupon they shall not continue. Happy is the man
whose heart is not exalted against God by any preferment that can come to him
upon the face of the earth: for he who rising in dignity rises also in pride
against the Lord, is raised up as Pharaoh was, that God may declare his power
in casting him down.

Nor depth. His other arm is desperation.
The other sort of Satan's tentations tend unto desperation: whom he sees he
cannot puff up, he does what he can to cast down, by fears, perturbations,
vvrong conceptions, but our comfort is both by the Apostles testimony, and our
own experience, we may be cast down, 2. Cor. 4. 9.
but we cannot perish.

Nor any other creature. No man is sure to continue in his estate but the
Christian.
Now in the end the Apostle does draw his speech to the height, his confidence
is so great, that not being content with the enumeration of adversaries which
he has made, he defieth yet all other whatsoever, if any other be: for he
speaks this by way of supposition, if there be yet any other creature than
those whom I have named, I am sure be what they will, they cannot separate us
from the love of Christ. He^e in the last room we do observe the surety of a
Christian above all other men in the world; only the Christian is sure his
estate shall never be changed. Worldlings may think with Babell in her
prosperity, Esa. 47. 7.
I shall never be moved, Luke. 12. 19.
and with the rich. Glutton promise to themselves many years to come, No
worldling shall abide in the state wherein now he stands.
but they shall be deceived, none of them shall continue in that slate wherein
presently they stand, the Lord shall drive them from their station as it were
with wheels, and shall roll them like a ball as he threatened to Shebna. Esaias.
22. 18.
Pharaoh his pomp shall perish in the red sea: Nebuchadnezzar shall be
changed from a Monarch of men unto a companion of Beasts: Manasses from the
Palace shall go to the Prison, and all the men of the world shall go from
the house to the grave; their beauty and royal pomp shall consume as a Moth,
only the Christian shall stand for ever in that happy union and fellowship
with GOD; this is the state of the Christian, this is his life, this is his
glory, and from it nothing present nor to come, shall ever be able to
transchange him. Everlasting praise therefore be to the Lord our God through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

