A Conduit of Comfort. Preached at Saint James before the Commissioners of the
Union of the Realms. By W. Couper, Minister of Gods word.

The Lord is my Comforter. Imprinted at London for W. Ferbrand, and are to be
sold at his Shop in Pops-head Allie, near the Exchange. 1606.

A CONDVIT OF COMFORT.
Romans 8. 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best, to them
that love God; even to them who are called according to his purpose.

My help is in the name of the Lord.


THis Chapter may be conveniently ^earmed, This Chapter is a compende of
Comfort.
A C^^p^nde ^f Chr^stian consolation; for, whereas many kinds of comfortes,
are dispersed throughout the holy Scriptures, for the strengthening of the man
of God, some of every kin^ are here gathered together in one, and like chosen
Flowers picked out of the Garden of God, are knitt together in one bunch, and
presented to thee, who art a Christian.

There are two things only which trouble us in this life. The sum and
division of this Chapter.
The first, is the remanents of sin in our corrupt nature: this was such a
matter of griese to the holy Apostle, that it made him to cry out; O miserable
man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from this body of (...)? So despleasant was it to him to
live in that body, wherein he found the motions of sin rebelling against the
law of his God. And if the Apostle accounted this bu^then so weighty to him,
Alas how should we complain* and what cause have we with Ezcchi^ to walk
weakly in the bitternes^e of our ^ou^es all our days* Esa. 38. 15.
in whom the life and power of that sinning sin is ^arre less restrained?
Yet least we should be so cast down with the sense of sin, that we despeare
and perish, being swallowed up with grief* the Lord furnishes us with many
comforts against it, 2. Cor. 49.
from the beginning of this Chap. to the midst of the 17. verse. The other
thing which may discourage us, is the manifold troubles which follow us in the
following of Christ.

For our Lord is like a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2. 2.
and at an Apple tree among the trees of the Forest: If we delight to sit
under his shadow; and if his Fruit be sweet in our mouth, we must be content
to walk toward him through many sharp afflictions: 2. Tim. 2. 3.
therefore are we commanded not only to suffer afflictions as the good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, but also to rejoice in tribulations: and if we
cannot attain to that perfection, Romans 5. 3.
at the least to count it exceeding joy when we fall into diverse temptations:
Iam. 1. 2.
Yet because no chastisement is sweet for the present, it has pleased the
Lord of his fatherly indulgence, and pity toward our weakness, Heb. 12.
to seyson the cupp of our bitter griefs, with his sweet comforts; which as
he does in many other par^es of holy Scripture, so specially from the 17. verse
of this Chapter, to the 30. wherein the Apostle aboundes with consolation;
showing himsel^e a fayth^ull Steward in the house of God, most careful to lead
as it were by the hand, the weary Son^es and Daughters of the living God, into
the Lords Wine-seller; there to refresh and stay us with the Flagons of his
wine, Cant. 2. 4.
and to comfort us with his Apples; Cant. 5. 1.
to ^^rengthen us with his hid Manna, and to make us merry with that Milk and
Honny, which out immortal Husband Jesus Christ, has proulded for us to
sustain us, if we faint not through these manifold tribulations, wherewith we
are compassed in this barren Wilderness.

That this is the Apos^les purpose, and order of proceeding in this Chapter, I
think his conclusion makes it manifest, which you have from the 31. verse to
the end; wherein he draws all that he had said, into a short sum, containing
the glorious triumph of a Christian, over all his enemies: the triumph is first
set down generally in the verse. 31. What shall we say then to these things: If
God be with us, who can be against us? thereafter he parts this general in
two: there is (would he say) but one of two that are against us; either sin,
or affliction: as to sin, he triumphs against it, verse 33. and 34. Who will
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, Who
shall condemn? It is Christ, who is dead, or rather who is risen again, who
is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. As to Affliction,
he begins his triumph against it, verse 35. Who shall separate us from the
^oue of Christ? his answer mountes up by a gradation, Will tribulation, or
anguish do it? yea, will death it self do it? or that which is much more; Will
Principalities and Powers do it? no: in all these things we are more then
conquerours, through him that loved us: Thanks therefore be unto our God, who
always makes us to triumph in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now in this verse, 2. Cor. 2, 14.
as Jacob gave his sons his greatest blessing in the last room, so the
Apostle gives to Christians his greatest comfort in the last room, whereof
this is the Sum: Our af^^ictions are so far from being prejudicial to our
salvation, that by the contrary, through the Lords marvelous working, they
tend to the aduancment thereof, and he enlarges the comfort: Not only
afflictions, but, all other things works for the best together, to them that
love the Lord.

The parts of the Verse are two: the first conteynes the comfort: the second,
a description of the persons to whom the comfort appertains. Now I come to
the words.

Also, that is, besides all the comfortes which I have given to you before, I
give you yet this further, learning us, Our troubles are many* but our c^mforts
are more then our troubles.
that albe^t our troubles be many, yet our comforts are more. Many (says
David) are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord deliureth him out of
them all. As if he would say, for every trouble, the Lord has a several
deliverance. Psalm. 34. 19.
Every temptation (says the Apostle) has the own issue. Every horn that
rises against us to push us, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
has attending upon it an hammer to repres^e it, (says the Prophet.) Esau
mourned upon his father Isaac: Zach. 1. 21.
although he was profane, yet he cried pitifully, Have (...) but one Blessing
my Father? But we (with the holy Apostle) may bless our heavenly Father, who
comfort us so in all our tribulations; that as the suffe^ings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolations abound through Christ: 2. Cor. 1. 5.
not one, but manifold are his blessings; and the storehouse of his
con^olations, can never be emptied. The Lord our God has not dealt (...) nor
spa^ingly with us, but a good measure of co^^olatio^s, pr^ssed down and
running over has he given to us in our bosom; Luke 6. 38.
his name be praised therefore: and yet how little is all this that we now
receive, in compa^^son of these (...) joys of God, that he has prepared for
v^; the like whereof the eye never saw, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
the ear never heard of, and the heart can not understand: Surely the greate^^
measure of comfort that we have in this life, is but the earnest penny of that
principal, which shall be given to us hereafter: If the earne^^ be so great,
what shall be the principal? (...) the (...) fruits of the Heavenly (...) be so
delectable, how shall the full mass thereof abundantly content us, Psalm. 17.
15.
when we shall behold the face of our God in righteousness, Psalm. 16, 11.
and shall be satisfied with his image; when we shall be filled with the fullness
of joy, which is in his presence, and with those pleasures which are at his
right hand for euer-more?

We know. If you ponder the Apostles words, The Privileges of a Christian,
can not be known of them, who do not possess them.
you shall find, that by an Emphasis, he restraynes this knowledge to the
Children of God, excluding Worldlings and Naturalistes from it. The spiritual
man discerns all things: but he himself is judged of no man. A natural
man can not understand the things that are of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14. 15.
The Gospel is Wisdom indeed; but Wisdom in a misteri^; and Wisdom
among them that are perfect. 1. Cor. 2. 7.
Every Article of our Faith and ^oynt of Christian doctrine: every privilege of
a Christian, 1. Cor. 2. 6.
is a Mystery: therefore no marvel that the Gospel be foolishness to the
Natural man, who perishes: And this does draw us to consider that the
excellent things of Christiani^e, can be known of none, but of those that
possesses them. The value, or rather vanity of earthly Jewels, has bin
better known of some that never inioyed them, then of them who possess them:
but the Jewels of Gods kingdom such as Peace, Righteousness, joy in the Holy
Ghost, can be known of none but of the Christian only, who inioyes them. The
new Name, Reave. 2. 17.
given to the Christian, who can know but he that has it? and none can know
what is the sweetness of hid Manna, except he taste it: therefore says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 8.
Taste and consider how gracious the Lord is: telling you that the
graciousnesse of the Lord, can not be considered by him who never did taste it.
If you go and speak to a Worldling of inwar^ Peace, of Spiritual joy, or of
the privileges of a Christian, you shall seem to him a Barbarian, or one that
speaks a strange language which he understands not; or if he himself
speak of them which he sees learnedly hearing or reading, yet shall he speak
like a bird, uttering voices which she understands not. As the brute Beast
knows not the excellency of a man's life, and therefore delights it self
with Hey and Prouander, seeking no better; because it knows no better. So the
Natural man knows not the excellency of a Christian, Act. 26. 24.
and therefore disdaines him, counting him a fool, a madd man, and the
offspring of the world: he takes the Dung of the earth in his arms for his
inheritance: 1. Cor. 4. 13.
let him brook the portion of Esau, that the fatness of the earth may be his
dwelling place: Genesis 27 39.
let his Wine and his Wheare abound to him, Psalm. 4. 7.
he cares for no more: he knows not what it is to have his Soul made glad
with the light of the countenance of God. This is your miserable condition, O
ye wretched worldlings, ye are cursed with the curse of the Serpent; Genesis 3.
ye creep as it were on your bellies, and lick the dust of the eath all the
days of your life: Coloss. 3. 1.
ye have not an eye to look up to heaven, nor a heart to seek those things
which are above; most fearful is your estate: we warn you of it, but it is
the Lord who must deliver you from it.

This resolute knowledge is the mother of spiritual courage, Resolute
knowledge is the mother of patience.
constancy, and patience: therefore the Apostle urges it in this place, that
the Christian may be made thereby strong, and patient in tribulation: and
indeed what needs him fear in the evil day; yea though the Earth should be
removed, Psalm. 42.
and the Mountains fall into the midest of the Sea: who knows that the Lord
sits on his Throne, Reave. 4.
having the world as a glassie Sea before him, governing all the walterings,
changes, and events of things therein, to the good of them that love him? Oh
that we had prosited so much in the school of Christ all our days, that
without doubting, or making any exception, we could believe this which here
the Apostle lays for a most sure ground of comfort, that so we might change
all our thoughts and cares into one; namely, how to grow in the love of God,
that in a good conscience we might say to the Lord with Peter, Lord thou
know I love thee. And as the rest of our fears, gr^eses, and temptations,
which many times do so compass us, that to our judgments, we can see no
out-gate: Psalm. 37.
cast all the burden of them upon the Lord, who cares for us; and has given
us this promise for a Pr^munire: All comes for the best. The Soldier with
courage enters into the Battle, under hope to obtain the victory. The
Mariner with boldness commits himself to the stormy Seas, under hope of
vantage: and every man hazardeth in his calling; and yet are they all but
vncertanie venturers, and knows not the end: But the Christian, 1. Cor. 9. 26.
runs not as uncertain; but as one sure to obtain the Crown: for he knows
that the God of peace, shall shortly tread Satan under his seete. Romans 16. 20.
What then? shall he not with courage enter into that battle, wherein he is
made sure ore ever he fight; that all the Watriers of Jesus shall become more
then Conquerours through him? Romans 8. 37.
If we will only stand still, Exodus 14. 13.
we shall see the salvation of the Lord, Gideon and his 300. sought against the
great Host of Midian without fear, Judge. 7. 19.
because he was sure of victory. David made haste, and ran to encounter with
Goliath, 1. Sam 17. 48.
because he was persuaded, the Lord would deliver him into his hands. The
Israelites spared not to enter into the Flood of Jorden, because they saw the
Aike of God before them, I^s. 3, 16.
dividing the waters: And shall only the Christian stand astonished in his
temptations, notwithstanding the word of God go, before him to resolve him,
that whatsoever fall out, shall work for the best unto him? The Lord increase
us, and make us abound more and more in love of our God; for perfect love
casts our fear. The Lord strengthen our Faith, that through these mistie
clouds of afflictions, which now compasses us, we may see that comforttable
end, which the light of God has discovered unto us.

But we are to beware of the subtle sleightes of Satan, who to the end, he
may spoil us of this comfort in trouble, endeauoreth by many means, either
else to quench this light of God in our minds; Judge not of Gods working
before the end, for that does greatly impair our comfort.
or else to darken and obscure it by the precipitation of our unbelieving
hearts, carrying us headlong to judge of the works of God, by their
beginings; and to measure our self in trouble, by our present estate and
condition, not suffering us to ^^rty while we see the end: whereof it comes to
pass, that our hearts being tossed too and fro with restless perturbance,
like trees of the Forest shaken with the wind: in our necessities, we hasten
to be our own prouisors: in our dangers, we will be our own deliuerers, and
every way we become the caruets of our own perdition: we have so much the
more to beware of this precipitation, because the dearest servants of God have
fallen through it, into fearful sins against the Lord their God, and breed
great unquietness unto them selves. When David was in extreme danger in the
wilderness of Maon, Psalm. 116. 11.
he said in his fear, that all men were liars. O what a blasphemy! that doing
the promises of God, made to him by Samuel the Lords Prophet, were but lies:
and how many times thought he (in his other troubes) that God had forgot to be
merciful, and had shut up his tender mercies in displeasure: But when he saw
the end, then was he compelled to accuse him self, to give glory to God, Psalm.
77. 9.
and to say: I should have been dumb, and not opened my mouth, Psalm. 39. 9.
because thou did it: I said it in my fear, but now I see, Psalm. 116. 11.
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. As this
precipitation made David to stumble and fall, so will it carry us also to the
like inconuencience too, except we, beware of it: For if we should look to
Lazarus in the dunghill full of Byles and Sores, Luke 16. 19.
having no comfort, but from the Dogs, and compare him with the Richman
clothed in Purple, and fareing daintily every day* What can we judge, but that
Lazarus is the most miserable of the two? yet tarry while the Lord have ended
his work, and Lazarus be conveyed to Abraham's bosom, and the Rich glutton be
gone to his place, then shall the truth appear manifestly: All things work
together for the best, so them that love God. Let us learn therefore to
measure the event of things, not by their present condition, but by the
prediction of Gods word. Let us cleave to his Promise, and wait on the Vision
which has his own time appointed, Abac. 2. ^.
it shall speak at the last, and shall not lie: though it terry, let us wait
for it, it shall surely come, and not stay. Let us go into the Sanctuary of
God, and consider the end; there shall we find and learn, Psalm. 37. 37.
that there is no peace to the Wicked, how soever they floorish for a time; and
that it can not be, but well with them that fear the Lord. Mark the upright
man, and behold the lust; for the end of that man is peace; but the
transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the end of the Wicked shall be cut
off: So both in the troubles of the Godly, and prosperity of the Wicked, are
we bound to suspend our judgment, till we see the end.

All things work together. Many working instruments of contrary qualities
and intentions in the world, yet agrees all in one end.
O what a singular privilege has the Christian, that not only Afflictions,
but all things whatsoever works for the best: and not only so, but they
work together for the best to him. Many working instruments is there in the
world, their course is not one, they communicate no counsels, yea, their
intentions often times are contrary; yet the Lord bringes all their ways to
this one end, To the good of them that love him. Where (...) they be, in
regard of place: what ever they be, in regard of persons: what ever their
purposes be, how soever disagreeing amongst them selves; yet such is the power
and providence of that supreme governor our heavenly Father, that All of
them, works together to the good of them that loves him. And herein does his
Power and Wisdom appear more clearly, then in the tempering of this great
universe, making Elements of so contrary qualities to meet together, and agree
in one pleasant harmony. For the illustration of this, let us mark but one
example for all. Genesis 37.
Iaacob sendes his son Joseph to Dothan, to visit his brethren; his brethren
castes him into the Pit, Reuben relieues him, the Merchants of Midian buys
him, and selles him again to Poliphar, his Mistress accuses him, his Master
condemns him, the Butlet (after long ingratitude) recommendes him, and Phara^h
exaltes him. O what Instruments are here! and how many hands are about this
one poor man of God: but how does the Lord direct them all? yea, beside their
own intention to further Joseph's advancement in Aegipt, for his own good, and
the good of his Church. But now to the particulars. All the ways of God, yea
even when to walk stubbornly against her children, are for the best to them.


There is nothing in the world which works not for our weal: All the works
of God, all the stratagems of Satan, all the imaginations of man, are for the
weal of Gods Children; yea, out of the most poysonable things, as Sin and
Death, does the Lord draw healthsome and mediciuall preservatives, to them that
love him.

All the ways of the Lord (says David) are Mercy and Truth. Mark what he
says, and make not thou an exception, where God has made none: Psalm. 25.
All, none excepted. But be thou strengthened in Faith, and give glory to God,
Job. 13 15.
saying with the patient Job: Albeit the Lord would slay me, yet will I trust
in him.

Sometime the Lord walks in the way of anger, seeming angie with his Children,
and to walk stubbornly against them, which has moved them to power out the
like of these pitiful Lamentes. The arrows of the Almighty are upon me,
Job. 6. 4.
(says Job) the venlme whereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of
God fight against me: Thou settes me up as a mark against thee, and make
me a burden to my self. Thy indignation lies upon me; Psalm. 88. 7. 1^
(says David) Yea from my youth I have suffered thy terrors, doubting of my
life. For felicity, I have had bitter gri^fe, Esa. 38. 17.
(said Exechia) for the Lord like a Lion, brake all my bones, so that I did
chatter like a Swallow, and mourn like a Done. I am troubled on every side,
(says the Apostle) having fightings without, 2. Cor. 7. ^*
and terrors within: And yet in all these, the Lord has a secret way of
mercy, wherein he walks and works for the comfort of his Children; which
albeit for the present we can not perceive, Job. 13. 24.
and can see no other, but the Lord has taken us for his enemies: yet in the
end, we shall be compelled to acknowledge it, Psalm. 119.
and confess, with David: O good was it for me, O Lord! that ever thou
correctest me: Therefore also said the Apostle, The Lord is marvelous in his
Saints. 2. These. 1. 10
And the Apostle cried out, O the deepenesse of the riches has of the Wisdom
and Knowledge God! Romans 11. 35.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! His
glory is great when he works by means; his glory is greate^ when he
works without means: but his glory shines most brightly, when he works
by contraries.

It was a great work that he did open the eyes of the blind man: The Lord
works by means, without means, and by contraries: and then is his glory
greatest
but greater, that he did by application of Spittle and Clay, such means as
are meeter to put out the eyes of the seeing man, then to restore the sight to
a blind man. So he wrought in the first Creation, causing Light to shine out of
Darkness: So also in the work of Redemption: for by cursed Death, he brought
happy Life: by the Cross, he obtained the Crown: and through Shame, he went
to Glory: And this same order, the Lord keeps yet in the work of our second
Creation, which is our Regeneration; Hos. 6.
he casts down, that he may raise up; he killes, and he makes alive: he
wounds, and he will bind up: he wounds, and he will heal: he accuses
his children of sins, that so they may get remiss of their sins: he
troubles their Consciences, that so he may pacify them; and in a word, the
means which he uses in working, are contrary to the work it self, which he
intendes to perform toward his Children. He sent a fearful Darkness on
Abraham, but afterward communicated to him a joyful Light: he wrestled with
Iaacob, and shook him too and ^ro; but in the end blessed him: he stroke the
Apostle Paul with blindness, and then opened his eyes, that he might know the
Lord Jesus: he frowns for a while upon his own, Genesis 43.
as Joseph did upon his Brethren; but in the end with a loving affection shall
he embrace them: he may seem angry at thy Prayers, as he put back the
Petition of the Woman of Canaan; Math. 15. 22.
but at length, will grant a favorable answer to them: therefore let us
learn to possess our souls in patience; let the Lord work by any means it
pleases him: It is enough that we know, All the ways of God, yea even when
he deals most hardly with his Children, are mercy, and tendes to the good of
those that love him.

And as to Satan's stratagems, it is also out of doubt, All Satan's stratagems,
work for the best to the godly.
that they work for the best, to them that love the Lord; not according to his
purpose in deed, but because the Lord trappeth him in his own snare. If under
the Serpents shape he deceived Adam, under the Serpents name shall the Lord
curse him: and all these weapons whereby he intendes to destroy the work of
Gods grace into us, shall the Lord make forcible to destroy the workmanship of
Satan into us, I mean that whole bastard Generation of sinful afflictions,
which Satan has begotten upon our mutable nature, by a most unhappy and
unlawful copulation: The experience of all the Saints of God will prove
this, that Satan by his restles temptations, does destroy him self; which is
most evident both in his temptations for sin, which tend to desperation, as
also in his temptations to sin which tend to presumption. How Satan's
temptations for sin, does good to the Christian.
Every accusation of the Conscience for bypast sins, is a Preservative to
the Child of God, to keep him from sin in time to come; he reasoning with
himself after this manner. If my Enemy does so disquiet my mind with inward
terrors, for these sins which foolishly I did by his inticement, why shall I
harken to him any more hereafter, Shall I hear and trust the enemy of my
soul, that has deceived me so often?
and so increase the matter of my trouble; for what fruit have I of all the
sins wherein I took pleasure, but terror and shame? And shall I look that
this forbidden Tree, shall tender any better fruit hereafter? O what a
faythlesse traitor is Satan, Rom, 6. 21.
he inticeth man unto sin; and when he has done it, he is the first accuser
and troubler of man for sin. When he works in us, he is a temptor: when we
have finished his work, (which is sin) he is an accuser of us to the judge;
and when he returns, he returns as a troubler and a tormentor of us for our
sins. Stop my care therefore, O my soul from the voice of this deceitful
enchaunter. His temptations again unto sin are so many prouocations,
spurring us forward to the throne of grace: for whilst we find his restless
malice pursuing that sparckle of spiritual life, whereby the Lord has
quikened us; and our own weakness and inhabilitie to resist him: then we are
forced with Israel in Aegipt, 2. C^r. 20. 12
to sigh for the thraldom; and to cry with Joseph, O Lord our God, we wott not
what to do! but our eyes are turned toward thee. And who feels not this? that
the grace of fervent Prayer, wherein otherwise we faint, (our hands being more
ready to fall down then the hands of Moses, except they be supported) is
greatly wakened, and intended in the Children of God, by the buffets of Satan:
So they wakened the holy Apostle, 2* Cor. 12. 7.
and stirred him up to such feruencie in prayer, that he besought the Lord
thrice, that is, many times, to deliver him from them: Yea (which is more) the
Lord made them effectual means to beat down the power of natural pride in
him, least he should have been exalted out of measure, through the greatness
of his revelations. A wounderfull work, that the Father of Pride, becomes
against his will, a represser of Pride: and he who first procured this Poison
in the nature of Man, is made (contrary to his intent) an instrument to
suppress it. Thus the Lord our God out-shooteth Satan in his own Bow: How
afflictions are profitable to a Christian.
and with the Sword of Goliath, cutteth off his own head: His holy name be
praised therefore for ever.

Now as concerning outward afflictions, it is true, that as the Philistines
could not understand Samsons Riddle, Judge. 14. 14.
how Sweet came out of the sower, and meat out of the eater: So can no
Worldlings understand, R^m. 5. 3.
that Tribu^ation brings out Patience: and that our light and momenta^^e
afflictions, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory: but the
children of God has learned by experience, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
that albeit no visitation be sweet for the present, yet afterward it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them, who are thereby exercised:
and that there is more solid joy in Suffering rebuke with Christ, Heb. 11. 25.
then in all the pleasures of sin, which endure but for a season. For as
Moses, the mediator of the old Testament, Exodus 15. 25.
by his prayer, made the bitter Waters of Marah sweet, that the Israelites
might drink of it; so Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, by his Passion,
has mittigated to his children, the bitterness of the Cross: and not only
mixed it with joy, but made it most profitable. Luke. 15. 12.
The for-lorne Son concluded, never to return home to his Father, till he
was brought low by affliction. And many in the Gospel, were forced by Diseases
corporal, to run to Jesus, where others enjoying bodily health, did nothing
but disdain him. The earth which is not tilled and broken, bears nothing but
Thorns and Briers: the Vines wax wild by time, except they be proyned and
cut: so should our vain hearts ouergrow with vilde affections, if the Lord by
sanctified trouble, did not continually manure them. Therefore (said Jeremy)
It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth. Lam. 3. 27.
And David confessed, It was good for him, that he was afflicted. Psalm. 119.
Yea (says our Savior) Every branch that bears fruit, my he menly Father
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Job. 15. 2.
No work can be made of Gold and Silver, without Fire: and Stones are not
meet for Palace work, except they be pollished and squared by hamering: no
more is it possible, that we can be vessels of Honor in the hours of our God,
except first we be fined and melted in the fire of affliction: neither can we
be as living Stones, to be placed in the Wall of the heavenly Jerusalem, except
so long as we are here, the h^nd of God beat from us our prou^ lumpes, by the
hammer of Affliction. As standing Waters pu^^^sies and rottes, Psalm. 55.
so the wicked fears not God (says the Psa^nist,) because they have no
changes. And Moa^ keys is sent, (says the Prophet) because he was not powered
from vessel to vessel, Ier. 48. 11.
but has been at rest ever since ^is youth. And therefore, O Lord! rather then
we should keep the old sent of our natural corruption, and live in a
careless security, without the ^ea^e of thy holy name, and so become sitfasts
in our sins; no rather, O Lord! change thou us from estate to estate; waken
us wid^ the presence of thy hand: purge vi, O Lord! with thy fire, and chastise
us with thy rods; always Lord, with a protestation, that thou stand to thy
promise made to the Sons of David, I will visit them with my rods, Psalm. 89.
if they sin against me: but my mercy wili I never take from them. So be it
Lord, even: So be it.

The same comfort have we also against Death; that now in Christ Jesus, How
death also works for the best to the Christian.
it is not a punishment of our sins, but a full accomplishment of the
mortification of sin, both in soul and body; for by it, all the conduites of
sin are stopped, the weapons of unrighteousness broken: and though our
bodies seem to be consumed, yet are they but sown like grains of Wheat,
into the ^ielde and husband^^e of the Lord, Death compared to the red sea,
wherein the Egyptians were drowned, and the Israelites went through to Canaan.
which must die, before they be quickness; but in the day of harvest, shall
spring up again most glorious, and shall be restored by the same holy Spi^^^e
who now dwel^s in them: and as to our souls they are relieved out of this
house of servitude, and that they may depart and return to (...) from whom
they came; therefore have I compared Death to the Red Sea, wherein Phara^h and
his Egyptians were drowned, Romans 8.
and sanke like a Stone to the bottom, but the Israelites of God, went through
to their promised Canaan: So shall Death be unto you, O miserable Infidels!
whose eyes, the God of this world has blinded, that no more then the blind
Aegiptians, can you see the light of God, that shines in G^shan, that is, his
Church; although ye be in it: to you I say, your Death shall be a Sea of Gods
vengeuce, wherein ye shall be drowned, and shall sink with your sins, heavier
then a Millstone about the neck of your soul, to press you down to the
lowest Helle^. But as to you, that are the Israelites of God, ye shall walk
through the valley of Death, and not need to be a^rayde, because the Lord is
with you; Psalm. 23.
His Staff and his Rod shall comfort you: Albert the terrors of Hell, the
horror of the Grave, the guiltiness of Sin, stand about thee like
Mountains, threatening to ouerwhelme thee; yet shall thou go safe through, to
the land of thine inheritance; where, with Moses and Mertam, and all the
children of God, even the congregation of the first borne: Thou shall sing
praises joyfully to the God of thy salvation. And thus we see, Exodus 15. 11.
how that not only our present Afflictions, but Satan, Sin, and Death, are
made, to work for the best, to them that love the Lord.

Now in the last room concerning the imaginations of men against us, How the
plots and imaginations of men work for the best to the Christians.
we shall have cause to say of them in the end, as Joseph said to his brethren,
You did it unto me for evil, but the Lord turned it unto good. The whole
History of Gods Book, is as a cloud of mani^old witnesses concurring
altogether to confime this truth: I content my selle therefore for all, to
bring one. When David was going forward in the Batta^le against Israel with
Achish King of Gath, (under whom he soiourned for a while, in the time of his
bani^hment) the remanent Princes of the Philistines, comm^unded him to go
back; and this they did for the worse to disgrace him, because they distrusted
him: but the Lord turned it to him for the best: Consider David's estate now,
and ye shall see him set betwixt two great extremities. If he had gone back
of his own accord, the Phil^stines might have blamed him, and han^led him as
an enemy: if he had come forward, he should have been guilty of the blood
of Israel, and especially of S^ul the Lords annoyted; who was slain in that
Battle.

In this strait, the wit of man can find him no outgate, but the provident
mercy of God delivers him in such sort, that no occasion of o^fence is given
to S^ul and his people, because David came not against them: neither yet could
the Philistines condemn him, because he went back by their command. So
notable a benefit did David receive even by that same deed, wherein his
enemies thought they had done him notable a shame: and it should learn us in
our straightest extremities whereunto men can drive us, to depend on the Lord;
and ever then to hope for an outgate, when we see none. For such is thy
providence, O Lord, whereby in mercy thou watchest over those that love thee,
that these euilles that are intended against them, by thee, are turned into
good to them.

And here we have further to consider, If this comfort belong to every
member, much more to the whole body and state of the Church.
that seeing this is the privilege of every one that loves the Lord; much more
must it appertain to the whole Church of God. It is the portion of Abraham,
alber^ the Father of the Faithful, yet one of Gods Children, I will bless
them that bless thee, end curse them that c^rsie thee: And shall it not
belong (think we) to all the congregation of the first borne? Will not the
Lord be a Wall of fire round about Jerusalem, Zach. 2. 5.
and the glory in the midst of her? Will be not keep her as the apple of
his eye? Shall not Jerusalem be as a Cup of Poison unto all her enemies,
Zach. 12. 2.
and a heavy Stone? Yea surely all that lift it up shall be torn, though all
the people of the earth be gathered together against it; the weapons made
against her shall not prosper; and every tongne that shall rise against her in
judgment, shall be condemned. This is the heritage of the Lords servants,
and the portion of them who love him. For the Church is that Ark of God, Genesis
7. 18.
which may mount up higher as the Waters increases; but can not be
overwhelmed: the Bush which may burn, Exodus 3. 2.
but can not be consumed: the House built on a Rock, which may be beaten with
wind and rain, Math. 7. 15.
but can not be overthrown.

The Lord who changes times and seasons; Enemies of Gods Church, look to
their end,
who takes away Kings, and settes up Kings: has reproved Kings for his
Churches sake: and he governs all the Kingdoms of the earth in such sort,
that their rysinges and fallinges, their changes and mutations, are all
dispensed for the good of his Church: for there is but one of two sentences,
wherein all the Judges of the world may judge of themselves, and see clearly
their end. Either that, which Mordecai said: Ester, ^ster. 4. 14.
Who knows if for this thou art come to the Kingdom, that by thee
deliverance might come to Gods people? Dan. ^, 21.
Or else that which Moses in Gods name said to Pharaoh, (the first oppressor of
Gods Church in his adulescencie) I have set thee up to declare my power,
because thou exaltest thy self against my people.

How miserable then are they, who when they are highest, abuses their power,
to hold the people of God lowest?

Have they not cause to fear, least the Lord have set them up against him, as
an Object of his Power and Justice? If we will mark the course of the Lords
proceeding ever since the beginning of the world, we shall find, that as he
orders the state of earthly Power, for the accomplishment of his will
concerning his Church; so evermore a blessing follows them, who are
instruments of her good: and by the contrary, an inuitable cu^ss^ follows
them, who are the instruments of her evil.

When the Lord concluded to bring his Church from Canaan, to so^orne in Aegipt,
he sent such a Famine in Canaan, as compelled them to forsake it: but made
p^entie in Aegi^t, by the hand of Joseph; whom the Lord sent before as a
prouisor to his Church; and by whom Phar^oh was ma^e so ^auourable to Jacob,
that he was allowed to dwell in G^shen: but when such time came* that he would
translate his Church from Aegipt to Canaan, then he altered Pharaohs
countenance; he raised up a new King, which knew not Joseph, and turned the
Aegiptians hearts away from Israel, so that they vexed Israel, and caused them
to serve by cruelty* and all this the Lord did, to the end his people should
become weary of Egypt, and enforced by violence to make forward to Canaan,
whereas otherwise (as it well appears) if they had been danted as in the
beginning, they would have neglected the promised Land, and contented
themselves with Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt. Thus Pharaoh by his obstinacy
bringes on him self, his just (...) punishment; and the Lord works to his
people their undeserved deliverance: and afterward, when the sins of his
people drew to that ripeness, that they had caused their days to draw near,
Ez^ch. 22. 4
and were come to their tear^e, the Lord sturred up the King of Babel, ^sa, 10.
5.
as the Rod of his wrath, and Staff of his i^dignation, he s^nt him to the
dissembling Nation, and gave him a charge against the people of his wrath, to
take the spoil and the prey, and to tread the^ under ^eete like mire in the
streets: and then that the Lord might be avenged of the sins of Israel, he
subdued all Kingdoms round about them under the King of Babel, that no sloppe
or impediment should be in their way to hold off the judgment from them: Esa.
10. 12.
But yet again, when the Lord had accomplished all his works upon Mount Sion,
and the appointed time of mercy was come, and the 70. The government of the
wh^le earth altered f^r the Churches sake.
years of Captivity was expired, the^ the Lord visited the proud heart of
the King of Ashur; and for his Churches sake, he altered again the government
of the whole earth, translating the Empire to the Medes and Persians, that
Cyr^s the Lords anointed, might perform to his people the promised
deliverance. All which, should learn us in the greatest changes and
alterations which can fall out in the world, to rest assured, that the Lord will
work for the good of his Church, Psalm. 42.
though the earth should be moved, and the mountains fall into the midst of
the Sea; yea though the waters thereof rage and be troubled, yet there is a
River whose streams shall make glad the City of our good God, in the midst
of it, and therefore it shall not be moved: yea they who should be as nursing
fathers and mothers unto the Church of God, may forsak her, and become her
enemies: but assuredly they shall perish; and comfort and deliverance shall
appear unto Gods people out of an other place. The Lord for a while may put
the bridle of bondage in the Phi^istines hands to humble Israel for their
sins, Esa. 12 1.
but it shall be taken from them: and the day shall come, wherein we shall with
joy draw Water out of the Wells of salvation, and praise the Lord, saying:
Though thou wast angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest
me. Yea, Sion shall cry out, and showt for joy, for great is the Holy one of
Israel in the midest of her: and therefore in our lowest humiliations, let us
answer our adversaries. Rejoice not against me, Oh mine enemy, though I fall,
I shall rise: and when I shall sit in darkness; the Lord is a light unto me:
I will bear the wrath of the Lord; because I have sinned against him, until
he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me, he will bring me forth to
the light, Mich. 7. 8.
and I shall see his righteousness: then he that is mine enemy, shall look
upon it, and shame shall cover him who said to me, What is a Christians best.
What is the Lord thy God? Now shall he be trodden under, as the mire in the
street: yea, so let all thine enemies perish, O Lord!

For the best. This best, is no other thing, but that precious salvation
prepared to be showen us in the last time, reserved in the heavens for us, and
whereunto we are reserved, by the power of God through Faith; whereof we learn
that our best estate is not yet wrought so as it is accomplished; it is only in
the working, ^* Pet. 1. 5.
says the Apostle: and therefore we are not to look for it in this life.

There is a great difference between the godly and the wicked: The wicked man
is at his best, when he comes first into the world.
the one enioyes their best in this life: the other, looks for it, and are
walking toward it: For if it should be demanded, when a wicked man is at his
best? I would answer, his best is evil enough; but then a wicked man is at the
best, when he comes first into the world; for then his sins are fewest, his
judgment easiest. It had bin therefore good for him, that the knees had not
Job. 3. 11,
prevented him, but that he had ^yed in the bath: for as a River which is
smallest at the beginning, incre^seth as it proceeds by the accession of other
Waters into it, till at length it be swallowed up into the deep; so the
wicked, the longer he lives, 2. Tim. 3. 13.
Wax^th ever worse and worse; deceiving, and being deceived (says the
Apostle.) Proceeding from evil to worse (says Jeremy,) Ier. 9. 3.
till at length he be swallowed up in that Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Reu. 19. 20.
And this the Apostle expresses most significantly, when he compares the
wicked man unto one gathering a treasure, wherein he heaps up wrath to
himself, against the day of wrath: For even as the Worlding, who every day
casts in a piece of money in his treasure, Romans 2.
in few years multiplies such a sum, the particulers whereof he him self
is not able to keep in mind; but when he breaks up his Box, then he finds
in it sundry sorts of Coin, whereof he had no remembrance: A warning for
impenitent sinners.
Even so is it, and worse, with thee, O impenitent man, who not only every
day, but every hour and moment of the day, do multiply thy transgressions,
and defile thy Conscience, hoording up into it some dead work or other: to
what a reckoning think thou, shall thy sins amount in the end, though thou
forget them as thou committest them? Yet the Apostle tells thee, that thou
have laid them up in a treasure, and not only so, but with every sin, thou
have gathered a portion of wrath proportionable to thy sin, which thou shall
perfectly know in that day wherein the Lord shall break up thy treasure, and
open the book of thy Conscience, Psalm. 50. 1^.
and set thy sins in order before thee: then shall Thine own wickedness
correct thee, I^r. 2. 19.
and thy turninge back, shall reprove thee: then shall thou know and behold,
that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God: And shall be astonished to see such a multitude of witnesses standing up
against thee; then shall thou perceive that these sins which thou have cast
behind thy back, Psalm 90. 8.
the Lord has set them in the light of his countenan^e: and then woe shallbe
unto thee, for the Lord shall turn thine own ways upon thy head, when thou
have accomplished the m^asure of thine iniquity: the Lord shall gi^^ thee to
drink of the cup which thou have s^lled with thine own hand, and shall
double his stripes upon thee, according to the multitude of thy (...).

But as to the Children of God, The Christian is not at his best now: it is in
the working only.
i^ you will ask, When they are at their best? (...). Pray^e^ be God, ou^
wo^st is away, our good is (...) best is at hand: as our Savior said to his
Kinsmen, ^o may we say to the Worldlings: Your Ti^^ is a^^ay, but, Ioh. 7. 6.
my time is not yet come. W^e were at the worst immediately before our
con^^^sion; for our whole life t^ll then, was a walking with the children of
disobedience in the broad way that leads to damnation: and then were we at
the worst, when we had proceeded furthest in the way of vntighteousnesse, for
then were we furthest from God. Our best began in the day of our recalling,
wherein the Lord by his Word and holy Spirit, called upon us, and made us turn
our backs upon Satan, and our face toward the Lord, and so caused us part
company with the children of disobedience; among whom, we had our conversation
before: then we came home with the penitent ^orlorne to our fathers family; but
they went forward in their sins to judgment: That was a day of division
betwixt us and our sins: In that day (with Israel) we entered into the borders
of Canaan into Gilgall, Ios. 5. 9.
and there were we circumcised, and the shame of Aegipt was taken from us, even
o^ sin, which is our shame indeed, and which we have borne from our mothers
womb: the Lord grant that we may keep it for ever in thanke^ull remembrance:
and that we may ^^unt it a double shame to re^urne again to the bondage of
Aegipt, to serve the prince of Darkness in Brick and Clay; that is, to have
fellowship any more with the unfruitful works of darkness, but that like the
redeemed of the Lord, we may Wak^from strength to strength, Psalm. 84. 7.
till we appear before the ^ace o^ ^ur God in S^on.

Always this difference of estates of the godly and wicked, This difference of
the godly and w^^ked concerning their best, should learn: us comfort and
patience.
should learn us patience: Let us not seek that in the Earth, which our
gracious God in his most holy dispensation has reserue^ ^or us in the Heaven:
Let us not be like the foolish Jews, who loved the place of their Banishment
in Babel, better then their home: For here we are not at our best, 1. Ioh. 3.
now our life is hid with the Lord, and we know not yet what we shallbe: but
we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him: Exodus 15. 13.
the Lord shall carry us by his mercy, and bring us in his strength to his
holy habitation: He shall plant us in the mountain of his inheritance, Esa
35. 10.
even the place which he has prepared; and sanctuary which he has
established: then, Everlasting (...) upon our hea^e^, and sorrow an^ (...)
shall fl^e away from us for ever. And now till the Lord has accomplished his
work into us, Psalm. 3^.
let us not faint, because the wicked fl^resh: neither think we have cleansed
our hands in vain, because they prosper, they are to be pittred rather then
enu^ed: let them eat and drink, and be merry; sure it is, they will never see
a blyther day then that which they see presently: they have enjoyed their
Heaven in the Earth: they have received their consolation in this life, Luke 19.
and has gotten their portion in this world. Oh what tongue can express their
misery! And yet as Samuel mourned for Saul when God rei^cted him: How
miserable are the wicked, who have their heaven in the earth.
and Jeremy wept in secret for the pride of his people, that would not rep^n^
of their sins: How can we but take up a bitter lamentation for many of you,
whom in this time of Grace, we see to be strangers from Grace? We wish from
our hearts, ye were not like the Kinsmen of Let, who thought he was scorning,
Genesis 19.
when he told them of a Judgment to come; and therefore for no request would
go with him out of Sodom, but ta^^yed while the fire of the Lords indignation
consumed them. But rather as Sara followed Abraham from Chaldee to Canam, so
you would take us by the hand, and go forward with us, from the Helles to the
Heavens. But alas, the lusts of the flesh, holds you captive, your Sins
has blinded you, and the Love of the world does bewitche you; but all of them
in the end, shall deceive you: For All the labor under the Sun, Eccles. ^.
17.
is but vanity and vexation of spirit. When you have finished your task, you
shall be less content then ye were at the beginning: you shall be as one wakened
out of a dream, who in his sleep thought he was a possessor of many things,
but when he awaketh, behold, he has nothing. Like that Rich man, who said in
his security, N^w my soul, thou have mickle good for many days: and even
upon the next day, redacted to so great poue^tie with him that despised
Lazarus, that he had not so much as a drop of cold Water to cool his tongue
with: then shall you lament, We have wearied our selves in the way of
iniqui^ie, and it did not pro^ite us. Alas, how shall I learn you to be
wise? The Lord when he created man, set him in a room above all his creatures;
and now degenerate man, sets every Creature in his heart above the Lord, O
fearful ingratitude. Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Do you foreward the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? There is nothing
which you conceive to be good; but when you want it, you are careful to seek
it: when you have it, you are careful to keep it; only you are careless of
the Lord Jesus, though he be that incomparable Jewel, that brings light in
darkesse, life in death, comfort in trouble, mercy against al Judgment* you
should set him as a Signet on your heart, as an Ornament on your head; and put
him on as that glorious attire that gets you place to stand before God. But
what pains do you take to seek him? what assurance have you, that ye are in
him? or what mourning do you make, because ye are strangers from him? Can ye
say that the tenth of your thoughts and words, are employed upon him? Alas, how
long will you wander after vanities, and follow lies? Will ye for ever
forsake the Fountain of living Waters, and digg to your selves broken Pittes
that can hold no Water? Psalm. 50. 22,
O consider this (in time) ye that forget the Lord, least he tear you in
pee^es, and there be none to deliver you.

The last lesson we observe in this part of the verse, All things work to
the worst, to the wicked.
is this: as All things works for the best, to them that love the Lord; so
all things works for the worst to the wicked: there is nothing so cleane',
which they defile not: nothing so excellent, which they abuse not. Make Saul a
King, and Balaam a Prophet, and Judas on Apostle, their preferment shall be their
destruction. If they be in prosperity, they contemn God, and their
prosperity becomes their ruin: If they be in adversity, they blaspheme him;
and like raging waves of the Sea, cast out their own dirt to their shame. Yea,
what speak I of these things, even their table shall be a snare to them: Psalm.
69. 22.
Jesus Christ is a r^cke of offense to them, the Gospel the sauour' of death to
them, 2. Cor. 5.
and their prayer is turned into sin to them: And what more excellent things
then these, as a soul stomach turns most healthsome food into corruption,
so their polluted Conscience, turn Judgment into Gall; and the fruit of
Righteousness, into Wormwood* And all this should provoke us to become good
in our persons, or else there is nothing, were it never so good, can be
profitable unto us.

To them that love God. The second part of the vese, is the persons to who^ the
former comfort belongs.
Here follows the second part of the verse, containing a description of the
persons to whom this privilege appertains, together with a reason of the
former comfort: of force All things must work for the best, (that is to
salvation) to them that love God, because they are called (namely to salvation)
according to Gods purpose. The strength of this reason, stands in the
necessity and immutabilitie of the Purpose of God, more stable then the Decree
of the Medes and Persians; for what he has decreed, can not be revoked,
annulled, not impeded. It is that supreme cause of all, which orders all
inferior causes and incidents whatsoever, in such sort, that they must work
to the advancement of that most high purpose of God.

This reason is made clearer in the subsequent verse, Our calling comes from
Gods purpose, and ca^^es us to the determined glory.
where the Apostle lets us see how the linkes of the golden Ch^ine of our
Salvation are knit together inseparable, by the hand of God, that no power in
heaven or earth can sunder them: whereof it comes, that he that is sure of one,
is sure of all. And now let us take a short view of it, for confirming the
Apostles reason. Election is the first, and it is the most ancient Charter of
the right of Gods Children to their fathers inheritance. Calling, is the
second, and it is that gift of God whereby we are cognosced the Sons of God,
and our Election secret in it self, is made manifest to our selves and others.
Justification is the third, and it is that Grace of God, whereby we are in^est
in Jesus Christ in such sort, that we are made one with him, and partakers of
all that is his, Gl^^ification is the last, and it is that Grace of God whereby
we shall be entered in the due time, full heirs to our heavenly Father.

No King on the earth can produce so ancient a right to his Crown, as the
Christian, effectually called. No Man on the earth can be cognosced his Fathers
heir upon such sufficient warrant, as the Christian. For in his Regeneration,
the Father communicates to him his Image, his Nature, his Spirit, whereby he
begins from feeling, to call G^d (...) ^ather; and in life and manners
^e^embleth him. No Freeholder so surely infe^t in his Lands, having so many
confirmations of his right, as has the (...) Christian, who upon his gi^^,
has received the ^^arnest, the Pledge, the Seal, and the Witness o^ the
great King. And last of all, the Christian shall be entered to the full
fruition of his inheritance, with such joy and trumph in the glorious
assembly of the Saints, as the like was never seen in the world, no not in
Jerusalem that day when Sa^omon sat down in his fathers Throne; 1 Kin. 1. 4^.
then their joy was so great, That the earth rang with the ^ound of them: but
nothing comparable to this: and herein stands the excellency of a Christian,
and certainty of his salvation.

For this Cheyne of our Salvation reaches (as I may say) from eternity to
eternity: How the Christian is made sure of his election, and glorification.
the beginning of it (albeit before beginning) is our election: the end of it
(albeit without end) is our glorification: And these two ends of the Cheyne,
the Lord keeps them sure and secret in his own hand: but the two middle
linkes of the Cheyne, to wit, Calling and Justification, the Lord has le^^en
them down from the Heaven to the Earth, that we should g^^pe and apprehend
them; that being sure of the two mindle Linkes, we might also be sure of the
two ends; because the Lord has knit them inseparably together. Then thou, who
would be comforted with the assurance of thy salvation, take heed to this,
making it known to thine own Conscience by a holy life, that God has called
thee, and justified thee: Gripe sure, as it were with the one hand, the Link
of Calling, and with the other hand, the link of Justification; By our
disposition in this life, each man has to consider of his euerlisting weal or
woe.
then may thou know assuredly, Election before the world is thine;
Glorification after this, shall also be thine. To make this yet more plain, we
are to remember, this mortal life of ours, is a short interiected point of Time
betwixt two Eternities (if so I may call it:) or like a stepping Stone betwixt
two Gulphes, whereupon some in fear and trembling, work out their salvation;
and so steps from Gods eternal Election to endless glorification. Others
again, in wantonness and careless security, drinks in Iniquity with
greediness, and so steps from the decree of Reprobation, that most justly
they procure their everlasting condemnation: So that every man is to consider
of his everlasting weal or woe by his present disposition in this life. Oh
that we had sanctified memories, to remember this so long as we are here. If
of weakness we fall, we may rise again: and if we have not learned well to
repent in one day, we have leave of the Lords patience to learn it better an
other day: his name be praised therefore, who has opened a door of mercy to
sinners, and with long suffering, waits for our repentance. But he who in the
day of his transmigration steps the wrong s^eppe, will never get leave to
amend it. Where the tree falls, it shall lie there, the wicked dies in their
sins, and so steps downward to the deep Pit and Gulf, out of die which
there is no redemption. Let us therefore be well advised before we leap. Let
us fasten our feet^ in the borders of that Canaan in time, which shall be done,
if we make our whole life a proceeding from Election to Glorification, and that
through Calling and Justification; which two, is inseparably following them,
the Sanctification and Renouation of the whole man, The Lord make us wise in
time, that we may consider our course, and think of the end whereunto it
leads us: for there is but one of two, as M^ses protested to the Israelites,
so do I unto you: I have laid this day life and death before you: the Lord
give you grace to make choice of the best.

But now to return to the words of this description of the persons, to whom
this privilege appertains, we have these things. First, the Purpose of
God: Secondly, his Calling according to his Purpose: Thirdly, the evident token
according to Gods calling, which is, the love of God. The Purpose of God,
concerning thy salvation, thou may know by thy Calling: and if again thou will try thy, Calling, try it by the Love of God, which thou finds in thee.
And of these three, now let us speak shortly.

According to his Purpose. What comfort we have in this, that our salvation is
grounded on the Lords unchangeable purpose.
Here you see then how the Apostle draws our Calling from the Purpose of
God: and so when he will comfort us with the certainty of our Salvation, he
leads us out of our selves, up to the Rock that is higher then we; he
teaches us to cast our Anchor within the Veil, and to fasten our Souls upon
that unchangeable Purpose of God. It is most expedient for the children of God,
to mark this, because the manifold changes we find in our selves, do often
times interrupt the peace of our minds, that the Lord our God has in such
sort dispensed our Salvation, that the ground thereof is laid in his own
immutable Purpose; but the marks, tokens, and pledges, he places in them*
after their Calling, for whom it was ordained. The tokens are changeable, as
we our selves in whom they are, are changeable, but the ground holds fast,
being laid in the unchangeable God, in whom falls no shadow of alteration*
and this should comfort us against our daily vicis^itudes, changes, defectes,
and temporal desertions: our Faith may faint, our spiritual life may
languish, our Hope hoouer, our Hearts in praying fall down like the infeebled
hands of Moses; yet let us not despair, no change in us, can alter the Lords
unchangeable Purpose: he who has begun the work in us, will also perfect it.
Because I am not changed (says the Lord) therefore is it that ye, Mal. 3. 6.
O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.

This Purpose of God, is called otherwise, Our salvation is neither in part
nor in the whole ascribed to our merits
The will of God, and, The good pleasure of his will: and it does learn us, to
give to the Lord the praise which is due to him, namely the praise of the whole
work of our Salvation, should be ascribed to the good pleasure of his will
only, and not to our foreseen Merits: that poison of pride, which Satan
powered in our first Parents, whereby he provoked them to aspire to be equal
with God, does yet appear in their posterity: the corrupt heart of man ever
aiming at this, either in part or in whole, to have the praise of Salvation
ascribed to him, and so would start up in the room of God, usurping that glory
which belongs to the Lord, and he will not give to another: then the which no
sacrilege more fearful can be committed against the Lord. O man! content
thee with that which the Lord offers thee, and let that alone which the Lord
reserueth to him self. My Peace (says the Lord) I give unto you, but my
Glory I will not give to an other. It is enough that the salvation of the Lord
is thine; but as to the glory of Salvation, let it remain to the Lord: he is
for this, called The Father of Mercy, because Mercy bredde in his own
bosom: many causes without himself, found he without himself, moving him to
execute Justice; but a cause moving him to show mercy found he never, save
only. The good pleasure of his will. Therefore says the Apostle, The Lord
has called us with a holy calling, nor according to our works; but according
to his Purpose and Grace. Surely except the Lord had reserved Mercy for us, we
had been like Sodom and Gomorrah, but it has pleased him in his Mercy, of
the same lump of Clay, to make us vessels of Honor, whereof he has made
others vessels of dishonor; and who is able sufficiently to think of so great
a benefit? Therefore let the Redeemed of the Lord, Psalm. ^.
cry out with a louder voice then David* O Lord! what are we, that thou have
been so mindful of us? Not unto us O Lord! not unto us, but unto thy name,
give the glory: for thy loving kindness, and for thy truths sake; for our
salvation comes of God, that sits upon the Throne, and of the L^^be: to thee
therefore be praise, and honor, and glory for ever and ever.

To them that are called. Two callings^ outward, and inward.
The Purpose of God, which is sufficient in it self, is made known and
manifest to us by his Calling: for our Calling is a declaration of the Decree
of our Election, and as it were the secret Voice of God, bringing from the
Heavens to our Souls, this comfortable message, That we are the Sons of
God. Now we must know, that Gods, Calling is twofold: one outward, which is
common also to the wicked, and of it speaks our Savior, Many are called, but
few are chosen: The other inward and effectual, proper only to the Godly,
whom the Lord is purposed to save. And this will learn us to consider of three
sorts of men in the world, whereof some not called at all; some called, but
not chosen: some chosen, and therefore called to be sanctified, lustified, All
the world stands in 3. Cucl^s, and that none are happy, except they who are
within the third.
and glorified. Ye that will take a right view of all mankind, shall find them
as it were standing in three Circles; they only being happy who are within the
third. In the outmost Circle are all those on whom the Lord has not vouchsafed
so much as an outward calling; and here stands the greatest part of the
world. In the middlemost Circle, which is much narrower, are all those which
are partakers of Gods outward calling by the Word and Sacraments. And in the
third Circle, which is of smallest compass (in regard of the rest) stands
those, who beside the outward calling of God by his Word, are called also
inwardly and effectually by his Holy Spirit. These are Christ's little Flock,
the few chosen, the communion of Saints, the Lords third part, so to speak
with Zachary; Zach. 13. 9.
the two parts shall be cut off and die, but the third will thy Lord ^ine as
Silver and Gold: of them will the Lord say, This is my people: and they shall
say. The Lord is my God. It is a great step in deed, that we are brought from
the uttermost Circle unto the second, but it is not sufficient to salvation:
yea rather they who stand in the second Circle, hearing the voice of God call
them to repentance, and yet harden their hearts, and will not follow the Lord,
may look for a more fearful condempnation, then they who are in the
uttermost rank of all. Weighty are those warninges of our Savior: Sodom
and Gomorah shall be in an easier estate in the day of Judgment, then they to
whom the Lord has spoken by his word, but they would not receive it: and that
double stripes are for him that knows his Masters will, and does it not.
Content not your self therefore with this, that ye are brought within the
compass of this visible Church, and made partakers of an outward Calling; that
ye have been Baptized in the name of Jesus, and communicated at his holy
Table: for not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter in his Kingdom:
except ye find also the Lords inward and effectual Calling, that the arm of
his Grace has drawn you within the compass of this third Circle, and so
brought you to be of his own third part, and set you down among the
generation of them that seeks the face of God, and therefore forsakes their
^innes, that they may find him.

Then we see this excellent Privilege is restrained to them who are called
inwardly; Of the inward calling.
and therefore let us yet a little consider it. This inward Calling, is the
communication of Christ's saving Grace, whereby the mind is enlightened, the
heart purified by Faith, the affections sanctified, and the whole man reformed:
For as the Lord by his Gospel, offers to his Children Righteousness and Life,
so by his holy Spirit he gives them that iustifiyng Faith, and opens their
heart to receive that Grace which is preached and proclaimed to them in the
Gospel. So then, this work of our Calling, is altogether the Lord: It is
his praise that he calls things which are not, ^. Cor. 4.
and makes them to be. The Lord that commanded light to shine out of darkness,
has given to our minds the light of the knowledge of his glory in the face of
Christ Jesus: Psalm. 51.
he it is that creates in us a new heart, and puts a new spirit into our
bowels, that we may walk in his Statu^es. The Lord promised that he would call
many of the Gentiles to the spiritual Jerusalem, Ezech. 11. 19
to suck out the m^^ke of the breasts of her consolation, and be delighted
with the brightness of her glory: Esa. 66.
shall I cause others to be fruitful; said the Lord, and remain barre^ my
self? and this his gracious promise has he most abundantly performed in our
days this name be p^aysed therefore.

As this work is only the Lords, This inward calling is the ^r^ne of God,
choosing (...) in the world his own elect.
so he restraines it only to them who are his own. The outward Calling is
extended to all: but the inward Calling makes a particular separation of a
few from the remanent: where it is wonderful to see the distinction which is
made betwix^ man and man in all ranckes and estates, by this effectual Calling
of two Brethren, as Jacob and Esau: of two Prophets, as Moses and Balaam: of
two Kings, as David and Saul: of two Apostles, as Peter and Judas: of two
Thieves, the one is taken, the other rejected: and thus the Arm of the Grace
of God, goes through to every corner of the earth, according to his pleasure,
culling out by his Word, from among the remnant of the world, those who belong
to this Election. This Grace of God, it enters in a Land, and not into every
City: it enters into a Cit^ie, but not into every Family: ye^, and it will
enter in a Family, and yet not come to every person of the Family, of husband
and wife, of masters and servants, Whereof it comes, that the Gospel where it
is preached, makes a great difference betwixt man and man.
of parents and children, of brethren and sisters; often times the one is
taken, the other is left: It came to Jericho, and weyled out Zacheus: It came
to Philippi, and weyled out Lidia and the Iaylor: It came to Nero his Court,
and not to him self: It entered into the Family of Narcissus, and yet past by
Narcissus himself: It is the work of God, and marvelous in our eyes. The
Gospel is preached to many, but the Blessing brought by the Gospel, lights
only upon the Children of Grace* And hereof aryseth this daily distinction
which we see between man and man: all hear alike, but all have not Faith; all
are not edified alike: Some forsake their sins, and follows the Lord: others
forsaking the Lord, walks on in their sins. As the Lord governs the rain,
and makes it fall upon one City and not upon another; so he dispenses the
deaw of his Grace, that he makes it drop down upon one heart* and not on
another. And of this I would wish, How the heart whereon grace descends* not,
now in this time of grace, is accu^sed.
that so many of you as yet are strangers from Grace, should learn to know
your miserable state: What a fearful thing is this, that God has converted
so many in the City wherein thou dwell, yea perhaps many in the Family
wherein thou remaynest, and yet his Grace never lighted upon thee, but thou art
lest in thy old sins: Consider it rightly, I pray you. If the Lord should do
to you as he did to Israel in the days of Athab, causing it to rain for three
years and a half on all the Lands about you, but not upon your Land, would
you not conceive in it a sensible curse of God upon you? O Hypocrite, thou
that can discern the face of the Sky, and take up the tokens of Gods anger
in the creature, can thou not discern the state of thine own soul, nor
apprehend this for a sensible curse, that 30. or 40. years the showers of
saving and renewing Grace, has descended upon many people round about thee;
but never upon thy self? thou possessest thy old sins, and keep still a
hard, a barren, and a fruitless heart. What shall I say to thee? to cut thee
off from all hope of Mercy, and so send thee to despair; I have not that in
commission: the Lord has his own time of Calling, and can when he will, of
Saul a persecutor, make Paul a Preacher. But one thing I can certify thee of,
So long as thou art in that state, mourn if thou will, thou have much cause of
mourning; for if this effectual Calling by Grace, go by thee in time to come,
as it has done is time bygan, it is an evident declaration, that thou art a
man reserved to wrath, and not ordained to mercy.

Now that this Calling flowing from Election, may be yet made sure to our
consciences for our greater comfort, In the inw^^d calling, the Lord begins at
the illumination of the mind.
let us mark the manner of the Lords proceeding into it, and so gather up some
tokens whereby we may discern it. As in the first Creation, the Lord began at
the light; so in the second Creation, he begins at the illumination of the
mind: For we can neither know the Lord to fear and love him, neither yet our
selves and our sins ^right, till the Lord who commanded light to shine out
of darkness, shine also into our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: and this light of God
discouers to us so many works of darkness, wherewith in ignorance we defiled
our consciences, that we begin to be ashamed of our selves in the sight of God;
ye^ our very flesh trembles for fear of his Judgments, He wor^eth motions of
sorrow and contrition in the heart.
and we cry out with Job: Now my eye has seen the Lord, therefore I abhor
my self. And thus the Lord proceeds from the mind to the heart, working into
it such a contrition and godly sorrow, Io^. 42. 6.
as causes repentance unto salvation, whereby the heart that was senseless
before, being dead in sin and trespasses, begins now to stir and move; as
the heart of Josiah melted at the reading of the Law: and the hearts of those
penitent Jews which were pricked at the sharp Sermon of Peter: then feeling
our selves under death through sin, we begin to bethink us of the way of
life, Act. 24. 25.
and to ask (with the Iaylor) What shall we do, that we may be saved? These
motions, meltings, He works a respondence and answering of the heart to his
calling, and a following of the Lord.
and prickinges of* the heart, wrought, in the elect, by the hearing of Gods
word, are the very pluckes of the hand of God, translating thee out of Nature
into Grace: yet must we not rest here, for Felix may tremble while Paul is
preaching: and many for a while, may receive this word with joy, and yet
afterward fall away in the time of temptation. We must therefore consider, if
there be in the heart a respondence and answering unto the Lord: So often as he
calls, do we present our selves before him, ready to follow him, saying with
Abraham, Here I am Lord: and with Samuel (after he knew the Lords voice)
Speak on Lord, thy servant hears th^^. This answering and following of the
Lord, are undoubted tokens of effectual Calling. So often as the Lord calls,
the Christian answers: When thou saydst, Psalm. 27.
Seek ye my (...): my heart answered, O Lord! I will seek thy (...). If the
Lord command, the Christian answers, Psalm. 119. 1^.
O Lord! quicken me according to thy loving kindness, that I may apply my
heart to keep thy Statutes always to the end. Psalm. 119. 39
I^ the Lord promise Mercy, the Christian answers, Stabl^sh O Lord! thy
promise to thy seru^nt, and let it be to me according to thy word, for I
beleeu^ in thee; but Lord, help my unbelief. And thus in the heart of one
effectually called, there is a continual respondance to the voice of God,
awayting on the Lord, a walking with him, and a following of him where ever he
go, If the Lord have called thee, sure it is thou will follow him; and no
power of the Devil, of the World, or the Flesh, shall hold thee back from
him. When Eliah touched Elisha with his Cloak, he left his Oxen, and came
after him. When Jesus called on Andrew and Peter, they left their Nets, their
Ship, and their Father, and followed him: When he called on Matthew, he left
all his gainefull trade of the receipt of Custom, and followed him* When he
called on Mary Magdelen, she forsook her sinful life, and followed him. Here
is the finest touchstone to try an inward calling. If the Lord has called
thee, thou will follow him: but if yet thou be wandering after vanity, walking
on in the course of thy sin, turning thy back, and not thy face unto the
Lord; deceive not thy self, partaker of this heavenly Calling* (wherein
s^andes the only comfort of a Christian) have thou never been.

That love God. The lo^^ of God is a sure token of an inward calling, and of
the commendation o^ Love.
And last of all, to return to the words again, the whole effects of our
Inward Calling, the Apostle compriseth under one, to wit, The love of God; and
that most properly, for Lou^ compriseth all the rest v^der it. Love is the
cognoscence of Christ's Disciples, says our Savior. It is the Band of
perfection (says the Apostle,) and accomplishment of the Law. Love, speaks
with the tongue of every Virtue, Pity biddes thee help the Indigent, Justice
biddes thee give every man his own, Mercy biddes forgive, Patience biddes
suffer: but the voice of Christian love, commaundes all these. Holy love is the
oldest Daughter of a Justifying Faith; that is, the first affection that Faith
procreateth and sanctifies, and whereby she works in the sanctification of
the rest. L^ue is the strongest and most impe^ious affection in the whole
nature of man: all the rest of the affections gives place unto it, which we may
see, even in the man natural and unregenerate: Where Love is kindled, Fear is
banished* Covetousness coucheth, Ambition is silent. A Coward i^flamed with
Love, becomes valiant; and a Covetous man is often times commanded by Love, to
be prodigal: yea, the Proud and ambitious man, who otherwise gives place to no
man, for obtaining that which he loves, cares not to prostrate his honor to
the dust. If Carnal lou^ be so forcible, what shall we say of the Spiritual
l^ue how much more does it draw the whole powers of soul and body after the
Lord: neither is it possible to do otherwise; for every thing returns to his
own origin^ll, as the waters go down to the deep from whence they came; and
Fire tendes upward to the own place and region: even so holy L^^e, being a
sp^rke of the heavenly Fire, kindled in our hearts by the ^oly Ghost, does
ravish us always vp^ard towar^e, the Lord, from whom it came, and (...) us
never to rest while we en^oy him: then we begin to l^ue, when we begin to Love.
As no Creature can live out of the own (...), so the Soul is but (...) in
sin, (...) of the love of God. No fear to o^^end him, no (...) ^o please
him, no obedience to his Commandments can be given by the heart that loves him
not. 'twere longsome to speak of all the properties of Love, we make choice of
a few, as chief tryalles of our Love.

The fir^^ property o^ L^ue, First trial of Love.
is a bur^ing desire to ob^aine that which is b^loued; as a Woman that loves
her Husband vnlargnedly, can not be content with any Love token she receives
from him in his absence, but longs more and more till she receive (...)* So
the Soul which is wounded with the Love of Jesus her immortal Husband, has a
continual desire to be at him. I grant every ^oken sent from him, bringes
comfort; but no contentment till she enioyes him: whereof comes these, and such
like complaints, Psalm. 42. 1.
As the Heart brayes for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
my God: O when shall I come and appear before the presence of my God: Psalm.
143.
my soul desires after the Lord, Phil. 1.
as the (...) land: ^or, I would be diss^lued, Reave. 22.
and be with the Lord: therefore come, even so come Lord Jesus. But alas, here
are we taken in our sins: ^hou say thou Love him; but how is it then
thou longest not to see him, neither desire to be with him? yea a small
appearance of the day of death, wherein we should go (...); or mention of the
day of Judgment, wher^in he shall come to us, does terrify and affright thee.
Thou that contents thee with the gy^^s of God, and think not long for him
self, thou art ^ut like an (...) woman, who if she possess the goods of her
husband, regards not, albeit she never see (...). (...).
The (...) are blamed, because they called on the Lord (...) for oil and wine,
(...) for worshipping the creature (...): but more (...) be condemned for
loving the gilts (...) God, ^ore then the giver. Let us therefore beware of
this (...). We may indeed rejoice in all the gifts the Lord has given us, and
they should thankfully be received; but always with a protestation, that no
thing given unto me here, be allowed unto me for my portion, and inheritance;
and that no contentment ever come to our hearts, till we get the full fruition
of our loving husband Christ Jesus. If the Love of men compelled the Apostle to
^ay to the Corinthians, It is not yours, but you I seek, how much more should
the L^ue of God compel us to say to our Lord, It is not thy gift, but thy
self, O Lord! I long for: thou art the portion of my soul: If thou would
give me all the worke^ of thine hands, yet shall I never have comfort nor
contentment, except thou give me thy self: therefore O thou whom my soul
loves! show me where thou feedest, where thou lie at (...); Cant. 2. 6.
for why should I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy
companions: Blessed is he that hungers and thirsts for thy righteousness,
for he shall behold the face of his God, and be filled with his image; for in
his presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand, (...) pleasures for
evermore.

The second trial of holy Love, Second trial of love.
is Obedience, and a care to serve and honor the Lord in all estates and
calli^ges. Preachers must be tried by this rule, Peter, L^uest thou me? ^eede
my fl^cke. Governors and Counselors in your callings, must be tried by this:
Can you say with the godly Governor David, I love the Lord then will ye also
say with him, Psalm. 119. 12
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? How shall I show to the
Lord my Love? and what shall I do in my time, for the advancement of his glory?
If you love the Lord, then ^e (...) Fathers to his Church; be saythfull
a^uaun^ers of his K^ngdome, wise prouisors to remove the stu^bling blocks
that impede the course of his Gospel: If ye love the Lord. Stand up with
David, and say, Do I not hate them, O Lord! that hate thee^ and do I not
earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee? Surely I hate them with
unfeigned hatred, as if they were my utter enemies. If ye honor the Lord as
David did, the Lord shall bless you as he did David. David swear unto the
Lord, that he would not rest, till he found out a place for the Lord, even an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. And the Lord swears again to David,
that of the fruit of this body, he should set upon his Throne to reign after
him. But if otherwise there be nothing in you, but a care to stablish your
selves and your houses, with the neglect of the glory of God; then remember,
the Curs^e of Shebna, and not the Blessing of Eliachim, Esa. 22.
shall be upon you: you shall not be fastened as a Nail in a sure place, but
shall be rolled and turned away like a Ball: The Lord shall drive thee from thy
station, Psalm. 140. 11.
and out of thy dwelling place shall he destroy thee; for the wicked shall not
have his desire; his thoughts shall not be performed, neither shall he be
established on the earth, but evil shall hunt him to destruction: the Lord
shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy Tabernacle, and root thee out of
the land of the living: and generally all of you in your callinges, remember
the value of your Christian Love must be tried by the same touchstone; not by
your words, Psalm. 52, 4.
but by your deeds. If any man loves me (says Christ) let him keep my
C^mmandements. But here also the hypo^^isie of this age is clearly
discou^red: In word they pretend the love of God, but in deed, they grieve him
with their transgressions: as the Jews, they called him King, and bowed their
knees before him, but spa^^ in his face, and busseted him: So the bastard
Christians of this age, call Christ, their Lord, and bow then knee before him,
yet they crucify him, and tramples his blood of the Covenant under their
feet: they kiss him, and betray him with Judas. It is but a Scepter of Reed
they grant to him, for they give him no commandment over their affections:
wherefore, great is the cont^ouersie which the Lord has this day with the men
of this generation.

The last trial of Love, Last trial of Love.
whereof I will speak at this time (leaving many other) is, Boun^^fulnesse.
Love (says the Apos^^) is bountiful. Experience proves this: every Lover is
a bountiful bestower on them whom he loves. Ye love your Backs, and spares
not to cloth them, yea with excessive Apparel: Ye love your Bellies, and
therefore are bountiful daily to them in feeding them: Ye love your Children,
and therefore lettes them want nothing that is needful for them: yea, ye love
your Beasts, and ye bestow largely on them; only you say you love the Lord,
but wherein are ye bounti^ull toward him? It is true, that in nothing can a
man be ^r^fitable to the Almighty, says Job. But are there no works which
should so shine before men, that by them our heavenly Father may be (...)?
Though works can be no merits, yet are they your witnesses: and what have you
done to stand^, when as you are dead, as witnesses of your ^^ue toward the
Lord? Though your goodness extend not to the Lord, yet where is your delight
that should be in his Saints, and excellent ones upon earth? Where is your
compa^sion and love toward the Brethren? Are not the men of this age like the
^ig-tree, that have fair Leaves, but not so much as one Fig to give Jesus in
his hung^r; hau^^g the show of godlin^sse, but has de^ied the power there^f,
^. Tim. 3. 5.
rendering words enough, but no ^ruites to adorn the glorious Gospel of our
Lord (...) And so, (if we might proceed) ^uery trial of (...), should
di^coue^ th'hypocrisie and bastard Christianity of the most part of Professors
of this age. But, being forced at this time, to conclud; I turn me toward you
(whom I know, has set your heart^ to seek the Lord) that I may leave my last
blessing behind me unto you, being no more purposed to speak to you from
this place; to you, and to every one of you, who can say with Pet^r in a
sinceere conscience, Lord thou know I love the^: to you here, in the name
of God, I ratify this privilege, All things shall wor^^ together for the
best unto you. Faint not therefore (^ beseech y^u) in the course of Go^lynes^e,
but (...) in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ st^^^fast in the power if his
might, praying to the Lord (...), that he would stablish that which he has
wr^ught in you, and bring it forward to p^r^^ction, And now I commend you to
that grace of God, which is able to build you ^arther, and to give you
inheritance among them that are sanct^fied in Christ Jesus: to whom, with the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, and glory, for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

