THE LADDER OF HELL. OR THE PROTESTANTS LIBERTINE DOCTRINE, BEING THE BROAD WAY
WHICH leads the followers of it to their eternal ruin and destruction in
Hell.

Set forth in Prose and Verse.

ISAI. 5. 20. Woe unto you who call evil good, and good evil; putting
darkness light, and light darkness. Permissu Superiorum.

CRANMER COVBRIDGE, MINISTER OF THE WORD IN CVMBERLAND, to the zealous
Protestants his Brethren, concerning the Printing, Title, and use of this
admirable Ladder, worthily called The Ladder of Hell.
COnsidering that this Ladder was first framed and entitled The Ladder of
Hell, by a Papist, to the great disgrace (as he conceined) of our Protestant
Religion; I imagine that some of you (dearly beloved Brethren) will wish that
it had been quite suppressed, and never seen light: yet, (in regard it
contains nothing but a collection of certain sentences set down in the
public books of twelve principal Pillars of our Church) I thought it not
amiss to set it forth, just as I found it, under your protection; knowing
well, that every zealous Protestant can with the dexterity of his reformed
spirit turn all, though never so plainly seeming ill, to at least a seeming
good sense: as for example, whereas the Papist called this collection of
sentences, The Ladder of Hell because in his judgment the belief and,
practice of it leads a soul directly to hell. Yet one of our new learning
(considering that Ladders are made rather to help men upward then downward)
will say it may be called The Ladder of Hell, because the belief and practice
of it will lift souls out of hell. And with reason may this be said, supposing
one ground of our new doctrine be true, Calvin. in c. 30. Isa. Hermonia ad cap.
3. Mat. v. 12. I. Instit. c. 25. n. 12.
to wit, that Hell is (no such local place in which are fire and other
torments, as is said by the ancient Fathers, and the Scriptures themselves, to
be prepared for the Devils and other damned creatures, but) only a certain
terror and horror of an afflicted conscience, the which may in some measure be
felt even in this world, and is ordinarily felt after sin committed even by
Protestants, until by believing firmly, and practicing freely the points of
doctrine contained in this Ladder, they come by degrees to contemn all things,
to wit, all Laws of God and man: and all scruple of mind and remorse of
conscience, and all fear of Death, Judgment, and Hell, which estate of mind,
it is like diverse zealous Protestants have already attained unto, esteeming
themselves hereby to be not only freed from hell, but to have attained a kind
of heaven in earth: Marry the doubt is, whether this their heaven will last
always, as true heaven ought to do, or whether this hasty freeing themselves
from the hell of care, fear, remorse and sorrow in this life, will not plung
them into a most bitter feeling of remorse in the hour of death, and into
intolerable torments of the eternal Hell in the next life. The which doubt
being in the judgment of some, only a Papisticall scruple, I will leave to be
discussed at better leisure: It shall suffice my present purpose only to
declare the manifold uses, which for the present time may be made of this
excellent Ladder, both by Papists and Protestants.

First, I find that the Papists mean to make this short Ladder serve for an
answer of many long discourses made by Protestant Ministers in books or
Sermons, in which they object the ill lives of some Papists; the which
objections the Papists do retort more strongly against us Protestants, who
cannot deny, but that since the light of the new Gospel was by Luther brought
into the world, Luther in Postilla supra Euangel. dom. 1. aduentus.
men are (as Luther himself coufessed) more reuengeful, more conetous, more
unmerciful, more immodest and unruly, and much worse then they were in
Papistry; the reason whereof (say the Papists) is for that the very doctrine it
self of the new Gospellers, does not only not afford such effectual
restraints and remedies against sin, as is in the ancient Catholic Religion,
but also has (as appears by the steps of this Ladder) diverse express
principles, which do plainly open the gappe to all licentious liberty of
lewd life, far more then can be imagined to be done by any principles of the
Papists doctrine. Whereupon the Papists conclude that the Protestant Religion,
whose doctrine is so unholy, cannot be a holy Religion inspired by the holy
Ghost, but suggested (as Luth. de abroganda missa priuata, editione prima.
Luther the first Author confesses some part of it (to wit, the denial of the
sacrifice of the Mass) to have been suggested to him) by Satan himself, the
enemy of all true Religion and holiness.

The zealous Protestant not much regarding this, or whatsoever other arguments
made by Papists, find out other uses of this Ladder: as for example. First, it
teaches every one of them to exercise heroical acts of their I call it new
found, because I find not in Scripture or in the ancient Fathers that a man is
made just by confidently believing that he is Just, but rather by humbly
acknowledging ones self to be a sinner, as appears in the Parable of the
Pharisee and the Publican. Luke 18.
newfound Justifying Faith, by which they believe that they are just, holy,
and of the number of the predestinate, not only by having a good hope, (as the
poor Papists have) when they see or feel some of those things in themselves,
which by the holy Scriptures they learn to be signs of true Justice (to wit,
repentance of sins past, carfulness to avoid sin in time to come, diligence
in doing good works; etc.) but also by infallible and absolute belief, as of
a chief article of their Christian faith, even at such times as they neither
see, nor feel any such signs, yea eue^ when they evidently see in themselves
contrary signs, and namely, even when they actually do those works of the
flesh, Gal* 5.
of which Saint. Paul pronounces, That they who do such things, shall not
obtain the Kingdom of God. Zealous Protestants, I say, maugre this threat of
S. Paul, are taught by this Ladder to believe boldly that they are Saints, and
cannot miss salvation, notwithstanding they commit never so many most horrible
sins.

Secondly, this Ladder teaches them to cast away all fear of God, not only
in respect of his Justice, in inflicting present or future pains for sin
(which is called servile fear) but also of separation from God, which fear
cannot stand with our new Justifying Faith, in regard we must hold it
absolutely impossible that we can be separated from God, and consequently we
must cast away this fear, although never so much commended in Scripture.

Thirdly, By this admirable Ladder, zealous Protestants may be delivered from
all inward remorse of conscience, and may come to that highest perfection of
our new Gospel, which consists in a neglect of al conscience, the which
cannot be attained on a sudden, but must be gained (as Luther himself gained
it) by entering into a terrible conflict, and fighting against ones own
conscience; the difficulty of which combat arises out of three heads.

The first is the letter of the written word, which seems every where to
cross thi^ liberty of conscience, and to forbid the doing of any thing against
conscience. But our new spiritual man, who judges all things, will oppose
against this killing letter of Scripture, which restrains our freedom, the
quickening spirit of this Ladder, which allows liberty of neglecting
conscience.

The second is an old Tradition of the Papists in favor of conscience, which
has by long custom taken a deep root in us. But the zealous Protestant, who
accounts Papistry a great blindness, will easily defy this among other
Papisticall traditions.

The third is an inueterate opinion and feeling of conscience engraven in the
very nature and flesh of man's heart. But we new spirited men do know old nature
to be corrupted, and that the flesh profits nothing.

Thus my dear Brethren, you may see what uses may be made of this admirable
Ladder.

It remains that in a word I also declare, why I make choice to dedicate it
unto you, and to put it in print under your protection.

The reason is, because the authors out of whom these sentences were collected,
were all zealous Protestants. Secondly, because none now adays will (as I
suppose) stedfastl^ believe and endeavor to practice according (...) these
points, but only zealous Prote^^a^s. Thirdly, beause none but such zealous
Protestants, who frame their lives according to this Ladder, can well
understand how it is possible that this Ladder can be good, or how it should
deliver one out of Hell, and consequently, why it should be styled in that
sense, in which I style it, The Ladder of Hell.

It may be the Papist, which first framed this Ladder, will play upon us with
his text, Woe unto you that call evil good, and good evil, Isa. 5. 20. But we
care not for his text, for we can cry as loud, and say as fast, Woe unto him,
and although the world will, witness that he has better reason to use this
text against us, then we against him: yet it suffices that our Which whether
it be white or black, Zuinglius himself could not tell.
new Spirit does bear witness to our nullity of conscience that we say true.

If the Papist take advantage at my intitling my self Minist. of the Word in
Comberland, saying that we Ministers comber the Land with these libertine
doctrines. I can reply and tell him, that it is he and his Seminaries, who
comber our consciences with their contrary doctrines, and with putting scruples
into our heads, by adding to this Ladder certain sentences, threatening hell and
damnation to sinners: for although we profess by our justifying Faith, that we
are sure to be saved, and that we need not fear to be damned: yet I confess,
when I seriously examine my guilty conscience, and by searching, find the holy
Scriptures themselves to pronounce plainly eternal damnation to all ill
livers. I cannot choose but be bodily afraid lest the Papist say true, when he
tells us that the Libertine doctrine taught by our new Gospellers, and set
down in this Ladder, will most certainly lead the followers of it to their
eternal ruin and destruction in hell; from which I beseech the Lord to
deliver us all. Amen

Your devoted servant in the Lord, CRANMER COVBRIDGE.

THE PROTESTANTS LADDER of liberty in Prose.
Easy it is Hell not to miss.

1 GOD is the Author and enforcing cause of all finne. Calvin.
2 The ten Commandments are impossible to be kept. Calvin.
3 The ten Commandments belong not to Christains. Luther.
4 Christ has fulfilled the Law for us. Willet.
5 We need take no pains for eternal life: Hofman.
6 David committing murder and adultery, did not lose the holy Ghost. Fulke.
7 Whosoever believes, God works for him. Hofman.
8 Sins are not hurtful to him that believes. Whittaker.
9 We have no freewill at all, for it is titulus finere. Luther.
10 Good works are not necessary to salvation. Illiricus.
11 Good works are hurtful to salvation. A^^^ders.
12 To teach good works, is the doctrine of devils. Luther.
1^ Let us take heed of sins, yea let us take heed of good works. Luther.
14 All our best works are mortal sins, and mere iniquity. Calvin.
15 We need not grieve or do any satisfaction for our sins. Luther.
16 A thousand fornications and murders a day, Luther.
cannot withdraw us from Christ. 17 If thy wife will not come, let thy maid
come. Luther.
18 A woman is as necessary as meat and drink. Luther.
19 We may have as many wives as we list together. Luther.
20 To fast and chastise our bodies, Luther.
is sanctity for hogs and dogs. 21 Purgatory is a delusion of the devil.
Luther.
22 The devils are but in hell. Luther.
23 There is no sin but infidelity, Tindall.
no justice but Faith. 24 No sins are imputed to the faithful. Calvin.
25 Sins of the faithful past and future, Wotton.
are pardoned as soon as committed. 26 The more wicked thou art, Luther.
the more near to receive grace. 27 We have as much right to heaven,
Zuinglius.
as Christ himself. 28 And we are all Saints, Luther.
and as holy as the Apostles were. 29 We are certain of our salvation. Calvin.
30 We cannot fall from ours, Zuinglius.
unless Christ fall from his.
A larger passage no man treads
Then that which to perdition leads.
THE PROTESTANTS LADDER of liberty, in Verse.
The gates are ^ide
And open bide.

GOD is of all our sins the enforcing cause,
It is impossible to keep his laws,
The Tables two no rules for Christians be,
Christ has fulfilled the Law, and left us free.
We need no pains take for eternal life,
David Vrias killed, defilde his wife,
Yet did not thereby lose the holy Ghost.
God for believers work, they (truly) boast*
To the believer, no sins hurtful are:
We have no freewill, it is a title bare:
There Is no necessity of our good works,
In them much hinderance to salvation lurkes.
The teaching of good works is devils lore;
Shun sin, but for good works eschew them more*
All our best works are sins and errors soul;
For sin near satisfy, nor grieve thy soul,
A thousand fornications on a day;
As often to kill, pulls not from Christ away.
If thy wife will not, let thy maid supply,
As meat and drink, a woman's necessary*
Wives thou may take at once all that thou please*
To tame the flesh by fasts, or want of ease,
Is sanctity for hogs and dogs to use,
With Purgatory the Fiend does fools abuse.
Nor are those damned rebellious sprites in hell,
No sin, but want of Faith, no doing well,
But to believe. No sins the faithful blot
Committed, straight they are pardoned and forgot.
The most defiled, the readiest is for grace;
As Christ, so we, have right to see Gods face.
The Apostles equals we are all, and Saints,
Our certainty of salvation never faints,
What ever soyleth ours, Christ's glory taints*
They spend their days in faring well,
And in a tri^e descend to hell.

THE BOOKS OF PROTEstants from whence the steps of the* Ladder are gathered.
1 Calvin. lib. 1. Iustitut. cap. 18. sect. 3. 4. Castalio is witness, l. de
Praed. con. Calvin. Ecker. in fascic. contr. quaest. 2. cap. 7. Paraeus apud
Beca in 1. par. c. 16. p. 182. Litt. Bern. dat. Anno. 1555.
2 Calvin. lib. 2. Instit. cap. 7. sect. 5. 3 Luther. Sermon. de Mois. and in
coloq ^^ns. Germ. fol. 152. 153. Melane. in Loc. Com. edit. 2. page 76. Eberus
Salmath fecicles cruciger colloq. Altemb. Anno 1568.
4 Willet in Sinop. Papis. page 564. 5 Hoffman. de Poenit. 6 Fulke in the Tower
disput. 7 Hoffman. de Poenit. 8 Whitaker de Ecclesia. page 301. 9 Luther Art.
36. 10 Illiricus in Pref. ad Romans 11 Amsdorfius quod bona opera sint perniciosa
ad salut. 12 Luther de Votis Monast. 13 Luther in Piscatura Petri. 14 Calvin
lib. 3. cap. 12. sect. 4. 15 Calvin lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 38. 16 Luther Tom. 1.
epist. fol. 334. 17 Luther Ser. de Matrimon. 18 Luther Ibidem. 19 Luther
Ibidem. 20 Luther Tom. 5. Ger. fol. 324. 21 Luther Epist. ad Wald. de Eucha. 22
Luther ad cap. 9. Ionae. 23 Luther in 5. par. post. German. fol. 140. and
Tindall alleged by Fox, Acts page 1137. 24 Calvin lib. 3. Instit. cap. 4.
sect. 28. 25 Wotton in his Answ. to the Popish Art. page 41. 26 Luther Ser. de
Pisc. Petri. 27 Zwinglius Tom. 1. fol. 288. 28 Luther Ser. de Cruce. 29 Disput.
Ratisb. page 463. 30 Swinglius Tom. 1 fol. 268.
FINIS.

