Fruitful Lessons, UPON THE PASSION, BVRIALL, RESVRRECTION, Ascension, and of
the sending of the holy Ghost.

GATHERED OVT OF THE FOUR Evangelists: with a plain exposition of the same.

BY MILES COVERDALL.

JOHN. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life no man comes unto (...)
but by me.

LONDON* Printe^ b^ Thomas (...). ^593.

The Author to the Reader.
SInce our humane imperfections are such, as one sin drives out another and
the frailty of our natures is so great, as having touched the brim of the
Ocean thereof, we never cease till we are overwhelmed and drowned in the
bottom of the same: since of our selves we are but graftes of a corruptious
tree, children of eternal darkness, infidels who bow the knee to Baal,
having uncircumcised hearts and lying lips, whose minds are fixed on the
world, and fastened on Mammon, I thought good (Christian Reader) considering the
self love in us, which have converted the Angels into deuilles, which (as
Augustine witnesses) has builded the very Babylon of contempt of God, to
level out a way for all men to tread, a glass for all men to see, an Adamant
wherewith all souls may be drawn to the beholding of their vices, the
loathing of the same, and finally the amendment and hearty conversion for
their misdeeds. And for that it most evidently appears, that the iustest man
falls oftentimes a day, and they that discern errors in themselves and
seeing then that they are in the next step to amendment, it behooves us to
consider the weakness which is in us, how far we are fallen and d^o fall
from the protection of the just, so that in the end we may in the spring* of
repentance wash away original and successive sins, which have defiled our
souls, and cleaning to the (...) corner stone, whereon our says should be
builded, withstand the peri^ of perdition, which our ghostly enemy has raised
against us.

And ^^r that truth is never known but by his contrary, and our nakedness is
not disclosed, unless our eyes be opened, let us examine our selves, and we
shall find, that these are inseparable errors in us, from which the iustest
are not exempted, namely, blindness, and corruptnes of judgment, (...) spirit,
mistrust in GOD, to be slack and weary in Gods service, defaming of Gods
truth, not to have God before the eyes, surmising, vanity (...) heart,
curiosity and niceness, grudging in our hearts against the enemy,
bitterness, desire of vengeance, a man's good intent, greedines to be seen and
praised, vainglorie, ambition, proper election, maintaining of our own and
dis^lainfull, false, unfaithful wicked are, and (...) points and feats,
wherewith the (...) the good men, that keep themselves from (...). These and
other innumerable vices shall every (...) good so ever he be) find in himself,
if he search (...) uprightly and thoroughly to the bottom.

(...) then, that we find our selves so vicious, altogether (...) poisoned,
and wounded unto death, we ought day and night without ceasing, to complain
and lament before God, to watch and pray unto God for remission of our sins,
yet should we not despair of life. The true Physician of our souls came down
from heaven, and through his passion has he made us a plaster for our wounds,
only let us use it and lay it to the sore. The faithful Samaritane pours
oil and wine into our wounds, takes us up to cure and to heal us, only let
us follow him, and fashion our selves after his image. He is the brazen serpent
without sin, whom with the eyes of faith we must behold hanging, and lift up
upon the cross for us, he taking our sins upon himself, gives us his
own innocence.

If the burden of sin now oppresses and grieueth us, we ought to run unto
him, he shall ease us and give us rest, for his blood washes away our sins,
him has the father given unto us to be our righteousness and redemption.

Besides this great treasure that God has given us in Christ, he is set forth
unto us, especially in his passion, for a pattern or example, whereby we may
learn to die from sin, and find a preservative against vices to come. For
selfeloue and high esteeming of a man's own self is the wel-spring of all
vice, Consider that Christ was not proud himself of his own highness, but
took upon him the shape of a servant, and come to serve us, humbled him most
lowly, loved not himself sought not his own, desired not his honor, but the
honor of his father: all despite and reproach fell upon him. If we ponder this
by says, all greedy love of our selves shall fall away.

The obedience of Jesus in true belief considered, expels and heals our
disobedience, and the idolairie of our own carnal heart. With his obedience
covers he the disobedience of all men, so far as we abide in the obedience
of faith, that Christ be dearer unto us than the whole world, for the which
cause we freely give over our selves into his obedience, suffering all things
for his sake. Pride and vaineglorie is healed through Christ's humility and
contempt, which he suffered for us manifold. Learn of me (says he) for I am
meek and lowly of heart. Why are we so greadie of temporal things, when
Christ the Lord of heaven and earth became for us so poor, hanging bare and
naked upon the cross? The chaste pure life of Jesus Christ expels in us all
uncleanness of the flesh. Also his martyrdom, anguish and trouble which in
his flesh he suffered for us, quenches the lust and concupiscence of the
flesh.

O how evil does it become a believer, to be irefull and greedy of vengeance,
when his forerunner, being in most humility like unto a sheep, prayed for
his enemies?

Envy and hatred is highly expelled, if we consider the excellent deep love
of Jesus toward us. Gluttony and excess of life shall fall away from us, if
we well remember that Christ for us drank vinegar mixed with gall.

As it is here showed in certain points, even so against all vices and
blemishes of the soul, there may remedy be^ sound in the passion of Christ,
if it be rightly used in the contemplation of faith. The old Adam ought we to
lay aside, to mortify the members upon earth, and to put on Christ the Lord,
as the new wedding garment. In the cross ought to be our exercise, our joy,
comfort, and life.

Hereunto also helps us our heavenly father, who unto us his children (whom
he most entirely loves) suffers manifold passions, afflictions, troubles, and
anguishes, sickness, poverty, and persecution to come: to keep us upon the
cross, least we as negligent people gape for temporal earthie things. And if
we will needs follow our own lusts, he hedgeth our way with thorns,
nourturing and humbling us through trouble, that we being tried and purified as
the gold in the fire, may cry and call unto him, and that we may give our
earthly things, seeing we find no quietness in them. He brings us into the
land of promise, howbeit through the wilderness, through much travel and
labor. Blessed are they that in patience without murmuring, suffer the Lord
to work, and do faithfully follow him.

All this, and more than I can say, ought to be the consideration and
exercise, when we celebrate the supper of the Lord Jesus, that we so sprinkle
the blood of Christ in our hearts, and drink it into us, that it may work in
us, and bring forth fruit. Our eyes and hearts we ought to lift up in to
heaven, and consider what the bread and wine points us unto, namely, unto the
body of Christ, that was offered up upon the cross for our sins, and to his
blood, that was shed for the washing away of our offenses: and that we fashion
our selves unto his image, and practice also such love one toward another.
This is the proof that Paul speaks of, with the which a faithful believer
ought to exercise himself before, and in the Lords supper examining well his
faith and love, which out of the love of God toward us, is kindled and
increased. First ought a man to consider the excellent love of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who so loved us, that he died for us. And seeing that he bids us to
so high a feast of his grace we ought also to ponder the same, in such sort,
that we be thankful unto him, and prepare our selves thereafter.

Saint Paul says, that there is a feeding with milk, and a feeding with
strong meat, which is to be observed according to the nature and property of
those that receive the meat. And in the Church of God there be three sorts of
men, as the same, by the high illuminated goodwise teacher Augustine, and by
others is written.

First, there be men, which having spent their former time past, in pastime and
wantonness of the world, and considering the careful end thereof, (as they be
inwardly moved by the grace of God) have undertaken to cease and refrain from
sin, and from all occasions of sin, and in most diligent wise, as near as
they can, with the assistance, grace and help of God, to be circumspect and
wary thereof: albeit they are yet weak, and have not so strong a spirit, as
to lay aside and despise all worldly things out of hand. And these are the
right true beginners of repentant and penitent persons: though they be not new
beginners, yet are they unto God the Lord so dear, that all things cannot
sufficiently commend and praise it.

This is witnessed unto us by the holy Gospel, of the unthrifty son: who
when with shameful riot he had wantonly consumed his inheritance, did in time
of his extreme hunger, convert and turn again to his loving Father, and
received not only gracious forgiveness of his trespass, but also special
tokens of his fathers love: as the garment, the kiss, the fat calfe, the
sweet minstrelsie and melody. This is the first anchor of true repentance.
This is the first state concerning the blessed swineheard, who forsaking the
hogs wiih the coddes, (draffe or swillinges) that he sometimes greedily
filled his belly withal, and returning to his loving father, is now in his
first coming again to his merciful father, graciously taken up, received and
rewarded.

Who so now with this unthrifty son forsakes his sins, and coming again
in true and hearty repentance unto God his most loving and gracious Father,
says meekely: O Father, I am not worthy to be called thy son, for I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, O make nice one of thy hired servants.
To him shall the father deny nothing. Who so now with an unfeigned heart and
mouth may speak this unto God, and truly and unfeignedly seeks Jesus,
assuredly he finds him, and has with him a cheerful supper. Look unto
whom God in his great mercy gives such a taste of his geace, let him render
thanks and praise unto almighty GOD, let him now look for it, that the
Father who has received him, will also nourture him in his own school, and
through manifold adversities furnish him, prepare him, and make him more
perfect. He has been fed with the milk, he must learn also to know,
what hard meat means. Through adversity and trouble, some chances, he
must be tempted and proved, whether he have ought in him of the blessed seed
that grows vpwardes unto eternal life. Which thing shall well appear and
be made manifest, if in time of temptation and troubles, he be not choked
with the thorns, nor trodden down by the high way side, nor withered among
the stones, but found fruitful in a good and fertile ground.

Other men there be, which are called reformers, to whom belongs somewhat
more than there does unto the other. For like as it appertains to the first
repentant or prnitent persons, that they continually and fervently, with the
confession of their sins unto God, with sorrow and lamentation, with prayer,
watching, and chastising of the the body, do break out a way from their
old sins, harnessing and arming themselves against others for to come, and
earnestly withstanding and forsaking their own evil and naughty customs,
(if they mind to bring forth fruit, and not to fall away again:) Even so
the reformers in the second order and manner, after the hard rooting out of
vice and wickedness, must still exercise them selves in the will of God and in
good works, seeking diligently experience thereof in holy Scripture, and of
those teachers who by reason of long practice, and by the Scriptures, can
declare and teach the same way. When these men in such a steadfast purpose to
walk and practice themselves in the will of God with his grace and power, do
go unto the supper of the Lord, they inwardly with joy and fruit of the godly
feast are nourished and refreshed. For who so desires to cleave unto virtue
and to a godly life, shall no where find the same so evidently and plain, as
in Christ's passion, whereof he is mindful at the supper with faith and
thanksgiving.

The third sort of men are ^^lled perfect: not that any man here in time may
be perfect, as to lack nothing, or to have no sin in him, but therefore are
they named perfect, because their exercise is such, that after long accustomate
doing of virtuous deeds, after many spiritual fruits brought forth by them in
patience, after many temptations, which they with the help of God have
overcome. They have so wholly humbled and cast down themselves before God,
being reconciled with him, that they are become one spirit with Christ their
head, whom they cleave unto, whose cross and holy passion they follow without
fainting, so far as their wit and power may suffer, being dead from the world
and the flesh, following only the Lord Jesus Christ, suffering with him, and
living with him. These with their minds and hearts step somewhat higher than the
others, having their dwelling in heaven, in the sweet contemplation and
beholding of Gods Almightinesse, wisdom, and goodness, with fervent devotion.
Which men also by inioying of the said feast, according to their belief and
ferue^^ love, receive the more excellent ^ruites, whereby they may expel the
temptations that they like not. For the devil keeps no holy day, he
sleeps not, runs about as a roaring lion: he cease not, and therefore
these men continually get them to their weapons, with the consideration of the
passion of Christ. Abraham the good friend of God, must still drive away the
ravenous birds from the sacrifice, till the Sun go down, and till a man
cheerfully say, In peace will I lay me down and take my rest, etc.

This probation must be well taken heed unto, for many men not justly
considering themselves, neither right discerning this meat from others,
receive the food of life unto death. Not that this holy bread was instituted
and ordained of Christ, to hurt any man, but because the evil man does wickedly
receive that which is wholesome, and abuses it thorough unbelief. Therefore
justly does Paul exhort, that there be first had a diligent examination of a
man's self, and that then he eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. Thus
let every man take good heed to his own state and vocation, that this banquet
may set him forward, not unto his hurt but to eternal life.

Who so takes not heed unto this difference, and to him self, as (alas)
carnal people do, which are not spiritually instructed. The same fails often
in many things, and undertakes to fly high, yea, higher than his knowledge
and power may attain. Hereof then it also proceeds (as we see before our
eyes) that so few folks come to steadfast amendment, namely, even hereof,
that when men are not exercised in discerning of Gods matters from others, a
mad headie motion of sensualtie provoke them inordinatly to sit highest at
the table, whereas yet they are not worthy of the lowest place, and so will
they forthwith possess the seat royal, before they have found the asses, or
kept the sheep, as of David and Saul in figure it is read. But thus ought it
not to be: for though the grace of the holy Ghost use not long fetches about,
yet comes no man suddenly to the happiest step. I speak after the common
course, as it beseems us to talk and do in the Church of God, namely, after
the ordinance which he has appointed us.

Behold Saint Paul being so perfect in the law, that the world could not accuse
him, being also chaste, earnest, fervent and well exercised in all virtues, whom
God that had separated him from his mothers womb, would call to his service.
Though he was taken up into the third heaven, and saw secrets that no man can
express, yet does not he trust so much thereto, as (by reason of that great
grace) to magnify himself, and to take upon him the office of preaching,
before he being taught at Gamaliels feet, and baptized and instructed of
Ananias, had perceived in himself, and proved, that same which he afterward
out of the perfectnes of the spirit, might distribute abroad unto al
Christendom. This is peradventure laughed to scorn of the inexpert, proud,
worldlynesse: but who so has ears circumcised with the fear of God, will
think more upon the matter.

He that will sit now at the table of the high king let him diligently consider
what he receives in his soul through faith, namely, the body end blood of
Jesus Christ, which feeds and nourishes him to eternal life, and draws
him to God, alters him, and makes him steadfast, which the outward bread
taken with the moueh, does point and lead unto: yea, let us ponder, how great
love, and what an example Christ there sets before him, that he also must
prepare the like: that is, that he to his power must follow the love, life and
passion of Christ, to the intent, that he being wounded with Christ's love, and
fastened with him upon the cross, may abide in him unto the end.

For in the passion of Christ, is the instrustion of the way which we ought and
must follow unto eternal life. There also is information where and how the
same way and the everlasting truth is showed and found. Thus the penitent
sindeth the way, the reformer the undoubted vnwandring truth: the perfect, the
very life eternal, which is Christ Jesus, and there is eternal peace. God
grant, that all they which read this little book, and consider this matter,
may so burn in love and fervent devotion, that they continue and live in
Christ, and he in them for ever, Amen.

THE PASSION OF CHRIST, Out of the holy Evangelists.
THE feast of sweet bread (which is also called Easter) drue nigh, namely,
after two days. Then said Jesus to his disciples: Know ye, that after two
days shall be Easter, and the son of man shall be betrayed and crucified. At
the same time were the chief priests and council gathered together in the
palace of the high Priest, whose name was Caiphas, and there they counseled,
how they might craftily apprehend take, and kill him. Howbeit they feared the
people. Therefore said they together, Not on the holy day, least there be an
vproare among the people. But Satan was entered into Judas (called Iscarioth)
one of the twelve, who went out to the high Priests and rulers, intending to
deliver him unto them: therefore how he would deliver Jesus unto them, he told
them and said: What will you give me and I will deliver him unto you. When they
heard that, they were glad, and agreed with him, promising him thirty pence.
Then promised he them, and sought from thence forth opportunity, how he might
deliver Jesus unto them handsomely and without any vprour.

But before the feast which is called Passah, Jesus knowing that his hour was
come, and that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, while he
loved his own that were in the world, he loved them unto the end.

On the first day of sweet bread, when they offer passah, the Disciples came to
Jesus and said: where will thou that we go and prepare Passah for thee? Then
sent he two of his disciples: namely, Peter and John, saying: Go and prepare
for us, that we may eat Passah. They said: where? then said he: Go into the
city to one, behold when ye enter in, one shall meet you bearing a pitcher
with water, follow him into the house that he enters into, and say unto the
householder: The master says unto thee, my time is now here, that I will eat
Passah with thee: Where is now the place where the multitude shall be kept?
Where is the Parlour that I shall eat Passah in with my Disciples? then shall
he show you a great Parlour that is paued, there make ye ready.

So the Disciples went and found as the Lord had told them, and they made
ready the Passah. At even came Jesus with the twelve, and when it was time he
sat him down at the table and the twelve with him.

Now when he sat at the table with his disciples, and they did eat, he said:
I have greatly longed and heartely desired to eat this Passah with you before I
suffer: For I say unto you, that now from hence forth I will not eat of it till
it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

Now as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, gave thanks and brake it, gave it
to his Disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body which shall be betrayed
and delivered for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also when they
had eaten, he took the cup, rendered thanks, and gave unto them, saying:
Take and divide among you, and drink ye all thereof. This is my blood of the
new Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, to the forgiveness of
sins. I say unto you, that from henceforth I shall not drink of the fruit
of the vine, until the day that I shall drink it new with you in the kingdom
of my Father. And they all drank thereof.

Now follows the doctrine and meditation.
HEre should we children of belief, diligently ponder and consider, what
Christ has done for our sakes: namely, that he, when he had fulfilled his
ministration committed to him of the father, and now would offer up himself
upon the cross for the sins of the world, and with his own death deliver
mankind from the captivity of Satan, and from eternal death declared, how he
loved his own until the end, John. 13. Luke 22.
and with what desire he longed to eat the Easter lamb with his disciples,
before he suffered. Giving them thereby to understand, 1. Cor. 5. Esaias. 53.
John. 1
that he was the true pascal lamb, which being slain for us, should take away
the sins of the world, that the figures of the old Testament might be
reduced into the truth. That like as the Jews (to whom with a prescribed
ordinance it was commanded, yearly to eat the Easter lamb) did the same
for a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt: Exodus 12.
So we believers also, might in the new Testament, have a remembrance and
exercise of the gracious redemption, whereas we by his death are delivered from
the power of darkness, of the devil, and of sin, and brought to eternal life.

And to the intent now that the remembrance of such excellent benefits, grace,
and merits of the passion of Christ, might ever be fresh and new with his
disciples and all believers, our Lord Jesus Christ, when he now would go unto
death, and pay the ransom for the sins of all the world, he then did eat
the Easter lamb with his Disciples, to finish the shadow of the old
Testament: and that he might be remembered thereby, he instituted the bread and
wine, for a sacrament and memorial of his ho^ie body and blood.

Seeing then, that we are cleansed, delivered, and redeemed with so dear and
worthy a treasure; namely, (...) 67.
with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, the undefiled lamb: 1 Pet. 1. 1.
John 1. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 9.
we ought never to forget such an high benefit, but at all times with
thankfulness to remember, that Christ our Paschall lamb, was slain and offered
up for us upon the cross, 1. Pet 2.
that we from hence forth should walk in pureness, singlenes and innocence
of life: and that when we in the Supper, by true faith do eat his body, and
drink his blood, we might through him be so strengthened and fed to eternal
life, as to abide and live in him for ever. For he is the bread of life that
came down from heaven, John. 6.
to nourish and strengthen our weak and hungry souls, yea to make us dead to
live again.

But then eat we his flesh, and then drink we his blood, when we through
true belief do ponder and consider, what he has done and suffered for our
sakes: then are we partakers of his supper and feast, when we for his sake do
live, as he did for his Fathers sake. He gave himself whole unto us: so ought
we to give our selves whole unto him, and to our neighbor. To him through
belief, to our neighbor through charitable love. Through faith we abide in
him: John. 15.
by working love he abides in us. The more we love, the more enjoy we of
this meat: the more we believe, the more we love. In this shall all men know
that we are his Disciples, if we love one another. John. 13. 1. Ioh 2.3.4
God is love, and he that abides in love, abides in God, John. 15.
and God in him. What greater love can there be, than to give his own life for
us? The death of Christ ought never to come out of our hearts: that we may
do and suffer all things for his sake that dyed for us.

The second part.
WHen supper was ended, after that the devil had put in the heart of Judas
Iscarioth Simons son, to betray him: Jesus knowing that the father had given
all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God, he
rose from Supper, and laid aside his upper garments, and took a towel and girt
himself. After that poured he water into a Basin, and began to wash his
Disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girt. Then
came he to Simon Peter, and Peter said unto him: Lord, do thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said unto him, what I do thou know not now, but thou
shall know hereafter: Peter said unto him, thou shall never wash my feet.
Jesus answered him: If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, Simon Peter
said unto him: Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus
said unto him, He that is washed needs not save to wash his feet, but is
clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all, for he knew who should
betray him: therefore said he, ye are not al clean. So after he had washed
their feet, and received his clothes, and was set down, he said unto them
again: w^t you what I have done to you? Ye call me master and Lord, and ye
say well, for so I am. If I then your Lord and master have washed your feet,
ye also ought to wash one another feet: for I have given you an ensample, that
ye should do as I have done to you. Verily verily I say unto you: The
servant is not greater than his master, neither the messenger greater than he
that sent him. If ye understand these things, happy are ye, if ye do them.

Doctrine and fruit.
Here ought we diligently to consider the unspeakable and fervent love of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Love.
who until the end leaves nothing undone that may serve for our welfare.
Humblenes.
Likewise also should we ponder and regard the meek lowlines of him, in that
he the king of heaven does humble himself, even to wash his Disciples feet:
which thing is accounted base and vile amongst men: yea even unto the man that
betrayed him, is not he ashamed, neither refuses to show such lowlines and
work of love.

By this we learn, to declare all works of charitable love unto our neighbor,
and not to be ashamed (how high soever we be) meekly to do our neighbor
service, though he be poor, base, and small in reputation, yea, albeit he
has already hurt and betrayed us. We ought to learn with Christ our head, to
do good: not only to our brethren and friends, but also to our adversaries,
enemies, evil willers, and such as love us not: even unto them should we
show friendship, serving them, being gentle, mild, and loving unto them. We
must pray unto the Lord, that he will grant us grace to fulfill and do, that
we hear and read of him.

Furthermore, considering that we daily perceive in our selves spots and
blemishes of sin, so that our feet (that is to say, our affections and
desires) while we walk in the myerie way, are still continually defiled and
stained: we ought therefore incessantly to watch and to call unto God, that he
with the water of his grace, will vouchsafe to make clean our feet, and wash
away the mire of earthie and carnal spots: that we in the pureness of
faith may abide in Christ our head, and he in us.

Of the Sermon that Christ made unto his Disciples after the Supper.
The exhortation and warning of Christ.
THen said Jesus unto his Disciples: This night shall you all be offended
because of me. For it is written: I shall smite the shepherd, and the sheep
of the flock shall be scattered But when I am risen again, I will go before you
into Galilee. Peter answered, The presumption and rashness of Peter.
and said unto him: And though they all be offended because of thee, yet will
not I be so. Then said Jesus to him: Verily I say unto thee, that this night
before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me three times. Upon this spoke
Peter further: Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee: and so
said all the Disciples likewise. But Jesus said: I speak not of you all: I
know whom I have chosen. He that eats bread with me, shall lift up his heel
against me. This I tell you before hand, ere it come to pass: that when it is
done, ye may believe, that I am he. Verily verelie I say unto you, he that
receives him whom I send, receives me: The dignity and worthiness of the
disciples. The foreknowledge of Christ.
and who so receives me, receives him that sent me.

When Jesus had spoken this, he was troubled in spirit, and protested and
said: Verily verily I say unto you, one of you shall betray me, yea even he
that eats with me. The Disciples looked one upon another, and doubting of
whom he spoke, they were very sorry and dismayed, and began to say one after
another: Lord is it I? Then said Jesus: One of the twelve, even he that dippeth
his hand with me in the platter, he shall betray me. The son of man goes,
as it is written of him: but woe unto him by whom the son of man is betrayed.
Better it were for him, that he never had been borne. The presumptuousnes of
Judas.
Then said Judas that betrayed him, Lord, is it I? Then spoke Jesus: Thou have
said.

One whom Jesus loved among the Disciples, lay upon Jesus lap. To him
beckened Peter, and said: Who is he that he speaks of? Now when he leaned on
Jesus breast, he said unto him: Lord, who is it? Jesus answered: He it is,
unto whom I shall reach the soppe. And when he had dipped in the bread, he
gave it unto Judas Simon Iscarioth: Treason comes of the devil.
and after the soppe entered the devil into him. And Jesus said unto him: That
thou do, do it quickly. None of those that sat at the table, perceived why
he spoke this. Some thought, seeing Judas had the purse, that Jesus had
commanded him to buy some thing necessary at the feast, or to give some thing
unto the poor. Now when he had taken it, he went out immediately, and it was
night.

Now when he was gone forth, Jesus said: Now is the son of man glorified,
and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified by him, then shall God
glorify him in himself, and shall straight way glorify him. Little children,
I am yet a small time with you. Ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the
Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come. And now I say unto you: A new
commandment I give you, to love one another as I have loved you, that ye
even so love one another. Herein shall all men know and perceive, that ye are
my Disciples, if ye have love among your selves. Then said Simon Peter: Lord,
whither go thou? Jesus answered him, and said: Whither I go, thou can not
follow me now, but thou shall follow me hereafter. Then said Peter unto him:
Why may not I now follow thee? I will ieopard my life for thee Jesus answered:
Will thou ieopard thy life for me? Verelie, verelie I say unto thee: Before the
cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice.

Doctrine and fruit.
GOod virtuous children should harken most diligently unto the words of their
father, and fasten them in their hearts: but specially those words which he
speaks and commits unto them, now when he minds by death to depart
from them, and to take his leave of them. For the same words (being the last)
pierce very deep into the heart, and are never forgotten. Seeing then, that
we are Gods children, and Christ here names us so to be, with his Disciples:
we ought very diligently to ponder and consider all his words and doctrine,
but specially such as he uttered unto them, when he now would go to his
passion. For there shall we find an ardent, earnest, and fervent doctrine, full
of most excellent, godly, and inestimable love, proponed and thrust into their
hearts, with words sweeter than honey. In this Oration brings he forth
specially that same, which most of all concerns his Disciples. First the
eternal wisdom declares, that he is ignorant of nothing, that unto him
there is nothing hid. He knows what shall happen unto them through
weakness of the flesh, and fear of men: albeit our feeblenes and
imbecillitie does always break forth, presume, and brag more, than we ever
are able to perform, as we have example in Peter. Such headie rashness the
Lord rebukes, admonishing us of our own weakness, and fall.

Moreover, we ought to consider in Christ our head and forerunner, how
earnestly, and lovingly, he mentions and warns the traitor, setting his
great offense before his eyes, and always touching him, to remove him from his
wicked purpose. Yet makes he mention of him, and of the vice, in such sort,
that he never desires his hurt, but only his conversion and amendment. His
desire is, that he were reformed, not that he should be bewrayed, or that any
harm should happen unto him by him or others. Such lenity and gentleness ought
we also to show and declare unto our enemies, and those that hurt us: if it
only concern us, we should not be desirous of vengeance. And though we all
ought sore to mourn in the Church, that is to say, in the Christian
congregation, if there be transgressors and naughty people, applying our
diligence the best we can, that such be not therein: yet whereas their vices
be secret, and as yet not opened, we ought in love and patience to bear and
suffer them until the harvest, when the Lord shall purge and cleanse his
stoore. Besides this, we ought not to cease with warning and advertisement,
with correction and doctrine, that they may leave off from their obstinate
wickedness.

And when the congregation of God through his grace is quite of such evil
people, and discharged of such wicked blemishes, God must be thanked, and
diligence applied, that no wicked thing breed therein again.

Love.
But above all things must we regard that principal and new commandment which
Christ gives us; namely, upon the love, that he after a new sort has
declared and performed: by the which love he renews those that are his, and
plentifully indueth them through the holy Ghost, whom he gives in their
hearts. Love comprehends and fulfilleth all laws: therefore Christ leaves
all other commandments, and admonishes us only of love.

Love has he himself showed us aforehand: of him must we learn to love.
Love is the assured and vnfailing evidence of the children of God. Who so has
not it, though he had all other virtues, yet has he nothing, neither is it
profitable to him that he has. If he have love, then has he all things that
are necessary for his health and salvation. Therefore ought we to regard nothing
so much as love. There is nothing more acceptable, nothing more perfect,
nothing better in heaven and earth, than love: for it is of God, and may rest
no where else but in God. Only love makes us godly, and shapeth us likest
unto God: namely, that love which springs and grows out of a pure heart,
out of a good conscience, and of an unfeigned faith. Nevertheless we must love
one another, not with words only, and with tongues, but with the deed, and
in the truth, even with our whole hearts, as Christ loved us.

JESUS said unto his Disciples: Let not your hearts be troubled. If ye believe
in God, believe in me. In my Fathers house are many mansions. If it were not
so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you even unto my
self, that where I am, ye may be also: and whither I go ye know, and the way
ye know. Then said Thomas: Lord, we wot not whither thou go: and how is it
possible for us to know the way? Then said Jesus: I am the way, the truth, and
the verity. No man comes unto the Father, but by me. If ye had known me,
ye had known my Father also. And now ye know him, and have seen him. Philip
said unto him: Lord, show us the Father, and it suffices us. Jesus said unto
him: Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me?
Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the Father. And how say thou then:
Show us the Father? Beleeuest thou not, that I am in the Father, and the Father
in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the
Father that dwells in me, is he that does the works. Believe me, that I am
in the Father, and the Father in me. At least believe me for the very works
sake. Verily verily I say unto you: he that believes on me, the works that I
do, the same shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he do,
because I go unto my Father. And whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I
do, that the Father may be glorified by the Son. If ye shall ask any thing
in my name, I will do it.

Doctrine and fruit.
WHen the Disciples of Christ heard of his death and departing, what trouble
should fall upon them, and what should happen unto them through the weakness of
the flesh, they were very heavy and dismayed, for they had great love unto
the Lord, and loath were they to depart from him, and yet might they not
follow him at this time. Adversity.
Therefore lovingly does the Lord comfort and strengthen them, saying; Be not
afraid, let not your heart be troubled. This comfort is spoken unto us all:
for while we live here, we must look for much trouble and adversity,
whereof springs many times heaviness, fear and vnpatiencie in our flesh.
Therefore Christ, who corporally is absent from us, Patience.
but present among us with his grace, speaks unto us inwardly by his spirit
in our hearts, or outwardly by his word and exhortation, comfortably
strengthening, and mightily comforting our feeblenes, giving us gladness also
in sorrow.

To be without adversity (if it please God otherwise) is not good for us: to
be rash and heady is hurtful. Therefore brings he us in between fear and
hope, that we should turn neither to the right hand nor to the left. Much
adversity suffers he to come unto us, so that often times fearefulnes and
sorrow falls on us: but this keeps us in his awe, Meeknes.
cutteth our comb, brings down our pride, and humbles us. Out of this we
learn, that if any humane infirmity and feeblenes fall upon us, as it did
upon the Disciples in the Lords passion, we shall not utterly despair, nor
fall away through fearfulnes: but remember, that in this time it happens so
of course, that we must suffer and bear much trouble and adversity, to the
intent, that the glory and power of GOD may be opened in our weakness: and
yet in all adversity must we be manly and stout, valiauntly fighting for his
names sake. And though of weakness we be fallen in the field, yet will he
have compassion upon us, and graciously forgive our fall. The fear of God.
For who would not be afraid to fall, when the earnest and fervent Apostle
Peter fell so sore, and all the other Disciples fled from the Lord? If this
chanced to the beloved Disciples, no man need to think the contrary, but the
like may happen unto him. He that stands, let him stand fast in the fear
of God, and look that he fall not.

Christ unto his own that stand in this conflict and dangerous battle,
Faith.
gives the shield or target of faith, which they cast up, and receive all
strokes and shot therein. Believe ye in me (says he.) Who so believes in
Christ, believes in God, for Christ is God. This faith gives strength, and
overcomes all adversity. As if Christ would say; Be not afraid by reason
of my bodily absence. Though ye see me no more from henceforth with bodily eyes,
yet with my grace and comfort will not I forsake you, but be with you until
the end of the world. I will always remain with you: Only look that ye believe
in me, continuing and cleaving fast unto me with the belief of the heart, so
will I defend, deliver, and save you for ever. Be not afraid for any
adversity: put your confidence in me. After your trouble, there is prepared
for you an excellent great joy, and an exceeding unspeakable reward. Eternal
reward.
For in my Fathers house are many dwellings, which from everlasting have been
prepared for all the elect, that believe in me, and follow me under the
cross. I will not deceive you, I will show you no unfaithful touch, I will
not disappoint you, into no fools paradise nor false hope will I bring you. If
the mansions were not prepared for you in my Fathers house, I would tell it
you: but doubt ye not in my promise, fall ye not off from faith and hope, stay
your belief and affiance steadfastly upon me, hope undoubtedly for the
dwellings to come, which are ordained and prepared of my Father for you. Here
is nothing but misery and trouble, here is no abiding, no dwelling, but a
pilgrimage. Here ye are among strangers: but in my Fathers house are many
dwellinges, not only for me, but also for you. And forasmuch as now through
my death I will furnish and perfectly open and make an entrance into the same
dwellings, which were prepared for you of my Father before the creation of the
world: be not you therefore dismayed by reason of my death. Christ's death our
life.
My death shall be your life and salvation. Through my death go I before you,
and make you a way unto heaven. Look what the Father of his gracious goodness
has ordained for you from everlasting, that will not he give you, but through
me. Therefore must I die, and with my death open you the entrance unto life.

And albeit that through my death and ascension I shall corporally depart from
you, yet will I not fail you, neither forsake you. The fruit of the death of
Christ.
Like as by my death I open unto you the entrance into the heavenly mansions:
so will I send you my holy spirit, who shall furnish you, and make you meet
for such dwellings. That I go from you, it is done for your wealth: therefore
be not sorry, that I open the dwellings unto you: I will come to you again, and
receive you to my self, that ye may always be with me in my Fathers kingdom.
For he that serves me, shall also be eternally with me in my Fathers house:
thither will I bring you through my power and grace: fear ye not, and believe
in me. Thus ye know whither I go, namely, unto the Father, to work your
welfare: ye know also through what way ye must follow me, even through
faith and adversity. Abide ye steadfast in faith, and put your trust in me, so
will I be your faithful mediator and attorney in the presence of God my
Father.

And if we would say as Thomas did, that we know not the way, the Lord Jesus
instructs us further, Christ is the only way.
and says: that he is the way, the truth, and the life. This ought we poor
sinners well to fasten in our hearts, that Christ is the only way which
brings us unto God, and that no man may come unto the father but by him. We
should not therefore erect or choose unto our selves any other way. Only by
Christ must we come unto God: this has he spoken that is the truth it self,
and cannot lie. In the way is he our guide, and by it he leads us unto
himself, and so by himself unto God. Thorough this way we come to life, and
though we must die in adversity for his sake, yet in him we find eternal
life, for he is the life and resurrection, Who so believes on him cannot die,
but comes out of death into life, and though he die, yet shall he live in
him everlastingly.

Furthermore, we must take sure hold upon Christ's promise, which in life and
death shall strengthen and comfort us, in that he promises us he will give us
all that we desire in his name. Wherefore in all our necessity and trouble, we
ought to have recourse only unto him, or unto God his father, in his name. And
then do we pray in his name, when we desire that which may serve to the
honor of his father, that the father may be honored through the son, and in
the son, when we desire such wholesome good things as the spirit of Christ
moves us unto.

All this does stir up in us patience, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, belief
in Christ, who is our God and h^ad, whom by his doctrine and wonderful miracles
we have learned to be very good in deed. The holy Scripture also both of the
old and new Testament does sufficiently declare the same, as Esa. 7.9.42.49.62.
Iere 23.33. Mich. 5. Zach. 13. Mala. 3.

What does he else in his whole Gospel, but evidently and strongly prove, that
Jesus is very God? as in the 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Chapters, yea, in all.

Christ calls himself the son of God, and teaches every where, that we
ought to believe on him: now if he were not very true God, then had he
deceived us, then had he taught us wrong, and then were he himself a false
teacher, for we must believe in none save only in God. If Christ now were
not God, how should we believe in him? If he were a false teacher, then would
not the father have commanded us to hear him: then had not he spoken from
heaven these words, This is my dearly beloved son, hear him: then had not
he also confirmed his cause with miracles, raised him up from death, taken him
up into heaven, and set him on his right hand: For he hates all liars, and
has no pleasure in the wicked.

Johan. 8. Before Abraham was, I am. Christ says, that the father has given
him all power in heaven and earth. Matthew. 28. Which sentence alone, were
sufficient and strong enough, to prove, that Christ is God, for God gives his
glory and honor to none other, Esa. 42. he says also, that what the father
has, it is his, Ioh. 17. And John. 20. says Thomas unto Christ: My Lord and
my God, by him were all things created, John. 1. Col. 1. Then must he needs be
God, for no creature is the maker or creator of all things. Paul says, He is
the wisdom of God. 1. Corinthians. 1. The wisdom of GOD is eternal, Proverbs.
8. Eccle. 24. Romans, 1.9. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, what does Paul else
even from the beginning, until he come far within it, but bring in
testimonies, that Christ is very God? John says: Every spirit which
confesses, that Jesus came in the flesh, is of God. Out of the which it
follows, that as concerning his divine nature, he was from everlasting before
he came in the flesh. Item, Paul to the Hebrews says: God took upon him the
seed of Abraham: then must he needs be eternal God, before the humanity
was. As also John says: The word was God, and the word became man. Item: No
man has seen God at any time. The son of God which is in the Fathers bosom,
he has opened it unto us. John. 3. Says Christ: No man ascends into
heaven, save he that came down from heaven. Now can thou not say, that he
came down as touching his humane nature, for that took he first upon him in
the Virgin Mary, Luke. 1. Then must it needs be true, that he came down
concerning his Godhead: as he often says, I came forth from the father. And Paul
Phil. 2. He took upon him the shape of a servant. Who? God. Also John. 17. he
says: Glorify thou me (o Father) with the glory and honor, which I had with
thee before the world was created. And 1. John. 5. We know that the Son of
God is come, and has given us understanding to know him, who is the true God.
And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: the same is the
true God, and the eternal l^fe.

Seeing then that God has given us his Son to be our righteousness, our
sanctification, savior, redeemer, ransom, life, light, and head, to believe
and trust in him, and finally by him to be saved, he must needs then be the
true living God, else might not, neither should our heart trust nor cleave unto
him. This ought a believing heart, fully and well to take hold of, and
steadfastly to stand thereupon.

IF ye love me keep my commandments, and I will pray the father, and he
shall give you another comforter, that he may bide with you for ever: even the
spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because the world sees him
not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be
in you, I will not leave you comfortless, but will come to you. Yet a little
while and the world sees me no more, but ye see me, for I live, and ye shall
live. That day shall ye know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in
you: He that has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that
loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father: and I will love
him, and will show mine own self unto him. Judas said unto him (not Judas
Iscarioth) Lord what is the cause that thou will show thy self unto us and
not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto him, if a man love me he will
keep my sayings, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
will dwell with him. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the
words which ye hear, are not mine, but the Fathers which has sent me.

Doctrine and fruit.
CHrist promises his Disciples (that is, such as believe on him) that he will
give them whatsoever they make peticion for, or desire: yea, if they love him.
For faith without love, is dead, and has no strength. Where there is faith in
man, there follows love. Many of us say: We believe in Christ, and we love
him, yet we keep not his commandments. Such men ought well to note the
words that Christ here speaks: He that loves works.
Who so loves me, keeps my commandments. The Disciples thought, that they
loved Christ right, because they were sorry for his departing: but Christ
teaches us, that love consists in the keeping of his commandments. If we
will declare our love toward GOD, it must not be done only with word and
tongue, but with keeping of his precepts. Psalm. 34.
The eyes of the Lord behold the righteous, and his ears consider their
prayers. God will not, that we (whom he through his grace has admitted for
his own children, and purified through faith) should go idle. Faith, which God
gives us in our heart, stands not idle: we have for this purpose received
it, even to keep his commandments. Now is it his commandment, Gods
commandment
that we deny and mortify our selves, hate and despise the world, take up
our cross upon us, and follow him, stoutly and manfully confessing and
acknowledging him before the wicked world: loving one another, as he has
loved us: innocently and godly leading our lives, whereby we may daily receive
the more gifts at his hand. For if we keep not his grace that he gives
us: if we do not continually and daily reform our selves, and with all
diligence fashion our lives after his life: it is but right that we loose
again what we have received.

And if any man says, it were impossible for man to keep Gods
commandments, (as it is true indeed) yet unto us that believe in Christ, All
things possible to believers.
are all things possible: not in our selves, but in Christ our head. If we
abide in him through faith, then hard and impossible things are light and
possible unto us: for in him that strengthens us, we may do all things. And
if we love God, then for his sake that is beloved, we may do and suffer all
things: Love overcomes all things.
for there is nothing but love overcomes it. Our Lord Jesus Christ
fulfilleth the commandments and will of his heavenly Father. So far as we
now are his members incorporated with him, and abiding in him as our head
through faith, our daily exercise, feruentnes, and diligence shall be, in
undertaking to perform and keep his commandments. And if we, out of a
true belief, do apply such diligence, to keep his precepts, then m^ it be
perceived, that we love God.

And if that after such diligence in keeping Gods commandments, there be ought
lacking (as we shall ever here want some thing) we must cry unto our heavenly
Father, and pray. O Father, forgive us our debts and trespasses. And then have
we with him a faithful mediator, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who makes
intercession for us, and takes our faults upon himself: and what we are not
not able, that fulfilleth he for us. Thus is it his first, and highest
commandment, which he earnestly requires of us, Faith, Love, keeping of the
commandments.
that we believe in him. Where the same faith is right, it brings with it love,
which keeps all the commandments. Now when we begin to break our minds off
from earthie worldly things, and to set them upon godly heavenly things,
which Christ calls us unto. Then take we in hand to be obedient unto God
the Father, after the example and pattern of Christ: for he loved us first. If
we now also love him, and practice our selves in his love, then shall he
help us to keep his commandments.

And to the intent that we may be able to put our trust in him, to love him,
and to observe his precepts, he promises us his holy spirit, to work all
such things in us.

He comfort also his Disciples and all his elect in this world: as if he
would say: Be not ye afraid neither sorrowful, by reason of my departing.
Albeit I now die, and go corporally from you unto the Father, yet will I
always have a fatherly love, faithfulness and care for you: neither will I
leave you friendles, as those that are utterly destitute of al help and
consolation. I will pray unto the Father, so that he shall send you another
to succor and comfort you. While I have been with you my self, I have
instructed and taught you in all things that were necessary for your welfare.
Unto all such works as are acceptable unto my father, have I exhorted you:
unto all good things have I moved you: from all evil have I defended you: in
all trouble and adversity have I comforted you. I have been your teacher,
your exhorter, your attorney, your advocate, and mediator, so that ye have
lacked nothing, neither has any man hurt you. Seeing now I have hitherto never
failed you, I will also from henceforth not forsake you, but pray unto my
Father, who shall send unto you the holy Ghost. The same shall perfectly bring
to your remembrance, and be your teacher in all that I have showed you: he
shall exhort and admonish you, aid, succor, and comfort you, The office of
Gods spirit.
so that ye shall not be without consolation. He shall be your tutour and
defender, neither shall he be with you only for a time, as I have been, but
even in your hearts shall he dwell with you, and never depart from you.

Of this helper, comforter, teacher, and tutor, shall ye also have need: for
great trouble and persecution shall the world move against you. Comfort and
strength in adversity.
To ouercom the same, is your flesh too feeble: therefore will I send you down
from heaven a power, whereby in all adversity ye may be able to stand fast,
and to have the victory.

O the unspeakable love of our Lord Jesus Christ, who takes such diligent care
for us, and endueth us with so excellent a gift: namely, his own holy spirit.
With what modesty and soberness, with how pure and honest behavior ought we
to walk, seeing that God has into our hearts given his holy spirit, who
utterly abhors and loatheth all vice, and all filthiness of sin? Great
diligence ought we therefore to apply, in keeping clean and undefiled our
bodies and souls, which God through his holy spirit has purified, and
consecrated to be his own dwelling place and temple: least we expel the
chaste spirit of God. For in no froward soul abides he, neither dwells he
in that body which makes it self slave and thrall unto sin. The ears of our
mind ought we to open, and to harken whereof this spirit admonishes us, and
what doctrine he in our Saviors words does teach us, and his motion ought we
to follow. Afraid ought we not to be: he that is in us, is stronger than all
our enemies.

This spirit has Christ by his prayer and merits obtained of his Father: for
he prayed with weeping and tears, and was heard for his worthiness sake.

He is called also the spirit of truth, because he proceeds of the truth,
teaches the truth, and makes us true: we are else of our own nature
altogether liars, inconstant, untrue, and dissembling hypocrites: and
whatsoever the world speaks, and does, it is nothing but vanity and lies.
Blessed therefore are they unto whom God gives the high gift of his truth.

The world, that is to say, fleshly men and children of the world, receive not
this spirit, for they despise the word of Christ, and laugh it to scorn.
Therefore God shows not himself unto them, for they love him not: which
thing they declare, in that they refuse his word. But who so receives his
word, shows thereby, that he loves Christ and God: him will God love again,
and open himself ever more and more unto him. This is a high reward which God
gives unto his lovers: that he comes unto them, makes his dwelling and
abides alwaie with them, working all good things in them and by them. Therefore
ought we earnestly to hear his word, to love him, and to keep his
commandments. And so even the same his own spirit which he gave us at the
beginning, shall he still grant unto us more perfectly from time to time.
Thus shall that spirit pour out love in our hearts, and indue them with more
perfe^tion. The love of the world, which is not of God the Father, shall this
spirit root out and daily consume: but the love of God it shall continually
plant and increase. The more love there is, the more grows the knowledge of
God: yea the more Gods knowledge increases, the more fervent and perfect is
love. Grant us (o gracious Father) thy holy spirit, to take possession of our
heart: that it may only trust in thee, love thee above all things, keep thy
commandments, and cleave still unto thee for evermore, Amen.

THese things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. But that
comfort which is the holy Ghost, (whom my father will send in my name) he shall
teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have taught you: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Let not your
heart be troubled, neither fear. Ye have heard that I said unto you: I go, and
come unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I said: I go
unto the father, for the father is greater than I. And now have I showed you
before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter will
I not talk many words with you: for the ruler of this world comes, and has
naught in me. But that the world may know, that I love the father: as the
father gave me commandment, even so do^ I. Arise, let us go hence.

Doctrine and fruit.
THe Lord Jesus continues his Oration in comforting his Disciples, and in
telling them what the office of the holy Ghost should be. Whereby we learn, We
must all be ^aught of God, which is don by the spirit.
that all reading and hearing, yea and al doctrine, brings utterly no fruit,
if the holy Ghost do not give us understanding, and teach us the word of God.
For the Disciples were ignorant and forgetful. Many things that Christ had
told them, they understood not: many things had they forgotten: in many
things they doubted. Such like happen also unto us: therefore ought we at all
times to pray unto God, that he will send us his holy spirit, to admonish and
provoke us, to comfort and strengthen us, to instruct and teach us all things
that are necessary for us to salvation. He is the right heavenly
schoolemaister: when he comes into us, he expels all ignorance away.

But forasmuch as there remains much trouble and adversity unto all
faithful believers, while they live in this time, The peace of Christ through
the spirit.
Christ does therefore promise them his peace, against the turmoyling,
unquietness, and trouble of this world. In the world are many hurley burlyes and
adversities: In Christ we find true peace and quietness. And Christ unto those
that are his, gives such a peace, Phil 4.
as surmounteth all understanding: in the which peace they being coupled and
knitte, are able valiauntly to overcome all enemies and adversity. For in as
much as they know, and be undoubtedly assured through faith, that their sins
are forgiven and taken away by Christ, that the father of heaven is favorable
and gracious unto them, that they be his own children and inheritours, they
do little pass, what thing outwardly happens unto them. All adversity and
trouble that outwardly is laid upon them, is, through the inward joy and
peace which they have in God, clean swallowed up and so forgotten. They settle
and stay their hearts upon salvation and eternal peace.

The peace of the world seeks quietness and rest of the body, throws
away the cross, Worldly peace.
and flies from it: The peace of Christ rejoices in the midst of
adversity, and overcomes the cross. For faithful believers look unto
Christ, who went before them unto the father, and after his passion and death,
took possession of so high honor and glory, Our nature exalted in Christ.
and has carried their nature up so high unto the right hand of the father,
where he now rules as a mighty king of heaven and earth. Oh how great
comfort, how sure a hope gives it unto us, when we see our own nature, our
own flesh and bones, incorporated unto Christ, the only begotten son,
Comfort in adversity.
and eternal word of God, in so high honor and glory! how can it be
otherwise, but we must needs hope, that our weak flesh also shall be taken
up?

Look what is past in the head, the same shall assuredly be fulfilled in the
members, for without the members cannot the head be. Which thing considered,
and (through true belief) printed in the heart, makes a man patient and
cheerful in all adversity, gives peace and joy in all trouble. Let the
Prince of this world, The devil has nothing in the faithful.
through his ministers and members, stir up all vexation against us, yet has
he no vauntage of us, if we be in Christ. Easily might he find somewhat in
our selves, but in Christ nothing, such innocence does Christ make us
partakers of. Tempt us he may, and thrust at us, but to overcome us, he is not
able, so far as we abide in Christ. In us is death a punishment of sin: We
must suffer, that we may be obedient unto the father.
in Christ it is obedience and love. For seeing the father loves the son,
and of very love gave him unto death for us, the son would of love obey the
father, and as he also loved us, so would he willingly and obediently suffer
death for us, that all the world might see his obedience, and that we might
learn of him to obey our heavenly Father, even unto the death, and faithfully
follow his precept: and that likewise, whereas it touches his glory, we should
be afraid neither of adversity nor death, considering how obediently he
dyed for our sakes.

I Am a true Vine, and my Father is an husbandman. Every branch that
brings not fruit in me, he takes away: and every branch that bears
fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye clear,
through the words which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As
the branch cannot bear (...) of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more
can ye, except (...) abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches. He
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings, forth (...) fruit: for
without me can ye do nothing. If a man bide not in me, he is cast forth as
a branch, and withered, and men gather them, and east them into the fire, and
they burn. If ye abide in me, and my words also in you, ask what ye will
and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much fruit, and become my disciples.

Doctrine and fruit.
Under this fair similitude, does Christ teach his Church, that without him
we can do nothing, but in him all things. Now forasmuch as he through his
grace, has incorporated us unto himself, we ought with great diligence to
apply our selves, that we may abide in him, and bear fruit. For as long as we
are in him, we live, that is, To abide in Christ.
we receive lively virtue and sap of him, namely, his spirit. For who so
cleaves unto the Lord, and is incorporated unto him through faith, the same
is become one spirit with him, the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the
sixth Chapter. For hereby know we, that we are in him, and he in us, in
that he has given us of his spirit, the first of John and fourth Chapter. For
why? the vineyard, the branches are of one nature and kind. Thus the only
begotten son of GOD took our nature upon him, is become man, and gives us
of his spirit, and makes us to be of a godly mind and spiritual nature. Out
of the same pith and sap, do all manner of godly virtues and good works
break forth. Gal. 5. Psalm. 85. For through his grace, are we his operation and
work in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2
created unto good works, wherein we are bound to walk. And seeing we have
received Jesus Christ of God the father, we ought to walk in him, that in him
we may be well rooted and stand fast. Col. 2.


What it is to abide in Christ.
But hereby know we that we are in him, if we walk as he has walked. For who
so says, that he abides in him, then even as he walked, so must we do. 1.
John. 2. But if we would say, that we were in him, and had fellowshippe with
him, and yet would walk in darkness (seeing he is the light, wherein is
found no darkness at all) then were we liars, and went not about with the
truth. But if we walk in light, as he is light, and we children of light,
then have we fellowship and company with him, and the blood of Christ purges
us from all sin. 1. John. 1.

In Christ Jesus may no man be idle and without fruit. Punishment of
unthankfulness.
2. These 3. who so now is unthankful to the grace of God, and does not practice
himself in good works, to Gods glory, the same is cut off, and as an
unfruitful dry branch, thrown into the fire and burnt. Faith grafteth us
into Christ, Love declares, that we are planted in, and it knitteth the
members with the head. Where the spirit of Christ follows from the head into
the members, from the stock into the branches; there are fruits of the
spirit: for by the fruit is the tree known. ^


Christ through his word and spirit has pacified us: that is, How the
faithful are clean.
he has called and separated us from the world, and from the filthiness of the
flesh unto good works. And into his own service, and school of godly nurtor
has he admitted us, and written up our names. He has begone to purge and
cleanse us from carnal lusts, and from all uncleanness of the world: accepting
us into the number of those that dye from the world, and that now from hence
forth will live unto him, and bring forth fruit. 1. Pet. 1. Faith brings
fruit.
But that is not enough: we must also obediently wait upon the grace that he
has placed us in: applying our diligence, watching, and praying, that from so
high a vocation, from so excellent grace and honor, we fall not away again.
1. Cor. 10. It is not enough to have begone, there must be a steadfast
continuance. He that forsakes the head again, has neither spirit nor
virtue: for without him we are able to do nothing. Therefore through faith
and love ought we to abide in him, having respect unto him in all things: so
shall we bring forth much fruit unto him. Then abide we in him, when we do
that he commands us, and love that which he promises us. The good works
are not open.
Howbeit, these fruits that we bring forth are not ours, but the fathers: to
him ought we to bring them forth, unto his honor must they extend, Matthew.
5.28.

For when Gods light does appear and shine in our conversation, and many
folks thereby are drawn unto God. The father of heaven is honored, his name
is hallowed, and then are we his disciples. For we have learned of him, how
Christ was obedient unto the father, and sought his glory in all things, and
so do we likewise.

What we ought to p^a^e.
Heereunto ought all our prayers to extend, that we may bring and win much
unto Christ. Therein is the father praised, when we bring unto him much fruit,
but that might we not, if God had given us his son, that we might be his
branches, and he our vine.

Where faith is, there is the holy Ghost, which teaches to wish and pray for
that only, which may serve to Gods honor, and that is the cause, why he that
prays, obtayneth all his desire: for GOD may not give over his glory. Who so
undertakes to further that, him does he assist and help.

AS the Father has loved me. so have I loved you. Continue ye in my love. If
ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my fathers
commandments, and abide in his love. These things have I spoken unto you,
that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. This is my
commandment, that ye love together, as I have loved you. Greater love than
this, has no man, that a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth call I you not
servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does. But you have I
called friends, for all things that I have heard of my father, have I opened
unto you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, that whatsoever
ye ask of the father in my name, he may give it you. This command I you, that
ye love together one another.

Doctrine and fruit.
OH how excellent great consolation is this to us all, which believe in Jesus
Christ, Entirely does Christ love those that are his.
and are undoubtedly assured in ourselves, that Christ loves us as his own
children and disciples, howsoever the world judge us to be forsaken of him? If
this love came right into our heart, oh how earnest and fervent should we be to
love him again, to further his honor, to keep his commandments, and in
charitable love to serve our neighbors? Then should all good works and keeping
of Gods commandments, flow out of faith: namely, when we believe that God is
favorable and loving unto us, yea, that he is our father, and our son Jesus
Christ our king, John. 4.
head, and brother. This faith works through love: for we could not love
God, if he had not loved us first. His grace, love, and mercy preuenteth us.

Therefore does Christ ever still set forth his love before us, as a light
torch, to kindle us in love toward him and our neighbors. If we believe
this grace, committing us cheerfully unto his love, which he has declared, and
continually does practice toward us, if we still abide therein: then shall
this faith upon the love of God, work great things in us, and by us, and shall
move us, with good will gladly and cheerefullie to observe his commandments.
And if we keep his commandments, Love is an evidence of faith.
every man shall have an assured token, that we be, and continue in the love
of God: that is, that we keep our selves unto his love.

What follows out of the love of God.
Seeing then that he loves us exceeding much, and we finding the same in our
hearts, through faith, do comfort our selves thereupon, there must needs
follow love to our neighbors, joy, peace, softness of mind, gentleness,
patience, etc. Gal. 5.

Now that Christ does not slenderly, but most notably love his Disciple, Tokens
of Gods love to us.
and all in them, he proves it himself diverse ways. First, in that he
gives his life for us, and dies for us upon the Cross: for greater love has
no man, than to dye for his friend. Thus Christ with his death and blood,
seals his love toward us.

Secondly, in that he counts and esteems us, not as servants, John. 1.
but as dear friends, brethren, and heirs with him. And the same declares
he in this, that all things which he has heard of his father, and sucked out
of that fatherly heart, he opens them unto us, and writes the same through
his holy spirit, 1. Cor. 2.
in our hearts. All his secret, his godly will, he gives us to understand. For
we which be in Christ, do know through an undoubted faith, and feel it also in
our hearts, that God is our father through Christ, and that in him he has
admitted and chosen us, that he is reconciled with us through the blood of his
dear Son, that he loves, preserves, and defends us. Romans 5.
Therefore do we also patiently and chearefully bear all adversity in this
time for his sake, considering we know, that so is the good pleasure of our
dearest Father.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 1. Romans 5.
Christ declares his excellent love toward us, in that he did choose us before
the world was created, and loved us when we were yet his enemies, We are chosen
to bring forth fruit.
calling us by his word, and appointing us to bring forth fruit unto him.

Fourthly, in that we obtain at the fathers hand, all that we pray and desire
in the name of Jesus. Are not these sure tokens of an exceeding love of God
toward us? We ought to endure in love.
After that we once have perceived such love, o that we always remained
therein. Which comes to pass, when we apply ourselves unto his
commandments, and when we in obedience and patience are content to be at
his will, as he for our sake was obedient unto his Father, Phil. 2.
even until the death of the cross. Now that we might know what his
commandments be, he concludes them in a short sum, and says: Love ye one
another together, as I have loved you. As if he would say, The commandment of
God, is love.
seeing I have declared my love so worthily, so notably, and with so great
faithfulness toward you, that I have nor refused to die for you: therefore
is it my will (and so is it reason also) that ye likewise show such love one
toward another: for I have given you example before, that ye should do as I
have done, John. 13. 1. Pet. 2.
and follow my foot-steppes.

This shall not only be very seemly unto you, but much profit also and
great honor shall it bring you. For like as my Father (as ye shall shortly
see) shall after my passion bring me unto glory, so shall he also do unto
you, so far as ye endure steadfast in adversity, and continue in love one
toward another. Like as I with great travail and labor have showed you the
way and will of GOD my Father, and therefore go now unto death, to make you
living: so ought ye also to be minded one toward another. Look that ye
serve one another in love, lead all men unto God: and the grace of God which he
gives unto the world through me, publish ye unto all men, though ye must
loose your life therefore.

IF the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own. Howbeit, because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Remember the word that I said unto you: the servant is not greater
than the Lord. If they have persecuted me, so will they persecute you. If they
have kept my sayings, they will also keep yours. But all these things will
they do unto you for my names sake, because they know not him that sent me.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin: but now
have they nothing to cloak their sin withal. He that hates me, hates my
Father also. If I had not done works amongst them, which none other man did,
they had not had sin: but now have they seen, and have hated both me, and
also my Father, even that the saying might be fulfilled, which is written in
their own law: They have hated me without any cause.

Doctrine and fruit.
LIke as Christ in the aforesaid words has given unto his Disciples, and to us
that believe in him, an excellent consolation in his love, which is infinite
great toward us: so does he now comfort us against such trouble and
adversity to come, as outwardly happens unto us, and against the hate and
persecution wherewith the children of the world recompense us for our love and
well doing. Love ought we to have toward all men: such godly love shall move
us earnestly to further Gods glory, to bring all men to the knowledge and love
of God, and to withdraw them from fleshly lusts and worldly vices. When we
now of a godly zeal, begin thus to rebuke vice, and to reprehend the carnal
lusts of the children of the world, then they that are drowned in the
shameful vices of the world and the flesh, may not suffer it, but hate,
trouble, and vex us, molest, persecute us, and put us unto death, contemning
and despising the word which we offer them from GOD (whereby they might be
saved) and going about by all means to root it out.

But all this ought not to drive us back, Exhortation to patienes.
or discourage us: For in this world must we seek no high honor nor praise,
but willingly humble and submit our selves under the rebuke and cross with
Christ our head. 1. Pet. 3. John. 13.
Christ also exhorts us to follow his footsteppes, and to do after his
example, and not to forsake the truth, and love of our neighbor for their
hatred, but constantly to proceed and do our best to guide all men unto God. And
if for such our unfaithfulness and love, there happen reproach and trouble to
us, Acts. 5.
we ought to rejoice, that God does us so great honor, as to grant us to
suffer somewhat for his name sake. If we lived as do the children of the world
we should not be hated of them, and happily we needed to fear but little
danger. But Christ has taken us from the world, and chosen and called us to
good works, and to innocence of life. Nothing has he omitted, that might
serve to our welfare: faithfully therefore ought we to follow his vocation, and
not do as the unthankful Jews, that despise his doctrine and works. He
talks yet daily with us, provoke and calls us: therefore ought we to
cease from sin, and not to fashion our selves after the world. Romans 12.
For if we would live to please the world, to serve it, and to hunt after the
favor and praise of it, we should not be faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ.
We ought not to look for worldly honor, but to have respect to the eternal
glory, which we shall have with Christ our head, yea so far as we suffer
rebuke and dishonor with him. When he lived in this time, and practiced the
truth against the Pharisees, he was reviled, put to shame and death. The same
happens also unto us; for we are not above the Lord. An evil token were it,
if the world loved us. Patiently therefore and with joy ought we to bear such
rebuke and shame, as happens unto us for his name sake, by those that hate
the truth. For our honor and reward is great in heaven: but after our trouble
shall the same be first opened, as it happened also unto Christ our head first
after the cross.

But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the father
(even the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the father) he shall testify of
me. And ye are witnesses also, because ye have been with me from the
beginning. These things have I said unto you, that ye should not be offended.
They shall thrust you out of their synagogues, and excommunicate you: yea the
time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does service
unto God. And such things shall they do unto you, because they know not the
father, neither me. But these things have I told you, that when the hour is
come, ye may remember that I told you. These things said I not unto you at
the beginning, because I was with you. But now I go my way to him that sent me,
and none of you asks me; Whither go thou? But because I have said such
things unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. But I tell you the truth: It is
expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that comforter will
not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you.

Doctrine and fruit.
FOr as much as it is our bounden duty to bear witness unto Christ with our
mouth and life, and yet our weak flesh fears the hatred and resistance of
the world, Math 26. Acts. 1.
Christ therefore promises us here, that he will send us strength from
heaven: namely, Romans ^.
the holy Ghost, first in our hearts to bear witness unto Christ, and then to
open our mouths, that we may testify the Lord Christ, and his truth manfully
and without fear. Certain it is, that all they which will live here godly in
Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.
must suffer persecution. But seeing that to suffer such adversity, our flesh
is far too slow, cold and feeble, God gives us the spirit of his son, Romans
8. Romans 5. Acts^ 2.
to move, strengthen and preserve us in all goodness. This spirit pours out
love into our hearts, expels all fear and terror (as we see in Peter on
Whitsonday) and makes us to overcome all adversity.

John. 15.
We are branches in Christ the true vine, albeit as yet very weak and tender,
soon blown away with the wind, or smitten down other ways: but for as
much as out of Christ we receive, yet the sap and virtue of spirit and life,
we are in life preserved that we wither not away. Of this now must we be
mindful in all adversity, so that without ceasing we pray unto GOD for his
holy spirit, who is our instructor, comforter, and teacher. We ought to have
respect unto our fore-goer and finisher of our faith, remembering, that we
suffer not as thieves and evil dooers, 1. Pet. 4.
but for his sake, yea and that of the wicked. This shall make our adversity
and cross the more easy and light, when we feel the comfort of the spirit,
and behold how shameful a death Christ suffered for us. Therefore should there
no fear make us to shrink from the confession of Christ, and his truth. We
are not they that speak, but it is the spirit of the Father which speaks in
us. Math. 10.
We may not fear those that kill the body, Luke 9.
we may not be ashamed of him: so shall he also knowledge us, and make us
honorable in his fathers sight. The honor of this world should not be dearer
unto us than the glory of God. And though we die for it, John. ^^
yet ought we not to shrink or stir from the confession of the truth.

This ingendreth many times much heaviness and fear in us, that we consider
only that which is present, little regarding that which is to come, and
everlasting. And because we think that when GOD thrusts us into adversity,
he is far from us: whereas he then is most of all with us by his grace,
comfort, and strength, and tries us through the cross, standing behind the
wall, Cant. ^.
and looking through the grate upon our conflict and battle, yea, helping us
to fight, and to overcome. Therefore must we not always be children, we must
not hang still at the breast, seeking milk as children do: 1. Cor. 14. Heb. 5.
but grow to a perfect age, learning to know Christ the Lord after the
spirit, as he now governs, and is a mighty king: under whose banner we
must fight valiantly, and endure the cross unto the death, throwing behind us
all things in this world, Psalm. 120. John. 1^.
and lifting up our eyes and hearts into heaven, whence our help comes, and
into the which Christ is gone, to prepare for us an everlasting dwelling.

ANd when the spirit is come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me: of
righteousness, because I go to my father, and ye shall see me no more: of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged already. I have yet many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now. Howbeit when he is
come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth. For he
shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak, and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me, for he
shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you All things that the Father has
are mine. Therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and show unto you.

Doctrine and fruit.
IN these words does Christ show us the office of the holy Ghost, and what he
works by his disciples, 1. John 5.
and by all faithful believers in the world. The whole world is set upon
wickedness and iniquity, and when that is rebuked, it hates and persecuteth
those that rebuke it. Whereout it follows oftentimes, that through
imbecillitie and weakness of the flesh, we cease from rebuking of vice and
sin.

Now when we find it to be thus, that the infirmity of our flesh, and the
terrible threatening of the world will hinder us, or utterly draw us back
from the free rebuking of vice: we ought to pray unto God our Father, for to
give us the spirit of his son, that he may power out love into our hearts,
and expel all fear, that with stout stomachs and words, 1. Ioh. 4.
we may reprehend the vices of the world, and valiantly resist them. This
spirit shall teach us the thing, that neither our flesh nor the world is
instructed in. All we of nature do err, Isa. 53.
and every one wandreth his own way, that is, every one follows his own
purpose and intent: and if we believe not in Christ, we perish in our sins.
Ioh. 8.
And this is the greatest sin of all, wherein the world is wrapped, before it
receive the truth. Not to believe in Christ, is a sin, out of the which, all
vice and wickedness does grow^. Unbelief is the original of all vices.
How great this sin is, no man is able to know, only the spirit of God
opens it: therefore the spirit teaches us, how far we go astray. And if
we come to Christ, from this erronius way of unbelief, all sins are
forgiven us through Christ, and not imputed us to our damnation.

Neither is it enough to know, that we have erred, or do yet err, but we
must know also which is the right way, wherein (when error is forsaken) we
must walk to attain unto godliness and bliss. This right way, Ioh. 14. 1.
Cor. 1.
does the spirit also show to be even Christ, who is our way, our
righteousness and goodness: which way nevertheless the world will not go. To
believe in Christ, is the true way to attain unto righteousness and salvation:
who so now departs not from the erroneous way of unbelief and vice, and
will not walk in Christ, the way of all virtue and goodness, (which all the
world alas so abhors) the same is convict, that the judgment of eternal
pain does righteously fall upon him, seeing the light is set before him, Ioh.
3.
and he will rather abide and perish in darkness. But is not this a just
judgment, that the world should perish in sin, and be punished for ever,
considering that God has graciously sent unto them his own son, promising
everlasting life and salvation in him, who with his blood has washed away our
sins, mightily overcome death, sin, and the prince of this world, delivered
us out of his power and heavy yoke, and taken possession of the kingdom and
glory with his father: And yet they will not know, receive, nor honor Christ,
as their chief king and Lord, but still serve the prince of this world in vice
and sin, and not submit themselves under the easy yoke of Christ, and of his
love and virtues.

O dear children, let us depart out of the kingdom of darkness, Col. 1.
into the kingdom of Jesus Christ the son of God: let us regard his word
with diligence: let us hearken what God speaks in us, and though there be
many things that as yet we know not, Psalm. 84.
many that we do not understand and perceive, we will earnestly pray unto God
for his spirit, who is the right schoolmaster and teacher. He shall lead us
into all truth, Ephe. 4.
he shall renew us in the spirit of our mind, and teach us to understand,
what the good, acceptable, Romans 12
and perfect will of God is. He shall plant and root us in love, that we may
comprehend with all Saints, Ephe. 3.
what is the length, the breadth, the height, and deapth, that we may also
know the exceeding love of the knowledge of Christ, that we might be filled
in all godly perfectnes. Thus the spirit teaches us all truth, when he
pours love into our hearts.

This schoolmaster teaches all believers here in time, every one as much as
he can comprehend, and kindles spiritual hearts with greater desire. He that
now increases in love, that is, who so loves that whereof God gives him
knowledge, and desires to know that which as yet he knows not, him does the
spirit lead into al truth. For the more that love grows, the more perfect
is knowledge. And in this school of the love which the spirit pours into our
hearts, the faithful believer learneth more, than all books and all men can
teach him: but the more a man learneth and can, the more must he acknowledge
and confess, that he can nothing toward that which we shall know, 1. Cor. 13.
when we shall clearly and perfectly see God face to face. Unto us shall it
be enough and sufficient, that we in spirit and in the truth know Jesus
Christ, which was crucified, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. ^ John 4 2. Cor. 4
and that he shine and be glorified in our mortal body, in our hearts, mouth
and in our whole life.

AFter a while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me,
for I go to the father. Then said some of his disciples among themselves: What
is this that he says unto us, After a while ye shall not see me, and again,
after a while ye shall see me, and that I go to my father? They said therefore,
what is this that he says, after a while? We cannot tell what he says Jesus
perceived that they would ask him, and said unto them: This is it that ye
enquire off between your selves, that I said, After a while ye shall not see
me, and again after a while ye shall see me. Verily, verily I say unto you* ye
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: ye shall sorrow, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow,
because her hour is come: But when she is delivered of the child, she
remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world.
And ye now therefore are in so^rowe: but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.

Doctrine and fruit.
AN excellent comfort does Christ give here unto his Disciples, who by reason
of his deparparting, were in great sorrow and heaviness. But like as the
Disciples of Christ, because of his passion, abode for a little season in great
combrance, fear, and trouble, and yet received great joy out of the
Resurrection, when he showed himself unto them: even so in adversity ought
not we to be faint-hearted, but comfort our selves in this, that the Lord does
not long leave those that are his. Though he hide himself for a time, he
shall shortly show us his gracious countenance again, and refresh us with
rich comfort. The adversities of faithful believers are not only short, but
also they end with unspeakable joy. After adversity and death, follows
everlasting joy and eternal life. We are here with Christ our head, in
trouble and on the cross, where the world laugheth at us, and reioyseth. For
all this ought not we to be unquiet in our selves. Very shortly will the
matter change and turn vpside down: so that their laughter and joy, shall be
altered into weeping and eternal sorrow. But our heaviness shall God shortly
end with great fruit and joy, and the same joy shall no man be able to take
from us, when we with Christ our head, shall everlastingly be glad and
rejoice, when all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and we discharged
of all travail and labor of this time.

IN that day shall ye ask me no question. Verily, verily I say unto you:
Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my name: Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may
be full. These things have I spoken unto you in Proverbs, but the time will
come, when I shall no more speak to you in proverbs, but I shall show you
plainly of my father. At that day shall ye ask in my name. And I say unto
you, that I will pray unto the father for you: for the father himself loves
you, because ye have loved me, and have believed, that I am come out from God.
I went out from the father, and came into the world, and I leave the world
again and go to the father. His disciples said unto him, Lo, now spekest thou
plainly, and thou speak no proverb. Now are we sure, that thou know all
things, and nedest not that any man should ask thee any question. Therefore
believe we, that thou came from God. Jesus answered them, Now ye do believe,
behold the hour draws nigh and is already come, that ye shall be
scattered, every man into his own, and shall leave me alone, and yet I am not
alone, for the father is with me. These words have I spoken unto you, that in
me ye might have peace. In the world shall ye have tribulation, but be of
good cheer, I have overcome the world.

Doctrine and fruit.
MAny times does Christ promise us, whatsoever we pray, to obtain the same
of the father of heaven, whereby he may stir up our hearts, faithfully to
cry unto God, the gracious and loving father, whose love toward us is
exceeding great, neither can he say us nay, that has given and bestowed upon
us his own son: yea, not only has he sent down unto us his dear and
only begotten son, to take the nature of man upon him, and to die for us,
but has also into our hearts given his holy spirit, with whom he has
sealed us, and certefied us of his love, pouring the knowledge and love of
Christ into our hearts. How can we then doubt of his love and faithfulness?
How is it possible, that in all our trouble and heaviness, we should not unto
him only have recourse, seeking help and comfort at his hand? The son for
our sake, came forth from the father, humbled and made himself of no
reputation, took all reproach, shame and trouble upon himself for our
welfare. To the father was he obedient, until the death of the cross, and
after that he through his blood had washed away our sins, and finished the
work of our salvation, he arose again from death, through the power and might
of his father, overcame death for us, and with his ascension, opened heaven,
and prepared an entrance unto God, carrying up our nature and flesh unto the
honor and glory, which he had from everlasting, and giving us therein a hope
and sure comfort, that we also shall with him have everlasting joy and glory
for ever.

Seeing then that he came out from the father, we ought to hearken unto him,
and not to despise his word: he is the eternal wisdom of God, he is the
truth, no false teacher can he be, forasmuch as he comes from God, and is
his only begotten son. Heb. 1
To contemn so dear an ambassador and messenger of God, must needs have
great punishment, and though we are not able, in most perfection to understand
his doctrine, truth, and love (for here in this time is our knowledge
imperfect) yet should we consider, that the father loves us, 1. Cor. 13
and faithfully ought we to cry and pray unto him for his spirit, that shall
teach us all truth, so much as is necessary and profitable for us: which
knowledge from day to day shall increase, till we shall see him face to face,
and have the perfect knowledge of him. Our nature is weak and feeble, the
nature divine is high and incomprehensible: we are full of darkness, God is the
clear and far passing light, but when our dark mist is taken away, then in
clear brightness shall the godly light open unto us.

Some first fruits and beginnings of Gods knowledge have we received already.
God has cast and planted a little seed of knowledge in our hearts, which through
his grace and moisture, shall daily grow, increase, and prosper. Of such
knowledge as we have of God, we may not presume, neither of our weak faith, nor
yet ascribe too much unto our own strength He that stands, let him look that
he fall not. We think many times that we are very strong in faith, but
adversity shows how feeble we be, and how soon we shrink. Therefore in
all trouble and distress of this world, we ought to comfort our selves, and
trust only in the grace and strength of Christ. In him shall we find peace and
quietness, in him shall we overcome all our enemies: for his ouercomming is
our victory, his power is our strength. The world is not able to hurt and
plague us, more than of our gracious father is permitted unto them for our
wealth.

While we live here, we are in misery, affliction, and distress: but seeing
the head has overcome, the members ought not to doubt of the victory. Let us
with steadfast belief look unto Christ the fountain of life, our foregoer,
and finisher of our faith, and let us stoutly step forth after him: let us go
the way that he is gone, and has trodden, and made before. Afflictions shall
serve us unto high honor, as they served Christ the Lord unto glory. In Christ
we find the peace and rest of our consciences and souls: in him we know and
find the goodness and love of God the father: out of him receive we power,
strength, comfort, and eternal life: only let us look that we turn not the
eyes of our heart, and faith, away from him. Our welfare consists in the
steadfast belief and love of Jesus Christ the son of God. Though we many
times stumble, fall, and be proved by sundry temptations and afflictions, yet
is the same good and profitable for us, that we may the better learn to know
our own weakness, and again, the strength and grace of God. If it were not
profitable for us, Christ had not suffered his Disciples to fall so grievously.
But in all distress, he puts his hand under us, and in adversity he
leaves us not alone, as he also left not his own Son alone. Though all men
fly away from us, yet have we God with us.

THese words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said. Father,
the hour is come: John. 17.
glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee, as thou have given
him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou
have given him. This is life eternal: that they know thee the only very true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. I have glorified thee on the earth.
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And now glorify me thou
Father with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee ere the
world was. I have declared thy name, unto the men which thou gave me out of
the world. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
sayings. Now they know, that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee: for I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and know surely, that I came out from thee, and do believe, that
thou did send me.

Doctrine and fruit.
CHrist the true, only, and chief Priest, who now would offer up himself to
the father upon the cross for our sins, after that he had loved his own unto
the end, comforting and strengthening them: turns now himself in an earnest
and fervent prayer unto his heavenly father, for an ensample and doctrine to
his Disciples and all faithful believers, How we should pray.
that they in all temptations and afflictions, should with an earnest and
fervent prayer, have recourse unto the Father of heaven. That he taught before
in words, the same declares he now in the deed. showing not only what,
but also how, and after what sort we ought to pray: not only for our selves,
but also for those that are given and committed unto us of God, and whom we
have comforted and exhorted. Our eyes and hands ought we to lift up unto
heaven, from whence our help comes, which doing is a token of a devout,
humble, and lowly mind. Yea, the eyes, not only of the body, but also of the
heart and belief.

The sanctifiyng of Gods name should we chiefly desire
But unto this end principally ought all our prayers to be directed, that the
heavenly father may be glorified. The devil the prince of this world, through
his adherents, causes the name and truth of Christ his doctrine and
knowledge, to be rooted out and despised. Seeing then that we are Gods
children, we should in nothing be so earnest, as in saving the honor of our
father, and in furthering his glory. Which thing comes to pass, What it is
to honor the Father.
when we notify to men upon earth, his grace, faithfulness, love and great
mercy, which he by his only begotten and dear son has declared and showed
unto mankind: when we lead men unto God from earthly vices and false Gods
service, and when we direct al things to his glory. Thus is Christ also
honored and glorified by us, when we through the Gospel do publish unto all
men, his power and goodness, his honor and glory: when we know, that he is our
savior, our righteousness, and sanctifiing: when we know, that the father has
given all things into his power: that to those whom the father has granted to
him, he may give everlasting life. Which life everlasting consists in this,
that we know the living God, and his son Jesus Christ, whom he sent into
this world. For God the father cannot be known without Christ Jesus his son:
John. 14.
neither is there any mo Gods but only one, on whom we hope and trust. The way
to God is Christ, Christ is the way to God
whom God therefore sent down, that by him the mercy and grace of the Father
might be opened and appear unto us. Wherefore if we will have eternal life,
that is, the knowledge of God, we must believe in Christ, and know him: and by
him as the way and mediator, we must know God the father. Who so refuses
Christ, cannot have the Father What should it help thee to think, that thou
know God the highest goodness of all, if thou had not him by whom thou art
delivered from sin and eternal plague?

Whereas GOD the original of all goodness is known, The knowledge of God
eternal life.
and our mind through Christ his Son assured of his grace: namely, that he
is favorable unto us, and that he therefore has separated us out of the
world, to the intent that by his spirit he might make us like unto his son,
righteous and blessed: there does there spring in our hearts a comfortable
trust unto God, a love, and such joy, as nothing in this world may be compared
unto. There also does arise in us a diligence to keep his commandments, godly
and innocently to live. The order of our health.
Thus comes our health originally out of the grace and mercy of our heavenly
Father, who before the world was created, did choose us in Christ Jesus his Son
unto eternal life, and in the book of life wrote up our names. After the same
did the Father grant unto us the Son, and gave him power over all men. Now
that we are given unto Christ, he opens unto us the name of his Father,
through the outward word, and through his spirit in the heart. When we
believe in him, (which to do comes also of him) then increases the knowledge
of God in us. Out of that knowledge, grows an assured confidence in God the
highest good: Of this assured trust comes love toward him. And when God
grants us all this, he saves us, and gives us eternal life.

This is an high worthiness and honor of Christ, in that the father gives him
all things into his hand, that he may give everlasting life unto faithful
believers. No man can have life, but through Christ. Who so believes not in
Christ, remains in death, and the wrath of God-abideth upon him. But then
gives he us eternal life, when we receive his word, and know, that he came
out from God, and that the father sent him the Savior of the world. And when
we thus are become faithful believers, What it is to keep Gods commandments.
then keep we his commandments: for faith studieth, and is diligent to
please God. This honor and dignity of Christ, his power and kingdom are
first opened unto the world, after his death and cross in the resurrection and
ascension. Of the which honor and glory we also in due time shall (after our
measure) be partakers, if we suffer with him. For the high Priest, who has
prayed for us, is heard of the Father, and glorified with eternal honor and
glory. Wherefore we may not doubt, in the remnant that he prays for still on
our behalf: he shall be, and is for his worthiness sake heard, and has his
request. Of this we will consider more.

I Pray for them and pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have
given me, for they are thine, John. 17.9.
and al mine are thine, and thine are mine: and I am glorified in them. And
now am I no more in the world, but they are in the world, and I come to the
holy father, keep them in thy name whom thou have given me, that they may be
one as we are. When I was with the^ in the world, I kept them in thy name.
Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost but the lost
child, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to thee, and these
words speak I in the world, that they might have my joy full in them. I have
given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the
world, even as I am not of the world. I desire not that thou should take
them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil. They are not of the
world, as I am not of the world. Sanctify them with thy truth: thy saying is
truth. As thou sentest me into the world, so have I sent them into the world,
and for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth. I pray not for them alone, but for those also which shall
believe on me through their preaching: that they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee. and that they may be also one in us, that the
world may believe, that thou have sent me. And the glory that thou gave me
have I given them, that they may be one, as we are one, I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one: and that the world may know that
thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.

Doctrine and fruit.
THIS prayer of our high Priest and mediator Christ Jesus, is fervent,
earnest, full of the fire of godly love, full of great secrets and spiritual
instructions. Herein may we learn to know, what hie honor, dignity, and
power, Christ by his obedience and patience, has obtained with his father:
wherein consists our peace, joy, and welfare. What care and love Christ
bears toward those that are his, and how he commits them unto his
father. First, he prays for his Disciples, whom he did choose to publish
his truth: afterward prays he for all such as should come to the faith by
their preaching until the worlds end. And for as much as the Disciples had a
great weighty matter in hand, full of danger and adversity, for they must
needs procure to themselves great hatred of the world, he first prays for
them, that the Father will strengthen, comfort, and preserve them through his
power, and defend them from all evil.

In this are we taught diligently, chiefly, and specially to pray for those
unto whom is committed the preaching of the Gospel: How the Ministers of the
word should be prayed for.
for a chargeable and great work carry they upon their shoulders, by means
whereof (among all others) they have special need of the grace, help, and
assistance of God. But our prayer ought we to frame, as Christ has framed his.
First we must in our prayer to God, make special mention of his own grace and
mercy, whereby he choosing them to such an office, has given them unto Christ
his son. Forasmuch then as they are the Ministers of him and of his Son,
and seeing the Son is so dear, worthy and beloved unto the Father, our
prayer must be, that he for his Sons sake will defend and preserve them,
as in him, and by him they are worthy.

Secondly, considering that for his sake and his word, which they declare, they
are persecuted of the world, it is requisite that God preserve them in his
own work. For great need have they of his fatherly protection, while they yet
live in the weak feeble flesh, and are mortal men.

Thirdly, their office serves to many men's health and welfare, their office is
necessary and profitable to the whole world, which walks in blindness and
darkness: for they are the light of the world, Math 5.
that thorough doctrine and living, must shine to many men's life: which
without the assistance and help of God cannot come pass.

Thus ought we to pray for the ministers of the word, and to desire, that God
through his holy name, and power, will defend, strength, comfort, and preserve
them in all adversity: but principally that he will give them grace to be
one, coupled together in the band of peace, love and uniformity: that they may
be of one spirit, and of one mind: that in one spirit they may further and
plant the honor of God: Ephe 4. Phil. 2.
that like as Christ neither spoke nor did any thing but that which was
acceptable and well pleasing unto the father, they also in their sayings and
dooinges may have respect unto Gods glory: and that they being rooted and
fortified in love, Col. 2.
be not vanquished nor overcome of the pleasures or threateninges of this
world.

Secondly, that in all their labor and travail, in all adversity and
persecutions, he will put into their hearts, his own comfort and spiritual
joy. For the world has manifold mirthes, pastimes, and pleasures: much
bragging and wilfulness uses it in the riches and fleshly voluptuousnes
thereof. John. 15.
But the true Ministers of Christ (seeing he has severed them from the
world) must and ought to refrain and absent themselves from all worldly joy
and voluptuousnes: yea, it is they, that ought to diswade the world from such
wantonness and vanity: by means of whose faithful admonition, there falls
much hatred and trouble upon them: Neither were it to the furtheraunce of Gods
honor and our commodity, to have them utterly taken away out of this world.
Therefore does Christ desire (and so must we with him) that from evil,
namely from the Devil the Prince of this world, who stirs the world
against them, they may of the father in the world be defended and kept.

Thirdly, that he will sanctify and cleanse them before other men, that they
may be holy and pure vessels in the house and temple, that is, in the Church of
God, for they are means and instruments, by who^ God ministereth his grace and
truth unto men, therefore is it also convenient, that they be pure and holy. 1.
Cor. 4.
This comes through the truth that God puts in their mouth and heart by the
holy Ghost, which inwardly purifieth them. But then are they holy when they
teach truth, and live godly. Into the world has Christ sent the^, as the
father sent him into the world. The father sent Christ into the world, that he
should destroy the kingdom of the devil and of the world, that he should
declare unto the world, the grace and mercy of God toward mankind, that he
should bring men from sin, and from false idolatrish faith, to the true
living God, and to a virtuous conversation, that he with the light of truth,
should shine upon those which sat in darkness: that he should bring the
knowledge of God into the world, and exhort men to the amendment of life. Even
this has Christ given in commission to his Apostles, and to all ministers of
the word to do. This is their office, this is their ministration, unto this
have they great need of the grace, power, and assistance of God, therefore
ought we most earnestly to pray for them, for if they fail or fall, it hurts
the whole Church: yea, out of the same there grows slander unto the name of
God in the sight of the unbelievers, and an occasion of falling, Ezech. 36
to such as are weak of faith. Therefore Christ also offered himself to the
father for them, and sanctified them, that they might be pure and holy: not in
outward appearance, but from the heart, and in the truth, that through their
uniformity and love, through the word of truth, which they preach, through the
holiness of their doctrine and living, all men and the whole world might know
and understand, that God has sent them, yea, that God sent his son Christ into
the world, unto whom they with mouth and life bear record, and who also every
where shines out of them with words and deeds.

Not only for them has Christ prayed, but also for us, as many as hearken and
believe the word of truth preached by them. Wherein first we may perceive and
see, the love, faithfulness, and great care of Christ for us, how earnestly the
trusty shepherd of our souls, commits his poor sheep into his fathers
protection, how faithfully our mediator and advocate prays for us, whereby
also he sets forth a doctrine unto us, how and what we shall pray of the
heavenly father.

First, that he will make us one by his holy spirit, in the truth, in the
unity of faith, and in love inseperable, Phil 2. Ephe 2.
that we all may be of one mind, one body, and one spirit in Christ Jesus our
head, and to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, that we all
being illuminated by his spirit, may in word and deed, yea in our whole life,
seek and further the glory of our heavenly father, that we all may be one
among our selves and with God, John. 13.
whereby all the world may spy, see, and perceive, that we are Gods children
and Christ's disciples

Secondly, that of his fatherly goodness, he will defend, save and preserve us
his own poor sheep, which be in the midst among wolves and manifold dangers:
Math. 10.
And seeing we being yet in the world, do not live after the world, that it
will please him to keep us from the evil, namely, from the prince of of this
world, that though the same our enemy does tempt and plague us, he never yet
have power to prevail against us.

Thirdly, that inasmuch as we being in sin conceived and borne, have hitherto
lived in sin, Psalm. ^3.
and seeing that albeit we are cleansed already by his word and faith, yet the
uncleanness of the flesh and of the world does daily defile us, it will please
him through his truth to purge and sanctify our bodies, our souls, 1. Cor. ^.
2. Cor. 6
and our whole life, that we may become an holy temple of his grace, pure,
clean, and holy vessels, consecrated and sanctified to Gods own use. He has
once purified and hallowed us through the blood of his son, and unto the father
has Christ sanctified and offered up himself an holy acceptable sacrifice for
our sins: but the devil, the world, and our flesh, is ever busy to lead us
away again from God and from true holiness. Therefore must we daily pray unto
him, that through his holy spirit, and through his holy truth, he will
continually purge, cleanse, and sanctify us, that we be not disse^bling
hypocrites, but godly and unfeigned even from our hearts, and that we be not
stained in the filthiness of this world, but to refrain from all uncleanness,
Iames^ ^
thorogh the assistance of his grace, that we may also offer up our bodies an
holy acceptable sacrifice to ^od the Lord, as he offered up himself upon the
cross for our sakes.

John. 17
FAther, I will, that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may see my glory, which thou have given me, for thou louedst me before the
making of the world. O righteous father, the world also has not known thee,
but I have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. And I
have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith
thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

Doctrine and fruit.
AFter that Christ had committed his unto the father, that he will care for
them, defend and keep them, while they live in the world: he desires now that
it will please him, finally also to save them, and to take them to himself into
his kingdom. With the which prayer, he gives a great consolation to his
disciples, and all faithful believers, that we might be the more cheerful to
serve him, considering the high reward that is prepared for us: that for his
sake we should joyfully and stoutly bear all adversity, seeing he will make
us (yea has made us already) partakers of his glory and of his kingdom.

Oh the great grace and incomprehensible love of God toward us, who through
his mercy and great love, whereas we were children of wrath and damnation,
has made us his own children, elect and beloved: and when we were dead in
sin, has with his son raised us up from death, revived us, and made us sit
with him among those of heaven in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2
to declare unto the ages to come, the riches of his grace in kindness and love
to us ward, through Jesus Christ.

Forasmuch now as God has caused the light of his glory, even Christ, to
shine into our hearts, and through the light of faith, has kindled and purified
our hearts, it is meet, that in this time we live as children of light, to the
intent that men may see the brightness of those good works which proceed of
faith, to the praise of our heavenly father. Math. 5
And though we be not as yet bodily with Christ, yet our hearts and minds are
always above, Col 3.
there as Christ sits at the right hand of God: our conversation and being
is in heaven, albeit we are yet in corporal misery, with heart we desire to
die, and to be with Christ. Phil. 1 2. Cor. 3
We are sure if this earthly house were fallen and broken down, that we have
one everlasting in heaven. We are dead, but our life is reserved with Christ
in GOD. It is not evident yet what we be, but when Christ our life shall show
himself, then shall we also appear with him in glory: even when we shall
rise up, and be taken up in the air, and be with him for ever, 1. These. ^.
and see his honor and glory, which the Angels delight to see and behold.

Oh how great pleasure and joy is it, to behold the eternal light that never
quenches, in the which no darkness has place: from the which shall be
expelled and cast out, all they that would not receive and know the light
which God has sent into the world to illuminate them, but are blinded by the
Prince of this world, 2. Cor. 4
least the the light of the Gospel should shine upon them? No wrong does the
righteous father unto them, when he plagueth them, and takes the light from
them. A righteous and just judgment is it, seeing the gracious Father so
mercifully sent them the light of the truth, and they yet so maliciously and
stubbornly have despised and refused it: yea, reason it is, that they perish in
untruth, in lies, John. 3.
and in everlasting blindness: for as much as they would receive darkness rather
than the light, lies rather than the truth. And considering that they have
forsaken the brightness of the truth, and of the son of God: they must needs be
cast into utter darkness, and never enjoy the light.

O gracious Father, grant unto us, which through thy son have known thy name,
that in such knowledge and light of the truth, we may increase more and more:
that the love wherewith thou love thy dear son, may be and remain in us,
and that thy only begotten son Jesus Christ our head, may in us his members
continue still, work, live, and bring forth fruit acceptable unto thee.

AND when Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his Disciples (as he
was wont) over the brook Cedron, unto mount Oliuet, into a village called
Gethsemani, whereas was a garden, into the which Jesus went with his disciples.
Judas now, who betrayed him, knew also the place, for Jesus used often to come
thither with his disciples. Jesus said unto his Disciples: Sit ye here, till I
go yonder and pray. And he took unto him Peter and the two sons of Zebede,
and began to be heavy and sony. And a fear and terror came upon him. Thus
said he unto them, my soul is heavy unto the death: tarry ye here and watch
with me. And he went from them as far as a stones cast. Then fell he down
upon his face to the ground and prayed: that if it were possible, that hour
might depart from him. And thus he prayed: O father, unto thee are all things
possible: take this cup from me: howbeit not my will, but thy will be done.

Doctrine and fruit.
AFter that Jesus has established his Disciples in faith and love, comforting
and strengthening them against adversity and trouble to come in this world,
promising also unto them, the spirit, love, defense, and protection of his
father: he goes now to meet his traitor and enemies, and begins the work
of our redemption. Awake up now, O thou faithful and devout soul, and go
after thy redemer, follow his footsteps, gather up diligently the drops of
his blood, and sprinckle them with a true faith in thine heart: take up the
bundle of mirrhe, and lay it at thy breast, O thou noble bride and spouse of
Christ: his passion that he suffers for thee, write then in thy mind, learn
to die from all sin, from thy self, and from the world: that thou may be
crucified unto the world, and the world unto thee.

Death is vgsome, and very terrible unto the flesh, but joyful and welcome is
it unto all such as are instructed in the secret science of God, namely, that
death unto faithful believers, is an end of all trouble, an enteraunce into a
better and eternal life.

Christ in that he goes forth to meet death, declares that he will suffer,
not of compulsion, but willingly, whereby he comfort us. But whereas he is
heavy, and trembles before his disciples, and confesses how he fears
death: the same is done for our wealth, to declare unto us the weakness and
feebleness that our flesh receives at the sight of adversity, Heb. 2.
for in all things (sin except) it was his good pleasure to become like unto
us his brethren, he would take upon him a true man, who felt our adversity
in his own flesh, and so could have compassion on us. Besides this, he
shows also to whom our weakness ought to resort for comfort and help in
adversity, namely, to our father in heaven, before whom we must fall down
with devout and fervent prayer, and unto him disclose and open our anguish and
trouble.

To this prayer, he seeks and chooses out a place meet and convenient for
the same: for prayer is a lifting up of the mind in GOD, which among the
multitude of men, and confusion of worldly matters cannot well be done.
Therefore Christ shows us, what great diligence we ought to use in prayer,
when the enemy falls in, that the mind may cleave unto GOD constantly and
without shrinking, and what iesture the body ought to show in prayer, Christ
also declares, in that he falls down to the earth upon his face, and
prays with the voice and words. God has no need of our prayer: but unto us
is nothing more profitable and better, than often and fervently to pray. And the
greater the adversity is, the more ardent and earnest should the prayer be:
as we see here in Christ our head, whose passion is very great in body and
in mind, for the which cause also, as a very true man, he shows the fame
his passion, and heaviness to his Disciples.

The strongest of all, is weak: and the comforter of all hearts, has need of
comfort himself: he that expels all terror and fear, does himself fear
and tremble. But all this comes to pass for our learning, that when we be in
temptations, we should not doubt in the help of God: and that none of us
(being in danger and adversity, and feeling himself loath to suffer, or
pensive and slow to tame the motions and wickedness of the flesh) should
therefore shrink and be faint hearted: but with a constant faith to resort
unto God, complaining to him of his trouble, with hearty prayer: that he will
bring the hard and painful beginning, to a blessed and joyful end: that in
all adversity we may consider, as well the excellent and great fruit which
proceeds thereof, as also the gracious good will of our heavenly Father, to
whom we ought wholly and perfectly to give over, and offer up our selves: that
neither through the multitude of sins, neither through the greatness of
adversity, we despair nor fall away: but with his help and assistance,
manfully to go through.

Jesus came again to his Disciples, and found them sleeping. Then said he
unto Peter: Simon, sleep thou? Could thou not watch with me one hour?
Watch ye and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE love of Christ toward us, is fervent, earnest and great: but our flesh
is so weak, that we not only consider it not, but are also so slow, that we
sleep, and feel not for whose sakes Christ has suffered so great things Often
times is there in us a ready will to take great matters in hand, as Peter and
the other Disciples did: but at the last we miss, and have many a sore fall.
Therefore Christ (who knows us better than we our selves) willing to expel
from us all pride and presumptuousnes, teaches us to be lowly minded and
humble, to be ever watching, and with continual prayer to cleave only unto
him, without whom we are able to do nothing, and in whom we may do all things
and even so does he also in his feeblenes, which assaulted him as a very true
man: to the intent, that we always remembering our own weakness, might
understand how to tame the rebellious flesh, and in no case to trust it: and
that we might be careful and vigilaunt, least the subtle enemy in
temptations, come behind us, fall upon us, and oppress us. It is no time to
sleep, the battle is yet a fighting, the enemy is yet alive, and as yet
beseegeth he our castle that Christ has in keeping. All is full of snares and
dangers, which no man is able to escape save only he, which in fervent
belief and prayer does earnestly watch and stoutly fight, yea, and that
continually unto the end.

Neither the present anguish and trouble, nor yet Christ's exhortation can
bring so much to pass in the Disciples, as to keep them from sleep: so
little it helps, where the spirit gives not life. Nevertheless Christ's
talk and admonition unto his Disciples is not utterly unprofitable, for that
they now understand not, the same afterward (when the spirit comes) is
made plain and evident unto them, and then are they fervent and earnest in
godly prayer. Wherefore we should never cease from comforting and exhorting
the feeble and weak: for though it help not at this present, the hour shall
come, that the spirit will make it to have life, and to be fruitful in them.

HE went forth the second time, and prayed like as before: My father, if this
cup may not pass except I drink it, thy will be done. Then came he again, and
found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy, and they knew not what answer
to make him. So he left them again, and went and prayed the third time like as
before, and kneeled down and said: Father, if thou will, take away this cup
from me: Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. And there appeared unto
him an Angel from heaven comforting him: and when he was in the agony
(distress and conflict) he prayed the longer: and his sweat was like drops
of blood trickling down to the ground. And when he rose up from prayer, and
came to his Disciples, he found them sleeping for heaviness, and he said unto
them: What? Sleep ye? Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough, up
and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Behold the hour approaches, and
the son of man is betrayed and given into the hands of sinners. Up, let us go:
behold, he that betraieth me is at hand.

Doctrine and fruit.
IN the perfect example and mirror of our life Christ Jesus, we find an
earnest fervent love, a doctrine how we ought to behave our selves in
adversity. First, we see that Christ of an exceeding great love, takes upon
himself al infirmities of mankind, and becomes like unto his brethren in all
things, sin except: being a very true man, he is therefore not ashamed
before his disciples to acknowledge his infirmity, sorrow, heaviness and fear,
and to complain thereof unto his father. A fear by reason of the death and
passion, he receives as a very man: for not to feel trouble, is not the
nature of man: and passion is no passion, if it smart not, if it be not felt,
Christ therefore both in his mind and body feels the passion, he feels the
conflict of death, albeit in wrestling withal, he overthrows it. Oh the
exceeding fervent love of our head and foregoer Jesus Christ, who for our
health, comes into so great an agony and trouble, that above natural
moisture, through the fearful conflict of the passion and death, he sheddeth
his blood and sweateth it: but with hearty desire runs he to his heavenly
father: to him complains he of his weakness and distress: to him gives he
over himself in all obedience and contentation of mind: of him also receives
he comfort and strength. In the mean season, he forgets not his Disciples,
but comes to them, exhorts them to watch and pray, and has great
compassion with their feeblenes and sloth.

If we now be the disciples and scholars of Christ Jesus, and have surrendered
our selves up into the school of the heavenly Schoolmaister, we ought
diligently to look, what Christ here in him self, does teach and prescribe
unto us: that we learning the same of him, and following his foot-steppes
(when temptations of sin, and conflicts of adversity, troble, and death fall
in upon us) may know how to order and frame our selves therein.

First, that we know our selves to be poor, full of faults; mortal men and
sinners having nothing of our own but feeblenes. So when the temptation of
sin and of the flesh assault us, we must not be ashamed to open such our
faults and conflicts unto God our heavenly Father, and to complain unto him of
them. God has not made us to be utterly without temptation, but has suffered
the same to remain in the flesh, that we thereby might be exercised and
provoked to seek help at him, and to learn, in how miserable a case we
should be, if he withdrew his hand from us When we now feel that the spirit
is willing and the flesh weak, Romans 7. Gal. 5.
and that the law of the members withstandeth the law of God in us, that the
flesh fights and strives against the spirit: we must not be ashamed to
confess our feeblenes before our heavenly Father (yea though of weakness we
had lain under in the battle already) desiring his help, that we may rise
again, and valiauntly to fight it out. Thus must we also do, when the cross
and hatred of the world for Christ's sake (or that is contrary to our nature)
falls upon us.

The cup which the father has filled in, that we should drink it, the same
ought we willingly to drink: and if there grow in our flesh a terror and
fear to taste it, we must not be ashamed to complain thereof unto our Father,
forasmuch as we see here, that Christ for our sakes being in such heaviness
and fear, did not yet (for all that) step aside from his Fathers will. The
patience therefore of Christians stands not in this, that they feel no
passion, or be not fearful, heavy, or sorry: but in this, that no cross be
so great, as to be able to drive them away from Christ. Yea, the more the
cross that God the Father has laid upon them does make them to smart, and the
more it presses them (so that they yet bear it) the more precious and more
excellent is their patience: which patience we ought to declare, but not as
they that suffer or feel no passion at all.

For here we are instructed and certified of the kindness of our loving
Father, that he is not angry, neither takes it in evil part when we
complain to him of our present trouble, so that we give over our will unto
his. All they therefore that be in afflictions, adversity and temptations,
must set this example of the Lord directly before their eyes, and ponder it in
their hearts. Not only is the father not angry when we complain unto him in
our necessity, but in all trouble he sends us his own help and comfort,
either by his Angel, or inwardly by his spirit, or outwardly by some other
mean, he sends us strength, gives us his hand, draws us, delivers us,
and suffers us not to be tempted above our power, or else in the midst of
our adversity, he gives us consolation and strength to overcome it.

O how great comfort brings this unto us in our afflictions in life and
death, if we ponder, weigh, and consider the exceeding love of GOD our heavenly
Father, who gives his dear Son into so great trouble, that we might be
delivered from eternal adversity and sorrow. If we also remember the love of
our Lord Jesus toward us, who for our sakes takes upon himself so great a
fear and passion, how cannot we look for all good things at his hand? What
thing is so great, that we his members would not suffer for his sake, if we
behold the head in such anguish and trouble? And for as much as he suffers
all this for the satisfaction of our sins, we ought to apply great diligence,
that we fall not again into sin, for the which Christ suffered this, and
from the which Christ with so great a passion has delivered and cleansed us.
We learn here also to love our neighbors, to care for them, to pity them
if they be impotent and slow, to pray for their infirmity, seeing we are
all weak and feeble: and unto such weakness must we so have respect, that we
be not arrogant, nor hold much of our selves, when we see that Peter and
others are so full of sleep and sluggishnes, that all the admonitions and
exhortations of Christ, could at that time do little with them. But ever in
humblenes of mind, and in the fear of God, ought we to stand: to ascribe all
good things unto him: to be careful and watch, least the Devil draw us into
his temptations.

O merciful Father, give us grace with fervent hearts to consider the
unspeakable love of thee and of thy Son, and never to forget the same: that
our faith and trust in thee may be strengthened: that love in us toward thee
and our neighbor may be kindled: that above all things we may love thee,
the welspring of all goodness: that we may serve our neighbors in love, care
for them, and do them good, according to the love that thy dear Son has
bestowed upon us O give us patience and stedfastnes in adversity, strengthen
our weakness, comfort us in trouble and distress, help us to fight: Grant
unto us, that in true obedience and contentation of mind, we may give over our
own wills unto thee our Father in all things, according to the example of
thy beloved son: that in adversity we grudge not, but offer up our selves
unto thee without contradiction. Give us strength constantly to subdue the
rebellious and stubborn flesh, and to make it obedient unto the spirit: to
castaway al temporal and carnal fear: to resort often unto prayer: to be
earnest and fervent therein: to mortify all our own wills and lusts, and
utterly to give them their leave. O give us a willing and cheerful mind,
that we may gladly suffer, and bear all things for thy sake.

SO when Judas had gotten him a company of soldiers of the high Priests and
of the Pharesies ministers, he came thither with lanthornes, linkes, and
weapons, yea the same Judas Iscarioth one of the twelve (as Jesus yet talked
with his disciples) and with him a great heap of people, with swoords and
staves, sent from the high Priests, scribes and elders of the people. Now had
the traitor given them a token, saying: Whom so ever I do kiss, the same is
he, take him and bring him warily. So Judas went before them, and came near
unto Jesus to kiss him. And when he came, he stepped unto him, and said: All
hail master, and with that kissed him. Jesus said unto him, Friend, whereto
art thou come? Judas, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Jesus
knowing all things that were to come upon himself, went forth, and said unto
them: Whom seek ye? They said, Jesus of Nazareth. Then said he unto them, I am
he. And Judas that betrayed him, stood with them. Now when Jesus said, I am
he, they went backward and fell to the ground. Then Jesus asked them again:
whom seek ye? They said: Jesus of Nazareth. Then answered Jesus and said: I
have told you that I am he: If ye seek me, then let these depart, that the
saying which he spoke might be fulfilled: Of them whom thou gave me, I have
lost none.

Doctrine and fruit.
CHrist the worthy and strong Captain, when he has wholly given over
himself, steppeth forth weaponed, going manfully and steadfastly against the
prince of this world and his ministers, yielding and offering himself
willingly to suffer for us, Esa. 53
as Esaias says, quia voluit: for so was it his will. No man had been able to
take him, or put him to death, if he had not so willed himself: for he had
power to leave his own life. Many times before, did he give place to their
fury, John. 10
and got himself out of the way: but when the hour appointed of the father was
come, he goes himself willingly and meets death by the way. Here ought we
also to learn, willingly and stoutly to go into adversity, if it be the will
of our father, if Gods honor and our neighbors welfare so require. For like
as the father suffers not his son to die till the hour of death come: even so
stands our life in his hand. The limits that he has set unto us, may we
neither prevent, nor over pass: neither lies it in the power of our enemies,
to kill us when they will themselves. Christ cares for those that are his: the
enemies are able to do us no harm at all, Job. 2
no neither in body nor goods, till the Father give them leave. Therefore he
says, Let these go. The father, according to his great mercy and gracious
will, thrusts us into adversity with Christ his dear beloved son, in such
wise, so much, and at what time he will himself. Against his will ought we not
to strive, but patiently and with obedience submit our selves wholly unto it.

Oh what an unspeakable great love is here! The shepherd dies, to save the
life of the poor sheep: the Lord goes unto death, to the intent that the
servants should not die: the creator spares not himself to save his creature.
If the son of God now does not abhor to suffer death for us, why would
we then be ashamed, to suffer and die for his sake.

And though he be very God, and shows his enemies the brightness of his godly
strength, in that he so throws them to the ground, yet will not he in the
same hour use such his divine power to deliver himself: albeit he admonishes
them thereby, to cease from their conceived malice, for his godly strength
casts them down, his mercy and grace lifts them up again. Out of the
which great miracle, they should have learned, not to lay hand on him
maliciously, they should have considered, that if it had been his pleasure,
he might well have escaped their hands, so that they had not been able to
hold him, but the unbelieving rabble are blinded, indurate, and hardened, that
neither miracle nor kindness can move them.

Oh the high majesty of Christ! how shall unbelievers be able to stand before
him, when he shall appear in the judgment, whereas before his weakness and
humility (when he was now to be judged himself) they were not able to
stand? If his loving voice wherewith he speaks so gently unto them (and
says: I am he) does so fear them and throw them down. What will then the
horrible voice of the Judge do, when he shall say: depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire? O how innocently and godly ought we to live before him, who
is among us, and in us, hears all our words, sees all our works, sercheth
and looks through all our thoughts, how secret so ever they be? Christ at
this time withdrew his high power, and in weakness of the flesh, and in
wonderful high patience, stepped he forth to suffer. By his ensample must we
learn, not to take us to our high estate, but with patience and humblenes of
mind to meet the enemy.

Like patience and gentleness uses he also toward his traitor, whom he
goes to meet, not speaking rough words unto him, brawleth not with him,
rateth him not, (as he was well worthy) but receives him with all softnes of
mind, and gentleness, whereas yet he came to deliver and betray him into the
hands of the wicked, and unto death. Neither does the Lord deny him so much
as the kiss, the token of friendship: but lovingly also talks he with him:
albeit he also makes mention of his unfeigned and dissembling friendship,
telling him of it: admonishing him (if he had not been hardened) to cease from
his conceived treason. Wherefore, we also must learn of Christ (so far as
concerns our own person and estimation) with all mildness, softness of
mind, patience and greatest love, to meet those that hate us and betray us:
Math. 5:
Romans 12.
if peradventure with such love and gentleness of mind. we may bring them away
from their malice and wickedness.

Here also with great fear and dread ought we to consider of the judgment
God in Judas. that he being one of the twelve and elect Disciples, does betray
and sell the Lord Jesus his gracious loving Master. Whereby we are taught,
how that amongst all men there is nothing thoroughly perfect and whole, seeing
that in so holy and small number there is one man so greatly stuffed with
wickedness. Therefore he that stands, let him look that he fall not. Let
covetousness blind no man: let the desire of temporal good possess and rule no
man's heart: for out of covetousness the root of all vice, grows nothing but
treason and despair. No righteousness, no fidelity, no truth, no honesty, can
be in that heart wherein greedy covetousness has taken root. Judas for very
greedines of money, gives over God and all love: and he that before was a
fellow and companion of the holy congregation of Gods children, is become a
mate, companion and Captain of the wicked and unbelievers: he that was chosen
to the preaching of the Gospel, is become an enemy, persecutor, and traitor
against the truth. O from how high and great honor, to what shame,
dishonestie, and vile state falls Judas, who having woluish conditions under
sheep clothing, does under the token of love, practice treason against the
truth? From Jesus the true health. he seperateth himself to the children of
the Devil: he gets him amongst the bloud-thirstie, yea even he that
hitherto in outward appearaunce had confessed the truth. Thus goes it when
temptation breaks in, when the truth comes into peril and adversity: then
the enemies of the truth declare themselves, and hypocrites get them to the
adversaries against Christ: then may we learn to know them.

Of these (the more pity) there be at this day in the church of God many,
which under the pretense and color of truth, fight against the truth, and that
taking the name of Christ in their mouth, betraye Christ, yea with the sword of
their venomous tungs kill Christ, and in sheeps clothing are very wolves,
false teachers, and most noisome enemies, whom covetousness and vain glory
blinds. And whereas they are not able to root out Christ with the truth, they
undertake to do it with weapons and swords, and set the princes and powers of
the world, to defend their falsehood and tyranny. Yea, many there be of those
that rebuking Judas act, do even as he did themselves: feyning the truth,
when in very deed they persecute the truth.

O our great slothfulnes! whereof we are admonished in the Disciples that
sleep, when wicked Judas in his ungracious work so diligently watches, and
earnestly runs about. O that the love and zeal of God might do as much in
us, as the ungracious will in the wicked! O that we which are chosen into the
service of Christ, were so diligent to minister unto our Father and Lord, as
the children of this world are to wait upon Satan their master! for nothing
do they omit, that may serve to the persecution of the truth.

O merciful God, grant us poor feeble men patience in adversity, that
sudden wrath overcome us not, and that bitterness and desire of vengeance,
kindle us not to use uncharitable words, and to do hurt, when enemies fall
upon us, and brag against us, telling us our faults, whereof we think our
selves vnguiltie. Grant us ever lovingly to receive all adversity: and that
we may know those to be our best friends, which speak unto us, and rebuke
us hardest of all. Let no wicked root of envy, malice, and evil will grow
in us: no tediousnes, nor sloth. Give us strength to be willing and patient,
and with fervent desire to suffer yet more grievous things for thy sake. Pull
up the wicked root of covetousness, and the false shine of feyned spirituality
out of us. Oh save us, that Satan bring us not into temptation Grant us love
toward friends and enemies: that we may follow the nature of thee our
Father, and the example of thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, Amen:

THen came they and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. But when they that
were with him saw what would come of it, they said unto him: Master, shall we
smite with the sword? Jesus answered, and said: Suffer ye thus far forth.
Simon Peter had a sword, which he drew out, and smote the servant of the high
Priest, and cut off his right ear. And the servants name was called Malchus.
Then said Jesus unto Peter: Put thy (word into the sheath. Will thou not that
I shall drink the cup which my Father has given me? All they that draw
the sword, shall perish with the sword. Think thou not, that I might pray
my father to send me now more than twelve legions of Angels? But how should the
Scriptures be fulfilled? It must needs be thus. And when Jesus touched his
ear, he healed it. Then began Jesus to speak unto the multitude (that were
come to him) and to the high Priests, and to the chief rulers of the temple,
and to the elders, and said: Ye are come forth as to a murderer with swords
and staves, to take me. whereas I yet being daily in the temple, sat and
taught, and ye took me not. But this is your hour, and the power of
darkness. All this comes to pass, that the Scriptures should be fulfilled.
Then the Disciples forsook him, and fled all from him. There was a young man
that followed after, who had a white linen cloth upon the bare, and him they
took. But he left the linen cloth behind him, and ran away naked. The
multiude, and the captain and Ministers of the Jews, apprehended Jesus, took
him, bound him, and lead him first to Annas the chief Priest: for he was
Father in law unto Caiphas, which Caiphas was high Priest, and was the same
Caiphas which gave counsel unto the Jews, that better it were one man to
die, than the whole people to perish. And all the Priests, and Scribes,
Pharisees, and Elders came together.

Doctrine and fruit.
PEter declaring his earnest love which he bare unto the Lord, undertakes to
defend him from malicious violence: but at the same hour it pleased the Lord
to declare and show, not only his own might and power, but also his
unspeakable goodness even unto his enemies: therefore is it not his will, that
any man on his behalf should have harm: for he was come to bring health, and
no hurt: and therefore the uncircumcised zeal of Peter, which was not directed
after the will of God, he rejected and reproved, commanding Peter to put up
his sword into his sheath: and the servants ear that was smitten off he set
on again, and healed it: for he was ready to be obedient unto his Fathers
will unto the death, and to drink the cup that the Father had filled for him.
Yet does he show unto his enemies, that he willingly suffers, and that if it
were not his will, they should not be able to take him. But he affirmed the hour
now to be here, that the Father had given him into the power of darkness,
and that they showed such violence unto him, that the scripture might be
fulfilled.

The Disciples fly from Jesus their Lord, and leave him to tread the wine
press alone. In their weakness, fear and flying, is signified the infirmity
of the imperfect members of the Church, which yet when the spirit comes, is
strengthened. Let no man build upon his own strength, but pray unto God, that
he suffer him not to be lead into temptation.

The gracious Lord Jesus is sold unto sinners, that we which were sold under
sin, bond and thrall to the prince of this world, might be redeemed, and
delivered. He is content to be bound and taken, that we might be quite and free
from the snares and ca^tiuitie of sin.

O Jesus Christ, the mirror of all gentle^ (...) mind, the example of highest
obedience (...) grant us thy servants with true devotion to consider, how
thou innocent and undefiled lamb were bound, taken, and hailed away unto death
for our sins: Esaias. 53.
how well content thou wast to suffer such things, not opening thy mouth in
vnpatiencie, but willingly offering up thy self unto death. O gracious God,
how vilely wast thou mishandled for our sakes: O Lord, let this never come out
of our hearts: expel through it, coldness and sloth out of our minds: stir up
feruentnes and love toward thee: provoke us unto earnest prayer: make us
cheerful and diligent in thy will: bind our stubborn flesh with the cords of
thy fear and nurture: yoke us under thy holy work and obedience. Yea, thy
bands make quite and free from all sins: thy bands keep us, and draw us
in, that we run not at large in curiosity and worldly vanity: they preserve
us in thy holy service under continual nurture and blessed perseverance. O
grant that it be light and not grievous unto us, to break and yield our
selves: that we do not loath nor abhor, to be enfourmed, taught, lead, and
corrected against our own self will. Grant that we never become
disobedient, unquiet, stubborn, busy, headie and contentious. that we never
be found fighters, neither such as use brawling and scoulding. Make thou us
quiet, mild, soft minded, tractable and meek: ever ready, and not loath to
keep thy commandments. Bow down our neck under the yoke of thy
obedience: help us, through strait exercises, to tame and overcome our flesh
and wicked dispositions, which we are most inclined unto. O Lord Jesus Christ,
grant unto us whom thou have delivered, that fully and perfectly we may
yield our selves unto thee, committing us wholly unto thy spirit: and to have
always before our eyes and hearts, that we are even as sheep appointed to
the butcherie and shammels: that we defend not our selves in ire and
greediness of vengeance: for thou have numbered our hairs, and given us thine
Angels to be our keepers. Wherefore preserve thou our minds from displeasure
and desire of reuengement: grant us a mild friendly stomach toward our
enemy, that we may love him, speak good unto him, pray for him, recompense
him good for evil, that we may be ready, to offer the other cheek also.
And when we stand in any danger, O grant us, that we do nothing which does
evil become thy children, and that is not agreeable unto thine example.

ANd Annas sent him so bound unto Caiphas the high Priest. The soldiers took
Jesus, and lead him unto the high Priest Caiphas, there as the Scribes, the
Elders, and Pharisees were come together. But Peter followed after a far off
into the palace of the high Priest, and so did another Disciple, the same
Disciple was known to the high Priest, and went in with Jesus into the high
Priests palace. But Peter stood without at the door. Then the other Disciple
(who was known to the high Priest) went out, and spoke to the damsel that
kept the door, and brought Peter in. So Peter went in, and sat with the
servants to see the end. They had a fire, and coals kindled in the midst of
the palace, and sat about it. Peter also sat amongst them, and warmed him by
the fire. The other servants also stood round about the fire, and warmed
themselves, for it was cold: and Peter being with them, stood and warmed
himself. Now when the high Priests maid that kept the door, saw Peter,
and spyed him by the light of the fire, she said: Wast not thou also with
Jesus of Nazareth the Galilean? Art not thou likewise one of his Disciples?
Another said: he also was with him. Then Peter denied before them all, and
said: Woman, I know him not, I am not he, neither wot I whereof thou
speak. And when he was gone out into the porch, the cock crew. Then there
spyed him another Damsel, which said unto those that were there: This fellow
also was with Jesus of Nazareth. Then denied he again with an oath, and
said: I never knew the man. After a little while, as it were about an hour,
others that stood there, spyed him and said: Verily thou art one of them, for
thou art a Galilean: thine own speech bewraieth thee. Then said one of the
Priests servants, a kinsman of his whose ear Peter had smitten off: Did not I
see thee with him in the garden? But Peter began to swear and to curse
himself, and to make great protestation, that he never knew the man.
Immediately while he yet spoke, the cock crew again. And the Lord turned him
about, and he held Peter. Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said
unto him: Before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me three times. And he
went forth, and wept bitterly.

Doctrine and fruit.
O The sudden change! O the great inconstancy of man's weakness! O the
unsearchable judgments of God! Not long heretofore would Peter have gone
with Christ his master into prison and death. But now he is so afraid at the
words of one Damsel, that he denies the Lord. Of the which fall, Christ
told Peter and the other Disciples before for a warning: but they believing it
not, became presumptuous, and ascribed too much unto themselves: therefore the
Lord suffers them to fall, that they may learn what they have of themselves,
and what they have of God: yea, that we all may see what the Apostles were
before the receiving of the holy Ghost, and what they became after the power
that was given them from above. Before they received the holy Ghost, they were
weak, feeble, inconstaunt and wavering: but when God has clothed them with
power from above, they became fervent, earnest and steadfast. Grievously does
Peter fall in deniyng of his master: which thing yet turns to the wealth of
him and all men, to the intent that thereby we might learn, how hurtful and
dangerous it is for a man to trust to himself, to his own strength, and not
only unto God, without whom we are able to do nothing that good is. Good
godly people do fall many times, and through fear and greatness of the battle,
they should utterly give over, if they were not fortified and preserved by the
power of God.

Therefore the mercy of God which continually cares for us, has brought to
pass and appointed, that such examples should be noted in the scripture, to
teach us, and to declare unto us his power and goodness in every thing. Thus
the sins and falls of holy and virtuous men are set before us: partly to the
intent that if we stand, we should so continue upright, looking well to our
selves that we fall not: and partly that if we be fallen, we should learn to
rise up again, to amend our lives, and to bewail our sins. And so have the
holy Evangelists perfectly and uniformly described the fall and denial of
Peter, not that thereby they thought to deface Peter, or to publishe and make
known his trespass: but that the power of GOD in him might be known and
praised.

As for such sins as holy men commit through weakness and ignorance, God
uses them to his glory and our commodity: that with the wounds of his
Saints, he might heal ours, and that the shipwreck of the godly, might be
unto us, a sure port and haven. Peter's fall serves first to the knowledge and
praise of the power and goodness of God, in that we see how mightily he
sets Peter up again, and strengthens him, how graciously he forgiueth
him his sins, that we which are fallen, should not despair, but hope for
assistance and forgiveness of God, who gives strength and power unto those
that are his. Item, it serves to our commodity and profit, in that we see a
good godly man fall and sin, and afterward rise up again and amend, least we
should say: Alas, I am lost, I have done this, and I have done that: but
forasmuch as we see that Peter by repentance, weeping and converting again,
does obtain grace, it is meet and convenient, that we acknowledge our
offenses unto GOD, desire grace, weep and complain of our sins before GOD.
For both are here set before us, the fall and the repentance: and this
ensample is good and profitable to those that are in the right way of
godliness, and also unto sinners. The godly, just, and righteous, learn by
this to be circumspect, and not to presume. Sinners by occasion of this do
learn, immediately to rise up again from their fall, and not in any wise to
despair.

Yea, our own fall learn we to know, by Peter's fall, but alas, our fall is
much more grievous and greater than Peter's. Peter sinned through weakness,
many a time do we sin wilfully and advisedly: he once, we daily: he was
constrained through fear, we many a time through light occasions, fall from the
way of truth and righteousness: he rises up again forthwith, we seldom and
slowly: he wept bitterly, we scarce do confess and knowledge the sin. Yea
bitterly wept he: which thing all the electought to do, if they have sinned.
There should nothing grieve us more, than to have sinned against GOD, than to
have displeased God. This do not wilful sinners, which pass little or
nothing upon sin, and when they come into the deepenes thereof, care not for
it, neither confess nor acknowledge their sin, until afterward with
despair, as it is to see in Judas.

But Peter bewailing the grievous fall and wickedness of his denial, without
further falling away into horrible desperation, is preserved through the goodness
of God: in the confidence of gods often proved and accustomed mercy, is he
lift up unto blessed repentance, and so healed. Christ's look (the true
Physician) is unto him as much as a word or speech. Wherein we may learn to
know the unspeakable love of GOD, who (even in the midst of sin)
forgets not his own, forsakes them not: but graciously looks upon them
with the eyes of his mercy, admonishes them, speaks unto them through the
outward and inward word, with the which gracious countenance he diswadeth them
from sin, and calls them again to himself, provoking them to sorrow, and
mourning lamentation and weeping. He spreads out his arms and lap of his
mercy, and graciously takes us up again, and receives us with the lost
son. Therefore let us knowledge, repent, and bitterly bewail our sins: let
us wash them away with tears, and endeavor our selves with great diligence,
that negligently we fall not into them again: let us run to the bottomless
well of the mercy of God, and pray.

O merciful God, give us the well of blessed tears, that from the bottom of
our hearts we may with Peter bewa^le our sins. O with how great and grievous
sins are we laden and entangled? O suffer us not to lie under the heavy
burden: let us not sink down in heaviness and desperation. Set thou us up
again, and convert us thoroughly: send grace of thy holy repentance into our
heart, wash away all our sins and negligence: grant us the light of new
graces and gifts: let not the souls perish, for whom thou did submit thy
self into so many pains and rebukes, and at the last did suffer the
terrible bitter death of the cross, Amen.

THE high Priest asked Jesus of his Disciples, and of his doctrine. Jesus
answered him: I have openly spoken unto the world: I have always taught in the
Synagogue, and in the temple, there as all the Jews resort together, and in
corners have I taught nothing: Why ask thou me? Ask them that heard me,
what I said unto them. Behold, they can tell what I said. When he had thus
spoken, one of the ministers that stood by, smote Jesus upon his cheek, and
said. Answerest thou the high Priest so? Then Jesus answered him and said: If I
have spoken evil, then bear record of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why
smitest thou me?

Doctrine and fruit.
Here in the high Priest we see an example of those malicious persons, that
take in hand to overthrow and condemn the truth before they hear it. Great is
the arrogancy of man, who dare presume to make him self a Judge of Gods
truth, whereas of more right, the truth and word of God should judge our
words and works. The understanding of man and of the flesh, perceives not the
thing that concerns God, and therefore he refuses it, and judges it
unright, and so gives sentence, before he know what the matter is. This (the
more pity) do al they that seek their own profit and estimation, and not the
honor of God.

Now in such a false and temerarious sentence,

gave him buffets upon the chocke, and (...), and then asked him: Area^ who
has smitten thee? And the servants stroke him upon the face, and did him (...)
^ther villainy.

Doctrine and fruit.
O How unjust people come together against the fountain of righteousness? What
false witness and sentence goes against the tru^th? And yet all their
shifting is, that their malice and hatred may have an appearance of justice.
They prevent him with false witness, they press him with perlous and subtle
questions, and go about to undermine and supplant the eternal wisdom. The
enemies are accusers, witnesses and Judges. And whereas they revile and
blaspheme Gods son to the uttermost, they will be seen to be the men, that
are sorry and displeased, when God is dishonored. But as much as they seek in
the innocent lamb, yet find they nothing, no not so much as any suspicion of
evil: so pure and sincere is all his life, so true and constant are his words.

This example ought all faithful believers to set before their eyes, 1. These.
5. Ephesians. 4. 1. Tim. 3.
learning thereby, so to direct their life, that the enemies not only find no
vice in them, but also no suspicion of evil: that unto the evil speaker,
there be given no occasion nor cause to slander, and that the name of Christ
through them be not blasphemed. But whereas the honor of God so requires,
Math. 15.
we must openly speak and confess the truth before the ungodly, although
they be angry and offended: according as in this place we hear of Christ, who
tells them of his glorious coming in Majesty and power, although they take
it for a blasphemy. Here ought we also diligently and devoutly to consider,
what Christ suffers for us, what ignominy and reproach he takes upon
himself for our sakes, how vilelie he is reputed, and how shamefullie in his
body, and in all the parts thereof he is beaten: And yet in all this, how
blessedly he behaueth and shows him self: to the intent that it should not
grieve us, for his sake to bear vile buffets, and all ungentleness: for all
this suffers he for the truths sake. Even he whom the Angels ^oe worship, is
blasphemed of unthrifts: he that gives true answer, is named a blasphemer:
the righteous Judge is condemned of the unrighteous, and pronounced to be
worthy of death. But the gracious Lord is quietly content to keep silence and
does suffer: and therefore the more humble he is, and submits him self to
be mis-intreated, the more glorious is his victory.

With many wicked evil words is he defaced and scorned, sore beaten and
mishandled. That gracious face which the Angels delight to behold, is
blindefolded, spitted upon, and buffeted: the head, the face, and neck beaten
with many sore strokes. Christ is become a stranger unto all his friends,
forsaken of al his acquaintance and kinsfolks, a mocking and ieasting stock
unto all men. Even as if it were a dizard fool, is he laughed to scorn that
is wisest of all: upon whom the cruel dogs all the night long practice their
insatiable malice and pleasure, with mocking, nipping, pulling, buffeting,
spitting, and reuiling of him.

In all this does his swiftnes of mind and excellent patience abide still
constant and immovable: whereby we may justly learn to be ashamed of our
presumptuous brags, in our pomp and pride which we use in our soft and costly
apparel: where as Christ for our sakes became most poor, and vilely reputed.
Very evil beseems it us, yea a shame it is for us, (which of Christ are
called Christians, and will be his disciples) to seek bodily pleasure, and
earthy joy and sensuality in all things, whereas the Lord Jesus our head does
bear and suffer all that is contrary thereunto. O how unlike are we to our
head and forgoer? How farare we from right and true humility, when for the
least wrong and unadvised word, we be displeased with our brethren: and
whereas we should give thanks for being rebuked to our profit, we are
impatient and miscontent.

O Lord Jesus Christ, grant us, so to consider thy holy passion, that it bring
fruit in us: make us pacient, when hurt and displeasure is done unto us: teach
us after thine own living example, not to fear the railing words and
persecution of wicked people, neither to be discouraged for any wrongful
accusation that happens upon us. Teach us to see our own vileness, how
justly we are of the people reviled and despised for our sins. Have mercy (o
lord) upon our imperfectness: thou wast reviled, that thou might take from us
everlasting shame: beaten thou was^, that from the stripes which we with our
sins have deserved, thou might deliver us: spitted upon and mocked, to
bring us from everlasting confusion to everlasting honor. Wherefore strengthen
our minds (o Lord) that in lowly shamefastnes we may patiently suffer and
bear the hard words and checkes that other folks give us for our sins and
offenses: for many mo falser accusations and rebukes have thou borne with
highest patience, for us vile sinners.

O let the hard strokes and knockes of thy head, be unto us a swaging of all
our bodily pains: let that scornful blindfolding of thine eyes, be unto us
a restraint and keeping in of our sight, from all wantonness, vanity, and
lightness of eyes: let the vile spitting upon thy holy face, expel out of us
all carnal lusts: and teach us, not to regard the outward appearance, but to
hold and keep in honor the virtues of the soul. That carrying about and
scornful derision, which happened unto thee undeserved, drive from us all
dissolute manners and wanton gestures. Let that refusing of thy worthiness
quench in us all desires of temporal honor, let it move us unto things that of
the world are contemned, and in small estimation. Give us (o Lord) a strong
victory in all patience: that from our heart roots we may acknowledge and
confess our selves to be most worthy of al contempt and slander, of all
rebuke, shame, and punishment, Amen.

Early in the morning at the break of the day, went the chief Priests and
Elders of the people to counsel, (...) they might destroy Jesus. And they
brought him to their Counsel, and said: If thou be Christ, tell us? Then
said Jesus unto them: if I tell you, ye will not believe me: if I ask you a
question, you will give me no answer, neither let me go. But from this time
forth shall the son of man sit at the right hand of the power of God. Then
said they all: Art thou then the son of God? Then said he: Ye say it, I am.
They said. What need we any more witness? We have heard it our selves out of
his own mouth. Then arose the whole multitude, as many as were there, and bound
Jesus, and led him from Caiphas to Pilate into the judgment hall. And it was
early in the morning. They went not into the judgment hall, least they should
be defiled, but that they might eat Passah. Then went Pilate forth unto them,
and they brought Jesus bound, and delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the deputy.

Doctrine and fruit.
Satan sleeps not, but watches and is diligent to drive his household
together, to destroy Jesus Christ, to make him sure, and to bring him to his
end. For they thought if they might have Jesus once dead, then had they rooted
out the doctrine of the truth. But foolish and vain is their devise, for the
truth is immortal: the more it is oppressed, the more it breaks forth again:
when men undertake for to quench it, then does the shine and brightness thereof
appear more glorious. Shame therefore and rebuke, yea eternal punishment bring
all they upon themselves, that withstanding the truth take it prisoner, bind
it, and deliver it to the Judge. 2. Tim. 2. John. 8.
They think they bind the truth, but the truth and word of God cannot be
bound, for it makes all things free, and such as are tangled and wrapped in the
snares of sin, those it delivers. Who so goes about to bind the truth,
does knitte and snare himself with vnlowsable bands, and casts from him the
band of love, wherewith God offers to draw him unto himself, and to bind him
under his yoke. Wherefore let us be obedient unto the truth, and not strive
against it: for if we undertake to condemn it, it shall so appear again in
high Majesty, that through the beautiful, fair, and clear brightness
thereof, we shall all perish, and be blinded.

WHen Judas which had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he repented
so, that he took the money, the thirty silver pence, and brought them to the
high Priests, and to the Elders of the people, and said: I have sinned in
betraying that innocent blood. They said: What have we to do withal? Look
thou to that. So he cast the money from him in the temple, went his way, and
hanged himself in a snare. But the high Priests took the money, and said:
It is not lawful to put it into the treasury, for it is the price of blood.
And they took counsel, and bought with the same money a potters field, to
bury strangers in. Wherefore the same field is called Acheldema, that is, the
field of blood until this day. Then was fulfilled that, which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, saying: And they took thirty silver plates the price of
him that was v^lued, whom they bought of the children of Israel, and ga^^ them
for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.

Doctrine and fruit.
LIke as we have had in Peter, an ensample of the grace and mercy of God: so
have we in Judas, a fearful and terrible ensample of Gods righteousness. In
Judas, are described unto us all unbelieving desperate persons, whom the
gracious God of his bottomless mercy calls to his goodness and service: but
they despise it, and follow satan, who blinds them, and entiseth them
through manifold wickedness, which they consider not, but when they are come
into the deepnesse of vice, they force not of it. The devil also, to whom they
surrender themselves to serve, and that has taken possession of their heart,
blinds them in such sort, that they ponder not the vileness, grieuousnesse,
and greatness of their sins, till they have fully finished the abomination:
for if they did consider it, they should repent and amend. How many loving
admonitions had Judas heard of the Lord, to dissuade him from his purpose? yet
all could not help. At the last opens he their eyes that they repent, but a
godly repentance they receive not. They behold the greatness and
grieuousnesse of the sin and offense, but the greatness of Gods mercy in
Christ they see not, by means whereof they despair in their sins, and are
damned.

In the Priests that loath the blood money, and yet abhor not to shed the
innocent blood, is set forth before our eyes an ensample of all hypocrites,
which outwardly appear to be good and virtuous, and yet regard not the
godlynes of the spirit: A gnat choaketh them, and a camel they swallow up.

But unto us poor strangers and pilgrims, there is prepared and bought
through the blood of Christ a field and Churchyard, that we being washed
clean from our sins, might find eternal rest to our souls.

Preserve us (O God) from covetousness and despair, from false hypocrisy,
treason, and bloushedding: G lead us not into temptation. And whereas we have
sinned, grant us true and fruitful repentance, that we never forget thy
goodness and mercy, but immediately cease from sin, and serve thee continually
until our end, Amen.

Jesus stood before the deputy. Then said the deputy: what accusation bring ye
against this man? They answered and said, If he were not an evil doer, we had
not delivered him unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and
judge him after your law. Then said the Jews, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death: that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifieng what death he should die. Then began they to accuse him, and said,
We have found this man perverting the people, and forbidding to give tribute
unto the Emperor, and naming himself to be Christ, a king. Pilate asked him,
and said, Art thou king of the Jews? Then answered he and said, Thou have
spoken it. Then said Pilate to the chief Priests and to the people: I (...)
nor guiltines in the man. Then were they more earnest and said: he has with
his doctrine moved the people to sedic^^^ through out whole Iewrie, beginning
in Galilee, and from thence hither unto this place. Now when Pilate heard of
Galilee, he asked, if he were a Galilean. And when he perceived that he was
under Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him unto Herod, who then was at Jerusalem.

Doctrine and fruit.
ALL they that hitherto from the beginning of the world, have at any time
preached the truth were of the adversaries noted and accused to be sedicious
and deceivers of the people: which thing was brought upon them, to rid them out
of the way. Hereof find we examples enough in the old and new Testament, Jeremy
26.32.38. 3. Reg. 18. Amos 7. In Christ and his Apostles we see it evident.
Therefore have we no cause to give over the truth, for we are no better than
our master.

And though we be complained upon for the truths sake, it ought not greatly
to grieve us, for as much as we see, that the like happened unto Christ, in
whose mouth there was never found guile. He is set forth unto us for an
example of most perfect patience. We that be spirituail Disciples of Christ,
must go unto him to school, and learn of him meeknes, obedience, patience,
and lowlines of mind. Behold our head stands before an Hethenish unrighteous
Judge, wrongfully and sore is he accused, even our ^^uiour our king and Lord,
yea even he that is judge (...) whole world. Why should we then (...) for Gods
sake to obey worldly (...) though they oppress us, and do us wrong? (...)
innocent, as for us, we are in many things guilty. Never should the patience
of Jesus slip out of our hearts.

Have mercy upon our impatiencie, O merciful Father, and print in our hearts
the image of thy son, grant us grace to follow his footsteps: expel out of us
all fear of worldly accusations and false judgments, give us such a gentle
spirit, as (when we be wrongfully accused, or unjustly punished) is not soon
unquieted: o drive thou out of us all fumishnesse, indignation, and self will:
let thy love increase and grow in us through the contemning of our selves, and
whatsoever is in us, that strives or resists against thy holy will, let the
same be clean extinct and die.

AND when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to see
him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and he trusted
to have seen some miracle done by him. Then he questioned with him many
words, but Jesus answered nothing. The high Priests and Scribes stood forth
and accused him straightly. And Herod with his men of war despised him: And
when he had mocked him, he araied him in white clothing, and sent him again to
Pilate. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together, for
before they were at variance.

Doctrine and fruit.
THe everlasting wisdom of God is mocked and iested at, as a desert fool,
the truth is belied. Us therefore that of nature are foolish and liers, it
should not grieve to be reviled for Gods sake. No answer gives Christ to the
ungodly voluptuous king (who of a curious desire, would feign have seen or
heard some new thing of Christ) for at that hour to answer, it could not
edify. It was a time wherein it pleased him to suffer, not to do miracles.
Thus the innocent Lord Jesus, for us guilty is drawn and haled from one
unrighteous judge to another* All reproach, shame, dishonor, and derision,
takes he upon himself for our sakes, every where is he grievously accused,
in every place is there hurt done unto him, and after many questions and
examinations, they hang him up upon a cross. Thus the high God is brought low,
as if he were most vile, the almighty is defaced, as if he were most weak of
all: the wisest of all, is laughed to scorn, as if he were a natural fool:
the most vnguiltie is handled as an evil doer.

This spectacle ought we very diligently to behold, for we are laden with
grievous burdens of all wickedness, and have for our iniquity deserved so
much, that we are worthy of all rebuke, shame, and confusion, yet are we
impatient, when we be despised. Nevertheless all such vile entreating does
Christ suffer for our sakes, to deliver us from eternal (...) and confusion,
which we justly have de^.

O Lord take from us all wantonness and pride. (...) us, thy servant,
wilfully and (...) our bodies, whereas thou Lord, king of heaven, are
scornefully despised in a fools coat? O Lord set thou before our eyes and
hearts the contempt and derision that was done unto thee. Teach us to follow
thee thorough the contempt and hatred of our selves, and to rejoice when we
are despised.

Let us never set our hope upon men, upon praise, upon honor, upon power,
upon money: but that from the bottom of our hearts, we may be able to despise
all temporal things, and love thereof, and firmly and steadfastly to follow
after thee, O Lord Jesus, our welfare, that as touching all the rebuke and
contempt which thou for us, poor unworthy sinners, have suffered, we may
bear the same in the perpetual remembrance of our heart, and never forget
it, Amen.

PIlate called together the high Priests and chief rulers with the common
people, and said unto them: Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
peruerteth the people. And behold, I examined him before you, and find no
fault in this man, of those things whereof ye accuse him, no nor yet Herod.
For I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him. So
Pilat went again into the judgment hall, and called Jesus, and said unto
him: Art thou the king of the Jews?

Then answered Jesus Speak thou that (...) others told it thee of me?
Pilate answered* (...) Jew? Thy people and thy high Priests (...) unto me:
What have thou done? Jesus answered (...) ^dome is not of this world: if my
kingdom were of this world assuredly my ministers would fight for me, that I
should not be given over unto the Jews. But now is not my kingdom from hence.
Then said Pilate, Then art thou a king. Jesus answered: Thou say it, I am a
king. For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness unto the truth. Who so is of the truth, hears my
voice. Then said Pilate unto him, What is truth? When he said this, he went
forth again to the Jews, and said unto them: I find no fault in him. But
ye have a custom, that I should deliver one unto you loose at Easter. Will ye
that I loose unto you the king of the Jews? Whom will ye that I shall let
go? Barrabas, or Jesus which is called Christ. For he knew, that the Priests
had of envy and hatred delivered him up. Then cried they all, and said: Not
him, but Barrabas. As for Barrabas, he was a murderer, who because of an
vproare made in the City, and for manslaughter, was laid in prison. Then
spoke Pilate farther with them, willing to let Jesus loose. But they cried,
Crucify him, crucify him. Then said he unto them the third time: What evil
then has he don? I find no cause in him. Therefore will I punish him, and let
him go.

Doctrine and fruit.
FOrasmuch as the devil knows, that Christ and his ministers apply all
diligence with their doctrine, that the kingdom of him (who is the Prince of
this world) (...) he destroyed, and that the kingdom of Jesus Christ the
son of God, the chief king of all might prosper, he brings to pass, that
Christ and the Ministers of the word, are noted and su^pected of sedition,
whereas they yet seek nothing less than worldly power and dominion. Christ
flies away, when they would make him king: now is he noted and accused, as one
that seeks to be Emperor. Nevertheless Christ is a true king, whose kingdom
consists not in corporal things, but in spirit and in power. Christ despised
all honor, riches, power, and pleasures of this world: his Ministers therefore
must of all the world be contemned. But Christ rules through his spirit and
power in their hearts, and they also shall rule with him in the resurrection.
He is the truth, and gives witness unto the truth: and who so is of the
truth, hears his voice, and bears record also unto the truth.

Here likewise we learn the unsteadfastness of the world: they that before
ran still after Christ, and would have made him king, crying joyfully Hosanna
unto the Lord, cry now: Crucify him, crucify him. So little worthy is the
praise and commendation of the world to be regarded. They that said before:
Praised be he that comes in the name of the Lord, the same cry now: Away
with him, crucify him: and so they chose a murderer, in stead of the Savior.
Their request is, that the murderer may live: as for the Savior and well of
life, him they desire to be put to death. If we pondered this well in our
hearts, that our Savior Jesus was esteemed worse and more vile than a
murderer, there should be nothing that we would not be glad to suffer for his
sake.

Now when the world is in hand with us, and casts many opprobrious words
upon us, we must not be overcome with vnpatiencie: the false accusation and
threatening of wicked people, ought not to make us shrink: but if we love
Christ with our hearts we must remember his patience, when he was falsely
accused and reuyled for our sakes: and so with stopped cares ought we to let
all sharp words pass, yea to pray for them that speak evil of or to us.

When our good works and meanings are taken in evil part, our enterprise
resisted, our words rejected and refused of every man, we ought patiently to
suffer it. For far inferiouis are we unto Christ our Lord, over whom goes
so horrible and wicked a cry; Crucify him, crucify him.

Hereof should all faithful believers be admonished, yea assured, if they
mind to live godly in Christ Jesus, that they must suffer much persecution, and
that if they will walk and go forward in the way of God, they must bear many
hurtful and noisome things: for no man can please GOD, that for his sake is
not exercised in much adversity. Therefore says he unto his dear friends:
Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and shall falsely
speak all manner of evil against you for my sake. Rejoice and be glad, for
great is your reward in heaven. Math. 5.

Wherefore dear children, let us follow our innocent Lord Jesus: who being
refused of wicked men upon earth, but chosen of God the Father, is crowned with
eternal glory, and godly honor in heaven. No evil saying or curse ought to
overcome us, considering that for the same there is so exceeding joy prepared
for us of God.

THen Pilate took Jesus therefore, and scourged him, and the soldiers wound a
crown of thorns, and put it on his head. And they did on him a purple garment,
and came unto him, and said: hail king of the Jews: and they smote him on the
face. Pilate went forth again, and said unto them: Behold, I bring him forth
to you, that you may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth,
wearing a crown of thorn, and a robe of purple. And he says unto them,
Behold the man. When the high Priests therefore and ministers saw him, they
cried saying: crucify him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them: Take ye him,
and crucify him, for I find no cause in him. The Jews answered and said
unto him: We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made
himself the son of GOD. When Pilate heard that saying, he was the more
afraid: and went again into the judgment hall, and says unto Jesus. Whence
art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Then said Pilate unto him: Speak
thou not unto me? Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and
have power to let thee loose? Jesus answered: thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above. Therefore he that
delivered me unto thee, has the more sin. And from thence forth sou^ht Pilate
means to loose him, but the Jews cried, saying: If thou let him go, thou art
not the Emperors friend: for whosoever makes himself king, is against the
Emperor.

Doctrine and fruit.
HEre in Pilate we learn, how hurtful it is, when every one in his office and
vocation looks not diligently about him, but slenderly lets the thing
slip and pass, that he earnestly ought to bring to effect. Pilate was the
deputy of a country, and knew that Christ had wrong, whereof he himself also
many times bears him witness with his own mouth. Seeing then that he was a
Judge, it appertains to his office, to judge right, and not to suffer the
innocent to die. For though Pilate does, as if he would discharge Christ, yet
he minds it not earnestly. He goes about to let Christ loose, nevertheless
so far as he displease not the Jews, and the Emperor, so far as he
loose not the favor and friendship of men.

While Pilate now faints, in the righteousness that he knows and is sure
of, and holds not on stoutly, as he should, to deliver Christ, God suffers
him still to fall, till he come to this point, that he condemns the innocent
to death against his own conscience. Thus goes it with all those, that for the
grace of GOD lent unto them, are unthankful and unfaithful in the little. It
is the part of a righteous Judge, to maintain justice, and to defend the
innocent, though it should cost him, body, honor, and goods.

The pride also of Pilate, that presumed by reason of his authority, is
brought down with the words of the Lord: there is no power but from above,
and therefore should it be godly used: the higher powers are Gods Ministers.
In the which words of Christ, the faithful believers that be in adversity,
are comforted: knowing that no man has authority nor power over them, except
it be given him of God.

Christ is bound to deliver us from the bands of our sins, and to place us
in eternal freedom. He is scourged to take from us the stripes that we
should suffer by reason of our sins: yea to heal our wounds, is he sore
wounded himself. Altogether suffers he for our sakes: through his stripes
are we made whole. His back (as Esaias says, Esaias. 50.) offers he to the
smiters, and his cheeks to the nippers, to purge us from all filthiness of
sin. He became without beauty, as a leper despised, spitted upon and
mocked, to deliver us from eternal shame and punishment. We had deserved all
this, he did nothing worthy thereof: we are the cause of his martyrdom. Oh
the great burden of our sins, that the Son of the eternal GOD must suffer
so sore stripes and cruel pain for us, to reconcile us with his Father! Oh
the exceeding great love which he declares unto us, in that he takes all
rebuke upon himself for us! Oh that we considered this with true devotion,
so that we might say with Christ and David: I am ready to be scourged, and
my plague is always before me.

O Jesus, kindle us with the fire of thy exceeding love, which thou in so much
adversity have well tried toward us. Grant us the help of thy grace to the
strengthening of our weakness, when the heavy burdens of adversities fall
upon us: that through the terrible ouercharge of them, we be not oppressed and
thrown down. Give us grace, so to chasten and subdue our body and flesh, that
it may be subject unto the spirit, and obedient unto thy will in all things.

WHen Pilate heard that saying, he brought forth Jesus, and sat down to give
sentence in the place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrew tongue
Gabatha. It was the preparing of the Easter about the sixth hour. And he says
unto the Jews: Behold your king. They cried: away with him, away with him,
crucify him. Pilate says unto them: shall I crucify your king? The high
Priests answered: We have no king but the Emperor. And the high Priests with
the Elders of the people, accused him in many things, but he gave no answer.
Pilate asked him further, and said: make thou no answer? See thou not in
how many and great things they accuse thee? But Jesus moreover gave no answer,
so that the deputy marvelled sore at it. At the feast he had a custom, to let
one unto them loose, whom they would desire. Now while the people pres^ed on,
Pilate began to ask them (as he always did) and said: Whom will ye that I
let loose unto you: Barabas, or Jesus who is called Christ?

While Pilate sat in judgment, his wife sent to him, and said: Have thou
nothing to do with that just man, for this night in sleep have I suffered
much for him. But the high Priests and the Elders persuaded the people, and
enticed them, that they should ask Barrabas, and require Jesus unto death.
Then answered Pilate, and said unto them: whom will ye of these two, that I
shall let go loose unto you? They said Barrabas. Then said Pilate unto them:
What shall I then do with Jesus, who is called Christ? Then said they al: let
him be crucified. The deputy said: What evil then has he done? Nevertheless
they cried yet more: let him be crucified

When Pilate saw that he profited nothing, but that the uproar was greater, he
took water and washed his hands before the people, and said: I am vnguiltie
from the blood of this just man: look ye to it. Then answered all the people
and said: His blood be upon us and upon our children. So Pilat, according to
their desire, let Barrabas loose unto them: And Jesus (whom he scourged) gave
he over unto them to be crucified.

Doctrine and fruit.
PIlate fears men more than God, therefore does he against God, and condemns
the innocent, although he thinks to be unguilty of his blood.

The Evangelist makes mention of the feast of Easter or Passah, to the intent
we should consider, that Christ the true right Paschall lamb, was put to
death and slain for us.

Here we learn what the judgment of the world is: righteousness is refused and
condemned: wickedness, ungraciousness, and murder, is delivered and quite. O
how lamentably perishes the righteous, and no man there is that considers
it, or that goes about to deliver him? The true, is given over to the liars;
the innocent, to the guilty; the godly, to the ungracious; the murderer is
chosen, before Jesus the anointed son of God: here the wicked is preferred
before the just, death before life, night and darkness before the light.

This now, in all our troubles, when we are oppressed and falsely condemned,
shall comfort and strengthen us, if we set before our eyes the blessed example
of Jesus the innocent, who for us was condemned as an evil dooer. For we
servants are not above our Lord. If the Judge of the quick and dead be
wrongfully condemned, how much more convenient is it, that we poor guilty
should suffer, when we are judged, whether it be done justly or unjustly?

Christ for our sake was falsely condemned, to take from us the just judgment
of eternal damnation, which was gone out upon us for our sins.

Grant unto us, O Lord Jesus, that neither thratening nor slander drive us
away from the contemned cross, but that with our whole powers we may gladly
follow thee, O give us grace, to fasten our flesh with the temptations thereof,
unto the cross, that we bewailing our former sins, may withstand and
overcome the temptations that are behind. Help us (Lord) in the conflict of
the spirit, let thy cross (o Lord) be unto us a medecin against all vice,
and grant, that we always chearefully take up our cross, and follow thee, Amen.

THen the soldiers lead Jesus again into the judgment hall: And when they had
mocked him, they stripped him out of the purple robe, and put his own garments
upon him, and lead him forth to be crucified. And he bare his own cross
himself, and went on toward the place of execution. And as they lead him,
they caught one that was called Simon of Cyren, who came from the field, and
was the father of Alexander and Rufus, him they compelled to carry the cross
of Jesus, and laid it upon him, that he might bear it after Christ. And there
followed him a great company of people, and women, which bewailed and lamented
him. But Jesus turned back to them, and said: Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for your selves and for your children. For behold, the
days will come, in the which they shall say: Happy are the barren, and the
wombes that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they
begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us: and to the hills, cover us, for if
they do this in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? And unto the
place of execution, there were lead with him two other murderers to be slain.
And they came unto the place called Golgatha, that is, a place of dead men's
skuls, (or the place of execution.) And they gave him to drink vinegre mixed
with gall, but when he had proved it, he would not drink it. And they
crucified him, and with him two murderers, the one on the right hand, the
other on the left, and Jesus in the midst. That the Scripture might be
fulfilled: He was counted among the evil dooers.

Doctrine and fruit.
Here ought we with devout hearts to behold our Savior Jesus, how meekely he
takes the cross upon him for our sakes, and patiently bears it, to bring
the lost sheep again upon his shoulders. Here we see our king bear his
kingdom upon his shoulders, Esaias. 9.
as Esaias the prophet says. He is is not only led forth, but it is done with
great teproch, even as if he were a ringleader of murderers and unthrifts. O
how was the king of glory blaspemed and misintreated for our sakes? He takes
our sins upon him, and discharges us of our burden.

In the consideration of this his reproach, we should not weep over him, but
over our selves. For if this be done to the innocent son of God, what are we
then worthy of? 1. Pet. 3.
By this also must we learn, patiently to bear our cross, in following our
fore-goer: for he shows us an example before, that we should follow his
foosteps, even to the death. And if we so consider our cross, it shall be
light and easy unto us. We have sworn under the cross, from the which we
must not shrink, if we will follow the Lord. The love of Jesus Christ shall make
all adversity sweet and acceptable unto us. Our joy and comfort ought to be
chiefly in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world must be
crucified unto us, Gal. 5.
and we unto the world. He shall cause our slothful flesh to be quick and
diligent, and shall kindle our cold heart. He goes before us in the narrow
way, and is a companion of our pilgrimage, a helper in all trouble, a
comforter in all adversity, a worker with us in the grievous travail that we
suffer for his sake.

O Lord help us to bear the heavy burdens: that we may be diligent and
apt unto all good works. Assist us with thy power and grace, help us
according unto thy accustomed mercy: teach us to break, and utterly to leave
our own will. Make us true Crosse-bearers and followers of thee: Take from us
all worldly lust and wilfulness, what so ever hinders us in thy love, that
in obedience and patience we may alwaie follow thee, and find rest with thee
after adversity. Thou Lord wast stripped out of thy apparel, and spoiled
thereof: that we with virtues might be clothed. The same that was put upon
thee to rebuke and shame, is unto us become the highest honor. Thou wast lift
up from the earth, that thou might draw the hearts of thy faithful
believers unto thee from all earthly things, and kindle them in the love of
hie heavenly things: that thou through thy death might reconcile and fully
restore all that is in heaven and earth.

O ye righteous and faithful, that delight to serve God, behold with the eyes
of your heart, how our God, Lord, king, and redeemer hangs on the cross for
us. let us consider our lover, who for our sakes hangs naked and bare in
great shame and reproach before the world. He spreads out his arms, to call
and receive unto himself, us poor sinners and lost children, saying, Math. 11.
Come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refresh you. He
shows his wounds, out of the which flows the plentiful river and
fountain of his precious dear blood, to the washing away of all our
filthynesse. Zach. 13
He boweth down his head, to speak friendly unto us. Boldly therefore with
great comfort and confidence, ought al sinners to resort unto him, where they
shall find help and consolation, defense and protection: there should they lay
down the heavy burdens of their sins. Unto us must all the world be a
cross, and we unto the world: only let Christ the Lord be our life, and to
die with him, our greatest advantage. Far be from us all rejoicing, save
only in the cross of Jesus Christ, far be from us al confidence in our own
works and merits, for all our health consists in the cross of Jesus
Christ, wherein undoubtedly we may well set all our hope. By him comes
forgiveness of sins, out of him flows the riches of all deserving: with
him is the reward of all righteousness. Through the contempt of our selves, and
of all temporal things, let us barely, nakedly, and simply follow the naked
and crucified Lord.

Teach us (O God) to have delight in contemning our selves, and all temporal
things: and when other folks are in trouble, to be sorry and pray for them.
Grant us grace to wish good unto those that hurt and punish us: let us not
trust in men, for there be few faithful and constant friends.

Here also should we learn, not to be grieved, if we have few lovers and many
enemies: for so happened even unto Christ our head. He had many foes to whom
yet he did none evil but much good, and received great vnthanke for his labor.
Sweet and acceptable should it be unto us, to suffer reproach of the world,
and to be despised for his sake: yea, to avoid all voluptuousnes and joy of the
world, saying we are fastened unto the cross with Christ. To seek much pastime
and pleasure of the world, becomes not him that must suffer adversity. All
this learn we in the passion of Christ, and in the cross. Blessed is he that
directs his daily exercise and his whole life there after: Apoc. 2. Psalm. 83.^
he shall enjoy the fruit of the tree of life for ever.

O GOD heavenly Father, look upon the face of thine anointed, who hanged
for us upon the cross: Be merciful unto us poor sinners, which be laden
with great and grievous sins: forgive us for the most worthy merits sake of
thine only begotten dear son, who for our sins was beaten and wounded:
Let him satisfy thee for all our sins.

He is our surety in thy sight, our faithful aduocat and mediator: him thou
gladly hear O father of mercy, and graciously acceptest his intercession
for all sinners.

O gracious Lord Jesus, son of the eternal God, who of very love toward us,
tookest upon thee our weak flesh (undefiled from all sin) and did offer
up the same flesh unto thy father upon the Altar of the cross for the safeguard
of the world, have mercy upon us thy servants, for thy everlasting goodness,
and for the infinite merits sake of thy holy passion: For thy deserving
excels al men's sins, and much greater is the abundance of thy mercy, then
all our wickedness. Therefore fly we unto thee under the protection of thy
holy cross, and with sighing hearts seek we help, grace, and remedy for our
wounds. Psalm. 119.
Receive us that are fled unto thee: Heal us that be sick, make us just and
righteous that be sinners. Draw thou us up an high O Lord Jesus from all
worldly things, bind up our flesh with thy fear, wound us with thy sweet
love, that nothing else take hold of our heart, save only Jesus Christ.

Out of the wounds of Jesus, and out of the running out of his blood, do we
receive hope: There find we medicine for our souls, abundance of grace, and
perfect forgiveness. Whatsoever we receive of sinful vices, whatsoever we
commit with bodily sensuality, the same is altogether washed and reformed in
the fountain of Christ's blood. O the vnoutspeakable love, which the son of
God bears toward his Church, that he washes and cleanses it with his own
blood, Ephesians 5.
with the blood of the new Testament, that it may be holy, pure, and without
spot. 3. Pet 1.
Not with silver and gold does GOD redeem his creature, but with the precious
blood of his own son. O dear children, let us not tread under foot the
blood of the holy Testament: let us not be unthankful unto our Savior.

Heb. 10.
Thy holy blood O Jesus, make us pure and clean from all sin, and sanctify
us thoroweout, that our spirit, soul, and body, may cheerefullie wait for
thy coming, and live with thee for ever. These. 5.


JESUS said: O Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Pilate
wrote a superscription of the matter, and fastened it above at the head of the
cross. The superscription was written in the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew with
these words: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews. This superscription did
many of the Jews read, for the place where Jesus was crucified, was near unto
the City, and the superscription was written in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.
Then said the high Priests of the Jews unto Pilate: write not king of the
Jews, but that he called himself king of the Jews. Pilate answered: What I
have written, I have written. The soldiers when they had crucified Jesus, they
took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier one part, and also
his coat. The coat was without seam, wrought upon through out. Then said they
together: let us not divide it, but cast lottes for it, who shall have it: that
the scripture might be fulfilled, saying: They have parted my raiment among
them, and for my coat they cast lots. Psalm. 22.
And the soldiers did such things in deed. Then sat they down and kept him.
There stood also much people, and beheld.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE last words which Jesus spoke upon the cross, ought all faithful
believers well to write in their hearts, and therein diligently to keep them.
First, he spoke a loving friendly word, a word full of grace and sweet comfort
to al sinners, sufficient and enough to break al hardness of heart, and to
provoke fruitful repentance: Father forgive them. O how great goodness and
loving kindness is this? how ready is Jesus unto mercy? how well willing is he
to forgive his lovers, that shows himself so mild and gracious unto his
enemies? No angry word, no displeasure pours he out against those that
crucified him: no vengeance nor plague desires he to fall upon that ungracious
people, but speaks most sweet words, full of ardent love: O Father forgive
them etc.

In these words apeareth his exceeding great love with vnoutspeakable softnes
of mind, which through no malice might be ouerome. They (like mad and blood
thirsty men) cried: Away with him, crucify him, crucify him. O the
wonderful great lenity of our Lord Jesus Christ! They revile and misintreat
him to the uttermost: he prays for them, that they being converted from
their wickedness, may acknowledge him the very true son of God to have appeared
in the flesh.

Esaias. 53.
Here is fulfilled that Esaias said: he has borne the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors, that they should not perish.

Who now being in sin, will despair in the mercy of God, when the great
offenders, that crucified and slew the giver of all remission, found so great
grace and goodness?

A steadfast hope therefore ought we to conceive and to be sure of, how great
soever our sin be: The hope of life stands yet open, the bowels of mercy
are yet ready prepared. Only unto him let us resort: full graciously will he
receive us, so far as we give over our selves unto him. Here likewise by the
example of our fore-goer, we must learn to forgive our neighbor, to pray
also for our enemies, and for those that do us harm. If we gladly forgive that
little, God will forgive us the great. If we so do, we find grace, and are the
children of the heavenly Father. As for the recompencing of all despite, and
taking of vengeance, we must commit and refer that unto our Father, who
judges righteously. 1. Pet 2.3.


O Jesus, thou heavenly schoolmaster, teach us this, and grant us grace to do
it. Give us also an assured hope of thy mercy and grace, that we fall into no
despair through the multitude of our sins: but with faithful minds to
consider, that for to heal sin, thou came into this world, and have shed thy
blood. O grant unto us free refuge and sure defense, under the shadow of thy
wings, and under the invincible token of thy holy cross. Receive us poor
sinners, which utterly trust not in any good deed or merit of our own, but
only in thy mercy, Amen.

Very spiteful extremity is showed unto our Savior, in that he must behold
and see, how the vile unthrifts part his clothes amongst them. By this, is
there set forth unto us a doctrine, how we ought to behave our selves, if our
temporal goods be withdrawn and taken from us. We must be readier to
suffer temporal harm, than to be revenged, or with unquiet suite at the law
to require our own. He that created the whole world, has not a corner where
to rest his head. He that beautifieth and decketh all things, hangs bare and
naked himself. Whereby we must learn to be pacient, if that which is ours be
taken from us: we must learn to be content with few things, and to take in
good part things of small reputation, and not to grudge, but with quiet minds
to be thankful unto God.

O Lord, grant unto us, that we appear not naked and bare before thee: cloth
us with the wedding garment of faith and love, and when we suffer wrong, give
us grace to follow thine example in patience: that no sorrow nor heaviness
for loss of temporal goods, lead us away from thee, Amen.

THey that passed by, reviled and blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and
saying: ha, thou that breakest down the temple, and set it up again in
three days, help now thy self, if thou be the Son of God, come down from
the cross. The high Priests also mocked him, together with the Scribes and
Elders, and said amongst themselves: He helped others, can he not help
himself? If he be Christ the chosen of God, the king of Israel, let him
come down now from the cross, and we will believe him. He sets his hope
and trust in God, let him deliver him, if he will have him, for he has said:
I am the Son of GOD. The murderers also that were crucified with him, cast
the same in his teeth, and reviled him. The people stood there, and waited,
and the chief of them mocked him, and said: Has he helped others, and
cannot help himself, and is Christ the chosen of GOD. The soldiers also
mocked him, came and proffered him vinegar, and said: If thou be king of the
Jews, help thy self. One of the murderers that hanged by him, reviled him
also, and said: If thou be Christ help thy self and us. But the other
rebuked him, and said: Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same
damnation. As for us we are justly punished, for we receive according to our
deeds: but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus: Lord,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: Verily
I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in paradise.

Doctrine and fruit.
Jesus for our sake took upon himself the most extreme shame, rebuke and
derision, to deliver us from eternal villainy, and that we should learn
gladly to suffer reproach and shame, and to despise the vain-glorie of this
world. He is mocked and contemned of high and low, of spiritual, temporal,
and of every man. For they being full of gal, bitterness, and poison, pour it
out with their false tongues and outward gestures, casting out wicked
slaundrous words, and sharpening their venomous tongs against the innocent
savior. They rather should have bewailed their own great sins: but there is
no compassion nor mercy in them, their hearts are stopped, Satan has the
leading of them. Yet cannot their malice overcome good Jesus: Through their
wickedness and despite cannot his patience be vanquished. No opprobrious or
vile word might cause him to omit the work of our redemption: but he
continues in love, and performs it with an honorable end. Even as he
teaches us to endure unto the end, so does he practice it himself, Math. 24.
and declares it unto us in deed and example.

We therefore that will be followers of Jesus Christ, should set before us this
excellent example of our forgoer, and learn to contemn the world, and
stoutly to abide in our holy vocation and purpose. It is the work of Christ
that we have in hand, and before us we have an high perfect example giver, of
whom we ought to learn, even Christ Jesus, who for our sakes was obedient to
the Father, until the death of the cross. Phil. 2.
Wherefore seeing we are become children of God through grace, we must be
obedient to our heavenly father, looking to his good pleasure, bidding the
world farewell, despising the mocks and scorns thereof, looking up ever
diligently unto the crucified Lord Jesus, who waits for us with outstretched
arms, calls us lovingly unto him, and for a short travail promises us
eternal reward, and says: If thou suffer with me, thou shall reign with
me: If thou dye with me, ^. Tim. 2.
thou shall also be crowned with me.

O Lord Jesus Christ, our fore-goer and protector grant us grace steadfastly to
continue in our holy, vocation, and to abide in thy service: that through no
tediousnes or sloth we shrink or cease from the feruentnes of good works and
holy exercises: that we being always ready furnished with watching and prayer,
may steadfastly stand, and with a constant mind despise all bodily prouocations,
showing patience in adversity, not fearing the slanders and despitefull
swords of the people, neither desiring the praise and honor of this world:
that in the only eternal wealth we may set all our trust, and never to go
back from the cross for wealth nor woe: but that under the same banner
through true patience, meekness and obedience, we may finish our life with a
blessed end, Amen.

In the offender that received of Christ the promis of grace, there is set
before us a comfortable example of the mercy and love of God: for, he that
before had been a murderer, and now was become a penitent and repentaunt
person, as soon as he acknowledged the trespass, and was unfeignedly sorry for
his offenses committed, confessing Christ the fountain of life, there was
promised unto him forgiveness of his sins, and entrance into joy. Whereby we
see, that no true penitent comes too late, and that no conversion is
unfruitful, if it be done unfeignedly from out of the heart. Here should we
learn to go into our selves, to acknowledge and confess our sins, to
complain unto GOD with lamentation, and to desire grace at his hand:
affirming also, that we are well worthy of all rebuke and shame, all
punishment, pain, and adversity. Nevertheless, in the consideration of Gods
eternal mercy, we ought not to despair, but to turn us unto the Bishop and
chief shepherd of our souls, and to say: Lord, remember us in thy
kingdom, where thou sit at the right hand of GOD thy Father: so shall we
undoubtedly hear this cheerful voice; To day shall thou be with me in
paradise. This word of consolation, this gracious promise shall strengthen and
comfort our troubled heart in the careful and terrible hour, so that we shall
be able quietly to die, forasmuch as Jesus so friendly speaks to us, and
receives us so graciously.

Great and unsearchable is the mercy of God, that pardons so great a sinner
and offendour, and does not cast him off: neither will he reject our fervent
prayer, which we in true confidence make unto him. He desires not the death
of a sinner, Ezech. 18.
but wills that he convert and live. John. 3
So loved he the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life:
neither came he to call the righteous, Math 9.
but sinners.

O Jesus, be mindful of thy promise, think upon us thy servants: and when
we shall depart hence, speak unto our soul these loving words: To day shall
thou be with me in joy. O Lord Jesus Christ, remember us thy servants that
trust in thee, when our tongue cannot speak, when the sight of our eyes
fails, and when our ears are stopped. Suffer not the old Serpent, and
wicked enemy the Devil, to find any thing in us, though he subtly tempt
us, and craftily lay wait for us. In thee shall we overcome him, for in thee
is our strength: thou take al our sins upon thy self, so that he shall
find nothing in us, but must depart from us with shame. Let them be turned
back, and soon confounded: but let our soul always rejoice in thee, and be
joyful of thy salvation, which thou through thy death have purchased for us.

IT was near hand about the sixth hour. And beside the cross of Jesus stood
Marie his mother, and his mothers sister Marie the wife of Cleophas, and Marie
Magdalene. Now when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple standing whom he
loved, he said unto his mother: Woman, behold thy son. Afterward said he to
the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from that hour forth, the disciple took
her for his own.

Doctrine and fruit.
IN the passion of Christ (as is mentioned before) it ought to be considered,
that he was most extremely reuyled, and suffered most great pain for our
sakes. This now appertains to the increasing of his pain, that he sees his
mother in all adversity, who might not help him, neither he her. Now does
the sword that Simeon spoke of, pierce through her heart.

But Jesus seeing her in sorrow and heaviness, declares his careful love
upon the honor and worthiness of his dearly beloved mother, and gives her
a tutour, such an one as will look unto her. On both the parties may we
perceive great love, which we ought to learn of the Lord, and to exercise
toward those that be committed unto us. Neither is it written of the
Evangelist for naught, that she stood: for thereby we see, that though Marie
was in very great heaviness and sorrow, yet behaueth she not he^selfe
unseemly nor indiscreetly, as carnal men do in adversity many times. She
stands demurely and soberly, being fortified through the strength of the
spirit that stays her. 1. These. 4.
Whereby we may learn when our dear friends die, not to be sorry for them
beyond measure and discretion. But chiefly we learn, when adversity comes,
one to have respect to another, to care for our own, faithfully to commit them
unto others, that one may brotherly and truly look to another: but specially
we ought to be careful for those which are dear unto God.

FRom the sixth hour there was darkness upon all the earth, till about the
ninth hour, and the Sun was darkened. About the ninth hour, Jesus cried
with a loud voice, Ely, Ely, lama, sabacthani? that is, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Some standing there, when they heard it, said: He
calls to Helias. Immediately one of them ran, and took a sponge, and
filled it with vinegar, and put it upon a reed, and gave him to drink. Other
said, let us see whether Helias will come and deliver him.

Doctrine and fruit.
IN all adversity and despite, is all bodily and temporal comfort withdrawn
from Christ, that even when he without all consolation does suffer most
grievous extremity, we might perceive his love. The Lord of all creatures that
lacks nothing, comes into so great affliction and necessity for our sake,
that he complains himself to be forsaken of him, who works all things in
him. This is the voice of the passible mortal flesh, which for us poor
sinners cries upon the cross. His patience is our comfort, his complaint is
our help, his sickness is our health, his pain is our satisfaction. The
Physician came from heaven, that he through great compassion, might give over
him self into exceeding many torments and rebukes. Therefore with the sick, he
is sick: with those that suffer, he suffers. with the sorrowful, he is
sorry: with them that suffer violence, he complains: for his feeble and
weak members, he prays. And the voice of the flesh and of natural sense, is
neither rebellious nor desperate. The flesh feels great pain undeserved,
the innocent holy body suffers sore punishment, the Godhead nevertheless
uses the highest silence: And as for the divine presence, the sensible pain
is not minished by it.

But a merueilous steadfastnes of patience is here declared, to perform the
redemption of mankind. This pain and smart is so great, that even the
Elements which have no sense, declare tokens of their compassion. The Sun
lost his shine, and hid his cheerful light from the wicked rabble, having as
it were a displeasure for the death of their maker. Seeing now that the sun
mourns* and the earth quaketh: much more ought we reasonable men to have
compassion, and to consider the death of our maker.

Behold O faithful servant of God, how thy foregoer in all his punishment and
sorrowful trouble, indureth still mild and patient, and that there is heard no
bitterness out of his mouth. His prayer and complaint sends he up unto his
heavenly Father, neither names he any other, save only God* To him alone
he complains and opens his desolation. Even so ought we to do when
adversity, reproach, or any such thing assaulteth us, we must not indiscreetly
sorrow or be angry, but run straight way unto the Cross, and at the Cross
tarry and abide a little while with the Lord. If thou be forsaken, complain
of thy trouble unto GOD the Father: Consider, that Jesus also for thy sake, was
left in great trouble and anguishe: Learn thou likewise to be soft minded,
and patient, without murmuring or cursing: Keep thee to the only comfort of
God, give over all the joy of this world, so shall thou not be forsaken of
him. All earthly things set apart, turn thou thy mind up into the
Country of Heaven. Take GOD for thy Father, Jesus for thy brother: Thou art of
a noble high kindred, namely, a child of the ever living God.

O merciful father, we cry unto thee in all trouble, and call upon thee
through the crucified Jesus. Suffer us not to sincke in great afflictions, give
us not over unto our own strength: but the more the enemy presses upon us,
the more be thou our assistance: For in all anguishe and trouble, thou art the
right helper, and most faithful friend. If temptation then come upon us by
thy fatherly will, grant us grace O Lord, patiently to bear it, and to lay
the burden upon thy mercy: that in all trouble, we being else destitute of all
consolation, may put our whole trust only in thee. Amen.

AFter this, Jesus knowing that all things were now performed, that the
scripture might be fulfilled, he says: I thirst. So there stood a vessel by,
full of vinegar. Therefore they filled a sponge with vinegar and wound it about
with Isope, and put to his mouth. As Soon as Jesus then received of the
Vinegar, he answered and said: It is finished.

Doctrine and fruit.
ADam satisfied his lust in the forbidden Apple: which noisome lust was ocasion
of our death. But Jesus for the reformation of this concupiscence, suffers
also upon his tongue, to restore us again from the fall, and to conquer us in
this life. His bitter drink is unto us a blessed medicine. Such great
unthankfulness of the Jews was prophesied by King David in the Psalms.
Psalm. ^^.
To him that fed them in the wilderness with bread from heaven, and gave
them water to drink out of the hard stony Rock. Even unto him for a
recompense, they give Vinegar and Gall. Esaias ^.
O the sower and unnatural fruit that the LORD receives of his own
Vineyard, which he had planted and garnished so fair? To us here is prepared
a sovereign medicine against glotonie and all voluptuousnes of the flesh,
through the love whereof God is forgotten and forsaken.

Now when Christ who is the fulfiller of the law, and all the Prophets, had
wholly and fully performed the will of his heavenly father, he says for a
conclusion and end of his life: it is finished, as he would say: Now is
finished all that the old law has written and spoken of me, all that the old
Testament figured with oblations and sacrifices, with glory and beauty in the
Gods service. Now are truly fulfilled the holy prophesies of the Prophets, and
the long wished desires of the holy old Fathers. Now is wrought and
performed all that belonged and concerned the redemption of mankind. It is
all (as it was promised of God) concluded with an honorable blessed end. And
look what is behind, shall undoubtedly be fulfilled in due time. I have
accomplished the commandment of my Father, who sent me into this world: the
work that he gave me to do, John. 17.
have I finished. What could I do more for thee, O my people, that I have not
done? Upon the sixth day, he finished the work of the creation of the world:
And now upon the sixth day and age of the world, he perfourmeth the blessed
work of man's redemption. Upon the sixth day he created man, and made him of
the mould of the earth: Upon the sixth day he restored him again, and
delivered him with his holy blood. Thus all things are finished: the great
work of his mercy and most excellent love, is accomplished: the way unto
heaven is opened: and the devils power is broken.

In such hope ought we valiantly to travail at this time in this unconstant
world, and not to let fall the work of God that is begun: but by his
assistance to bring it unto a blessed end, and stoutly to endure therein. It
is well-nie come to the point, that all shall be finished: the evening and end
of our life comes on apace, wherein we may say with glad hearts, as Christ our
foregoer did: It is all finished.

Wherefore dear brethren, let us ever most diligently and earnestly walk in
the way of the truth, and of commendable virtues begun, exercising our selves
in righteousness. We must not think otherwise but to have battle against vice,
against the flesh, the world, and Satan. Daily go we on a pace toward death,
in hope to attain eternal life. O that we might say with Paul: I have fought a
good fight, 2. Tim. 4.
I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith! We must suffer and have
travail yet a little season, the time of our deliverance will shortly be here.

O Lord Jesus, direct thou all our works according to thy good pleasure,
illuminate and purify our minds and thoughts. Teach us, how we ever to the
praise and honor of thy holy name, may meekly begin, diligently do, and
blessedly end all our works and enterprises. O give us grace, faithfully to
labor in the Vineyard of the Lord: that the heat and travail drive us not
back, that we faint not: that in the schole of heavenly exercise, we may
steadfastly endure till we give up the ghost: and that through thy mercy,
after many commendable battails, and long striving, we may say in the last
hour of our life: It is all finished. Vouchsafe thou to be the final
occasion of our whole life, and of all our woorkings: so shall it follow, that
thou will be also our eternal reward, joy, and salvation. Amen.

ANd Jesus criyng with a loud voice, said: Father, into thy hands I commit my
spirit. And when he had thus said, he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE life of all living dies after the flesh, through the painful torment of
death does Jesus depart: But by his death he opens unto us the way of life,
and takes from us euarlasting death. This is a precious, dear, and victorious
death, which has slain our death, and conquered us life again. Let this
death evermore continue in our hearts, and let our death be considered in the
consideration of his death. This shall bring us comfortable trust and hope,
when our death strives in us, so that we shall neither be afraid, nor
despair, if we steadfastly believe that Christ died for us, and that he
through his death, has opened unto us everlasting life.

Let us with devout hearts consider the death of him that has redeemed us,
and restored us again. The gracious innocent Lord Jesus dies miserable and
naked, so poor, so destitute as no man else: And yet unto God is none so dear,
although of men he he most vilely entreated. This is even the reward of the
world, to despise the children of God, and to recompense evil for good. If the
like happen unto us, we must not think it strange, for the servant is not
above the Lord. The Lord hangs on the cross, hard pierced, not only with
nails, but also with ardent love toward us: sore beaten and hurt in every
place, without succor, without help, without comfort, even as a dead man, who
is forgotten and out of mind. Ponder well, O thou good servant of Christ, who
and how great he is, that crying with a loud voice, gives up the ghost:
Verily even the son of GOD, as Centurio likewise does testify.

O dear brethren, let us consider, how great our sins are, for the which the
innocent son of God dies. Justly ought all the world to be dead unto us in
Christ, and we unto the world. And what is our life but a blessed death? He
that learneth not to die in his life, is afraid when the hour of death
comes. Every day go we one days journey unto death: therefore ought we so
to watch, so to speak, and so to work, as if we would die even now out of
hand. Before death we must learn to die, least he suddenly take hold upon
us, and make us afraid. Death unto those that faithfully believe, is through
the death of Christ, become the gate to life, for their comfort and strong hope
is in the words of Jesus, John. 11,
when he says: he that believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live Item: who so hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, John. 3.
has everlasting life.

In this promise ought we to live and die, casting away all impediments and
such things as hinder us from his love, being with heart and mind separated
from the world, and undefiled from the filthiness thereof.

Out of the passion of Christ, we must pick out unto our selves comfortable
help and medicine, so that obediently in all patience we offer up our selves
unto our heavenly father, committing our souls into his hands. In life and in
death, let the death of Christ be our comfort, and let us set it against al
fearful temptations, and between the wrath of God and our sins.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who in the feeble nature of man have suffered death for us
unworthy sinners, grant us grace, fervently in our hearts to bear the pain
and love of thy most bitter death, and through the subduing and ouer-comming of
al vice and wickedness, to use and exercise our selves daily, in following thy
footsteppes and dying with thee: And when the end of our life draws nie, that
we then may depart in thy mercy and grace, and receive the joy of paradise.
Assist thou us when we die, and defend us from the old enemy, whom thou
through thy death have overcome. O Father, we commit our spirit into thy
hand, thou have redeemed us O God of truth. Let these be our last words, when
we depart hence. Amen.

AND behold the veil of the temple rent into two pieces, from above till
beneath: and there was an earthquake: the stones claue asunder: the graves
opened: they that had slept rose up, and went out of the graves, and came after
his resurrection into the holy City, and appeared unto many. The captain,
and they that were with him which kept Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and
that he gave up the ghost with such a cry (and other things that there
happened) they were afraid very sore, and said: Verily, this was Gods Son.
Centurio likewise praised God, and said: Verily this was a righteous man. And
all the people that were there and saw it, smote upon their breasts and
returned.

Doctrine and fruit.
THe Jews always required tokens of Christ, and of such there happened many now
in the death of the Lord: for the very earth quaketh at their wickedness and
blaspheming of God: the hard stony rocks with their cracking and cleaving
asunder, express a lamentation on their makers behalf: the veil in the
temple renteth, for a declaration, that the old covered things in the old
Testament are laid away, and the hid significations of Christ expressed and
opened: for he is the holy true oblation, that takes away the sins of the
world: he is the undefiled lamb of God: he is the true high Priest, Heb. 10.
that enters within the veil into the sanctuary, for the way of holy things
is opened through his blood: he is the high Priest that once entered in, and
with one only sacrifice does perfectly cleanse and sanctify. The graves
opened for an evidence of his resurrection. Centurio knowledgeth that, which
the hard hearted Jews would not confess.

O good faithful believers: let us not be harder than the stones: let our
hearts rent asunder in repentance and sorrow for our sins, that we may enjoy
the fruit of the Lords death.

ANd a far of stood all his acquaintance, among whom were many women, that
came up from Galilee, and followed him, and ministered unto him: among whom was
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less, and Ioses, and the
mother of Zebedes children, with many other that were come to Jerusalem.

The Jews then, because it was the Sabbath even, that the bodies should not
remain on the cross upon the Sabbath day (for that was the great Saboth day)
besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken
down. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that
he was dead already, they brake not his legs, but one of the soldiers with
a spear thrust him into the side, and forthwith came there out blood and
water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true. And he knows
that he says true, that ye also might believe. These things were done, that
the Scripture might b^e fulfilled: Exodus 12. Zach. 11.
Ye shall not break a bone of him. And again, another Scripture says: They
shall look on him whom they pierced.

Doctrine and fruit.
OVt of the side of him that sleeepeth upon the cross, runs the fountain of
wholesome water, with the which our uncleanness is washed away, and the whole
world sprinkled, purified, and cleansed therewith. The heart is opened and
wounded, love flows out, the blood gusheth forth, to the washing away of all
our sins. This is the true stony rock, which being smitten upon, gives water
unto our thirsty souls: like as Eve was taken and fashioned out of the rib
and side of her husband that slept: so is the holy Church, the spouse of
Christ, Ephesians. ^.
shapen out of the side of her husband. This gate is opened wide to all
faithful believers: he that hides himself in this hole, is sure from all
hurt and harm. Of this holy and godly fountain, who so drinks once, or
takes a draught of the holy love, does forthwith forget all his adversities
and griefs, and shall be whole from all wicked heat of temporal lusts and
bodily prouocations: fervently shall he be kindled in love and desire of
eternal things, and shall be replenished with the unspeakable goodness of
the holy Ghost: and in him shall be a fountain and well of living water,
John. 7.
flowing into eternal life.

By this creeps the poor sinner into the loving heart of Jesus Christ, which
with exceeding great kindness is pierced through: and there finds he rest and
quietness in the stony rock. Here are opened the conduites and well pipes of
life, the way of our health, wherein we find rest unto our souls, and shadow
for heat and travail: this fountain of grace is never dried up. This is the
well of the godly (...) that flows out of the midst of paradise, to wate^
the whole earth, to moisture the dry hearts, to wash away sin.

Out of this plentiful well, ought we with great desire to draw and drink,
that from henceforth we live not in our selves, but in him who for our sakes
was wounded so deep. Our heart must we give wholly unto him, that has opened
his heart so wide. His heart and ours must be all one. Nothing requires he of
us but the heart. Son (says he) give me thy heart. Our heart must we give to
the Lord, not to the world: to eternal wisdom, not to lightness. There do the
true heardmans sheep find pasture, there are the water brooks of life, there
may they go in and out. Nothing is there upon earth that so kindles,
draws, and pierces the heart of man, as does Christ's love declared upon
the cross. When we thus surrender our heart unto the Lord, when we thus
wholly and fully give over our heart into the Lords hands, that he may keep
and possess it for ever, then have we blessed peace.

O Lord Jesus Christ, draw thou our hearts unto thee, join them together in
inseperable love, that they may fervently burn: that we may abide in thee,
and thou in us, and that the everlasting covenant between us may stand sure
for ever. O wound our hearts with the fiery darts of thy pearcing love. Let
them pierce through all our slothful members and inward powers, that we
being happily wounded, may so become whole and sound. Let us have no lover but
thy self alone, let us seek no joy nor comfort, but only in thee.

Thus have we the passion and death of our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ. Heb.
12.
Now (as Paul says) let us go forth of the tents, unto him that for our
sake is despitefully crucified without the City of Jerusalem, and let us
help him to bear his rebuke, giving him thanks and praise for his great
love. In his death stands our life, for in his death is our death slain: the
sting of death and firm is taken away. Here find we true life and eternal
salvation: here sin is forgiven, and pardon granted A poena and culpa: here
mercy is denied unto no man, for the virtue and merits of the Lords holy
passion is bottomless. Through his shame comes eternal honor and glory
unto us. His passion is the wholesome plaster for all wounds: his cross the
overthrow of all enemies, and victory against all vice.

From our whole hearts therefore ought we to rejoice in the great and blessed
fruits of thy holy passion.

O Lord Jesus, whilst we are in this feeble life, grant us so to live, that
we may direct all our works, desires, and intentes, according to thy godly
will and pleasure: that this our temporal course may be found and finished
in thy grace: that after the ouercomming of all temptations and careful
things, we may come to the reward of eternal salvation. Teach thou us daily to
die, and by the spirit to subdue the flesh: that when the flesh corrupts, the
spirit may be taken to eternal rest. Grant us grace, chearefully and
continually to cleave unto thy holy cross: O give us blessed tears of true
repentance, while the door of grace stands open: grant that we may
steadfastly and blessedly finish the thing which commendably is begun.

Let our daily exercise be in the confideration of the passion of Christ, let
him be our mirror continually: let us not shrink from the cross, but endure
with Christ in life and death: with him on the cross, with him in the grave
and death, so shall we continue in rest, peace, and quietness: that when Christ
our life shall appear, we may rise up with him in glory. God the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, grant this unto us all. Amen.

THE BVRIALL OF JESUS CHRIST, OVT of the holy Evangelists.
NOW when it was late, Math. 27. Mark 15. Luke 23. John. 19.
for as much as it was the day of preparation before the Sabbath, there came a
rich man of Arimathia, named Joseph, such a principal and famous Senator, as
was just and righteous. The same had not consented to their counsel and
doings: for he also was one of those that waited for the kingdom of God, a
disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews. Boldly went he in unto
Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. But Pilate wondered, if he were now dead
already. And when he had learned of the Captain that it was, he granted him
the body of Jesus, and commended it to be given him. Joseph had bought a white
linen cloth, and took down the body of Jesus, John. 19.
and wrapped it in the fair linen cloth. There came also Nicodemus (who was
come to the Lord before by night) and brought mirrhe and Aloes upon an hundred
pound, mixed together. So taking the body of Jesus, they wound it with clothes,
and prepared it with sweet ointments according as the manner of the Jews was to
bury. And by the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in
the garden a new sepulcher. There Joseph laid Jesus in his own new sepulcher,
which he had caused to be hewn out of a rock, into the which no man had yet
been laid. Forasmuch then as it was the Jews day of preparing, the sepulcher
being at hand, they laid Jesus into it, and Joseph weltred a great stone before
the entrance of the sepulcher and went his way.

Now follows the doctrine and contemplation.
IN the former little Book, we have heard of the passion of Christ. Now if
our great sin put us in fear, making our conscience unquiet, and press us
with the terror of everlasting death and damnation, we ought to remember,
that the lamb of GOD being slain and hanged up upon the Cross for our
sins, has himself satisfied for them all, and washed them clean away.
This holy sacrifice was offered unto God the father for our welfare, and even
the same it is that has taken away the sin and wickedness of all the world.

Whatsoever is read and spoken concerning the passion of Jesus Christ, it is
altogether done for our eternal wealth and comfort. Now is it described of the
holy Evangelists, with what honor and glory his holy body was buried: and
that not of mean persons, but of noble and famous just men, Joseph and
Nicodemus, who while Christ yet lived, favored him and were secretly his
Disciples. But now after his death, they step forth somewhat more stoutly and
boldly, begging of Pilate the body of Jesus, to bury it. In the which act, is
declared their worthy and valiant belief and love unto the Lord Jesus. For
their bodies, their estimation and goods must they needs put in ieopardy, and
procure unto themselves the hatred and displeasure of all the world, if they
honorably bury him, who in his life time was taken to be an evil doer, a
deceiuer, a sedicious murderer, and so was condemned unto death. But thus it
pleases God, in weakness: 1. Cor. 1. John 12.
to declare his own strength and glory: Thus the dead wheat corn brings
forth fruit in the death of Christ, and thus appears the power of his death.
For though he verily and truly died as touching the body, yet after the
spirit, and in mighty power, he lives* yea he himself is the life of all
things.

This is the power and fruit of his passion, when a mighty and strong spirit
does exercise it self in faithful believing hearts. They that before were
ashamed to go openly unto the Lord, step now forth manfully, all fearefulnes
set apart, ieoparding their bodies and goods. For besides that they put
themselves in peril of loosing their life and estimation, they bestow also
great cost in linen cloth, and in costly sweet ointment. For they bury not
Jesus as an evil doer, but as an honorable man and friend of God, according to
their custom. Lo, what a thing it is, to cleave somewhat unto Christ, how
feeblie soever it be done: it brings alwaie great fruit in his time. No
man therefore ought to be rejected that cleaves any thing unto Christ, and
earnestly seeks him. Faith is strengthened in affliction and adversity, the
death of Christ gives power unto the fearful. In death begins his honor
and glory to appear, there are all things fair and beautiful. Centurio
gives testimony, and makes an honorable confession, and so do they that
were under him.

Necessary it was we should believe and confess that Jesus verily died upon
the cross: therefore do the Evangelists describe it so perfectly, how his
body was taken down from the Cross by Joseph, and was laid in the Sepulcher:
To the intent that we also might believe and confess, that he has broken the
bands of death, and is from death mightily risen again. For life might not be
holden captive in death, neither might death with the rules thereof always
bind him, that of all things is the life, in whom we live, move, and have
our being.

Here we must learn to know the eternal infallible foresight and providence
of God, who for his anointed, appoints before hand an honorable Sepulcher,
and moves the hearts of his elect to bury the body of Jesus, which else
undoubtedly had been vilely cast out, and remained still unburied. How be it
his burial and rest must needs be honorable, as the Prophet says, Esa. 11.
For when he by death had finished the course of his life, and the work of
his father, this rest appertained to his honor, and the father heard him as
he prayed before: Father, (make thy son honorable) or glorify thy son.
John 17.
This began in the burial, there was the fair white linen cloth, the new
sepulcher, the honorable men and excellent dead buriers, as witnesses of his
death, there were the hundred pounds of precious and costly ointment. All these
things were evidences of a glorious, new, and immortal life, which Christ had
in his body as the firstling of his deed, and as we also shall have according
to our measure. The sepulcher is new: partly to prevent all wrong suspicion,
(for if any man had lain in that sepulcher before, it might easily have been
suspected or talked, that Christ was not risen again from the dead, but some
other) partly to declare the newness of life in Christ, and in those that are
his, as it is said before.

By this also we see into what poverty Christ submitted himself: he that in
his life time had neither house nor place where to lay his head, is now
covered with strange cloth, and laid in a strange Sepulcher. In the which
thing (though Christ's body was alwaie vncorrupt) we are taught fruitfullye to
consider the corruption of our body. We are earth, and to the earth must we
yield and pay earth again. Ashes we be, and into ashes we must return.
Why brag we then? Why are we proud and high minded, seeing that shortly we
shall become foul doong and carrion? Why have we such desire to the wicked
world, considering it casts us out so vilely? We should alwaie remember,
that within a small short time, we shall be laid down into a foul pit. There
is the harborow of all flesh: There lie the rich and poor together in one
bed: There is no difference between noble and base of blood: There, neither
goods help the rich, nor subtle craft, the witty. There the tender is worms
meat, and he that a little while ago went bragging up and down in costly
apparel, is now an ugly smell to the nose: There the hardy Giant, is feign
to play stoop gallaunts part. The praise and commendacion of such as are puffed
up in foolish pride, departs as the dust before the wind. Thus passes away
all mankind and all flesh falls to the place whence he came, being dissolved
by reason of original sin.

Wherefore let us learn in this time so to live, and so to subdue the flesh
through the spirit, that when the flesh corrupts, Romans 6.
our soul may be taken into eternal peace and rest. For all we that be
baptized into Christ Jesus, are baptized into his death, being buried with him
rhrough baptism into death: that as Christ was raised up from the dead through
the glory of his father, so we likewise might walk in the newness of life.
For if we be grassed in him through the similitude of his death, we shall
assuredly also be partakers of his resurrection: knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be emptied, and that we
should serve sin no more, for he that is dead, is made righteous from sin, if
we now be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live with him.
Look upon the whole sixte Chapter to the Romans.

We must die from the world, and from our own flesh, that the world may be
crucified, and dead unto us, as we unto the world. The old Adam, who in us did
live and rule, must be subdued and mortified, that Christ only may live and
reign in us. We must bury our bodies with mirrhe and Aloes, that is, with
lamentation and sorrow for our sins, with weeping with fasting, and with
abstinence, which works of repentance are bitter unto the body. But like as
those bitter things, Aloes and mirrhe, do keep the body from corruption, so
the cross and adversity sent of God and borne for his sake, preserves our
flesh from sin.

If we thus die with Christ from the world, and be buried in his death, we
shall rise again to a new life, here and in the world to come: and so as for
death, we need not be afraid of it. For the sepulcher is new, and lies in the
garden: which notes unto us, the return to the pleasant garden of paradise,
which is opened us through the death of Christ, for he as a guide is entered
in before us, John. 14. Heb. 9.10. that we also after a new sort might escape
from death, and rise again to a new life. For in the death of Christ, is death
killed, overcome, and wholly nenued, and as much as altered into a sleep. For
we live unto God, and our bodies (as the Scripture testifies) shall also live
again. And this is the cause that the Scripture affirms those which are dead
in Christ, to be asleep. Esaias 26. 1 Thessalonians 4.

Before time had death mightily and openly reigned, even over those also that
had not sinned like unto Adam (yet had they put on Adams image, and were
therefore subdued unto the curse) but when the second Adam, 1. Cor. 15
namely Christ, appeared, and purchased life again for mankind, through the
death of his flesh, destroying the dominion of death, and rising from death
again. Then was death renewed and changed, and became like unto a sleep, for
it destroys us not for ever, but is a gate and entrance into a better and
eternal life, therefore have we a much more perfect hope of the resurrection in
Christ, than they of old, which therefore buried the bodies so costly and
honorably, because they hoped in the resurrection to come. As for us, we must
bestow such cost upon Christ in his members, clothing and feeding the poor,
and being ready also to loose all things for his sake.

Grant unto us, O God, that as concerning the world and the old life, we may
die with thy son our head, and be truly buried in his death, that with him
and in him we may rise again to a new life* that we weak and feeble, may with
Joseph and Nichodemu^ grow in virtue and stedfastnes, daily laying somewhat to
the heap of godly exercises, being ever still renewed in the spirit, that we in
our hearts laying up Christ who dyed for our sakes, may so in thankful
remembrance bury him, to the intent that our soul and body may still remain
pure and unspotted, until the coming of our Lord, Amen.

MArie Magdalene and Mary Ioses, sitting over against the sepulcher, beheld
where Jesus was laid. For certain women there were, which coming with him
from Galilee, and following him, beheld the sepulcher, and how his body was
laid. Those returned back, and prepared sweet odors: but upon the saboth they
rested, because of the commandment.

The next day after the day of preparation, the high Priests and Pharesies
came unto Pilate, and said: Sir, we remember that this deceuer said while he
was yet alive, that after three days he should rise again. Cause therefore
the grave to be kept until the third day, least his disciples happily come
and steal him away, and say unto the people, that he is risen from the dead,
and so shall the last error be worse than the first. Pilate said unto them:
Ye have watchmen, go and keep it as ye know. They went and kept, and provided
the sepulcher with watchmen, and sealed the stone.

Doctrine and fruit.
HEre we learn to have an earnest, diligent, and fervent love unto Christ,
hearing with what zeal and feruentnes, that devout women (...) unto him, and
serve him in life and death. Him whom they loved in life, will they not
forsake in death, but cheerfully with constant minds they ieopard their life
and goods. What avails us then, that we cannot show friendship, love and
service unto Christ, as well as these women? Seeing we have not Christ always
bodily with us, who now being in his kingdom, needs no corporal
ministration and service, we ought to bestow the same upon his poor ones,
whom we have always with us. Herein ought we to spare neither goods nor
money, to serve and please Christ, who unto death did ieopard and give his body
and life for us.

But like as in the women there was a devout gesture and good mind toward
Christ: so in the Jewish priests and pharesies there was found a great malice
and hatred against Christ. They were not satisfied in persecuting him while he
was alive, but undertook also to hinder his resurrection. Yet God by his
wisdom uses their wickedness to the glory of Christ, that even the enemies
themselves (albeit against their will) must bear record of his burial and
resurrection in that they keep the grave with watch men, and seal the stone.
The truth is immortal, the more it is oppressed, the more it breaks forth.
Therefore ought we to beware, that we never go about to hinder the truth: for
if we should so do, we should both labor in vain, and procure unto our selves
everlasting hurt.

THE RESVRRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST, out of the holy Evangelists.
AND when the Sabbath was now past, Mark 16.
even the Sabbath day at even, Marie Magdalene, Marie James and Salome, bought
sweet spices, that they might come and anoint Jesus. Luke 24. Math. 28. John.
20.
The evening when the sabbath is ended, and the first day dawneth after the
Sabbath (namely, the first day of the week) while it was yet dark, and the
Sun brake forth and began to arise, the women came to the Sepulcher, to see it.
But there happened first a great earthquake: for the Angel of the Lord came
down from heaven, and went and rolled back the stone from the mouth of the
sepulcher, and sat upon it. His countenance was like the lightening, and his
raiment white as snow. And for fear of him the keepers were astonished, and
became as dead men. And behold, some of them that had watched the sepulcher,
came into the City, and told the high Priests all the things that had
happened. Then gathered they themselves with the Elders, and took counsel,
and gave large money unto the soldiers, saying: Say ye, that his Disciples came
by night, and stole him away while ye slept. And if this come to the rulers
ears, we will persuade him, and save you harmless. So they took the money,
and did as they were taught. And this saying is noised among the Jews unto
this day.

Now as the women were in the way going, they said among themselves: Who will
roll us the stone away from the door of the Sepulcher? (for it was a very
great one) and as they looked, Math. 28.
they saw that the stone was rolled away. Then went they into the Sepulcher,
and found not the body of the Lord Jesus, but saw a young man sitting at the
right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were afraid. But the
Angel said unto them: Fear not, I know whom ye seek. Ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, that was crucified: He is not here, he is risen as he said.
Behold the place where they laid him. But go ye and tell his Disciples and
Peter, that he is risen again from the dead. Behold he goes before you into
Galilee, as he said unto you. Lo I have told you.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead is very diligently and
perfectly described of the four Evangelists, for right profitable and
necessary is it for the strengthening and stablishing of our belief in
Christ. And whereas in the description of this history they speak not all
alike, the same happens to our wealth through the ordinance of the holy
Ghost, that we should exercise our faith therein, and apply our diligence,
perfectly to learn and comprehend the same Resurrection of Christ: For where
that is right conceived and believed, there is faith perfect. The Evangelists
now in describing Christ's Resurrection, do most of all declare, to what high
honor Christ came after death, and that in one order and degree, according as
our belief and weakness increases and grows toward perfection.

At the first, is faith in us feeble and imperfect, but through the grace of
him that has given it, it daily grows. Very hard also is it for our
natural reason, to receive and believe the resurrection of the dead: therefore
do the Evangelists right diligently and with many words set forth the same
resurrection of Christ, that our belief therein might be assured and steadfast.
For whosoever truly and constantly believes the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
is ready and prepared to believe all that concerns Christ. Neither is there
any thing that makes a man more joyful then when he believes, that at the
coming of the Lord, he shall rise again, and receive a glorified body after
Christ, and with Christ. What can be tedious to such a faithful believing
man, when he beholds so high a reward from God. Diligently therefore ought
we to hear, what the holy Evangelists write of his resurrection, and to give
credence to the witnesses that saw it.

First, we hear again the great zeal, and the fervent love and diligence of
these devout women, in that they desire to show honor unto the Lord being
dead: but the Angel a messenger of his resurrection, commands them to
declare this joy unto the Disciples, and to get them unto the Lord now being
alive. Heavenly is the messenger and proclaimer of the resurrection, for it
passes far all natural reason and all flesh. Therefore are the women also
afraid of him, and at the fair brightness of his countenance and apparel. For
our feeble flesh is not able to sustain the glorious shine of the heavenly
light and godly clearenes, but is afraid at it, and fears. Nevertheless God
by his Angel does right soon comfort the women's weakness, takes from them
their fear, speaks lovingly unto them, makes them Apostles, that is,
messengers and proclaimers of the ioifull resurrection. So little does God
reject our weakness, that he makes even women to be the declarers of his
resurrection: for he ever delights of the last to make the first. Forasmuch
then as they were the beginners of death in sin, they are here first before
the Apostles, chosen to be declarers of that immortal life, which even out of
death is come forth unto us in Christ.

As Christ with the earthquake died on the cross, so rises he with the
earthquake, which also was heard in the sending of the holy Ghost. This
signified, that through his death and resurrection, and by the power of the
holy Ghost (when the Apostles declare the same in the world) the whole world
should be moved and changed. And though the ungracious falsehood of the high
Priests, undertook with their lies, to hide and suppress the truth of
Christ's resurrection, yet God did direct it an other way. Loo^ ^her with they
minded to oppress the truth (...) with the same have they helped to set it
forth: and thereby was it signified, how the Jewish people should be blinded
and refused. And forasmuch as they had no love unto the truth, but rejected
it, it it was much that they should be blinded and darkened in lies, and that
there should error and blindnsse enough fall upon them.

The Angel is not ashamed to call Jesus the crucified, for the cross is the
token of Christ's victory: The cross is the glorious and victorious token of
the faithful.
through the cross began his honor and glory: through the cross was death
overcome: the cross is the glorious token of all Christians: In the cross is
the exaltation of Christ the head, and of all his members. We ought not
therefore to be ashamed of the cross of our Lord which was crucified: for
therein stands our health, life, and resurrection, all our reioicing and
glory.

Commission is given, that unto Peter before other disciples, they should
declare the Lords resurrection: that from the fear wherein he stood by reason
of the denial, he might be delivered, and so comforted.

He sends them to Galilee (thither will he go before them) that they might be
safe from the fear of the Jews, which at that time raged horribly.

Grant us (O God) an earnest zeal and love unto the poor, in whom we may
highly honor Jesus thy son. And whereas we through the weakness of the flesh are
inclined to be faint hearted, and not able of our selves to behold the bright
shine and clearnes of his glorious Resurrection, strengthen and comfort thou us
by thy holy Angel, that we may constantly believe the Resurrection of thy
son: whereby (...) receiving an holy hope of the life to come, (...)
immortal Resurrection of our bodies, may be (...) also to comfort and
strengthen others that be (...). O make thou this hard earth of our flesh to
(...) and move through the power of thy spirit, to holy fruitful pennaunce,
amendment and confession of our life. Preserve us, that we never resist the
truth, nor take part with lies* Grant us love unto the truth, keep us from
error and blindness. Let our joy be in the cross of Jesus Christ thy son,
and our life in his resurrection: that we with him, and in him may truly rise
again, hereto a godly righteous and sober life, and in the world to come to
the blessed life everlasting, Amen.

Mark 16.
AND the women went out quickly, and fled from the sepulcher, for they trembled
and were amazed: Neither said they any thing to any man, for they were
afraid. Mary Magdalen ran, and came to Simon Peter and to the other Disciple
who Jesus loved, and said unto them: John 20.
They have taken the Lord away out of the Sepulcher, and we wot not where they
have laid him. Then went Peter forth, and the other Disciple, and came to the
Sepulcher. They both ran together, and the other Disciple out-ranne Peter,
and came sooner to the sepulcher. And he stouped down, and saw the linen
clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then came Simon Peter following him, and
went into the Sepulcher, and saw the linen clothes lying, and the napkin that
was about his head not lying with the linen cloths, but (...) together in a
place by it self. There went in (...) Disciple, which came first to the
Sepulcher, Angus, he believed that the body was taken away.
(...) and believed. For as yet they knew not the (...) he should rise again
from death. And the (...) Disciples went away again unto their own home. But
Marie stood without at the Sepulcher weeping. And as she wept, she bowed
herself into the Sepulcher, and saw two Angels in white, sitting the one at
the head, the other at the feet, where they had laid the body of Jesus. And
they said unto her: Woman why weepest thou? She said unto them: For they have
taken away my Lord, and I wot not where they have laid him. When she had
thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not
that it was Jesus. Then said Jesus unto her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom
seek thou? She supposing that he had been a gardener, said unto him: Sir,
if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
fetch him. Jesus said unto her: Marie. She turned her self, and said unto him,
Raboni: which is to say, Master. Then said Jesus unto her: Touch me not, for I
am not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brethren, and say unto them: I
ascend up unto my father and your father, unto my God, and your God. Marie
Magdalene came, and told the disciples (which had been with the Lord, and now
were weeping and mourning) that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken
such things unto her. But though they heard that he was alive, and that Mary
had seen him, yet they believed not.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE Evangelists do most diligently set forth to us the resurrection of Christ,
as a thing necessary profitable and joyful unto all faithful believers. For
in the resurrection we see how Christ (...)* and what hope we have in him. But
this resurrection do the Evangelists teach, according as man's (...) ^standing
may comprehend it. For if Christ had suddenly at once opened himself to his
Disciples, so that other exhortations and warninges were not gone before, then
should they have taken it but for a plain fantasy and vision, Math. 14.
as they did when the Lord appeared unto them upon the water. Therefore the
Evangelists describe the matter very distinctly and sundry ways, so that no
man can be able to suspect any deceyte. First, how the women and men came to
the sepulcher, looked and went in, and how they viewed every thing thoroughly,
not once, but often and many times: the clothes wherein the Lord was wrapped,
the head kerchiefe, every thing folden together in his several place: and
how they saw and perceived, that the body was not there, that the Sepulcher
was open, the stone rolled away, and how the Angels and heavenly spirits
testified, that he was risen again. Yet for all this, they are weak and
believe it not steadfastly, but be as yet in a doubt. Thus GOD permits them
to waver, and to be feeble of belief, and does not thoroughly persuade them
forthwith, and that altogether for our sakes.

He might well suddenly have certified and assured Thomas and them at the
first, but thus is it better both for them and us. For the more a sick man
feels his own disease and wounds, the more acceptable is the medicine unto
him: The weaker that our belief is, the more cause have we to call upon God
for the increase of faith: the more weakness we find in our selves, the
farther are we in debt and the more bound to praise God. When he makes us
strong, and seeing it is his only strength that staieth us, we ought the less
to rejoice in our own. Christ in his life time had often told them before, Math.
20.
of his resurrection, but their mind was so dull, that they understood it not,
neither perceived they that great mystery. The resurrection of the bodies they
could not comprehend, but always understood it otherwise There was much written
thereof, and that with evident words, in the Scripture (as in the sixteenth
Psalm, and in the figure of Jonas) and yet could not they understand it. Which
thing nevertheless to believe, Christ had given them occasion sundry wais: As
in that he raised up Lazarus and other which were dead, and made them alive
again. John. 11.
In all his preaching and doctrine he declared, that this was unto him in no
wise impossible, by reason of the divine power working in him. For all this,
the disciples are yet so weak that they understand it not all.

Therefore does the godly wisdom lead them still by little and little, to make
them stronger, declaring unto them certain assured evidences: as that the
body was not in the sepulcher, but that the clothes lay there wrapped together:
for these were undoubted tokens, that he was risen up again. For if any man
had taken him out of the sepulcher (as Magdalen thought) he could not have had
so much time and leisure, as to loose up the bands, and to undo the clothes
from the body, but had taken and carried away the clothes and body together.
For the clothes did cleave hard fast to the body, partly by reason of the
(...)* and partly through the Aloes and Myrrh than the body was dressed
withal. But for all this, they are weak still, and in doubt, until such time
as the Lord himself does strengthen them. Therefore even Marie also, as
fervent as she is, judges not the body to be risen again, but to be
stolen and privily carried away: thus God opens himself unto whom and when
he will, for though we see sometimes many great and wonderful works, though
we read and hear much of the Scriptures, yet remains our heart still
ignorant, neither does the doctrine take effect, till Christ open it, and till
he himself be schoolmasters within.

Who so would rather have another and higher sense or exposition than this, it
may be understood that Christ appears unto those which mourn and weep, and
stand in death with Christ in subduing of the flesh, in mortifying of the
body, in abiding of the cross. For while they be in adversity under the
cross, and buried with Christ, the greatness of the trouble causes them to
think, that Christ is not risen again, that is, they have nothing but
heaviness, and sorrow. Notwithstanding Christ appears unto them, comfort
and refreshes them, and makes them partakers of his resurrection and joy.

Here may we perceive and see a great desire and love unto Christ, Luke. 7.
in the disciples that run, but specially in Marie Magdalene: for seeing that
much (...) forgiven her, therefore was her love exceeding (...) Peter also and
John, which were more fervent (...) others in the love of Christ, and drew nee^
(...) others did, when the Lord was taken, although the one fled, and the
other denied him: therefore unto them, as to the principal, was this opened,
before others.

Marie loved Christ very fervently, for many sins were forgiven her, The
number of seven for many.
many devils and vices were driven out of her, therefore unto her did Christ
first appear. The cross and trouble was not able to bring Christ out of her
heart, Mark. 16
it could not quench her love unto Christ: the seed of faith was in her heart,
it had taken root, although it were not yet ripe. Very earnestly and with
great diligence seeks she him whom she loves, declaring her feruentnesse
by her weeping, and her zeal by tarrying still at the sepulcher, when the two
Apostles were gone away already. The Lord therefore forsakes her not, but
instructs her, and comfort her by the Angel, appears unto her unknown,
at last talks with her, and makes himself known unto her.

The Angels which are ministers for the wealth of the elect, dissuade her from
weeping and mourning, and bring her tidinges of great joy: for herein now is
no just cause to weep, but rather to rejoice, seeing that Christ has overcome
death for us, delivering and setting us free from the power thereof, and
placing us in eternal life. Like as the Angels at the birth of Christ in this
mortal life, did bring tidinges of joy: so do they here also when Christ is
risen again into an immortal life. And hereunto also serves the brightness of
the countenance, and whitenes of the clothes: for all such are tokens of joy.

But some man might marvel, why Christ will not suffer Marie to touch him,
saying: he would afterward be touched of the other women, of the Disciples,
and of Thomas, yea he provoke Thomas and the Disciples thereto.

It seems that Marie, with the ointment which she brought with her, thought
to anoint the body of Christ (as she did before in his life time) and to
reverence him, and to deal with him as with a mortal man: which thing Christ
forbad her to do. Hereafter shall we hear how he offreth unto his Disciples
his hands, feet, and side, willing them to touch him. But with this
inhibition, and that commandment he has respect to one only thing: namely,
to deliver Marie and the Disciples from unbelief, from weak faith and
doubting. Unto Marie he will say: Touch me not of a carnal devotion, as
though thou would anoint me. I need it no more. As for such corporal
service, it is not necessary to do it unto my body any more. The cause why I
became man, was not that ye should always hang upon my corporal flesh, and
honor me with bodily service. Thou shall now shortly understand, that I have
like power with the father. I am in thy heart, not yet ascended up unto the
father. That is: Thou have as yet no right knowledge of my Godhead, therefore
can thou not now rightly touch me.

Thus learn we also, to know and honor Christ now no more after the flesh,
2. Cor. 5
God is a spirit, with the spirit will h^ be worshipped.
and to show no corporal outward service unto his person. In spirit will he
be worshipped, with the faith and love of the inward mind. If any thing
bodily be done of us, the same should be done unto the poor, and to the
neighbor that has need thereof. Thus may faith and love well use some
outward things, not to do service therewith unto God, but unto our selves,
or to our neighbor As when we take and minister bread and wine about in the
supper, distributing and eating it, the same is not done principally, to the
intent to declare a service unto God: but somewhat to provoke our outward
senses and flesh by the exterior signs, that we may the better consider and
ponder the grace of God declared unto us in the death of Jesus Christ, and that
we may lift up our minds unto Christ the heavenly food and living bread,
which inwardly feeds us with his flesh, and nourishes us with his blood.

Thereto also has our savior Christ instituted the figurative tokens and
sacraments of his grace, to help our infirmity: for Sacraments are gracious
evidences of the faith that men have or should have to God. In the which they
comfortably exercise and practice themselves toward Gods promises, wherein
also they declare the obedience of their inward says, and that they
faithfully believe the words and promises of almighty God. For the token
without belief is nothing profitable, but rather hurtful. All bodyly service
that the flesh imagines pleases not God. He sits at the right hand of
GOD, there ought we to touch him with the lifting up of a faithful heart, and
with the worship which he through his spirit works and directs into us:
for therefore he dyed, rose again, and ascended up into heaven, that he might
fulfill all things, and reign truly and spiritually in our hearts. Our
hearts must we lift up, Col 3. Phil 3.
there as Christ sits at the right hand of God, and our conversation ought
to be in heaven.

Whereas the Lord willed his disciples to touch him, it was done to banish
their doubtfulnesse, and to strengthen their weak faith. Which touching was
not required of them as a worship, but that their flesh through the outward
handling of his body, might be quieted and stilled: and so is it a proof and
testimony (that he verily rose with the former body) rather than a
worshipping or service. Christ did not therefore take upon him his flesh, that
we should alwaie hang and depend thereon, but that we by his humanity, should
ascend up to his godhead: for when we know the high and holy mystery of his
Passion and Resurrection (with the which he has served our turn) we ought
to stir up our minds to know the Godhead, wherein he is like unto the
father.

Therefore unto Marie Magdalene also does Christ speak of ascending up to the
Father, which thing he commands to show the Apostles, as if he would say, now
shortly begins mine honor, that I, as concerning the humanity received,
shall be taken up to the glory, which I have had from everlasting, that is,
the flesh which I have taken upon me for your sakes, shall sit at the right
hand of my Father.

Oh how great a grace is this? Oh how high is the glory that here is
promised unto us in CHRIST? The only begotten son of God, descended and
became man for us, that we (so much as were possible for our nature) should
ascend up unto his Godhead. He descended down low, that when we are
humbled, he might receive and exalte us to his own promotion. He that of
nature is the Lord, took upon him the shape of a servant, that of us which
naturally were bond servants, he might make us Gods children.

Forasmuch then as he became man, to make us Gods, and children of godly
grace. He took upon him that which is ours, to give us and to part with us
that which is his. Psalm. 22.
Therefore calls he us brethren, and makes his own father common unto us,
so that he is also our Father and our God: that same which he has of nature,
does he of grace give unto us. For his spirit bears record unto our
spirit, that we are the children of GOD, Romans ^^
for we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear, but the spirit of
adoption, in the which we cry, Father, Father.

Christ also calls those that be his, John. 15.
not servants, but friends and brethren: he will be our God, and we his
people: Iere. 31.
our father, we his children: and his covenant which he has made with us,
shall be everlasting, for it is sealed and confirmed with the blood of his
only begotten son. Now have we fellowshippe and company with God the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost.

But such grace and glory, is inwardly seen with the eyes of faith, and felt
in the spirit, being hid here in time under the shape of the cross. The
glory of the faithful is hid under the cross.
For Christ does not straight way by and by declare himself openly unto Marie
Magdalene, as he is in his glory: but stands there as a gardener, and
speaks unto her, by the which voice she knows him: he long deferreth the
comfort, permitting her a good while to weep and lament, that the joy and
consolation afterward may be the greater. But the cause why he so long
delaieth his help and comfort from these that be his own, is, that their
inward desires may be the more fervent and earnest, and that he may stir up
and kindle their faith. Now when the fire is kindled enough, then comes he
with his comfort, as it is evident here in Marie Magdalene, and in the woman
of Cananee. Matthew 26.

Moreover, he sends Marie Magdalene from him; to bring the Apostles tidings
of this glorious exaltation, whereas she doubtless had rather have been
longer with him, and to have had the comfortable fruition of the sight of him.
Howbeit he directs her forth, to declare that felicity, and poynteth her to
the work of charitable love, to the service of her neighbor. For here in time
we cannot as yet come to the beholding and sight of God face to face, it shall
first begin after this time. Now while we live here, we must serve our
neighbor in charitable love, and do him good.

O God, strengthen thou our weak faith in the resurrection of thy beloved son:
that by it our consciences being examined, may well answer: Illuminate our
minds, and expel out of us all darkness, through the light and brightness of
the glorious resurrection: Romans 6.
O strengthen our weakness through the power of thy spirit. Raise us from the
death of sin, in the same spirit and power wherein thou have raised up thy
son from the dead. Comfort and strengthen us in adversity, and make us
constaunt therein: that we may preasse through the same in steadfast hope, to
the joyful and blessed resurrection. Kindle in us the fire of thy godly love,
that with earnest and fervent desire we may seek and find thee through
Christ. Withdraw our hearts from all earthly love of creatures, and from
filthiness, up to heauen-ward, where Christ sits at thy right hand, that we
may lead a godly and heavenly life upon earth. Set up the spiritual kingdom
of Christ Jesus in our hearts, that in us thy name may be sanctified and thy
will performed: that we may become thy virtuous children, and never displease
thee our gracious father. that we continuing still in thy merciful covenant, 1.
John. ^.
do never fall away from the company and fellowship of thee and thy son.
And where as thou have given us such knowledge, grace, and understanding,
grant that we may make the same known unto many, being always ready through
charitable love to serve our brethren, Amen.

It follows now further in the history, how the women that first were with
Marie Magdalene at the sepulcher, and being afraid, fled away (no man saying
ought unto them) returned now more stoutly and boldly to the sepulcher, to see
what would come of that wonderful terrible matter.

WHen the women came to the sepulcher and found not the body of Jesus, they
were sore troubled in their minds. And behold, two men stood by them in
shining garments. And as the women were afraid and bowed down their faces to
the earth, they said unto them; Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is
not here, he is risen. Remember how he spoke unto you, when he was yes in
Galilee, saying: that the son of man must be delivered into the hands of
sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. And they remembered
the words of Jesus, and returned from the sepulcher, and told all these things
unto those eleven, and to all the remnant. And as they went to tell his
disciples, Math. 28.
behold, Jesus met them, saying: All hail. And they came and held him by the
feet, and worshipped him. Then said Jesus unto them: Be not afraid. Go tell
my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

But when the women, namely; Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Mary Jacob, and
other that were with them, told these things unto the Apostles, their words
seemed unto them fained things, neither believed they them.

Doctrine and fruit.
LOne is not idle, but diligent and zealous: which thing may well be perceived
in these women, that ran again to the sepulcher, although they had found it
empty before. Gladly would they have found the body, and done reverence to their
Lord, whom they loved. This fervent zeal of the women confounds our coldness
and unmercifulness toward the poor. Often times do they seek him that is
absent, and that with great diligence: we receive him not, when (in the poor)
he comes unto us. No travel, labor, nor cost greeueth them: as for us, we
pity our substance, when we should distribute to the poor which are
Christ's. O that we could rightly consider, how precious a treasure we gather
unto our selves in heaven, when we give of our goods into the hands of the
poor, lending the same unto Christ! Then should not we garnish and build
timber and stone, but the living temples of God, keeping them from wind and
rain, and from decay: namely, that they suffer no extreme poverty, nor be
destitute of help. Such a treasure had Tabitha laid up in store, Acts 9.
for when she died, it was not stones and stocks that commended her benefits,
but the bodies of the widows, they lamented her death, and declared how
merciful she had been.

Christ opens and shows himself unto those that earnestly seek him, and
those he suffers to touch him: to the intent that forasmuch as they must
declare his resurrection to the Apostles, their weak faith must be
strengthened, to know and to be assured that he was verily risen again. For
not only the Angel, but Christ also himself commands them so to do. He
comfort them, and takes from them the fearfulnes and sorrow. Thus we
ought not to doubt, he shall in all adversity and trouble meet us, he shall
cheerfully appear unto us, and with his joyful presence and resurrection
shall he comfort and preserve us.

But we lack an earnest and strong faith: our hearts are slow and cold:
Diligent we be in seeking of temporal things, but godly things we either
despise or neglect. Love has no rest, she cease not to run and seek, till
she find him whom she loves, and when she finds him, she holds him
fast, that she loose him not again: glad is she also, to make others
pertakers of the treasure that she has found.

O God, kindle our cold hearts with the fire of faith and love, that we may
earnestly seek thee: and that when we have found thee, we may fervently
receive and keep thee, and with a right spirit worship thee. Expel all
hardness and ungentleness out of our hearts: make us loving and merciful unto
the poor ones. Take from us the terror of all vndoubtfulnes, unbelief, and
fear of the world, and comfort us in all adversity. Grant us the faith of
thy resurrection, that we despising all transitory things, may set all our
comfort and hope in the blessed resurrection to come, Amen.

Here also we learn, how exceeding weak and ignorant our flesh is, to
receive and believe the truth (...) it of God give not light and strength. For
a^ (...) of the Apostles were illuminated and (...) the holy ghost, they
esteemed the truth (...) Resurrection (opened unto them by the women) to be a
foolish and fained thing. Nevertheless Christ forsakes not those whom he
has once embraced, but still opens himself unto them more and more, to
expel out of them all dubitation and unbelief.

ANd behold, two of them went that same day to a town called Emaus, Luke 24.
which was from Jerusalem about a threescore furlongs, and they talked
together of all these things that had happened. And it chanced, that while
they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near and went with
them: but their eyes were holden, that they should not know him. And he said
unto them: What manner of communications are these, that ye have one to another
as ye walk, and are sad? And the one of them (whose name was Cleophas)
answered and said unto him: Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have
not known the things which have chanced there in these dais? He said unto
them; What things? And they said unto him: Of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
Prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, and how the
high Priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned unto death, and have
crucified him. But we trusted, that it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel. And as touching all these things, to day is even the third day that
they were done. Yea and certain women also of our company made us astonished,
which came early to the sepulchrt, and found not his body, and came saying:
that they had seen a vision of Angels, (...) that he was alive. And certain of
them that (...) went to the sepulcher, and found it even so as the (...) said,
but him they saw not.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE longer the more, is set forth unto us the vnoutspeakable love and trusty
faithfulness of Jesus Christ our lord, who forsakes not those that any thing
love to talk of him. For look whom he admits into his school, those he
teaches still continually (how weak soever they be) until he bring them to
perfect understanding, and expel all doubtfulnes out of their hearts.
Forasmuch now as these his Disciples speak of him in the way, he gets him
to them, albeit he holds their eyes that they know him not: that by the
means thereof, they themselves with their own words might knowledge and
confess their doubtful wavering, and weakness of faith: that they might open
their disease unto him, and he to give a convenient medicine for their
unbelief: that through the long delay, friendly talk, and opening of the
scripture, their hearts and desires might more and more be kindled and set on
fire: that their doubtfulnes might be taken away, and their weak faith
strengthened. For though they held Jesus for a great and principal Prophet,
and and for an innocent good man, yet speak they uncertainly of the matter,
and their heart wauereth: yet were not they assured that he had overcome
death, and by his own death purchased life for all the world, that he was
risen again into an immor^ (...) made us undoubtedly partakers of the (...)
and joyful resurrection, and eternal life in himself.

Now for as much as they gladly talk and willingly hold of him (how feebly
and imperfectly soever it be) yet the gracious and loving Lord approaches
near unto them, and instructs them. It shall never be unfruitful, it shall
never pass without profit, but assuredly do good, where Christ is gladly
and with a good heart spoken of. Where two or three be assembled in his name,
there is he in the midst among them, and infourmeth them. That he does to
the Disciples in the way by mouth, the same declares he always unto us
inwardly by his spirit in our hearts, and outwardly with the scripture and
word, and with the teachings of good godly men. He that well and faithfully
uses the little talent, shall not be denied a greater, if he earnestly desire
it.

Wheresoever he is earnestly and fervently thought upon, and talked of, there
is he present, and instructs and teaches the ignorant. For he is not ashamed
to resort unto those that lack knowledge, and be in error, and to talk with
them.

This lowly and gentle condition ought we to learn of our head, that we
shame not to repair unto such as are not yet right instructed, that we may
infourme them, and commune with them. We should despise no man, that with a
single heart seeks God, though as yet we perceive much wavering and weak
faith in him. For if the eternal (...) was not ashamed to humble himself, and
(...) the ignorant, much more ought we to doo^ ^ing we are neither
sufficiently instructed in the scripture, nor yet diligent and careful to do
that which we know.

Luke. 24.
THen said Jesus unto them: O ye fools and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to
enter into his glory? And he began at Moses and all the Prophets, and
interpreted unto them in all Scriptures which were written of him. And they
drew nigh to the town that they went unto: and he made as though he would
have gone further. And they constrained him, saying: Abide with us, for it
draws toward night, and the day is far passed, and he went in to tarry with
them. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took bread and
blessed it, and brake and gave to them, and their eyes were opened, and they
knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. And they said between
themselves. did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the
way, and opened to us the scriptures? And they rose up the same hour, and
returned again to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them
that were with them, saying: The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto
Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew him
in breaking of bread.

Doctrine and fruit.
CHRIST says, John. 5. Search the Scriptures, (...) they testify of me.
Also, If ye believed Moses, ye should believe me, for he has written of me.
Christ therefore willing to strengthen the weak, and to teach the unlearned,
expounds unto them the Scriptures, beginning at Moses, and so thorough out
all the Prophets. For whatsoever is written in the Scripture concerning the
mercy, goodness and wisdom of God, the washing away of sin, and satisfieng
for the same, it belongs properly to Christ. For so worthily and evidently
have they described the passion and glory of Christ, that one would think them
not to write of a matter which were to come, but done already, as it is plain
in the Psalms and Prophets. Psa* 22. Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 1. etc.

Thus out of the Scripture we learn, partly the testimonies of the passion
and resurrection of Christ, partly by what way Christ came to so high honor;
and glory of his father, that we first believing that Christ dyed for our
sins, and rose again for our righteousness, might by his resurrection be
sure of a good conscience, and consolation of the life to come.

Secondly, that we in patience and obedience might learn to be obedient to
our heavenly father, to take up our cross, and to follow our Lord JESUS
Christ, if we will have joy with him, we must also suffer and travail with
him. Our head goes to eternal joy through adversity and trouble, and will we
enter into it through the pleasure of the world and lust of the flesh? It
passes the bounds of all ^nitie, and comlynesse and honesty, for (...) to
be sluggish and slothful, when the (...) ^keth upon him such travel and
pain, (...) narrow gate that we must enter in at, for thorough many
tribulations, vexations, and miseryes must we come into the everlasting
kingdom of heaven: and all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution in this world. He that will possess an inheritance, must
bear and suffer all the charges belonging to the same. The eternal
inheritance is appointed us of our heavenly father thorough Christ: but with
this addition, that we receive the possession of it in such sort as the son
has done, namely with and through the cross and trouble. Blessed are they
whom God the father makes partakers of the passion of his only begotten
son: for who so is a companion with him in suffering, shall have his eternal
fellowship in heaven, and enjoy with him everlasting bliss and rest. He that
understands not this, is a fool and slow of heart to believe the
Scriptures: let that man beseech God to open the Scripture unto him, and to
make him understand it. Where that comes to pass, ignorance vanishes
away, and the heart is fervent and receives understanding, for the Lord is
the right and perfect schoolmasters, that touches the heart, and pearceth it
through with the arrows of his words and ardent love.

In breaking of the bread, they know the Lord, (...) life time, when he now
would go (...) and death, took bread, rendered (...) it, and gave it them,
admonishing (...) ^bit as they did the same, they should (...) remembrance of
him. Whereby they now ^hin^^ng on the same words, and being admonished of the
act, remember that it is he. Thus the breaking of the bread before our eyes in
the supper, is an admonishing token, that Christ's body was broken and dyed for
us on the cross: and the drink an admonishing token, that his blood was
shed for the washing away of our sins. And so when we break the bread,
and drink the drink, we ought thereby to know the Lord, thanking him for
his death which is our life, being mindful of him, and following his great
love, wherein he dyed for our sins.

AS they thus spoke, (it was very late the same day; which was the first day
in the week: and where the disciples assembled together, the doors were shut
for fear of the Jews) Jesus came while they sat at the table, and stood in
the midst among them, and said unto them: Peace be with you. But the
disciples were afraid, thinking that they had seen a spirit. Then said Jesus
unto them, Why are ye troubled? And why do thoughts arise in your head? And
he said yet again unto them, Peace be with you. And with that showed he
them his hands, feet, and side, and said: Behold my hands and feet, that it is
even I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. The (...) when they had seen the Lord. And (...) ^^leeued not
for joy, and wondered, he said (...) ye any thing to eat? So they offered him
a (...) fish, and an honey comb. The same he took^ (...) before them, casting
in their teeth their unbelief (...) ^nes of heart, because they believed not
them which (...) that he was risen again from the dead.

Doctrine and fruit.
IN that the Evangelists describe the true resurrection of Christ, they declare
withal, unto whom such a high mystery was opened and showed For when we hear
how the disciples were minded and behaved themselves, we learn thereby what
becomes us, that we also may believe, that Christ is truly risen again: yea,
not only to acknowledge the same with the mouth, but also to prove and feel it
in the taste of the spirit. So have we heard before, what the desire and ardent
love which God stirred up in Mary Magdalene, did bring to pass, and what good
came of the feruentnesse and diligence of Peter. This we see now here, for God
has a pleasure to stir up our desire when he will open himself unto us. And
therefore all the same day from morning early until night, were the disciples
still more and more endued with new joy, that the desire to see Christ, might
be kindled more and more in them. And as they were assembled in love and
uniformity (for those two things please God well) Christ comes and appears
vnro them. He opens himself unto those, that longing after him, are coupled
in love and uniformity, and being assembled, do hold themselves together, for
where love is, there is God: where discord is and division, there is the devil.

O dear brethren, let us regard charitable love, let us care for our brethren,
that the brotherhood be not broken, and that love be not spotted, for else
farewell says. No man needs to boast himself of faith that has not
charitable love, but stirs up and seeks division.

Moreover, we see here that the disciples of Christ stood in great danger of
their bodies and life: for when the Jews had no more power to rage against
Christ, they raged against his disciples. Look what men are partakers of the
cross and passion of Christ they verily shall understand the high mystery of
his resurrection. For undoubtedly, God with his own consolation shall visit
and comfort those, that suffer any danger and harm for his names sake.
Forasmuch then as the good disciples of Christ, must still be in conflict and
battle with the Jews, the Lord speaks unto them with this comfortable word,
Peace be with you: as if he should say, be of good cheer, your matter shall
stand in good case, in me ye shall have peace and be safe, and quiet, how hard
so ever it go outwardly: Fear not, be not afraid, howsoever the Jews do rage,
ye shall do right well. This salutation was common among the Jews, therefore
does Christ also use it. Such a charge gave he likewise unto his Disciples,
when he sent them to preach, that entering into an house, they should say,
Peace be to this house. Luke 10.


And though the disciples were somewhat amazed and afraid at the first blush,
yet was their gladness great, when they were thoroughly instructed, that it was
the Lord. Now was fulfilled that which Christ had said and promised unto them
before. Io. 16 Ye shall mourn, and the world shall rejoice, but I will see you
again. Your sorrow shall be turned into gladness, your heart shall rejoice,
and your joy shall no man take from you. For the joy of a faithful believing
heart is constant, and endures. If the resurrection of Jesus Christ were
truly and rightly believed, and the same joy comprehended as it ought to be,
all sorrow must needs vanish, all hurt and adversity must needs be little
regarded. For what can be grievous unto a man, when by faith and hope he is
assured, that he in a glorified immortal body shall arise again with Christ
his head, and have everlasting joy with him.

And this is the cause that Christ appears so often unto his disciples,
instructing them so much and so perfectly of his resurrection, even to make
them steadfast in this faith, and to assure them of this joy. Therefore shows
he them his body, and gives it them to handle. The palpable body certifieth
them, that it is a true body: the immortal body shows, that it is
glorified, and of highest honor: the printes of the wounds declare, that it is
even the self same body that it was before. He shows them the tokens of
victory, as a mighty ouercommer of death, and so does he the wounds that he
had gotten for them in the battle: and likewise the side that was opened,
declaring his great love. His wounds shows he to them, to heal the wounds
of their unbelief. As if he would say: look upon me, and fight manfully:
Without a battle shall no man be crowned. 2. Tim. 2.
But unto him that overcomes in the conflict, Apoc. 2.
will I grant to eat of the bread of Heaven, and will crown him for ever.

Where as he eats before them, it is done for the probation of the true
human nature, and not for the great necessity of the body: To them was it
very needful, not unto Christ. Even so we, knowing how to further our
neighbors faith, must, and ought many times to do somewhat, and to leave
somewhat undone, that for our selves we need not.

O GOD grant us true love and uniformity: Take from us all Scisme and
division: gather us together through thy holy spirit, remove all discord
and variaunce out of thy holy Church. Give us patience in adversity: send
thy godly comfort and joy unto all such as be in distress and trouble for
thy names sake: Strengthen the weak, lift up the feeble, establish the
doubtful, and in the battle help those which be thine own: that they lie
not under, but that in thee, they may overcome all danger and harm. Amen.

THomas one of the twelve (which was called Didimus) was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: We have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them: Except I see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe. And after eight days again his disciples were
within, and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and
stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. And after that said he to
Thomas, Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust it into my side, and be not faithles, but believing. Thomas
answered, and said unto him: My Lord, and my God. Jesus says unto him, Thomas,
because thou have seen me, thou have believed, Blessed are they that have not
seen, and have believed.

Doctrine and fruit.
THat which was spoken before, is here evident and plain, namely, that Christ
opens himself unto those, which are desirous of him, and long after him
associating themselves together one with another in true love, and being
partakers of the passion and cross. Forasmuch then as Thomas is less fervent,
and therefore absent from the rest, he saw not Christ with the other
disciples, but when he obtained a desire to see Christ, and was assotiate and
joined to the other, he became also partaker of the joy that they had.

And here we learn the nature and condition of true belief (which is an
illumination of the grace of God, yea a very godly property) that he makes
others partakers of his holy and glorious joys, and that through love, which
seeks not her own profit, neither is disdainefull, to the intent that the
glory of God may be preferred among all men Therefore the Disciples of the
Lord make Thomas their companion partaker of such gladness as they had
received of Christ's Resurrection opened unto them: for he was very
faithless, and too stiff in his own opinion. Which unbelief God suffered to
happen unto him, and to continue somewhat the longer, that his slacknes and
lack of faith might serve to our commodity: that through his unbelief, we
might be provoked unto faith, for as much as we hear, that he so perfectly
proouing, seeing and feeling the thing, came so to an undoubted faith: that we
also might believe, that the body of Christ which was hanged upon the cross
for our sins, was of the Father raised again unto life. For if we believe
in our heart, Acts. 2. Romans 10.
and confess with our mouth, that God has raised him up from the dead, we
shall be saved. Yea believe we must, John 2.
that Christ (according to his words before) has through his godly power,
erected up again from death, the temple of his body. Therefore through the
doubting of Thomas, we learn the mystery of the resurrection of our own
bodies. For Christ has sufficiently proved, and Thomas has confessed that the
body of Christ which was hanged upon the cross, is verily risen again from
death. Wherein, our faith is confirmed, to believe, that our bodies also shall
truly and lively rise again to eternal life.

When Thomas is with the other disciples, Christ shows himself unto him. For
they that in the unity of faith and of undivided love, do not associate and
accompany themselves with other faithful believers in the Church, shall not
be partakers of heavenly joys. Truth it is, that to believe with the heart
justifies: but the confession that is made with the mouth, belongs unto
health, and serves unto love and unity of the Church and congregation of God,
without the which there can be no hope of health. He that says he believes,
and does not join himself unto other Christians, his faith is vain and of
none effect. And therefore did Christ for his church institute the sacraments,
that is to say, exterior signs of his grace, that his people might be
associate together in the unity of faith. The Church of God is it, that
preserves us poor ones (as did the Ark of Noah before time) in the flood, and
brings us thorough this raging sea unto the haven of eternal salvation. Not
that the grace and health is therefore to be ascribed to the elements and
outward things: but that it may appear how effectuous faith is, and what it
woorketh through charitable love in the Church. Christ makes mention of the
words which Thomas had spoken before to the Disciples in his absence: Namely;
Except I see in his hands the print, etc. Therefore says Christ: Thomas,
bring thy finger hither, and see etc. Whereby it is evidently proved, that
Christ is God, and even so does Thomas understand and confess.

The wounds are showed of Christ, specially to this intent, that his passion
might be printed and sealed in men's minds. For a very deep and high mystery
is it, that Christ's side is opened, out of the which flows blood and water:
whereby the spiritual and faithful believing minds may well perceive
Christ's good loving will toward mankind. Now when we look upon his hands,
touching his side inwardly with our desire of inward faith, and considering why
and with what love Christ suffered for us, it shall be no hard thing unto us to
believe his resurrection. If Christ were dead but even as an other pure man or
Prophet, we could have no hope of the resurrection. Who so believes it,
comes soon to this knowledge, that immortal life is given unto us. Now
where there is hope of an immortal life, there is the Lord served with great
diligence. For if God has not spared his son, Romans 8.
but given him for us all, what good thing then may we not look for at his
hand? If we be only true believers with Thomas, then shall God faithfully
perform that he has promised us. Christ desires no more of us weak feeble
ones, than that we be not faithless, but steadfast believers.

Thomas is immediately obedient unto the voice of Christ, and becomes forth
with a new man. The Pharisees could by no doctrine, by no miracles, be
brought to give credence unto Christ, and to believe in him, although they saw
Lazarus raised again from death: malice and hatred did so hinder them. But
Thomas acknowledges him freely to be his Lord and God. He sees and handles
man, he confesses God, whom he saw not. He acknowledged, that he whom he saw
was his God and Lord. Through the same faith was his unbelief and sin
forgiven him.

O merciful God, grant us love, that we seek not our own commodity nor
honor, but the profit of our neighbors, and thy glory in all things. Expel
out of us all disdain, greedines, ungentleness, headines, and flattering of our
selves. Preserve us from discord and division, bind us together in uniform
love, that we may be one body, and of one mind. Stablish also our faith,
that our minds may always be comforted in the resurrection of thy son, and
immortal life purchased by him, Amen.

ANd many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which
are not written in this book. These are written, that ye might believe, that
Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that ye so believing, might have life
through his name.

Doctrine and fruit.
LIke as Christ, while he yet lived, did miracles before his death, to declare
his godly power: even so after his rising again from death, he works many
tokens in the presence of his Disciples, to prove his resurrection in the
flesh. Some of the same are described of the Evangelists, not of any
curiosity, or for vain glory, but to confirm our says therewith. To write
all, John thought it not needful: for who could have written all? Or who could
have fastened and borne them all in mind? Who so will not believe these few
that are written, shall never believe a greater multitude. A faithful believer
is well satisfied with these. For these that be written of him, are therefore
written, that we should believe, that Jesus is Christ the Son of GOD, and
that we through his faith might have eternal life. Seeing then that all
things which are written, do extend and serve to this end, that we might
believe in him, and be saved by him, what lack we then? Or what can we
desire more? So that hereby we learn, with great diligence to read, to
consider, and to apply into our own life, whatsoever the Evangelists have
written of Christ: as they have written nothing but that which is altogether
excellent, dear holy and godly, and such things as do lively describe,
set forth, and print Christ unto us: that our faith, hope, love, patience,
meekness, and all good things might grow with blessed fruit: that we in
our life might become thankful for such an excellent grace, and in no wise to
contemn or despise it.

A scornful thing is it, and the evidence of a great unbelief, whereas some
think by these words to prove, that for as much as all things are not
written in the book, it is lawful for certain men to add the rest, and to
devise and ordain what they will. For in these things that are written, does
John comprehend the whole sum of faith: which consists in this, that Jesus is
the son of the living God, who for our salvation came down from heaven, died,
rose again, and purchased for us eternal life* Jesus the son of Mary, is the
anointed king and high Priest, the savior of the world promised of God, and
spoken of before by the Prophets. And even he it is, who being of the heavenly
father anointed king everlasting, was to come after David, and to reign for
ever. This king is the redeemer and savior of mankind, and the very true son
of God. If we believe in Christ, we believe in the true God* one only God we
honor, one only God we worship. Seeing now that we honor and worship Christ,
we worship God, for only God is to be worshipped. Forasmuch now as we worship
the son no less than the father, it is certain, that Christ is of one
nature with the father: yea this ought we to believe, and that he came down
into this world to die for us, to wash and wipe away our sins, and to kill sin
in our mortal flesh, when he makes us partakers of his passion, and mightily
works in us by his spirit, in mortifieng our carnal desires. We must also
believe, that he by his godly power arose again from death, to a new, glorious
and immortal life. For if we thought that he died, and believed not that he
were risen again to life, we should have no life in him. For us he died, for
our sakes he rose again, for our welfare reigns he for ever. A new godly
and blessed life works he in us with his resurrection, and after this life
have we in him life everlasting.

AFterward did Jesus show himself again at the sea of Tiberias. And on this
wise showed he himself. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas (which is
called Did^^us) and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and
two other of his disciples. Simon Peter says unto them: I will go a fishing*
They say unto him: We also will go with thee. They went their way, and entered
into a ship immediately, and that night caught they nothing. But when the
morning was now come, Jesus stood on the sh^^e: but the Disciples knew not
that it was Jesus. Jesus says unto them: Children, have ye any meat? They
answered him no. And he says unto them; Cast out the net on the right side of
the ship, and ye shall find. They cast out therefore, and anon they were not
able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. Then said the Disciple (whom Jesus
loved) to Peter: It is the Lord. When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord,
he girt his coat unto him (for he was naked) and sprang into the sea. The
other Disciples came by ship, for they were not far from land, but as it
were two hundred cubits, and they drew the net with fishes. As soon then as
they were come to land, they saw hot coals, and fish laid thereon, and
bread. Jesus says unto them: Bring of the fish that ye now have caught. Simon
Peter went up, and drew the net to the land full of great fishes, an hundred
and three and fifty. And for all there were so many, yet was not the net
broken. Jesus says unto them: Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst
ask him: What art thou? For they knew that it was the Lord Jesus then came,
and took bread, and gave them, and fish likewise. This is now the third time
that Jesus appeared to his Disciples after that he was risen again from death.

Doctrine and fruit.
WE read in the holy Evangelists, that at the first Christ called his
disciples, namely, Peter and the others from fishing, which they also left,
and came to Christ, who told them that he would make them fishers of men. Now
when he will send them out to that office, and depart from them he appears
again unto them at their fishing. And (like as he did before at their vocation)
he does before them a great miracle: in the which he admonishes them of their
office, and charge them diligently to care for his sheep committed unto
them. But first he proves his resurrection, to stablish and confirm their
weak faith thereby, commanding them afterward, to bring other folks also
thereto.

This history in it self is evident enough, therefore ought we first to
consider it after the letter, for the letter also teaches for it self. Christ
like as he appeared unto those that were sorrowful and mourned: so does he
here appear unto those that labor and travail. Christ gave his disciples
authority out of the Gospel, Math 10. 1. Cor 9.
that they preach to take a competent honest living, as food and necessaries
of the bodie^ and yet did not he restrain them, that they should not or might
not labor, when occasion serves. Therefore Paul also used not that liberty
at certain times, but labored with his own hands and wan his meat. So did
the Disciples of Christ exercise themselves in their labor. For when they were
come into Galelee, from the feast of Easter which they had kept at Jerusalem,
before the holy ghost was given them, they would not go idle, and thereby
become a burden unto other men: (for he that goes idle, lies upon other
folks, eating that theirs is, and ouerchargeth them) but undertake to get
their own living with their handy work, which they had used before. Whereby
we must learn to apply our selves unto labor, and not to be idle: for
idleness is the mother of many and great vices. Every man ought to have an
honest traiuaile, to be exercised either with the body or with the mind. Who
so labors not, must not eat. Man was created to labor, 2. These. ^. Job. 5.
as the bird to fly. Therefore ought every father to bring up his children in
honest exercise from their youth up, that the devil get no place in their
hearts, which yet comes to pass, if he find them idle. The first
commandment given to our forefather Adam after the fall was this: In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread.

Now when we in true faith and confidence unto God, do take in hand the work
that he has committed unto our charge, we ought not to doubt, God shall prosper
it, and give us his rich and gracious blessing in it, as it is written, Prouer.
3. In althy ways remember the Lord, and he shall direct and order thy doings.
Eccles. 5.9.

Here is also to be considered, how Christ utters his godly power before
his disciples, in the great miracle that he did in their sight, to confirm
our faith in him. For out of the appearing of Christ grows faith, Psalm. 85.
And his true resurrection will he print in them, in that he appears unto
them, and eats with them.

Here we see the ardent desire of Peter, which leapeth into the sea, as soon
as he hears that it is the Lord: he that before had denied him, makes now
speedy have again unto him. Though we of man's feebleness and fear, do
fall into sin, yet always when we hear God in his word, we ought forth with
to turn again unto him: and so shall he with the lost son, graciously
receive and embrace is again. Luke. 15.


In that Peter covers himself being naked, we learn nurture and
shamefastness, to walk and dwell with all honesty in the sight of men,
specially in the presence of our superiors and governors.

In the corporal works and deeds of Christ, there is nothing in vain,
nothing without effect. Besides the outward appearance of the work, there is
described somewhat more excellent, where unto a faithful believer ought to
direct the eyes of his mind as when he makes the blind to see, it is an
outward act, and a declaration of his godly power, and an alteration there is
outwardly in the eyes of the blind, in that his fight is restored unto him
again: nevertheless over and besides the outward work, there is given us to
understand, that Christ is the true light of the whole world, which drives
away the blindness of our heart, and illuminateth the eyes of our mind,
according to the Scriptures, Isay. 42.49. John. 1.9.12. etc.

Christ taking bread and wine, gives the same to his disciples to eat and
drink. This (as no man can deny) was an outward act, and they commanded
outwardly to do it, albeit in the remembrance of him. Besides and above the
outward eating and drinking, the faithful believer must lift up his heart, and
look with the eyes of faith unto that which is spiritual, namely, how that
Christ is the true living bread which feeds our souls to eternal life, how
his body was broken for us upon the cross, how we thorough his death are made
living, and washed away from our sins by his blood. In this is set forth
unto us the highest love of all, namely, that Christ gave himself unto the
death for us, whereby we are admonished of his grace, yea, not only in this
described unto us, but also the holy Ghost does mightily land fruitfully work
the same in the hearts of the true believers, which in faith at the supper
receive the true body and blood of Christ: whereby their hearts are kindled in
love toward God and their neighbor, so that they dwell in Christ, and he in
them. etc.

So here likewise the outward fishing, represents a fishing spiritual. Like
as in fishing it lies not in the fishers power or wit to take many or few, but
(...) the power and blessing of God. And as the labor of the disciples is in
vain before Christ commands them, but when they have his commandment, and
cast out the net upon the same, they draw up a multi^^on of fishes: even so
comes it to pass at this present day that we bring forth no fruit so long as
the holy ghost works not with us inwardly. But when Christ bids cast out
the net: that is, when he gives his spirit, we are able to draw up many
men, and to win them unto Christ. For all the night long had they taken
nothing, till Christ came unto them: Even so can we do nothing if Christ be
not with us by his spirit. Acts. 2.
On Whit-sonday when the spirit came upon his Disciples, they brought forth
much fruit, and drue many men unto Christ.

Hereby declares Christ unto them in this taking of fish, how it should go in
their office, and how the time was now at hand, that they should shortly draw
many men out of the sea of this world unto him, and that they should prosper
and have good success therein. The world is this wild raging sea: the shore
is the quietness of eternal life that we have in Christ, unto whom we make
have with Peter and the other Disciples: neither do we bring men unto our
selves, but unto Christ, and to the haven of everlasting life. Faith is not
idle, but is always occupied in the Lords business, causing us to contemn
all perrils, and to speed us a pace unto Christ with the clothing of virtues,
especially with faith, the wedding garment: that we appearing not naked, may
make have unto the land of the living, where Christ is, the conqueror of
death: For the faithful believers are not far from the land, when their
conversation is in heaven. Without Christ we must begin nothing, Heb. 11.
without faith may no man please God. In the night of sin, our labor is
vain and unprofitable: Romans 4.
yea whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Upon the right hand must the net be
cast out: That is, in the office of preaching, must respect be had to the
only glory of God, and edefiyng of the church and not to our own profit or
preferment. 1. Cor. 14


Christ hungreth after our health, this is the meat which he desires: that we
do the will of his heavenly father: that we put our trust in him, John 4.
and love one another: that we lead a just and innocent life: John. ^.
that we keep our selves from the filthiness of the world, and bring much
people unto God. Such meat is brought unto Christ by the Apostles, when they
through their teaching do catch men, and bring them unto God. Therefore does
he ask them whether they have any thing to eat. They said: nay, for before the
receiving of the spirit, they could do nothing, but when he came, they
brought many profitable things to pass. The harvest was so great, that they
must needs have many workmen.

So when God helps the faithful ministers of the word, that they in the
ministry of preaching have prosperous success, so that they draw up many men
through the net of the Gospel, and find much fruit: Then the Disciples
whom Christ loves, and which love him again, do know that it is the Lord,
and that the same comes not of their own virtue, but of the power of God.
And hereof then grows there in them a great desire to come unto Christ, and
to be with him. The office therefore of Apostles and of all ministers of the
word is this, that when they do what Christ commands them, they turn them to
Christ again, and ascribe the honor unto him* And if ought would let or
hinder them to come unto Christ, they ought to refuse all the same, and to have
unto him with the loss of their life. John knows Christ before Peter, but
Peter comes to the Lord before him, whereby we may note the diversity of
ministrations and gifts in the Church. Though Peter be more fervent, yet is
he not ashamed to learn of John.

The fishers come with the fish unto Christ, the shepherds with the sheep to
one manner of salvation, for they are not careful only for themselves how
they may be saved: but also for those whom they have caught, to bring the same
with them unto the shore of eternal rest. It is our salvation, when we become
Christ's meat, yea when Christ is our food and sustenance. For they that in the
sea of this world do faithfully labor to draw the fish unto the Haven,
shall obtain great fruit, and enjoy an eternal banquet at Christ's table in
his kingdom. For Christ prepared them a dinner, wherein he set forth unto
the ministers of the word, what they ought to do, namely, to feed the people
committed unto them. A great honor is it, to bring much people unto Christ.
Great commendacion, and unspeakable joy shall those teachers have, that
faithfully travel in the scriptures and word of God.

By the multitude and great number of the fishes that the Apostles drew in the
net, is figured the multitude of the Heathen, who through the preaching in the
whole world, should be brought into the unity of the faith. And although many
Scismes and erroneous divisions arise, yet of those that are ordained unto
life, there shall no man fall out of the net. God knows those that be his,
and they shall always hearken unto the voice of their shepherd. Thus shall
there ever be one only Church, which cannot by us be thoroughly purged:
Evermore will Ipocrites do all their diligence to continue therein, though the
makers of division shall not be without great trauail and labor. As for such
vices as be manifest, great, and offensive, they that be in authority, are
bound to suppress them, according unto the ordinance of Christ. Mat. 5.13.18.

First, they that be faithful believers and ordained unto life, do cleave unto
Christ their head, and then to the members, that is to say, all faithful
Christians. For they that are faithful believers, be knit together in
perpetual unity. And although some at this present day be in contention, yet
so far as they are of the number of the elect, they will agree together
again one with another, before they depart hence: that they may die in the
unity of Gods congregation and Church, without the which, there is no health.

After the great labor that the ministers of the word have in the raging
sea, Christ rewards his with a very costly and glorious feast in his kingdom:
there will he be the bread of life, that feeds and satisfies them for ever.

O merciful GOD, grant unto us all that we may faithfully cleave unto thee,
and follow thy commandment. Tame thou our body and members in honest labor,
that we loyter not in vices. O draw our hearts alwaie upward: that all
temporal things set apart, we may have only unto thee. O gracious father,
give us such faithful fishers, as being true and careful in their office,
may with the net of thy holy word, draw us out of the raging sea: that we
with them, and they with us, may enjoy the everlasting banquet. Amen.

SO when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna love thou
me more than these? He said unto him: Yea Lord, thou know that I love
thee. He says unto him. feed my lambs. He says unto him again the second
time: Simon Ioanna, love thou me? He says unto him: Yea Lord, thou know
that I love thee. He says unto him: feed my sheep. He said unto him the
third time: Simon Ioanna, love thou me? Peter was sorry, because he said unto
him the third time, love thou me? And he said unto him: Lord, thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto him: feed my sheep.

Doctrine and fruit.
FOR as much as Peter had taken a special grievous fall, Christ lifts him up
with a special comfort: but so, that he sets forth unto all Shepherds of
his sheep, what their office is Peter had many sins forgiven him, Luke 7.
therefore was it meet that he should love the Lord the more. And seeing he
had thrice denied, he makes now a threefold confession: so that now the
song does no less service unto love, than it served fear before. Christ
shows him that he is received again unto grace, so that he may safely put
his trust in him, seeing he commits unto him his own sheep. As if Christ
would say: As for thy denial, I will no more remember it. And for an evidence
hereof, I put thee in trust to keep my sheep: In no wise do I refuse thee,
but a shepherd of my sheep will I make thee. Neither does he cast him in the
teeth with his denial, but says: If thou love me, then take upon thee the
care of the brethren. The love that thou have willed to declare unto me in all
things, and wherein I delight, the same declare thou now unto my sheep, whom
I so dearly have bought. Thy life that thou would have offered for me,
give now for my sheep. Now to the intent Peter should not say that he were
expelled from the Apost^eship through his denial, the Lord therefore gives
him a new commission to keep his sheep. As for Peter, he was no more so rash
and foolish hardy, but answers more advisedly than before, and takes the
Lord to witness: for he remembers how it had happened unto him already,
therefore stands he not arrogantly in his own conceit, neither speaks
he against the Lord, so witty and circumspect is he become thorough the
fall.

Arrogant had he been and high minded, and therefore through the denial he
fell very sore. But his weeping through faith and sure confidence purifieth him
again, and in love he becomes more fervent, pondering, that much is forgiven
him: so that where sin was great, grace is more abundant and plentiful. Romans
5.

In Peter is the office of the other Apostles, and of all preachers of the
word described: for here may we see, who are meet to be called to guide the
people, and what care and diligence they ought to take for them.

But here principally we must note this, that Christ minding to stablish his
special excellent doctrine, did ever first work a notable token and miracle.
As when he fed the five thousand men with few loaves, he taught immediately upon
the same, John. 6.
how we must be sustained with the bread of heaven. Even so here when the
Disciples had taken a great heap of fishes at Christ's commandment, and were
afterward fed of him, he told them immediately upon the same, what their
office is, and that they should look, even so to nourish and feed those that
are committed unto them. This was spoken unto Peter, and in him to all others.

Christ who searches and knows all hearts, does not ask this question as one
ignorant, or as one that first would prove and learn, but to teach faith, and
to declare it unto others. Such a question demands he. Math. 16. Who^ say
the people that the son of man is? showing thereby what confession and faith he
requires of those that are his. Even so here: the schoolemaister of the whole
world, minding to put them in trust, will declare unto them with this question,
how they ought to be, and the same will he print sure into them with this
threefold interrogation. Here also will the Lord teach, how necessary it is,
that he who is to be made a shepherd and teacher of christian people, be first
well known, proved and tried, and that in many things aforehand he be found
faithful. It is not requisite to take children unto such an office, but such
godly and apt men, as have been tried and tempted: namely, such men as have
proved, suffered and felt somewhat by experience, whereby they have learned
humility and nurture.

The first thing that Christ in his examination requires of those, which must
guide the people, is a great, fervent, and notable love to GOD. Without this
love shall soul shepheardes do no good. This love to GOD, shall bring with it
love toward the sheep committed unto them. For as much then as at this day
the love of Christ is so greatly quenched, therefore are many Curates and
soul shepheardes so faint and cold to preach and teach Christ. They burn not
in the love of God against vice, they print not virtue and godliness fervently
into the people, for there is no love of Gods name in them. Seeing then that
they have no heavenly zeal unto the glory of GOD, and to the amplyfiyng of
his name, it is no marvel that their preaching is so cold and unfruitful.

Therefore says our Savior Christ unto Peter: Agapas me? Love thou me? For
Agapao among the Greeks signifies, fervently, earnestly, and right heartily to
love: yea to love with a great good will. And this word he uses in the two
first questions. In the third question he says: Phileis me? Love thou me?
Phileo signifies so to love, that one be loving to another, and show him
friendship: therefore does Peter take the Lord himself to witness. As for
the high excellent love, he dare not brag of it, but says: Philose: which
is as much to say, as, I have hitherto done all that becomes a friend to do.
If any derogation or hinderance be done to thy honor and name, I am heartily
sorry for it: as a friend is justly grieved, if his friend be vilely entreated.

Thus the Lord with the three questions lays hard unto Peter: for a notable
love is it that he requires of those, to whom he commits his sheep in his
absence. Peter had a good conscience, and knew no falsehood or deceit by
himself, but bare a notable and fervent love unto Christ: yet by reason of his
former fall, and this often questioning, he was partly out of quiet, fearing
least peradventure there lay yet hid in him some secret thing, that displeased
the Lord, or were against him, or that happily he should not stand in such
favor with Christ. Therefore said he: Lord, thou know all things, thou
know the hearts of all men, and wotest, that I bear thee a good heart, and
friendly mind: which words proceed of a meek fervent heart. Christ knows
better how we love him, than we our selves. Thus a shepherd oght to have an
ardent love unto Christ, and yet not to stand high in his own conceit, or to
brag of himself, although he love, and be garnished with virtues more than
other men.

Wherein may it be perceived, that a soul shepherd loves Christ, and is his
friend? Verily in loving his sheep which Christ has committed to him.
Therefore says Christ always upon the same: Feed my sheep. But Christ uses
here two distinct words. First he says: Vosce, that is, feed them, pasture
them, fodder them. Secondly, he says: Poimene, that is, be thou unto them a
heardman, take thou care for them as it beseems a shepherd: be thou a
shepherd unto my sheep, keep them from the wolf, and from al such hurt.
First, he requires of him a fervent love, then commits he his sheep unto
him, a treasur^ great and dear, redeemed and bought with the precious blood of
Christ. As if he would say: If thou love me declare the same in care and love
toward my sheep, whom I commit to thy charge.

The sheep are Christ's, not the shepherds. As forsuch shepherds as keep
them so, that they make them hang upon themselves, those love themselves, not
Christ. They that seek their own glory, profit, and lucre among them, are
not faithful shepherds. Against such does cry the threefold voice of Christ:
Feed and keep my sheep: mine (says he) not thine. Feed them, oppress them
not, flay them not: Feed them not thy self: Seek my glory, not thine own.
Phil. 3.
For some there be, which (as Paul with weeping tears complains) that
seek themselves, not the glory of Jesus Christ. Of these spoke Paul also
before. 2. Timoth. 3. Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, etc. Where
the wicked root of self love is in a Curate, there follow all the vices
which he in the same place makes mention of. Who so now will be a lover of
Christ, and a faithful shepherd (...) sciences, that they may be fruitful
and comfortable to the whole Christian congregation. If this might come to
pass, then should there be no lack of wise counselors and active men,
profitable to be in common authority: and also amongst christian people, there
should be found men meet to be made ouer-seeers in the ministry of Gods word,
with which men the people should be well and worthily provided for.

Good virtuous teachers bring forth a virtuous and godly people. And
doubtless, the meaning of those that gave such goods to monasteries and
churches, was at the first, that they thought thereby to serve God, and to do
good unto the poor. If such goods then as heretofore have been evil
bestowed, be now profitably and blessedly turned to the honor of God, and
commodity of the whole Church, then is the last will and meaning of the
founders fulfilled. They also that must pay such rentes, tithes, and goods,
will be the readier so to do, if they see, that the same is well and
profitably bestowed. Then shall not they untruly, but faithfully perform and
pay all things, when they consider that they do service unto God himself.

Grant us all (O God) to harken and be obedient unto the voice of true
shepherds: and give us hearts to have in great honor, and worthily to esteem
of such faithful shepherds as upon earth are thy Ministers and stewards, by
whom and in whom thou speak to us, and with us: that we showing unto them
all reverence and honor which they be worthy of for thy sake, may give them
honest liuinges; and consider, how that Christ thy son our Lord teaches
the same, Math. 10. and Paul thy servant. 1. Cor. 9. Reason it is, seeing
they sow spiritual things unto us, that they of us reap things corporal. O
Lord, remove away the contempt of thy word and ministers, for the same never
escaped without great punishment and harm.

JESUS said unto Peter: verily verily I say unto thee: When thou wast young,
thou girdest thy self, and wentest whither thou would: but when thou art
old, thou shall stretch out thine hand, and another shall gird thee, and lead
thee thither as thou would not. This he said, signifyng with what death he
should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he said: follow me.

Doctrine and fruit.
IT is not sufficient to have begun, except the soul shepherd continue in
his office and faithfulness.

For to take the cure and charge of the sheep, brings great danger, loss,
travail, and labor with it. Many a time must a faithful shepherd ieoperd
his life for his sheep. Such perrill does Christ promise unto Peter, namely,
that he must die, and with what death. Afore-time when he was young, he
sought that which pertained to the flesh, he might not away with the cross:
but now after the receiving of the holy ghost, he is stout, and dies for
Christ's sake, and for his sheep. Behold, such an end had Peter, that of love
he dies for him, with whom to die he rashly promised before. But necessary
it was, that Christ should first die for Peter's health, and that Peter
afterward should suffer death for his names sake.

The presumption and headines of man would have set the cart before the horse,
but the everlasting truth has appointed this order. Peter thought he would
have ieoperded his life for Christ, and have redeemed the redeemer: but Christ
came to give his life for his sheep, of whom Peter was one. Now after that
Christ died for those that be his, there is strength given in the hearts of
such shepherds and sheep as be faithful, to suffer death for Christ's sake.
Death is not now so to be feared of us, that we would therefore go back from
the truth: for by death do not we lose life, yea Christ has made death to be
the way unto life: And by his Resurrection he has set forth unto us an example
of another life, which is immortal. Peter was first afraid and feared death,
and would have dissuaded Christ that he should not die: Math. 16.
but now that the precious treasure of Christ's blood is shed, he follows
his redeemer, yea even unto the death of the cross goes he after him,
therefore is he now no more a satan, but a Peter. Petrus of the rock.


But from whence comes such strength into a feeble man? Even from God who
dwells in the hearts of the faithful, for else is the nature and flesh of
man impotent and weak, being afraid of death: which fear (natural heat
being abated) is the greater in them that are old. And though we all wish to
to be with Christ, and be desirous of eternal life, yet would we feign have it
without any grief of death, if it might be. Thus came the conflict of death
even upon Christ, whereby he declared himself very man, but the will of God
had the mastry above man's in the wrestling: Peter also went not with his will to
death, but with his will he both suffered it, and overcame it. Christ likewise,
to comfort us, was heavy: who nevertheless came upon earth, that he would die:
neither was it necessity that moved him to die, John. 10
but his own good will and love: for he had power to give his soul, and take
it again.

Now though the fear of death be great in nature yet is it overcome through
the strength and greatness of the love, 2. Cor. 5.
which we bear unto him who is our life, even Jesus Christ. And albeit he was
the life it self, yet pleased it him to suffer death for us. Seeing then that
he alone dyed for us, we ought not to be ashamed, neither should it grieve us
to die also for him, specially considering that the publishing of so excellent
grace is committed unto us. When the shepherd dies for the sheep, it is no
great matter if the sheep die for the shepherds sake. Forasmuch now as the
faithful shepherd with his love, directs and encourages many of the
sheep, to die for his names sake: how much more meet is it, that the
shepherds be the first which ieoparde their lives, striving for the truth,
and even unto blood to resist sin, when Christ has put them in trust to
feed his sheep? This is now the occasion why our Savior Christ tells Peter
of his death before hand, and strengthens and incourageth him thereunto: for
though the will be constaunt in the saints, yet is the flesh feeble and weak.
Romans 7. Math. 26.
No man dies without pain and grief: which thing is appointed unto us by the
wisdom of God, to the intent no man should kill himself: For seeing the
devil does now and then persuade some to murder themselves, how should it go,
if the soul were not so loath to depart from the body? With these words
therefore thought nor Christ to make Peter afraid, or to discourage him, but to
furnish him, and make him ripe. For Peter had a good desire to suffer somewhat
for Christ's sake: nevertheless, being yet young, he could not follow: but
when he was old, he followed him: therefore will Christ perform his desire.
As if Christ would say: Peter, thou have hitheto bin weak and fearful, but I
will strengthen thee: so that hence forth thou shall deny me no more, but
manfully die for me. Thou have been tender, in that thou wast afraid at one
woman's voice: but now shall thou stretch forth thy hand to the cross to be
bound. For by the stretching out of the hands, he understands and
signifies with what death he should die, namely, upon the cross. Which death
before time was most shameful: but after that Christ was hanged upon the
cross, it is now an honorable and glorious death, with the which the faithful
do glorify God: and therefore says the Evangelist, that the Lord would
thereby signify, with what death Peter should glorify God.

For in Gods quarrel, and for Christ's sake to die, is the highest honor,
whereof no man ought to be ashamed. This ought all soul shepherds to ponder
and consider, that they faithfully and constantly following Christ the Lord, 2.
Tim. 4.
go not from that they have taken in hand, but proceed and bring their course
to an honorable end, keeping fidelity and trust with their Lord, and being
fully appointed in themselves, to die for the sheep of Christ. Therefore should
they consider before hand, what things they must suffer for the truth: least
they destroy that, which they have of long time builded and taught.

O gracious father: strengthen thou us in thy work and in thy truth: that in
the thing which thou have begun in us, we may steadfastly continue to the end.
Expel out of us the fear of death, and stablish us through thy holy spirit,
that we manfully may despise and ieoperd this life, for the life eternal.
Grant O God to the shepherds of thy sheep, a fervent love to the truth and
thy glory: strengthen them with thy spirit that they valiantly standing by the
flock, may even with their death confirm thy people in the truth.

PEter turned about and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved, following (which
also leaned on his breast at Supper, and said: Lord, who is he that betraieth
thee?) when Peter therefore saw him, he said to Jesus: Lord, what shall he here
do? Jesus says unto him: If I will have him to tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren,
that that Disciple should not die. Yet Jesus said not to him, he shall not die,
but if I will that he tarry til I come, what is that to thee? the same disciple
is he, which testifies of these things, and wrote these things, and we know
that his testimony is true. There are also many other things that Jesus did,
which if they should be waitten every one, I suppose the world could not
contain the books that should be written.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE former words which Christ spoke unto Peter ( Follow me) were spoken unto
him in this meaning, that he should follow the footsteps and passion of
Christ, namely, with word and deed to go the way that Christ had gone. But
in as much as Peter is a figure of the Church, Christ spoke those words, not
only unto him, but unto all faithful believers. For the Church of Christ while
she dwells here temporally in many troubles and afflictions, she follows
Christ her spouse and head, who also delivers her from all adversity. She
loves Christ, and in the behalf of his truth she strives until the death:
for seeing Christ dyed for all, it is meet that they which are his, do follow
his foot-steppes. To follow Christ, is nothing else, than stoutly to suffer
and overcome despite and poverty in this world for his sake. And God truly,
even in his wrath (which we with our sins deserve) cannot forget his mercy.
Over and besides the manifold comfort and help which he otherwise declares
unto us, he has given us his own son, to be our mediator: by whom, if we put
our trust in him, we should be saved and delivered from eternal death, that we
living from hence forth still in faith, hope, and charitable love, as pilgrims
in this world: and being in all troubles and adversities preserved by the
corporal and spiritual comfort of God, might walk innocently before his
sight, in him who is become our way unto God. It is no vile thing to suffer,
and to be put to death for Christ and his truths sake: yea, a man cannot die a
more honorable death, than when for the truth innocently, he suffers with a
good conscience and with an upright mind. No man in deed ought to put
himself in danger arrogantly, wilfully, or for vainglory.

Whereas Peter asks a question concerning the disciple whom the Lord loved,
what he should do, it is a niceness and unprofitable curiosity, that serves
nothing to edification, and therefore it pleases not the Lord. Whatsoever
edifieth not, that ought not we to desire of Christ. Let every man look to
himself, waiting upon his own business and office and not to be curious in
another man's matter: whatsoever is not committed unto his charge, and belongs
not unto him, let him not meddle withal. Peter loved Christ, so did he them
also: therefore asked he what should become of him, and whether he should
remain still ot die, for he was very loath and unwilling to depart from him.
And so he passed more upon John, than upon the precept and commission of Jesus
Christ. Such curious back looking does the Lord rebuke.

We many and sundry times do regard and esteem more the thing that we
love, than that which God commands and bids us. But such love is very
hurtful, and especially in those that should be soul shepherds. Christ's will
is, that they have respect to his work and commandment, and with a fervent
love to perform the same, not meddling with other business not needful.

To enquire curiously of other men's matters, brings not always profit, but
much rather unquietness. Therefore Christ remoouing Peter from such curious
questions, draws his mind unto a better thing, namely, to follow him. As for
that which he desires to know, Christ tells him that it is no point of his
charge, as if Christ would say: what have thou to do with other folks
business? Thou have heard what I have commanded thee: look that thou faithfully
do the same. What inquirest thou after other men's matters.

Thus looking diligently and faithfully to our own charge, and expelling the
affection of the flesh, we should neither desire, curiously to ask any thing
beyond the will of God, neither to look upon any other men, but uprightly to
follow the Lord.

Here also we learn, that in the commission and final departure of the
faithful, there be manifold differences. Some rest in the Lord blessedly,
without any special heavy affliction: but some it pleases God to bring
through sore travail and exceeding trouble, laying the greater burden upon
him: according as it was told Peter before hand, that he should be crucified,
but not John.

They now that are admitted to feed Christ his sheep, prepare themselves, and
be always ready, without any curiosity to follow the will of God.

Whereas John in the conclusion of his book refuteth the erroneous opinion of
some, it is an evidence of his meekness and sincerity. It was not so spoken
of the Lord (says he) that the same Disciple should not die: whereby John
confessed, that he himself also was mortal. His writing will he have credited,
for he has written nothing save only the truth, whereof he may well testify
that which he has seen. Yet says he has not written all, but only that
whereby we may obtain eternal life: as we have heard sufficiently before.

THE eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, Math. 28.
into a mountain whereas Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they
worshipped him: but some doubted. And Jesus said: These are the words which I
spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all must needs be fulfilled,
which were written of me in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms. Then opened he their wits, that they might understand the
Scriptures, and said unto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behooued
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from death the third day, and that
repentance and remission of sin, should be preached in his name among all
nations, and must begin at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things.
And behold, I will send the promise of my Father upon you. But tarry ye in
the City of Jerusalem, till ye be endewed with power from on high.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE Lord minding to make his Disciples assured of his Resurrection,
instructs them first well in his passion, which he declares out of the
Scripture, and printeth it in their hearts. He teaches them, that it was
necessary, that Christ should suffer and die, yea even thus to die, namely,
upon a cross, upon a tree. On the tree was the transgression committed: upon
the tree behooued it the restitution to be made: upon the tree was death
fetched, upon the tree was life given: upon the tree must satisfaction be made
for the lusts of the flesh, which on the tree were first conceived. And would
God, that we rightly knew the passion and cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, then
should the glory of the resurrection be well known and loved of us.

O Jesus, grant us grace right to consider, what, wherefore, and with what love
and feruentnes thou have suffered for us, then shall our heart feel and
profitably enjoy the sweet fruit of thy resurrection: then shall our life
become new and of another sort, if we take upon us true penance, being sorry
for our sins, converting us unto thee, amending and changing our
conversation. Which with the gracious forgiveness of our sins, is declared
and promised unto us in the Gospel, according to thy commandment.

Esaias 2. Psalm. 109.
O what a joyful message is this, that such great grace should out of Sion be
showed unto us, which come of the heathen From this grace is no man shut out:
it is common unto every man, John. 5.
unless the unthankful exclude himself: as do they that love darkness more
than the light, and they that disdainfully enclose thy grace, and hedge in thy
Church, which thou by the preaching of repentance, and forgiveness of sins,
have commanded to be gathered unto thy self in the whole world: not only at
Jerusalem, but also in Samaria and Galilee, even unto the end of the world. O
God, suffer us not to be subject unto vain-glorie, and headines: remove all
contention and strife out of thy holy Church. Preserve us from scismes, and
all dissension: knitte us together in uniform love, which is an undoubted
token of thy children.

It behooued Jesus Christ to suffer, not for himself, but for our sakes, to
become the sacrifice for our sins: that he so satisfiyng the justice of GOD,
might make amends for our trespass, and deliver us from death. It behooued him
also to rise again, that he by his power might raise us up from the death of
sin to a new life, and by his own resurrection, to make us assured of ours, and
of immortal life.

Jesus came to his Disciples, and said unto them: Math John
To me is given all power in heaven and in earth. As my father has sent me,
so send I you. And when he had thus spoken, he breathed upon them, and
said: Receive ye the holy Ghost. Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven:
and whose sins ye reteyne, they are retained. Go therefore and teach all
people, Mark 28.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
And behold, I am with you every day until the end of the world. Go ye
therefore into the whole world, and preach the Gospel unto all creatures. Who
so believes and is baptized, Mark 16.
shall be saved: but he that will not believe, shall be condemned. The tokens
which shall follow those that believe are these: In my name they shall cast out
devils: They shall speak with new tongues: They shall take away serpents: And
if they drink any venomous thing, it shall not hurt them: They shall lay
hands upon the sick, and they shall be whole.

Doctrine and fruit.
WHEN Jesus with many evidences had certified his Disciples of his
Resurrection, he shows them now to what excellent glory, and how high power
his heavenly father has brought him, whereby their hearts might be stablished:
and how that all things are justly subdued unto him, who through the cross
has overcome, gotten a glorious victory, and suppressed the Prince of this
world. And though some now declare themselves contrary to his kingdom, and are
not obedient unto his power, but persecute and kill him in his members (saying:
Luke. 19.
We will not have him to reign over us) resisting and gathering themselves
together against God and his anointed king, Psalm. 2.
how mighty soever they be: yet shall he bruise them with an iron rod, and
as an earthen vessel all to break them: yea they must become his footstool,
Psalm. 109.
and he shall reign for ever.

As if he would say: In most perfect humility, in highest patience, and being
in greatest contumely, I have hitherto served you, and all mankind: but now
is the time come, that the Father will glorify me, and bring me to high
honor, which I had before the world was made, John. 17. Phil. 2.
that in my name all knees should bow: for I am set above all power, and
dominion, having all things in my hand. From henceforth shall I be
worshipped and honored of the Angels in heaven, and of all men upon earth.
And forasmuch as I have received a whole power over all flesh, I send you, not
only unto the Jews as before, but unto all nations in the whole world, Math.
10.
for in my self have I sanctified the whole nature of man. Look therefore
that ye declare this joyful and gracious message unto all men, and plant them
in with baptism unto the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. And
those whom ye baptize, see that ye teach to observe and keep all that ye have
received of me. Ye must also be stout, and not faint hearted. Many
afflictions, much evil will, great persecution, shall happen unto you: but
consider how mighty a Lord ye have, unto whom is given all power in heaven and
earth: he is able enough to defend and save you from all enemies. And albeit
that I go now from you as touching corporal habitation, yet will I be still
remaining with you, with my power, grace, woorking, and protection, until the
end of the world. Wherefore go your way, set your whole delight in me,
keep your selves unto me alone, so can ye not miscarrie.

O how excellent and great consolation is this unto all faithful and believing
hearts? O how mighty a strength is it in all adversities and dangers of this
world, to hear and consider, that all power in heaven and earth is given unto
Christ our Lord and king, under whose protection and wings we are safe and
well preserved? And who cannot understand that this promise reaches not only
unto the twelve Disciples, unto whom it was then made, but unto all faithful
believers, John. 17.
which through their doctrine are come unto Christ? For those twelve did not
continue in this life until the end of the world: and yet he says: I will
be with you until the end of the world. Wherefore we may well perceive, that
Christ until the end of the world, will be with all faithful believers: that
is to say, with his holy church, to instruct, teach, strengthen, comfort,
defend and deliver it, against all malicious violence of this world. John. 10
In his hand they are safe and well kept, and no man is able to pluck them out
of his hand. Although the world rage, and the devil the prince of the world,
set all his power (as great as it is) against the Church of Christ: Math. 16.
yet are not the gates of hell able to do any thing against it: for it is
founded and strongly builded upon Christ the rock: and he that is with it unto
the end of the world, is mightier than all enemies.

Now forasmuch as the disciples of Christ should bring the heavenly doctrine
throughout the whole world, man being yet of himself unable to comprehend the
doings of God: he therefore first expounded and declared the Scriptures unto
them, as Luke mentions: and seeing they were simple unlearned men, he opened
to them their understanding. But to the intent they might not think: What
should we poor simple bodies do against so many learned and wise men? Who will
arm us against those that are so mighty? Therefore he breaths upon them, and
says: Receive the holy Ghost, whom he there gives them, and therewith
strengthens them inwardly, but with much more power and might upon
Whitsonday: whereupon he commands them to wait at Hietusalem, Joel 2.
where he will send them the promise of the Father: clothing the weak with
heavenly strength, as with a garment, and arming them as with a shield.

What good thing then can he lack, or what evil thing can hurt him, which is
his messenger (that has all power in heaven and in earth) and with whom such
a king is ever abiding?

But when Christ would send out his disciples, he says unto them: As my father
has sent me, so send I you. Whereunto did the father send his son into the
world? Even that he should open the glory of the father unto the world: that
he should declare the will of the heavenly Father: that he should offer
health unto the world. This to do, Christ also sent forth his Disciples. He
sent them not to seek after vainglory, after power and riches, after
bodily pleasure and worldly pomp, but to do as he himself did. Luke. 15.
Christ sought the lost sheep, brought men unto the knowledge and love of the
true living GOD, taught them to lead a virtuous and honest life. He was a
Physician, Math. 9.
went to the sick, helped them, and healed them: John 6. John. 3.
he was not come to do his own will, but the will of his Father: he was not
come to condemn the world, but to save it.

In all this, ought the ministers of the word to follow Christ, and to do as
he did. Unto this new heavenly and godly life and work, Christ gives them
the holy Ghost. For like as he himself was risen into a new life: Even so
through his holy spirit, will he grant and give a new life unto those that
are his. Therefore breaths he upon them, to declare, that it is he, who at
the beginning made man, and now by his death had quickened him, and renewed
him: and that even he is the fountain and giver of the spirit. Thus unto his
Disciples he gave the firstlinges of the promised spirit, and with it a taste
of more and greater perfection, as an earnest penny.

All this declares, what belongs to true Apostles and Ministers of the
word, which are sent of Christ (for no man sends himself) what their office
is: and that they which seek the pleasures of the body, honor, praise, and
riches, are not followers of Christ, and successors of the Apostles Wherefore
most diligently ought we to pray unto GOD, that he will give us faithful
Ministers of the word, which looking truly to the work of Christ, may
lead us unto God.

But forasmuch as without the holy Ghost, nothing can be fruitfully done, we
must nevertheless pray for his holy spirit, who may in us stir up holy
thoughts and devout desires, directing and moving our will, and so giving power
and strength to accomplish the works of God, and steadfastly therein to
continue: and that the same holy spirit may illuminate and kindle our minds,
and provoke them unto all good and godly works. Considering then, that the
keys which were promised unto Peter, and in him to the whole Church. Matthew
16. are here given of Christ, we will also entreat somewhat thereof.

These keys are nothing else than the Gospel, Of the keys.
Christ now deduceth his oration from the common custom of men. Like as things
corporal are shut and opened with the key: so be the consciences of men shut or
bound with the Gospel. Thus are these the keys which Christ gives unto the
Apostles, vnburdening of consciences and souls. And that comes to pass, when
the holy Ghost illuminateth the mind that it understands the mysteries of
Christ, and commits it self thereunto. To be discharged or unbound, is,
when the mind that has despaired of health or salvation, is lift up to an
assured and undoubted hope. To bind, is, to leave the obstinate and
unbelieving mind unto it self. Jesus therefore sends forth his disciples,
to publish this health unto the whole world, and to exclude and separate no man
from this grace.

But first he gives them the holy Ghost (as John says) that is, he opens
their minds that they may understand the Scriptures, as Luke says: for what
is it else to open the understanding, but to give the holy Ghost? Meet is it
also and convenient, that they which by the Gospel should bear Christ
throughout the whole world, should receive the holy ghost. For if they should
preach Christ, it was necessary they had Christ's spirit, seeing that Christ
and they had one manner of thing in hand: as, Christ was sent of God, so were
they sent of Christ. Without fruit verily should the ministers of the word
preach the gospel, if they were not endued, illuminated, and inspired with the
holy Ghost.

Preach (says he) the gospel, that is the key wherewith the gate of heaven is
opened. Who so believes the Gospel when he hears it preached, and
understands it, feels comfort in his conscience, that he is delivered from
sin.

Now does the Gospel set before us, not only the grace of God by Christ,
through the which grace our sins are forgiven us, but also it teaches and
requires a new life. Neither does any man begin a new life, unless he first be
ashamed of the former old and wicked life. Luke 24
Therefore says Luke, that Christ opened the minds and understanding of the
disciples, that they might perceive the Scriptures, namely, that he might thus
and thus suffer, and rise again: and that in his name, that is, in his
commandment and power, conversion of life, and forgiveness of sins should
be preached and declared among all people.

Therefore when the poor sinner through the preaching of the holy Ghost,
hears his wicked and sinful life (for the holy gospel rebukes the world of
sin) he begins to know himself a sinner, and to be displeased, repentant
and sorry for his sins: he considers also, that he is well worthy of
eternal punishment and damnation. By means whereof, through the multitude and
greatness of his sins, he utterly dispaireth in his own power and
righteousness, and eternal salvation. But therewithal, he hears also, that
Christ (by reason of his sins) came down from heaven, and dyed for him upon
the cross, washed away al his sins with his blood, has reconciled him with
God, made him Gods child, and an eternal inheritour of his kingdom. And this
he steadfastly believes: I pray you does not such a man's heart leap for joy,
when he hears, that thorough Christ he is discharged of all the sins that
so sore pressed him?

The keys therefore are the pure word of God, which teaches men to know
themselves, and to put their trust in God through Christ. With that word, with
those keys do the ministers of the word open. For they that so are taught and
instructed by the word of God, that they put all their confidence in God,
through Christ, those verily are loosed and discharged of their sins. But he
that either will not hear, or when he hears, will not receive and believe
this grace declared to the world through Christ, and offered unto him by the
ministers of the word, him do the ministers bind, that is, they leave him still
in his error according as Christ commands his disciples, Mat. 10. that from
such as will not receive and hear their word, they shall depart, and shake off
the dust from their shoes upon them. Thus did Paul bind, Act. 13.18.

To bind then with the word, is nothing else, but (when the word of the grace
of God is preached, and not received) to leave such impenitent people, and to
have no fellowship, neither ought to do with the despisers of the truth and
grace. For in the day of judgment, it shall be easier unto Sodom and
Gomorrha, than unto such.

Now although the word that the Apostles preach, is not their own, but Gods,
and no man may cleanse, unbind, and discharge from sin, but only God, yet
Christ of his grace, and (according to the property of the Scripture)
ascribes such unto the Apostles. For the gracious father of his abundant love
and kindness (and by reason of the covenant that he has made with us) does
often ascribe unto us many things, which can properly belong unto none, save
only to himself. Neither is this any marvel, seeing he has given us his
only begotten and most dear son, to be our own: for how cannot he give us
al things with him?

Notwithstanding, we ought not by reason hereof to be high minded and proud,
and to ascribe unto our selves, that which only is Gods: but much rather to be
thankful for his grace, and diligent in our vocation, faithfully to employ and
bestow the high treasure and gifts of God, and not to abuse them. This thing
therefore extends not so far, as that every one man (properly to speak)
does of his own power and authority forgive sin. But forasmuch as the
Apostles and ministers of the word, do publish and declare remission of sin,
they bring the keys and forgive sins ministerially, and as ministers.
Nevertheless, if here withal the spirit of God do not work in the hearer to
believe the word when it is prached, then is not the sin forgiven: All the
power therefore and working is Gods.

Thus the Apostles may damn no man, but undoubtedly they may by the word
declare damnation to the unbelievers. Where an assured promise of grace is
declared, there sins are forgiven. The holy Ghost that works in the
Apostles forgiueth the sins.
Now when the Apostles show unto sinners remission of sin, they do it out
of the holy Ghost, and are not deceived: for they preach, that our sins are
pardoned us through Christ, who has made satisfaction for them. If this faith
upon Christ, be lively in us, Note this condition well
so that we abhor sin, and be desirous of heavenly things, then are our
sins forgiven us through the holy Ghost, for no man can say, that Jesus is
the Lord but by the holy Ghost.

The key there extends to this end, that the minister declare remission of
sins thorough Christ. Who so now believes the Gospel preached, shall be
saved: he that believes not shall be condemned. And seeing that faith is an
inward thing in the soul inspired of God, the minister cannot know who in the
sight of God believes, or believes not: for God only knows the heart.
Howbeit by the outward confession, which is done with the mouth, and by
receiving of the preaching, and by the fruits, the minister may judge. For who
so receives the word, openly confessing Christ, and does not outwardly
defile himself with vile deeds, to such the minister opens with the key,
and discharges them: that is, he takes them into the Church of Christ,
numbereth them among the people of God, and receives the^ into the kingdom of
heaven. As for those that will not hear the word preached, or that when they
hear it, do refuse it, not confessing Christ, or uttering their unbelief
with foul gross and open vices, those the minister binds: that is, he
shuts them out of the Church, and banisheth them out of the realm of
heaven. To him that is in the Church, is forgiveness of sins promised: who
so despises charitable love, has not faith: upon such one remains sin
still, and the wrath of God.

Now what the Apostles and Ministers of the word do, that do they not in
their own name, not in their own power: but as they which are sent of God and
that declare his word, the holy gospel, out of the power of God, even out of
the holy Ghost, who being given unto them, does speak and work by them. What
these bind, is bound before God, and in heaven, for out of God is it that they
judge: and what they unbind, is unbound before God, for God will ratify and
allow what they do, that being sent of him, keep themselves in exercise,
and meddle within his word and commission. As for him that is not sent of God,
and declares not his word and Gospel, but of his own proper power will
bind one man, and unbind another, set this man in heaven, and that man in
hell: is it any marvel if such one do many times miss and be called a wolf
and not a shepherd, seeing his proceedings comes not of God?

Here also we learn, with what desire and thankfulness, we ought to receive
the ministers of God, that bring us his holy word, and comfort of our
conscience: how we ought to esteem them that have the holy Ghost, who
speaks unto us by them. Luke. 1^ Heb. 13.
For if we despise them, we despise God himself. S. Paul therefore exhorts
us, to be obedient unto them, and to have them in worthy estimation that show
us the word of God. Worthy they be of double honor, partly, for that through
them God speaks, whose ministers and ambassadors they be: 1. Tim. 5.
for the highest king of all sends them out unto us with his commission,
partly, for that they be charged with so dangerous and heavy an office and
travel. For, 2. Cor. 5
though as concerning themselves they live justly, well, and blameless, yet if
they regard not the life of their sheep, but neglect them, they must look
for great and sore punishment. Not only for themselves must they give account,
but for all the souls that are committed unto them, if one of them perish
through their negligence. We should not therefore have respect to the
infirmity or baseness of the ministry, but unto him that sent him, and
whose commission he executes. When a Prince or king sends out a mean
servant with a commission and charge, who will despise him without the wrath
and indignation of the prince? How can we then contemn the ministers of the
high eternal king, without plague and punishment?

This be spoken, not that unworthy and unmeet men should be placed in so high
an office, or that we should delight in their evil: but to the intent that
malicious judgment may be avoided, and that there be no villainy done to the
anointed of the Lord. More respect and regard should we have to the word of
God that they bring unto us, than to their living and ^aults: more to the giver
than to the minister. It is not they that work, but God works through his
own power, he cannot fail us in his promise. The minister lends his hand
and mouth, but the holy Ghost works in the hearts of the believers, neither
can the wickedness of the Priest diminish or hinder that operation. If we our
selves have pure, clean and faithful believing minds. It is not the
uncleanness of the minister that can either defile or hurt us.

This is now the story of the Resurrection of Christ, wherein we see, how the
goodness of the Lord wondefully strives with the weak faith of those that are
his. For when the Angels could not persuade them that he was risen again, he
himself appears unto them alive, and proves by many evident testimonies,
that he is of a truth risen again and revived, talks with them, eats with
them, offers himself unto them, that they may see him and handle him,
sends the women and certain disciples for witnesses, and leaves nothing
unattempted that may persuade them. For in the faith and belief of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ lies all our welfare. We must therefore beseech
Almighty God to establish in us this faith, and by his spirit mightily to
work, that we from sin may truly rise again, to a new and godly life,
and afterward with our bodies to enter into an immortal and everlasting life.
Hereunto help us God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Amen.

Here ends the Sermons upon the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, according to
the true copy of the Author: and now follows the Sermons of the Ascension.
THE ASCENSION OF JESUS CHRIST, out of the holy Evangelists.
JESUS lead his Disciples out into Bethanie. And when he had brought them
together, he spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem: but to wait for the promise of the
father. For John (says he) baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with
the holy Ghost after these few days. When they therefore were come together,
they asked of him* saying: Lord, will thou at this time restore again the
kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them: It is not for you to know the times
and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power: But ye shall
receive power after that the holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses unto me not only in Jerusalem, but also in all Jury, and in
Samaria, and even unto the worlds end. Now when Jesus had spoken these words
unto them, he lifted up his hands, and blessed them, and was taken up, and a
clowd received him out of their sight: so that he departed from them, and was
carried up in heaven, and sits on the right hand of God. And whilst they
looked steadfastly up toward heaven, as he went behold two men stood by them in
white apparel: which also said: Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? The same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come even as you have seen him go into heaven: So when they had worshipped
him, they returned with great joy into Jerusalem from Mount Oliuet: which is
from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey. And when they were come in, they went
up into a parlour where abode Peter and James, John and Andrew, Philip and
Thomas, Bartholmew and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus and Simon Zelotes,
and Judas the brother of James. These all continued still with one accord in
the temple, lauding and praising God, and making their prayers with the women,
and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

Doctrine and fruit.
John. 13.
CHrist who loved his Disciples, declares unto them his love, even unto the
end: Math 28.
yea he never cease to love them For though he leave them as concerning his
bodily presence: yet with his love, grace, and power, he is ever still with
them. Forasmuch now as after sufficient proof of his resurrection, he will
depart from them, and go to his Father that had sent him: he takes them forth
with him unto the place, from whence he minds to depart from them. And
manifestly before their eyes, he ascends into heaven into the glory of his
father: that they might be witnesses, as well of his glorious ascension, as of
all other things which they had heard and seen before. O how fervent words
spoke he then unto them? How deeply entered he into their hearts? How
earnestly printed he those his last words into them? The eternal wisdom
speaks nothing vainly, nothing slenderly, nothing without profit. Although
the Disciples (as men yet somewhat carnal) do ask questions concerning the
restitution of a bodily and temporal kingdom: yet makes he no answer unto
their demand, but directs them unto that which is for their profie, and
belongs to their office, drawing their hearts from the earthly kingdom, (from
the which they ought to be mortified) unto the kingdom of heaven, even unto
the kingdom of God: in the which he himself is king, and into the which they
now were received as citizens, that they should declare the same throughout the
whole world and offer it unto all men.

This is the gospel of the kingdom of God, which for a testimony unto all
nations, must be preached in the whole world, to witness the grace of GOD
unto the elect. But to the damned and unbelievers, a testimony of their
damnation: in that they are convinced of their own infidelity, and shall have
no excuse, if they contemn and despise the grace offered unto them. By this
ought we also to learn, to see such things which are most profitable, and
wholesome unto us: and which bring us the nearest way to put our trust in God,
and to love our neighbors, for that part of the play is ours. As for
unprofitable and contentious questions, if we meddle not with them* then the
less division, and the more love and edifieng in the Church of God shall
follow. Many times are we too much careful, for such things as we desire
our selves: as what end this thing or that will come unto, when God will set
up our prosperity, and what shall be done hereafter, when and how God will
punish those that are against us. And this temptation, carnal zeal, and
curiosity, chances often even in the hearts of the faithful: as we see here
in the Disciples of Christ. Sometimes there be froward and wicked minds,
which pretending to be Christians, seek out of the Gospel nothing but
honor, lucre, and profit. but such be both false and fained. Notwithstanding
(all these set apart) we ought to commit and refer all things unto our
merciful creator and gracious father, who can right well order and dispose
them, how and when he will, as he thinks best to further his glory, and to
edify his elect children. Our care ought rather to be, how we may lead a
godly life, and beautify the faith of Christ with good works. We must
look, that we be neither ungodly, nor hypocrites: but to live virtuously
and innocently in his sight, and patiently at his hand to wait for our
deliverance. The kingdom of Christ that is published and offered through the
Gospel, is not a corporal but a spiritual kingdom: neither consists it in
outward things, but in a pure and faithful believing heart, and yet reaches
it throughout the whole world, and amongst all nations. In the hearts of all
faithful believers does Christ reign through his spirit, and there
overcomes he the devil, sin, and death.

And to the intent they should well understand this kingdom, he commands
them to wait for the holy spirit, whom he had promised them: as if he would
say; Now go I to my Father, now enter I into my kingdom, that I may mightily
reign upon the earth: this thing ye understand not, but when the spirit is
given you, ye shall perceive it well. All things in heaven and in earth, are
given into my power: In those that are mine shall I reign, and make them
righteous through faith: yea invincible shall I make them against all enemies:
hereof shall ye bear witness when ye are baptized through the holy Ghost.

This my kingdom shall ye publish in all nations, from one end of the world
to another. Thus shall I reign from sea to sea, of the which my kingdom the
Prophets spoke so much before. Of this kingdom does Christ take possession
through his ascending up to the Father, at whose right hand, and in this
kingdom he sits: reigning much more mightily in his Church, and working
more effectuously in those that be his, than he did before when he lived yet
corporally with him.

Thus taking his leave, he gives them loving words, comfort them, and
admonishes them of their office, that they all may be diligent therein, that
they continually direct and lift up their hearts into that kingdom. and that
they take in hand to bring all men to the same into the obedience of Christ.
His blessing he gives them, saluting them, wishing them good, and praying
heartily unto his Father for them.

Thus was he taken from them, and carried into heaven. By the heaven we
understand the incomprehensible light in the which God dwells: and which no
mortal man can attain unto. From thence came Christ unto us, and thither is
he gone again, even into the invisible glory and clearenes of God. For the
eternal word and power of GOD, dwelling in Gods incomprehensible light from
everlasting, became man: and had his conversation upon earth in all parts
(sin except) as a very true man. But when he had fully finished and
thoroughly ended the work that was given him in commission of his heavenly
Father, and had obeyed him even unto the death, for as much as in all things
he had honored and glorified his Father upon earth: it was convenient that
the Father also should glorify his Son. And therefore raised he him from
death, and took him up into heaven: not after the Godhead (for so was he
always in heaven) but after the manhood. For his true humane nature which he
took upon him for our sakes, is carried and taken up out of this world into
the invisible honor and glory, into the highest incomprehensible, and into
the perfect fruition of the Godhead.

In this honor and glory Christ dwells and reigns, and yet amongst those
that are his, does he finish and perform all things by his spirit, having
governance in the hearts of the faithful, through belief, through love,
through patience, and innocence of life.

To the intent now that this kingdom might be erected in the hearts of men, it
was necessary that he should give his disciples commission to publish the
same, and to prepare men's minds thereunto through the preaching of the Gospel.
But first he made the minds of his disciples ready and apt to receive the
holy ghost, whom he afterward poured into others by them, and therefore he
commanded them (until the spirit appear and open the work) to wait still
at Jerusalem: from the which place the kingdom of Christ was afterward
planted in all the world. Of the promise of the spirit, read Esaias. 44. Iere.
31. Ezech. 36. Joel. 2. John. 19.16.

Considering that the mystery of Christ's ascension is great and excellent, and
that there is notable power contained therein to those that be faithful
believers: the Evangelists do therefore describe very perfectly, the time,
the place, the persons, with all circumstances and assured testimonies thereof.
He ascends up before his disciples, that they might openly and evidently see
it with their eyes: there did appear Angels, as messengers and witnesses from
heaven, even two of them, that in the mouth of two all truth might be
established. The white apparel signifies the evident glory, into the which
Christ is taken up, as a noble, royal, and mighty king and conqueror,
entering into his heavenly kingdom.

Thus the high and glorious king, clothed with our nature, is entered into our
royal palace, as one that minds faithfully to dispatch our matters. He is
our own mediator and advocate in the presence of the Father: notwithstanding
our sins committed, we have a free entrance unto GOD by him. Our flesh has
he in himself carried up, and exalted our nature unto the right hand of GOD
the Father. Wherefore we that are bones of his bones and flesh of his flesh,
do justly conceive a comfortable and assured hope, that our mortal bodies
also shall be taken up, and have immortal and eternal joy.

The earnest penny of his spirit has he given and left behind him unto us,
and contrariwise he has of us taken an earnest penny and pledge: namely our
sinful and wicked flesh, which he in himself has carried up into the
kingdom of heaven. Now where the parcel is, there shall also be the whole
sum.

By this, we that are flesh and blood, have a comfortable and assured trust,
that in Christ we shall have the possession and inheritance of heaven. Our
sins in him are recompensed, heaven in him is opened, in him is the hope of
immortal life sealed and made sure unto us: Christ the victorious and glorious
conqueror is able to defend his church. So that from henceforth no man shall
have power, to condemn his elect and faithful believers. Romans 8. Heb.
5.7.8.10.

That his flesh is with-drawne from us, and taken into heaven: it is our great
profit, to the intent that all our devotion and Gods service may be directed
vpwardes in the spirit: and that the minds of faithful believers may be
drawn from earthly unto heavenly things, even unto the place where Christ
sits on the right hand of GOD the Father.

When the Disciples saw that their Schoolemaister was taken away from them
into heaven: they perceived and considered the thing that they knew not
before, although Christ had told it them. John. 6. Namely, that by the
Ascension they should receive understanding. Therefore they worshipped Jesus
Christ, and according unto his commandment, they returned to Jerusalem:
where they kept themselves until the time that the spirit came: neither were
they idle, but continued in the holy fellowshippe and godly exercises, with
prayer and devotion, preparing and making themselves ready unto the coming of
the spirit.

By occasion hereof (all niceness, curiosity, and contentious questions, all
pride, vainglory, and fond affections and desires set aparte) we ought
with upright minds, and with the eyes of faith to be always taken up into
heaven, and there to have our dwelling, where Christ our head sits at the
right hand of God, king and Lord of all things, our faithful advocate and
mediator. Then shall true godliness increase, then shall virtue blessedlie
grow and bring forth fruit in us, if we with steadfast faith do consider,
that our Lord Jesus Christ dyed for our sakes, rose again from death, and is
exalted at the right hand of God, reigning mightily above all things in heaven,
and finishing our salvation, if we in spirit and in the truth worship and
honor him, as the eternal God: confessing with a true faith, that all power is
given unto him of God the father, that he cares for us, and that for our
healths sake he rules and shall reign, until all things be brought under
his feet. In the mean time he daily in his church purifieth al his members by
his spirit, cleansing them still more and more from all their sins. And when
he shall have rooted out all sin in his elect, ouercomming death the last
enemy, so that God shall be all in all, then shall Christ also give up his
kingdom unto God the father, namely, the mediation for our sins, the purging
of the same, defense against the devil, and deliverance from death. For then
shall there be no more sin in the elect, so that he shall not need to be
mediator for them, to purge from sin, to defend against the devil, or to
deliver from death.

Oh merciful father, grant us perfectly to know thy blessed and glorious
kingdom of Christ thy son, draw up our hearts in such sort, that we with
all obedience may yield our selves into this kingdom, seeing and regarding
only those things that are above, and wholly applying our selves unto this
end, that the same heavenly kingdom may be far spread abroad, and known
unto all men. To the intent, that as for all worldly things, wherein many
foolish people set all their salvation, but in vain: men may utterly refuse
them, and heartily with body and soul, and with their whole life, may give
over themselves perfectly unto the only Lord Jesus Christ, the true God. For
thy good pleasure it was (O God) that in him all perfectnes should dwell, and
that by him al things toward thee, should be reconciled and pacified through
his blood, whether they be in heaven or in earth. Grant us (O God) unity and
brotherly love in thy holy Church, kindle our hearts to fervent and devout
prayer: make us diligently to watch and circumspectly to wait for the coming
of thy beloved son, that we neither be drunken in excess and bodily lust,
nor entangled with the snares of this world: but that we having always the
eyes of our heart open, and praying with upright minds, may chearefully meet
our redeemer, and joy with him for ever. To him be eternal praise and honor.
Amen.

THE SENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST.
WHen the fifty days were come to an end, Acts. ^.
they were all with one accord together in one place, and suddenly there came
a sound from heaven, as it had been the coming of a mighty wind, and it
filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongs, like as they had bin of fire, and it sat upon each one of them: and
they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, even as the same spirit gave them utterance.

Doctrine and fruit.
Here the Euanglist Luke describes how that after Christ entered into his
glory, the Gospel (even the heavenly doctrine and grace) was opened unto the
world down from heaven, by a glorious and great miracle. For though the law
(which is the will of God) and also the Gospel, that is his grace, has from
the beginning been always in the world: namely, in the hearts of Gods
elect children: yet was each one of them at several times, gloriously uttered
unto the world by manifest and apparent miracle. And like as the holy Ghost
was in the hearts of the faithful believers (for after the Resurrection he
gave the spirit unto the Disciples) even so here he gives them the spirit,
with an open miracle, and with a more perfect woorking and power. For the
spirit which Christ gave them after his Resurrection when he breathed upon
them, was even this day with more perfection: that is to say, his operation and
strength declared it self more evidently, and more perfectly, and showed his
presence by the visible miracle.

Thus is it here described, how the promise of Christ and of the Prophets made
as concerning the holy Ghost, were fulfilled: and how the same holy Ghost,
who is the teacher of the truth, the earnest penny of salvation, the wedding
ring of grace, and joy of the mind was given. Now when it is said that the
holy Ghost is given unto men, the same may be understood of the gifts and
operations of the holy Ghost: for though GOD may be comprehended of man's
mind, yet can he not be included or shut therein. Nevertheless, his gifts
according to his will and pleasure, are poured and measured into our hearts,
unto every one so much as may ferue^ (...) ^fite.

Who so is desirous to know (...) Ghost is promised unto faithful bele^ (...)
read Ezech. 36.39. Joel. 2. Math. 3. Now (...) God the Father has promised by
his Mini^ (...) same also does Christ his son promise: where^, we may see
that the son has like power with the father, and that there is but one only
spirit of them both: as we may read Luke 12. John. 7.14.15.16.20.

But before we come to the sending of the spirit, we will first
substantially and well peruse the story, and look what may be gathered
thereof: For here is nothing written or set down in vain.

The Evangelist does here make mention of the fifth day, upon the which this
great wonder was don. In the which there lies hid a notable mystery. Ezod.
25. Deuteronomy. 16
The Jews from the day that they offered the Easter Lamb, told fifty days,
and upon the fiftith day was the feast of weeks: In the which feast they kept
holyday, offering unto GOD a willing sacrifice of the first fruits when they
cut them down: We begin to number from the resurrection of Christ our
Easter lamb, who also was offered up. Upon the fiftith day when the fruits
began now to be ripe and ready to be reaped, the harvest also being great,
Math. 9.
and the laborers few, then sent God his spirit to prepare and furnish the
Disciples, John. 4.
that they from amongst the heathen might gather fruit together unto (...)
^ore time when the children (...) out of Egypt, the law was gi^ (...) people
upon the fifth day: even (...) ^nient that upon the fifth day the holy (...) be
given to the Disciples: which ho^ (...) is both an interpreter and fulfiller of
the ^we. The place where the holy Ghost was given, is Sion, for there Christ
commanded his Disciples to wait: (...). 2. Mich. 4.
and from that place should the law of GOD (according to the saying of the
Prophets) proceed forth into the whole world. Therefore like as before time
the law was given upon mount Sinay: even so was the spirit given upon mount
Sion. Upon Sinai did God at that time with some terrible things declare his
might and power, his plague also and vengeance, which should fall upon those
that despised his law: and therefore was there such fearefulnes through
lightnings, thunderings, and other like terrible things. Here there is heard a
noise, mighty and vehement, Note.
but not horrible and fearful: in the which wind is signified, that the
doctrine of the spirit should speedily and with power break in through the
world* and bring fruit: and that no man should be so mighty as to hinder the
strength thereof, even as the wind in his course can by no man be kept back.

Whereas fiery tongues do appear, and are seen, it signifies the manifold
speeches and instruction, which the spirit gives to Christ's Disciples, the
zeal also and feruentnes that he works in their hearts: making them altogether
fire, and kindling them in such sort, that even their words are fervent, and
pierce afterward into the hearts of others. A^ (...) fear and coldness
remoueth he out of the (...) they are not afraid manfully to step forth
(...) all the people, although not long before (...) not abide, but fled from
the Lord.

Now they confess him to be the Savior of all the world, whom they before
had denied. Whereas the tongues were divided, it signifies the diversity of
the gifts of the spirit. Christ promised them in Mark. 16. that they should
speak with other tungs, or with a new speech or language: which promise is now
performed unto them. Ephesians. 4. Col. 4.
The tongues of Christian men ought to be garnished with gentleness, and with
the holy Ghost, that no foul or wanton talk proceed out of their mouth. The
tongues that pronounce and confess Christ the eternal truth, and his sincere
spirit, must not lie, neither talk any unclean, hurtful, nor venomous thing:
for unto all such is the spirit enemy. Therefore are they not fleshly but
fiery and spiritual tongues: out of the which the fire of the spirit has
consumed all moisture of worldly and carnal wantonness, and God with his own
love has kindled them. How could the Apostles else have been instructors of
the whole world, if the spirit had not taught them the diversity of tongues?
Of signs.
Oh the great wisdom and grace of God, who at all times for our wealth has
set forth and offered unto us poor men, his high, spiritual, and heavenly
things, under corporal and visible tokens! For how might we carnal men else
understand godly matters, if they were not exhibited with visible and bodily
things. (...) God always this custom, that he (...) unto us his high gifts
under those tokens, (...) most known of us, and likest unto those (...) which
he offers us: and so with human (...), he covers divine and godly
things. Not that God is closed or shut in with things of men, but that
celestial and heavenly things forsoorth unto us by such as be earthly, might
be of us the better understood. For else every man of knowledge wotteth well,
that the holy Ghost is not a dooue, neither a wind, a tongue, fire, nor water:
For GOD is not a thing corporal, neither a thing that can be felt or
comprehended, with outward senses. Notwithstanding things invisible are the
better known and perceived of us, when they be set forth and represented by
visible things: namely, by such as have some similitude with the invisible and
spiritual things: And (so far as natural things may set forth heavenly
matters) do perfectly describe before our eyes, the nature and property of
them. Therefore does the spirit appear in the form of fiery tongues, and
with a sound, that thereby the two principal senses of man might be moved,
namely, his hearing and seeing: for the sound touches the ears, and the fire
moves the sight.

Like as Christ also in the supper with bread and wine, to move the outward
senses of man: thought to represent his body and blood. For by bread is
signified unto us, the true body of Christ which died for us upon the cross,
and by wine the blood that was shed for our sins, which true flesh and blood,
they that believe, do at the supper eat and drink through faith. By the
which food and sustenance, their souls are vpholden to the gracious and
eternal life.

Thus with exterior tokens it pleased the wisdom of God, to guide the outward
senses of his Disciples into the obedience of faith, and under the same, to
signify and declare the strength and operation of the holy Ghost. For like as
the wind blows through the whole earth, piercing, moving and altering all
privy and secret places: Even so the spirit of God goes through all things,
searching all secret corners and inward minds of men. Mightily also he
woorketh in men's hearts, kindling and changing them. He is the clear, pure,
and hot fire, that consumes all filthiness of sin, inspiring men's hearts, and
drawing them upward to God.

Without this spirit may a man work no fruitful thing, yea think no good
thing: For man is nothing but flesh, neither considers he of himself ought
that is spiritual or godly, but only carnal things. Forasmuch now as the
wisest and most gracious God, knows this so to be, whereas he has made man
his creature, to have fruition of himself: he will not suffer him to corrupt in
the flesh, but give him his own holy spirit.

God the father, through Christ his eternal word, did shape man out of the
mould of the earth, and created him after his own similitude and li^^nes. Now
is God a spirit, therefore the image of God in man must needs be spiritual:
which image in the inward man is such a thing, as partly does express and
declare God that created him.

But when man being deceived through the devil fell into sin, and lost this
image: then the proportion of Gods pure spirit (in whom his image was
printed) was defaced, and the image of God lost his beauty. So that the noble
man who at the first was of God, so fair and goodly fashioned and beautified
in the similitude of God: became after sin like unto the devil, filthy, and
shameful, yea altogether carnal, having nothing more of the spirit in him,
as the scripture in the book of creation testifies. Genes. 6.
For as much now as the miserable man was degenerate from the noble,
spiritual, and godly nature, to an unclean, carnal, and devilish
disposition, becoming altogether flesh: he was able no more either to think
or work any spiritual or godly thing.

All his thoughts and imaginations are carnal, in that he is fallen into
eternal death, and has lost the life of the spirit: for the affections and
lusts of the flesh are death; but the desires of the spirit are life and
peace. Romans 8.
The affections of the flesh are enmity against God, for the flesh is not
subject unto the law of GOD, neither can be: they therefore which are in the
flesh, cannot please GOD. Now when man who had taken so hurtful a fall, was
brought down from life unto death, from the grace of God into his wrath: life
might not be given him again but by the spirit of God, whom man by sin
has lost.

Therefore like as the Father at the beginning had created man: so fashioneth
he him again by his Son* who overcomes and destroys death, and gives
unto us again the way of immortality. Sap. 1.
For into a froward soul enters not the spirit of GOD: therefore is it
convenient and necessary, that such soul and corrupt flesh be purged and
cleansed again. By Christ the eternal word were all things created, by him
therefore after the fall must all things be restored again: for this cause
died Christ upon the cross, to banish the sin of the world, and to make
satisfaction for it. From death also he rises again, to give us a certain
and assured hope, and an undoubted pledge of an immortal and eternal life,
and that he has overcome death and sin for us.

Immediately after the resurrection, John. 20.
he breaths upon his disciples, and gives them the holy Ghost: to declare
that he is the same, who at the beginning created our nature, and sealed it it
with his spirit, and that it is even he who now in the beginning of a new
life, must by his spirit renew and restore our decayed nature again, Heb. 1.
Col. 1.
that thus Christ who is the living and express image of the invisible GOD,
may be fashioned and fourmed of the new in us: Gal. 4.
now cannot Christ the image of GOD be right proportioned and renewed in us
but by the holy Ghost. Now like as Christ after the resurrection gave his
Disciples the spirit, to print into them a new life, whereby they knew and
were assured, that he was the fountain and giver of the spirit, (and
therefore he said, John. 16. Math. 28.
All that the Father has is mine: Item, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth) even so immediately after the same, he ascended up into heaven,
to declare unto them, that he was the Lord of all things. Col 3.
Out of the high and real throne where he sits at the right hand of God his
Father, Christ the eternal king sent down his holy spirit upon all flesh,
Ephesians 4.
that we by him might obtain the old innocence and salvation again: and that
the Image of God stained and defiled by sin, might be restored unto us, and
that we thus might become partakers of eternal life. What they be unto whom
God gives his spirit, that see we well here: namely, even unto those, that in
unity of faith, and fervent love, are gathered together with one accord; for
of all unity he is the fountain and original. In contentious and proud
hearts dwells not the holy Ghost: therefore is it meet that we pray.

Come (O holy spirit) replenish the hearts of thy faithful believers, and
kindle in them the fire of thy love; thou that through manifold tongues have
gathered together all the nations of the heathen in unity of faith: O take all
dissension and discord out of thy holy Church, and make us to be of one mind
in unfeigned love, without the which we cannot please thee.

THere were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of every nation of
them that are in heaven: now when this was noysed about, the multitude came
together, and were astonished, because that every man heard them speak with his
own language. They wondered all and marvelled saying amongst themselves:
Behold, are not all these which speak of Galilee? and how hear we every
man his own tongue, wherein we were borne? Partheans and Medes, and Elemytes,
and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iewrie, and of Capadocia, of Pontus
and Asia, Phrigia and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Lybia, which
is besides Siren, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Greeks and
Arabians: we have heard them speak in our own tongues the great works of God.

Doctrine and fruit.
THE eternal wisdom has endued all good minds diligently to learn and
search the thing wherein they think to find that which they desire: and what
can be more worthy to be desired, or more acceptable to the mind of man, than
eternal life and salvation, which only consists in God the highest good of
all. Now was the sacred scripture given of the holy Ghost, that man thereby
might be guided and lead unto salvation, and to most excellent felicity. For
they that exercise themselves in holy scripture, studying and perusing it,
ought thus to do; even to direct themselves and others unto life. Therefore by
the ordinance of God, there has been ever men in all nations, which to
instruct others, have applied themselves to the scripture: as among the Jews
we find Leui, of whom in the Prophet Malachie it is written, Mal. 2.
that the law of the truth was in his mouth, and no wickedness in his lips,
that he walked before God in peace and equity, and converted many from
ungodliness: for the lips of the Priest are sure of knowledge, and the law is
required at his mouth, for he is a messenger of the Lord of hosts. Thus as it
may well be coniectured, there were at Jerusalem congregations of learned men,
that exercised themselves in the holy scripture. For though all wisdom come
of God (as the fountain and well) and no man can be learned whom God himself
teaches not: yet will not he give his grace, spirit, and knowledge, to the
idle, slothful, and unthankful, neither to the proud, but unto those that
with meeknes and fear of God practice themselves in the scripture, and that
applying unto fervent prayer, do not despise the means and gracious gifts
granted them of God.

And if any man will say, that all falsehood and destruction, all erroneous
doctrine and discord were come into the church by such as be learned, let him
consider, that the thing which in himself is good, ought not for the abuses
sake to be refused, remove the abuse, and then the thing is good and
profitable. Wine is a profitable and wholesome thing, created of GOD for the
behoof of man, and is never dispraised of any witty man to be evil, because
many do abuse it, and is drunken: Even so is holy scripture and other
profitable sciences, to be esteemed as high gifts, although many men puffed up
with pride, blinded in covetousness, and entangled with other affections, have
misused the same scriptures.

In the Papistry, the Universities, Colleges, cathedral Churches, and
Monasteries, have highly exalted the Pope and his false faith, and by false
interpretation of the scripture brought him so far, that the doctrine of the
faith and Christ is utterly darkened. Now whereas lewd learned with false
science, with wrong understanding of scripture, have brought such high things,
great goods, and plentiful riches to pass, drawing so much people unto
themselves: we ought not therefore to cease from reading and exercising of the
scripture, but to take upon us to further the true religion, and faith of
Christ, and to set it forth again with no less diligence than they do
theirs. If we will that the true faith of Christ shall grow, continue, and
increase, then we must bring the same to pass by true understanding of the
scripture, by pure, sound, and wholesome doctrine. With the truth must lies
be banished, with sound doctrine must false be rooted out, with the light
must darkness be expelled. But how can the true understanding of the
scripture, the undoubted, wholesome, and sound doctrine be had: when men do
neither exercise and employ themselves, nor apply their endeavor, study, and
diligence therein?

All the charges therefore and expenses, which heretofore have been bestowed
upon the unprofitable and noisome learned men, ought now to be converted to
godly Colleges and studies, to the intent that little seeds which God has laid
up in young wits, may fruitfully grow, be planted and brought forth. If thou
seek wisdom as the gold (says Solomon) thou shall find it. Gold is with
great travail and labor dug out of the inward and secret veins of the
earth, and of the high hills, it raineth not down upon men's heads: even so
must knowledge and wisdom be gotten with great travail and diligence, not
with loytering and idleness. But when God gives us his gifts, we must look
that we be not unfaithful in them, but use and bestow them to his glory, and
edifiyng of his Church. Where godliness comes to knowledge, or where they
two are together in one man, God is highly to be thanked for so excellent a
gift and grace, and greatly is such a gift to be had in estimation: but
whereas pride, heaviness, contention, greedines, and self love, is in a learned
man, there is not a more hurtful poison found upon the earth.

O God, thou that of thy grace and fatherly love, have given so good and
excellent gifts with singular light of all sciences: grant unto such as be
learned a heart and mind, that in all things they may have respect only to thy
glory, and that in all their readings, writings, teachings, and doctrines,
they may prefer the same. 1. Cor. 8.
For knowledge puffs a man up, but love edifieth. O suffer not thy holy and
excellent gifts to be stained, defiled, and marred, with the filthy dirt of
men's affections. Grant that our studies be not heathenish, but godly and
Christian. Preserve the tender and good youth from wicked and ungodly
schoolmaisters, that the pure hearts which thou have consecrated to be a temple
for thee and thy holy spirit, be not polluted with vice and filthiness.

To testimonial amazed and wondered, Acts. 2.
saying one to an^ (...) What means this? Other mocked, saying: (...) of new
minds. But Peter stepped forth (...), and lift up his voice, and said unto them:
(...), and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this (...) you, and with your
ears hear my words, for these are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it is
but the third (...) of the day: but this is that which was spoken by the
Prophet Joel. And it shall be in the last days (says God) I will pour out of
my spirit in those days, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.
And on my servants, and on my hand-maides I will pour out of my spirit in
those days, and they shall prophecy, and I will show wonders in heaven above,
and tokens in the earth beneath, blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke, the
sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before before
that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Doctrine and fruit.
WHen the truth is published in the church of Christ, and the power of God
utters it self, there be always some simple people, that of good mind
seek to know that which they understand not, and therefore they demand
questions* unto those the Lord does gladly open himself. But again there be
others that despise, slander, mock, and abhor all holy things, as in the old
and new Testament we have many witnesses of the same. Ierem. 20.26.32. John.
8.10.11. Acts. 17. For the natural man understands not the things that
appertain unto God. 1. Cor. 2.
And thus do they most of all which being puffed up in the wisdom and
science of man, have nor yet attained to the spirit and right kernel of the
scripture: in the sight of which men, 1. Cor. 1. Math. 11.
the wisdom of God, and preaching of the cross of Jesus Christ, is but a
derision and foolishnes. But blessed are they that in the singlenes of their
heart, with pure minds in meeknes, obedience, and in the true fear of God,
submit themselves unto his doctrine: Math. 11. Luke 24.
from them cannot God hide himself, but opens their minds, that they may
understand the scriptures. For they that of a good mind do here ask the
question; What means this? are afterward converted by Peter's preaching.
Peter the fervent Disciple of Christ, the faithful shepherd of Christ's sheep,
as soon as he receives the spirit, is bold to step forth, and to confess
him, whom before he had denied.

But first he persuades that the Disciples were not drunken; for if such vice
were in the Ministers of Christ, and they truly convinced thereof, it should
bring unto the Gospel and name of Christ, great hinderaunce, stain his
doctrine, and make it to be despised and subject. Most diligent therefore ought
we to be, in keeping us from such vices, whereby our office, mniistration, and
doctrine, might be suspect and set at naught. Yet must we not defer too long
in aunswering such evil reports; for more diligence must we apply in setting
forth the name and glory of GOD, than in defending and maintaining our own
estimation.

Thus the Apostle Peter in answering that objection concerning drunkenness,
does shortly pass over, and says: Brethren, these are not drunken, as ye
suppose, for why the time does not permit, it is yet too early in the morning.
Immediately upon the same, he proceeds forth, to admonish them of the
excellent graces and gifts, which the God of mercy had promised before, and
now performed them. But this satisfaction concerning drunkenness, and this
instruction of the ignorant, is made with all meeknes, and yet with sincerity
and stedfastnes, not lordly, or braggingly; although he was highly endewed with
the holy Ghost.

Thus we that be Ministers of Christ, and teachers of his congregations, ought
not by reason of our office or high gifts, to take too much upon us, that
with bragging or arrogancy we would outface the weak: but worthily and
valiantly with sincerity and truth of the scripture, to instruct such as be
ignorant and out of the way. Our mouth is an instrument of the holy Ghost, and
of the truth, not of any lightness, bragging, or presumption.

This word prophecy is taken not only to tell and show before of godly and
high things, but also to harken unto the same, and to perceive them* and this
makes for the understanding of this place. For the holy Ghost declares by
Joel, and promises also (as he does by Jeremy) that the knowledge of GOD
should be common in all the world, Joel. 2. Ierem 31.
and that from the least unto the most every one should be instructed in Gods
knowledge, through the guiding of the spirit: which knowledge before time was
common only to the Jews and Scribes, but by Christ is such abundant and
plentiful knowledge of God, powered out in all the world, through his holy
spirit: who works in the Church until the end, not only in Scribes, Math.
11.
from whom such high mysteries of Gods wisdom are oftentimes hid, but unto
simple unlearned fishers, and to others that in the sight of the world are not
esteemed.

1. Cor. 12. Esaias. 11.
Yea richly powers he out of his holy spirit upon all flesh, unto every one
his measure, as it best pleases him, no man excludes he from his grace, his
knowledge suffers he to flow over all the earth as a water flood, unto all
those that are his servants and hand maids. This is the dear and excellent
treasure, which in stead of it that was given before by the incarnation of
Christ, is now offered, that the knowledge of God, which by the holy Ghost is
the preaching of the Gospel, is come forth into all the world, Psalm. 75.
John..11.
whereas before it was manifest only amongst the Jews. For after the death of
the Lord finished upon the cross, was the Gospel published in all the world;
by the which preaching, the children of God dispersed abroad are gathered
together. Esaias 40.
The holy Ghost also who was before in the godly, did by his gifts and
operations work much more mightily and strongly after the death and ascension
of Christ, Ierem. 31.
than before: by the which holy Ghost, the captivity of of the law and
ceremonies is taken away, and heavenly freedom given to the children of God.

For as much as to know Christ and his kingdom, it minis^^eth true godliness
and eternal life: Peter in his oration trauelleth especially to this end, that
the Jews being there present, which held Christ for a wicked doer, and put
him to death, might know him to be the true savior of the world, and to be
risen again from death: and therefore he alleges the prophecies which in
Christ were fulfilled. As if I would say, Behold Joel told before of the time
that these your children should prophecy, now ye see it performed in them:
whereby ye may well perceive that the kingdom of Messiah (which is a
spiritual thing) is now begun already. In the which kingdom must be not only
Jews (which have the outward temple and ceremonies) but all as call upon the
name of the Lord, wheresoever they be in the world. Unto the Jew was promised a
savior, nevertheless such one as should not only save them, but also the whole
world, and whose kingdom should be everlasting, that he also should deliver
and bring them, yea all mankind, from the captivity of the prince of this
world. Of these things there were amongst the Jewish people many signs and
figures, whereby in bodily and corporal things God did partly set forth
these things spiritual: which they also which are spiritual and elect
amongst the people of the Jews, understood right well (though darkely) in that
they with the eyes of inward faith had a further respect than to gaze only
upon the outward corporal things. Thus God the holy Ghost by visible
things lead and taught them (even as a young scholar is first taught by
letters and syllables under the schoolmaister) until the time that the
glorious kingdom came that in Christ the true Messiah, all things were
reformed, and became spiritual.

Thus had the Jews the corporal kingdom of David and of other kings, and
thus for their sins they were brought unto Babylon into captivity. By the
which captivity was figured the grievous bondage and thraldom of mankind,
under the violent power of the devil. But when they were in captivity at
Babylon, God comforting them by his Prophets, promised to bring them thence,
and to restore them to their own land: in the which deliverance was figured
the redemption of the world by Christ. This custom had all the Prophets, that
when they told the people before hand, and promised of Gods behalf, deliverance
out of the captivity before they came into it: they always made mention also
of the punishment of the sins that should go before. Prosperity shall come
(said they) but first there must be an horrible plague for sin, the justice
of God must first be satisfied. Thus does Joel here also, in whom partly we
learn, that God will not suffer our sins to pass without punishment, as we
see also in the grievous captivity of all mankind, that God will have the
sin so worthily satisfied, that even his only begotten son, by whom no
sin was committed, must therefore die, and by his innocent death (...)
sins. If God now spared not his only (...), how may we then think that he
will (...) sinful life, to pass without punish^^^^ (...) we patiently, and
with good will bear the (...) ^^nishment of our sins, sent unto us of God: and
converting from our sins, do turn us to the gracious father that beats
us, God undoubtedly shall send us grace, prosperity, and welfare, and help us
out of all misery. Once we must either live a godly and innocent life, and
throghly amend our selves or else sin must be punished, and every unclean
thing must in the fire and punishment of Gods wrath be consumed. Again, though
we were virtuous and godly, yet is God of this nature, that he makes his
chosen to be like fashioned unto the image of his son, and by much
adversity and trouble he leads them unto joy: Luke 24.
Even as it behooued Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his glory. The
punishment of sin is hard, and the judgment of the Lord, as often as he
comes to recompense sin, is sharp: which the Prophet partly by bodily
things does describe, as other Prophets do also. Esaias. 13. Ierem. 15. Amos. ^.
The sun shall be turned into blood, etc: and even so is it in the opinion of
those, that must bear the judgment of God. For as much now as the Apostle
Peter (according as the matter required) did necessarily allege testimony out
of the Prophet, concerning the holy Ghost (who is given to the good children of
God) he thought also to specify that which was written in the Prophet, as
touching the punishment of the wicked, that despise the grace of God: giving a
warning thereby unto the Jews, to cease from their unbelief and shameful
life: declaring unto them, that if they proceed forth in wickedness, it should
happen unto them, as it did before unto their forefathers, unto whom Joel
opened the punishment of God. Whereby we must learn, patiently to bear it,
and to take it in good part, when our sins are rebuked, our vices spoken
against, and we told that the punishment is at hand. For this custom had the
Apostles in their preaching and declaring of the Gospel, that they not only
made mention of the grace of God offered unto the world by Christ: but
therwithall likewise, they threatened sore punishment to those that either
despised such excellent grace, or having knowledge of the truth did cleave unto
vice, which thing in the word of Peter is yet more evident.

The Gospel also preaches amendment of life, and not remission of sins
only through the blood of Christ. But now at this present time there be many
dainty Christians, as certain Princes and Senates in the countries, and
cities, whose opinion is, that the grace of the Gospel is to be preached,
yea, and they permit Christ and his grace, gently and worthily to be spoken of:
but if the false Gods service, as the honoring of Images, and all that is crept
in and erected up in the Papistry against Gods word be reproved, or if the
preacher speak against their tyranny, unjust acts, their malicious violence
and wilfulnes, whereby they oppress poor widows and fatherless children,
doing right unto no man, or if the preacher touch them on the gald backs for
their excessive pomp and pride, for their rioting, whoredom, adultery,
gluttony, drunkenness, fighting, and extortion, if such vices (I say) wherein
they still lead their lives, be touched to the quick, then is all favor gone,
then burn these preachers (say they) drown them, they be seditious fellows,
they will set us together by the ears, and bring the common people in our
necks. But such men should consider, that unto this office of the preacher it
belongs to cry against vice, least he be called of God a blind watchman, a
dumb dog, Esaias. 56.57. Ezech. 5.
and least all the souls which perish through his silence be required at his
hands: their wilfulnes, pride, and vain life they should forsake, and reform
themselves, and so needed not the preacher to cry out against them. Now
considering that the Prophets used (as I said before) to make mention of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, and of the calling of the heathen to the grace and
knowledge of God, especially in their orations when they speak of captivity,
and deliverance from the same. Joel in his prophecy does also keep that
order. For seeing that the Jews were ever still continually as stifnecked,
rebellious, and unbelieving people, unthankful to the grace of God: the holy
Ghost foresawe their reiection, declaring it by the Prophets, and that another
people, namely the heathen, should be received in their stead. For in as much
as they despised the grace of God, which first was offered unto them, it was
meet that the kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to another
nation. Seeing they thought scorn to come to the marriage, and to the royal
feast whereunto they were bidden, it behooued others to be called unto the
same. Therefore is Peter earnest upon this sentence: Whosoever calls upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved. As if he would say; O ye Jews, brag not of
circumcision, of Abraham, of the temple, or of other ceremonies, think not
that ye only are the people of God, the time is now come, that God will bestow
his grace upon those whom ye esteem to be unclean. God is no accepter of
persons, but among all people who so calls upon him shall be saved.

Of this sentence does Peter now take occasion more manifestly to speak of the
kingdom of Christ: for much more pithily, and with more evidence does the
Apostles describe the kingdom of Christ, than do the Prophets. Who so calls
upon Gods name, must know God: Now can no man know God but by Christ:
Therefore in this little word (to call upon the name of the Lord) is
comprehended the whole sum of the Christian faith. Like as oftentimes in the
Prophets, be these: to swear by God, is contained his whole religion. But
forasmuch as the Jews knew not Christ, by whom comes the true knowledge of
God, therefore begins Peter, and declares with strong arguments, how the
name of God is to be called upon: namely, through true faith in Christ, who is
the true Messiah, the anointed king and son of God, which was promised in
the Prophets. This does Peter prove by the ground of the resurrection of
Christ from death, by his ascension into heaven, and by that he now sits at
the right hand of God, Lord and king of al things. First let us hear the text.

Ye men of Israel hear these words* Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God
among you, with miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you (as ye your selves know) him have ye taken by the hands of
unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by the determinate council and
foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain him, whom God has raised
up and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should
be holden of it. For David speaks of him, aforehand I saw God always before
me, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore did my
heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: moreover also my flesh shall re^t in hope,
because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine
holy one to see corruption. Thou have showed me the ways of life, thou shall
make me full of joy with thy countenance.

Doctrine and fruit.
TO the intent now that no man should be offended at the death and cross of
Christ: Peter shows first, that in the council of God it was concluded,
foreseen, and determined, that the son of God, the true Messiah, should and
must die: and how that the same sacrifice was ordained from the beginning of
the world, to be slain and offered up upon the cross for our sins. And that
no man should make any stop by reason of his death, Peter therefore
declares, that he was no misse-doer, which had deserved his death by any
transgression, but that he was sent unto us by GOD the father, to dye for us;
whereby we might perceive the love of our Father in heaven. And if they now
would think; well, if it were so concluded in the council of God, then are
not we guilty of his death? he answers unto the same, and says;
Unrighteous men brought him thereto, and it is ye your selves that slew him and
crucified him. As if he would say, yea even so behooved it to be, that the
righteousness of God for the sin of mankind, might be satisfied. Christ must
needs die, to recompense and wash away with his blood the sin of all the
world. And yet ye Jews which have betrayed Christ, and brought him to the
cross, are not unjustly accused: ye cannot through the fore ordinance of God
discharge your selves that ye be without sin, seeing ye have slain the savior
of the world, he being guiltles. By this now we learn, that when we do wrong
and evil, we may not excuse our selves, with the free ordinance of God, for
it is not God, but the devil and our own wickedness that provoke us to sin.

And here we see, that when the grace of GOD through the Gospel is offered
unto the world, the sin and vice also wherein the world is entangled, must
be spoken of and touched, for no man can be justified, and come to the health
of his soul through Christ, which does not first know and confess his sin and
wickedness. How can he be made whole, that will will not know his own disease
and sickness? Therefore does Peter set before their eyes their great sin which
they had committed against the innocent son of God, saying: The innocent and
righteous whom God had given unto you, have ye slain and crucified, which is a
great wickedness and sin. Now go to, on your behalf it was evil done, and
grievously offended, but on his behalf it was so ordained before. Therefore at
his death, which in the sight of the world was so shameful and vile, ye ought
not to be offended, that ye therefore would hold the less of him, or not
receive and know him for a savior. For if you look upon his former
conversation, the same was innocent, pure, and holy: therefore cannot ye
doubt but he was sent of God. Besides this, ye have perceived and seen God to
be every where in his works: for the tokens and wonders which he showed and
declared amongst you, give evident knowledge that God was in him, and wroght in
him presently, for no man had been able to do the tokens that he did, unless
God had been with him. Which tokens also were spoken of before by the Prophets
concerning Christ, and by those tokens must ye know and confess, that he is
even the true Messiah, of whom the Prophets spoke. Wherefore considering that
by his former doctrine and godly power, ye know that he is the true Messiah,
ye ought not to be offended that he as an evil dooer was crucified upon the
cross; for it was the special determination of God, that Messiah should be
crucified, according to the foresayings of the Prophets. Consider ye also,
that the Prophets likewise spoke of his resurrection from death, by the which
ye may well perceive that he is the true Messiah.

Thus earnest is Peter, beating into them the resurrection from the dead, and
that out of the Scripture. For Christ's resurrection from death, is a strong
argument to prove his godhead, as it is taught. Romans 1. John. 20.

Yea he died (says Peter) for our sins, but now he is alive and risen
again from death: death has no more power over him, for he lives for ever,
and his kingdom is everlasting. Yea impossible it was, that the son of God
should corrupt in the earth and sepulcher: namely, he that is the firstling
risen from the dead, and that from his own godly power. Seeing that these
words of Peter concerning the resurrection and life of Christ, were little
credited among the Jews: he alleges the 15. psalm of David, who amongst
them was in great reputation.

But now might the Jews say or think, David speaks these words of himself,
and not of Christ: that weapon therefore does Peter take from them, and
proves, that the same words may in no wise be referred unto David; but that
David as a Prophet having knowledge of things to come, spoke them of Christ, in
whom they be now fulfilled, and thus he says.

Ye men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David*
for he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with us until this
day: Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn unto him
with an oath, that Christ (as concerning the flesh) should come of the fruits
of his loins, and should sit on his seat, he knowing this before spoke of
the resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in hell, neither
his flesh should see corruption. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all
are witnesses.

Doctrine and fruit.
THe Prophet David speaks of one whose flesh should not corrupt; now could
not he have spoken this of himself, for his flesh corrupted in the sepulcher,
which we yet have, and his bones lie yet in the sepulcher, by the which it may
well be perceived, that David as a Prophet knowing of things to come, spoke of
another, which should be borne out of his own loins and seed, Psalm 88. 2.
Reg 7.
whom God with a solemn oath had promised to sit upon his seat, and reign
after him: not only for a season, but also that his governance, kingdom, and
dominion should be perpetual and endure for ever. And this king is Christ the
true Messiah, who as concerning the flesh was borne of the seed of David, and
is his son.

If this son now of David had after death remained still in death, and not
risen from death again, how could he then reign for ever? It is evident
therefore, that David out of the holy Ghost (who had opened this unto him)
prophesied it of the resurrection of Christ his son, the eternal king. For
though he as a very man died indeed upon the cross, and was then buried:
yet his soul or life remained not in death: neither did his body resolve into
corruption as other men's, but on the third day he rose again from death to
life. This must we needs testify: for after his resurrection he appear do
unto us. We saw him, we heard him, we handled him, we did eat and drink with
him. Here we learn, that the Saints in the old Testament, understood and
knew by faith, the resurrection and eternal kingdom of Christ, seeing they
prophesied of it so evidently. Here is also proved, that Christ died in very
deed, and yet abode not still in death, forasmuch as he overcame it. Also,
that the power and virtue of his holy passion and death, came not only to the
living upon earth, but unto all those that died before him, according as Saint
Peter in his Epistle, and the Article of our belief (He descended into hell)
declares. Whereof in the Catechism upon the Creed there is made mention
sufficient.

Since now that he by the right hand of God is exalted and has received of
the Father the promise of the holy Ghost: he has shed forth this gift, which
ye now see and hear. For David is not ascended into heaven, but he says:
Psalm. 109.
The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy foot stool.

Doctrine and fruit.
WE believe, that Jesus Christ our king and Savior, is not only risen again
from death to life, but also is ascended up into heaven, sits at the right
hand of God, and reigns for ever. Psalm. 11^
For though he here a season was despised and refused (as the stone of the
builders) yet has the strong hand of God exalted him, and mightily wrought in
him. Which thing may well be perceived by this, (as Saint Peter here
valiantly concludes) that he sends down from on high such an excellent
gift of the holy Ghost upon those that are his. This is a sure evidence that he
mightily reigns at the right hand of God, and has all things in his hand,
seeing he has power of the spirit of God, whom he pours into the hearts of
his, and that sometime in visible manner. For the glorious triumpher ascending
up to heaven with great victory, Ephesians. 4
did after the custom of great kings, and let fall his gifts down upon us,
and parted them among us, namely, the gifts of the holy Ghost, whom he as man,
received of the Father, but after the godhead he had him alwaie, for of the
father and of the son there is one only spirit.

Neither may this be applied unto David, for though he as a just friend of
GOD, be saved and come to heaven, yet did not he immediately after death
ascend into heaven with body and soul, that he might be reported to sit at
the right hand of God: Math. 22.
for his words speak of another, whom he calls his Lord, namely in the
hundredth and ninth Psalm he says: God the Father said unto my Lord, even the
Son, Sit thou on my right hand.

So therefore, let all the house of Jerusalem know for a surety, that God has
made this Jesus (whom ye have crucified) Tord and Messiah.

Doctrine and fruit.
WIth these words does Peter conclude his Oration, exhorting them not to doubt
Jesus Christ to be the same anointed savior and king, who of God the father
was first promised, and then given for the deliverance of the people of the
Jews, and of all nations.

In this conclusion is comprehended the sum of the whole Christian faith,
namely, that we believe, that Jesus, who was borne of the virgin Marie, and
crucified of the Jews, is the true Christ, that is to say, Messiah, even the
king that was ordained and anointed of God, to reign forever over all
faithful believers, Lord of the whole world, and savior of all such as put
their trust in him. This has God the Father opened and set forth unto us by
miracles, by the resurrection, by the ascension, and by the power of the holy
Ghost, that we might believe it, and not doubt thereof. Therefore says John,
Who so believes that Jesus is Christ, the same is borne of God.

WHen they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter,
and to the other Apostles, Ye men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter said
unto them: Repent of your sins, and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sinners, and ye shall receive the gift
of the holy Ghost. For the promise was made unto you, and to your children, and
to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. And
with many other words bare he witness, and exhorted them, saying: Save your
selves from this untoward generation. Then they that gladly received his
preaching, were baptized: And the same day there were added unto them about
three thousand souls.

Doctrine and fruit.
THis is the fruit and end which follows out of the preaching of the word of
God, that they whose hearts God touches, are so sorry for their sins, that
it even pearceth them: for Gods word is even a sharp two edged sword, and
enters through to the depth. Blessed are all they which so read and hear the
word of God, that they begin to be ashamed of their sins and wickedness,
being repentant and sorry therefore. A blessed and wholesome sorrow is that,
which rises and grows out of the truth, which is opened unto the heart by
the holy Ghost. Which spirit in the heart gives hope upon the mercy of God,
and drives away all despair. Then begins a man to ask, What shall I do?
Then enquireth he after the will of God: and such a man that so asks is easy
to be helped: soon is he healed, that knowing his disease would feign be made
whole.

Unto such a man does the faithful Minister of Christ give counsel out of the
Scripture* and shows him the fruit of Christ preached and known. He does not
bid him bestow money on solemnities and Diriges, on Images, Monisteries, or
co^les, in^^^ying of pardons: He does not will to run unto Rome, or to
Lawret, but requires of him the best and most profitable thing of all, namely,
amendment and conversion of life. Our minds, our works, and manners must be
altered, if we will please God. Who so says with his heart, that he believes
in Christ, holding Christ for his savior and king, must forsake his evil way,
eschuing evil, and doing good. Iere. 7.11. Isa. 1 Niniue stood still upright,
when they took upon them true conversion and amendment. As for Jerusalem,
though they offered many sacrifices, and fasted much, it helped not, because
there was no true reformation and forsaking of sin, needs must they be
destroyed and miserably perish. To botch or patch the matter it will not
help, there is no remedy, we must become godly and virtuous of life: it
avails not to dissemble, God looks into the heart, which he will have pure
and unfeigned. Forasmuch then as we through baptism in the faith of Christ,
have received Christ, and are marked out for him* having once forgiveness of
sins, through the grace and gift of Christ, let us be of a virtuous lfe,
walking innocently and in the fear of God: Let us die therefore to the
innocence which is restored unto us again through Christ: let us daily
remember to harken and follow the admonishment of the spirit, which teaches us
all good things. We are they unto whom God has promised his grace of the
spirit, yea, and unto our children also, so far as we abide in his
covenants. Let us thankfully receive such excellent grace (dear brethren)
being ware, that we stain not the temple of Jesus Christ, and of his holy
spirit with filthiness of the world, that we never make our selves partakers
in the iniquity of wicked and faithless men, but to lead here a pure and
clean conversation with a good conscience before GOD our most loving father,
and alwaie lift up our minds unto the place, where Christ our Lord and king
raignneth at the right hand of God, Col. 1
from whence he shall come and take us unto himself. At all times therefore
ought we to watch and wait for his coming, that we may joyfully receive him,
and be partakers with him in eternal bliss.

Here also we learn, how faithful believers use themselves in the outward
Sacraments. They that being moved by the inspiration of the holy Ghost in their
hearts, do hear the eternal word preached, giving credit unto it, and
gladly receiving it, these do not afterward despise the outward Sacraments,
which GOD has instituted for the welfare of his Church: but use the same with
all obedience, good will and reverence. To use the Sacraments without faith
profits not, but rather hurts: to be loath to use them, declares a
compulsion and unbelief.

For though the water in baptism be an outward thing, and cannot cleanse the
soul from sin, yet the faithful do know right well, that Christ the
eternal wisdom in whom they believe, did not institute it in vain, and
therefore will not they contemn or leave unexercised the ordinance of their
head, to whom they as members are incorporated by faith. For they know, that
Christ with these outward tokens, thought to couple and knit together the
members of his holy Church, in obedience and love one toward another, whereby
they knowing one another among themselves, might by such exterior things,
stir and provoke one another to love and godliness. They know also, that the
sacraments are evidences of the promise and grace of God, which they after a
visible and palpable manner, do set forth declare, and represent unto us. These
tokens of grace does no man use more devoutly and with more reverence, than he
that in himself is certified and assured of the gracious favor of God, as we
see in Cornelius, in Paul, and in Queen Candaces chamberlain.

What fruit follows the preaching of the Gospel, it is here evidently
seen: for in one day at Peter's preaching, by the working of the holy Ghost,
there came three thousand men to the Church of God. God suffers not his word
to pass void and unfruitful. Very earnest therefore and diligent ought we
to be, and to spare no travel, cost, and labor, that the pure and sincere
Gospel, the word of truth, may every where be preached by good and faithful
men, not doubting, God will give blessed success thereto, that the seed sown
by the minister, shall bring forth fruit.

AND they continued in the Apostles doctrine, in the fellowship, in the
breaking of bread, and in prayers.

Doctrine and fruit.
TO endure, crowns and rewards all works: who so indureth unto the end
shall be saved: without continuance may no good thing be brought to end and
fruit. Therefore is it now declared, how the word preached in the Church of
God, brings fruit, and what the same fruits be, wherein faithful believers
do exercise themselves.

Saint Luke mencioneth four things that proceed out of the faith in Christ:
for faith is not void nor idle, but works without ceasing in them that
believe. Therefore here we find a pattern and myrrour, how it ought to go in
the Church of Christ: for where these four things be, there is Christ's
Church. First, the Church of Christ, which is the fellowship of all Saints and
faithful believers, indureth, abides, and continues in the doctrine of the
Apostles: for every thing is preserved with that out of the which it is borne:
now is the Church of God borne first of the word of truth, therefore in the word
of truth also must it endure and be kept, daily must it be planted, nourished,
and watered with the word and doctrine: the success and the increase does God
give.

The doctrine of the Apostles is nothing else but the boly Gospel, John. 1.
Mark. 16. Romans ^.
which the son of God committed unto them, and which they receued of him,
which also the Prophets before Christ spoke of by the holy Ghost. What Gospel
was preached by the Apostles it is easy to perceive by the aforesaid Sermon of
Peter and of others in the Acts, by the Evangelists and Epistles of the
Apostles: namely, that God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son for it, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
eternal life. Also, he dyed for us, rose again from death, ascended up to
heaven, and sits there at the right hand of God, being king and high Priest
for ever, in whose name all knees must bow, and without whom there is none
other name given unto men, in whom we must be saved, than the only name of
Jesus, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Tim. ^.
whose blood washes away our sins and he is the only perpetual mediation
between God and us.

In this doctrine continues the Church, being builded upon the sure rock
Jesus Christ, and is not moved or driven away by every wind of strange and
inconstant doctrine. Mat. 7.16^ Ephesians. 4.
She hearkneth not to the voice of any other, but of Jesus her shepherd. In
the doctrine of the Apostles, there is no deceit, no guile, no poison. And in
this doctrine is found none of those things, which certain years after the
Apostles were brought in by Romish Bishops, as Masses, Diriges, Cloisters,
worshipping of Idols, setting up of Images, buying of pardons, forbidding of
this or that meat.

First now does faith in Christ bring forth this fruit in the Church, namely,
in faithful believers, that it draws them to the doctrine of the truth, by
the which they became believers: and in the same it makes them to continue,
that they neither hearken nor give credit to any false errronious doctrine:
for they do very assuredly know, that such doctrines are not wholesome, but
venomous and hurtful. But in the Gospel of our savior Jesus Christ, and in
the doctrine of the holy Apostles, they are sure to find the truth, which
nourishes and preserves them unto eternal life.

The Church of God abhors all untruth, for she knows it is of the devil:
but of the truth is she desirous, for she knows that the same comes of
God, and brings unto GOD again.

This Evangelical truth and doctrine of the Apostles, in the which the Church
of God, and all the members of Christ must continue, has been of long time,
even from the beginning, comprehended in certain Articles, which we call the
Creed, whereof there is sufficient mention made in the Catechism. Among the
true children and servants of God also, there is no schism, doubt, nor
division, concerning the head and chief Articles, in the which they are well
and firmly established, fully persuaded, and of one mind and consent.

And whereas there be some men which ouerreach and go beyond this mark,
willing other men, and compelling Christians, as far as in them lies,
thereto, teaching those to be heretics and damned, that cleave to the only
doctrine of the Apostles. The same comes and proceeds of the presumptuous
arrogancy of flesh, who esteems his own invention, more than that which God
speaks: As when they say that Images must be had in Churches, that pardons
must be bought with money, and such like things, which are not grounded in the
doctrine of Christ nor of the Apostles, nor mentioned in the Articles of the
right and true ancient belief, but invented by the fantasy and covetousness
of men.

The second thing that must be constantly and inuiolably kept in the Church of
God, is the communion and fellowshippe, namely, that none look unto his own
singular profit, that no man seek himself, but that every member looking
one to another what he lacks, supplye the same, helping him, and comforting
him, and giving him the best counsel he can. This friendly love and loving
fellowshippe ought to be among Christians.

All temporal and outward goods ought to be common among them. Not as some
fondly think, that I must defraud another of that which is his, or take it
against his will, whether he will or no, or that I should go idly and
loytering, eating and consuming that which other men labor and travail for,
or to think, that when I do service and am profitable to no man, every man
shall give and serve me. Christian love which grows out of the belief and
doctrine of the Gospel, must distribute the goods and make them common: it
must not be any man's greedy desire, presumption, nor wilfulness that shall
do it.

All faithful believers are one body: now like as in the body, one member
serves to the profit and wealth of another, so ought one Christian to help
and serve another in love. The eye looks not to himself only, but unto the
whole body: the mouth eats for the whole body, and for all the other
members: the stomach digesteth for all the whole body, and for all the
members. Thus ought it to be likewise among the spiritual members of the
body of our savior Jesus Christ. No man must be wise and learned for
himself only: no man ought to be rich for himself, but every man's gifts
must serve to the profit one of another, and to the edyfieng and sustaining of
the whole body. Every one is bound to serve the body, according to the gift
and measure which the spirit of God has distributed unto him.

Among all living creatures, there is none created to a more loving and
friendly society and fellowshippe than man. Hereunto serve all sciences and
handie crafts, that men after a friendly manner agreeing among themselves, may
relieve one another necessity and want, and help bear one another burden.
Heereunto serve all inward gifts of the mind, as reason and judgment, will,
and remembrance. Also the speech given of God unto man, whereby one is known,
and discerned, and made privy one to another. And therefore is man borne into
this world without any defense or weapon, bare, naked and feeble: whereas all
other creatures living in this world, bring with them every one his weapon
and defense. The Bear has his claws and teeth, the horse his hoof, the ox
his horns, the hedghegge his pricks, and the serpent his poison. etc.

Only man is borne smooth and unweaponed, to signify, that he must not be
mad, furious and terrible, but mild, loving, and gentle, there must be one
mind, one meaning, and one will. Man also comes into the world bare and
naked, weak, feeble, and impotent, not able to do any manner of thing to
help himself, but must stand unto the courtesy of another; for if he be not
helped, relieved, and succored, he could not choose but perish, there were no
remedy. Whereby almighty God will declare, that there is no man that either
may or can live without the help and comfort of another. Thus the poor
wretched and distressed child, lying upon all four, (whom if it were not
for pity, no man would take up, but let it lie still) is helped, nourished,
and brought up of the mother, nourse, etc. Other folks must cherish it, by
other folks help must it live, for nothing does it bring with it into this
world wit must beg and borrowe every thing, and therefore it weepeth and
cries.

This teaches us to do good, to be obedient, loving, and thankful to our
parents, and unto those which bring us up and do cherishe us, that we
recompense them according to our power. By this also we learn to help
others, and to have compassion of them when they are in need, remembering and
considering out of what misery and poverty other folks have helped and
brought us.

Who is he that is at this present so rich, so mighty and strong in this
world (if he will live) but he must use the help and service of poor and
feeble folks, as the Husbandman, the Miller, the Baker, the Shepherd, the
Weauer, etc. yea, the higher and greater any man is in office or authority,
so much the more must he use and have the help of other people that are not so
great as himself. Therefore does GOD set up some so high, that they must
make provision and help all those which are ynder them, seeing that they must
have the use of them all. For the poor and they that be under, must supporte
and bear up the rich and mighty (as pillars do the house) that they fall
not: For without the help and service of such, are not they able to live in
their dignity and calling one day. Therefore it is ordained of Almighty God
in his secret wisdom, that certain Countries lack some things, whereof
others have sufficicient and too much, that one might be sustained by another,
and that no man shall be enough to him self.

GOD has given unto man remembrance, to the intent that he should never
forget the benefits, which he from his youth vpwardes has received of
others, and daily does receive, without the which he cannot live. And also
again remember and forget not, how and in what manner he ought to behave
himself in love, in compassion, in succor, and in faithfulness toward
those that have any ways need of his help. To this is he moved, when he
considers and pondereth in his thoughts the weakness, feeblesse, and
necessity of man's corrupt nature, which constrains us to lack so many
things.

Hereof grows unity, love, and fellowship among men, when we cast and call
to our minds thus: either he has been, or is now profitable unto us, or he
does good unto ours, of whom we have profit, or hereafter he may do us
some good. This to be so, there is not any man that can deny. And whereas
we perceive not this, and are not of one mind, friendly and fellows in love
and good will one toward another, but given unto such variaunce, dissension,
strife, and discord, it comes through the darkness of our own wicked and
froward natures and dispositions.

Forasmuch now as our eyes are so blinded, that we see not Gods ordinance and
creation in man, our ears are so stopped, that we will not hear the plain
and perfect voice of nature: our understanding and remembrance so dull and
blunt, that we will not once regard or think any such thing, whereby we
might the sooner forsake the division and stiffenesse of our heart, and in
friendly unity and brotherly love, to do good one unto another. Christ
therefore, the restorer of our decayed nature, and the only true and eternal
light, came into this world, to illuminate and lighten our blind eyes, to
cry with his voice unto us that be dumb, and to set that again before our
eyes, which we our selves have made dark and dim. He cries unto us in his
Gospel, with a loud voice, so that no man can say he has not heard it.
He is the heavenly schoolmaster, the eternal wisdom, the fountain of all
knowledge, the only and true teac^^^* the whole building of his Church, the
foundation and roof, the beginning and end of all his commandments, has
he set and comprehended in only love, exhorting us to love, unity, and
friendship, and saying, that men hereby shall know us to be his disciples,
if we love (...) them unto that, which faith inwardly considers and looks
upon. These tokens are instituted, to signify and represent unto us high and
great things, to gather together and unite the Church, that being dispearsed
every where over the face of the whole earth, might gather together into one
communion and fellowshippe in Christ, and be made partakers of his promises,
and inioye those comfortable blessings which he has promised from the
beginning, namely, such as be faithful and true believers, and that the
exterior and outward sense, might from all corporal things be withdrawn
to that which is spiritual, for the eyes see the bread, which represents the
body of Christ: they see, as the bread is broken, so was the body of Christ
broken upon the cross for our sins: and that as the wine is poured in and
out, so was the precious blood of Jesus Christ shed to wash away all our
sins. The ears do hear Christ's words spoken by the Minister in the
person of Christ Jesus, by the which the promise is renewed, by which means
those that are his, and of his Church, are by a certain feeling and comfort in
their souls and consciences refreshed. The taste upon the tongue, the smell in
the nose, and likewise the handling, and so each other member in his several
office, every one of them has his delight and operation in confessing,
acknowledging, and doing his service unto says.

But for what cause our savior Christ did specially use bread and wine before
any other corporal things, to signify his death and shedding of his blood,
it may well and easily be perceived by the nature of faith. With bread is the
body fed and sustained, with wine are men's hearts made merry. Forasmuch
then as faith, the life of our souls, through the flesh of Christ spiritually
eaten, is nourished and sustained: and seeing our mind is moistened and
refreshed with true and perfect joy thorough the blood of Christ shed for us,
there was nothing more mere, nothing more expedient, nothing more necessary
for this Sacrament than bread and wine.

Moreover, through the blood of Christ, are all other oblations and sacrifices
clean laid aside: and therefore Christ minding to finish the high sacrifice
upon the cross, testified and declared before hand that his body being
offered up and his blood shed, should be sufficient to wash away all men's
sins, and that from thence forth there should not need any other sin
offering, in the which there must blood be shed. Therefore would he with
evident and plain words testify and say, This is my body which is given
for you: do this in remembrance of me: This is the cup of the new Testament
in my blood, which shall be shed for many to the forgiveness of sins. To
the inten^ th^n that this excellent and worthy propitiation and sacrifice
should not out of their eyes and hearts, he added visible signs, not bare
signs, but seals of his covenant (as was the Circumcision and Passah) and
common tokens of love and friendship amongst men, even bread and wine, which
have no blood, to declare that all blood for sin is only in Jesus Christ,

Christ's mind was also, in one body to couple and knit together in one body
the whole multitude of his Church. To signify this, that there was nothing
more apt and sit than wine and bread: for like as out of many corns, is made
one paste and one bread: and like as out of many grapes, one wine flows
together, even so by faith and love become they all one body, that eat of one
bread and drink of one cup.

And even from the beginning of the world, it has alwnyes been the use among
men, that with bread and wine, they have made and confirmed great friendship
and league: And even so Christ with the distributing of the bread among his
disciples, would establish an everlasting friendship with them.

The fourth thing now in the Church of Christ is prayer: namely, as Christ
taught them to pray unto the father of heaven, that the kingdom of his Son
might still grow and increase, that his glory might arise, and spread it self
throughout all the world, that his name might be hallowed, and his will
fulfilled, etc.

This is the necessariest thing of all, and if we lack this, in vain are all
our good works, in vain are all the honest actions of a civil life, in vain
are all godly exercises, nothing prospers we go about, no oblation is
sanctified, all is impuritie that we either do or think, the holy Apostle
Paul wills us to pray continually: God grants not the presence of his
spirit to any thing but unto prayer. Without the presence of Gods spirit
unprofitable is the word preached, unprofitable are the Sacraments ministered,
unprofitable shall all things be unto us, so that prayer is most requisite.
Let us therefore pray unto almighty God, to increase in us the spirit of
Prayer, that with our soul and spirit we may pray continually for
spiritual gifts, that they may daily increase in us to his glory. Grant
this the great giver of all good gifts, for his mercy sake. To whom be all
honor, glory, power, dominion, and thanks, for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Merciful God, preserve our hearts from pride, from vaineglorie, and from
shameful covetousness, give us grace to abide in thy holy vocation, and to be
thankful for thy grace, that the fall of thine Apostle being always before
our eyes, we may walk in thy fear before thee. For if we stand, we must take
heed that we fall not, neither despise those that as yet do not stand. Make us
to continue thy grace for nothing have we saving only tha^ which we have
receued of thee. And if of weakness we fall, put thy hand under us (O Lord)
and suffer us not to despair in sin, but cause us with repentance and sorrow
for our offense, to resort unto thee. Oh keep us, that we neither despair,
nor betraie thy dearly beloved son, whom thou thorough thy Gospel do
send unto us, for without him is no safeguard, but eternal death and damnation.
From which keep us (good Lord) for thy mercies sake, Amen.

FINIS.

