A JUST AND TEMPERATE DEFENSE OF THE FIVE BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTICAL POLICY:
WRITTEN BY M. RICHARD HOOKER:

Against an uncharitable Letter of certain English Protestants (as they term
themselves) craving resolution, in some matters of doctrine, which seem to
overthrow the foundation of religion, and the Church amongst us.

Written by WILLIAM COVEL Doctor in Divinity, and published by authority.

The contents whereof are in the page following.

Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance.

At LONDON Printed by P. SHORT for CLEMENT KNIGHT, dwelling at the sign of the
holy Lamb in Paul's churchyard. 1603.

The Articles handled in this Book.
1 Of the Deity of the Son of God. 2 Of the coeternitie of the Son, and the
proceeding of the holy Ghost. 3 Whether the holy Scriptures contain all things
necessary to salvation. 4 Whether the Scriptures be above the Church? 5 Of the
nature and freedom of man's will. 6 Of the use of faith and good works. 7
Whether God allow more then he commands. 8 Of the virtue of good works. 9
None free from every sin, how from all? 10 Of Predestination. 11 Whether the
Church of Rome be any part of the visible Church? 12 Of Preaching and Sermons.
13 Of the Ministers office. 14 Of the nature of the Sacraments. 15 Of Christ's
institution of the Sacraments. 16 Of the necessity of Baptism. 17 Of
Transubstantiation. 18 Of speculatiue doctrine, or sentences mistaken. 19 Of
Calvin and the reformed Churches. 20 Of Schoolmen, Philosophy, Reason, etc.
21 Of the style and manner of M. Hookers writing.
TO THE MOST REVEREND Father in God, my very good Lord, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate, and Metropolitan of all England.
THree principal causes (Right Reverend) have moved me to offer this small
Labor to your Graces view: First, the just respect of my particular duty,
which challenges al parts of my labor, as a most thankful acknowledgement of
that service which I owe unto you. Secondly, the form of our Church
government, which imposes a submitting of our labors, to the censure and
allowance of those, to whom by right that charge belongs; wherein seeing your
authority and care, next unto our dread Sovereign, is, and is to be esteemed
greatest, I desire you to vouchsafe to give that allowance, which your Grace in
your wisdom shall think fit. The last reason, is the person of him, who
(whilst he lived) was advanced, honored, and esteemed by you; and now being
dead, his learning, and sincerity, against the false accusations of others,
challenges a defense at your Graces hand: For doubtless it is more right to
virtue, to defend the deceased, then to advance those that are living. This as
reason, ever expects at the hands of virtue; so especially then, when men of
worth, of desert, of learning, are mistaken and accused, by those that do want
all. I crave to the rest of all your Graces favors, that this last may be
added; That whatsoever my imperfections are, in this just and temperate
Defense, they may no way diminish the honorable remembrance of him, whom I do
defend: all allowance is his due; the faults are mine; for which in all
humility, I crave pardon.

Your Graces to be commanded, W. COVEL.

TO THE READER.
SEeing we are all bound, in the dutiful respect of a common just cause, even
to defend those who are strangers to us; it cannot seem unfit to any, if we
afford the^ so much favor, whose persons, and deserts are very well known.
There is no better contentment for our labor past, then in the assurance from
our conscience, that it is well employed: for doubtless the spurning at
virtue, gives a greater stroke to the doer, then to him that suffers; and
yet even that religion, that commands patience, forbids not the just
defense of our selves in a good cause; especially then, when by wronging a
particular man, there may be some hazard of the truth it self. Our Church has
had some enemies, more openly discontent in the case of Discipline, then they
now appear; whom to satisfy with reason, Master Hooker endeavored with much
pains; that which might have contented all, was in diverse, a spur to a more
violent choler: for medicines how profitable soever, work not equally in all
humors. From hence proceeded a desire in some, to make question of things,
whereof there was no doubt, and a request for resolution, of some points, where
in there was no danger: to this end a Letter (which here is answered) was
published by certain Protestants (as they term themselves) which I hear
(how true I know not) is translated into other tongues; this they presume has
given that wound, to that reverend and learned man, that it was not the least
cause to procure his death. But it is far otherwise; for he contemned it in
his wisdom (as it was fit) and yet in his humility would have answered it, if
he had lived. Surely for mine own part, I never thought it convenient that the
gravity of this present business, and the reverend worthiness of him that is
accused, should not be answered with gravity both of person and speech; and my
witnesses are both in heaven and earth, how justly I can excuse my self, as
Elihu did: Behold, I did wait upon the word of the ancient, and harkened for
their knowledge: Job. 32.
I stayed the time, and a long time, until some elder and of viper judgment,
might have acquitted me from all opinion of presumption in this cause; which
being not done by the^, whom many reasons might have induced to this Defense, I
could not for that part which I bear in that Church, whose government was
defended by Master Hooker, with patience endure so weak a Letter any longer
to remain unanswered. And herein I have dealt as with men (although to me
unknown) of some learning and gravity, to whom peradventure in many respects
I am far inferior; and yet for any thing that I know, or appears in this
Letter, they may be clothed with the same infirmities that I am. But if this
had been by himself performed (which I hear he has done, and I desire thee
to expect it) thy satisfaction (gentle Reader) would have been much more, yet
vouchsafe in thy kindness, to accept this.

The Authors Preface.
LIttle has labor done, to make any man excellent, if virtue have not as much
power to make it continue: neither were it any honor, to deserve well, if our
memories might die with our names ^or our names be buried, as often ^s malice,
or envy does seek to hide them. Few things are eminently good, which are
endured amongst distempered judgments without bitter reprehension; for where
weakness has not strength enough to imitate, and reverence that virtue which
it fears; it has violence and malice sufficient to detract from that virtue
which it hates. Amongst evil persons, as there be few things that are good,
in themselves; so there be not many things which they are willing should
appear good in others; for virtue, where it is not followed, must either be
dispraised, or our negligence shall want excuse. And whatsoever has the power
to convince, must suffer reproof, where the heart of man wants humility to
give obedience. The worlds greatest error, is in esteeming, when our
corruptions making us ambitious to seem, whilst we are careless to be,
wins allowance from a fond opinion, which the stream of violent fancies,
denies to rest upon those that are truly virtuous. Because for any man to
oppose himself, against that evil which is grown heady, either by custom,
or patience, is to hazard much of himself, if he be strong; and in the opinion
of many undoubtedly to perish, if he be weak. And therefore as vice has ever
had mo that did dislike it, then durst dispraise it; so virtue will ever have mo
that are willing to allow it in their judgments, then dare adventure to
interpose themselves, for the defense of that which they do allow. Jealousy
making those to deprave, even the very defense of that, which their own
judgments did think worthy, and their wishes desired, might be defended. For
to do that which every man accounts his own duty, as it argues oftentimes
more strength then courage; so amongst many, it reapeth little else but an
opinion of singularity. From this corrupt fountain (a fountain poisoned by
malicious ignorance) have flowed these bitter, but small streams, which the
importunity of some men's commendations (arising out of a blind love) have made
for power and greatness, like the red sea, to drown (as they say) Pharaoh and
all his host. Let them perish in it without help, beaten down with that hand,
that strikes from above, who seek to hold Israel a servant in Egypt, or
captive in the house of bondage: but let them pass through without harm, who
courageously have freed the posterity of Jacob, and led Israel to the land of
promise. I doubt not but without a miracle, a man of small stature may go
through these waters and not be drowned; yet sometimes the most righteous, may
say with David, the ouerflowing of ungodliness made me afraid. Deceit usually
covers with a mask (better then the face) that evil which it desires should
kill unseen and vnpreuented: but error cannot more easily fall, then when it
is built upon such a foundation; nor weaker opinions sooner vanish, then when
they are bred, nourished, and supported, only with the strength of fancy. It
is of small use in the church (though a thing practiced in all ages) for men
ouercuriously to labor to remove those stains, which like an impure breath,
darken the glass of steel, whilst it is warm, but slide off through their
own weakness, having no power to make any deeper impression, then only
air. Any cloth in a hand of no skill, or strength, is able to wipe off, with
ease, those blots, or marks, that are stained with no greater force, or virtue,
but a hot breath. But seeing the reputation that virtue challenges, and
industrious labor seasoned with discretion does merit, seeks rather to gain
an approbation, from the judgment of the wise, then recompense or reward, from
the mighty hand of the rich; men of virtuous desert in all ages (even from the
lowest step of humility and obedience) have with confidence, and truth, taught
the world a far better judgment, by their wise apologies; and have gained as
much honor in removing evil, as they have gotten virtue unto their names, in
doing well. The malice of envy out of impatient ignorance, doing virtue this
benefit, that that which was clear before, by a few, light, trifling spots,
gains a wiping, to make it clearer. desert and goodness, being effects of a
first motion; perfection and excellency the work of a second maker. It must
needs seem strange to many, and be unpleasing to all, that are of any sober,
indifferent, or virtuous disposition, that the just defense of a present,
religious, Ecclesiastical policy, undertaken without bitterness of spirit,
in a grave moderation to reform presumption, and inform ignorance, should so
far taste, of the eagerness of some unlearned pens; that judgment, should
be thought too weak, to answer idle words; or virtue not strong enough to
withstand malice; or lastly, that he could want a defense, whose endeavor (as
himself professes) was not so much to overthrow them, with whom he contended,
as to yield them just, and reasonable causes, of those things, which for want
of due consideration, heretofore they have misconceiued; sometimes accusing
laws, for men's ouersights; sometimes imputing evils grown, through personal
defects, to that which is not evil; framing to some sores unwholesome
plasters; and applying remedies sometimes where no sores were. It is much
easier to answer those shadows of reason, wherein these Admonishers do please
themselves; then by their silence to make them confess, that they are fully
answered. For as they know not (for the most part) well how to speak, saving
only tinkers music, like sounding brass, because they want charity; so do
they less know how to hold their peace, like clamorous Frogs, because they
want humility. Holy pretenses have ever been the strongest motives that pride
has; and Zeal, how preposterous and ignorant so ever, has been deemed
reason sufficient to some men, in the opinion of their followers, to warrant
and defend whatsoever they have done. Upon this ground, was published, some few
Articles in manner of a letter, in the year 1599. requiring resolution in
matters of doctrine, concerning some points, which either they misconceiue, or
list not to understand, uttered by M. Hooker, in those five learned, and grave
books of Ecclesiastical policy; wherein, it must needs appear, that their
ignorant malice, has done him great honor; who in an argument so distasted by
them, and coming with a proud confidence to reprehend, have only carped
sillily, at some few things, neither of moment, nor importance, whereof
humility, and charity, would have craved no answer. But these being willing,
and desirous, to find somewhat to oppose, have only discovered* his great,
mature, and grave judgment, and their own small, undigested, and shallow
learning. For there is nothing, that can better, both excuse, and commend a
workman, the^ to see envy desirous to reprehend, and reprehension to vanish in
his own smoke. For (says the Wiseman) Wisd. 10.8.
all such as regarded not wisdom, had not only this hurt, that they knew not
the things that were good, but also left behind them, unto men a memorial of
their foolishness; so that in the things wherein they sinned, they could not
lie hid; yet the people see and understand it not, and consider no such things,
in their hearts, Wis. 4.15.
how that grace and mercy is upon his Saints, and his providence over the
elect. For as he himself well noted; as to the best, and wisest (while they
live) the world is continually a froward opposite, a curious obseruer of their
defects, and imperfections; so their virtues, it afterward as much admireth.
Those, whom we must make adversaries in this cause, are men, not known either
by name, religion or learning; yet such as would seem, in zeal to the present
state, to desire a resolution in some points that might otherwise give offense.
It may be peradventure the work of some one, who desirous to gain an opinion
amongst his followers, undertakes to speak as from the minds of many, hoping
those demands (how idle soever) will gain answer, being to satisfy a
multitude, which no doubt M. Hooker in his wisdom, patience, and gravity,
would easily have contemned, if they had but been the private cauils, and
objections of some one. For there is no man but thinks, many, how light so
ever, in themselves, being united, may have that weight, to challenge even by a
civil right, a direct answer, from one every way far better then had been
fitting, for their modesty, and weakness to provoke. Well; whosoever they
are, as I cannot easily conjecture, so I am not curious to know; this age has
affoorded an infinite number, whom superstitious fear, for want of true
understanding, and an ignorant zeal, not directed with discretion, have made
violent in matters of Religion, using the razor in steed of a knife, and for
hatred of tares oftentimes pulling up good corn. But with these we will deal,
with that temperate moderation, as may serve, to give true worthiness, a just
defense; and impatient and furious spirits (unless desperately violent) no
just cause to find themselves to be grieved with us.

This which we are to answer, is termed by them, A Christian letter of
certain English Protestants, The title of the Book.
unfeigned favorers of the present state of religion, authorized, and professed
in England; unto that reverend, and learned man, M. Richard Hooker. Thus the
humility, and mild temper of their superscription, may peradventure gain the
reading at some men's hands, through an opinion, that Protestants; and many;
and in a Christian letter; would hardly be carried with violence so far, to make
demands, seasoned with so little modesty, learning, or understanding. These
men, they may be (as we take the word largely) Protestants for any thing that
I know; that is, men outwardly of the Christian religion; who live and profess
a doctrine, for the most part opposite to the Church of Rome; but I can hardly
be persuaded, that the Letter being wholly an uncivil Ironie, is either
Christian, or that themselves, are unfeigned favorers of the present state of
religion; or that they think M. Hooker to be either reverend, or learned in
their opinions. For whatsoever they may pretend, in urging the reverend Bishops
of our Church against his assertions; as though they ascribed much unto them;
yet their desire is, to make an opposition appear, and in that show of
contradiction, to make themselves sport, and in the end proudly and maliciously
to contemn both. But Saint James tells these, that if any man seem
religious, and refrain not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
religion is vain. And in this I appeal to the censure of the most modest and
discreet amongst themselves, by what show of reason, they could term that
Letter to be Christian, wherein were contained so many unseasoned and
intemperate speeches? or that man to be either reverend, or learned, whom they
have used with so little respect, and accused of so many defects? But
doubtless, as they never thought him to be either reverend, or learned (whom
all that knew him, whilst he lived knew to be both) so they little desired,
that their Letter should be such a one, as might worthily be accounted
Christian. in the Letter Page 1.
Else what mean these accusations, to account his goodly promises, mere
formal, and great offers to serve only, to hoodwink such, as mean well; as
though by excellency of words, and intising speeches, of man's wisdom, he meant
Ibid.
as they say to beguile, and bewitch the Church, of God. A little after page 2.
they call him a goodly Champion, and by the sweet sound, of your melodious
style, almost cast into a dreaming sleep; which style notwithstanding
afterward, they account not Page 45.
usual, but long, and tedious; far differing from the simplicity of holy
scripture; and a Page 3. Lin. 10
hard, and harsh style: for the manner of the style, we shall make our defense,
when we answer that Article. But in that, you scoffingly account him a goodly
Champion, give me leave to tell you, that if our Church were thoroughly
furnished with such men, the holy function of our calling, had not grown in
contempt by ignorant and unlearned ministers; our peace had not bin troubled
with furious and violent spirits: worldly men, had not seized upon the Church,
with such eagernes, through an opinion of the unworthiness of the clergy: they
of the Church of Rome, had not thus long remained obstinate, through the
violent proceedings of indiscreet men, whose remedies were worse then the
disease it self: nor last of all, the general amendment of life (the fruit
of our preaching) had not bin so small, if these turbulent heads, had not more
desired, to make Hypocrites, then truly religious. It is much safer to praise
the dead, then the living, having seen the period of their days expired;
Quando nec laudantem mouet adulatio, nec laudatum tentat elatio.
when neither he that is praised, can be puffed up, nor he that does praise can
be thought to flatter, he was, as Saint Austine said of Saint Cyprian Tanti
meriti, tanti pectoris, tanti oris, tantae virtutis.
, of such desert, of such a courage, of such a grace, of such a virtue, that as
Theodosius said of S. Ambrose, I have known Ambrose, who alone is worthy to be
called a Bishop* of whom I dare give that judgment (though he were in true
estimation great already) which Antigoras, gave of Pirrhus, that he would have
bin a very great man, if he had bin old. Great in his own virtues, of great use
in the Church, and in all app^rance, (though these times be unthankful) of
great authority. I let pass those other terms, which show your letter to
be unchristian, until we come to their particular answers; and thus much for
the title.

It has bin, no new thing in all ages, that reprehension has waited upon
those books, The preface of the letter answered: when men dream they are a
sleep etc.
which zeal* from a virtuous mind, has written to support the truth; for the
nature of man is much apter to reprove others, then reform it self; seeing to
see faults in others, is an act of the understanding if they be; and of a
frowardnes of the will if they be not: but to rectify them in ourselves must
be the work of a clear understanding and a reformed will; therefore usually
men practice themselves, what they punish in others; so that no man can
directly conclude, Vt argumen^o non sit propter quod alios accusant has ipsas
odisse. Dio. Cass. lib. 36. hist.
that all men hate what they do accuse. Therefore Saint Epist. ad Asellam virg.
in prolog super los.
Hierom, of whom says S. Austin (no man knew that whereof S. Hierom was
ignorant) oftentimes complains of the detractions, slanders, and untrue
accusations of evil men. These, for the most part, are unstaid, violently
carried with the current of the present time, sometimes bitterly either upon
discontentments, or to please others, inueighing against those, whom themselves
before out of flattery, not judgment, have highly praised. Thus Nicephor.
Calixtus lib. 10. hist. cap. 36.
Libanius the sophister, who was eloquent against the Christians, to please
Julian, was noted with this mark of leuity, for writing Panegyricks, or
orations of praise, to commend Constantius, while he lived, against whom
afterward he wrote most bitter inuectiues when he was dead. Thus some small
coffeehouse served to turn the heart, and open the mouth of Porphyry
against the Christians: what cause of grief these zealous professors have I
know not, but in my opinion, the whole tenor of that uncharitable and
unchristian letter, argues some inward discontent, either envious that other
men should be excellent, or that themselves being excellent, are not more
regarded. Wherein though they dislike, the dim eye of government, that looks
not clearly into men's virtues, and the niggardly hand, that does not
bountifully reward such, as deserve well; yet they might out of patience, and
charity, worthily have forborne, to have inueied against his honor, which
consisted in no other wealth, but in his religious contentment, and in that
true commendation, which was the due merit of his own virtues. For In obit.
Humber^i. Ber,
the world had not much to take from him, because he had not taken much from
the world; for he never affected, flatteringly to please her, nor she never
cared fauninglie to please him. For as Nihil ex ea quod meum diceretur praeter
cognomen retuli. Val. Max.
all that Scipio brought* from Africa, after his danger, and travel, to be
called his, was only a Surname; so the greatest recompense, that his labors
had, was the just commendation, that he was a very reverend, learned and grave
man. For his judgment taught him out of a Christian patience, the resolution
of Cato, if Si quid est quo vtar, vt^r; si (...), ego sum.
I have any thing to use, I use it; if not, I know who I am. And seeking to
profit in knowledge, and that this knowledge might profit the Church; he showed
that he was borne for the good of many, and few to be borne for the good of
him. For as S. Hierom speaks of Nepotian, Nepotianus noster auru^ calcans
schedulas consectatus.
despising gold, he followed learning, the greatest riches. But peradventure
his learning had puffed him up; and his pride had made his writings, impatient,
and full of bitterness; and this moved you, to undertake, this uncharitable and
unchristian letter; for you say if we believe them (meaning the Bishops) we
must think, that Master Hooker is very arrogant, Page 19. lin. 16
and presumptuous, to make himself the only Rabbi. That you had no cause, to
provoke him, in these terms, all men know that do read his writings; for
dealing in an argument of that kind, with adversaries, of that nature; and in
a time grown insolent by sufferance; he has written with that temperat
moderation, rather like a grave father to reform the unstayed errors, of hot,
young, violent spirits, then severely correcting them with the intemperate
bitterness of their own style; and sighing at the scurrilous and more then
satyricall immodesty of Martinisme, Lege Carol. mag. fol. 421.
he feared with a true sorrow, least that honorable calling of Priesthood,
which was ruinated by slander amongst ourselves, could not long continue firm
in the opinion of others. Well, for all this the government of his passions,
was in his own power, as Ira eius in manu eius. Ber.
Saint Bernard speaks of Malachie the Bishop. And he was able to rule them;
for he was truly of a mild spirit, and an humble heart, and abounding in all
other virtues; yet he specially excelled in the grace of meekenes: for the
gravity of his looks, as Sereneb at vultum suum asside^tium gratia, no ^ieret
^nerosus, sed visum integrum si been recolitis non admisit. Ber.
Saint Bernard speaks of Humbers, was cleared by those that did sit, or
converse with him; least he should be burdensome unto them; but a full laughter,
few ever discerned in him. Some such our Church has had in all ages; a few now
alive, which are her ornament, if she can use them well; but more that are
dead, whom she ought to praise. For Eccl. 44.7 8. v^^s. 11 12.13.14.15.
all those were honorable men, in their generations, and were well reported
of, in their times; there are of them, that have left a name behind them, so
that their praise shall be spoken of, for whose posterity, a good inheritance
is reserved, and their seed is contained in the covenant; their bodise are
buried in peace, but their name lives for evermore; the people speak of their
wisdom, and the congregation talk of their praise. In this number virtue
has placed him, whom you accuse; and are not afraid, being now awaked out of a
dream, to account a deceiuer. As though in his labors he had meant by
intising speech, to deceive the Church; or as though by a colorable defense of
the Church discipline, he purposed (as you say) to make questionable, Page 2.
and to bring in contempt the doctrine, and faith it self; beating against the
heart of all true Christian doctrine, professed by her Majesty, and the whole
state of this realm. Therefore you have made choice of the principal things
contained in his books; wishing him to free himself from all suspicion of
falshoode and treachery; accounting your selves to rest contented, if he will
show himself, either all one in judgment, with the Church of England, or else
freely and ingenuously acknowledge; his unwilling oversight; or at the least
show plainly by good demonstration, that al our reverend Fathers have hitherto
bin deceived* To this you crave a charitable, direct, plain, sincere, and
speedy answer; this is the sum of the preface to your Christian letter. It
is too true that al ages have had deceivers; and that the most dangerous
deceivers, have strongly prevailed under pretense of Religion; and therefore
whereas all bodies are subject to dissolution, there are undoubtedly mo estates
ouerthrown, through diseases within themselves, which familiarly do steal upon
them, then through violence from abroad. Because the manner is always, to cast
a doubtful, and a more suspicious eye, toward that, over which men know they
have least power; and therefore the fear of apparent dangers, causes their
forces to be more united; it is to all sorts a kind of bridle; it makes
virtuous minds watchful; it holds contrary dispositions in suspense; and
imployeth the power of all wits; and the wits of all men, with a greater care.
Whereas deceits covered with good pretenses, are so willingly interteyned, so
little feared, and so long suffered, until their cruelty burst forth, when it
is too late, to cure them* vice has not a better means to disperse it self,
nor to gain intartainment, and favor, then by borrowing the counterfeit name,
and habit, of seeming virtue. Justin. lib. 15. ex Trogo.
Thus that rebellious Sandracot under pretense of liberty, moved the Indians,
against the officers of Alexander the Great; which when they had slain, he
that was the author of their liberty, turned that into a more cruel bondage,
oppressing the people whom he had freed from strangers, under the cruel
tyranny of his own government. But of all deceits, there is none more
dangerous, then when the name of God, or religion is pretended, to countenance
out heinous crimes. And howsoever even in this kind, this age has not wa^ted
examples, who being dangerous under holy pretenses, the hand of Justice has
cut off; yet the imputation of this fault, can in no reason cleave to him, who
has so far hazarded himself, for the just defense of religion, and Church
government. If he had broched any new fancies, or proudly opposed the wise
established discipline; there had bin some reason to have suspected, that by
intising speech he had meant to deceive the Church. But seeing he has
labored in a weighty cause, with reasons, against those, whom the Magistrates
severity could not easily suppress; seeing he has undertaken it by
appointment; and performed it with allowance; and seeing he has made no other
show of supporting popery, but only by resisting Puritans; the slander must
needs be too light, and the accusation without color, to say that he has
beaten against the heart of al true Christian doctrine, professed by her
Majesty, and the whole state of this Realm: as though (which you desire the
world might believe) the heart of Christian religion, were only amongst such,
whom the affectation of singularity has termed by the name of Puritans: And
that the rest who are not of that temper, are dangerous, and close heretics.
Thus Appollinarius the younger, Sixth Sin. lib. 4. bibliothecae.
who wrote so much in defense of the Christian faith, that Saint Basil said of
him, that with his volumes he had filled the whole world; and wrote against
rauing and frantic Porphury, thirty books, more excellent then any other of
his works; was afterward accused that he held the error of the Millenaries,
that into the trinity he had brought, Great, greater, and greatest of all; that
he thought not right of the incarnation of Christ: but seeing Theophilus Bishop
of Alexandria, who was an enemy unto him, and diverse other Authors besides,
report that he was vehement, to confute the Arrians, Eunomians, Origenists, and
many other heretics, in many volumes, Epiphanius in 3. pannarii.
it may be thought whatsoever his other errors were, the malice of his
adversaries had forged this, to diminish the authority of those books, which
he had written against them. So that this practice is no new thing, to
diminish the soundnes of their religion, whose judgments, and reasons we are
unable to withstand. But I doubt not by that which follows, but it shall
easily be made to appear, that he is of the same judgment with the Church of
England; that he has not committed any oversight; nor that he goes not about
to contradict, the reverend fathers of our Church; which things (in all
likeliehood) are matters by all you much desired; and therefore I hope you will
accept (as you desire) this charitable, direct, plain, and sincere answer;
which no doubt of it, from himself had bin far more learned and more speedy,
if he could either have resolved to have don it, or after he had resolved could
have lived, to have seen it finished. But first of all, he was loath to
entermeddle with so weak adversaries; thinking it unfit (as himself said)
that a man that has a long journey, should turn back to beat every barking
curre; and having taken it in hand, his urgent and greater affairs, together
with the want of strength, weakened with much labor, would not give him time
to see it finished. Yet Erat animus victor annor^m, and cedere nesciens
infirmitati: Ber. in vita Humberti.
his mind was stronger then his years, and knew not well how to yield to
infirmity. Wherein if he had, somewhat favored himself, he might
peradventure, have lived to have answered you; to the benefit of the Church,
and the comfort of a great number. But Mors fecit quantum potuit, occidit
carnem, and ecce recondita est in cord terr^; separauit a nobis dulcem amicum,
prudent^ Consiliarium, Auxiliarium fortem. Ber.
death has done what he could; it has killed his body, and it is laid up in
the heart of the earth; it has taken from us, and from the Church of God, a
sweet friend, a wise counselor, and a strong Champion: so that I may say, as
it was sometimes said of Demosthenes: Demosthenes is meet for Athens, Demades
ouergreat. Others fit enough to live in the midst of error, vanity,
unthankfulness, and deceit, but he too good. For he was as the morning
star, in the midst of a cloud, and as the Moon when it is full; and as the
Sun shining upon the Temple of the most High, and as the rainebowe that is
bright in the fair clouds; when he put on the garment of honor, and was
clothed with all beauty, Eccles. 50.6.7.11. Wis. 3.1.2.3.
he went up to the holy Altar; and made the garment of holiness honorable.
But this ought to content us, that the souls of the righteous, are in the hand
of God, and no torment shall touch them: In the sight of the unwise they
appeared to die, and their end was thought grievous, and their departing from
us destruction, but they are in peace.

ARTICLE I. Of the Deity of the Son of God.
AL points in Divinity, are not of the like easiness of apprehension. For in
some, the dim light of nature not wholly darkened, can give a reason of that
we do; as well as faith out of precept, does warrant what we do believe.
And therefore the Gentiles both before, and after the Law, were to themselves
a kind of Law, even by the light of nature, not to do all those things that
they did desire, but they had a thing in their hearts, equivalent to the law in
respect of forbidding, because they could accuse and excuse themselves, having
the witness of their conscience present with them. Thus the effect of all the
commandments, was in the Jews before the law, and in the Gentiles who had
not the law, given unto them. Thus the first commuandement was in Terah, Genesis
13.
Abraham's father, which was the reason of his departure from Vr of the
Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan. And afterward in Jacob when he
departed out of Labans house; Genesis 35.2.
above four hundred years before the Law was given: so the second
commandment in Rachel; Genesis 31.34. Genesis 24.3.
the third in Abraham to his servant: the fourth had a precept in the creation:
the fifth for honoring his parents, even in Esau: the sixth in Cain, Gen 27 41.
Genesis 4.9
who knew the greatness of that evil, which he had committed, that slew his
brother: fear making him, out of a guilty conscience, to deny that, which
love before had not power enough to teach him to forbear. The seventh, in the
hatred of the sin of Sichem; Genesis 34 31.
which Jacob though he allowed not to be rightly punished, yet he did not
approve as to be well done. Gen 49.6.
The eight, even in Egypt, which made Joseph to say, What act is that you have
done? when the cup of Pharaoh was found in the sack of Benjamin. Genesis 44.15.
ver. 12 Genesis 38.23.
The ninth, when Judah feared the witness of Thamar. The last in Abimelech for
taking the wife of Abraham, Gen, 20.3.
where the vision did not so much tell him it was a sin (which he knew by
nature) as that she was another man's wife. Now in these things which were
observed before the moral Law, some were of more apparent dislike, even in the
opinion of the heathen, who had no other direction but the light of nature; as
the third, fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, and ninth commandments. Diodorus Sicul.
For the Egyptians had a law; Swear not least thou die. And this was punished
in the twelve tables of the Romans. Fustibus caeditur.
For the fifth, Homer says of one that had a misfortune, it was because he
honored not his parents. Homicida quod fecit expectat.
For the sixth, nature has made the Murderer to expect what he has committed.
Fuge nomen maechi si mortem fugies.

Stephanus ex Nicosirato.

Tarpeio Saxo deijciatur. Leg. 12. Tabul.


For the seventh, Fly the name of an adulterer, if thou will escape death. For
the eight, Demosthenes against Timocrates repeateth it as Solons law, plainly
in the very words. And for false witness, the Romans did punish it by their
twelve tables. But the incarnation of Christ, the Sacraments, the Trinity, the
Decree of God, are matters of a deeper speculation; wherein humility must
follow the direction of faith, and not seek vainly with curiosity to know
that, which our silly weakness, is far unable to comprehend. For Quae deus
occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda; quae autem manifesta fecis, non sunt
negligenda; no and in illis illicite curiosi, and in his damnabiliter
inueniantur ingrati. Prosper de vocat. Gentium.
as those things that are manifest are not to be neglected, so those things
that are hid, are not to be searched; least in the one we be unlawfully
curious, and in the other be found daungerously unthankful. Now specially for
the matter of the Trinity, wherein you take exception in your two first
Articles; doubtless Nec periculosius alicubi erratur, nec laboriosius aliquid
quaeritur, nec fructuosius aliquid inuenitur Aug. lib. 4 de Trinitat.
there are few errors more dangerous, or that have stirred up greater
tragedies in the church of God. All men see in nature, that there is a God; but
the distinction of persons, Trinity in Unity, that faith in humility must
teach us to believe. For who can comprehend by reason, that in that holy, and
sacred Trinity, one is what three are, and that two is but one thing; and in
themselves and every particular infinite; and all in every one, and every
one in all, and all in all, and one in all. Fire has three things, motion,
light and heat; Arrius divide this if thou can, and then divide the Trinity.
Out of this difficulty, together with the rash presumption of ignorant men,
have proceeded those dangerous errors, that so long, and so hotly have
troubled the church; thus the Manichies have denied the unity of Essence; the
Valentinians (or Gnostici) from Carpocrates, Aug. tom. 6. ser. 7
held that Christ was man only, from both sexes borne, but that he had such a
soul, which knew all things that were above, and snewed them. Those that have
in their erroneous doctrine oppugned the Trinity, are of two sorts; they have
either denied the distinction of persons, or else the samenesse of Essence;
thus the Arrians (for we will not stand to encounter or confute all other
heresies) held that Christ was a person before his incarnation, but that he was
true, and eternal God, equal, and of the same essence, with his Father, that
they denied; for they hold that the Son is not eternally begotten, of the
substance of his Father, and so that there is an inequality, and indeed a
distinction, and prioritie of essence. Into this dangerous, and ignorant blind
heresy, confuted long since with powerful and strong reasons, it seems you
are of opinion that Master Hooker is fallen, both against the truth, and
against the true assertions, of the Reverend Fathers of our church. The ground
of this so great and so uncharitable accusation, is because he says, that the
Father alone, is originally that Deity, Lib. 5. Page 113.
which Christ originally is not. Where you seem to infer, against the
distinction of the Trinity, that the Godhead of the Father, and the Son
cannot be all one, if the Son be not originally that Deity. It seems then
in your opinions, that this speech uttered very learnedly, and with great
wisdom, and truth; The Father alone is originally that Deity which Christ
originally is not, is both unusual, new, and dangerous. First, because it
weakeneth the eternity of the Son, in the opinion of the simple, or makes
the Son inferior to the Father in respect of the Godhead, or else teaches
the ignorant that there may be many Gods. I know your own Christian
judgments, could easily have freed him from all suspicion of error in this
point; if your charity had bin equal to your understanding: for he himself
has confessed in the very same place, from whence you have taken this, whereof
you accuse him; that by the gift of eternal generation, Christ has received
of the father, one and in number the self same substance; which the father
has of himself vnreceiued from any other. Who sees not, says S. Augustine,
that these words Father, Epist. 66 ad Maxim.
and Son, show not the diversities of natures, but the relation of persons; and
therefore the Son is not of another nature and of a diverse substance, because
the father is God, not from another God, but the Son is God from God his
father: here is not declared the substance but the original; Hic non
indicatur substantia, sed origo. i. non quid sit, sed vnde sit, vel non sit:
epist. 66. ad Maxim. Aug.
that is, not what he is, but from whence he is, or is not; for in God the
Father, and in God the Son, if we inquire the nature of them both, both are
God, and but one God, neither greater or less in essence of Godhead, one then
the other. But if we speak of the original, says Saint Austin (which you see
Master Hooker did) the Father is God originally, from whom the Son is God; but
there is not from whom the Father has originally his deity; so that to mislike
this kind of speech, is contrary to all truth, to affirm, that the Son is not
eternally begotten of the father, and that the Father is not eternally a deity
begetting. But here you must take heed of the error of Arrius, who against
the truth reasoned thus; If the Son be coeternall with his Father, tell us,
we beseech you, whether he were begotten when he was, or when he was not; if
when he was, then there was before two unbegotten, and afterward one begot the
other; if when he was not, then he must needs be later, and after his Father.
But says Saint Augustine, as we have known only the Father, always and
without beginning to be vnbegotte^; so we confess, the Son always, and
without beginning to be begotten of his Father: therefore because the Father,
is originally that Deity, from whence the Son is the Son; though he be
the same Deity, yet the Father alone, is originally that Deity, which the
Son originally is not: The want of Identitie being not in the Deity (whereof
we must needs with the Church of God acknowledge an Unity) but in that it is
not originally the same. For every thing that is a beginning, is a father unto
that which comes of it, and every offspring is a son unto that out of which
it grows. Christ then being God, by being of God, light by issuing out of
light, though he be the same deity (for in the Trinity there is but one deity)
yet the Father is originally that deity alone, which Christ originally is not.
Here if you note but the difference betwixt that Deity, and originally that
Deity, you must needs confess that M. Hooker speaks, with the consent of
reformed antiquity, and has said nothing to diminish the eternity of the
Son, or to make him inferior, in respect of his Father; or to teach the
ignorant, that there be many Gods.

ARTICLE II. The coeternity of the Son, and the proceeding of the holy Ghost.
IN this Article, the thing which you mislike is not any matter of his
judgment, but that he seems to confess, either out of less learning then
you have, or more humility then you show, that the coeternitie of the Son of
God, with his Father, and the proceeding of the Spirit from the Father and the
Son, are in Scripture no where to be found by express literal mention: And
yet you cannot be ignorant, but that undoubtedly he believed both. Therefore in
my opinion it is strange, why out of the second, and fifth Article, holde^ by
our church; you allege that the Son is the word of the Father from
everlasting, begotten of the Father; and the holy Ghost proceeding from the
Father and the Son; as though you dealt with an adversary that denied either.
You could not be ignorant (having perused his writings with that diligence to
reprehend) but in this great mystery of the Trinity, both concerning the
equality of the Son with the Father, and the Deity of the holy Ghost, who
proceeds from both, see plainly, that he held directly, and soundly that
doctrine, which is most true, and every way agreeable with the judgments, and
expositions of the Reverend Fathers of our Church. Neither do I know, whether
in this point, any of them, have left behind them a more sound, learned, and
virtuous Confession, then he has done. Books 5. page 106. sect. 51.
For, says he; The Lord our God is but one God. In which indivisible unity,
notwithstanding we adore the Father, as being altogether of himself; we
glorify that Consubstantiall Word, which is the Son; we bless and magnify
that coessentiall Spirit, eternally proceeding from both, which is the holy
Ghost: what confession can there be in this point, of greater iudegment,
learning, and truth? and wherein, there is less difference with that, which
our Church holds? both having their ground, as you may see, by the places
alleged by M. Hooker, in the Margent, from the infallible evidence of Gods
word. This troubles you that he says, that these points are in scripture no
where to be found, by express literal mention: which you out of your learned
observation, have proved (as you think) to be far otherwise, by those
places of Scripture, which his careless reading and weak judgment, was no
way able to observe. Where first, to prove the coeternitie of the Son, you
allege; The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way; I was before
his works of old. Pro. 8.22. Ioh. 1.1.
And again, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. And again, Ioh. 17.5.
Glorify me thou Father with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. These places I confess by way of collection,
may serve, truly to confirm in this Article, that which our Church holds
(and yet they are not the plainest places that might be alleged for this
purpose.) But in all these, where is there to be found express literal
mention, of the Coeternitie of the Son, with the Father? Nay, for any thing
that ever I could read; I do not think you are able to find the word
Coeternall, or Coequall, in the whole Scripture in this sense. For after the
Arrians had long, in this point troubled the Church, the holy Fathers express
what they held, by the word Homousion; which word Saint Augustine affirms,
Tom. 2. epist. 174 A^g.
not to be found in all the Scripture. What then has Master Hooker said;
which Saint Augustine said not long since? neither of them disprouing the
thing, but both denying the express literal mention of the word; which I
persuade my self your selves are never able to find.

Now for the proceeding of the holy Ghost, you allege, as you say, express
words: When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you* from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, Ioh 15.26.
which proceeds of the Father: Out of this place (as you think) you have
sufficiently proved, the express literal mention of this point; we conte^d not
with you, nor with any, whether the truth of this point may directly be
warranted by holy scripture, but whether there be, as you say, express literal
mention. First then we call that express literal mention, which is set down in
plain terms, and not inferred by way of consequence: that it is so in this
point we have some reason to doubt, until out of your great observation, you
confirm it by more plain and apparent Scripture. For against this place
(which is but one) which you have alleged, we take this twofold exception; as
thereby accounting it insufficient, to prove as you would have it, that there
is express literal mention of the proceeding, of the Spirit from the Father
and the Son. For first, in that place alleged out of Saint John, there is no
mention at all of proceeding from the Son. Secondly, as Master Beza (whose
authority you will not deny) does expound the place, In comment* in Johan. 15
26
Christ speaks not of the essence of the holy Ghost in himself, but of the
virtue and power of the holy Ghost in us: neither does his interpretation
(which we will not examine at this time) any way prejudice the foundation of
that truth, which our Church does hold. For the Deity of the holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father, and the Son, though not by any express literal
mention, yet may easily be proved by infinite places of Scripture, and other
infallible demonstrations besides this. In the days of Liberius the Pope, and
of Constantius the Emperor, certain fantastical spirits held, that the holy
Ghost was not God; but only the ministerial instrument of divine working:
This began under Arrius, and increased by Eunomius, a leprous heretic, but a
subtle Logitian; whom the Church has strongly confuted, with arguments
impossible to be answered. Psalm. 126. 1. Corinthians. 2 Iam. 1. Matt. 28.
As first, that the holy Ghost is every where; to give all things: to know and
search all things; that we are commanded to baptize in the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: besides the greatness of the sin
against the holy Ghost: Matthew. 12.
So Ananias that lied, as Peter said, to the holy Ghost, lied not to man, but
to God. These and many such places, warranted those ancient Councels, to
conclude the Deity of the holy Ghost, equal to the Father and the Son; and
equally proceeding from both. As first the Council of Constantinople, About
the year 381.
consisting of an hundredth and fifty Bishops, under Theodosius the elder, and
Damasus the Pope, which condemned the heresy of the Macedonians. The same
faith was confirmed by the Council of Ephesus; the Council of Chalcedon;
430.451.
the Council of Lateran, under Innocentius the third, and diverse others. And
Athanasius himself makes it most plain, that the Father is of none, either
made, created, or begotten: the Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor
created, but begotten: the holy Ghost is from the Father, and the Son, not
made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding. In this, nothing being first,
or last, greater, or less; but all the three persons, coeternall and coequall.
The proceeding of the holy Ghost (as the Schoolmen observe) is threefold; one
unspeakable and eternal, whereby the holy Ghost eternally; and without time,
proceeds from the Father and the Son; the other temporal, when he is sent
from the Father, and the Son, to sanctify the elect. Of this latter
proceeding, says Beza, is that place understood which you peremptorily
allege, for to prove the first. So then we say, for our answer to this cavil,
that as yet we see not express literal mention of these points; but that they
are truly and soundly collected, by the Church, we neither do, can, or dare
deny; secondly, that the denial of express literal mention, ought not to
make any scruple, in the minds of weak Christians, concerning these articles,
the substance whereof are plain scripture; though for the words we find not as
yet any express literal mention: nor last of all (as you seem to fear) it
can be no underpropping to the traditions of the Church of Rome, which if they
can prove with the like necessary collection, out of the holy scripture, we are
ready to embrace them with all our hearts. In the mean time we account it a
wrong, to have an article of our faith, for want of express literal mention
out of scripture, to be compared to traditions, of that kind, for which in
scripture there is no warrant at all. To conclude then this article, we say
that in the Trinity there is that Identity of essence, Aug. in Psalm. 68
that it admits equality, but not plurality: the Father is one, the Son
another, the Holy Ghost another, Alius non aliud. Vnum non vnus.
but not another thing. For that thing that they all are, is this one thing,
that they are one God. So that Saint Austin says, I and my Father are one;
here both the words of the sentence, one, and are; in that he says one, Aug.
tom. 9. in Euang. Ioh. tract. 36. Damasc. de Orthodox. fid. lib. 3 cap. 6.
he freeth thee from Arrius; and in that he says are, he freeth thee from
Sabellius. For are, he would not say of one; and one, he would not say of
diverse: for every person has his own substance, which no other besides has,
although there be others besides, which are of the same substance. For the
persons of the Godhead by reason of the unity of their substance, do as
necessarily remain, one within another, as they are of necessity, to be
distinguished one from another: because two are the issue of one, and one the
offspring of the other two; only of three, one, not growing out of any other.
For since they all are but one God in number, one indivisible essence, or
substance, their distinction cannot possibly admit separation; Ho^. lib. 5.
page 121.
the Father therefore is in the Son, and the Son in him; they both in the
Spirit, and the Spirit in both them: He that can, says Austine, Aug. tom. 6.
cont. Max. epist. lib. 3.10.
conceive, let him comprehend it, but he that cannot, let him believe, and
pray, that that which he believes* he may truly understand.

ARTICLE III. Whether the holy Scriptures contain all things necessary to
salvation.
TWo things, are requisite to man's better life; a faith to believe what he
ought, a knowledge to comprehend what he must believe. For, says our Savior,
Job. 17.3.
in this is eternal life, to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. Because therefore the want of this knowledge, is the
cause of all iniquity amongst men, as contrariwise the very ground of all our
happiness, and the seed of whatsoever perfect virtue grows from us, is a
right opinion touching things divine: this kind of knowledge we may justly set
down, for the first and chiefest thing, which God imparteth to his people; and
our duty, of receiving this at his merciful hands, for the first of those
religious offices, wherewith we publicly honor him on earth. Now our Church
holds, and we most willingly confess, that the scripture is the true
ground, of all that holily we believe. But yet for all that, not the only
means, concerning God, of all that profitably we know. For that new
impression, made into our nature, eue^ by the hand of the Almighty, after the
first sin; and the wise beholding of his excellent workmanship, in the making
of all his creatures, are two volumes wherein we may read (though not
directly) the mercy of that power, that has saved us; yet the greatness, and
the might of that hand that has first made us: which though it be not all that
we must believe, yet it is not the least part of that, which we ought to know.
For this, as it makes us without excuse, so it serves even to lead us, to a
better knowledge: Romans 1.
and (until it be perfect) to utter out of the light of nature, those voices,
which may argue us, though not to be sons (for by this we cannot cry Abba
Father) yet to be reasonable creatures, of that power which we do adore; this
made O terrae ^ehiculum, and in terrasedem habens. Quisquis tande es maccesse
nostri^ ^^imis Jupiter; sieve naturae ordo sic ferat, sieve men's mortalium te
veneror: omnia enim secret, and sine strepituqui facis incedcrevia, and iusto
libramine mortalia and humana. Eurip. in Troas.
Euripides in Troas, and many of the heathen, to utter those prayers, which
had they been offered up in Christ, had not bin unbeseeming a good Christian:
so that though the Scriptures contain all things, which are necessary to
salvation; and that our chiefest direction, is from them; yet we are not
afraid to confess, that there is besides a light of nature, not altogether
unprofitable; the insufficiency whereof, is by the light of Scripture, fully
and perfectly supplied: and that both these together, as Master Book 1. page
88.
Hooker affirms, which you mislike, do serve in such full sort, that they
both jointly and not severally, either of them, be so complete, that unto
everlasting felicity, we need not the knowledge of any thing more then of these
two; I cannot but marvel, that men endued with reason should find any
thing, in this assertion, which in the hardest construction, might be wrested
as detracting from the sufficiency of the holy scripture: And only for this
cause, by reason that we read darkly, by the light of nature those first
elements, out of a natural knowledge, which by the access of a better
teacher, serve afterward for the full perfecting of that knowledge, which is
requisite to man's salvation. For as the schoolmen say, man stands in need of
a threefold law, to a moral vprightnes, setting aside that righteousness
requisite for his heavenly country. First an eternal law (which ^^b. 1. de
Libero. arbit. cap. 6. Summam ratio^em.
Saint Austin calls the chiefest reason) secondly natural; last of all
humane; unto which if we add that man, over and besides these, is in an
ordination to a supernatural end; then it is manifest, Caietan, ad ^uit mam
Aquinatis in quest. 9.2
that to make him a heavenly Citizen there is requisite a fourth law; which
man, must learn to obei^, out of the holy scripture. But as in the greatest
and fairest buildings even those stones, that lie lowest, are of an use, not be
contemned; though peradventure, not comparable to those last, exquisite
perfections, by which the work is finished; so even the light of nature, for
the acting of moral virtues, has his use, though not absolutely complete, to
make us Christians: And therefore in the nature of man's will, the very
Philosophers did seldom err; but in the strength of it often. So that some
ascribed more then was fit; others less then they ought; imputing al to a
stoical and fatal necessity. Now that we may truly understand, (the ignorance
or mistaking whereof, has bin the ground of your exception in this third
article) what good things man of himself may do or know without the grace of
God; we are taught, first that all Paul says, in him we live, Acts. 17.
we move, and have our being. This the Schoolmen call a Super fluxus
generalis.
general ouerflowing; and of the late writers, especially of Luther, it is
called the action of the omnipotency; and this grace is common to all, that are
within that compass to be called creatures. Secondly 1. Cor. 12.
To the faithful, that having the help afterward of a better light, they may
serve to be means of their salvation; to the unfaithful, for special uses,
and manifold, in the society of man, and to make themselves, in the end without
excuse. Such were those gifts in the Romans, and others of the heathen, of
justice, fortitude, temperance, prudence, which they thought, were from nature;
but we acknowledge to be from the special favor of God; for as being, so
truth is but one, and by Veritas a quocunque dicatur a Spiritu Sancto est.
Ambros.
whom soever it is done, or spoken, it proceeds from the Holy Ghost; and
therefore I both marvel at those, who make an opposition betwixt this light
of nature and the scripture; Si vnicum veritatis fontem de^ Spiritum esse
reputamus, veritatem ipsam neque respuemus neque contemnam^^ vbicunque
apparebit.
being both from one fountain, though running in diverse streams; and that
some men peeuishly refuse the excellentest truths, of heathen learning, seeing
even in them, these have proceeded from the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, there is a
grace of regeneration, or the grace of Christ, without Calvin Inst. lib. 2.
cap. 2. sect. 14.
for says Io. 15.5.
our Savior, Without me, you can do nothing; and Saint 1. Cor. 15.10.
Paul, Not I but the grace of God which is with me; so that this must be the
perfection of the other two, which is powerful to man's salvation, not rasing
out, that which before was, but finishing that which before was imperfect. The
two first, induing man with a passive power, (as the schoolmen call it) which
though actually it can do nothing, yet it is fit to perform that, which it
has no repugnancy in his own nature to resist; as wood can be made fire,
which water cannot. The last only affoording that actual power, which makes
him capable of the supernatural work; so that it is true in divinity, that
Posse habere fidem, est naturae; habere, gratiae. Aust. et Prosp. cont.
Cassianum.
the possibility to have faith, is from nature; but to have it, it is of grace
(as Saint Austin and Prosper hold) neither of them understanding an actual
having of faith without the grace of regeneration: This made the Fathers, in
their sermons to the people, to stir them up to prayer and good works; to
tell them often, that we can love God, and do good works; whereunto, they
only meant that we had a passive power, which stocks and brute beasts have not.
Now for the active power, we hold, that man has not this in natural things,
without the general help of God; and in moral actions, or the learning of
arts, not with that general help only, (which has bin some men's error) but
from a more special and peculiar grace; the weakness of those common notions
of good and evil, just and unjust, left in our nature by a new impression,
after sin, is for the most part such, that they can hardly discern any thing,
no not in arts, unless they be enlightened from above. And therefore, that Numa
amongst the Romans; Solon amongst the Athenians; Lycurgus amongst the
Lacedaemonians; and that many other amongst the Gentiles, were wise, and in that
kind virtuous; was not so much from nature, as from a special grace: Officio
et action bona sunt sed non fine. Aust.
whose moral works, says Saint Austin, were good, in their office, and
action; but not in their end. This argument he very learnedly handles, against
Julian the Pelagian, Tom. 7. lib. 4. cap. 3.
where he concludes two things; that there can be no true virtues, or truly
chaste works in infidels; and that those works whatsoever they are, are not
from nature, but from a special grace: the having whereof, though it serve not
of it self to salvation, yet we are not afraid to affirm, that the want of
these do ordinarily exclude from salvation: Justice, fortitude, temperance,
and prudence, being the effects of the same grace, but less powerfully
working; faith, hope, and charity, only taught by a supernatural truth. So
that though the light of nature, teach a truth necessary to salvation, without
the scripture, yet it teaches no knowledge, which is not contained in holy
scripture; the difference only being in this, that the light of nature, does
not teach all that the scripture does, but that the scripture teaches all,
(and more perfectly) which is taught by the light of nature: herein only
neither excluded as unnecessary, the one being subordinate to the other, and
both means of the same thing. To conclude then this point* we hold (being
warranted by holy truth) that the scriptures are the perfect measure and rule
of faith, Deu^. 4 2. Gal. 1.8. John. 20. vlt. 2. Tim. 3.16. Rom 10.17 Rom 15.4.
Ephe. 2.20
and that without Christ, we cannot be complete; and yet for all this, that
nature, so enlightened, teaches those moral virtues, without which, is no
ordinary salvation; but we say not, that matters and cases of salvation be
determined, by any other law, then warranted by holy scripture; or that we
are, or can be justified, by any other then in Christ, Romans 3.27
by faith without the works of the law: for there is no other name, which is
given under heaven, amongst men, by which we must be saved. The natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.14
for they are foolishnes unto him: for except a man be borne again, he
cannot see the kingdom of heaven. Io. 3, 3


ARTICLE IIII. Holy scriptures above the Church.
THough the unthankfulness of man be without excuse, even from the brightness
that rises from looking upon all the creatures; which with their beams shines
into the darkest corners of man's heart, yet in his mercy, he has not left him
altogether destitute of a better guide. The first serving, to teach him that
there is a God; the latter, what that God is, and how he will be worshipped by
man. This light we call the scripture; which God has not vouchsafed to all,
but to those only, whom he gathers more nearly and familiarly to him self,
and vouchsafes that honor, to be called his Church, that, as men through
infirmity seeing weakly, provide unto themselves, the help of a better sight;
so, what man cannot read, by the dimnes of his seeing out of the creatures, he
may more apparently read them, in the holy scriptures. For as there is no
salvation without religion; no religion without faith; so there is no faith
without a promise, nor promise without a word: for God desirous to make an
union betwixt us and himself, has so linked his word and his Church, that
neither can stand, where both are not. The Church for her part, in her choice
allowance testifying, as well that it is the scripture; as the scripture, from
an absolute authority, does assure us that it is the Church. For as those, who
are converted, have no reason to believe, that to be the Church, where there is
no scripture; so those who are not converted, have no great reason, to admit
that for scripture, for which they have not the Churches warrant. So that in my
opinion, the contention is unnatural and unfit, to make a variance by
comparison, betwixt those two, who are in reason and nature, to support each
other. It was a memorable atonement, that Abraham made with Lotte, Genesis.
13.^
let there be no strife I pray thee between thee and me, neither between thy
heardsmen, and my heardsmen, for we be brethren; so undoubtedly, may the Church
and the scripture say; it is then to be feared that those, who treacherously
make this contentious comparison betwixt both, are in very deed, true friends
to neither. For though we dislike of them, by whom too much heretofore, has
bin attributed to the Church; yet we are loath to grow to an error on the
contrary hand, and to derogate too much from the Church of God: by which
remoouall of one extremity with another, the world seeking to procure a
remedy, has purchased a mere exchang of the evil, which before was felt. We
and our adversaries confess, that the scriptures in themselves have great
authority* inward witness from that spirit, which is the author of all truth:
and outward arguments, strong motives of belief, which cleaves firmly to the
word it self. For what doctrine was ever delivered with greater majesty? What
style ever had such simplicity? purity? divinity? What history or memorial of
learning is of like antiquity? what oracles foretold have bin effected, 1.
King. 13.2 Esaias. 44.28.45 1.
with such certainty? What miracles more powerful to confirm the truth? What
enemies ever prevailed less or labored more violently to root it out? To
conclude, what witnesses have dyed with more innocence, or less fear, then
those that have sealed the holiness of this truth? This the scripture is in it
self; but men who are of less learning, then these reformers are, do not
unworthily make question, how that which ought thus highly to be esteemed for
it self, comes to be accounted of thus honorably by us; for the weakness of
man's judgment, does not ever value things, by that worth which they do
deserve. For undoubtedly out of that error, has proceeded your suspicion of
him, whose inward worthiness, must now be content to receive testimony, from a
witness by many thousand degrees, inferior to himself. To them of Samaria the
woman gave testimony of our savior Christ; John. 4.
not that she was better, but better known; for witnesses of less credit,
then those of whom they bear witness, but of some more knowledge then those
to whom they bear witness, have ever bin reputed to give a kind of warrant and
authority unto that they prove. Seeing then the Church, which consists of
many, does outwardly testify, what every man inwardly should be; to swerve
vnnecessarilie from the judgment of the whole Church, experience as yet has
never found it safe. For that which by her ecclesiastical authority, she shall
probably think and define to be true, or good, must in congruity of reason,
ouerrule all other inferior Judgments whatsoever. And to them (that out of a
singularity of their own) ask us why we thus hang ou^ judgments on the
Churches sleeue, we answer with Solomon, Ecclesi. 4 9
Two are better then one; for even in matters of less moment, it was never
thought safe, to neglect the judgment of many, and rashly to follow the fancy,
and opinion of some few. If the Fathers of our Church, had had no greater
reason to avouch their forsaking of the Antichristian Synagogue, (as you call
it) then this point; we might justly have wished to have bin reconciled to the
fellowship, and society of their church. For this point, as it seems rightly
understood, affords little difference betwixt them and us; and therefore there
was no mention of it in the last council their Church had. And Bellarmine
himself, does apparently complain, of Trent.
that we wrong them in this point; for doubtless it is a tolerable opinion of
the Church of Rome, if they go no further (as some of them do not) to affirm
that the scriptures, are holy and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us
for the authority of the Church; for there is no man doubts but that it
belongs to the Church (if we understand as we ought those truly who are the
Church) to approve the scriptures, to acknowledge; to receive; to publish; and
to commend unto her Children. And this witness ought to be received of all, as
true, yet we do not believe the scriptures for this only; for there is the
testimony of the Holy Ghost, without which the commendation of the Church were
of little value. That the scriptures are true to us, we have it from the
Church; D. Whitaker.
but that we believe them as true, we have it from the Holy Ghost. We
confess, it is an excellent office of the Church, to bear witness to the
scriptures; but we say not, that otherwise we would not believe them. We grant
that the scriptures rightly used, are the judge of controversies; that they are
the trial of the Church; that they are in themselves a sufficient witness for
what they are: but yet for all this, we are not afraid, with Master Hooker to
confess, Book. 2. page 102.
that it is not the word of God, which does, or possibly can, assure us, that
we do well to think it is the word of God. For by experience we all know, that
the first outward motion, leading men so to esteem of the scripture, Book. 2.
page 146 Hooker.
is the authority of Gods Church, which teaches us to receive Marks Gospel,
who was not an Apostle, and refuse the Gospel of Thomas who was an Apostle,
and to retain S. Lukes gospel, who saw not Christ, and to reject the Gospel of
Nicodemus that saw him. For though in themselves, they have an apparent and
great difference (as there must needs be betwixt Scripture and no Scripture)
yet to those that are unable to discern so much, the matter stands ouerruled
only, by the authority of the Church. For though, as Master Hooker says, the
Scriptures teach us, Li^. 38. (...) supra.
that saving truth, which God has discovered to the world, by revelation; yet
it presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is divine and sacred: And
therefore the reading of the Scripture in our Churches, is one of the plainest
evidences we have of the Churches assent and acknowledgement that it is the
Scripture: And yet without any contradiction at all, who so assenteth to the
words of eternal life, does it in regard of his authority whose words they
are. Those with whom the Church is to deal, are often heretics; and these
will much sooner believe the Church, then the Scriptures. Therefore says Saint
Austine (in that known place) I had not believed the Scriptures, Contra epist.
fundamenti. cap. 5.
if I had not been compelled by the authority of the Church. And howsoever
the Church may seem, now little to need her authority, because the greatest
harvest of heresies is past; yet we must not contemn her for all that, because
even the weeds of heresy, being grown unto a ripeness, do even in their
very cutting down scatter oftentimes, those seeds, which for a whilely
unseen, and buried in the earth, but afterward freshly spring up again, no
less pernicious then at the first. Therefore the Church has, and must have, to
the end of the world, four singular offices toward the Scripture. First, to
be a witness and keeper of them, Testi^.
as it were a faithful Register: whose fidelity, in that behalf, unless we
be bastard children, we have no reason at all ^o suspect; witnesses of less
truth and authority, having oftentimes the credit to be believed. Vindex
Secondly, to discern and judge between false and adulterate, and that which
is true, and perfect; in this respect, it has a property, which other
assemblies want; to hear, and discern the voice of her husband; neither can
she be thought a chaste spouse, who has not the ability to do that. But as the
Goldsmith either in his balance, or with his touchstone, discerns pure gold
from other metals of less value, yet does not make it; so deals the Church,
who has not authority to make scripture, that which is not; but makes a true
difference from that which did only seem. Neither in this respect, is the
Church above the Scriptures, but acknowledges in humility, that she is left
in trust, to tell her children which is her husbands voice; and to point our to
the world (as John Baptist did Christ) a truth of a far more excellent
perfection then her self is: As if I doubted of a strange coin, wherein I
rest satisfied in the resolution of a skillful man; but yet valuing the coin
for the matter and the stamp of the coin it self. Praeco.
The third office of the Church is to publish, and diuulge, to proclaim as a
crier, the true edict of our Lord himself; not daring (as Chrysostom says) to
add any thing of her own; Homil. 1. ad Titum.
which she no sooner does, but the true subjects yield obedience, not for the
voice of him that proclaims, but for the authority of him whose ordinances
are proclaimed. The last is to be an Interpreter; Interpres.
and in that following the safest rule (to make an undivided unity of the
truth incapable of contradiction) to be a most faithful expositor of his own
meaning. Thus whilst the Church for that trust reposed in her, deals
faithfully in these points, we are not afraid to acknowledge, that we so
esteem of the Scriptures, as rightly we are led by the authority of Gods
Church. Those that are of that judgment, that they dare give credit without
witness, though we follow not their example in overmuch credulity, yet we
blame not their judgments in that kind. Touching therefore the authority of the
Church, and the scriptures, though we grant (as you say) that the Church is
truly distinguished by the scriptures; Epist. page 9.
that the scriptures (which is a strange phrase) warrant ye trial of Gods word;
and that it was ever believed for the words sake; yet without fear of
underpropping any popish principle (as you term it) we say, that we are
taught to receive it, from the authority of the Church; we see her judgment;
we hear her voice; and in humility subscribe unto all this; ever
acknowledging the Scriptures to direct the Church, and yet the Church to
afford (as she is bound) her true testimony to the Scripture. For the verse of
Menander, Act. 17.28. Tit. 1.^0.
Aratus, or Epimenides, was, and had been ever but the saying of Poets; had
not the Church assured us, that it was uttered since, by an instrument of the
holy Ghost.

ARTICLE V. Of Freewill.
IN searching out the nature of humane reason, whilst we reach into the depth
of that excellency, which man had by creation; we must needs confess, that by
sin he has lost much, who now is unable, to comprehend all that he should;
but we dare not affirm that he has lost all, who even in this blindness,
is able to see something, and in this weakness strong enough, without the
light of supernatural Justifying grace, to tread out those paths of moral
virtues, which have not only great use in humane society, but are also not
altogether of a nature oppositely different from man's salvation. And therefore
the natural way to find out laws by reason, guides, as it were by a direct
path, the will unto that which is good, which naturally having a freedom in
herself, is apt to take, or refuse, any particular object whatsoever being
presented unto it. Which though we affirm, Hook. Book 1. page ^0 61.
yet we neither say that Reason can guide the will unto all that is good (for
though every good that concerns us has evidence enough for it self, yet
reason is not diligent to search it out;) nor we say not, that the will does
take or refuse any particular object; but is apt rather, noting the nature
whereby it has that power, then showing the ability whereby it has that
strength. For though sin has given (as the Schoolmen observe) four wounds
unto our nature; Ignorance, Malice, Concupisence, and infirmity; the first in
the understanding, the second in the will, the third in our desiring appetite,
the last in the Irascible; yet the will is free from necessity and coaction,
though not from misery and infirmity. For (as Saint Bernard says) there is a
threefold freedom, from necessity, from sin, De graetia et libero arbitrio
and P. Lomb. lib. 2. Sent. did. 25. 1. Cor. 7.36. Libera sed liberata. Romans 6.
Romans ^.
from misery: the first of nature, the second of grace, the third of glory. In
the first, from the bondage of coaction, the will is free in it own nature,
and has power over it self. In the second, the will is not free, but freed,
from the bondage of sin. And in the third, it is freed from the servitude of
corruption. Now that freedom, by which the will of man is named free, is the
first only: and therefore we dare say, that the wicked, who have not the two
last, (being captives to sin in this life, and to misery in the life to come)
yet for all this, want not the freedom of will. Now this freedom of nature as
Aristotle notes, is two fold; that which is opposite to a simple coaction,
Aristot. 3. Ethic. cap. 4.5.
and that to which not only a coaction, but a necessity is opposite. The first
is of those things, which cannot by any means but be willed of us, and yet
freely and voluntarily are willed; as to be happy, which none can choose but
will, Clem. Alexan. in Strom. Aug. lib. 2. confess. cap. 6.

Boeth. de. con. lib. 4. Damasc. de. fide lib. 2. cap. 22 Arist. 1* Eth. cap.
1. Senec. lib. 4. de. ben. cap. 7. In hypothesi bonum, in thesi malum.


though most do fail in the means: the second, when we can either will, or
not will; as to walk, speak, sit, or such like. Now because nothing is the
proper, or the chief object of the will, but that which either is, or seems
to be good, as all learned men affirm; therefore in our wills, there is this
usual error, that our understandings are deceived by the inferior appetite of
the flesh, which makes that seem good, in the particular proposition, which
it pronounces to be evil in the general. And therefore being by nature to
will good, wills that which is directly opposite, because reason growing
idle, in the sloth of an inferior appetite, wants diligence to search it
out. Few men but think drunkenness in general to be evil, which
notwithstanding themselves do embrace, because in particular they think it
good: This being the difference in all sin, that then it seems to be none,
when it is (this sin) Thus the conclusion by the rules of Logic, being from
the particular (wherein reason corrupted has failed) the will has reason
enough to follow that; and therefore says S. Austin, Ang^n ^ach. cap. 30.
man using amiss the freedom of this will, has both lost it and himself; not
in respect of the natural liberty from coaction, but in respect of the
liberty which is from sin, Part. 1. quest. 83. art. 2.
as Aquinas answers. Saint Ambrose (or whosoever was the Author of that
book of the calling of the Gentiles) says, that in man there is a threefold
will; sensitive, animal, spiritual; the two first, he holds to be (...), the
last to be the work of the holy Ghost. For as one (...), ^al Inst. lib. 2.
cap. 2. sect. 13. Inspersum est vniuersis s^men ^liquod ordinis ^olitici.
there is in man an understanding of earthly things, and of heavenly: earthly
things, as of policy, governing of families, arts, liberal and mechanical,
and such like, which pertain not directly to God, to his kingdom, to the
righteousness of it, to eternal happiness; heavenly, as the knowledge of the
divine will, and framing our lives according to it: Of the first we say, that
because man is a sociable creature, and naturally inclines to all that
concern the preservation of that; there are left in him certain universal
impressions, wherein in all ages, wise men have conspired for the making of
good laws: Which in my opinion is not much less, then that which you
reprehend, being affirmed by M. Hooker. But the understanding of heavenly
things, we confess by the corruption of original sin wholly to be taken from
us. Naturalia corrupta supernaturalia ablata.
For natural things are corrupted, and supernatural taken away. For we think
not as some of the ancient Fathers did, especially the Greeks (who were loath
to dissent too much from the Philosophers) that man was corrupted only in his
sensual part, and that he has reason found, and his will also for the most
part. For says Saint Austin, De corrept. and gratia ad Valent. cap. 2.
Adam had that he might, if he would; but not to will that he could: And
therefore in supernatural things (which are the works of piety pleasing and
acceptable to God) (of which is understood all that you allege out of the
tenth Article of the Church of England) we say the will of man has not
obtained grace by freedom, Humana voluntas non liberate gratiam, sed gratia
consequitur libertatem. Aug. vbi supra. Cum vult non potest, quia qua^do potuit
noluit: ideo per malum velle perdidit bonu^ posse. Aug. Call. lib. 1. Instit.
cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 2.

Grego. Arimi. in in 2. Sent. did. 26. quest. 1. art. 1 Gaspar. Cassalius lib.
1. de quadripartita iustitia cap. 32.

Prima principia doctrinae moralis.


but freedom by grace; yet for all this, neither does the will want in his
own nature a potentiall freedom in all things, nor an actual powerful
freedom in some things: for the blow that sin gave, made not an equal
disabilitie to all actions; seeing all actions are not in equal distance from
man's nature. For the thoughts, and the actions of man, we know are of three
kinds; natural, moral, supernatural; now there are many truths
theoricall, and mechanical, contained in natural and humane arts, which by
man may be comprehended, only by the light of nature: for though some divines
are of opinion, that no moral truth can be known of the understanding of man,
in the state of nature corrupt, without the special help of God; others
contrary (as Albertus, Bonauenture, Scotus, Aqumas and diverse others) yet all
agree in this, that man can know a moral truth in general, without any
special grace; but that good that directly belongs to eternal life, he
cannot. Now what I pray you does our Church say less when says, that without
the grace of God (which is by Christ) preuen^ing us, that we will, and working
together while we will, we are nothing at all able to do the works of piety,
which are pleasing and acceptable to God? Or what in your opinion does M.
Hooker say more, when he says that there is in the will of man, naturally that
freedom, whereby it is apt (not able) to take, or refuse any particular object
whatsoever, being presented to it? or when he says there is not that good
which concerns us, but it has enough for evidence in it self if Reason were
diligent to search it out: the fault of man's error in election, arising out of
the sloth of reason, not out of the nature of the good. And this sloth, being
nothing else, but that heavy burden, wherewith we are laden by our first
corruption. And therefore in mine opinion, the accusation is directly false,
whereby you would make him to say contrary to his words; that reason by
diligence is able to find out any good concerning us. For he that says that
there is virtue enough in the poole to heal, Ioh 5.
if a man had power enough to put himself in; does not affirm that man has
strength enough to do it; but that the poole had virtue, if he were able to
do it. Ephe. 2.5. 2. Cor. 3 5. Deorum munus est quod ^iu^mus, nostrum quod
sancte vinimus. Senec.
But doubtless we are dead in our sins, and trespasses; we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing; and yet as Seneca says, it is
the gift of God that we live, for that he has done without us; but it is an
act of our own (not simply, but of our selves helped) that we live well. For
many other things may unwillingly be done by us, but the act of believing, as
it must be done in us, so it must be done willingly, and with us. And therefore
says Saint Austin, there are three things necessary that supernatural
mysteries may be perceived by us; first, a divine revelation from the
Scriptures; Romans 10. Imperium voluntatis. Aug. in tract. 36 in ^ohan.
a persuasion of that truth by miracles, or some other means; and last of all,
the rule of the will. For, says he, a man may enter into the Church
unwillingly; he may receive the sacrament unwillingly; but no man can believe
but willingly. Now there is no difference betwixt the will, and the free will,
(both being the rational power of desiring) but that the one respects the
end, and then it is called will: the other respects the means, and then it
is called free will. So the same power of understanding, Prima principia.
as it respects the first principles, is called understanding; as it
respects the conclusion which is gathered by a discourse, from the
principles, it is called reason. Now this reason concerning things doubtful,
has naturally in it self, a way to both opposites; but leans to that for
the most part, whereunto either appetite, ignorance or grace sway it. So that
though freely and without constraint, it follow naturally the wisdom of the
flesh; yet without a supernatural grace, Romans ^ 7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: For it is not subject to the
law of God, neither indeed can be. This being duly weighed with understanding,
and considered of with a charitable humility, such as the cause requires,
every man may see (notwithstanding your accusation) that our Church in this
neither differs from the truth, nor Master Hooker at all from our Church.

ARTICLE VI. Of Faith and Works.
WHere charity has not power enough to guide reason, there malice out of
ignorance, is able to make conclusions against sense. For the eyes being
blinded which naturally are to perform the best offices of seeing; the colors
that are discerned otherwise, are little better, then the false errors of a
troubled fancy. For where the light is darkness, how great must that darkness
be? To attain by a supernatural power, Matthew. 6 23
to that felicity, which is an act of the greatest mercy, as infinite numbers
fail in the thing; so there are not a few, which utterly mistake the means.
And whilst all, that are Christians, acknowledge it to be a grace; eager
contentions are stirred up, whether it be imputed or inherent in us. And seeing
in this act of justification, by the consent of all, man does receive from God
what he has, the question is, what virtue must be in that hand, to enable
weakness to receive such strength: and how that faith must be accompanied, that
is able to clothe our souls with the righteousness of another merit. Here we
have adversaries, whom peradventure we mistake, as they mistake us; making, (as
in other points) a misconstruction, to be the ground of a great difference, and
the strongest opposition, to arise from hence; that nether part is willing to
understand each other. Here if we should but discover the least means of
reconcilement, some hasty spirits would not stick to accuse us as more then
partial; and that treacherously we sought to betray the cause. In that we
purpose, to set down what truth warranteth in this behalf, it is rather to
free him from suspicion, whom you do accuse, then that he in that, wherein
you accuse him, any way stands in need of our weak defense. If man rightly
value but the merit of the Son of God; and how so humble, and innocent
obedience, to so low a state, must needs in justice, make a full
satisfaction, for so great a sin; he cannot choose but confess that only for
the merit of our Lord, A^t. 11. Eccl^s. A^gl. de hominis iustificat.
and Savior Jesus Christ, through faith, and not for works and our merits, we
are accounted righteous before God. If the soul of man, did serve only to give
him being in this life, then things appertaining to this life would content
him, as we see they do other creatures; which creatures, inioying those things
by which they live, they do seek no further, but in this contentation, do
show a kind of acknowledgement, that there is no higher good, which any way
does belong unto them. With man it is far otherwise; for although all inferior
things were in the possession of one, yet he would ever with a desire thirst,
for some thing above all those; Su^^ma merce^ est vt ipso perfruamur. A^g. de
doct. Christi. cap. 6.
so that nature, even in this life, does claim a perfection, higher and more
divine, then any thing in it self, which man must receive in the reward: now
rewards do always presuppose such duties performed as are rewardable; Matthew
5.11
our natural means unto blessedness are our works, nor is it possible, that
nature should ever find any other way to salvation, but only this. Yet seeing
that no man can say, since the foundation of the world, that his works are
pure, but that all flesh is guilty of that, for which God has threatened
eternally to punish; there rests either no way unto salvation, or a way which
must needs be supernatural, and above man's reach. Had Adam continued in his
first estate, man's absolute righteousness, and integrity in all his actions, had
bin the way of life to him and to all his posterity; though peradventure not in
so large a manner as heavenly felicity, does import; the possession* whereof,
even the least moment, were too abundant a retribution. Yet now, we failing, in
that which was our duty, it were a thing impossible in nature, to obtain the
other. The light of nature, is never able to find out any way of obtaining the
reward of bliss, but by performing exactly the works of righteousness. Therefore
God has prepared a supernatural way, Ioh. 6.29
namely that we do believe; not that God does require nothing unto happiness,
at the hands of men, Lib. 1. page 32
(as Master Hooker says) saving only a naked faith (for Hope and Charity we
may not exclude) but that without faith all other things are as nothing; this
being the ground of those other divine virtues. The principal object of
faith, is that eternal verity, which has discovered the treasures, of hidden
wisdom in Christ; the highest object of hope, is that everlasting goodness,
which in Christ does quicken the dead; the final object of charity, is that
inco^prehensible beauty, which shines in the countenance of Christ, the Son of
the living God. The first begins here, with a weak apprehension of things
not seen, and ends in the beholding of God in the world to come. The second
begins here, with a trembling expectation of things far removed, and as
yet, but only heard of; and ends with a real, and actual fruition, of that
which no tongue is able to express. The third begins here, with a weak
inclination of heart, toward him, unto whom; we are not able to approach, and
ends with an endless union; the mystery whereof, is higher, then the reach of
the thoughts of men. And howsoever the apprehension, of that righteousness,
whereby man is justified, be properly but the work of one, yet we dare not
(neither do any learned in our Church) make faith to be naked of other
virtues; and therefore it is so much the more strange, that you follow the
error, which our adversaries have accused us for, as though it were an opinion
holden by our Church. In this article against Master Hooker, you say, that God
requires no more at the hands of men* unto happiness; Epist. page, 13.
then a naked belief. And a little after; We claim nothing, by any duty we
do, or can do, or any virtue which we find in our selves, but only by that
naked faith, etc. In these assertions (which in my opinion are repugnant to our
Church) and in the best construction, make but a harsh sound; what do you else,
but discover ye error, which they of the Church of Rome, by a mistaking, have
thought us to hold? as though it were our doctrine, that we could be
justified, by a faith that were merely naked? Luther striving to show how
little our works, did in the merit of man's salvation, speaks somewhat harshly,
when he says; Fi^es and sine and ante charitat^ Iustificat.

Luth. in 2. ad Ga^.

Luth. tom. ^. prop. 3. Fides nisi sit sin^ vllis etiam minimis operibus non
iustificat* imo ^on est fides, In Anti. council. ad a^. 11. sess. 6. Melancton.
Brent. Clemnis. Calvin. lib. 3. Inst. cap. 16. Necessitas praesentiae, non
e^^icientiae.

Gratia saluamur sed non a s^ue bonis operibus. C^em. Alexand. ^. Strom.


Faith without and before we have charity, does justify. And in another place
(both which are not unjustly called in question by those of the Church of Rome)
he says; Faith unless it be without even the least good works, does not
justify; nay, it is no faith. But M. Calum speaks in this, better then either
Luther or you; Faith alone justifies, but not that faith which is alone. For
if our Church held a naked faith (which none that were wise ever did) might not
all the world justly accuse us as enemies to good works? The most of the
learned in Germany held a necessity of good works* not a necessity of
effecting, but a necessity of presence for we are saved doubtless by grace,
but (having years) we cannot ordinarily be saved unless we have good works. For
faith which we teach to justify, is not void of good works; as Doctor In cap.
2. la^. annot. 11.
Fulke answers to the Rhemes objection. And In Matt. 25. annot. 3.
therefore in another place, he says; the elect are always fruitful of good
works. From hence (seeing faith has no assurance for itself either to God or
to man) we exhort in our sermons to good works, we persuade to humiliation, by
fasting and weeping; which are (if they be truly penitent) means to blot out
sin, thorough Gods unspeakable and undeserved mercy. For as Saint 2. Cor. 7.10
Paul says, Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented
of: And therefore says Saint Hierom, fasting, and sackcloth are the armor of
repentance* And ye men please God by fasting (says D* In Matt. 15. annot. 3.
Rhem. ^est.
Fulk) as Anna, Tobie, Judith, Hester, we doubt nothing at all, while we use it
to the right end allowed of God; that is, hu^bling of our selves, and
chastising of our bodies, that it might be more obedient to the Spirit, and
fervent in prayer. Nay our solemn fasts are, as M. Hooker says, the splendour,
and outward glory of our religion; forcible witnesses of ancient truth;
prouocations to the exercise of all pi^tie; shadows of our endless felicity
in heaven; and everlasting records and memorials upon earth; which, it is great
pity it is so much neglected, because even therein, they which cannot be
drawn, to harken unto what we teach, might only by looking upon that we do,
in a manner read whatsoever we believe. Now, that he says, the attainement
unto any gracious benefit of Gods unspeakable and undeserved mercy, the
phrase of antiquity, Meriting for obtaining: so in the Confession of
Wittenberge.
has called by the name of Merit; this is that, wherein you desire to be
resolved. And surely, he has read little, who is ignorant, that the heathen
Masters of the Casobon. in Pl. epist. Mereri stipe^dia. Call. Inst. lib 3. cap.
sect 2. Vsi sunt (fateor) passim vetusii ecclesiae scriptores, atque vtinam
voculae vnius (abusu) (so that it properly signifies otherwise) erroris
materiam posteris non praebuissent. mark the word ( praebuissent) gave but only
occasion. Heb. 13.
Latin tongue, and the Fathers for antiquity, nearest unto those times, have
used the word ( Merit) far in another sense, then that whereunto the violence
of some co^structions have wrested it at this day. And Aquinas himself
understands by the name of ^urit, not a work not due, which should deserve a
reward; but a work which mercifully, and by the goodness of God a reward
follows. The phrase of the Latin does properly make one to merit of another,
and as it were to bind him to him, who does any thing, which pleases and
delights him, for whom it is done. Thus that place in the epistle to the
Hebrews, To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifice God
is well pleased. Where they of Rhemes, following the Latin ( promeretur) say
promerited, showing that they meant nothing else, in ancient time, by merit, but
that delight, allowance, and contentment, which God takes in those good things
we do, and so rewards them. And Doctor Fulke confesses that Primasius, who
was Saint Austins scholar, used the same word, pleased.
promeretur, as it was taken amongst the vulgar at that day, far differing
from the sense wherein it is now used. Thus much briefly, may serve for answer
in this point; that faith is not alone, though alone it justify; that though a
man sin (if he repent) his faith may save him; that there are uses, (nay
excellent uses) of good works, though they do not save us; and last of all, if
posterity had not corrupted the word merit, that we would not be afraid, to
speak in the phrase of antiquity, and call our virtuous attainment (by mercy
of grace) by the name of merit.

ARTICLE VII. The virtue of works.
AS goodness, so truth being but one, whatsoever is opposite (be it never so
carefully observed) in the course of a long stream, at the last foldeth it
self in a contradiction. For falsehood has no more strength, to prove a truth;
then truth, has weakness, to beget a lie. Then the ground of all true
assertions, concurring immoueably in that one first truth, of which all other
inferior are but branches; whatsoever goes about to disprove that, must of
necessity, in his own parts be diverse, and imply a contrariety, seeing it
labors to infring the certainty of that, which eternally, and unchangeably,
is but one. Hence comes it, that unskillful men (the grounds of whose
opinions are but the uncertainties of their own ignorance) are thought to want
memory, whilst they contradict themselves; when indeed, the defect is in
judgment, which cannot make truth the ground of their knowledge, from which if
they swerve never so little, they do not sooner oppugn others, then cross
themselves; truth admitting no coherence of contrarieties, seeing it self, is
but only one. From this has proceeded, that oversight of a great number, who
speaking first, against a truth uttered by others; come at length, to speak
even directly, against themselves. Thus you that in the former Article,
disputed of faith, naked and destitute of all good works, make your next step
to those good works that do accompany faith. Where I understand not (but
perhaps you do) why you call them good, if they arise not naturally out of
faith; or why you call that faith naked, which is accompanied with these good
works. But doubtless there being a moral goodness, even where there is want of
supernatural light; and the most certain token of that goodness being, if the
general persuasion of all men do so account it; it can not choose, but seem
strange, that the approbation of these, should in your opinion be applied to
those works that are done out of faith, after man is justified; seeing there is
a good (as M. Hooker says) that does follow unto all things by observing the
course of their nature; yet natural agents cannot obtain either reward, or
punishment: for amongst creatures in this world, only man's observation of the
law of his nature (because he has will) is righteousness; only man's
transgression sin. For even to do that, which nature tells us we ought
(howsoever we know it) must needs be acceptable in Gods sight. How this,
uttered out of great judgment to another purpose (namely, that good things are
done, and allowed, whereof we have other direction then Scripture) is by you
wrested against the articles of our Church, Hook. lib. 2. sect. ^.
either concerning the perfection of works, which are with faith, or the
goodness of works, without faith; to say plainly, I cannot yet understand.
Therefore as the dealing is unequal, to make him say what you list, so the
advantage is too great, to make him an adversary to a cause of your own making;
when the whole scope of his speech is to another purpose. For there is no
indifferent reader, but had he considered what M. Hooker speaks, and to what
end, in those places by you alleged; he must of necessity have wondered at
your sharp and acute judgments, that would without blushing, adventure to
allege him to that end. But an opinion doubtless that these things would never
be examined, gave that confidence to your first motion, which consideration
would have hindered, if you had but once dreamed to have bin called in
question. We should not therefore need in this, much to defend him but briefly
resolve you, what our Church holds, (and fitly) in this point. The Art. 12
articles of our Church which ye think are oppugned, are two; first that the
fruits of faith, cannot abide the severity of Gods justice; that man out of
faith, does good works, which though they make us not just, yet are both
acceptable, and rewardable: I doubt not but it is a truth, whereof if ye had
not bin persuaded, this letter of yours (profitable (as you think) to the
Church and pleasing to God) as all the rest of your writings in that kind, had
lien buried, unborn in those rotten sepulchers, from whence into the world
they did first come, whilst we are by that intermediat justice of Christ, made
righteous, and have obtained a free remission of our sins, that we are termed
just; there is with this mercy joined the Holy Ghost; which dwelling in us
makes us fruitful to good works; this reviving all parts from our natural
corruption, reformeth us to a pure, and willing obedience unto that revealed
will, which is the rule of all that we ought to do; yet seeing we are clothed
with corruption, there are even in our best actions, those remainders of
imperfection, which serve, to teach us thankefulnes, and humility, both
arising, from the consideration of our own weakness. And I doubt not, but even
in this point, many of the Church of Rome, (whose humiliation in their
penite^cy of heart, seems far to exceed ours) are of this opinion, that even
the best action performed in their whole life (as there are yet some few
momuments spared from the covetous hand) if all points of it were considered
with a straight view, sifting even the least circumstances, which closely
insinuate themselves, out of our corruptions, into our actions, they would (I
say) confess, that there is something which tastes of the flesh; which
corruption, if either for want of a strict consideration we see not, or through
a selfeloue could pardon, yet it is not able, in the feeblenes of his own
nature, to abide the exact trial, and severity of Gods judgment. That law,
the least transgression whereof is sin, is said to be fulfilled three ways;
first in Christ; and so all the faithful are said to fulfill the law, having
his obedience imputed to them. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
Secondly, it is fulfilled by a divine acceptatio^, for God accepts our
obedience begun, as if it were perfect; seeing what imperfections are in it,
are not imputed to us. For it is al one, not to be, and not to be imputed;
blessedness being the reward of both: And we know that there is no condemnation
to those that are in Christ Jesus. Psalm. 32.1. Romans 8.
Thirdly, it is fulfilled by us; an error I think scarce any do hold, saving
only the Anabaptists. For that eternal wisdom, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum etc.

2. Non concupisces.


which has led man by the law unto Christ, has set those bounds, which all
men have broken, (the first commandment and the last) to include all, as
guilty of the breach of the whole law: For our knowledge being but in part, it
is not possible (says Saint Aug. Tom. 3. de Sp. et lit. cap. vlt.
Austen) that our love can be perfect. And therefore we conclude the first
point, according to the article of our Church, from which there is no syllable
in Master Hooker that is different; that our works though they be good, and so
esteemed, and rewarded, yet they cannot abide the justice of the law, and the
severity of Gods judgment. The second point is, whether the works which are
done before the grace of Christ, are not only not acceptable to God, but also
have the nature of sin. In this we must use some care; for whilst men justly
disagreeing, have equally labored to be different one from another, both in
the end, have bin equally distant from the truth. That there are excellent
graces in the heathen, no man doubts; and he must needs be far from reason,
and sense, who makes no difference betwixt the justice, moderation, and equity
of Titus and Traian, and the fury, violence, and tyranny of Caligula, Nero, and
Domitian; betwixt the unclean lusts of Tiberius, and the continency in this
respect of Vespasian; in one word, betwixt the observation, and the breach of
laws. For there is that difference betwixt just, and unjust, that even the
frame of nature (where sense wants) acknowledge a well being, by the
observation of what it ought: and therefore, much more in those good works,
which because they missed of the right scope, we dare not call by the name of
true, perfect Christians virtues; yet for their very action, we are content,
(so long as they swerve not from the righteousness of the law of nature) to
give them leave to be called by a better name, then only sins; and yet for
all this, no man takes them, to be much better in the true severity, of a hard
construction; for those that are not regenerate, although they sin in their
best observation of the moral law, yet it is much better to perform those
offices, then to perform them not; seeing Zanch. de relig. lib. 1. cap. 6.
a part of that endeavor, though it be not mere righteousness, yet it is
less sin. We must therefore remember, that a work is considerable, either
in respect of the substance; or in regard of the manner of doing. In respect of
the work, all the actions of infidels are not sin; seeing they perform those
things, which are commanded, by the law of nature, of nations, of God; nay they
are so far, in this respect, from being sins, that as (Saint Austin says) God
does plenteously reward them. But concerning the manner of working, all their
actions are sin; as proceeding from a corrupt fountain, a heart that wants
true faith; and directed to an end of less value, then he is, whose glory
ought to be the end of all we do. This is confessed even by our adversaries
themselves, with whom seeing we do agree, there can be no suspicion that we
should dissent, from that which our Church holds; and this may serve rather
to tell you what in these points, is the judgment of our Church, then to
defend him, whose words you have wrested, to a far different sense.

ARTICLE VIII. Works of supererogation.
THe neerenes, oftentimes to evil, is warrant enough for suspicion, to accuse
of evil; and because all errors, are not equally distant from truth, some men
in their true assertions, are supposed, by weak judgments, not to differ at
all from error. From hence comes it, that those men (who have no other
judgment but zeal) (which is the best excuse I can make for your accusation
in this article) have run so far, with a desire of safety, from those opinions
that were thought dangerous; that they have come at length, unto those that
were much more dangerous in truth. Which practice, though it argue a good
care, yet it proceeds from a timorous nature, wanting the ability, to put a
difference in the causes of true fear; so that this circumspection, is but
cowardlinesse; as he that were loath to be taken amongst his enemies trenches,
would get himself so far distant, that he would outrun, even the utmost limits
of his own army. Thus have you dealt in this article; fearing to approve any
thing that might tend to supererogation, you have misliked even the allowance
of those works, which are good, and yet not commanded; for (say you) to hold,
as Master Hooker does, that God approves more then he commands, what is it
else, but to scatter even the grains of Popery, and to lead men, to those
arrogant works of supererogation. Herein your fear, if it would have given you
leave, to have looked behind you, it may be peradventure, you would not have
run away in such haste; especially in cases of no great danger. And therefore
give me leave, to tell you, that there is no treachery, no danger, no cause of
flying, from this opinion. All the unforced actions of men, are voluntary; and
all voluntary actions, tending to their end, have choice; and all choice
presupposes the knowledge of some cause, wherefore we make it; and therefore it
is no absurdity to think that all actions of men, endued with the use of
reason, are generally either good, or evil. And although whatsoever is good,
Hook. lib. 2. page 122.
the same is also approved of God, yet according to the sundry degrees of
goodness, the kinds of divine approbation are in like sort multiplied: for some
things are good, yet in so mean a degree of goodness, that men are only not
disproued, nor disallowed of God, for them: as that no man hates his own
flesh; Ephe. 5* 29.
it is a matter of approbation, and allowance, but of no great, or singular
acceptance. So says Matt. 5.46.
our Savior, if you do good unto them that do so to you; the very Publicans
themselves do as much: Wherein to come short of them, as it were a great vice,
so not to exceed the^, is no great virtue. Some things in such sort are
allowable, that they be also required as necessary to salvation, by way of
direct, immediate, and proper necessity final; so that without performance of
such, we cannot by ordinary course be saved; nor yet by any means be
excluded from life, if we observe those. As nature gave light, unto the former;
so the Scripture is a guide to teach these: wherein because all fail, it is
the obedience, and merit only of one, that must make all righteous, that must
be saved. Some things there are, although not so required of necessity, that
to leave them undone, excludes from salvation; yet notwithstanding are of so
great dignity and acceptance with God, that most ample reward in heaven is
laid up for them. Of these we have no commandment, in nature, or Scripture,
that does exact them, in particular at our hands; yet those motives there are
in both, which may serve to draw our minds, most effectually to the performance
of them. In this kind there is not the least action, but it does somewhat make
to the accessorie augmentation of our bliss; which men have as much reason to
desire, as to desire that they may be blessed; no measure of blessedness
having power to content, saving only where the blessed wants capacity to
receive greater. Upon this depends, whatsoever difference there is between
the states of Saints in glory. Hereunto we refer whatsoever belongs unto
the highest perfection (for all perfection in this life is not equal) of man,
by way of service toward God: hereunto that feruor, and first love of
Christians, did bend it self, causing them to Act. 4 31
sell their possessions, and lay down the price at the blessed Apostles feet;
hereunto Saint 1. These. ^.9.
Paul, undoubtedly did aim, in so far abridging his own liberty, and
exceeding that which the bond of necessary, and enjoined duty tied him unto,
to ease those Churches, to whom he preached, with his handie labor; knowing
that although it were not a duty which he was commanded, yet it was an
advantage to his preaching, and acceptable to God; who doubtless approves
much more, then he does command. Thus when a man may live in the state of
matrimony, seeking that good thereby, which nature principally desires; to
make rather choice, of a contrary life, in regard of Saint Paul's judgment; 1.
Cor. 7.
he does that which is manifestly allowed, and yet not commanded in Gods word;
because without any breach, Hook. lib. 2. page 140.
he might do otherwise. Thus when a man who might lawfully possess his
riches, yet willingly does bestow them, to religious uses, virtuously embracing
that poverty, which he esteems as an advantage to eternal riches; does that
which argues a greater perfection, and for which he has warrant, though no
precept at all; because that which is a great virtue in him, is not a fault
simply in those that do not the like. Precepts and counsels having this
difference, that the one is of absolute necessity, the other left unto our
free election; where both tending to the same end, yet in this differ; that
both tend not after the same manner: both looking at the means, but the one
after a more exquisite, and excelling perfection. For every man being placed in
this life, betwixt the things of this world, and spiritual good things, the
more he cleaves to these, the more perfect and excellent he is; and yet to
cast them away wholly, is no precept of necessity, but an advise of greater
perfection. He that obeys not a precept, is guilty of deserved punishment;
but he that fails of these counsels, only wants, without sin, that
measure of perfection. Non est criminis non v^^isse, sed (...) and r^dd^sse e^t
^audi^. Aug. de virg. cap. 14.
For it is not a fault not to vow, but to vow, and to perform, it is a praise.
He that performs the one, shall have greater glory, but he that fails in
the other (without repentance) shall have certain punishment. Neither is it
said, says Saint Austine, as thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not
kill; so thou shall not marie, for Illa exi^untur, i^la o^feruntur, si (...)
illa damna^tur. A^g.
those are exacted, this is offered. This if it be done, it is praised; those
unless they be done, they are punished. For says (...) ad Eu^^ch.
Saint Hierome, where it is but advise, there is left a freedom; but where
there is a precept, there is a necessity. Precepts are common to all; counsel,
the perfection of some few. The precept being observed, has a reward; being
not observed, a punishment: but a counsel, or advise, not observed, has no
punishment* and being observed, has a greater reward. In these points all have
not holden the same opinions; some thought these counsels to be of the same
necessity with precepts; as those heretics called Apostolici, mentioned by
Saint Austine and Epiphanius. Her. 40. Her* 61. (...) Vigilan (...). Aug. her.
82.
Others esteemed them as things indifferent, and of no greater perfect^on.
Others as things forbidden, which error is accuse^ by some of our adversaries,
to be an opinion of our Church. He that amongst us of learning is most earnest
in this point, is Peter Martyr; and all that any of them to the true
perfection of a Christian life; not that we can supermerit, Proficientem
coronabo, non proficientem non punio. Chrysostom.
by these, more then we ought; but that by these, we do more, then without
these we should: for nature, common wealths, and religion, as they have a
being, so they refuse not a perfection, and a being well.

ARTICLE IX. None free from all sin.
IT cannot choose but seem strange, that this should be an act of many, which
in the most favorable construction, comes far short of that wisdom which
should be in one. But it may be peradventure (that as it falls out in things
natural) actions are then best done, when one does but one; distraction being
a let to a finite power, and usually arising from diversity of judgments. For
all not looking with the same eyes, nor following the like principles of
understanding, though they agree in the general to reprehend, yet for the most
part, they fail, in a particular resolution, of what they think worthy to
be reprehended. And therefore as in elections, whilst two of the worthiest
are competitors, stiff factions unite themselves, in allowance of a third
inferior to both. It seems that you have dealt so in this article, wherein
either all your consents made a hindrance to what you meant, or a division made
you agree to mislike a thing of the least importance: Wherein if you had not
discovered a weakness to be pitied, you might justly have expected an answer of
more learning; but as men failing, eue^ in those things, wherein it is no great
virtue not to fail, ad little unto any man yt shall direct the^ (because it is
small praise to teach that which is ashame not to know) so to omit our
direction, eue^ where we wonder that any man should need it, must needs be
esteemed in a high degree, an inexcusable neglect of a necessary duty. No man
I think (not of those that are thought to be out of the compass of the
Church) makes a doubt whether all men sin, leaving the redemption of man, and
so the freedom from sin, to him only who was eternally the Son of God. It was
as necessary that he should be without sin, as it is certain that (except him)
in many things we offend all. This is our frailty, that all of us do amiss
which we know, and the best of us do offend, when we know not; and therefore
Psalm 19.
David with an humble heart, desired to be cle^sed, from his secret faults;
making that even a step, to keep him from presumptuous sins. As it is
therefore, an infirmity that we do amiss in many things; so it is a virtue,
that we would do amiss in nothing; this being the perfection of our country,
and that the desire of our way: which because (clothed with corruption) we
cannot attain, we say daily (as we are taught) forgive us our trespasses. And
they pray in vain, to have sin pardoned, which secke not also by prayer, to
have sin prevented; yea every particular sin, except men can have some
transgression, wherewith they ought to have truce. For although (says Master
Hooker) we cannot be free from all sin collectiuely, Lib. 5. page 102.
(that is general, for so none was free saving only Christ) in such sort that
no part thereof shall be found inherent in us, yet distributiuely at the least al
great and grievous actual offenses, as they offer themselves one by one, both
may, and ought by all means to be avoided; so that in this sense, to be
preserved from all sin, is not impossible. This assertion, seems in your
opinions to be untrue, and for proof you allege, that we which are baptized,
and regenerated, in many things do offend all; did ever Master Hooker deny
this? Nay in the very same place, are not these his words? In many things we
do all amiss. But say you if that be so, how can we avoid all great and
greiuous sins? Or if we can, why may we not be preserved also, from all small
sins; and so being free from both small, and great, preserve our robe pure, to
the coming of our Savior Christ? In these few words, in my opinion, are three
of the most strange, and most violent conclusions, that I have ever read; and
those, which are by no means agreeable to any Church. First we say, In many
things we offend all; therefore say you, in all things we offend all. Secondly
we say, we may avoid some particular great, and grievous sins; therefore fay
you, why not less also? as if it were all one, not to small, and not to sin
at all. Thirdly, we say yt we are to pray, and hope to be pre^erued from any
and every special sin; therefore say you, we may keep our robe pure, to the
coming of Christ. I would be loath to make evil arguments worse by repeating;
and therefore I have used a direct sincerity in rehearsing your own words;
wherein I shall not need, to bestow any labor to overthrow a ruinous building
of such weakness; but only to tell you, in these points, what is the judgment,
and sentence of the whole Church. First, no man doubts but that all men are
sinners; for Genesis 6.5.
all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only evil continually.
In Psalm. 51.5.
iniquity are we borne and in sin are we conceived; who Psalm. 19.12
can understand his faults? For Ier. 17.9.
the heart is deceitful, and wicked above all things, who can know it? John.
3.5.
For unless a man be borne, of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Ephesians. 2.3.
And we are all by nature, the children of wrath. In one word, none are free
from sin, but he whom the blessed Virgin conceived, without the law of the
flesh, rebelling against the law of the mind; as Saint Austin proves most
learnedly, by a Lib. 1. and 2. Irenaeus. Cyprian. Raeticius. Olympius.
Hilarious. Ambros. Innocent. Greg. Naz. Basil. Chrysostom. Hieron.
cloud of witnesses of the ancient Fathers against Julian the Pelagian. Nay
even they of the Church of Rome, show by their exorcising before baptism, that
they think none to be without sin; where we do not now dispute of the
lawfulnes of that use, but by that conclude that in this point, they hold a
truth. So that the maine thing which you so seem to mislike, is a thing not
holden or defended (saving in some particular case, as the Virgin Marie) by any
that I know; for even that stream of original sin, has ouerflowed all
mankind, out of which daily proceed those great and innumerable multitudes of
actual sins. Your three false conclusions, seem to establish a threefold
error, contrary to the doctrine of all Churches, that are accounted Christian.
First, that all sin is but one sin. Secondly, that all sins are equal.
Thirdly, that all sins, are united. The first, making no division, of the kinds
of sin; the second, no distinction of the qualities of sin; and the third no
difference, in committing sin. Against these, we say (and we hope warranted by
truth) that sins, are of diverse kinds; of diverse degrees; of diverse (...)
delinquendo, (...) a ^acien^o.
from the manner of committing; of Ignorance, Infirmity, Malice; from the
action it self; or our Saints, which are venial, not imputed; of the wicked,
mortal, for which they shall be condemned. From the guilt; not pardonable, as
the sin against the Holy ghost; pardonable, not crying, or Gen 4. Exodus 22 Genesis
19 ^am. 5.4
crying sins; as the sheading of innocent blood; the afflicting of the
fatherless, or widow, the sin of Sodom; and last of all, the denying the
laborers wages* These, are called crying sins, because for their greatness,
they call aloude, for a great punishment. Others, make a distinction of the
seven Capital, or deadly sins; which as we have no great reason to admit, so
we have as little reason to disallowe; knowing that even those are the heads
and fountains of all sins, of the second table. The second assertion which we
hold, is; that all sins are not equal; this was an opinion of the Stoics, who
desirous to seem unwilling, to commit the least, held an opinion that they
were equal to the greatest; a good care, grounded upon an evil reason. If a
pilote (say they) ouerturned a ship full of gold, he sinned no more, then if he
ouerturned a ship full of straw; for although there be a difference in the
loss, yet the unskillfulness, or negligence is all one. Or if two err, from the
scope, even he that misseth a little, as well erreth, as he that misseth a
great deal. But as in the former of shipwreck, the fault was greater, because
he had greater reason, to make him circumspect; reason telling us that where we
have mo, and stronger motives to do any thing, there we have less excuse, and
the sin greater if we do it not: for the latter, he erreth as well, but not
as much; seeing both, shooting at one mark, it is not al one to be a foot, and
a rod wide. And therefore that law, that forbad but one thing (thou shall not
kill) forbad three things, as Christ expounds it; anger to thy brother; to
call him fool; to offer him violence; these having every one as their several
degrees, so their several punishment. For who will say that the first is as
great a fault, as the second; or the third as small as the first; for doubtless,
things that are all forbidden, do in their own nature admit more or less.
And howsoever in some sort, virtues are called equal; yet vices are not: for
all virtues, from the vanity of the world, tend but to one perfection, (either
to reason, as the Philosophers thought) (or to say better, to the reueiled will
of God) which is the rule of good, and evil; but sins departing from this
leads unto diverse vanities, in diverse kinds. Neither are virtues all equal
simply, but by a kind of proportion; because they all proceed from the love
of God; and all tend unto his glory: otherwise in it self, faith is better
then te^perance, and one virtue may in the same man, be far more excellent,
then in many others. As faith in the Centurion; obedience in Abraham; patience
in Job; the consideration of this inequality of sin, as it acquainteth us,
with those steps that sin makes in us; ^o it causes us, not to despair,
that we have committed some, but to hope, and to be thankful, that we have
escaped greater: Assuring our selves, (if we be not ourselves wanting) that
though we cannot avoid all sins; yet we may, and shall avoid, all great and
presumptuous sins. This heresy, then we leave to his first Aug. ^er. 82.
Authors Iouinian, and the rest; and so come to the last point: Because Saint
Iaemes says, he that keeps the whole law, and offends in one, is guilty
of all; some thought, all sins to be imputed unto him that committed any
one; but Saint James only tells us, that God exacteth a keeping of them all.
The Schoolmen, they interpet this place thus; In all sin, are two things; a
departure from God, and a coming to the creature; which made S. Pecca^um est
vt^ndis frui, and fruendis vti.
Austine call sin, an using of that which we ought to enjoy, and an enjoying
of that, which we ought but to use. So that in respect of the departure, it is
true that S. James says, he departs as well, from God, that commits but
one sin, as he that commits many, but not so far. Therefore to impose this
upon us, were to add even to those that are oppressed already, a burden far
greater, then the law does; for by obedience of the divine law; we tend from
many to one; but by disobedience, from one to many; and those diverse: and
therefore though virtues, have amongst themselves, their union, and consent; yet
vices, have their dissent, nay their opposition. So that this, then, is the
conclusion; that though no man be without all sin, yet many are without many
presumptuous sins: which because through prayers, and good means they avoid;
it follows not an utter exclusion of all sin; nor because they commit the
least, it follows not, that they offend equally, as if they committed all.

ARTICLE X. Of Predestination.
LEast you should be like those, whose humility ye are loath to imitate; ye have
drawn your readers in this Article, to a serious consideration of a deep
point; letting them understand, that ye are able, not only to advise
sobriety, to such rash presumers (as in your opinions M. Hooker is) but also
to direct them, in those points, wherein, in your judgments, they are much
deceived. That there is no man, how excellent soever, but without humility may
easily err; I can as willingly confess it, as I commend such, whom I see
careful to give advise unto those, that have gone astray. The one being the
punishment of pride, to teach sobriety; the other the power of their learning,
to show humility; but that either he has done the one, or you the other, in
this Article, it is more then (as yet) I see any just inducements to believe.
And I am sorry, that things of principal excellency, should be thus bitten
at, by men, whom it is like, God has endued with graces both of wit and
learning, to better uses. For if all men had that indifferency of mind, that
the greatest part of their forces were employed, for the enlarging of that
kingdom, whereof all of us desire to be subjects; we should easily discern,
that a curious searching into that will, which is not revealed, serves but to
breed a contempt, of that which is revealed unto us. Man desires rather to
know, then to do; nay to know, even those things which do not concern him,
rather then to do that, for the neglect whereof, he must give an account. From
hence comes it to pass, that what the Schools have curiously sought out,
concerning the nature of Gods will; the Pulpits, nay the stalles of Artificers
have undertaken to decide them all. So that those things, which once were but
the deep amazeme^t of some few, are now become the usual doctrine, and the
vulgar consideration of many: where, that is not so much to be lamented which
we search, and cannot comprehend; as that which we might comprehend, but do not
search: Following, even that first evil exchange, for eating of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, Arbor scientiae complures private arbore vitae.
Bonauent.
to deprive our selves of the tasting of the tree of life. So, that which
nature once made a disease, the continuance of that disease, has made it
nature; for even that light, Lux inaccessibilis.
which man whilst he wants lives in perpetual darkness, is a light by
our weakness not possible to be attained unto, ^. Tim. 6.2. In^estigabiles
(...) eius. R^m. 11. Psalm. 97.^
and those paths, which in our blindness we grope after with so much desire,
they are ways not possible by man's weakness, to be found out. For there is a
cloud and darkness which are round about him, and thick mis^es to cover him;
for we are without proportion inferior to that power that has first made us;
not equal, not like. This being the just recompense of him that searches out
that Majesty, Prou. 25,
in the end to be overwhelmed with the same glory. Our greatest knowledge in
this, says Saint Cyprian, is to confess our ignorance; for those acts, that
are of this nature, there is greater holiness to believe them, then to know
them. Truth lies in the bottom, as Democritus speaks; and as Pindarus
says, about our minds there hang innumerable errors; therefore the counsel
of the son of Sirach is to be followed; Eccle. 3.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things
rashly, which are too mighty for thee; but what God has commanded thee,
think upon that with reverence, and be not curious in many of his works;
for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes, the things that are
secret; be not curious in superfluous things, for many things are showed unto
thee above the capacity of men; the meddling with such, has beguiled ma^ie,
and an evil opinion has deceived their judgment; thou can not see without
eyes. Yet for all this to be absolutely either ignorant, or careless, of
those things that concern us; are no warrants for humility; but evidences of
our sloth: The world at this day has two sorts of men; whom though we need
not to respect much, yet we are willing even to give them a reason of what we
do; which though peradventure they challenge at our hands, yet we demand not
of them, a reason of what they surmise. The first sort are sensual and
careless; neither respecting the will of God, of us, or toward us: these for
the most part, understand nothing but earthly things; whom if you remove to
matters of a higher reach, you only arm them against yourselfe, and awake
them, to show an insufferable contempt of all virtue. For that which they
think painful to themselves, being idolaters to the belly, that they
suppose partly impossible to others; and that which for their own dullness,
they cannot easily learn, that they imagine (but falsely) that others can as
hardly teach. The second sort, wiser then these, think that we ought to
search, what God will have us to do; but what he will do with us, or what he
has decreed, or determined of us, that they think, ought wholly to be
neglected by us. In these two errors, there is this difference; that the
dangers being equal, the reasons are not equal, that do move both; seeing man
has mo reasons, to persuade him to know too little, then to know too much.
Therefore the Church of England, calls Predestination unto life, Art. 17.
the eternal purpose of God, whereby before the foundations of the world were
laid, he constantly decreed, by his counsel unto us unknown, to deliver from
the curse and destruction, them, whom he chose in Christ out of mankind, and as
vessels made unto honor, through Christ to bring them to eternal salvation;
whereupon, they who are endowed with so excellent a benefit of God, are called
according to his purpose, and that by his Spirit, working in a fit time:
wherein if any thing, in his general will be opposite to that which secretly he
has determined of us, it is neither a contrariety in that essence which is
but one; neither any warrant for us, to be defective in our charity, which
must imitate his general inclination to save all. And howsoever he grant not
those prayers, which we make, for those who are not predestinate, because there
is a more secret will that has determined the contrary; yet notwithstanding,
even these prayers conformable to his general inclination, are in themselves
without sin; they are our duties; and acceptable to God. For in God there is a
will reueiled, which not to do is sin; and not reueiled, which we may do and yet
sin. And therefore* it must needs seem strange, that it is made a question by
any, how God eternally predestinateth by a constant decree, them whom he
calls and saves, and yet has a general inclination to save all. A matter
easily answered, Epist. page 16.
if we do but remember a twofold will; It is not then a foresight of any
thing, that occasioned his will otherwise; It is not any general election,
altered upon a special cause; It is nothing either in us, or in himself, that
makes this decree, either to be at all, or to be any other, saving only one.
We must know therefore, that the will of God is secret; which therefore in
scripture is compared to a deep; Psalm. 36.7.
or reueiled, which must be the rule of those actions which we ought to do: we
may endeavor to do against the first and not sin, as Abraham in offering
Isaac; I say endeavor, for no man can do against it; as also fulfill the other,
and yet sin, as Judas. This division of the will of God, made by many others,
(though in other terms) serves both to answer such doubts, as usually arise
out of this darkness; as also, fully to satisfy those slender objections, which
you have framed in this point. Lib. 2.46. Lib. 1. did. 45.
Damascene deuideth the will into antecedent and consequent; Peter Lumbard,
into his good pleasure, and the sign of it; others, into a will absolute, or
conditional; In E^^h. 102.103.
others, into will of us, or by us, to be done; S. Austin, into a most
omnipotent, and most powerful will, and into a will not so powerful, that it
ever comes to pas^e: all these divisions, concurring in one, and the self
same thing, to teach us, that there be parts some reueiled some secret of that,
which in his own nature, can no more be diverse or many, then it is possible
for the essence of the Godhead, to be more then one. But how is it then (say
you) that God wills all men to be saved? Is it a constant decree, 1. Tim. 2.4
or only an inclination? That he thus wills, there is no man doubts; and
although some with the restraint of the word (all) understand it, of his
eternal, unchangeable, secret decree; yet we affirme^, that with a
conditional will (which ever implies faith and obedience;) with a will of the
sign, antecedent, ineffectual, reueiled, he wills all men to be saved. Who
therefore that they are not, it is not his decree, but their own fault. And
although we say, as Master Hooker does, that God wills many things
conditionally, yet if we speak properly, all things that God wills, he
wills simply; and therefore all things that God wills, must be: the
condition being, not in respect of the will, but the manifestation of it. For it
is no more possible, that there should be a will in God conditional, then that
his knowledge, and his wisdom should not be eternal: and yet in respect of
us, who must be ruled by his law, it is conditional. God sometimes commands
what he will not have done; not that he is contrary in his will, but that his
will as yet is not, wholly reueiled: The matter of predestination was never fully
handled before the time of Pelagius, whose heresies gave occasion to Saint
Austin, and others to confirm us in this point; wherein though I confess I
unwillingly labor at this time, yet I doubt not to affirm (which may serve in
steed of answer to content you) that the predestination of God, is eternal,
not conditional; immutable; not for works foreseen, and that those, Bell. Tom.
3. de great. et lib. arb. lib. 2. cap. 11.12 Aqui. par. 1. quest 23.

By his revealed will.


which God has determined (though his predestination do not take away second
causes) certainly must come to pass. Neither is that any variablenes, as you
over boldly seem to insinuate, that he inclines one way, and decrees
another; for certainly says S. Ambrose, he wills al men to be saved, if they
will themselves; for he that has given a law to al, doubtless has excluded
none. Neither is here any acceptatio^ of persons, that he has chosen some, and
not others; for that is acceptio^ of persons, says S. Austin, when things to
equals, equally due, are not equally divided; but where those things are
divided, yt are not due, but only of mere liberality bestowed, there this
inequality is without injustice, or acceptance of persons: It being in the
power of a creditor, that has two debtors, to exact his due of the one without
injustice, and merely of his bounty, to forgive the other. If you go further
in this point, to lead me into that depth, that lamentably has swallowed up
many thousands, I say with S. Austin; thou oh man, do thou expect an answer
of me, and I am a man also? therefore let us rather both hear him, who says,
oh man who art thou, that do answer God? reason thou, Romans 9.10
I will marvel: dispute thou, I will believe; and say, oh how unsearchable are
his ways, and his Judgments past finding out!

ARTICLE XI. The visible Church and the Church of Rome.
IN the vehement dissentions of factions that are opposite; there is not a
labor usually that reapeth either less fruit, or less thanks, then a
charitable persuasion to a reconcilement; which peraduenure has bin the
principal cause, why both parties, looking with a jealous eye, at the
indifferent persuasions of a third, have continued both enemies in themselves,
and yet the third, suspected as a friend to neither. This whilst men have done
in kingdoms, their conclusions of peace, have faintly languisht; all sides
earnestly wishing the thing, but suspecting those, who were agents to entreat,
a persuasion to it: this in the Church, some men have done, both in former
times and of late, with more charity, then either learning or success; so that
in the end, both parties have taken offense, at the mention of a reconcilement.
That the Church is at variance in it self, and so has continued a long time,
I think there is no man doubts; and surely we are all persuaded, that unity,
and peace, are not fitter for any society in the world, then for that, which is
called by the name of Church: how this might be effected, it has bin the care
of very wisemen; who though they have found little appearance of success, by
reason of those badde offices, which uncharitable minds have performed, yet
they have not ceased, Psalm. 122
to wish in the behalf of the Church, as David did for Jerusalem, Oh that it
were, as a City built, at unity in it self. Private contentions, are then
furthest from all hope of agreement, when both parties, equally standing upon
terms of superiority, earnestly contend, which is most excellent; and that
neither have committed fault. In what straits the Church is, and has bin in
all times, it may easily be gathered, in that as yet, men are not resolved to
whom it belongs principally to procure her peace. Some are of opinion that
princes must, and ought to provide for the good and welfare of the
commonwealth; but as for religion, they may lawfully permit to every man what
his fancy desires; so that the peace of their realms be not thereby troubled.
This once was the Aug. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 51.
error of the heathen, who admitting all sects of Philosophers, accounted it
their honor that they refused none. Whereupon says Pope Ser. 1. de S. S Petr^
et Paulo.
Leo, this City (speaking of Rome) ignorant of the author of her advancement,
whilst she has ruled almost over al nations, has basely bin a servant to the
errors of them al, and seemed to her self to have entertained a great
religion, because she has not refused the falsehood of any. This made
Themistius the Philosopher, (as Lib. 4. hist. cap. 27
Socrates reports) to persuade Valens the Emperor, that the variety of sects
was a thing much pleasing to God, seeing by that means he was worshipped after
diverse manners. This though Eusebius. lib. 10 cap. 5.
Constantine the great did at the first, (whose fact we will not at this time
examine) yet afterward, he commanded all the temples of the Idols to be shut
up, and the Christian religion to be only used; whose sons Constantius and
Constantinus so far followed (as Saint Austin says) the example of their
Father, Optatus lib. 2 cont. Parmen. Epist. 166. et Ru^fin. lib. 10. cap. 5
that Constantine threatened banishment to al those, who rested not in the
determination of the Nicene council. The contrary was practiced by the Emperors
Iouinian, Valens, and Julian, who giving a liberty to all heretics, sought
nothing more, then the overthrow of the unity of the Church. But wisemen have
ever seen, that the peace and tranquillity of the common wealth, seldom or
never arises, Greg. lib. 4. epist. 32.
but out of the concord and agreement of the Church it self. The dissentions
whereof, as they serve to hinder religion, so they kindle that flame,
wherewithal doubtless in the end, the common wealth it self, must needs
perish. But how far all sides are from allowance of reconcilement, both the
times present can testify too well, and the ages to come must needs witness;
which shall possess a Church, as sons do the inheritance of contentious
parents, the best part whereof is wasted in unnecessary suits: The sound
knowledge of religion, as well perishing in the midst of dissension, as the
true practice does fail, by the plentiful abundance of too much peace. There
have been in the world from the very first foundation thereof, Ho^^. lib. 5.
page 184.
but three religions; Paganism, which lived in the blindness of corrupt, and
depraved nature; Iudaisme, embracing the law which reformed heathenish
impiety, and taught salvation to be looked for, through one, who^ God in the
last days, would send and exalt to be lord of al; finally, Christianisme which
yields obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and acknowledges him the
Savior, whom God did promise. Now the question is, whether the dissenting
parties, in this last religion, be so far (not in opinion) but in the object,
differing, as that there is no hope of reconciliation, and the one part only,
has but the privilege, to be termed the Church. For the matter of
reconcilement, it is no business, which lies within the compass of this
labor, and whether, and how it may be done, we are willing to refer it to
the judgments of men, who have better ability to decide the cause. A book in
Latin was published, in the first beginning of these bitter contentions,
without name, bearing the title, De officio pii viri Ton. 1. de ec^l. lib. 3.
cap 19.
of the duty of a godly man; but since Bellarmine says, that the Author was
one George Cassander; this book persuading that Princes ought to make an
agreement betwixt the Catholics, the Lutherans, and Caluinists, as he terms
them; which whilst they cannot find out the means to perform, they should
permit to all men their several religions, so that they held, both the
Scripture and the Apostles Creed: for all (says he) are the true members of
the Church, howsoever in particular doctrines, they seem to differ. This book
was first confuted by Calvin, on the one side, and then by one John Hessels of
Louaine, on the other side; that all the world might see, how loath both sides
were, to be made friends. This has since been esteemed by others, a labor,
Euag. lib. 3. cap. 14, 30. Eusebius. lib. 35. hist. cap. 13.
much like to those pacificants, in the Emperor Zeno his time, or the heresy
of Apelles, who held, as Eusebius writes, that it was needless to discuss,
the particulars of our faith, and sufficient only to believe in Christ
crucified. But least any man should think, that our contentions were but in
smaller points, and the difference not great, both sides have charged the
other, with heresies (if not infidelities) nay even such, as quite overthrow
the principal foundation of our Christian faith. How truly both have dealt,
those that are learned can best judge; but I am sure, that in the greatest
differences, there are great mistakings, which if they were not, it is like,
their dissentions had been much less. Now for the second, whether both parts
may be called the Church, this is that which concerns the cause that we
have in hand. The Church of England confesses, that the Church of Christ, is a
company of faithful people, among whom the pure word of God is preached, Art.
19. de eccle.
and the sacraments rightly administered, according to Christ's institution; so
that as our reverend Fathers say, without Christ there is no Church; and those
particular Churches, are more perfect, which in their religious worship, have
less failed in both these: now when enemies become judges, sentences are often
partial, and each side with bitterness of terms, does condemn other;
whilst neither part, is willing to confess their error, or amend themselves.
We have not suffered the contemptible reui^ings of the Church of Rome, without
telling her aloud that her faults are not so few as she imagines; that her
chastity and purity are not so great, that she need to boast; and that if she
will needs be proud, and confidently strive to be the chief, and the only
Church; we must tell her in zeal, that what she was, she is not; that pride
and prosperity have corrupted her, as other Churches. This though we speak
out of zeal, seeing her faults, and knowing her contempt of us; yet out of
judgment, we say (which Master Hooker does) that with Rome, we dare not
communicate, concerning sundry her gross, and grievous abominations, yet
touching those maine parts of Christian truth, wherein they constantly still
persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ:
therefore, we hope that to reform our selves (if at any time we have done
amiss) is not to sever our selves from the Church we were before; in the
Church we were, and we are so still; as also we say, that they of Rome,
notwithstanding their manifold defects, are to be held, and reputed a part of
the house of God; a limme of the visible Church of Christ. Hook. lib. 5. page
188.
This is that, whereat your hot spirits have taken offense; speaking out of
the same ignorant zeal against our Church; as ye wish our Church to speak
against the Church of Rome; accounting us for perfection of a Church, as far
short of you, as Rome is of us; or your selves of the Angels that are in
heaven; and therefore you affirm that our statute congregations of England,
are no true christian churches. Which error, as you have at last been from an
irresistable wisdom taught how to recant, Preface against D. Bancrof^.
so no doubt at length, upon better advise, you will learn in judgment how to
censure of the Church of Rome. And yet mistake me not, to give her her due, is
not to grant more then she ought to challenge; nor to account her a part of
the Church, is not to affirm that she is absolutely perfect. There is no one
word, that from the variety of acceptance, has bred greater difference, in
the Church of God, then the word Church. Psalm, 26.5. Ecclesia malignantium.
Sometimes, it is taken for any assembly; sometimes for a faithful, and religious
assembly; and the^ it sometimes notes out the whole body of the elect in all
ages, times, and places, both in heaven and earth; and only them. So it is in
the article of our faith, Catholic Church.
I believe the catholic church, that is, all those who are, or shall be saved
both Angels and men; so it is taken in that speech of our Savior; Upon this
rock will I build my church, Matthew. 16
that is, the whole catholic church. Sometimes it is taken for that part only,
which is in heaven; Ephe. 5.27.
as when it is said, that the church is without spot, or wrinckle; which can be
verified of no part* (whatsoever the Anabaptists dream) but of that which
triumphs. Sometimes it is taken for that part of the catholic church, 1.
Tim. 3.15.
which is militant, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God, which is the church of the living God; the pillar
and ground of truth; Act. 5.11
So fear came upon all the church. Sometimes it is taken for the pastors, and
governors only of the church, as when it is said, Tell the church, Matt. 18.17
that is, the heads and governors of the church. Sometimes for the people,
Take heed therefore unto yourselues, Act. 20, 28.
and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to
feed the church of God, which he has purchased with that his own blood.
Sometimes for particular churches, Reu. 2, 1.
professing the doctrine and religion of Christ: as, To the Angel of the
church of Ephesus; so we say, the church of Rome; the church of Corinth; the
church of England: now from the mistaking of this word ( Church) doubtless
much harm, and needless contentions have come unto the church of Christ. For
in the first great contention (of what persons the Church consists) in my
opinion we dispute of one Church, namely, the true Catholic, all which must
be saved; they dispute of the visible, wherein are hypocrites also. So that the
reasons that are brought on both sides, are smally to the purpose, seeing both
sides directly mistake the question. Thus in the judgment of those of the
Church of Rome, persons excommunicate (though unjustly) are cut off from the
particular Church, but not from the catholic; excommunication being only, the
censure of a particular Church: Therefore (says our Savior Christ) many are
called (with an external calling to the society of the ^isible Church) but few
are chosen; that is, to the Catho^icke. For though both be a fold, yet of the
visible Church (says Saint Austin) In the Church there are many wolves, and
out of the Church there are many sheep; but in the Catholic, without any
other mixture are sheep only. Now visible and invisible makes, not two
Churches; but the diverse estate and condition of one, and the same Church.
Hence comes it to pass, that in this question of the visibility of the
Church, there is the like mistaking as in the former; for they of Rome say, we
have made this distinction, because our Church has not bin always visible;
but we say, if our Church had bin as glorious, and as famous, as any Church in
the world, we would have accounted, the Catholic Church invisible: Which (no
doubt of it) they of Rome do, understanding (Catholic and visible) as we
mean. For the Church of Christ, which we properly term his mystical body,
can be but one; neither can that one, be sensibly discerned, by any man; in as
much as the parts thereof, are some in heaven already with Christ, and the rest
that are on earth, (albeit their natural persons be visible) yet we cannot
discern under this property, Hook. lib. 5.
whereby they are truly and infallibly of that body; only our minds by internal
conceit, are able to apprehend, that such a real body there is, a body
collectiue, (because it conteyneth a huge multitude) a body mystical, (because
the mystery of their conjunction is removed altogether from sense.) Whatsoever
we read in scripture concerning the endless love, and the saving mercy, which
God showed toward his Church, the only proper subject thereof is this Church.
They who are of this society have such marks, and notes, of distinction from
al others, as are not subject unto our sense; only unto God who sees their
hearts, and understands al their secret cogitations, unto him, they are
clear, and manifest. In the eye of God, they are against Christ, that are not
truly and sincerely with him; in our eyes, they must be received as with
Christ, that are not to outward show, against him; to him they seem such as
they are, but of us they must be taken for such as they seem. Al men knew
Nathaniel to be an Israelite, but our Savior pearsing deeper, gi^eth further
testimony of him then men could have done, Ioh. 1.47.
with such certainty as he did; behold indeed, an Israelite, in whom is no
guile. Now as those everlasting promises of love, mercy, and blessedness, belong
to the mystical Church, even so on the other side, when we read of any duty,
which the Church of God is bound unto; the Church whom this does concern, is
a sensible known company; and this visible Church in like sort is but one,
continued from the first beginning of the world to the last end: which company,
being divided into two parts, the one before, the other since the coming of
Christ; that part which since the coming, partly has embraced, and partly
shall hereafter embrace the Christian Religion, we term as by a proper name,
the Church of Christ. Ephesians. 2.16.
For all make but one body, the unity of which visible body, and the Church of
Christ, consists in that uniformity, which al several persons thereunto
belonging have by reason of ye one Lord, whose servants they all profess
themselves to be, that one faith, which they al acknowledge; that one baptism,
wherewith they are al received into the church. As for those virtues, yt belong
unto moral righteousness, and honesty of life; we do not speak of them,
because they are not proper unto Christian me^, as they are Christian, but do
concern the^, as they are men. True it is, the want of these virtues,
excludes from salvation; so does much more the absence of inward belief of
heart; so does despair and lack of hope; so emptiness of Christian love and
charity; but we speak now, of the visible Church, whose Children are signed
with this mark; One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. In whomsoever these things
are* the Church does acknowledge them for her children; them only she holds
for aliens and strangers, in whom these things are not found. For want of
these, it is that Saracens, Jews, and infidels are excluded out of the bounds
of the Church; others we may not (though you do) deny to be of the visible
Church, as long as these things are not wanting in them. For apparent it is,
that al men are of necessity, either Christians, or not Christians; if by
external profession, they be Christians, then are they of the visible Church
of Christ; and Christians by external profession they are all, whose mark of
recognisance has in it those things which we have mentioned: Yea although they
be impious Idolaters, wicked heretics, persons excommunicable, such as we deny
not to be even the lims of Satan, as long as they continue such. Is it then
possible, say you, that the selfsame men should belong both to the Synagogue
of Satan, and to the Church of Christ? Unto that Church, which is his mystical
body, not possible; because that body consists of none, but only true
Israelits; true sons of Abraham, true servants, and Saints of God. Howbeit of
the visible body and Church of Christ, those may be, and oftentimes are, in
respect of the maine parts of their outward profession, who in regard of their
inward disposition of mind, yea of external conversation, yea even of some
parts of their very profession, are most worthily both hateful in the sight of
God himself, and in the eyes of the sounder parts of the visible Church, most
execrable. From hence have proceeded those bitter speeches, wherewith many of
our reverend Fathers have censured the Church of Rome: as also those violent
courses, and unseemly, which they have hitherto used against us. Matthew. 13.47
Therefore our Savior compares the kingdom of heaven, to a net, whereunto all that comes neither is nor seems fish; his Church he compares to afield,
where tares manifestly known and seen by all men do grow, intermingled with
good corn; and so shall continue til the final consummation of the world. God
has had ever, and ever shall have, some Church visible upon earth. But for
lack of diligent observing, the difference, first betwixt the church of God,
mystical and visible; then between the visible, sound, and corrupted,
sometimes more, sometimes less, the ouersights are neither few, nor light,
that have bin committed: This deceives them, and nothing else, who think that
in the time of the first world, the family of Noah, did contain all that were
of the visible church of God. From hence it grew, and from no other cause in
the world, that the Affrican Bishops, in the council of Carthage, knowing how
the administration of Baptism belongs only to the church of Christ, and
supposing that heretics, which were apparently severed from the sound
believing church, could not possibly be of the church of Jesus Christ, thought
it utterly against reason, that baptism administered by men of corrupt belief,
should be accounted as a Sacrament. Some of the Fathers were earnest,
especially Saint Cyprian, in this point: but I hope you have not yet proceeded
so far. This opinion was afterward both condemned by a better advised
council, and also revoked by the chiefest of the Authors thereof themselves: In
conc. Nicen. vide Hieron. in di. con^. Lucifer.
And therefore as it is strange for any man to deny them of Rome to be of the
church; so I cannot but wonder, that they will ask where our church was,
before the birth of Martin Luther; as if any were of opinion that Luther did
erect a new church of Christ. No, the church of Christ, which was from the
beginning, is, and continues in substance the same unto the end; of which, al
parts have not bin always equally sincere and sound. In the days of Abiha, it
plainly appears, that Judah was by many degrees more free from pollution, then
Israel: In Saint Paul's time, 2. Cor. 13
the integrity of Rome, was famous; Corinth many ways reproved; they of
Galathia much more out of square: in John's time, Ephesus and S^yrna, in better
state, then Thiatyra and Pergamus were; and yet all of them, no doubt, parts of
the visible church; so stands the cause, betwixt Rome and us; so far as
lawfully we may, we have held, and do hold fellowship with them; we acknowledge
the^, to be of the family of Jesus Christ; and our hearty prayer unto God
Almighty is, that being conjoined, so far forth with them, they may at
length, if it be his will, so yield to frame, and reform themselves, that no
distraction remain in any thing, but that we all, may with one heart, and one
mouth glorify God, the Father of our Lord, and Savior, whose church we are.
As there are, which make the church of Rome no church at all, utterly: so we
have them amongst us, who under pretense of imagined corruptions in our
discipline, do give, even as hard a judgment of the church of England it
self. But whatsoever either the one sort, or the other teach, we must
acknowledge, even heretics themselves, to be (though a maimed part) yet a
part of the visible church. For as to baptize is a proper action, belonging
unto none but the church of Christ, which is true in the church of Rome
(howsoever some Anabaptists account it but a mockery) so if an infidel,
should pursue to death an heretic, professing christianity, only for
christian profession sake, could the church deny him the honor of Martyrdom?
Yet this honor all men know to be proper unto the church; and therefore where
the Fathers make opposition betwixt the visible church, and heretical
companies (as often times they do) they are to be construed, as separating
heretics, not altogether from the company of believers, but from the
fellowship of sound believers: for where professed unbelief is, there can be no
visible church of Christ; there may be where sound belief wants. Infidels
being clean without the church, deny directly, and utterly reject, the very
principles of Christianity; which heretics embrace, and err only, in
misconstruction. And therefore it is strange that you dare affirm; the Turk
to hold any part of the christian faith, or to be in that respect comparable
to the church of Rome: For that which separateth utterly, that which cutteth
off clean, from the visible church of Christ, is, as Master Hooker says,
Book. 5. page 186.
plain Apostasy; direct denial; utter reiection of the whole christian
faith; as far as the same is professedly different, from infidelity.
Heretics, as touching those points of doctrine wherein they fail;
Schismatikes, as touching the quarrels, for which, or the duties wherein they
divide themselves from their brethren; loose, licentious, and wicked persons,
as touching their several offenses, or crimes; have all forsaken the true
church of God, the church which is sound and sincere, in the doctrine; that
they corrupt: The church that keeps the bond of unity, which they violate:
the church that walks in the laws of righteousness, which they transgress:
This very true church of Christ, they have left; howbeit not altogether left,
nor forsaken simply the Church, upon the maine foundations whereof, they
continue built, notwithstanding these breaches, whereby they are rent at the
top asunder. But peradventure you will say, why then do we refuse to
communicate with the church of Rome, more then Zachary, Elizabeth, Anna, and
others, did with the high priests? corruptions being in both, and both
remaining parts of the church of God? I answer, that in the time of our Savior
Christ, the synagogue of the Jews, although it was not in regard of the high
Priests, and chief Doctors in all respects, the true visible church; yet in
some sort, it was; because the remainders of religion, were left, and the
worship instituted of God himself, was not wholly taken away: so with the
Papists we would not be afraid to communicate, in our liturgy, if it were not
in respect of their superstitious order, and some prayers which are idolatrous,
for which we have some reasons, as yet to doubt, that they have no warrant. We
must all of us be joined to the true church, else we cannot be saved, that is
to the catholic* not the visible: for doubtless a man may be saved, that
lives not in any particular Church; or that is excommunicated from all: yet we
say, thus much; That we must join ourselves to some particular Church, if we
will be saved; with this twofold caution, If such a Church be known unto us;
or if it be possible to join unto it. Wherein, because every particular may
err, yet none absolutely exclude from salvation, all men have reason to join
with that, that is most sound. This then were the fittest point, to be discust
with moderation, and learning: That seeing all Churches have some unsound parts
in them, which Church is to be reputed at this day the soundest of all the
rest. Doubtless the Church of Rome, was once a light to all the Churches of
the world; Romans 1.^.
but through the corruptions of some, those diseases have somewhat infected the
Church, which now to the sorrow of Christendom, like a canker, or leprosy,
have enlarged themselves. As there is a contention when Adam fell; so histories
vary, when this defection began: Some make five or six hundred years to be
the continuance of her sound estate; Calvin. Melanct.
some three hundredth; some to err, even from the Apostles time. Doubtless in
the Apostles time, there were heretics in the Church; the Nicholaitans, Simon
Magus, Cerinthus, and others. Lib. 3. cap. 32.
Eusebius reports out of Egesippus, that although as long as the Apostles
lived, the Church did remain a pure virgin, yet after those times,
immediately, errors crept into the Church. Clemens Alexandrinus, to confirm
that there was corruption of doctrine presently after the Apostles time,
alleges the proverb, There are few sons like their Fathers. Socrates says
of the Church of Rome and Alexandria (the most famous Churches in the Apostles
time) that about the year 430. the Roman and Alexandrian Bishops, leaving
their sacred function, were degenerate to a secular rule or dominion. Yet we
say not, that all before Gregory, were sound, nor all after, corrupt: yet
their errors grew on by little and little, even from those men, whose reverend
names, gave warrant to what they held; they thinking nothing ^esse, then by
those means to have corrupted the Church. But she may when it pleases God,
recover her former soundness again; if we had but so much care of them, as
they seem to have of us; or that all sides peaceably with indifferency, would
admit the true use of a general Council. But let their errors be as they
are; we leave them, to be reproved by those, whom that business does
concern, and to be judged by the searcher of all hearts: yet for all that, we
affirm them to be parts of the Church of Christ; and that those, that live,
and die in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved. Of those who are of a
contrary opinion in a good meaning, I say with Lactantius, Lib. 5. I^st. cap.
19. O quam ^onesta voluntate mis^rierrant.
With how good a meaning these poor souls do evil. To conclude, least you
should think Master Hooker to be arrogant, and presumptuous, to make
himself (as you say) the only Rabbi; know that he has said nothing, which
that honorable Frenchman of worthy memory has not said before, In his
Treatise of the Church cap. 2.
with great wisdom, moderation, and learning. But if you cannot be resolved
without a miracle, as you scoffingly seem to desire, we can but in our
prayers recommend your weakness to the God of all power, and the fountain of
all light.

ARTICLE XII. Of Preaching.
HOw hard it is, for those who are in love with themselves, to car^e a well
tempered indifferency, betwixt that, which they out of ignorance perform, and
others, out of judgment avoid; this Article alone may serve, as evidence
sufficient to persuade all. For even, in the matter, of greatest use unto Gods
church (the dispensation of the word of life) a vehement dislike of those
things, which they cannot attain, has wrought too violent an opposition, for
the overthrow of that course, which learning and truth have held not to be the
weakest means, to support the same. Hence comes it to pass, that whilst al
grant the word to be powerful and effectual; some think, this is only true, of
the word preached; which otherwise, has small virtue, except it be in sermons;
and those sermons only, to have this power, which are of their own making.
Causing the holy ghost, whose strength is perfected in weakness, to be
necessarily tied, to a defect of al outward ornaments; as though that almighty
power, 2. Cor. 12
upon whom ever excellency depe^ds, eue^ in the weakest means, were of less
authority, or less power, when the means which he uses, were more excellent:
thus depriving the church of variety of gifts, who out of obedience and
humility, has learned how to profit by all. But, as to tie the power of
converting sinners, to that which is eloquently strong in human wisdom, were
a thing not safe, and injurious to the church; so to be too earnest, against
al outward ornaments, through an affectation of pure simplicity, is an error no
less dangerous then the former was. For seeing those that teach are not all,
either capeable, or furnished, with the same gifts, and that continually, there
is no less variety in those that hear; it is the wisdom, and discretion of
the church, for a better attainme^t of a more perfect estate, to learn with
thankfulness and reverence how to profit by all. For as it is impossible, that
any one form of teaching should please or persuade all men, Acts. 3.
(a prerogative which was not granted to the first and best sermons) whose
excellency was that they converted many, but not all; so the rest, who yet are
not, but must be converted, are to expect (though not with curiosity to affect)
a variety for the manner, even of that which in substance and end, is but
merely one. For the mystical body, as it is full of variety and diversity in
his parts, yet in it self but one; so the working is manifold, and different,
though the beginning and the end, Gods power, and his glory be in truth, to,
and for all men, but one. For sometimes the word, by being read proposes, and
preaches it self to the hearer; sometimes they deliver it, whom privately
zeal and piety moves to be instructors of others, by conference; sometimes,
of them it is taught, whom the church has called to the public, either
reading thereof, or interpreting; and by them after a most diverse manner; but
all tending to one end, for which God has made his visible church to be that
congregation of faithful people, wherein the pure word of God is preached: so
that in this respect we refuse not, to make the preaching of the word (taking
the word preaching for all manner of teaching) to be an essential note, of the
church. For doubtless in that parable of the sower, Matt. 13.3
by you alleged, we mislike not much the interpretation of that Reverend
Bishop which you bring forth, as opposite to Master Hooker; saying, God is the
husbandman, Bishops of Lincol. 1. Ser. upon. Mat. 13.
the Preachers of the word are the seed sowers, the seed is the word of God,
the ground is the hearts of men; and yet Saint Austin, differs a little from
this exposition, where he says, the sower is God, and I, because he sows,
Cophinus Seminantis.
what am I but the seedmans basket? Which even the meanest Christian no doubt
is, though never called to the office of preaching, if he can by private
conference, exhort and instruct out of holy Scripture: which as it is an act
of less honor, and profit, then the preaching of those, that are worthily
called to that office; so even, in their sermons that are called, there is no
man but must acknowledge, a manifold, and apparent difference. For seeing
speech (as Master Hooker says) (which you mislike) is the very image, whereby
the mind, and soul of the speaker, conueyeth itself into the bosom of him
that hears; we cannot choose, but see great reason, wherefore the word, that
proceeds from God (who is in him self very truth and life) should be (as the
Apostle to the Hebrews notes) lively, Heb. 4.12
and mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword. Now, to make our
sermons that strong, and forcible word, is to impart the most peculiar glory of
the word of God, unto that which is not his word. For touching our sermons,
that which gives them their very being, is the will of man; and therefore,
they oftentimes, accordingly taste too much of that ouer-corrupt fountain, from
which they come. For even the best of our Sermons, (and in Sermons there is an
infinite difference) howsoever they oftentimes, have a singular blessing, and
that the scripture, the pure word of God, is the text and the ground of the
speech; yet the rest of the discourse, which is sometimes two, or three hours
long, (a time too long for most preachers to speak pertinently) is but the
paraphrasticall enlarging of the same text, together with those fit
exhortations and applications, which the learning of the preacher, is able to
furnish himself withal, and his discretion shall think fit for that auditory
to which he speaks. And therefore, as to equalize every declamation, or
oration in schools, to them, is to wrong sermons; so to make, even the best
sermons, equal to the scripture, must be in apparent reason a great wrong, to
that which is immediately Gods own word; whereunto, though the best preach
agreeably, yet the sermons of none, since the Apostles time, are or ought to be
esteemed of equal authority with the holy scripture: and yet, we are not
afraid, to ascribe unto them, that blessing from above, to convert, reform,
and strengthen, which no eloquence, Wisdom, Learning, Policy, and Power of
the world, is able to match. Neither is there contrariety in this, that we that
are the Preachers are sent as the Apostles were, in respect of our calling from
God; and yet, that the learning, and wit of man, gives the very being unto
that we teach. Unless (which some ouerboldly do) you think it unlawful to
use either learning or wit, in making of sermons: As though all other helps,
purchased with great cost, and infinite labor, together with a natural
ability, all perfected in those excellent fountains of all learning, the
Universities, were to be rejected, as wholly unprofitable in this business.
Neither does Master Hooker, or any other of judgment say (which you seem to
infer) that a man by natural wit, without a supernatural light, from the
scripture, is able to utter those mysteries as he ought; which doubtless being
a great fault, is rather the error of those who preach most, and yet use least
helps of learning or wit, for that they utter. Wherein it must needs seem
strange, that they ever understanding by the word, the word preached;
whereunto they ascribe vital operation; yet they perform this with such
negligence, that they come rashly, unfurnished, to so great a business; and
scarce attentively weigh the dangerous sequel, of this construction.
Doubtless, our sermons, even the best, either for sound knowledge, or pure
zeal, are not Gods word in the same manner that the sermons of the Prophets
were; no, they are but ambiguously termed his word, because his word, is
commonly the subject, whereof they treat, and must be the rule whereby they are
framed. Yet sermons have sundry, peculiar, and proper virtues, such as no
other way of teaching besides has: aptness to follow particular occasions
presently growing; to put life into words, by countenance, voice and gesture;
to prevail mightily in the sudden affections of men; these and such like, are
those excellent prerogatives, which some few may challe^g, who worthily deserve
the name to be called preachers. We reject not (as of no use at all in the
Church) even the virtuous labors of meaner men, who come far short of the
perfection of these few; but earnestly wish the governors of our Church, for
fit employment and maintenance, to respect both: And they laying aside all
comparisons, equally to labor to further that work, which by a blessing from
above, knows how to profit by the labors of all. Epist. page 23. sin. 20.
It seems by that which you allege, that only such sermons, have their
being, from the wit of man, which curiously bring into the pulpit, Poets;
Philosophers; Rhetoricians; Physicians; Schoolmen, and other human learning;
which the reverend Fathers, say you, and more staid divines, are war^e to
avoid. In this speech of yours, in my opinion, there are two faults. The first,
a particular unjust censure, of the Fathers, whether you mean, the holy
Fathers of the Church, as Saint Austine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Gregory, Saint
Bernard, and the rest; or those reverend Fathers which do live at this day;
all which, whilst you seek to commend, directly you dispraise; accounting
them, to avoid all humane learning, and that their sermons, have not their
being from the wit of man: which doubtless is false, seeing they excel by
infinite degrees, the sermons of many others which are framed, by neither. The
second fault, is a general taxation of all those, who any way furnish their
sermons with humane learning. You may peradventure be able, to give good
direction in other points, but surely in framing of a Preacher, or making of a
sermon, you are much deceived: for I can never persuade my self, that the
exactest industry that man can use, is unlawful or unnecessary in this
work; for sometimes, we are to deal with those, whose opinions are not easily
confuted without humane learning; nor their attention gained without wit; nor
their affections persuaded without eloquence; where to come unfurnished, and
leave the workings without means, to him who gives a power, and a blessing to
the means we use, is all one to appoint him what means are fittest, or to
inioyne him to work without means at all: which, though that Almighty power
can do, yet then to refuse the^, when they are provided, or not to furnish us,
with as much as we can of the best that he has provided, it argues our
unthankfulness, and our want of choice. This made (when Celsus, Julian, and
Porphyry, had written against us) the holy Fathers to confute them, with all
variety of humane learning; that thus the enemies of that truth, which we
teach, may say with Julian, We are struck through with our own weapons.
Prop^lis p^nnis configutur.
This was the happiness of Epiphanius (whi^^ I wish were common to all
preachers) that his writings were read of the learned for the matter, of the
simple for the words. Thus we should not doubt but to win an attention from
all; nay even for the true discharging of this business, there is a necessary
use of Grammar, to teach the original and propriety of words; of Logic, to
discern ambiguities; of Rhetoric, for ornament (a good tale being much
better, when it is well told;) of Philosophy, for the unfolding the true
nature of causes; the ignorance whereof, has brought much error in expounding
the holy Scriptures; of History, for the computation of times; in one word, of
all humane learning, which like the spoils of Egypt, we have recovered from
the unjust owners; accounting it no more disgrace to be accused of eloquence,
wit, or humane learning, then S. Austin did, by Petilian, to be termed
Tertullus the Orator. There be that account Inciuilitie of manners, and
Rusticitie of speech, Ad Marcell. epist. 102.
as Saint Hierome speaks, true holiness. But it is not fit, that those that
are toothlesse should envy the teeth of others; or those that are Moules,
repine that others see (as the same Father admonishes Calphurnius.) Epist. ad
Romans
It has been a trouble, of some of our best and most excellent preachers,
that they have been enforced, after their wearisome ^oiling, and unregarded
pains, to give a reason, and make a defense (as though they had committed a
fault) for the use of that, for which in true estimation, they ought to have
reaped much praise. And therefore says one (whom I dare oppose, for eloquence
and judgment, London.
against the best in that great city of the contrary faction) I am not of
opinion with those men, who think that all secular, M. King upon Jonas, page
541
and profane learning should be abandoned from the lips of the preacher, and
that whether he teach, or exhort, he is of necessity to tie himself, to the
sentence and phrase of only Scripture. Good is good, wheresoever I find it:
upon a withered and fruitless stalk, De Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 6. cap. 2.
says S. Austin, a grape sometimes may hang; shall I refuse the grape because
the stalk is fruitless and withered? There is not any knowledge of learning to
be despised, seeing that all science whatsoever, is in the nature and kind of
good things; rather those that despise it, we must repute rude, and
unprofitable altogether, who would be glad that all men were ignorant, that
their own ignorance lying in the common heap, Aduers. Cresco. (...). cap. 1.
might not be espied. And S. Austin in in another place, says, Eloquence is
not evil, but a sophistical malignant profession, proposing to it self, not
as it means, but either of contention, or for commodity sake, to speak for
all things, and against all things. What were more profitable, then the
eloquence of Donatus, Parmenian, and others of your sect, if it ran with as
free a stream, for the peace, unity, truth, and love of Christ, as it flows
against it? for else it is a venomous eloquence, Epist. ad Cornel.
as Saint Cyprian wrote of the eloquence of Nouatus; I know there is much
amiss, both in matter, and in the use of profane learning; but this we are
sure, if we bring it to the Scripture, if it be faulty, it is condemned; if
wholesome, it is there confirmed. And I see no reason, that any man should be
bold, to offer his own inventions, and conceits to the world, when he finds
such, in the Fathers, and others, as cannot be amended. I am sorry that the
learned of any sort (as my Author says) that has but born a book, should
dispraise learning; she has enemies enough abroad, though she be justified by
her children. It is fitter that wisdom, be beaten by fools, then by those
who ought to be esteemed wise; above all other places, a blow given in the
pulpit against learning (a fault too common) leaves a scarre in the face of
knowledge, which cannot easily be cured. It calls in question, the reaching
of others, as if they fed the people with acorns and husks, not bread; or
because they gather the truth out of humane Authors, they contemned the
authority of the holy Scriptures. Doubtless, it is sometime vanity in those
that preach, and itching in those that hear, and a thing not tolerable, or
allowable in either; but where it is otherwise, let not a ras^ conclusion
without proof (as though it were young men's faults) be admitted against good
learning. If Asclepiodorus will draw with a cole, or chauke alone, I judge him
not; if others, will paint with colors, neither let them be judged: for those,
that are wise, and humble in the Church, know how with discretion to make use
of all; and yet, not all of the like authority. For doctrines derived,
exhortations deducted, interpretations agreeable, are not the very word of
God, but that only, which is in the original text, or truly translated; and
yet we call those sermons, though improperly, the word of God. To conclude this
point, as our Church has many excellent Preachers, which we wish by good
encouragement may increase; so it is too presumptuous a labor for any, to
prescribe one form necessary to all. But I could wish that all were like him
whom you accuse, or like one Marianus Genazanensis, Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 6.
Tristano Chalco.
whom Angelus Politianus does excellently describe, in my opinion an excellent
pattern of a reverend Divine.

ARTICLE XIII. Of the Ministers office.
IN the actions of this life, whether spiritual or temporal, God and man give
their approbation in a diverse manner; the one looks only at the thing done,
the other at the mind and disposition of the doer. And therefore, the same
things from diverse parties, are not of the same, nor of like value: nay, that
which is from sincerity, a worship; is from hypocrisy, a sin: and the
defects, which outwardly the manner of doing disproueth, the sincerity
oftentimes in the mind of the doer, acquiteth. In the eye of man, it is
sometimes a fault which is no sin; and in the eye of God, a sin, which in the
eye of man, was no fault. So that according to laws, which principally respect
the heart of man, works of religion being not religiously performed, cannot
morally be perfect. Baptism as an Ecclesiastical work, is for the manner of
performance ordered by diverse ecclesiastical laws, providing, that as the
sacrament it self, is a gift of no mean worth; so the ministry thereof might
in all circumstances, appear to be a function of no small regard. The
ministry of the things divine, is a function, which as God did himself
institute; so neither may men undertake the same, but by authority and power
given them in lawful manner. That God which is no way deficient or wanting
unto man in necessaries, and has therefore given us the light of his heavenly
truth, because without that inestimable benefit, we must needs have wandered in
darkness, to our endless perdition; and who has in the like abundance of
mercies, ordained certain to attend upon the due execution, of requisite
parts, and offices, therein prescribed, for the good of the whole world; which
men thereunto assigned, do hold their authority from him, whether they be such
as himself immediately, or else the Church in his name inuesteth; it being
neither possible, for all, nor for every man, without distinction convenient,
to take upon him a charge of so great importance: and therefore very fitly, the
Church of England affirms, that it is not lawful for any one, F^^le. Ang.
artic. 23
to take to himself the office of preaching publicly, or administering the
Sacraments, in the Church, except he be first lawfully called to do th^se
things: For God who has reserved, even from the first beginning of the world,
until the end thereof, a Church unto himself, upon earth; against which, the
gates of hell, shall not prevail; has likewise appointed, a perpetual
ministry for the service therein; which though for outward calling has not
bin ever the same, yet continually it was limited, in those bounds, as a thing
most unmeet, and unlawful, for any man to undertake, that was not called. For
as it is Gods infinite mercy, when he could either save us without the
ministry of any, or by the ministry of Angels; yet then to honor man, with this
dignity to make him a coadiutor, dispenser, and cohelper in so great a work;
so it is his wisdom to appoint both for the avoiding of confusion, and
unfitness, such persons as are truly allotted to so honorable an office; which
neither before, under, or after the law, was ever lawful, without any calling
to undertake. The enemies to this religious order of the Church, have bin
certain lovers of confusion, which under pretense of the calling of the
spirit, have ouerboldly intruded themselves, into those holy functions; for
which lawfully they had never warrant. Such were the Enthusiasts, Anabaptists,
Schwenkfeldians, who being enemies to all order, under pretense of a calling
from the Holy Ghost, which others wanted, have made a passage contrary to that
restraint of the Apostle, Heb. 5.4.
(Let no man take upon him that honor to himself, but he that is called of
God) without expectation of lawful warrant, to those duties, that in the
Church are greatest: for in the time before the law, it was not permitted to
take the office of priesthood, unless he either were or had the prerogative of
the eldest brother. This was for the sin of Ruben derived to the tribe of
Louie; first for their zeal, in that great idolatry; and was after confirmed
unto him, in the sedition of Corah: and yet not to all of that family, either
to serve in that tabernacle, Leuit, 21.22 Number. 8.
or to teach throughout all Israel. Neither were all ages equally fit unto this
calling; it being neither lawful before five and twenty, nor after fifty to be
admitted to it: As also those, that were admitted, had a special consecration,
for a personal difference, from the rest of that family, Exo. 29 Leuit. 8 Number.
8
to let them understand, that although they, and only they of that tribe, were
to be employed in those functions, yet it was not lawful to undertake it,
without a calling: this afterward, when better notes of eminency gave that
allowance which before birth did, was with greater reverence to be expected,
and to be observed with a greater care, by those whom the Church had invested,
with authority to call unto that charge. To these persons, because God imparted
power over his mystical body, which is the society of souls, and over that
natural, which is himself, for the knitting of both in one (a work which
antiquity does call the making of Christ's body) the same power is in such, not
amiss both termed a kind of mark, or Character, and acknowledged to be
indeleble. For ministerial power, is a mark of separation, because it
seuereth them that have it from other men, and makes them a special order,
consecrated unto the service of the most high, in things wherewith others may
not meddle. Their difference therefore from other men is, in that they are a
distinct order: and I call it indeleble, Hook. lib. 5. page 228.
because they which have once received this power, as Master Hooker says, may
not think to put it off and on like a cloak, as the weather serves, to take
it, reject and resume it, as often as themselves list: of which profane and
impious contempt, these latter times have yielded (as of all other kinds of
iniquity and apostasy) strange examples. But let them know, which put their
hands to this plough, that once consecrated unto God, they are made his
peculiar inheritance for ever. Suspensions may stop, and degradations utterly
cut off, the use or exercise of power given; but voluntarily it is not in the
power of man, to separate and pull asunder, what God by his authority coupleth:
Neither need there a reordinatio^ for such as were consecrated by the Church,
in corrupter times; for out of men endued with gifts of the spirit, the Church
chose her ministers, unto whom was given ecclesiastical power by ordination,
which they could neither assume, or reject at their own pleasure. Of these,
without doubt the Apostolic Churches, did acknowledge but three degrees at the
first; Apostles (in stead whereof are now Bishops) Presbyters, and Deacons; for
there is an error (as Master Hooker says) which beguileth many, who much
entangle both themselves and others, by not distinguishing, services, offices,
and orders Ecclesiastical; the first of which three, and in part the second,
may be executed by the laity, whereas none have, or can have the third,
Ostiarii.
namely (order) but the clergy. Catechists, Exorcists, Readers, Singers, and
the rest of like sort, if the nature only of their labor, and pains be
considered, may in that respect seem clergy men; even as the fathers for that
cause term them usually Clerks; as also in regard of the end whereunto they
were trained up; which was to enter into orders, when years and experience
should make them able; notwithstanding in as much as they no way differed from
others of the laity, longer then during that work of service, Hook. lib. 5.
page 240.
which at any time they might give over, being thereunto but admitted, not
tied by irreuocable ordination; we find them always, exactly severed from
that body, whereof those three before rehearsed orders, alone are natural
parts. This will appear more fully (howsoever you mislike it) ^f we consider
but a little, Ostiarii.
those services, and duties, about which they were employed. The first were
doorekeepers, (for we omit the first tonsor, which was not any order but a
preparation) whose office was, as Master Calvin notes, to open and to shut
the doors of the temple; Lib. 4. Instit.
we agree in this with the Church of Rome; cap. 4 sect. 9. Bellar. tom. 1. de
Cler. lib. 1. cap, 13. Lect^re^.
our diffrenece is, for the ordination of them. The second were readers, the
duty of these, as Zanchy says, was only to read the Bible, without any
exposition, in a pulpit or place more eminent then the rest; so that in the
compass of a whole year, it was fully finished and read over: this was to
make the people who could not read, more familiarly acquainted with the holy
scriptures. Of this duty, Epist. lib. 2.5. lib 3. Epist. 22 lib. 4. epist. 5.
S. Cyprian in his Epistles, has written most; as of one Aurelius, being made
a Reader* of one Satur^s; as also of Celerinus, which afterward was a Martyr.
The difference betwixt us, in this point, and the Church of Rome, is, that they
make it a certain degree and order, which Master Calvin does not; Lib. 4.
Inst. cap. 4 sect. 9.
which in my opinion is no material difference, seeing undoubtedly the Church
by special ordination (without Ecclesiastical order) appointed those, whom
she used in those places. The next were exorcists, Exorcistae. which did adjure
those that were possessed
with unclean spirits; but this was rather doubtless a peculiar gift, Ca^.
lib. 4 cap. 49 sect. 24. Zanch. in 4. praecep. page 688. Disputatores.
Acolouthi.
then any ordinary office in Gods Church. The next were disputers, which were
appointed with all comers to defend the religion, against the heathen. The
next were Acolouthi, attendants upon the Bishops, with whom these had for their
learning, and reverend behavior, that familiarity, that they were thought
fittest to succeed in the place of Bishops. This, as it was an employment of
great respect; so it is retained in the Church of Rome at this day, with too
mean a regard for so reverend a place. The next were Singers: for it was
thought unfit, Cantatores Greg. in regist. lib. 4 cap. 88. Catechista. Gal. 6.
that a Bishop, a Presbyter, or Deacon, should do this. The last which we will
reckon, was the Catechists, whose office was to teach children, and others
converted, the sum of Christian doctrine. This duty was referred to learned
men; sometimes Presbyters, Doctors, or Deacons; but not ever. For though Origin
and Clemens, were both Doctors, Eusib. lib. 6. Cap. 13. and 20.
and Catechists in Alexandria; yet all that were Catechists, and so allowed to
expound, and teach the Scriptures, were not of necessity admitted to holy
orders: and so consequently, as the word is properly taken by Master Hooker,
none of the Clergy. I say properly, for Clergy is a general name for all
those, All Christians.
whose lot, and portion is the Lord: More specially for those, who are students
in divinity, and after are to enter into holy orders. Of these, there were
Colleges after the Apostles; as before, Colleges of the Prophets. And out of
these, were taken such, as the Church (without Ecclesiastical ordination) used
in those services, which before are mentioned. Out of all which, it is most
apparent, that from the Clergy in respect of ministerial power, these are
justly severed. This is that which you mislike, esteeming it a thing unfit for
any man to preach, that has not a ministerial calling. Neither does Master
Hooker determine how fit it is, that this should be performed, by men who are
not entered into orders; but that this has sometimes been the practice of the
Church, howsoever now performed by men of another calling; there is no man of
any reading can possibly doubt: Neither is the practice in some Colleges of
divines at this day, altogether unlike; where men are admitted, even for
exercise, or trial, to interpret and expound the Scriptures, which are not as
yet (but hereafter may be) consecrated to an Ecclesiastical function. Now,
whereas you scoff at the word Character, as if there were no stamp at al which
made a difference betwixt the Clergy and the Laity: know, that where there is
a change of estate, with an impossibility of return, there we have reason to
account an indeleble character to be imprinted. Bell. (...). 2. page 220.
This faith the Church of Rome, is in Baptism, Confirmation, and Order. Of the
last of which, we only contend at this time: For any thing that I read, Saint
Austin was the first that used the word in this sense; and no doubt of it, in
Baptism there is that mark stamped upon us, in that we are baptized, that
there is a passive power, as the Schoolmen call it, which makes a man in time
fit to receive the rest, which they call Sacraments, and without which, they are
truly accounted void. This form, figure, impession, or character, is called
indeleble, because that is not to be reiterated, from whence it comes. The
character of Order, is an active power, as the Schoolmen speak, which gives
an ability publicly to administer the Sacraments, unto those, who^ the church
has esteemed fit. From whence proceeds the second great exception, which you
have taken in this Article, namely, that Master Hooker seems to grant a
liberty, as for Cat^chists to preach, who are no Ministers; so also for women
in cases of some necessity to Baptize, My L. Grace of Cant. D. Whitgift. page
516.
contrary, say you, both to that most Reverend Archbishop, and others, who
constantly affirm, that God, and well ordered Churches forbid women all
dispensation of holy mysteries. We are not to dispute, what laws give
allowance to the performance of this office, nor what care ought to make
restraint from too usual a liberty of doing it without great necessity;
seeing weakness is commonly bold, and boldness a presumptuous intruder, where
it has least cause. But this we say, which M. Hooker has pro^ed already, that
Baptism by women is truly Baptism, good, and effectual to those that have it:
neither do all those exceptions of sex, quality, insufficiency, or
whatsoever, serve to frustrate, such as the Church of her indulgence, is
willing to admit, from being partakers of so great a benefit. To make women
teachers in the house of God, were a gross absurdity, 1. Tim. 2.12.
seeing the Apostle has said, I permit not a woman to teach: and if any from
the same ground, exclude them from other public offices in the Church, we are
not much against it. But to women's Baptism in private, by occasion of urgent
necessity, the reasons that concern ordinary Baptism in public, are no
just prejudice; neither can we by force thereof, disprove the practice of those
Churches, which (necessity requiring) allow Baptism, in private to be
administered by women. We may not from laws that prohibit any thing with
restraint, conclude absolute, and unlimited prohibitions. For even things
lawful, are well prohibited, when there is fear, least they make the way to
unlawful more easy; and it may be, the liberty of Baptism by women, at such
times, does sometimes embolden the rasher sort to do it, where no such
necessity is. But whether of permission besides law, or in presumption against
law, they do it (which now is no part of the question in hand) it is not hereby
altogether frustrate, void, and as if it were never given. True it is, that
seeing God, from whom men's several degrees, and preheminences proceed, has
appointed them in his Church, at whose hands his pleasure is that we should
receive Baptism; and all other public helps medicinable to the soul;
perhaps thereby the more to settle our hearts, in the love of our ghostly
superiors; they have small cause to hope that with him, their voluntary
services will be accepted, who thrust themselves into functions, either above
their capacity, or besides their place, and ouerboldly intermeddle with
duties, whereof no charge was ever given unto them. In which respect, if laws
forbid it to be done, yet therefore it is not necessarily void when it is done.
For many things are firm being done, which in part are done, otherwise the^
positive rigor, and strictnes did require. Actions usurped have often the same
nature, which they have in others, although they yield not him that does them
the same comfort. What defects then are in this kind, they redound with
restraint to the offender only; the grace of Baptism comes by donation from
God only. That God has committed the mystery of Baptism unto special men,
it is for orders sake in his Church, and not to the intent that their
authority might give being, or add force to the Sacrament it self. Infants
have right to Baptism, we all know; that they have it not by lawful
ministers, it is not their fault; Men's own faults are their own harms. So
then we conclude this point, with Master Hooker, that it is one thing to
defend the fact for lawfulness in the doer (which few do) and another thing
the fact being done, which no man has reason to disallow; for though it is not
lawful for women to undertake that office to baptize, which peradventure
belongs not unto them; yet the Baptism being done, we hold it lawful.

ARTICLE XIIII. Of the Sacraments.
IT is not a thing less usual in the apprehension of truths, through the
weakness of our understanding, to ascribe too little, to that which in all
reason has great virtue; then to allow overmuch to that, which has no virtue
at all. It fares with men in this kind, as it does with some deceitful
artificers; who bestow most art and outward additions, where inwardly there is
least value, whilst they leave that altogether unfurnished, which is able to
expose it to sale, by his own worth. It is our fault, no less violently to
extol, what our fancies make us to account excellent, then to dispraise things
truly commendable in their own nature, because only they have gained this
disadvantage, to be disliked by us. So that whosoever makes, either praise,
or dispraise to be a rule of judgment, or the judgment of some few, to be a
sign of value, he with like hazard equally erreth in both. For times and
places, violent circumstances, of that which men say with or against, breed
infinite variety of alterations, where things are the same; and out of
commendation alone (a strange effect) dispraise like a monster, does spring up:
It being cause sufcient to distempered humors, vehemently to dislike, only in
this respect, that others do commend the same. Wherein, the safest, and most
charitable direction, will be absolutely in that violent opposition to believe
neither; but even from both, to derive a truth much sounder then that which
either holds: From hence has it come to pass, that whilst they of the
Church of Rome, have peradventure ascribed too much to works, some of us too
little, others have set down an equality, dissenting from both. Thus in the
matter of the sacraments, (things of greatest and most hidden virtue left unto
the Church, (for they are called Mysteries) some have bin thought to derive
that power to them, which belongs to God only; which, whilst others sought
to avoid, they have even deprived them, of that grace, which God doubtless in
truth has bestowed upon them. In this kind you are of opinion, that M. Hooker
has erred, who as you imagine, has ascribed to the sacraments, far more,
(following therein the steps of the Church of Rome) then either the Scripture,
the articles of our Church, or the exposition of our Reverend Bishops, and
others do. For the Fathers (say you) make the Sacraments only Seals of
assurance, by which the Spirit works inuisibly, to strengthen our faith: Jew
Apol. Aug. cap 10 diuisi. 1.
And therefore, they call them visible words, seals of righteousness, and
tokens of grace. That they do, and say thus, there is no man, doubts; but we
are not yet persuaded that this is all, or the furthest (as you allege) that
they say; because undoubtedly we are assured, The letter page 28. lin. 2.
that they have learned both to know and to speak otherwise. For the
Sacraments chiefest force, and virtue, Hook book. 5 page* 226
consists in this, that they are heavenly ceremonies which God has
sanctified and ordained, to be administered in his Church: First, as marks to
know when God does impart his vital or saving grace of Christ, unto all that
are capable thereof: and secondly, as means conditional, which God requires
in them, unto whom he imparteth grace. For doubtless, it must needs be a great
unthankfulness, and easily breed contempt, to ascribe only that power to them
to be but as seals; and that they teach but the mind, by other sense, as the
word does by hearing: which if it were all, what reason has the Church, to
bestow any Sacrament upon Infants, who as yet for their years, are nor capable
of any instruction; there is therefore of Sacraments, undoubtedly some more
excellent and heavenly use. Sacraments, by reason of their mixed nature, are
more diversely interpreted, and disputed of, then any other part of Religion
besides; for that in so great store of properties belonging to the self same
thing, as every man's wit, has taken hold of some especial consideration,
above the rest; so they have accordingly given their censure of the use and
necessity of them. For if respect be had to the duty, which every communicant
does undertake, we may call them truly bo^ds of our obedience to God; strict
obligations to the mutual exercise of Christian charity; prouocations to
godliness; preseruatio^s from sin; memorials of the principal benefits of
Christ. If we respect the time, of their institution, they are annexed for
ever, unto the new testament; as other rites were before with the old. If we
regard the weakness, that is in us, they are warrants for the more security
of our belief. If we compare the receivers, with those that receive them not,
they are works of distinction, to separate Gods own from strangers; and in
those that receive them as they ought, they are tokens of Gods gracious
presence, whereby men are taught, to know what they cannot see. For Christ and
his holy spirit, with all their blessed effects, though entering into the soul
of man, we are not able to apprehend or express how, do notwithstanding give
notice, of the times when they use to make their access, because it pleases
Almighty God, to communicate by sensible means, those blessings which are
incomprehensible. Seeing therefore, that grace is a consequent of Sacraments; a
thing which accompanies them as their end; a benefit, which he yt has,
receives from God himself, the author of Sacraments, and not from any other
natural or supernatural quality in them; it may be hereby both understood,
that Sacraments are necessary; and that the manner of their necessity to life
supernatural, is not in all respects, as food, unto natural life. Because
they contain in themselves, no vital force or efficacy, but they are duties
of service and worship; which unless we perform, as the author of grace
requires, they are unprofitable: For all receive not the grace of God, which
receive the Sacraments of his grace. Neither is it ordinarily his will, to
bestow the grace of Sacraments upon any, but by the Sacraments. Which grace
also they that receive by Sacraments, or with Sacraments, receive it from him,
and not from them. That saving grace, which Christ originally, is, or has, for
the general good of his whole Church, by Sacraments he severally deriueth into
every member thereof. They serve, as instruments, the use is in our hands, the
effect is his. And this made the Schoolmen, and the rest, (which you are
affraide to grant) to say that the Sacraments were not only signs, Aquin
part. 3. ^uest. 62
but causes of our justification. Now agent causes, we know, are of two sorts;
principal, which works by the virtue and power of his form; as fire, makes
hot: and thus nothing can cause grace, 8. Pet. 1.
but God himself; Grace being a participation of the divine nature.
Isntrumental, which works not as the other, by virtue of his own proper
form, but only by that motion, which it has from the principal, and first
agent. Thus do Sacraments work; and therefore says Saint Austin, Cont. Faust.
cap. 19.
the Sacraments are finished, performed, and pass away; but the virtue of God,
that works by them, or with them, remains. Thus for the use of them, the
Church has Gods express commandment; for the effect, his conditional
promise; so that without our obedience to the one, there is of the other no
apparent assurance; as contrariwise, where the signs, and Sacraments of his
grace are not, either through contempt vnreceiued, or received with contempt,
we are not to doubt, but that they really give what they promise; and are what
they signify. For we take not the Sacraments (as it seems you do) for bare
resemblances, or memorials of things absent, neither for naked signs, and
testimonies assuring us of grace received before, but (as they are indeed and
in truth) for means effectual, whereby God, when we take the Sacraments,
delivers into our hands that grace, available unto eternal life; which
grace, the Sacraments represent or signify: And yet we acknowledge as Hugo
says, Lib. 1. de. San. cap. 4
that the Sacraments, being, as he calls them, vessels of grace, they cure
not of them selves, no more then glasses, do the sick; but the potions
contained in them. Neither does any man say, (no not the Church of Rome)
(although they be so accused by some of us) that the Sacraments, Bell. Tom. 2.
lib. 2 de Sacr. cap. 1 Calvin lib. 4. Inst cap. 14. sect. 17.
work of themselves, by a virtue resigned unto them, without God, merely of
the worked on actiuely; but that God works by them, as by instruments
powerful, and thought in his wisdom fittest. For doubtless, the Church has
authority to use the word, and the Sacraments, as powerful means, of
regeneration, both having by a divine ordination, a force, and virtue to beget
faith: and therefore justly amongst all the treasures, that God has left unto
his Church, we honor and admire most, the holy Sacraments; not respecting so
much the service, which we do unto God in receiving them, as the dignity of
that sacred and secret gift, which we thereby receive from God. And therefore,
when our Church says, that Sacraments are not only marks of Christian
profession, but rather certain testimonies, Eccles. Ang. art. 25.
and effectual signs of Grace, and of the goodwill of God toward us, by
which God works invisibly in us, we thereby conceive, how grace is indeed
the very end, for which these heavenly mysteries were instituted; and besides,
sundry other properties observed in them, the matter whereof they consist is
such, as signifies, Alia sunt sacramenta d. vitia salutem, alia promittentia
saluatorem. Aug. in Psalm. 73.
figureth, and represents their end: For surely sacraments are the powerful
instruments of God, unto eternal life. For as the natural life consists in
the union of the body with the soul; so the spiritual life in the union of the
soul with God: And for as much as there is no union of God with man, without
that mean between both, which is both; nor this participated to us, without
the sacraments; the virtue must needs be great, that God by these imparteth
unto his Church. For they are signs, not only signifying, Exhibentia. Zanch.
in decal. lib. 1. cap. 16. page 396.
but (as M. Zanchie says) exhibiting also invisible grace. For God directly
affirms, that he gives that with the sign, which by the sign he
represents. In the Sacraments, we acknowledge three things: The Word, the
Element, the thing signified by the word; and represented by the element; and
all these united, yet not by any real, or physical union, that one cannot be
received without the other; but in these the union is sacramental, and the
order mystical, betwixt the signs, and the things signified, by an
institution from God: Whereby it comes to pass, that heavenly and spiritual
things by signs bodily, and earthly are signified, offered, and by the virtue
of the holy Ghost, really exhibited, and performed unto the elect. Thus if
either the signs, or the thing signified be wanting, it cease truly to be a
sacrament. Neither is grace, necessarily tied ever, to the external sacrament:
for we give the one, and God gives the other; and when both are given, then is
the sacrament faithfully received. Tit 3.5.
Thus God justifies by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost: for this being the effect of his promise; the sacraments apply it
unto us, by thus giving it, faith by thus receiving, both being as instruments.
For God does justify, by the sacraments, man by faith; but God one, and the
same, makes righteous, by both; he being the author from whence they both
come. Therefore it is a branch of belief (howsoever you scoff at it as
omitted in our Creed) that sacraments are in their place, Hook. book. 5 page
133 2. King. 5.14.
as Master Hooker says, no less required, then belief it self. For when our
Savior promises eternal life, it is with this condition, as health to Naaman
the Syrian, Wash and be clean. But you are afraid to say that the Sacraments
beget faith, although you confess that they do increase it: Surely this is a
fear like to the disposition of some melancholy humor, where fancy growing
strong, forces an auoidance of things, oftentimes that are without danger:
for to make Sacraments, and the word, to be joined with faith, both in his
generation, and in our justification, is neither to rob faith of his proper
office, nor to ascribe more unto the Sacraments, then of right belongs. For
we are not in any doubt to affirm, that the Sacraments by the work done
actiuely, do not afford grace, though rightly understood, passiuely they may,
by the work done: for in that justification, and means of righteousness,
whereof man is made partaker by the Sacraments, many things concur. First in
Gods behalf, a will that we should use those sensible elements; in Christ's
behalf, his passion, from which the sacraments have their virtue; in the
Ministers behalf, his power, his will; in the receivers behalf, will, faith,
repentance; in respect of the Sacrament it self, the external action, which
arises out of the fit application of the matter, and the form of the
Sacraments. Now that which in all this, actiuely, and instrumentally brings
grace, is the external action, which is commonly called the Sacrament: This
having his virtue from his institution, and not from any merit, either in the
Minister, or in him that receives. For the will of God, which uses the
Sacraments as that means of grace, which it has ordained, concurreth
actiuely, but as a principal cause; the passion of Christ concurreth, as a
cause meritorious; the power and the will of the Minister, necessarily
concur, but as causes further removed; having their use only in effecting the
sacramental action; in whose due circumstances, of administering, he is
unwilling to fail. Will, faith, and repentance, are necessarily required in
the receiver, that is of years; not as active causes, but as fit dispositions,
for the subject; for faith, and repentance, make not the sacramental grace,
nor give power to the Sacrament, but only remove those lets, which are
hindrances, that the Sacraments exercise not that virtue, that is annexed to
them. So that in infants, in whom no such disposition is required, the
sacrament of Baptism is available without these. And therefore to satisfy
your demands in this Article, we conclude that a man dying without faith,
Dente non cord, soris non intus. Aug.

Habent ad testimonium damnationis, non ad adiu^orium sanitatis. A^g. contra
liter. Petil. lib. 2. cap 21.

1. Cor. 11 Tom. 6. lib. 13. cont. Faustum Manich. cap. 16. cont. epist.
Parmen. lib. 2.


and receiving the sacramental signs (for sacraments he cannot receive) shall
not be saved; and not receiving them (if his want be not either negligence, or
contempt) may be saved. Yet the latter to us is fearful, and ordinarily,
impossible; whereas the former is an evidence of our hope, and gives most just
reason charitably to judge. So that we say with Saint Austin, he that eats,
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, but he that
contemns to eat has not life; and therefore shall not come to eternal
life. And yet those things that hurt the unworthy receiver, do much profit him
who receives them, as he ought.

ARTICLE XV. Of Christ's Institution.
IT is not an apprehension equally incident unto the judgments of all wise men,
rightly to conceive the true dependence of things; for those who allow, and
confess actions, to have much virtue, oftentimes do mistake, from whence that
virtue comes: this, as it happens in causes of more usual, and known
nature; so it is sometimes, even in those things, where the author is but one,
and he incomparably the best: Because he vouchsafes to admit instruments, of a
lower condition, to be agents in the performance of things of so great an use.
This makes men, in the sacraments, those holy institutions of God, left unto
the Church, often to fail, in a due estimation of them: And when they do
grant, their use to be singular; yet even then, to doubt whereupon this
depends; because the same things performed by diverse, are not the same; and
those which admit no difference, in respect of substance, yet are subject, in
regard of some circumstance, to an alteration, either more, or less. From
hence has proceeded, the difference in this article, which over violently you
urge to be betwixt Master Hooker and our Church; of whom (as usually you do)
you carry too jealous a suspicion, of too great agreement with the Church of
Rome. That sacraments have a virtue, even more then to be only signs, is
already proved: but whether this virtue be less, where the Minister has more
faults, or none at all, where his intention is not to administer a sacrament,
that comes now to be discussed in this place. To make the Sacraments, depend
for their grace, upon the integrity of men, were to deny the benefit to a
great number without cause, and to punish men, for a fault that were none of
theirs. The first of these is denied by few; nay, some are so far from
opinion, that sin in the Minister, is any let to the sacrament, that they are
not afraid to affirm, that Sacraments are effectual, though administered by
Satan himself. Luth. de Missa private. ^dit. anno 1534.
Doubtless few (saving only some Anabaptists) deny the efficacy of the
Sacraments, for the defects of life, in the lawful dispensers of them. They
are inestimable favors, unto Gods Church, not to be measured by the hand, from
whom immediately we receive them, but by that Almighty power, the fountain
of all goodness, from whence they do first come. For as, amongst men it were
want either of judgment, or civility, or both, less to esteem of the
benefit, for the meannesse of the messenger, where we are undoubtedly assured,
that it is the princes seal: so, in the Sacraments, we must esteem them, as
the seals, and favors of God himself, whatsoever the imperfections are, in
those Ministers, from whom we have them. For the defects of men, being in the
Church, and lawfully called to those functions, no way touch the efficacy of
the Sacraments, whose virtue depends upon a higher power: And therefore we
deny all reiteration of Baptism, whatsoever the defects for manners are in
those, that do first give it. For we are equally baptized, into the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, what unworthiness, or inequality soever,
remain in the persons, that do baptize. For the holiness of the Sacraments,
is no way polluted, Aug. cont. Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 13
by the uncleanness of the hands that give them. For those Sacraments, which
irreverently being handled, Cont. epist. Parm. lib. 2. cap. 10.
as Saint Austin says, do hurt the giver, yet even by their hands profit
those that receive them worthily. It was both in Asia, and Africa, an error
long since, Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. cap. 6. etc. 2
that the Sacraments were not firm, which were administered by Heretics, or
Schismatickes, separated from the unity of the Church. The first author of
this, was Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage, whom Saint Cyprian succeeded, as Saint
Austine writes; and was a little infected with the same error. Lib. 2. de
Baptis.
After these were the Donatists: but we will not labor for confirmation of this
point, because, you object nothing against Master Hooker in it. And it is no
controversy at all, betwixt us and the Church of Rome: and therefore we say,
with the ancient Fathers, Stephanus, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 2. in epist 1. ad
Himerium. Ep^st. 22. ad Maced. episc. Epist. 77. ad Nicetam.

Lib. 2. de Bapt. cap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 circa Ann. 327. Eccles. Angl. art. 16.


Siricius, Innocentius the first, Leo, Anastasius the second, in his epistle to
Anastasius the Emperor; with the councels; first the general council of
Nice, often alleged by Saint Austin to this end; the first council of
Carthage, the last assembly at Trent; with the testimonies of Fathers, and
Doctors, and according to the articles of our Church by you alleged; That by
the malice of wicked men, which are over the administration of the Sacraments,
the effect of the thing ordained by Christ, is not taken away, or the grace of
Gods gift diminished, as touching them which receive by faith, and orderly,
the things offered unto them; which for the institution of Christ, and his
promise, are effectual, although they be administered by evil men. But to
infer hereupon, that the same actions, howsoever don scoffingly, and in
jest, contrary, or besides the holy institution of the Church, are truly
Sacraments; It is a conclusion too violent, and not warranted by any truth. For
howsoever, the grace of Sacraments depends not upon the Minister, who may
fail of these virtues, that are fit to be required in him: yet it is
necessary, that there should be an intention to administer a true Sacrament,
least we put no difference betwixt that, which either derision, imitatio^,
chance, or the Church does. For if the conversion of Lucius first Christian
king of this land, Circa ann. 165
were to be acted upon a stage, and that two persons, were to represent,
^ugatius and Damianus, sent by Eleutherius the Pope, to baptize Lucius, could
any man in reason think, how orderly soever performed; that this were true
baptism? were not this, to make the bare action, all, and the intention a
circumstance not belonging to it? But we must know, as M. Hooker says, that
Sacraments are actions, mystical and religious (for no man can truly define
them otherwise) which nature, they have not, unless they proceed from a
serious meaning: yet what every man's private mind is as we cannot know, Hook.
lib. 5. page 129.
so neither are we bound to examine; for in these cases, the known intent of
the Church, does generally suffice; and where the contrary is not manifest, (as
circumstances will serve easily to discover) we must presume, that he which
outwardly does the work, has inwardly the purpose of the Church of God. Now,
this being a discreet rule, wisely to put a difference betwixt Sacraments
(holy actions) and the like irreligious^^e, and profanely performed, is that,
whereat your zealous wisdom, does take offense; and which you pursue with that
bitterness of speech, (calling it mere Popery, a humane invention, and
induceme^t to fides implicita) as though the dangers were neither few, nor
small, which came unto ye Church by this opinion. Let me entreat your patience
a little, and vouchsafe to be but advised by him, who in all humility will be
ready to follow ye sound directions of the meanest in Gods church; and I doubt
not, to make it apparent, that Master Hooker has delivered that truth, the
contrary whereof, is no way fit, to be admitted, or allowed by us. Some are of
opinion, that no intention at all is required in the Ministers of the
Sacraments, but that if the thing, and the words be present, though either in
^est, But Sacramentum ect Sacra actio.

Lib. 1. de Sacra. cap 27.

Lib. de. missa priuata.


or otherwise performed, yet notwithstanding it is a Sacrament. The first
Author of this, as Bellarmine says, was Luther, whose words I must needs say,
are violently wrested, to make him speak that which he never meant. It is like
that heout of whom by misunderstanding you have collected this opinion, was
Master Calvin; who rightly deriuing the virtue of Sacraments from the Minister
to God himself the author of the first institution, says thus; I refer, so
much to the holy institution of Christ, that if an Epicure, inwardely deriding
the whole action, In audit. con^i^ii. Trid. sess. 7. can. 2
should administer the supper, by the commandment of Christ (mark the words)
and according to the rule by him given, (which no man could that wanted the
intention of the Church) I would account them, says he, the true pledges of
the body, and the blood of Christ: Where we are willing to confess with him
and with truth it self, that Sacraments for their virtue, depend not upon the
intention of the Minister, though without the intention of the Church they are
not Sacraments. Where, by intention we mean not a particular purpose, of all
that the Sacraments require, (a thing peradventure above the capacity of many
lawful Ministers) but a general intention, of performing that sacred action,
according to the meaning of the Church: Where, by church we mean not any one
particular, but the true Church; or as M. Calvin says, Christ's rule, or that
intention which Christians in that action have; and yet if one in this should
follow the intention of a particular Church that did err, it were not a reason
sufficient to make the Sacrament to be none at all: for even his intention, in
following that particular Church though erring, were an intention of following
the true Church that does not err. Neither is it required, as the scholemen
say, that this intention necessarily be actual, nor it suffices not, to be
habitual, (which may be in men either drunk or asleep) but vertuall, that
is, in the power of that intention, Tho. Aqui^. part. 3. quest. 64. art. 8.
which howsoever now distracted, before was actual: Neither do we mean, that
the Minister should necessarily have the same intent of the end, which the
Church has, but of the action; the end being perhaps, without the compass of
his knowledge, but the action cannot; unless we suppose him to be a Minister
weaker then any church has. For it is one thing, to intend what the Church
intends, and another thing, to intend what the Church does: For those that
intend by baptism, an utter acquittance from original sin, and those that
do not, there is a diversity in the end, but the action is all one; and
therefore not reiterated, though the end be diverse. Now to do the external
action, and yet in jest, is no more to do, what the Church intends to do,
then their speech, and action ( Hail King of the Jews) was any honor, or true
reverence to our Savior Christ. The necessity of this intention, (not for
grace, but to make it a Sacramental action) will more evidently appear, if
we consider what kind of instrument the Minister is. Man may be the
instrument of another agent many ways: First in respect only of his bodily
members, his hand, his back or such like; without any, use of the will.
Secondly, in respect of his outward parts, with the use of sense; as to read,
to watch, to tell what he sees; and to this also, the will is no further
required, but to the outward action. Thirdly, in respect of the bodily members,
together with sense and reason, as in Judges appointed by Princes to determine
causes, wherein wisdom and the will are to be instruments. Now the Ministers
of the Sacrament, must be of this third kind: And therefore says Hugo, if a
father should take his son to a bathe, and should say, Son, Lib. 2. de
^^cra. part. 6. ^ap. 13.
I wash thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
and so dip him in the water, it were ridiculous to think that he were thus
baptized. Where, although such prophaners are without excuse, for irreverent
imitation of holy things, yet these actions, without the intention of the
Church, can no ways be termed sacraments. For if those, who hold a sermon
read, to be no sermon, and yet a prayer read, to be a prayer, require that the
Spirit of grace, Perk. upon the Lords prayer. page 143. imp^. 1596.
and prayer, be not wanting in the party reading, and the hearers; how can we
think those actions to be sacramental, where in the Minister, there is not so
much as an intention, that they should be sacraments? And therefore, says
Hugo, in the place before alleged, Ruf^. lib. 10. cap. 14. (...) 2.16 Nice^.
lib. 8.40.
Alexander the Bishop held the Baptism that Athanafius ministered to other
boys in play, to be true Baptism, because he did it with an intention of true
Baptism. In those that are but instruments (as the minister is no more) the
virtues of faith, hope, and charity, are not requisite; and yet because they
are reasonable instruments, their actions must proceed from election, and
intention. Therefore we conclude, that this intention of the Church, is no
ground of uncertainty, seeing she tends but one thing; that is, to perform
them as Sacraments; nor gives any power to the virtue of the Sacrament; and
that the Church cannot make a Sacrament; but to distinguish betwixt actions
religious, and the same not religious, there is required the intention of the
Church.

ARTICLE XVI. Of the necessity of Baptism.
WHere many things are doubted of without reason, it is neither easy, nor
usually expedient to answer all. Wisdom esteems it much fitter, to pass by
without yielding satisfaction to some apparent truths called in question,
rather then by answering, to let the simple understand, that men have doubted
of those points. For the first calling in question of infallible truths, gave
strength to evil minds, to find out all shows of reason, for maintaining of
those things, which their own weakness at first made them simply to mistake.
So that, whosoever makes every doubt to be a contention, or labors to
confute errors of long continuance, in the first, kindles but that spark,
which without some breath would easily die; and in the latter, must arm
himself to encounter an obstinate resolution. The consideration of this, made
me not willing, either to dispute the new borne doubts of your own in this
Article, which being discussed in time, might grow to be old errors, or to
bestow labor, for the assisting of that truth, which out of great judgment,
and learning, has often been defended by other men's pains. But seeing it is
an usual false conclusion, as to argue a lawfulness from what we do, so a
want of ability from what we do not; I thought it fitter, even following
their steps that have gone before me, rather to resolve others what you have
doubted of in this point, the^ that any should conclude out of silence, an
impossibility that you could be answered. For the willingness that some men
have, to do more then they are able, makes others suspected, to want ability,
in whom there appears not the same willingness. If al men rightly considered
in those actions that concern man's salvation, how far we are tied not only
in obedience, but for use, to those things that are means to effect the same;
few would have been so carelessly resolute, to contemn good works, through an
opinion of an eternal election, or so negligently have despised the only
door of entrance into the Church (Baptism) through an opinion that God does
save, even where this is wanting. Roman. Catechis.
We do all confess, that Baptism is a sacrament of regeneration, or new
birth, by water in the word of life; that it is a sign, nay a means of
initiation, whereby we are coopted into the society of the Church: Call. lib.
4. Inst.
Thus, by this being ingraffed into Christ, we may be taken for the sons of
God; and so receive new names to be called Christians: And therefore learned
men, have thought it to be the door of our actual entrance into Gods house;
the first apparent being of life, as Saint Basil calls it; Hook. lib. 5. page
132.
the first step of our sanctification, as Master Hooker says. For as we are
not naturally men, without birth, so neither are we Christian men, in the eye
of the Church, without new birth; we say in the eye of the Church: for we take
not upon us, to see as God does, who knows without all means, both to make,
and without visible tokens, is able to discern who belong unto him: And yet in
our eye, Baptism is that, which both declares, and makes us to be
Christians. T.C. lib. 3 page 134.
Therefore it is a strange opinion of them, who say, that he which is not a
Christian before baptism, cannot be made a Christian by baptism; which is
only the seal of the grace of God, before received. These, as it seems you
do, eleuate too much the ordinary and immediate means of life, relying wholly
upon the bare conceit, of that eternal election, which notwithstanding
includes a subordination of means; without which, we are not actually brought
to enjoy what God secretly did intend: And therefore to build upon Gods
election, if we keep not our selves to the ways which he has appointed for
men to walk in, is but a self deceiving vanity: for all men notwithstanding
their preordination unto life (which none can know but God only) are in the
Apostles opinion, Ephe 2.3.12. Jewel in the Def. of Apol. 2. par. page 150.
till they have embraced the truth, but the children of wrath as well as
others. And howsoever the children of the faithful, are borne holy, as you
allege out of yt reverend Bishop; and the Elect, are adopted to be the sons of
God in their predestination, (...) afterward when they believe, then they are
said more properly to be the sons of God indeed: for although it be true as
Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.
that your sons are holy, namely, when they are borne, by reason of the
promise, yet he says, that we are sanctified by faith, meaning actually and
indeed. For as kings (in those kingdoms that are by election) are first
chosen, then designed, then crowned, which last action is that which makes
them full, Zanch. in decal. page 400.
and complete kings; so whatsoever we were, in that secret election to us
unknown, 1. Cor. 12.
yet then, when we are baptized, and not before, we are properly, publicly,
solemnly joined unto God, and admitted into his Church: Yet we exclude not
(neither does any that I know) these benefits thus bestowed, ordinarily, in,
and with Baptism, but that extraordinarily (sometimes before, as in Paul and
Cornelius; sometimes after, as in many baptized by heretics; sometimes
without, as in those who prevent their baptism by martyrdom, and some others)
these benefits may be bestowed. For it were a fearful doctrine, injurious to
many thousands souls, and blasphemous against the bottomless mercy of a most
loving father, to exclude all those from eternal life, whom not negligence, or
contempt, but some other occasion has hindered to be baptized. And therefore it
is strange, that you would make M. Hooker to speak for so absolute a
necessity (which indeed he does not) but makes it limited; or that yourself
would dislike a necessity, In the Letter page 31. lin. 16.
whereas you confess, this to be the condition of baptism, if it cannot be had
as it ought. The matter then principally called in question in this Article, is
what kind of necessity there is of baptism; a thing already fully handled by
M. Hooker; Lib. 5. page 130.
and therefore we will be more sparing in this point. All things, which either
are known causes, or fit means, whereby any great good is usually procured, or
men delivered from grievous evil, the same we must needs confess necessary:
now we know there is a necessity absolute, and there is a necessity
conditional and even that conditional for the end in ordinary estimation, is
absolutely necessary. Thus to a man in the sea, to escape drowning, we account
a ship a necessary means, even of absolute necessity in respect of our
judgment, howsoever some few, have escaped by other means; so our Savior
says of Baptism, unless a man be born^ ^gaine of water, Ioh. 3.5
and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Which
place we understand, howsoever some deny it, of Baptism, by material water,
according to the general consent of the ancient Fathers: For it is a rule in
expounding the Scriptures, that where a literal construction will stand, (as
in this place) the farthest from the letter is commonly the worst. And
therefore water, and the spirit both concurring in that sacrament, why should
there not be, though not an equal, yet a necessity of both. For as the spirit
is necessary to regeneration, so regeneration is necessary to eternal life,
which so far depends upon the outward sacrament, that God will have it
embraced not only as a sign or token what we receive, as you affirm, but also
as an instrument, or mean, whereby we receive it; and this without any
inthralling, as you seem to fear, of Gods merciful grace: Neither, as Hugo
says, do these give, (speaking of the Sacraments) that which is given by
these, Non enim i^^a tribuunt quod (...). Hugo. de Sacra. lib. cap. 3
and yet ordinarily as necessary to receive these, as those graces are
necessary which we receive by these. For, though Baptism be not a cause of
grace, yet the grace which is given by baptism, does so far depend upon the
very outward sacrament, as God will have it embraced as a necessary means,
whereby we receive the same: and howsoever we dare not judge those, that in
some cases do want it, yet we may boldly gather, that he, whose mercy now
vouchsafes to bestow the means, has also long since intended us that
whereunto they lead. For to imagine, Iren. con. Her. lib. 1. cap 18. De baptism.
nothing necessary but says, is to come near the error of the old Valentinian
heretics, who ascribed all to knowledge only. So says Tertullian. Some
account the Sacraments, as unprofitable without faith, so needeles where faith
is; Epist. 70. ad. Hugo.
but no faith can be profitable, says Saint Bernard to him, who when he may,
yet refuses to receive the Sacraments. Therefore if Christ himself, which
gives salvation, require Baptism, it is not for us to dispute or examine,
whether those that are unbaptized, may be saved, but seriously to do that,
which is required, and religiously to fear the danger, which may grow by the
want thereof. For doubtless, the sacrament of Baptism, in respect of God the
author of the institution, may admit dispensation; but in respect of us, who
are tied to obeie, there is an absolute necessity. Hug. de sacra. lib. 1. cap.
5.
For it is in the power, of God without these to save; but it is not in the
power of man, without these to come to salvation. And yet the Church holds
constantly, as well touching other believers, as Martyrs, that Baptism taken
away by necessity, takes not away the necessity of Baptism; but is supplied
by the desire thereof. For what is there in us, says Saint Ambrose, more then
to will and to seek for our own good. Thy servant Valentinian (who died
before he was baptized) Oh Lord, did both. For as the visible sign, may be
without true holiness, so the invisible sanctification, says Saint Austin,
may sometimes be without the visible sign: And yet these are no just reasons,
Lib. 3. quest. vet. Test. cap. 84
either to make us presume, or to take away the necessity of this holy
sacrament: For even those have it in their wish, Aqui. part. 3. quest. 63

Art. 2. voto, non re.

In Act. Apost. 10 Sect. 9.


as the Schoolmen say, who indeed do want ye same. And howsoever, as they of
Rhemes confess, such may be the grace of God toward men, that they may have
remission, justification and sanctification before the external sacrament of
Baptism; as in Peter's preaching they all received the Holy Ghost before the
sacrament; yet this is no ordinary thing now in infants; and whosoever
therefore shall contemn them, cannot be saved. Yet God, who has not bound his
grace, in respect of his own freedom, Rhem. test. in Ioh. 3. sect. 2.
to any Sacrament, may, and does accept them as baptized, which either are
martyred before they could be baptized, or else depart this life, with wi^he
and desire to have that Sacrament, which by some remediles necessity, they
could not obtain. For the just, by what death soever he be prevented, Wis. 4.7
his soul shall be in rest. And whereas you demand, whether our sacraments be
not the same in nature, virtue, and substance, that the sacraments of the Jews
were under the law; and therefore baptism to be of no more necessity, De
doctrine Christ. lib. 3 cap. 3.
then circumcision; we answer with Saint Austin: The Sacraments delivered by
Christ, are for number fewer; (taking, as Master Zanchy notes, sacraments
largly for all those ceremonies as he did) for performance easier; for
understanding more excellent; for observation more chaste. And therefore, though
all sacraments for their substance be one, (that is Christ) and that more
particularly baptism succeeds circumcision: yet their difference is great,
both in their rites which were diverse, Petra erat Chri^^us. 1 Cor. 10 Colos^. 2.
and in the manner of the object; the one Christ to come, the other already
come; the one a corporal benefit, to be of that Church which should have her
certain seat until the coming of the Messiah, in the land of Canaan; the
other expecting a spiritual kingdom. The one bound, to an observation of the
whole law, Ceremonial, Judicial, Moral; the other only to the moral law;
and for want of true fulfilling of it, to faith and repentance. The one to
Israel only, the other to the whole Church. The one to continue, till the
coming of the Messiah in humility, the other until his coming in glory. The
one belonged unto the males only, the other to all. So that as the differences
were many, and not small; even so we doubt not to affirm, that the benefits
are far more; and the necessity is much greater. And therefore, as Master
Hooker says, we have for baptism no day set, Lib. 5. Page 135
as the Jews had for circumcision; neither have we by the law of God, but only
by the Churches discretion, a place thereunto appointed. Baptism therefore even
in the meaning of the law of Christ, belongs unto infants capable thereof,
from the very instant of their birth; which if they have not howsoever, rather
then lose it by being put off, because some circumstances of solemnity do not
concur, the Church, as much as in her lies (mark the words, for she cannot
disappoint Gods eternal election) but as far as is in her power, by denying
the means, casts away their souls: and therefore there is a more absolute
necessity, in the Church to give Baptism, which she can never willingly refuse
to do without cruelty, then there is in the faithful to receive it, who, how
willing soever, yet always cannot.

ARTICLE XVII. Of Transubstantiation.
SEeing the Church, has nothing left unto it, either more powerful, or more
reverently to be esteemed, then the holy Sacraments; it has bin the policy of
Satan, from the beginning, to darken the clear light of these, with infinite
clouds of unnecessary questions, wholly impertinent, and unprofitable to that
cause. So that out of due consideration of this great evil, wisemen have
thought it more fit, by application, to make use of that, which concerns them
in this kind, rather then by curious inquisition to desire, to find out, what
concerns them not. The whole benefit, which the Church has, is from Christ;
and this by no other means but by participation: For Christ to be what he is,
is not to be what he is to the Church, but only by a participation of all that
he is, (as a mediator) betwixt him and us. This we call the mutual, inward
hold, which Christ has of us and we of him, in such sort that each possesses
other, by way of special interest, properly, and inherent copulation: for what
soever we are eternally, according to his election, we are actually no longer
in God, then only from the time of our actual adoption into the body of his
true Church, into the fellowship of his children: Col. 2.10.
we are therefore adopted sons of God to eternal life by participation of
the only Son of God, Ioh. 14.19.
whose life is the welspring and cause of ours. This participation, besides the
presence of Christ's person, and besides the mystical copulation thereof, with
the parts and members of his whole Church, imports a true actual influence
of grace, Gal. 2.20,
whereby the life which we live, according to godliness, is his, and from him
we receive those perfections, wherein our eternal happiness consists. This
is partly by imputation of his merit, partly by habitual, and real infusion
of his grace; the first whereof, as the ground of all the rest, being the
Spirit, makes a blessed union of all those, howsoever distinguished, by place,
or time, who mystically belong unto that body; and this being the common union
of all Saints, we fitly term, the communion of Saints. That of imputation,
makes us al sons, in which number, how far so ever one may seem to excel
another; yet touching this, that all are sons, they are all equals; some
happily better sons then the rest are, but none any more a son, then
another. Neither does this participation, include any gross surmise, of any
mixture of the substance of his flesh with ours, but is actually derived unto
his Church, by the use of his holy Sacraments: Wherein Baptism does challenge
unto it self, the inchoation of those graces, the consummation whereof
depends upon other mysteries. For the grace which we have, by the holy
Eucharist, does not begin, but continue life; and therefore no man receives it
before Baptism, because nothing is capable of nourishment, that does not live.
Now life being propounded to all men as their end; those which by Baptism have
laid the foundation, and attained the first beginning of a new life, have in
the Eucharist, food prescribed and given, for the continuance of life in them.
In both the same thing being affoorded (which is a participation of Christ) in
our infancy we are incorporated into Christ, and by Baptism receive the grace
of his Spirit, without any sense or feeling of the gift, which God bestows.
In the Eucharist we so receive the gift of God, that we know by grace, what the
grace is, which God gives us. The degrees of our increase in holiness, and
virtue, we see, and can judge of them; we understand that the strength of our
life begun in Christ is Christ; that his flesh is meat, and his blood drink,
not by surmised imagination, but truly; even so truly, that through faith we
perceive in the body and blood sacramentally presented, the very taste of
eternal life: the grace of the Sacrament is here as the food which we eat
and drink. And howsoever it was to be feared, that by the means of some, men
should be brought to account of this Sacrament, but only as of a shadow,
destitute, empty, and void of Christ; yet now at length, for any thing that I
can see, all sides are grown, as it is fit, to a general agreement concerning
that which alone is material, namely, the real participation of Christ, and
of life, in his body and blood, by means of this Sacrament. The manner how,
which ought to be the least part of our consideration, is in this question, the
greatest difference: So that, considering the small success, that bitter
contentions have had in this cause, it were to be wished, that men would give
themselves, more to meditate with silence, what they have by the sacrament; and
in humility, less to dispute, of the manner how: This being the true
difference betwixt Christ's disciples, and others; that the one, because they
enjoyed not, disputed: the other disputed not, because they inioyed. For
doubtless this heavenly food, is given for the satisfying of our empty
souls, and not for the exercising of our curious, and subtle wits. It is
sufficient that the sacraments reallie exhibit, what they promise; though they
are not really, or do not really contain in themselves, that grace, which
with them, or by them, it pleases God to bestow. Now the first by all sides
being granted, Lib. 5. page 176.
why do we vainly (says Master Hooker) trouble our selves with so fierce
contentions, whether by consubstantiation, or else by Transubstantiation, the
sacrament it self, be first possessed with Christ or no? a thing which no way
can either further, or hinder us, howsoever it stand, because our participation
of Christ in the sacrament, depends upon the cooperation of his omnipotent
power, which makes it his body and blood to us, whether with change, or
without alteration of the element, such as they imagine; we need not greatly to
care or enquire for: That being admitted, wherein all agree, (which is a real
presence) why should not the rest in question, rather be left as superfluous,
then urged as necessary. This is that, which being uttered by Master Hooker,
out of great wisdom, argues as you surmise, that he makes light of the
doctrine of Transubstantiation; whereas the reverend Fathers of our Church, do
so much detest it; and that so many blessed Martyrs, have suffered death for
denial thereof. Whether the doctrine of Transubstantiation be true, or false
(howsoever it is plain what Master Hooker thought) yet, that is no part of
the contention at this time. The matter in question betwixt you and him, is
only this: Whether it be not curiosity, to contend for the manner, how, seeing
all sides are agreed, that the thing is. For as in those who were to be cured,
by our Savior Christ, we ought not curiously to enquire how the hem of his
garment had such virtue, but faithfully to believe that it was able to afford
health; so neither in this need the church to be inquisitiue after what manner,
Christ presents himself, but truly to believe that he is there present.
Which because some irreligious men, at the first doubted; men have been driven
to find out these reasonable satisfactions, or rather satisfactions to humane
reason, from his omnipotency, Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, or such
like; whereas indeed we know, that in many mysteries of our faith, it is
sufficient to believe the thing, though we cannot comprehend the means, how.
Lib. 2. de Sacr^. cap. 1.
Of this kind, says Bellarmine, is the Trinity of persons in the unity of
essence* Christ to be both God, and man; the same bodies in number to rise
again; Christ really to be in the Eucharist; and such like, which by reason of
our shallow understanding, man's weakness is not able to comprehend. Eccle. ^.
For if ignorance be in these things that are below, then how much more in
those things that are above. 2. Sam. 9.
And if Mephibosheth, when he came unto David's table, accounted himself in all
humility, so far unworthy; what ought our contemplation to be, but of his
mercy, and our want of desert, when we shall come to be partakers of so
inestimable favors? 1. Sam. 6.
For if the Bethsamites were punished for looking into the Arc, what can we
expect to be the recompense of our indiscreet folly? Is it not then an advise
needful, which Master Hooker gives, and you mislike, rather to seek how to
receive it worthily, then to desire to know how it is present with us? For the
one imports a duty that is necessary, and the other bewrays a desire, that
is superfluous; in the one, we perform what God has commanded, and in the
other, affect, what he has forbidden. Neither is this to make
Transubstantiation (for denial whereof so many, as you say, have died) any
light matter, but rather to show, the great depth of the mystery, and the small
profit, that is reaped by the searching of it: for seeing it is on all sides
plainly confessed; first, that this Sacrament is a true, and real participation
of Christ, who thereby imparteth himself, even his whole entire person, as a
mystical head, unto every soul that receives him, and that every such
receiver, does thereby incorporate, or unite himself unto Christ as a
mystical member of him, yea of them also, whom he acknowledges to be his
own. Secondly, that to whom the person of Christ is thus communicated, to them
he gives by the same Sacrament his holy Spirit, to sanctify them, as it
sanctifies him which is their head. Thirdly, that what merit, force or virtue
soever, there is in this sacrificed body and blood, we freely, fully, and wholly
have it by this sacrament. Fourthly, that the effect thereof in us, is a real
transmutation of our souls and bodies, from sin, to righteousness; from
death and corruption, to immortality and life. Fifthly, that because the
Sacrament, being of it self but a corruptible and earthly creature, must
needs be thought an unlikely instrument, to work so admirable effects in man;
we are therefore to rest our selves, altogether upon the strength of his
glorious power, who is able and will bring to pass, that the bread and cup,
which he gives us, shall be truly the thing he promises. Now seeing there are
but three differing opinions, for the manner of it; Sacramentaries,
Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation; and al do plead Gods omnipotency;
the first to that alteration which the rest coufesse he accomplisheth; the
patrons of transubstantiation, over and besides that, to the chang of one
substance into another; the followers of co^substantiation, to the kneading up
of both substances as it were in one lump: and that in this variety the mind
which loves truth and seeks comfort out of holy mysteries, has not perhaps
the leisure, perhaps not the wit, nor capacity, to tread out so endless mazes,
as the intricate disputes of this cause, have led men into, how should a
virtuously disposed mind, better resolve with it self then thus? Variety of
judgments, and opinions argues obscurity in those things where about they
differ; but that which all parts receive for certain; that which every one
having sifted, is by no one denied or doubted of, must needs be matter of
infallible truth: whereas therefore there are but three expositions made of,
This is my body; the first, this is in it self before participation, really,
and truly the natural substance of my body, by reason of the coexistence which
my omnipotent body has with the sanctified element of bread, which is the
Lutherans interpretation. The second, this is in it self, and before
participation, the very true and natural substance of my body, by force of that
deity, which by the words of consecration, abolisheth the substance of bread,
and substituteth in the place thereof my body: which is the construction of the
Church of Rome. The last, this hallowed food, through concurrence of divine
power, is in verity and truth, unto faithful receivers, instrumentally a cause
of that mystical participation; whereby as I make my self wholly theirs, so I
give them in hand, an actual possession of all such saving grace, as my
sacrificed body can yield, and all their souls do presently need; this is to
them, and in them, my body. Of these three rehearsed interpretations, the last
has in it nothing, but what the rest do all approve, and acknowledge to be most
true; nothing but that which the words of Christ, are on all sides confessed to
enforce: nothing but that which the Church of God has always thought
necessary: nothing but that which alone is sufficient, for every Christian
man to believe, concerning the use and force of this Sacrament: finally,
nothing but that, wherewith the writings of all antiquity are consonant, and
all Christian confessions agreeable: And as truth in what kind soever, is by
no kind of truth gainsaid; so the mind which rests it self, on this, is
never troubled with those perplexities, which the other do both find, by
means of so great contradiction, between their opinions, and the true
principles of reason, grounded upon experience, nature, and sense. What moves
us to argue how life should be bread, our duty being but to take, what is
offered, and most assuredly to rest persuaded of this, that if we can but eat,
we are safe? Such as love piety will as much as in them lies, know all things,
that God commands, but especially the duties of service which they owe unto
him: as for his dark and hidden works, they prefer (as becomes them in
such cases) simplicity of faith, before that knowledge, which curiously sifting
what it should adore, and disputing too boldly of that which the wit of man can
not search, chilleth for the most part, all warmth of zeal, and brings
soundnes of belief, many times into great hazard. Let it therefore be
sufficient for me, presenting my self at the Lords table, to know what there I
receive from him, without searching, or inquiring of the manner, how, Christ
performs his promise; let disputes and questions, enemies to piety,
abatements of true devotion, and hitherto in this case but over patiently
heard, let them take their rest: Let curious and sharp witted men beat their
heads about what questions themselves will, the very letter of the word of
Christ gives plain security, that these mysteries do, as nails, fasten us
to his Cross, that by them we draw out (as touching efficacy, force, and
virtue) even the blood of his wounded side; that this bread has more in it,
then our eyes behold; that this cup hallowed with solemn benediction, avails
to the endless life, and welfare both of soul and body, i^ that it serves,
as well for a medecin to heal our infirmities, and purge our sins, as for a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, which touching it sanctifies; it inlightneth with
belief; it truly conformeth us unto the Image of Jesus Christ. What these
elements are in themselves, it skilleth not, it is enough that to me which take
them, they are the body and blood of Jesus Christ; his promise in witness
hereof suffices; his word, he knows which way to accomplish; why should any
cogitation possess the mind of a faithful communicant but this? Oh my God,
thou art true! oh my soul, thou art happy! To dehort then from violence of
disputing, and curiosity of seeking in a matter needless to know, being (as
Master Calvin says) incomprehensible, what fault can you find, in Master
Hooker? Does he not dissuade from this in zeal, only to draw us, to a better
contemplation? Can this in reason be termed any gentle construction of popish
opinions, or privily to rob the truth of our English creed of her due
estimation? think not so uncharitably of one, whose principal care was, in
the midst of all his knowledge, only to follow that truth, soundly, and
incorruptly, which was available and sufficient to save himself. Many itch
with curiosity, they are not few, that do blow contentions, to make them
kindle; some desire to know, only that they may know; some others, that they
may be known; he doubtless, with humble sobriety, both in this and in all other
points, to comprehend that which was most available for the true direction of
others, and the salvation of his own soul. And therefore to your objections in
this article, which are neither great, nor many; I have framed my answer, most
out of his mouth who fulliest understood this cause, and ought to be esteemed,
the best interpretor of his own meaning.

ARTICLE XVIII. Of Speculatiue doctrine.
AS wise Physicians in the curing of some diseases, neglect not that habit of
the body which when the disease is cured, may threaten a relapse, because evils
past, leave a disposition for the like to come, and by returning are so much
the more dangerous, by how much the strength of the sick is less able to make
resistance; so fares it with us, in the labor employed about these articles
that follow: wherein if you had well considered, the serious superscription of
your letter, that it was for resolution in matters of doctrine, and those of no
small moment, but such as seem (it is well you said seem) to overthrow the
foundation of Christian religion, and of the church amongst us, these articles
that follow, might very fitly have bin omitted by you. For though all that you
object, be far from that mature judgment, which ought to be in such as you
desire to seem; yet these, concerning speculatiue doctrine, the naming of
Master Calvin, Schoolmen, or Master Hookers style, how can they be called
matters of doctrine, or in any construction, be thought to weaken the
foundation of the Church amongst us? But seeing in the former we have done
somewhat to cure that distemper (the effect of too much choler) which being
suffered to increase, might grow dangerous; it is not amiss gently to apply
some thing, even to these, which wanting the malice of any dangerous discase,
yet are infallible tokens of a distempered habit. Neither need we in this, to
make any other defense, for the right use of those sentences, which you
reprehend, saving only to set down to the readers eye, the sentence at large,
which you have maimed by seuering; and challenging him, in those things, which
are incomparably excellent, you have manifestly discovered your weakness of
understanding. But as in any curious workmanship, where the parts are not
disiointed, there appears the admirable effects of a skillful hand, which
rudely being severed, and rashly pulled in pieces, blemish the beauty of the
former work, and make many things seem, in the eye of ignorance, to be idle,
and of no use; so fares it with those speeches, which in this Article so
unseasonably are distasted by you, which if any indifferent reader, will but
compare, with the places from whence you took them, he must needs be amazed,
that things set down with so much eloquence, and judgment, should be called in
question, by so great a weakness of understanding. The sentences by you
alleged, of speculatiue doctrine (as you call them) are only eight, which if
you had set down at large, with that coherence, that he did, doubtless you
could not have devised, to have done Master Hooker a greater honor; but being
pretermitted, by what reason I know not, you have hazarded the suspicion of
intolerable ignorance: And undoubtedly this Article alone, gives full
assurance, that this Letter could not possibly be the act of many, nor of any
one, that had either charity, leisure, or learning in any great abundance. The
first Theorem (so you term them in derision) not familiar to you common
Christians, Hook-booke. 5 page 244.
is this: Ten the number of natures perfection: In which place Master Hooker,
speaking of paying of tithes, says, as Abraham gave voluntarily, as Jacob
vowed to give God tithes, so the law of Moses did require, at the hands of al
me^, the self same kind of tribute; the tenth of their corn, wine, oil, fruit,
cattle, and whatsoever increase, his heavenly providence should send: Plin.
hist. nature. lib. 12. cap. 14.
Insomuch that Painims being herein followers of their steps, paid tithes also.
Imagine we, that this was for no cause done, or that there was not some
special inducement, to judge the tenth of our worldly profits, the most
convenient for Gods portion? are not all things by him created in such sort,
that the forms which give their distinction are number; their operations
measure; and their matter weight; three being the mystical number of Gods
unsearchable perfection, within himself; seven the number whereby our
perfections through grace, are most ordered; and ten the number of Natures
perfections (for the beauty of nature is order, and the foundation of order is
number, and of number ten the highest we can rise unto, without iteration of
numbers under it) could nature better acknowledge the power of the God of
nature, then by assigning unto him, that quantity, which is the continent of
all that she possesses? Now let the Reader judge, what reason you had to
mislike that he called ten, the number of natures perfections. But in this the
injury you do to Master Hooker, Philo. Iud. Lib. 4. biblio.
is not all; for thorough his sides you wound one, upon whom, as Sixtus
Senensis says, all the commendations of the Christian Fathers, are poured out;
for he takes this speech out of Philo Iudaeus, in whom there are many
excellent things to this purpose, and who was in all kind of learning,
incomparably the most excellent in his time; in honor of whom the ancient
Romans placed his works, as everlasting monuments in their public Library.
The second is this: Angels Hook. lib. 5. page 190.
the hand that draws out celestial motion: Where M. Hooker speaking of the
reuolutio^ of time, which brings with it, a reiteration of Saints memories,
says; as the substance of God alone is infinite, and has no kind of
limitatio^; so likewise his continuance, is from everlasting to everlasting,
and knows neither beginning nor end. Which demonstrable conclusion, being
presupposed, it follows necessarily, that besides him, all things be finite:
it cannot be but that there are bounds, without the compass whereof their
substance does not extend; if in continuance also limited, they all have it,
cannot be denied their set and their certain terms, before which they had
no being at al. This is the reason why first we do most admire those things
which are greatest; and secondly, those things which are ancientest, because
the one, are less distant from the infinite substance; the other, from the
infinite continuance of God. Out of this we gather, that only God has true
immortality or eternity, that is to say, continuance; wherein there grows no
difference by addition of hereafter unto now, whereas the noblest, and
perfectest things besides, have continually through continuance, the time of
former continuance lengthened: so that they could not heretofore be said to
have continued so long as now; neither now so long, as hereafter. Gods own
eternity is the hand which leads Angels in the course of their perpetuity,
the hand that draws out celestial motion, the line of which motion, and the
thread of time, are spun together. What could have been more excellently
spoken, to have set down the frame, and dependence of things, even Hooker,
Book 5. page 61. Psalm. 149.
with that lightsom affection of joy, wherein God delights, when his saints
praise him; and so lively resembles the glory of the saints in heaven,
together with the beauty wherein Angels have appeared unto men, that, they
which are to appear, for men, in the presence of God as Angels, if they were
left to their own choice, and would choose any, could not easily devise a
garment of more decency for such a service. Now whosoever considers that the
Angels are said to come out of the Temple, clothed in pure and bright linne^,
Revel. 15.6.
and that the Angel at Christ's sepulcher, sat clothed in a long white garment,
Mark. 16.5. Act. 1.10.
and those Angels that appeared at Christ's ascension, in white apparel, and
that white is the color of brightness, and brightness an adiunct of the glory
of Saints, will neither deride nor mislike this speech, that Church attire with
us, lively resembles the glory of Saints in heaven. The fourth thing is this:
Daily bruises spiritual promotions use to take, by often falling. Io the
Letter. page 37, lin. 2.
what be the bruises and falls that spiritual promotions ordained by Christ
do or can take? M. Hooker weighing the manifold impedime^ts, which hinder the
usual consultation of providing able preachers in every parish, to instruct
the people; alleges the multitude of parishes; the paucity of Schools; the
manifold discouragements, which are offered to men's inclinations, that way; the
penury of the Ecclesiastical estate; the irrecouerable loss of so many livings
of principal value, clean taken away from the Church long since, by being
appropriated; the daily bruises yt spiritual promotions use to take by often
falling; the want of something in certain statutes, which concern the state of
the Church; the too great facility of many Bishops; the stony hardness of too
many patrons hearts, not touched with any feeling in this case: who is there now
that considers this discourse, but sees easily, the propriety of his
speech, and without an interpreter the truth of it? that even some of the best
of our spiritual preferments have received great bruises by often falling;
where the fault has bin, that they have light so hard, some men know, though
you and I do not. And I heartily wish, for the good of the Church, that you were
able to prove, that he had spoken false in this; to the intent that our
reverend Fathers, the Bishops might be more beneficial to the inferior
Clergy; more bountiful in hospitality; more honorable in their attendance;
more able in their paiments to their prince; more forward in the memorable
works of devotion; building of hospitals, colleges, and such like: which no
doubt, some yet do out of their poverty: And last of all, more conveniently
provided for the avoiding of such base means, as are a hindrance of religion,
a wrong to the Church and a dishonor to their profession. The next thing is
this; multiplied petitions Hooker answering those, who dislike in our prayers
the multiplied petitions, for earthly things says; it must be considered, that
the greatest part of the world, Lib. 5 Page 71
are they, which be furthest off from perfection; such being better able by
sense to discern the wants of this present life, then by spiritual capacity
to apprehend things above sense, which tend to their happiness in the world to
come, are in that respect more apt to apply their minds, even with hearty
affection and zeal, at the least, unto those branches of public prayer,
wherein their own particular is moved; and by this means, there steals upon
them a double benefit. First, because that good affection, which things of
smaller account have once set on work, is by so much the more easily raised
higher: and Secondly, in that the very custom of seeking so particular aid,
and relief, at the hands of God, does by a se^ret contradiction, withdraw them
from indeuoring to help themselves, by those wicked shifts which they know can
never have his allowance, whose assistance their prayer seeks. These
multiplied petitions of worldly things in prayer, have therefore besides their
direct use, a service whereby the Church under hand, through a kind of heavenly
fraud, takes therewith, the souls of men, as with certain baits. I know not
in this point what could have bin spoken, either more soundly, more plainly, or
more agreeable to this purpose. And therefore it must needs be in you, either
delicacie, or ignorance to account this a Theorem of speculatiue doctrine; the
very metaphor of baytes, being not unfitly applied, even Hook* lib* 5. page
154.155.
and the Holy Ghost, binding also himself to ad in process of time, what
grace soever shall be further necessasary for the attainment of everlasting
life. Here you ask of Master Hooker, what warrant he has of present grace
in the very work wrought of baptism: where by the way you cu^ningly (with a
truth of his) mingle an error of your own; for who ever doubted but that
baptism does bestow the remission of sins, and yet not this, as we have often
told you, for the very work wrought of baptism. The Hook. lib. 5. page 160.
The sign of the Cross, as we use it, is in some sort a mean to work our
preservation, from reproach, and Christ's mark. It seems, that this speech has
made you to forget that civil respect, which had bin fit to one whom worthily
you ought to esteem, as reverend; for very rudely you say, when, where, or
how, did Christ tell thee, that the sign of the Cross (as we use it) is the
mark of Christ, and preserves from reproach? Be not carried more violently then
the cause requires: for Master Hooker does not affirm, but says, shall I
say? and adds, surely the mind which as yet has not hardened it self in
sin, is seldom provoked thereunto, in any gross and grievous manner, but
natures secret suggestio^ obiecteth against it, ignominy as a bar; which
conceit being entered into that palace of man's fancy, the gates whereof have
imprinted in the^ that holy sign, which brings forthwith to mind whatsoever
Christ has wrought, and we vowed against sin; it comes hereby to pass,
that Christian men, never want a most effectual, though a silent teacher, to
avoid whatsoever may deservedly procure shame. Let us not think it
superfluous, that Christ has his mark applied unto that part, where
bashfulnes appears; in token, that they which are Christians, should at no
time be ashamed of his ignominy. The last words misliked by you, in this
article are these. Assuredly whosoever Hook. lib. 5. page 261
will hardly judge it meet, or good, that the Angels assisting them, should be
driven to betake themselves unto other stations, although by nature they were
not tied where now they are, but had change also else where, as long as their
absence from beneath, might but tollerably be supplied, and by descending,
their rooms above, should become vacant. Here wholly mistaking Master Hooker,
you run into a strange discourse of Angels, of their attendance upon the elect,
and ask where it is revealed that they attend upon celestial orbs, and
whether it be not sin, to leave their natural charge; and here you ask,
whether he mean not the Angels that fell: These, and such like, are those
collections which your judgment thath gathered, wholly mistaking the scope of
this excellent speech. For he shows here that there may be just reasons of
non-residence, in Universities, in Bishops houses, and last of all for their
employment in the families of noble men, or in princes courts. For assuredly
whosoever does well observe, how much all inferior things, depend upon the
orderly courses, and motions of those greater orbs, will hardly judge it either
meet or good, that the Angels assisting them, should be driven to betake
themselves, unto other stations; although by nature, they were not tied, where
now they are, but had charge also else where; as long as their absence from
beneath, might but tolerably be supplied, and by descending, the roumes above,
should become vacant. Who understands not now, that by orbs are meant those
great persons, which by their motion do carrye inferiors with them? And by
Angels assisting them, are meant those grave divines, which are by their
wisdom, holiness, and direction, to moderate their motion? Why then, being
but a parable, or an allegory, run you to examination of orbs, of Angels, of
motion; and yet these are things so well known, in the Philosophers schools,
as that Master Hooker, had no reason to fear, to take a similitude from them,
without being called to examination of the truth of the thing it self. And
this may suffice, for a moderate answer, to those things which in this article
are termed by you speculatiue doctrine. Only I must ad this, which Master
Hooker notes in a troublesome adversary, with whom he had to deal, that in
this article, as often* in this letter besides, there are two faults
predominant, which would tire out any, which should answer to every point,
severally; first unapt speaking of school controversies: and secondly, a very
untoward reciting of M. Hookers words, that as he which should promise to draw
a man's countenance, and did indeed express the parts, at least the most of
them truly, but peruersely place them, could not represent a more offensive
visage, then a man's own would be to himself; so have you dealt with M.
Hooker, where your misplacing of those words, which he has uttered, has
framed a picture, which as you direct men to look at it, little differs from
the shape of an ugly monster: for answer whereunto, this labor is
sufficient; wherein I have set down, both his words, and meaning, in such
sort, that where your accusation does deprave the one, or that either you
misinterpret, or without just cause, mislike the other; it will appear so
plainly, that to the indifferent reader, I shall not need to ad any further
answer: for any man may see, that you have judged his words, as they do
colors, which look upon them with green spectacles, and think that which
they see is green, when indeed that is green whereby they see. The best
remedy will be to use charity, where judgment wants.

ARTICLE XIX Of Calvin and the reformed Churches.
WHere the persons of particular men, is the subject of our discourse, we
cannot well either be too short, or too charitable; for of the best if we
speak much, something will be wrested to a hard construction, if uncharitably
we shall seem to follow the practice of those, which have no other skill, to
overthrow a general cause, but by wounding of some particular men. And
howsoever that cause must needs be weak, which either has his beginning, or
his greatest strength, from one private man; yet doubtless in common reason it
is no small policy, to blemish a truth, by detracting from the sincerity and
religion of such, as are the principal defenders of it. How much this part of
the world has cause to esteem of Luther, and Calvin, there is no man of any
learning that can be ignorant; in which respect, notwithstanding, by some me^,
a threefold wrong is don unto our Church. First, to make the^ authors of that
religion amongst us, which by many hundredth years, was far more ancient then
they both were: Secondly, to lay the infirmities that were in the^ (as being
me^, it were too great ignorance and flattery, to acquit them from al
imperfections in that kind) even upon the religion it self, which had no more
affinity with the faults that were in them, then they had, with the framing of
that religion, which proceeded first from no weaker author then God himself.
The last, is ye wrong, which our church has even from those, who undoubtedly
would seem in their zealous affection, exceedingly to favor both. The ground
of which wrong proceeds only from hence, that those persons, and y^
government, which place, time and other necessities, caused them to frame,
ought without exception, to be an absolute pattern to all the Churches that
were round about them: In so much, that that government, which was at the first
so weak, that without the staff of their approbation, who were not subject
unto it themselves, it had not brought others under subjection, began now to
challenge an universal obedience, and enter into open conflict, with the most
Churches of Europe; but especially with those, which in desperate extremity had
bin releiuers of it. Thus, because some few, who neither in quality nor place
were much distant from Geneua, in opinion of Master Calvin, were content to
follow their form of government, others not weighing the riches of that mercy
which had made their own Church too great and honorable, to be framed to so
narrow and poor ascantling, began stormingly to repine, that presently al
things were not so bared to ye pattern of those Churches, which in their
opinions were most reformed. So that whatsoever any man spoke or wrote, in
disallowance of that, to be our model to beframed by, or truly to the laying
open of those conflictes, (conquered with great policy) which Master Calvin
had in the first establishing of that government, all sounded harshly in the
ears of these men, and was plainly construed to be a direct disgracing of
Master Calvin, which could be nothing else (as you say) but a discovery of a
popish and unsound affection. Where before I answer to this, I must first tell
them, that if they should with the like importunity seek to frame us to the
example of the primitive church, in respect of government, we should tell them
that Israel are not bound to the same things in Canaan, that they were in the
desert; nor that those reverend Fathers (...) Bishops, who succeed in that
apostolic charg, are not for their maintenance and state, (though the
authority be all one) to be framed to that poverty which was the portion of
those, who planted, and governed the first Churches. This being then no such
necessity, but that the Church may lawfully use, even those benefits wherewith
God has blessed her, setting her feet in a large room, why should men
without cause recall her back again, to her days of mourning, or feeding her,
with the bread of tears, coupe her up in those narrow limits of subjection,
and want, seeing God in his mercy has provided for her now, the same government
to be administered, in a richer manner? Now how far all men are bound to speak
of those, whom they reverence and love, and yet in some cases do think not
safe to follow, this is that error that has deceived many. For from hence, the
private ouersights of those (who, how famous and excellent soever, were but
men) have grown, by the violence of some of their followers, to be stiffly
maintained, as undoubted truths, as though there were no difference betwixt
being a man not always erring, Aliud est virtutem habere, aliud nihil nisi
virtutem habere. Ber.
and not erring at all: The one is a worthy happiness granted to some few; the
other a special privilege not permitted to any, merely man, no not to
Master Calvin himself. This serves to teach us, that for those things which
we do and believe, we have better warrant then man's invention; and that no
man, how excellent soever, (except Christ) may, or ought precisely, to be
followed in all that he does. For thus while we ad unto men that honor, a great
part whereof peradventure they deserve, we detract from that truth, which we
make no where to be found, but in those, who inseparably are followers of their
steps. That Master Calvin (who is made by you, the unpleasing subject of this
article) was, (as Master Hooker terms him) the wisest man incomparably, that
ever the French Church did enjoy, since the hour it inioyed him; I think
there is no man of any reading, that much doubts: and surely for learning,
and unwearied pains in his calling, men of best judgment and understanding,
would be ready enough, to give him that which belonged unto him, if some
private men out of their love and zeal, did not too greatly ouerlode him with
it: For doubtless, we should be injurious to virtue it self, if we did
derogate from them, whom their industry has made great. Two things there are
of principal moment, which have deservedly procured him honor throughout all
the world; He preached yearly 286. sermons, he read 186. lectures every year.
the one his exceeding pains in composing the Institution of Christian
religion, from which most have gleaned, that have written since; the other his
no less industrious travails, in the exposition of holy scripture; in which
two things, whosoever they were, that after him bestowed their labor, he
gained the advantage of prejudice against them, if they gainsaide; and of glory
above them, if they consented. Now out of this (so hardly are we taught to
keep a mean) proceeded this intolerable fault, that many were desirous, in
an opinion of his worth, that all Churches together with his learning, should
swallow up, without making choice, whatsoever other imperfections remained in
him. So that of what account Peter Lumbard was in the church of Rome (whom for
singular reverence they called the Master of the Sentences) of the same, and
more, amongst the Preachers of reformed Churches, Master Calvin was: And they
only were judged the perfectest divines, which were skilfullest in Caluins
writings. His books almost were reputed the very Canon for controversies to be
judged by. To this extremity, and far greater, the partial affection of love
carried a number of wise men, who from approbation growing to strong praises;
from praises, to admiration; from admiration, to a tyrannous opinion; that it
was wholly unlawful, in any thing to dissent from him. So that now, it was
almost as necessary to dispraise him, as to commend him; because what with
discretion, the Church before might have used with much profit, she scarce now
could admit, without a general suspicion, thorough all Christendom, that we
durst not in any thing dissent from him. And doubtless, in some weak minds,
that which at first was but praise, in the end was not many steps short of
idolatry. So that the practice of Ezechias, 2. King. 18.3
in breaking to pieces that serpent of brass, whereunto the children of Israel
had burnt incense, was not altogether unfit to be used in this case. For in
kingdoms it is high time, either to cut off, or disgrace those, whom the
multitude are willing to puff up; when (neglecting their own ruin) they are
content to bury the happiness of their country, in the ashes of another
greatness. Thus God both in mercy and judgment (in mercy to them that die,
and in judgment to those that are left behind) does before the fullness of
years, cut off those men, whom other men's erring affections have advanced too
high, conueying that from the presence of unstable minds, whereunto desert and
weakness, whilst it was in our sight, gave strength that it could bewitch.
This oftentimes I confess has been my private contemplation, when I have
seen Parents untimely, to loose their children, In whom they took most pride;
Churches, those persons of greatest ornament; the common wealth those, that
were worthiest of all honor; as if God had bin jealous, that these would have
stolen our honor, and love from him. And therefore wise was the answer of that
mother, who in one day losing both her husband, and her two sons, said, I
know O Lord, what thou seek, my whole love: Which she thought peradventure
might have been less, if those things had bin left unto her, which she found
her self apt for to love too much. And therefore as virtuous men have
voluntarily disclosed their own infirmities (scratching as it were the face of
beauty) least others should too much admire them; so I persuade my self, that
Master Calvin, if he now lived, would much worse esteem of your fond
commendation, then of those speeches, which M. Hooker out of judgment, does
write of him. He was doubtless, as Bishop Jewel calls him, Defense of the
Apol. 2. part. page 149. (...).
a reverend Father, and a worthy ornament of Gods Church; and surely they do
much amiss, who have sought by unjust slanders against him (a thing too
usual) to derogate from that truth, whose strength was not builded upon man's
weakness. This therefore being the practice of our adversaries, you ask M.
Hooker, what moved him to make choice of that worthy pillar of the Church above
all other, to traduce him, and to make him a spectacle before all Christians?
Give me leave to answer you for him, who undoubtedly would have given a far
better answer for himself, if he had lived; There is not one word that
sounds in that whole discourse, to any other end, toward Master Calvin, but
to show how his great wisdom, wrought upon their weakness; his knowledge
upon their ignorance; his gravity upon their inconstancy; his zeal upon their
disorders; only to establish that government, which howsoever not necessary
for other places, was fit enough peradventure for that town. Neither need the
present inhabitants thereof, take it in evil part, that the faultiness of
their people heretofore, was by Master Hooker so far forth laid open, seeing
he says no more, then their own learned guides, and pastors have thought
necessary to discover unto the world. But what, say you, has Master Calvin
done against our Church, that he should be singled out, as an adversary?
Surely that harm (though against his will) which never will be soundly cured,
so long as our Church has any in it to spurn at the reverend authority of
Bishops. For howsoever those Ecclesiastical laws, 12. of November. 1557 13.
Nouemb. 1561. 19. Feb. 1560.
established in Geneua (wherein notwithstanding are some strange things) might
be fit enough to pass for statutes, for the government of a private College,
or peraduture some small University; yet to make them a rule, for so great, so
rich, so learned a kingdom as this is, must needs be a vain desire of
novelty, idly to attempt; and a thing in nature, impossible to perform. And
therefore he cannot be free, as an occasion, though no cause of all those
troubles, which have disquieted our Church for these many years. But it may
be M. Hooker spoke not thus against M. Calvin of himself, but persuaded
either by our adversaries, in whose mouth, he is an invincible champion, or
incited unto it, by some of the Reverend Fathers of our Church; and therefore
you desire him to resolve you in that point. Can it possibly be, that you
should think him a man of so great simplicity, either to be moved to attempt
it, by the persuasion of others, or having attempted it, that he must needs
disclose it? are all those flatterings of the Bishops; that alleging of their
authorities, ended in this, to accuse them as Authors of doing that, which your
conscience makes you accuse to be evil done? Could you persuade yourselfe,
that those reverend Fathers, whose authorities you allege in the praise of
Calvin, would be drawn to substistute another, to dispraise him whom
themselves commended? Is it not a thing differing from sense? void of reason?
contrary to religion? And if that be a fault that M. Hooker is commended by our
adversaries, in no construction, it can be concluded to be his fault. This
peradventure may commend them, who are ready to approve learning, judgment,
and moderation, even in those who are adversaries, but no way can touch those,
whom they thus commend: Unless we make the conclusion to light heavily upon
the best, both for place, wisdom, and learning that our Church has. Have not
in all ages, the Heathen thus commended the Christians? and did not Libanius,
thus think Gregory most worthy to succeed him, if he had not been a
Christian? Can we in reason deny, Julian his learning, because an Apostata? or
Bellarmine, and others, because they have written against us? No, we willingly
give the^ that due, that belongs unto them, and hold it not unmeet, to receive
even from their mouths, without suspicion of treachery, that commendations
which are but the recompense of a just desert. The terms of hostility are too
violent, and unreasonable, which deny us thus far to communicate with our
very enemies. But, you say, this was pride in M. Hooker, to contemn all those
of our own Church, as too weak to encounter with him; and therefore he must
raise Master Calvin out of his sweet bed of rest, to contend against him. And
here you uncharitably make a comparison betwixt Golias and Master Hooker; only
you say unlike in this, that Golias was content to challenge one living and
present in the army, demanded, but chose not; sought for one, that was alive,
and vaunted not over the dead; in all which respects by your censure, Master
Hooker is more presumptuous. To speak the least which is fit to be answered in
this place, surely, he which will take upon him to defend that there is no
oversight in this accusation, must beware left by such defenses, he leave not
an opinion dwelling in the minds of men, that he is more stiff to maintain
what he has spoken, then careful to speak nothing, but that which justly may
be maintained; that he has not shunned to encounter those, even the best of
that faction in our land, your selves can witness: that he names M. Calvin,
only to this end, to show the author of that Discipline, which he was to
handle, you must needs confess; that he rather reproved another state, Aetas
praese^s corrigitur dum praeterita suis meritis obiurgatur. Gregor.
then discovered the violent and uncharitable proceedings to establish it at
home, it was his wisdom: for we know that the age present is corrected, when
the age past is justly rebuked for the same fault. And there cannot be a better
means to cure our disorder at home, then by discovering the effects that it
has wrought abroad. Now, that which principally discovers that you are not
such, as in the title of this letter, you term your selves, is, that you make
not Calvin, but Christ himself the author of this discipline; who, as you say,
raised up diverse men, in diverse places, as Oecolampadius, Swinglius, Suychius,
Philip, Bucer, Capito, and Miconius; and ^aught them, by the same spirit, out
of the same holy scripture, the same doctrine, and commandment of truth and
righteousness. In this you bewray what you are; and how truly you favor our
present state, in giving so honorable testimony of that Church government,
which has bin so much oppugned by the Fathers of our Church: In the
parliament. 29. martii. 1585. the Q. oration.
Nay so much misliked by the Queen her self, as appears by her most eloque^t
speech against those reformers. And I must needs tell you, that those who have
taken upon them the defense thereof, are only able to confirm it, not by
places of scripture, but by poor and marue^lous slight conjectures, collected
from them. I need not give instance in any one sentence so alleged: for that I
think the instance of any alleged otherwise not easily to be given. A very
strange thing sure it were, that such a discipline as you speak of, should be
taught by Christ and his Apostles in the word of God, and no Church ever has
found it out nor received it till this present time: contrariwise, the
government, against which you bend yourselues, to be observed every where,
through all generations, and ages of the Christian world, no Church ever
perceiving the word of God, to be against it. Find but one Church (one is not
much) upon the face of the whole earth, that has bin ordered, by your
discipline, or has not bin ordered by ours, that is to say, by Episcopal
regiment, sithence the time that the blessed Apostles were here conversant.
T.C. lib. 1. pa. 97
But you complain of it, as an injury, that men should be willed to seek for
examples, and paterns of government in any of those times, that have bin before:
It is to small purpose, that some daughter Churches have learned to speak
their mothers dialect. In one word to conclude this article, such is naturally
our affection, that whom in great things we mightily admire, in them we are
not persuaded willingly, that any thing should be amiss. The reason whereof is,
that as dead flies putrefie the ointment of the apothecary, Eccles. 10.1.
so a little folly, him that is in estimation for wisdom. This in every
profession has too much authorized, the judgments of a few: this with Germans
has caused Luther, and with many other Churches Calvin, to prevail in all
things. But thou O Lord, art only holy, thou only art just, who permittest the
worthiest vessels of thy glory, to be in some things blemished, with the stain
of humane frailty, even for this cause, least we should esteem of any man,
above that which behooves.

ARTICLE XX. Of Schoolmen, Philosophy, and Popery.
Philosophy tells us (if it be lawful for me to use so much Philosophy)
that natural motions in the end are swifter, but violet are more slow; and
therefore heavy things, the lower they descend, do move faster; and by so much
also they move slower, by how much they ascend higher. It seems that the
accusations in this letter were such, as had their first motion, rather from
the violence of some affection, then from any natural inclination to
understand the truth. For surely, though I take not upon me to censure any man
(being my self clothed with so many wants) yet in my weak opinion, those,
that would desire are solution of such things, as overthrow the foundation of
the Church amongst us, which in your le^ter you profess, should hardly
esteem, the right use of Philosophers and school learning, to be an
accusation of that kind. So that whereas, at the first your objections seemed
to move with a greater strength, now in the end, they grow weak like the
stroke of a man that is half tired. But I have final reason to complain of
this, which is mine own advantage: for without the armor of other learning,
only in the strength of reason, I du^st encounter a stronger man then my self,
in this, wherein you accuse Master Hooker; that the right use of Schoolmen,
and Philosophers, is no hindrance, or disgrace to true divinity. And therefore,
whereas you charge him, In the letter page 43.
that in all his discourse for the most part Aristotle and the ingenious
Schoolmen, almost in all points have some finger; and that reason is highly
set up against holy Scripture, and such like: I verily persuade my self, that
herein he has committed no unlawful thing. For those school employments, are
acknowledged by grave and wise men, not unprofitably to have bin invented; the
most approved for learning and judgment do use them without blame; the use of
them, has bin well liked, by those that have written in this kind; the quality
of the readers of his books, though not of the most, yet of those whom the
matter concerned most, was such, as he could not but think them of capacity
very sufficient, to conceive harder learning then he has used any; the cause
he had in hand, did in my opinion necessarily require those schoolmen and
philosophers that he has used: for where a cause is strangely mistaken, for
want of distinctions, what other way was there for him, but by distinctions to
lay it open? That so it might appear unto all men whether it were consonant to
truth or no; and although you and I peradventure, being used to a more
familiar, and easy learning, think it unmeet, to admit, approve, or
frequent the schools; yet our opinions are no Canons for Master Hooker: And
although you being troubled in mind, do think that his writings, seem like
fetters, and manacles; yet no doubt he has met both with readers and hearers,
more calmely affected; which have judged otherwise. But it is a strange
presumption in my opinion, In your letter page 35. lin. 29.
for private men, such as profess themselves to be but common Christians,
(which your writings, besides your own confession, do make manifest) to
prescribe a form, either of writing or teaching, so plain and familiar, or
rather indeed so empty, and shallow, that no man may doubt, how unlearned
soever, to give his censure. Must all knowledge be humbled so low, that it must
stoop to the capacity of the meanest reader? But the Fathers, say you, have
misliked it. Indeed I confess, there is an overmuch use, Cranmer, Luther.
which is evil, in all things, where there is not an absolute necessity.
Besides things comparatively spoken, in regard of true understanding of the
scriptures, is no rule for warrant that they are to be misliked simply. For
Stapleton himself confesses, in his cautions of expounding the scripture,
Lib. 10. cap. 11.
that the Schoolmen have not a certain, and infallible authority of
interpreting; which as to maintain must needs be great simplicity, so to
dislike all use of them is intolerable unthankfulness. But in this accusation,
it is not apparent what you mean, when you allege out of Luther, that school
divinity, has banished from us, the true and sincere divinity. If this were
the direct judgment of Luther, to condemn all school divinity; yet it is a
strange oppositio^ to allege the sentence of one man, against the practice,
and authorities of the best Fathers. Neither do we understand which it is (the
old or the new) that so much offendes you; by old, we mean that Scholasticall
kind of expounding, which the most eloquent Fathers lately comen from the
schools of Rhetoricians, and Philosophers, have brought with them, to the
interpreting of holy Scriptures; that thus they might be able to teach, to
delight, to persuade; a matter fitting al, but not easy for any, that is not
excellently furnished with humane learning. In lib. de art metr. nobilissim
(...) Hispanorum Scholasticum.
In this sense Beda calls Prudentius the most noble Schooleman of the
Spaniards, whom it is like in the severity of your judgment, you would have
dispraised; and Gennadius in the Catalogue of famous writers, reckons up
Museus, Iulianus, Eucherius, and diverse others, amongst the Schoolmen; that is,
amongst the chief professors of Schoole-eloquence. Saint Hierome affirms of
himself, In Com. Epist. ad Ti^um.
that many things in Divinity, he handled with School o^nament; and of Saint
Paul he says, that when he preached at Athens, upon occasion of the
inscription of the Altar to the unknown God, he handled it with a
scholasticall kind of elegancie. Is this then that which so much offends you?
Was it an ornament in these Fathers, and many others, and is it a blemish in M.
Hooker? But peradventure it is the new and later kind of School interpreting
that you mislike; whose method is Philosophical disputing, made of
Aristotelian learning; this sprang up about some four hundredth and odd years
past, Ann. 1130.
in the time of Lotharius the second, Emperor of Rome, who recovering out of
darkness the Roman laws, caused them publicly to be read, and to be
expounded by diverse Writers; by this means divinity began to wax cold,
until by imitation of these men, certain devout Monks, and others,
undertook the like in expounding the holy Scripture; by which means even
until this day, Sixth. Sin, bib. Sanct. lib. 3. page 180.
there remains in the Schools ten orders of their usual expounding; by
Concordance, History, Postill, Question, Lecture, Compendium, or Abridgement,
Sermon, Meeter, Meditation, all which no doubt of it in your opinion, are
esteemed unlawful and unprofitable: Now, many that were excellent in this
kind, the Church both knows how to use with great profit, and in recompense
of their labor, has given them titles, with much honor. Thus Alexander
Hales, who made his Sum, that excellent work, by commandment of
Innocentius the fourth was called the fountain of life, Pons vita.
because of that lively knowledge, that flowed from him: he was Master to
Bonauenture, a scholar not inferior to himself, of whom he was wont to say,
that in Bonauenture he thought Adam sinned not; meaning, for that illumination,
which was in him (and doubtless there was much in him) as though he had not
been darkened by the fall of Adam; and therefore the Church called him the
Seraphicall Doctor. To these Aquinas was not inferior, who came so near unto
Saint Austin, that some thought, he had all his works by heart, and by a
common proverb it was spoken, that the soul of Saint Austin dwelt in Aquinas;
in whom above all the rest, four contrarieties were said to excel; abundance,
brevity, Moritur* ae^at. 48. ^n. Dom. 1274.
facility, security: In respect whereof, he gained the title to be called
Angelical. Now for any man to follow the steps of these, though treading sure,
as having more light, can any man in reason account it to be a fault? Is there
no other matter of reproof in Master Hookers writings, but that virtues must
be faults? But he seeks to prove matters of divinity with the strength of
reason: Indeed this is a great fault, which if many had not been afraid to
commit, the world had not been filled with so many idle, and unreasonable
discourses. But so it is, that through an ignorant zeal of honoring the
scriptures, the name of the light of nature, is made hateful with men; the
star of reason, and learning, and all other such like helps, begins no
otherwise to be thought of, then as if it were an unlucky Comet, or as if God
had so accursed it, that it should never shine, or give light in things,
concerning our duty, any way toward him; but be esteemed as that star, R^uel.
8.10.
in the Revelation called wormwood: Which being fallen from heaven, makes
rivers, and waters, in which it falls so bitter, that men tasting them, die
thereof. A number there are, who think they cannot admire, as the ought, the
power and authority of the word of God, if in things divine, they should
attribute any force to man's reason; for which cause they never use reason so
willingly, as to disgrace reason. Then usual and common discourses are to this
effect; The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, Ob. 1.
1. Cor. 2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. For answer where unto we say, that concerning the
ability of Reason, to search out, and to judge of things divine, if they be
such, as those properties of God, and those duties of men toward him, which
may be conceived by attentive consideration of heaven and earth, we know that
of mere natural men, Romans 1.2.
the Apostle testifies, how they know both God and the law of God; other
things of God there be which are neither so found, nor though they be showed,
can ever be approved, without the special approbation of Gods good grace, and
spirit: such is the suffering, and rising again of our Savior Christ, Act.
25.19 Act. 26.24. 1. Cor. 2.24.
which Eestus, a mere natural man, could not understand; therefore Paul
seemed in his eyes to be learnedly mad. This shows, that nature has need of
grace, to which Master Hooker was never opposite, in saying that grace may have
use of nature. Ob. 2. Col. 2.8.
But Paul charge the Colossians to beware of Philosophy, that is to say,
such knowledge as men, by natural reason are able to attain. Sol.
I confess, Philosophy we are warned to take heed of, not that Philosophy,
which is true and sound knowledge, attained by a natural discourse of reason;
but that Philosophy, which to bolster heresy, or error, (which I am sure
Master Hooker does not) casts a fraudulent show of reason, upon things which
are indeed unreasonable; and by that means, as by a stratageme, spoyleth the
simple, which are not able to withstand such cunning. He that gives warning to
take heed of an enemies policy, does not give counsel to avoid all policy;
but rather to use all provident foresight, and circumspection, least our
simplicity be ouerreacht by cunnin^ sleights: The way not to be inueigled, by
them, that ar^ so guilefull through skill, is thoroughly to be instructed in
that, which makes skilful against guile; and to be armed with that true and
sincere Philosophy, which does teach against that deceitful, Ob. 3.
and vain which spoileth. But have not the greatest troublers of the Church
bin the greatest admirers of humane reason? Has their deep and profound skill
in secular learning made the^ the more obedient to the truth, and not armed
them rather against it? Indeed many great philosophers have bin very unsound in
belief, Sol.
and yet many sound in belief have bin great Philosophers. Could secular
knowledge bring the one sort unto ye love of christian faith? nor Christian
faith, the other sort out of love with secular knowledge. The harm that
heretics did, was to such, as by their weakness were not able to discern
between sound, and deceitful reasoning, and the remedy against it was ever,
the skill of the ancient Fathers, to discover it. In so much that Cresconius
the heretic complained greatly of Saint Austin, as you do of Master Hooker,
for being too full of logical subtilties. Ob. 4.
But the word of God in it self is absolute, exact, and perfect, and therefore
needless to add any humane or school learning; for those weapons are like
the armor of Saul, rather cumbersome then needful; and with these has
Master Hooker filled his writings. Sol.
I answer, there is in the World no kind of knowledge, whereby any part of
truth is seen, but we justly account it precious: yea that principal truth,
in comparison whereof, all other truth is vile, may receive from it, some kind
of light; whether it be that Egyptian, Act^ 7.22. Dan. 1.17. 1. King. 4.29.30*
Act. 22.3.
and Chaldean wisdom mathematical, wherewith Moses and Daniel were furnished;
or that natural, moral, and civil wisdom, wherein Solomon excelled all men;
or that rational, and oratoriall wisdom of the Grecians, which the Apostle
Saint Paul brought from Tharsus; or that Judicial which he learned in
Jerusalem, sitting at the feet of Gamaliel; to detract from the dignity
thereof were to iniure, even God himself; who being that light which none can
approach unto, has sent out these lights, whereof we are capable, as so many
sparkles, resembling the bright fountain from which they rise. And therefore
unto he word of God, being in respect of that end whereunto God ordained it,
perfect, exact, and absolute, we do not add any thing, as a supplement of any
maime, or defect therein; but as a necessary instrument, without which we
could not reap by the scriptures perfection, that fruit, and benefit, which
it yields. In respect of al which places alleged, it must needs seem
strange, that any for the use of school divinity, and humane learning, should
incur that hard suspicion, which you seek to fasten upon M. Hooker, namely,
that he is a privy and subtle enemy, In your letter. page 43.
to the whole state of our Church; that he would have men to deem her Mai^stie
to have done ill, in abolishing the Romish religion; that he would be glad to
see the back-slyding of all reformed Churches; or that he means, to bring in a
confusion of all things; a tolleration of all religions; these, and such like,
are the heavy conclusions, that follow the use of schoolmen, and secular
learning; and the least of those evils, which are likely in your opinion, to be
derived into the heart of our Church and common wealth, from that dangerous
poison which is contained in Master Hookers writings. Surely it is great
pity, that al men should think what they list, or speak openly what they
think; but doubtless it did little move him, when you say that which a greater
the^ you certainly will gainsay. His words in this cause have seemed to you, as
an arrow sticking in a thigh of flesh, and your own as a child, whereof you
must needs be delivered by an hour; but deliberation would have given
peradventure, more ripenes, which now by haste, has, as a thing borne out of
time, been small joy to you that begat it. Therefore I will conclude, with the
speech of the son of Sirach: He that applies his mind to the law of the most
high, Eccle. 39.1.2.3
keeps the sayings of famous men, and enters in also into the secrets of
dark sentences: he seeks out the mystery of grave sentences, verse. 11
and exercises himself in dark parables; though he be dead he shall leave a
greater fame, the^ a thousand: Doubtless this is verified in him, of whom you
have published unto the world so hard a censure.

ARTICLE XXI The style and manner of writing.
AS it is an honor to perform that which is excellent; so it is a virtue to
approve that which is excellently performed; where to be wanting in the first,
may be sloth, or ignorance, but to be wanting in the latter, must needs be
malice. Few there are, or have been in any age, which reaping the due
recompense of their labor, have done that good, which they ought, and have not
received that reward which they ought not. Wise men have thought no otherwise,
but that this common lot, might be their portion; yet the fear thereof, could
not have that power ouerall, to make them in that respect, wholly and
unprofitably silent: Knowing, that even that which they suffered for well doing,
was their honor; and that which they did well, and suffered for it, was others
shame. This vice, in my opinion, is not more usual with any, then with us,
who by reason of the corrupt quality thereof, have imposed a silence to a great
number, who by their writings, doubtless, would have bin very singular
ornaments unto Gods Church: whereas strangers of less merit, have a twofold
advantage. The one, that we read their writings without prejudice of their
persons; the other, that with a desire of nouelty, we greedily devour (as we
do fashions) whatsoever we think to be done by strangers; this only in all
things (how excellent soever) being cause enough of dislike, that it is home
borne; but more justly of silence, that it is disliked. So that when we have
sifted, whatsoever is likely to be reproved, even the last thing to be
examined, is the style itself. Thus have you dealt with Master Hooker, whom
as in all other things, you have set upon the rack; so in this you have taken
upon you far more, the^ beseems either the modesty, or the small learning
that is usually found in such, as profess themselves, to be but common
Christians. For certainly to judge of a style, is not the least point of
learning, though it be the least known: but peremptorily, to dislike, which you
do, is more then only to judge. For this, is but to deliver a special verdict,
as we think our selves; but the other is to take upon us, exactly to tell what
the law is. Some I have seen, excellently writing upon the variety of styles;
and the best, in my opinion, is one Pascalius, who was like enough to judge
well, because he himself wrote an excellent style; yet surely there is in no
point of learning, greater variety of tastes, then there is in this: some
prefer Salust, others Caesar, a third Seneca, a fourth Tacitus; in one word,
every man according to his own fancy. This, as it is in styles, so it is in
the several actions of men; where they are no sooner borne into the world, but
Censure, as a gossip names them. A thing I confess needful, and unfit to be
prohibited, seeing we reap oftentimes, more benefit by our enemies, then our
friends; yet this shows, that the world is unhappy, where the best offices
are performed by our worst acquaintance. If we come to Authors, some dislike
Plato, as Athenaeus did, calling him confused; others say, I only esteem Plato,
who does so cunningly weaue knowledge, and virtue together, as if he said, he
were content to give you knowledge, upon condition, that you should be honest.
Some compared Aristotle to that fish, Sepia a Cuttle.
whose humor is like ink; Liui^ he likes not Trogus, nor Tully Demosthenes;
Lenaeus a servant of Pompeies mislikes Salust; Asenius calls him an affecter;
Quintilian calls Seneca chalk without sand; Galigula dispraised Liuie, as
full of words, and yet negligent, in suppressing the triumphs of Romulus,
gotten by the victory of the Tuscans. Thus Varro (without question a man most
learned) even in the opinion of S. Austin, by one Quintus Rhemius Pal^^on was
called a hog. Surely emulation of learning, and difference, either of opinion,
or manners, breeds a dislike in scholars. This has bin, is, and shall be that
evil, whereunto learned men must be subject in the variety of other men's
censures; nay even those books, which we translate, because they are
excellent, others wish because they are excellent, not to be translated. Surely
it is much easier, (...) 36. hist
says Dio Cassius, to reprehend others, then to moderate our selves. Some are
of so feeble, and weak stomachs, that they loath bread: nay some are of that
inconstant humor, that what they comme^d now, they dispraise the next day; and
what yesterday they dispraisd, they commend to day. For in the beginning of
your Letter, you call it a sweet sound of M. Hookers melodious style; Page 4.
lin. 3. Page 46. lin. 4.
and in another place, you confess that his books are very excellently and
learnedly penned; and yet in this Article, your last scruple is, because his
books are so long and tedious, in a style not usual, and as you think, the
like hard to be found. Where it seems you are desirous to reprehend, if you
could but resolve of the manner how. I dare not take upon me to censure those,
whom you say he is unlike; Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Jewel, Whitgift, Fox,
Fulke: but I persuade my self, that whatsoever their other virtues were,
wherein peradventure they were more eminent, yet doubtless the best of them
that now lives, will acknowledge M. Hookers style to be very excellent. And
although it is unmeet I should compare him with others, whose labors have
been profitable in another kind, yet I hope I may say without offense, that as
profoundly to judge, with sound variety of al learning, was common to him with
diverse others; so to express what he conceived, in the eloquence of a most
pure style, was the felicity almost of himself alone. That honorable Knight S.
Philip Sidney, gave a taste in an argument of recreation, how well that style
would befit an argument of a grauer subject; which it may be is more unpleasing
in the taste of some, because the manner is learned, and the subject is not
agreeing to their humor. Doubtless the perfecting of a style, and especially
of our English style (which in my opinion, refuses not the purest ornaments of
any language) has many mo helps, then those honorable places of learning, the
Universities, can afford. And therefore in those things, which they conceive
(and some of them conceive much) there are found in the Princes court, diverse
most purely eloquent, whom even the best in the Universities may despair to
imitate. And (if I may speak without offense) I am fully persuaded, that M.
Hookers style (if he had had less learning) (a strange fault) (for the weight
of his learning made it too heavy) had bin incomparably the best that ever was
written in our Church. If our English story had been borne to that happiness,
ever to have been attired in such rich ornaments, she might worthily have
been entertained in the best courts that the world has; but all Countries
know our actions have been better done then they have been ^old. Of things
affected we may give a reason, but to ask, as you do, a reason of M. Hooker
for his style, it is all one, as if you asked him why he knew so much. For
doubtless out of judgment he made this choice (in my weak opinion, or strong
fancy) simply the best, and (without comparison) imitable to few. Therefore
your comparison of the bramble was unfit, which by a show deceived you a far
off; for there is much more by a narrow view to be discerned in him, then he
seems to promise at the first sight. Three things you desire with all
instancie. First, to show what arguments he has alleged, which are not to be
found in the answer of that reverend Father unto M. Cartwright. To satisfy you
in this demand, if there were no difference, yet the consent of their
arguments were reason enough, for you to allow M. Hooker, seeing you have given
your approbatio^ of the works of that most reverend Father, Page 46.
whose worthiness no doubt, can receive little honor from your praise; yet you
know, that the whole subject of M. Hookers first four books, is an argument,
as, full of learning, so directly heretofore, not handled by any, that I know.
Secondly, you desire, that if he set forth his other books, which are promised,
that he would be more plain, and sensible. Concerning those three books of
his, which from his own mouth, I am informed that they were finis^^, I know not
in whose hands they are, nor whether ye church shall ever be bettered by so
excellent a work; for as the Church might have been happy, if he had lived to
have written more; so she were not altogether so much harmed, if she might but
enjoy, what he has written. But for you to prescribe him a style, as it is an
authority unfit to assume unto your self, so it were a request, if he lived
impossible to obtain. The L. Keeper.
For as once the greatest of place for judgment of law in our land answered a
client of his in my hearing, who was desirous to have him take information of
his cause, from another lawyer, that seemed more fully acquainted with it; he
will speak (says he) well himself, by his own direction; but if I should
speak by his information, I should speak but like a fool: so I am sure,
howsoever you your self may write, following your own style, yet Master
Hooker by your direction could hardly attain the commendations that himself
had already gaind. Lastly, you wish him to be careful, not to corrupt the
English creed, by philosophy or vain decei^, of Schoolemens newborn
divinity; give me le^ue to exempt you from this fear: for I am fully persuaded,
never any man lived, who would have bin lother, to have bin the author of any
new and unwarranted opinion, which might give but the least show of
co^tradiction, to the faith which our Church professes. Things are not to be
measured by violence of speech, or uncharitable collections; for who are on
Gods side, and who against, our Lord, in his good time, shall reveal. And
seeing you doubt of his soundnes so far (y^ because he makes the church of
Rome a part of the church of christ (which M. Sarauia, Zanchy, and others do,
that you wish him to take heed, that he forget not to give his lawful
Sovereign, her right, and full due) give me leave to set down his words, and
in his words his sound, and fervent affection in this point. When the ruins of
the house of God, (that house which consisting of religious souls, is most
immediately the precious temple of the Holy Ghost) were become not in his fight
alone, but in the ^ies of the whole world, so ^nc^^ding great, that very
superstition began even to feel it self too far grown; The first that with
us, made way to repair the deca^es thereof, was King Henry the eight; the son
and successor of which famous King, as we know, was Edward the Saint. In whom
(for so by the event we may gather) i^ pleased God, righteous ^^d just, to let
England see, what a blessing sin, and iniqui^y would not suffer her to enjoy;
that work, which the one had begun and the other so far proceeded in, was ^n
short space so overthrown, as if almost it had never bin, till such time, as
that God, whose property is to show his mercies then greatest, when they are
nearest to be utterly despaired of, caused in the depth of discomfort, and
darkness, a most glorious star to arise, and on her head settled the Crown, whom
he himself had kept as a lamb from the slaughter of those blondie times, that
the experience of his goodness in her own deliverance, might cause her
merciful disposition, to take so much the more delight, in saving others, whom
the like necessity should press; the continuance of which mercy toward us, in
the abundance of his favor to her, we wish may happily continue so long, as
the Sun indureth. Hitherto Master Hooker. To conclude this small and
imperfect work, Querimonia Ecclesiae. A Book of Scotizing and Geneuatizing.
whereas you join these books of Master Hooker, with two other which you
take to be bellows to blow the coals of sedition; I persuade my self, that
the ages which are to come, shall more then the present, esteem them with high
honor: for mine own part, what I have don in defense thereof, it is neither
from opinion of sufficiency, who know mine own strength in this kind, weaker
then many thousands; nor from a desire of contention, which I hold (howsoever
sometimes needful) the worst employment of all learning; nor from a
willingness to flatter any, a fault (what soever my other infirmities are)
whereunto I was never subject; nor that I thought those would have bin wanting,
who had, both far more learning, and greater reason, to undertake the
defense, then my self had: Wherefore, if there be anything, either unsoundly,
or uncharitably set down (faults, which willingly I would be loath to be
accused of) I submit my self to the Judgment of the Church, and the courteous
admonition of the Christian Reader. But if any man without cause, spurn or
think himself grieved, and find that contained herein, which with judgment,
and sound learning he is able to confute, and be desirous hereafter to receive
my answer, let him set to his name, that writes; otherwise, let him think,
that Libels, personal, and of no moment, are to be rather punished by
authority, then confuted by any man's pen. And so I will heartily pray that no
strife may ever be heard of again, but this, who shall hate strife most, who
shall pursue peace and unity with most desire.

FINIS.

