OF THE OFFICE OF SERVAVNTES, A BOOK MADE IN Latin by one Gylbertus Cognatus
and newely Englyshed.

1534

TO HIS RIGHT VVOVRSHIPFVL MASTER SIR HENRY KNYVET KNIGHT, ^one of the
ienti^men of the kings majesty's privy Chamber.
ACCORDING sir, as ye bad me have I inglishid this little book, of the office
of servants, but not according as I would it were, both to content
tendereares, and also for mine own satisfaction. Trusting your goodness will
with as free a mind receive it, as I also went about it, albeit in many places
I found the same as a glass to see mine own fautes in, (as I can not tell,
and am glad to believe you meant it so) but thereby I find my conscience doble
discharged, in confessing the one, and fulfillynge the other. And I pray God
give your maistership long so to serve, as in a less degree we your
servants owght, and would do.

Your humble servant

Thomas ^^aloner.

FOR AS MUCH AS MOST MEN SVPpose it to skille little, what waitinge men they
take to service, or in what wise they have them, where as in my judgment, not
the smalleste part of a man's good, or evil hap, dependith on the servant, I
have thought good to set fourth this short treatise upon the same matier,
which shall not (as I trust) be unfruitful, both to the masters, and them
that serve also. And first will I treat what choice is to be had in
servants. Then how their ratches, and condicio^s should be tried, Thirdly of
the office, and duty of servants toward their masters, and of theirs like
wise toward their men. For as towthynge the first, saying we chose out a
treinde, we chose out a wife, not unskillful how pestilente a thing a faygned
friend, or an evil manerde wife is, so must a servant also be chosen, who
if he chance good, avails greatly: if otherwise, is no mean hyndrance. For
why, we read of hole howses and families, that have decayed, and ben subverted
through untrusty servants. Then must this said choice be had, as well on
the one party, as the other, in as much as all men agree not with other so
narowly, but that it comes often to pass, what things alone by them selfs
at well sittinge, yet the same put together may be unfitly. So because there is
great diversity of wits among us, you shall find two men perhaps of like
goodness, and perfection, whereof neither may away with other as towchinge
howsholde feleship.

Further we must make our choice not only through our eyes, but our ears
also, for our eyes conceive a certain guess upon the figure, and shape of the
body, called by Greeks the phisenomy, sins Nature has endewid men's bodies
with certain marks, and tokens, whereby (not^ing well) ye may the sooner wite
of a persons inward dispositions, as in some man's look and aspect, there
aperith a manner ferocite, or rudenes, with disceite sittinge in his brows, and
wrath in all his countenance: and though the Gospel warns us to deem no man by
his look, yet is not the guess we conceive upon the notes of a man's body by
these wourdes forbidden, for it speakith only of out ward things: As if we
judge holiness in a man upon his pore and simple arraye, humilnes, for holdinge
down his head, or hard living, because he looked lean. But yet upon the
bodily marckes, which either birth gave, or haunte of vices has induced, a
wise coniecturer may gather many things. These be natural notes, or tokens,
as when the eyes are ouerbigge, or to inwardly hollow, the mouth straiete,
the eybries either slopewise as a fox has, or else joining toguither, the
voice great, or small. Besides these may ye also find in a man's face both
likelyhodes of accustomed drunkinnes, or an yrefull mode in him: but of this
kind of contecturinge albe it the great Aristotle disdaigned not to make a
book, yet ought we give thereto, neither none, ne to ^oche credit, and as the
choice therein requires quick auisement, so ought not the same be ouermoche
curious, lest else perhaps the bargain should never kuytt betwixt them. But
through our ears conceive we a more assured judgment. For as by our eyes we
learn both of thage, and helthines of the person, or what ever tokens else
that Nature has apparently expressed in his forehed, and eyes: as of
unshamefastness, fiersnes, amasednes, with such like: So by our ears
understand we of his country, kinnesfolkes, bringing up, life before led:
toguither with the true stines of his service in case ere then he has served
any body: yea of the self communication had with him may ye conceive no small
intellygence of his conditions, for thereby is a man's figure most perfectly
inseene, according to Socrates sentence. Who unto a young man sent by his
father to be seen and auewed of him, speak (que he) somewhat, whereby I may see
the. Neither is it vnwittye that is told by Diogenes, who at a mart sitting
to be sold for a slave, when the bro ker bad him stand up to show him self:
what neadeth that (que Diogenes) for ar not fishes sold also lieng? meaning
by this that as fishes ar dom, no more is a man ke ping his tongue, known
thouroly, whether he stand, or sit down. It is an evil sign when a servant
reaporteth lewdely by those whom before he dwelled with, or if his talk be
vain, lieng loud without any change of hew. In this case surely not only
the goodness of his nature must be co^sidred, but also how things may be
appliable. for if they agree not in effect, they ne can long hang toguither.
And so, whose nature is somedele yrous, he should chose him servants of a
mylder mood: who so is godly disposed, let him take none but such as ar given
to godliness, or easily may be induced to the same. Then let a courtier pike him
out a man of courtlike fashons. And so must a merchaunt get him those that are
both gaining, and crafty. As touching this purpose, the countreye where they
were borne, imports not a little. for seldom shall ye se a man of Sueuia or
Silesia serve a Prouinsale, or Hollan der: seldomer a Hispanierde coupled with
an Almaigne, and yet shall one hispanierd serve an other living with skarce and
sobre fode, even point devise, that and if the common report is beleuable,
some of them get into service, to the end that with their clean conueyaunce, and
light fingring, they may furnishe out their masters also: the Italians ar more
framed to al men's vsages, yet skant can they susteign any foraine masters: but
above al others the Frenchemen are most seruisable.

THVS hitherto having treated of the choice in servants, rests what proof
belongs to the same: And as unto them that enter religion, is given one year
of probation, so think I it behouing for me^ to hire their servants also
under condition, that if after oone months assay the one likith not the other,
they may the^ break of, which is indifferent to both parties: and then
afterward for so long, and so much may the bargain between them be more
firmly renewed. Let no man stick much at his servants bluntnes in the
beginning, in case he find him apt to be taught, and pliant. Concerning which,
the first assay (as says the old proverb is) if he make a fire handesomely:
For of less wood well couched shall a greater fire arise, then of a bigger
heap disordrely frusshed down. For as with to much pestringe the flame is
choked, so the same through due espace left be twen is quickly kendled
through the aires help. Moreover in other like seruyces it is a good token
when a servant of him self forseeth many things, when being owght warned,
he thinks thereon, and of his own reason does gather, what is further there
unto belonging. But of his talk (as I aforesaid) is the surest conjecture
taken, how he is inclined. He seems well to be of an honest courage, who
being admonyshed of his fault, does blushe thereat, and likes naught him self
therein: and then again reioyseth, heryng his duty well done to be commended
of his master, or if he be glad of his masters presence, loving, who^ he
knows for his masters well wyllers, and hatynge, whom he knows do mind,
or speak the contrary. Suppose not that servant to be trustye, who either is
abandoned to thine ennemies, or (that worse is) to thy feigned friends. Some
me^ for the nonis leave abroad money (as who says) rechleslye, for proof if
their servants be limefingred, which if it be well done, I report me: for
that in my mind, makes not so much to search owte, as to teach their
servants theft, namely moved with such a stale, which oftentimes entiseth
the vprightest, the^ of their blabbynge in this wise may ye be instructed, in
telling them some tri full upon ernest charge not to disclose the same, and
then do suborne some one, who may bait them to utter it, that in case they
blabbe it fourth, it skilleth you little, and if they be hushte, ye may well in
a greatter matter trust them. Plutarche reherseth a propre count by a certain
senator, who when his wife still enquired of him what was done in the senate
house (as the report went how some weighty matiers were there as then debated)
seeing she never left boking, I shall tell the (que he) in case thou canste
hold thy peace, Tushe, a stone shall sooner utter it. There was an Egle (que
he) seen fly over the City, being gyrte with a twohande sword, and therefore
take the Senators advise, what is meant by this wonder? for it should seem to
pretend some great myshap unto our city. Now what became hereof? Forsouth, ere
ever the husband could attein unto the mercate stead, he found all the
commens there ready assembled deuysyng of this foresaid wonder, and there unto
the hole Senate, that meruayled much at the peoples so sudden assemble, did
this Senator rehearse this tale upon his wifes goodly silence.

AND hitherto having treated what proof men should make upon their servants,
I shall thurdely speak of both their offices and duties interchaungeably.
whereof the chief point is, that either have a well willing mind toward
the other, The One to deserve, tho there to reward. For the good will is that, that
supplieth a great deal in soch offices. Then that from the beginning either so
may bear with other, till at last upon further acquaintance in manners, a
faster friendship may knit betwixe the^: for among many, soch fre^dshyp is
disioigned, before the one can know the other thouroly. And then again, many at
the furste ar mysliked, who, better assaied, may content you well enough.
Therefore on the one part, avails the ma sters ientilnes, and (as who says)
winking at small faults. On the other the servants willingness to fulfill all
his masters hestes. In many, some light tatches do reign, but soch as with as
many virtues ar recompensed again. As if a man be hastye, but yet soon
cawlmed, but at neade a faithful freinde.

So fares it by a servant, peradventure hault minded. Who natheles by a soft
meats may be reformed, the same being both trusty, and at all assayes right
profitable. And some there be again dut witted, yet if ye enioigne the^ ought
they will give good ear, with no less dilygence to the same. It behooves a
master to interteigne his servants between both: that neither his sternes may
withdraw their good hertes, nor yet his to much softnes move them to
wantonness. No More should their couraige with to much chiding or reuilinge be
sharpened: but rather with good entreaty be made bounden unto him, so that
next unto his wief, and children, should the servants in his house be
cheryshed. he owes them their fode and clothing, not over dainty, but rather
as neade requires, and they again owe unto their master, good and true
service. Wherapon they are called megnial, and chargetakers, because they
perteign to howshold and ought to tend well their masters business. For and if
that proverb is wourthly blamed, As ma ny slaves so many ennemies. (Natheles
even among soche slaves, there have some ben, who in their lords defense
have little esteemed their own liefes). How much the more then may we conceive
soche trust upon our servants? And yet all slaves were not soche as in
Comedies they are set fourth.

Therence in his comedy named, Adelphos, sets fourth an example of one only
slave to be well condicioned: and that was poor Geta, slave also unto a pore
wydowe. In an other of his comedies entyled Hecyra, he faigneth Parmeno slave
unto Pamphilus to be somdeale geuin to vices, and a very drawlatche, both
inquisitiue, and a blabbet fourth of things told unto him. Which two
faults are of like kind, and yet soch as most men have an espece of. Therefore
unless they many ways be approved, I reke it no wisdom in trustinge eany
servants with secrets, where as the greater need constreignith not. no more
then chyldern, or wiefes, in as much as nothing is more hard, then counseil
kepinge, and though a servant be trusty, yet is a ma^s mind changable, yea
and by priuey whisterers may he sone be corrupted. For such a kind of men is
there, the most malicious and reprouable that ca^ be devised, whose chief
delighte is to sow discord atwixe the servants, and their masters, who
where in dead they ne can well govern their own meigny, yet take they upon
them the rule of others. Forgetting this verse of Homere, not without cause so
much praised. Men, that have praignant policies known
In others ne adis, but naught in their own.


The civil law grants action against them that corrupt a man's slave, or
bondeman, and I think the self same case may stand in a servant also
corrupted. for what so ever he does amiss in, they are to wite that entised him
thereunto. It is an honest man's part to exhort others servants to their
duties doing, and when strife falls between them and their masters, to set
them (as much as in him lies) at agreement. But those wyked tounges that go
about to disseuer servants from their hyrers, ar wourthy being hanged up in
the chimney roof to be parched dry with smoke. Moreover as it comes of
ientilnes to remit light faults, so if you find your servants gyltie of
eany greater offenses, as of theft, adultery, malicious slaundre, or accusement
raised upon eany person, then would I advise you without long chyding
straight to dismiss him. And because servants through continual abode, and
practice in house with their masters, must neades have some intellygence of
his affairs, This gift therefore would I chiefly wisshe in them, neither to
harken much what is done abroad, nor yet to spread fourth thin ges done at
home. Which were better untold, namely soche as at meals were perhaps
spoken un dre the frankeste fashon. For nothing can be more knauyshe then
soche, as (according to Geta his guise in Therence) when so their master
having shut the door to him is in secret communication with some freinde of
his, then holdyng their breathe, lay care unto lock hole, or note well if
eany wourde, perhaps in drink eskaped him, which straight they reaporte to
them by whom the same was spoken, so tellinge that for ernest, which might be
meant but in jest, yea and that with some addicions of their own making.
Wourthely is that slave commended, who when his master at supper, through
drunkinnes, had vttred certain wourdes of treason against the emperor
Augustus Caesar, the next morning advised him thereof, and that ere reaport of
the same might through his accusers come to Cesars ears, he should goo and
axe his pardone at him. Wherapon Caesar not alonely forgave the may ster, but
also moved him to enfranchise his so faythefull a slave, giving to the same of
his own revenues a certain stipend to live on. A servant that brings many
newis into his masters house, may we well suppose will carry owte as many. Some
men make but small count of surfeites or drunkynnes in their servants, as
though the same were a fault more wourthye of lawghter, then displeasure.
Which in dead, might partly be borne with, ne were not the same a trayner of
so huge a heap of vices following, When thereby servants become lyther,
vnstanche of tongue, brawlers, fyghters, yea and commenly fulfilled with
diseases, so likewise is horehaunt by some men little passed of. But yet thereby
servants get the french evil, and deal the same among their masters
childern and hole family, infectinge oftetymes both master, and maistres,
may the same then be counted a light fault in them? Nay verily. And albeit to
be amourus, as ferfourth as the law againsaith not, may somewhat be permitted in
young folks. yet certes soche louinge causes much inconvenience: when
thereby servants after undue means make shifte to furnishe their crauynge
lemans with gay gifts, and them selfs also with gay appareil. But of all
others, those are the shamefulleste that defyle the self house they dwell in
with their lechery, and vncleaner then the burdes ar, do beray their own
nestes. Speadines in a servant is much commended by the wise Solomon. Have
thou seen (says he) a man that spedely dispatcheth his business? he shall wait
before princis, and shall not lowte to mean men. Then bla meth he as much eany
stouthefull dolt, that foldinge his arms toguither, ydleth fourth the time, or
being sent on an errante fyndeth many bars in the same with colpropheting,
as, a lio^ is in the way, a bear haunteth such a wood, It is like to be foul
wether. so is he not sent fourth, but rather thruste owte by the shoulders.
Then shall he houer by the way upon every light occasion, staieng him self
even for the nonis, lest if he return the shortlier, he may straighte be put
to a new task. But yet the others speadines avails not so much, unless an
auised considrance be ioigned thereto: else, were it better to do no whit, then
to frame a thing untowardly, but a certain ware deliuernes in all things chif
ly becomes eany seruyng man, for to much rest, is a brodgate unto vi ces,
namely in young men, who for their small practice wot little how to govern
them selfs according to learned men's repose in studieng. Then, as it is a
kind part in a master, not to burden his servants ouermoche, so ought he
also take keep, that having somewhat aye in hand, they do spend their time in
some fruict, yea rather should he put them to vnneadfull works, then that
slowthes rust might byte apo^ them. For as the emperor Helioga balus was wont to
set his men to task in this wise, commanding one within soch espace to catch
him so many. M. flies, an other so many. M. spiders, and so forth, to thend
that being pestred with this busynes, they ne might do according to others
servants vsages, who take upon them to have an oyer in their masters public
offices, oftetimes under that pretense, selling wind unto suitors. albeit this
was but a fond devise of Heliogabalus, yet may ye same be aplied to our
exe^ple. Pamphilus (as There^ce in Hecyra expresses) sendith away his slave
Parmeno to the haven side, upon a feigned messaige, lest being (as in dead he
was) both inquisitiue, and a blabbe also, he might have an incling in matiers
of priuitie mete to be concelid. I have known also some me^ cause their
servants write some thing of small purpose, suppo sing it better for the^ to do
a thig net there here, ne there, the^ that through idleness they should intend to
worse occupations. Lowlynes is a fair thing in a servant, for ye shall see
some choplogikes, who skante will forbear their own masters. The Emperor
Hadrianus is much commended for that he warned a slave of his goinge amides two
senators, to remember his own de gree and condition. But now a days a
servant, if his master be but of a mean estate, will little esteem him, not
so much regarding how great wages, as of how great a man he receives the
same. That although this mean master do no wourse feade, and clothe him, yea
and better tends his bringing up, then does that great lord, yet under his
wynge liftes he up his horns, under the other semith he no thing well apaied
with him self. So a servants pride reboundeth. oftetimes to his masters
reproach.

Moreover sum there be that grudge to do ought, because they have of their
own to live with, or for their wourshipful stocks sake. But what makes that
to their ma sters, who bestow no less cost upon them, then if they were
taken up by the high way. Let no man therefore count so much upon his degree
at home, as of that rowme in service, which willingely he betaketh him self
unto. It is an evil custom used among many nations, inespeciall among
Anglishemen, to keape abowte them for a show only, a superfluous no^bre of
waiting men, thinking them selfs thereby the more wourshipfull, the greater
train that follows them. But (lord) what a band shall that be of tryfling
truantes, both doltishe, drunkin, and eke piking. And therefore may Uirgilles
verse well be verefyed, What shall the masters do at last?
when servants bribe, and steal so fast?


For who so has many servants, must neades have some unthrifty, then one
only is enough to mar the hole flock. To this I hard it ones said by a
friend of mine merely co^ceited, He that has but one man, has some man, he
that has two, has haulf a one: but he that has three, has never a oone. For
then if ought be mysdone, the one will twyte the fault in the other. If ought be
not done, each will say he thought his fellow had goone about it. Iulianus
the emperor is much commended, for that he after the empress his wiefes
deceas, clearly dispatched his house of all soche as were to be spared, which
being but an vnneadefull encombraunce, yet for her womanishe fan tesies sake,
by her liefe days he mainteygned. And therefore as a wise man bieth howsehold
stuf, rather to serve him self, then to fead others eyes, so a great deal
sooner ought unnecessary meigny be put away, who ar nothing else but con sumers
of vitailes, as Homer calls them. Princis courts ar much pestred with this
evil, but not therewith only, since Ambicion may hardly there be barred
forth. Here I remember a certain mad tale, fondely brought fourth, but yet
that serves to this purpose. A certain good bludd had encroched him self
into the meigny of a bushope in Poleland, although his name were never entered
in the checkroll. which part not withstandinge, no man yet controlled him,
that nation being liberal enough to depart with meat and drink. But when
time came for all the servants to be paid their wages, he also throust in
among them, whereat when the rest repyned, aduertising the bushop how the
same was none of his retinew, The bushoppe called him fourth, and all to
ratinge him, axed how he durst be so bold to demand wages, being never
admitted of howsholde? I have done you sir (que he) now a few months past,
soch service as other your men do. How so (que the bushop?) mary eaten your
meat, and drunk your drink, with which answer the bushop being sturred
to laughter said he had good skylle, and so commanded him to be waged.

Not seldom the waywarde disposition of a master is in cause that few can
abide in house with him. That and if soche are wourthely noted, as use their
slaves or bondemen (cost they never so little) no better then bearinge beasts,
since they are men as we be, how much the^ more deserve they blame, that use
their servants after like rate, being freemen, and but upon a condition only
apprentised unto us? Add hereunto, that among christen me^ there ought a
grea ter respect of humanity be had in all intentes. For we all be servants
under one master, and as touching those things wherein veraye felicity
chiefly consists, the lowest ar on euin bourde with the highest. Let a
master therefore consider with him self, thus: what ever good turn I do
him, I do it as for my brother, he being a membre of the self same body I am
of, and thereby shall I merit of Christ him self. Thus then ought a servant to
repute again: What ever service I do unto him, the same do I unto Christ, who
byddeth us with all our good hertes to obey our masters, and will therefore
him self reward us, be they never so vnientill. But now some seem to make it
tough, in that they should become servants to others, settinge fourth what
hiegh service they do, and thereby thyncke them seluis much beholden unto, in
that they daigne to be obeysant, as who says they bare in many poynctes with
their masters. But then again they considre not, how this ministration is
egally dealt between them. For as to smaller pourposes the servant endeuorith
him self toward his master, so he again in greter matters does his part
no less, Findinge him both howserome, fode, and clothing, kepinge him from
unthrifty company, bringinge him up as well in sundry crafts, as also in
lernyng, and good manners, yea and with an easy bytte refraigninge his pliant
courage, and slydinge youth, which else suffered to run at large would stomble
upon all unhappiness. That admit it were so wretched a thing to live in awe,
ar not lords and princis sons then also wretched? But how goodly a thing
is it (I pray you) for a ser uaunte to live under great, wise, and learned men,
when thereby (and that without cost, or travail) he attaineth knowleage in
many thin ges, and also endeweth him self both with wisdom, sobrenes,
curtesy, and manerly fashons. That and if eany mishappe chance unto the
servant, as by slander or violence done upon him, who but the master is ready
to support him, if he fall in eany grievous malady, what thought (trow ye) will
a louinge master conceive for his recouerey? And yet is this in him reputed as
no service, where as the other for caryenge in a dysshe unto the table, or
geuynge a pissepot, fares as he served all the world. Then not seeldome a
master is dri ue^ to bear with his man's conditions, more than he will daigne
to suffer in his again, and that comes of a more co^sidrance in the one then
the other. Add hereto, that to be daunted under a stern, or waywarde masters
rule, avails often to tame a wild harebraine, in tea chinge him more
attemperatenes. This the common sort of servants never calls to
remembrance, Only bearing in mind: Thus long have I served, and for thus
small wages yearly. Nay then should they further reckon: Thus long, have I
been mewed from evil hauntes, hitherto, have I ben well entreated, with
howserome, meat, and dryneke, this while, have I conuersed with honest com
pany, I have seen men's customs abroad, I have gotten me reputation among
good men, I have shifted of my rude, and goffishe manners. These causes move
the richest oftetymes, to put fourth their best beloved chuldern in to
strange countries, to thend they might be broken, yea and that of their own
expenses. Many do co ueit after rest, and liberty, where as nothing above
the one, may be more infectiue, specially in young folks, and then the other ne
may so sone be called freedom, as a cer taine licenciousnes, or leude
liberty, the very wellspringe of al folly, to run at randon hither, and
thither, through the wide world perteygninge to no body. Which inconvenience
now a days under title of religion is very breme among us. The world is
full of vagabondes, and neadye folks, who neither will labor, ne abide with
eany man, ne yet be bound in eany couenaunte. and what do they then? Forsooth
they beg alms, and entendinge to live in ydelnes uncontrolled, they become
skolars: then what do they learn? ten wourdes of latin, with as many of
greek, and hebrewe, by rote, but those disciplines for which the tounges were
furst ordeigned, do they never apply them selfs unto, as phisike, a study very
mete for our bodily health, or else the law civil, whereby commonweals ar
governed, nor yet the law canon, or theology, which chiefly is our souls
leache, (And yet I mean not this by all in general, but by a certain only,
of whom (would god) the nombre were skarcer.) So that this is not the liberty
of the spirit, (as they call it) ne yet of faith or charity, taught in the
Godspell, which freely and for no gain meant aban donith it self upon others
neades, and stirs all men to be the riper toward their own offices. How
be it their piety, and tendrenesse ought not to be rejected. who with some
socoure do relieve soche as ar driven to wandre fourth of their cuntreis, or
otherwise ar fallen in to poverty. and yet (in mine advise) should they do
bettre, in indu cynge soch young, and strong lubbers, to betake them to an
occupation, so with some service and work doing, to erne their fynding. For else
will al men by their good wills, cleave unto ydlenes, and bealycheare
skottefree. But (alas) to what stead in a commen wealth may soch a frothe, or
rablement of raskals serve? in case they swarm ouermoche abroad? Thus will I
stint here (wourshipful Mecenas) further to dilate of thoffice of a ser uaunt,
addinge only for a conclusion and knot of all toguither, the image or
portraiture of a good servant, according as the french me^ have the same
paincted in their howses, and that in this wise.

Furste should he have a skarlette bonet upon his head, with a fair shurte
on his back, but in stead of a nose, they make him a hogs snowte, with ass
ears, and hertes feate, holdinge up his right hand stretched fourth, and upon
his left shoulder bering a cowlestaffe with two pailes of water, one before, an
other behind. Last then, holding in his left hand a shouell full of quick
coals, signifienge by these devises, as towchinge the fair cappe, and shurte,
how a servant go netely apparellyd. by the hogs snowte was mente, he should
not be lykerous, or ouerdayntie mowthed, but content with all mea tes. the ass
ears pretended, that he also should have pacient earis, in suffrynge what ever
his master should roughly say unto him. So like wise his hand holden up
warned him of vprightnes, in hand lynge his masters goods. The hertes fete
betokenid quykenes in dispatchinge lightly what ever he went about, and so by
the two pailes, and the fire was understood both deftenes, and good conueyaunce
in bringinge many things at ones to pass. This much, at this time, came to
my mind to write of, as touching the choice we should take in servants, and
then what proof is to be made apo^ them, toguither with their offices set
fourth accordyngly. Albeit upon this matier there might a great deal more be
enlarged.

DIXI.

Londini in officina Thomae Berthe, regij impressoris typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XLIII.


