The Country man's chat,
Wherein you shall find
How each man does talk
To please his own mind.
To the tune of, Welcome to Town.


IN place where late I chanced to be at
a feast of friendly meetings,
Where men and women of each degree,
Used kind and courteous greetings,
For their acquantance and their conference,
one had with another,
Well I noted as they sorted
all their speech in order,
Men by themselves, women likewise.
men they talked of Tillage,
The prises of wheat, of sheep and Neat,
and orders of their Uillage.
First, quoth. John Thake, to the Goodman Lake,
what when do y^ gin sow Barley?
Mass quoth he not, this sennet yet
I think it is somewhat too early.
Quoth Goodman Hare, to another there,
how works your land in Brimly?
Why, quoth old Pain, 'twants but a rain,
but I warn't twould work even trimly.
Then, quoth old Iud, I think twere good,
and if you sew't with Pe^ason,
No, quoth John How, were I as you,
it should lie another season.
Quoth. Goodman Ros, how is your horse,
I heard he is scicke ath' stauers,
Ohhang him Jade, quoth old John Dade,
its time he were at the Glouers.
Quoth Goodma^ Read, to the Goodman Pead,
how sold you wheat at Hertford?
Faith, quoth old Brown, even half a crown
and so it was sold at Storford.
I never knew, quoth old John True,
the Markets to be slower.
Nay, quoth old Snow, it is very like so,
the prizes will be lower.
Marry, quoth old Gue, pray God he true,
then poor shall fare the better,
Now forth came Mence, with his eloquence,
yet he knew never a letter,
We are confused, and infused,
and our hedges broken.
I faith, quoth Bars, I tell you sirs,
my fields they lie all open,
Faith, quoth old Neale, the poor will steal,
before they will fall to working.
I and whore for all they are poor,
they care not for a Ierking.
These hedgebreakers I think it fit,
that at next leete we pain them,
And these inmates, quoth Peter Gates,
how should a man restrain them.
Faith Boys and Girls, and knaves and truls,
their can be no dividing,
They must be matched, and will be pitched,
somewhere to have a biding.
Tush, quoth old Rule, man you're a fool,
don't those so that have riches;
But now they will prevent th'impediment,
for down goes Cloackbag breeches.
The second part. To the same tune:


Then, quoth. Goodman Dent, how shall we do, this lent,
they say there is no good Herring
There Is no good white, quoth. Goodman Knight,
nay, I Will stand to it, quoth old Seering,
And quoth Tom Bush, law's strait ^or flesh,
if that is true, quoth old Kelly.
Tush you may be excused, quoth. Goodman Hewes'd
along of your wives great belly.
You Are killing a calfe, quoth Goodman Roffe,
I catch this same at Roston,
Where I sold my hogs as cheap as any dogs,
that I bestowed such cost on.
Quoth Goodman Fip, how stands your sheep,
they say there ^ie^ abundant,
Faith, quoth Ned Scot, they all have the rot,
I hold a hundred pound ont,
Nay that's a Jest, quoth Robin Feast,
for I know here is good Mutton,
There Is little found in all this Town,
I Will stand to it quoth old Hutton.
What is there then, quoth Francis Wren,
that is without some misflaw,
But stay your tale, quoth Humfrey Sale,
can ye spare us a load of Pea^-straw?
What now John Dan, how do thou man?
me thinks thou lookst but sickly,
I doubt, quoth Ieames, he has raid his seames,
that makes him go so s^atly,
Now here John Simmes, to all our friends,
in City and in Country,
Do let it come and I Will drink round,
to Dicke and so to Humfrey.
man I was at Stadds with those old Lads,
and there we drunk full deeply,
Come, quoth Tom Trap, man take of your lap,
and lets be going quickly.
How does, quoth ane, your neighbor Ton,
I doubt he thriues but slowly.
But there is Ned Stitch is grown vile rich,
which way the dewce is it know ye.
Thus much delating and much chatting,
is there at such meetings.
If ought I leave you may it conceive,
I Will now to the women's greeting
For they were neatly talking featly,
as they use at Banquets:
Whose kinds I spide even last Shrouetide,
when they were eating Pankakes.
FINIS.
London, printed for H. G.


