THE SERMON PREACHED AT the Cross, Feb. xiiij. 1607.

By W. CRASHAWE, Batchelour of Divinity, and Preacher at the TEMPLE; Justified
by the Author, both against Papist, and Brownist, to be the truth:

Wherein, this point is principally intended; that the religion of Rome, as now
it stands established, is still as bad as ever it was.

The second impression, reuiewed by the Author.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 13. The evil men and deceivers shall wax worse, and worse,
deceiving and being deceived.

Imprinted at London by H. L. for Matthew Lownes: and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul Church yard, at the sign of the Bishops head. 1609.

The XX. Wounds found to be in the body of the present Romish religion, in
doctrine and in manners: and Proved in this Sermon, not to be yet healed.
1. THe Pope is a God, and the Lord God, and such a head of the Church, as
infuseth spiritual life and heavenly grace into the body of the Church. page
53. etc. 2. The Pope has done more then God for he delivered a soul out of
hell. page 57. etc. 3. God has divided his kingdom with the Virgin Marie,
keeping Justice to himself, but committing and giving up his mercy to her^ so
that a man may appeal from him to her. page 60. etc. 4. The Popes decrees be
at least equal to the Canonical scripture. page 69. etc. 5. The Christian
Religion is founded rather from the Popes mouth, then from Gods in the
Scripture. page 71. etc. 6. The holy Scriptures are therefore of credit, and to
be believed, because they are allowed and authorized by the Pope: and being by
him authorized, they are then of as good authority, as if the Pope himself
had made them. page 73. etc. 7. Images are good books for lay men, and better
and easier then the Scriptures. page 80. etc. 8. An Image of God or a
Crucifixe, or a Crosse^ are to be worshipped with the same worship as God and
Christ, with latria that is divine worship. and that we may speak and pray to
the Cross it self, as we do to Christ. page ^2. etc. 9. Friar Francis was
like to Christ in all things, and had 5. wounds as Christ, that did bleed on
good-Fridaie^ yea, he did more then Christ ever did. page 96. etc. 10. The
Pope may and does grant Indulgences for a hundred thousand years, and give men
a power to redeem souls out of purgatory. page 103. etc. 11. The Pope may
annexe Idulgences for many thousands of years, to such beads, Crucifixes,
pictures and other like toies, as are hallowed by his hands. page 107. etc. The
popish Church baptizeth bells. page 115. etc. 12. The Pope denies the Cup in
the Sacrament to the Laity, tho Christ ordained the contrary. page 120. etc.
13. The popish Church allows many sorts of sanctuaries for wilful murder.
14. Romish religion publicly tolerates, and permits Stews, and takes rent for
them. page 132. etc. 15. By the Popeslaw, he that has not a wife may have a
Concubine. page 141. etc. 16. By popish doctrine, it is a less sin for some
men to lie with another man's wife, or keep a whore, then marry a wife of his
own. page 143. etc. 17. Priests in popery may not marry, but are permitted to
keep their whores, under a yearly rent. page 147. etc. 18. Such Priests as be
contine^t, and have no whoores, yet must pay a yearly rent, as they that have,
because they may have if they will. page 150, etc. 19. Their Liturgy is full of
blasphemy, their Legend full of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition. page
153. etc. 20. A general corruption of manners in all estates of the Romish
Church. page 156. etc.
TO THE PRINCE his Highness, HENRY, The Hope of great BRITAIN.
MOst mighty Prince, Solomon being but young, knew the God of his Fathers
Chron. 28. 9.
; and Josias being but 15. years old, set his heart to seek the Lord 2.
Chron. 34. 1. 3.
: And blessed be God, who has put into your royal heart to set them as
examples before your eyes, and to follow them in the best things. For, to be
Kings (even greater then they Nero Julian, etc.
has befallen the wicked, whose names now rot on earth Pro. 10. 7.
: and they in hell wish they had never been: But, to be a good godly, and
religious Prince, few have attained it 1. Cor. 1. 26. etc.
: but those that did, were made happy by it. Noble Prince, this is the way to
be honored of men, blessed of God, and beloved of both 1. Sam. 2. 30.
.

In this holy path, you have so happily begun to walk, that your personal
practice of Religion, and the religious government of your honorable household,
may be a pattern to all the great families of these kingdoms; wherein if
Popery and profaneness found no better countenance nor encourageme^t, then in
the Princes Court, it were happy for our Church and State.

Go forward, Princely Solomon, and walk still in the ways of David, your
kingly Father: so shall our Israel be happy and blessed by you: and all the
world shall praise God for you; for on whom are the eyes of al Christendom set,
but upon you and your fathers house? Surely, the hope of the Christian world
is, that God has appointed and anointed our gracious Sovereign, and his
royal issue, to hold up his religion in these declining days, and to give the
Whore of Babylon that foil, and fall, from which she shall never rise; even
that deadly blow, whereof she shall never recover.

Now, somewhat to stir up and provoke your heroical heart, and princely spirits
to a yet farther detestation of popish impietye; vouchsafe (hopeful Prince) the
reading and patronage of this discourse: the scope whereof is, to discover that
those would but deceive us, who speak or write that popery is now well
reformed in manners, and refined in doctrine, and therefore they and we by a
reasonable mediation might well be reconciled A pernicious ^book was published
in french by that unsettled H. C. called Le Pacificquod examen, etc. tending to
that end, and it was turned into english by some papist.
: for the truth is (if any man will search it out of their own records) Popery
both for doctrine and manners, is (at least) as bad as ever it was.

This I affirming before an honorable audience at the Cross, the Papists gave
out, it was false, and I could not prove it, nor durst stand to it; but that
we may say we care not what, that we are set up to rail on them, and make
them and their religion odious before our people: and in the Country they
dispersed, I was called before Authority for it, and silenced, and censured for
railing on the Catholics, and that I was stricken by Gods hand with a strange
hoarcenesse after I began to rail on them, and could not speak, etc.

Therefore not so much to clear my self, as to honor the truth, and to show
that it is no trick nor policy of our State (as it is in popery ^^ook was
printed in english in the college at Rome, wherein it is affirmed that we
take catholics, and draw upon their legs, boots full of hot boiling liquor,
and upon their feet hot burning ^hooes: and do put them into Bears skins, and
cast the^ to the dogs to be pulled in pieces: all this and many such other set
down in pictures.

Feuardent a famous Friar, yet living at Paris, wrote in latin 7. years ago,
that we revile and reject that prayer to the holy Trinity; Sancta Trinitias
(...) Deus^ misercre nobis.

Thus writes he in his Comme^t. on 1. Pet. cap. 1. What will not he say, that
day say this^ for, all our common praier-books, now, and those in Q.
Elizabeth's, and K. Edwards times, do test^fie^ the contrary. Gretserus a
sesu^^e was suffered to write within these 2. years, that we rackt and
tortured Garnet, even near to death, to make him confess himself guilty of
the powder treason; but he did not: and so we having no proof ha^gd him only
for being a Priest, and not for it. And that Oue^ (his man) was pulled in pieces
on the rack; and when we had so killed him, then we gave out he had killd
himself with a knife: But for the 1. we appeal to public records and the
worlds knowledge; and for the second, there yet live witnesses whose eyes saw
the wounds and bloody knife, and whose ears heard him freely and penitently
confess he did it with that knife, to escape the rac^ which he said he feared
but had never tasted.


) to set up men with authority to rail, and license to lie, thereby to make
our enemies odious; I have been induced to publish what was said, and to
justify out of their own records what was affirmed of them: namely, that the
deadly wounds found to be in that diseased body of Popery many ages ago,
remain rotting, rankling and unhealed even to this day.

This I demonstrate in 20. or more particulars. Concerning all which wounds, if
they be true as I have laid them down; and being true, if yet they be not
healed, then I hope your Highness, and al Christian Princes may clearly see,
that seeing she is past hope of reformation, there remains no more but that she
is ripe for vengeance and destruction. Which as that Whore of Babylon has so
long deserved: So God will put power into the hand, and zeal into the hearts
of our mighty King and noble Prince, to reward her as she has served (...) and
to give her double for all her iniquities: that so all the Kings and Princes of
the Christian world may rouse up themselves, and take example at the King and
Prince of great Britain, to hate the whore and make her desolate, and ^are her
flesh, and burn her with fire; and that a^l nations, who have stood amazed
hitherto at the patience and long suffering, may now rejoice and admire to see
the zeal, courage and constancy of our kingly David and princely Solomon.

The King of Kings, bless this king and prince: and the blessed Father, for
his blessed Sons sake, double and trebble the graces and blessings of the
blessed Spirit both upon the father, and the son: whereunto, I am sure all
good subjects at home, and all true Christians in the world, will say Amen, With

Magna est veritas, and praeualet.

Your Highness humble and devoted servant, WILLIAM CRASHAWE.
To the Christian Reader whosoever, be he a true Catholic, or a Romish.
TO prevent all misconceits that might arise upon the so late coming forth of
this Sermon, (so many weeks expected) I desire thee good Reader be satisfied,
that the cause thereof, was a long and unlooked for journey. And now that you
have it, let me desire all men in the reading and judging thereof, to deal
with that ingenuity and sincerity, as I have endeavored in the writing of it.
My conscience speaks for me, I have forged no new Author, I have falsified
none, I have corrupted none, I have to my knowledge misalledged none: I have
taken no proof upon bare report, nor have I produced our men to prove what I
lay against them: nor is there one quotation of any Author of theirs, which I
have not diligently perused aforehand, and the whole scope of the place. If
any should think of answer, I desire him let pass all personal railing, and
by-matters, and come directly to the points in issue: which be these; 1 Whether
the Church of Rome teach and practice in these xx. or xxi. points, as I have
charged her withal, or no. 2 If she do, whether they be healed of these wounds
as yet, or no. 3 If she be not, then how she can be the true Church, which is
so wounded, and will not be healed.


If they do not teach and practice so, I will yield the Cause. And he that can
show me that either she is healed since, or being not healed, how she can be
the true Church, I shall willingly hear him, and thank him. I desire all that
profess themselves papists, or their favorers, not to be so wilful as to
condemn what they know not; but only to give it reading, and then judge as
they see cause. Wright, in his Articles, lays to our charge many strange
Paradoxes: as, that we are all Atheists, and Infidels by our doctrine; that we
are bound by our doctrine to do no good works, and many such. And Kellison in
his Survaie, thrusts upon us that we deny Christ to be the only Savior, and
Judge of quick and dead, and many such abominations; all which we renounce,
and detest: yet, do what we can, we must have them laid upon us; and our
writers and teachers have their speeches wrung and wrested, beyond their
meaning to make the^ sound that way. I dare appeal to the judgment of Gods
Church, and al judicious Readers hereof, that I have not done so with them,
nor taken vantage of their words, when it is apparent they meant otherwise; but
charged them only with such points of doctrine and practice, as themselves
cannot deny but to be their own: and that not of one or two, but (for the most
part) generally received. Co^me^ding it to thy reading, and my self to thy
prayers, I leave us all to Gods blessing. At the Temple. May, 21. 1608.

Thy brother in the Lord, W. Crashawe.
The Names of the Popish Authors produced in this Treatise; together with the
impressions here used.
A.
AQuinatis summa. Ven. 509 Idem, Antuerp. 85. Fr. Agricola de verbo dei etc.
Leod. 97. 8 Cor. Agrippa, de vanitate scient.
B.
BReuiariu^ Romanum vetust. Idem. 93. 4. Bernardini de Busto Manuale. Lugd.
511, 4. Idem, Colon. 607. 4. Bellarmini opera. Ingolst. 601. fol. Bernardi
Morlanensis poemata. 607. 8 Brigittae reuelationes. 517. Nuremb. fol
Bonauenturae opera. Romae. Cl. Bonarscij Amphitheatrum honoris etc. 605. 4
Berarduccius su^ma Confessoru^.
C.
Geo Cassan^ri Consultatio. Covarruvias variarum resolutionum. Corpus Iuris
Canoniciper Greg. 13. Lugd. 91. 4. Idem cum glossis. edit. vetust. 507. and 510
Constitutiones Pont. Romans per Pet. Mathaeum. Lugd. 88 Caeremoniale Romanum.
Aug. Taur. 602. 4. Capella in Ieremiam. Tarracon. 86. 4 Coccij the saurus
catholicus. Col. 99. fol. Costeri Enchiridion controuersiarum etc. Col. 600. 8
Alp. Ciaconus, Apologia pro Tr^iano etc. To. Concilium Trident. Ra. de Caesare.
Caietanus, in Aquinatis summa^. Ant. 68. fol. ^h. de Combis compendium
theologicae verit. Lugd. 79. B. Corradus. Quaestiones cascons. Ven. 600. 4 H.
Cuickij speculum concubinariorum etc. Lov. 600. 8.
D
Decretalium sextus. St. Durantus, de ritibus ecclesiae catholicae. To. 91. 8.
E
D. Erasmi opera. Bas. 4. fol. Espencaeus, in ^itu^ par. 68. Idem. de
Continentia. 4
F.
Io. Ferrariensis Practica Papiensis. Feuardentius in Petru^. 600. homiliae.
par. 605 Firmamenta trium ord. S. Fra^cisci. Par. 512. 4
G
I. de Graffijs decis. aureae cascons. 604. 4 Ado. Gualandus de morali
facultate. To. 603. fol. Gregorius de Valentia. Ingolst. 98 fol. Ia. Gretserus
de Cruce. ibidem. 60. 4 Anas. Germonius de sacrorum immunitatibus. To. 91 Io.
Gersonis opera. fol.
H
D. Hessi Synodus protesta^tium. Graeciae. Stir. 93. 8 Heskins his parliament.
Ant. 66. fol. Hosij opera. Col. 84. fol.
I
Io. Chrysostom. a visitatione, de verbis dominae. Ven. 600. 4 Index librorum
prohibitorum. Clem. 8. 97
L
Liber conformitatu^ beati Fra^cisci etc. Bon. 90. fol. Llamas summa etc.
Litaniae and preces profide Catholica in Anglia etc. To. 603 Liber voc.
exercitium Christianae piet. etc. Col. 92
M
Missalia vetust. and noua edit. 905 fol. Magnum speculu^ exemplorum. Duaci.
605. 4. Monumenta ordinis Minorum. Salmant. 511. 4.
N
Nauarri Enchiridion. Wirce. 93.
O
Onuphrius de praecipuis vrbis Ecclesijs. Col. 84 Oleaster in Pentateuchum.
Onus ecclesiae Ant. 68. fol.
P
Posseuini Apparatus sacer. Ven. 603. fol. Pontificale Romanum vetust. Ven.
520. fol. Idem, Romae. 1595. fol. Proctor his way home to Christ. 8 Pistorius
contra Mentzerum. Peraldi summa virt. and vit. Ant. 71. 8. Alb. Pighius
decontrov. in com. Ratispon. 42. and 49. 8
R
Rhemes testament: at Rhemes. 82
S
D. Stapleton. doctrine. princip. Par. 79 fol. Simancae Institutiones cathol.
Vallisol. 55. fol.
T
Tolleti instructio sacerdotum. Ant. 603. 8 H. Tursellinus de virgin
lauretana. Mag. 601. 8
V
Vi^aldi Candelabrum aureum. Brix. 95. 4 Vincentij ferrariensis prognosticon. 4
Vasquez, de cultu adorationis, Mog. 601. 8
W
Watsons quodlibets. 4
Z
Lae. Zecchius. Summa moralis theologiae: de casibus conscientiae. Brix. 98. 4
Ludouicus Viues de causis corruptionis artium. Les voyages de Sr. de Villamont
A Arras 1605. Catalogus reliquiaru^ and Indulgentiarum in 7. Ecclesiis vrbis:
Manuscript.
Other Authors alleged, not popish, or but in part.
Augustinus. Concilia per Crab. Col. 57. fol. Eadem per Bininum. Col. 606. fol.
Ca^bdeni Britannia. Land. 607 Colloquium Ratisbone^se. 4. 600. Epistolae
Iesuiticae. 601. 8. Euangelium Romanum. 600. 8. Centum grauamina Germanorum. 4
Hospinianus de Templis. Tig. 603. fol. Harmony of confessions. 4 Zuinglius.
Cyprianus.
A SERMON PREAched at the Cross.
JEREMIAH. 51.9. We would have cured Babel, but she would not be healed: let
us forsake her, and go every one into his own country: for her judgment is
come up into heaven, and lifted vpto the clouds.
THis is not spoken in person of the Angels that were set over Babylon (as
some think); for Angels have no charge of curing men's souls: they mourn for
men's sins, and rejoice at their conversion Lu. 15. 7 10.
; they guarde their bodies Psalm. 34. 7.
; and carry their souls to heaven Luke 16. 22.
: but the curing and converting of the soul has God delegated to his
Prophets, being men like our selves; that so he might make man to love man,
seeing the has made man a sauer of man.

Neither is it the speech and protestation of hypocritical and fained friends,
who say thus to Babel, to make a great boast of their little love (tho some
hold so, whose judgment otherwise is of great respect): for the reason here
given is too good, and the cause too divine, to proceed from a profane heart.
Her judgment (say they) is come up to heaven, etc.

But rather, it seems to be the voice of the true Church showing their love
to Babell, and their longing desire to have done good to their souls: Bring
balm, (says the former verse) if she may be healed. Heereunto, the Church
answers: For our parts, We would have cured Babell, but she could not be
healed: we did our endeavors, but found her incurable; therefore now, seeing we
can do her no good, let us look to our own safety, let us forsake her, and
go every man to his own Country. For now we see God will take the matter
into his own hands; seeing man cannot heal her, he will destroy her. Her
judgment is come up into Heaven, and lifted up to the clouds.

The particulars, considerable in this Text^ be 4. 1. The Churches love to her
very enemies, manifested in her desire to have healed them: We would have
cured Babylon. 2. The malicious nature and incurable state of Babel, causing a
comfortless issue of the Churches labors: She cannot be healed. 3. The
Churches duty, upon consideration of her obstinacy and incurablenesse: namely
to lose no more labor upon her, but to abandon her and look to herself:
Forsake her, and let us go every man to his own country. 4. What becomes of
Babylon being incurable, and forsaken of the Church? what further remains for
her? Vengeance and destruction from God: her judgment is come up into Heaven,
etc.


All these are true in a double sense: namely both in the literal Babylon. and
in the mystical

There is a Babell spoken of and literally understood in the old Testament:
there is a spiritual Babylon, mystically meant in the Old, and literally in
the New Testament. Both are spoken of in this place: the one historically and
literally; the other allegorically, and in a mystery: and this interpretation
is not without warrant; for it is ordinary with the Prophets in the old
Testament, when they speak of matters literally true at that time, in and
under them to point at further matters, of a more spiritual and higher nature.
For howsoever to destroy the literal and historical sense of the old
Testament (with some old, and many late writers that be Papists) is worthily
condemned by the Church as injurious to Gods word: Yet the literal sense once
laid, we may then warrantably extend the text to the allegorical sense, as far
as we see the holy Ghost in the New Testament, to go before us, or to give us
leave. Thus Peter makes an allegory of Noah's Arc, and makes that business a
type of Baptism 1. Pet. 3. 20. 21
: and Gal. 4, 24. etc
Paul of Sarah and Agar, says by them another thing is meant: and no less
says S. John, of Babylon, as we shall see hereafter.

Touching the old and literal Babylon, all these points have been long ago
verified upon her, since the Prophet vttred them: The Church of the old
Testament would have cured her: But she2 could not be healed: therefore she3 for
sooke her: and God4 has destroyed her. And touching the mystical Babylon, the
kingdom of Satan and Antichrist, partly they are and partly shall be made
good upon her. The Church of the new Testament, 1 would have healed her: But2
she is found incurable: therefore when Christendom3 forsakes her, God4 will
destroy her. The two first are already performed: the third is a-doing, and the
fourth is sure to be fulfilled in Gods good time.

Of all these in their order.

Of the old and literal BABYLON.
Touching the old and literal Babylon, the first point is the Churches love
and care of her good, in these words;
The first Point.
We would have cured Babylon.
COncerning which point and all the rest, we will not pursue the particular
historical matters: considering that the history of Babylons carrying Israel
captive, of their usage in their captivity, of their forsaking Babylon and
returning home again, and lastly, of Gods just vengeance and destruction of
Babylon, are so notoriously known. Therefore we will pass by the story, and
stand rather upon matter of doctrine.

First therefore let us observe this general doctrine, namely; that a good man
loves his very enemies, and not desires only but even seeks their good:
this did the Church of Israel to their enemies and persecutors. For these
Babylonians had done the greatest hurt to the Church and kingdom of Israel,
that ever one nation did to another: for first they invaded their land
unjustly; then they besieged and took Jerusalem, the ^ea^e of the kingdom,
took and slew their kings, overthrew their Kingdom, ruinated their state,
burnt their Temple, defaced their Religion, killed whom they would, carried
captive whom they would, and so left their land a heap of desolation Read for
this purpose the last chapt. of this prophecy together with the ends of the
books o^ kings and Chronicles.
: And yet worse then all this; being their Captives at Babylon. there they
mocked them in their misery, and scoft at their Religion. Come, (say they) you
that are these singers, and have had your Kings to be singers 2. Sam. 23. 1.
David etc.
: you that are these great Psalme-men, and have had your Kings such base
fools, as some of them to be Prophets, some Preachers Solomon. Ec. 1. 1. 2.
^2.
, some song-makers David, Solomon, Hezekia. etc.
: Come make us merry with one of your Psalms; let us have part of your Hebrewe
music: Sing us one of your songs of Syon Psalm. 137. 3.
. Psalm 137. The least of these wrongs is heavy to be borne: but all put
together, and especially, for a Christian after all these miseries to be mocked
for his religion, and to see his God dishonored, oh how bitter is it to the
spirit of a man. Yet, after all this what do Gods people? not only pardon it
and put it up; but further, do both wish and seek their good; We would have
healed Babell.

Thus to do is a mark of Gods child, and a sign of a true Church. For to
do evil for evil, and good for good, is no more then nature; even the
publicans, (says Christ) do so much Mat. 5. 46.
: to recompense evil for good, is worse then nature; it is malice, and
perverse corruption: and therefore (says Solomon); He that does so, evil
shall never depart from his house Prou. 17. 13.
. But to do good against evil; that is above nature, it is grace, and a good
evidence of Gods spirit: thus doing, says Christ, you are the children of your
heavenly father Mat. 5. 44. 45
.

Hereupon for the use of this doctrine, we may see a comfortable evidence, that
our Church is the true Church of God; seeing that we pray daily for the Church
of Rome, which curses us: and it is very obseruable, that whereas the Pope,
with all solemnity excommunicates and curses us all to hell, on the evening
before good-Fryday See the Popes bull, set down at large i^ the first
impression.
; we, for recompense, the next day morning in every Church and chapel of this
kingdom, and many places more, pray for the conversion and salvation of him and
all his sect See one of the prayers appointed by public authority in the
common prayer book for good-Fryday.
: and so by Gods providence it falls out that our public prayer for the^, is
the same or the next day, when they have publicly cursed us: and this is the
fact of our whole Church in the public liturgy, appointed of old, and still
confirmed by authority. Therefore if Christ's argument be good, that private men,
blessing their cursers, are the children of God; then sure this is not ill: the
Church that blesses her cursers, is the Church of God. Let them therefore still
go on in cursing, if they needs will: but let the^ take heed, least as they love
cursing, so it come unto the^, and as they cloth themselves with cursing like a
garment, so it come into their bowels like water and like oil into their bones
Psalm. 109. 17. 18.
: we, contrariwise, let us not be weary of well doing: let us follow that
blessed Peter, whom they pretend to follow but do not, (unless it be in
denying Christ) whose blessed counsel is; Render not evil for their evil, nor
curse for their curse; but contrariwise bless, knowing that we are thereunto
called, that we should be heirs of blessing 1. Pet 3. 9.
; thus doing, we have Peter's own testimony against the^, that we are a Church
of blessing, a blessed Church: and the Father of blessings, bless it more and
more, and all that seek the peace of it, Amen.

Thus we see generally, they wished her well: But what is the particular good
they wished her? namely, her healing and conversion. We would have healed her^
here many things might be pressed; I will but point at them.

1. That it is the property of a holy man, to wish above al^ things the
spiritual good of them with who^ he lives: the wicked man seeks the
spiritual hurt of men; the natural man, the carnal good: but the holy man
their spiritual and eternal good. Worldly matters have their time and place in
his thoughts: but that that takes up, and possesses his desires, is the
spiritual good of them he loves, namely, their conversion, their repentance,
their salvation: these things be worthy their prayers, and pains. Herein Gods
children are like to God their Father, who wishing good to his peopeople,
cries out: Oh that there were in them (not the skill to rise in this world,
and attain the honors and ease of this life, but) a heart to fear me, and
keep all my Commandments, that so it might go well with them and theirs
Deuteronomy. 5. 25.
. God wishes no trifles to his children: But oh (says God) that Israel were
healed^ and oh says Israel that Babylon were healed! Thus do God and good men
accord in their wishes. Learn thou, here, thy duty, if thou be Gods: thou
wishest for, and prayest for, and seek for many things for thy children, and
thy friends, thy wife and family. Thou clothest them, and feedest them, and
prouidest for them (else thou art worse then an infidel 1. Tim. 5. 8.
and preferrest them, and much more: but all this is for the body. But, can
thou say, from a good conscience, I would have healed their spiritual
diseases: I have heartily wished, and faithfully endeavored their salvation.
This is to be a true friend, a true father, a worthy husband, and a good wife:
happy they that have such friends near them.

2. Observe further, they seek the salvation even of their persecutors: so
does always the holy man. Paul was put in prison, the gayler tormented his
body, and Paul healed and saved his soul Act. 16. 24. to the 35.
. Many a sinner, is made a happy man, by his prisoner: and the Martyrs often
times by their patience, their prayers and holy instructions, converted their
executioners and tormentors. As in the former point, a holy man is like to God:
so herein, to Christ; who when Judas and the Jews were conspiring his
destruction, the same hour was ordaining the holy sacrament, and establishing
the means of their salvation 1. Cor. 11. 23.
.

Thirdly, Israel lives in Babel, and would gladly have her as holy as
themselves; we would have healed her. It shows the excellency of the nature
of holy things: they are fire (not in the flint, hardly bet out; but) in the
bosom, that will not be concealed. Pro^
A man is not covetous of them: He is indeed greedy to gain them; but not to
keep them secret and to himself, as in worldly things we are: nay he desires
and joys to impart them to others; and it is the joy of his heart to see
others as good or better then himself. Numb. 11. 29.
Would God (says Moses) all Gods people were Prophets: and Paul wished from
his heart, not Felix the president and Agrippa the king alone, but that all
that heard him, were like him; not a prisoner and in bonds, but in grace and
goodness Act. 26. 29.
. Hardly shall a man hear such voices in the world; I wish others were as rich
as I, as high as I, as learned as I, as much in credit and favor as I. No:
these things make men base and servile, self-louers and privately minded: but
grace and holiness is of a royal and excellent nature, and inlargeth the heart
wherein it is, with such love to other men, as nothing more contents him that
inioyeth it, then to make others as good as himself.

Lastly, where it is said, they would have healed the Babylonians with whom
they lived; see what a good neighbor, a holy man is: he comes, he dwelles, he
soiournes in no place, but he seeks the good of it. Lot would gladly do good
in Sodom: if he can do none, at least his righteous soul shall be vexed, for
their sins 2. Pet. 2. 8.
. Israel soiournes in Babel, and had rather be away; yet while they be there,
they will cure her if they can: and if she cannot, yet Babel shall thereby
know that Israel was amongst them. Thus the whole shyre and parish shall fare
the better by one good man dwelling among them. He comes no where but
presently he considers what that people wants, what is their disease, what he
may do to heal them, or any way to help them: he comes no where but he
leaves behind him signs of his goodness, monuments of his holiness, and a
sweet savor of his virtues. Thus every place is better for him where he comes:
and when he is gone, his memory is blessed, Extinctus amabitur idem.
his virtues praised, his name honored, and his person loved. Contrariwise, the
wicked leaves behind him the stink of his ungodliness, and monuments of his
pride, his cruelty, his wantonness: Come (say they) let us leave some toke^ of
our pleasures in every place Wisd. cap. 2. 9.
. Thus every place is worse for him, while he stays, and his memory rots when
he is gone. Let us learn of Gods Church here, so to behave ourselves in all
places, where we live, or where we come, that the good may be helped, and the
evil healed by us, that we may be able to say; Them I found good, I
encouraged: whom I found sinful, I would have healed. Thus shall we be
honored while we are there, praised when we are gone, and ever loved and
blessed both of God and good men: and the mouth of wickedness shall be
stopped. And thus we have the particular good they wished to Babylon; namely,
her curing, that is her conversion and salvation.

Touching which healing of Babylon, there be three particular circumstances,
implied in these words; namely, who they would have healed. how whom

The first is Who they be that would have cured Babylon: the Text says, We
would, that is not the Prophets alone, or the people alone, or the princes
alone, but We, that is altogether^ the Prophets would, as we may see in Daniel
and Ezekiel See their prophecies.
: the Princes would, as we may see in SHIDRACH, MISAK: and ABEDNEGO Dan. cap. 3.
, Noble young Gentlemen of Israel: and the people would have cured her, as is
plain both here, and in the 137. Psalm.

Where we may learn, that howsoever properly, and peculiarly, and more
principally it is the office of the Minister: Yet it belongs also to every
Christian, to perform the duties of holy and spiritual edification, to them
with whom he lives, for their spiritual good. Not only the Prophets here
would have cured Babylon, but even those three young gallants, being noble
Courtiers, gave a worthy example, to all of their age and rank, of admirable
courage and constancy in Gods cause, choosing rather to die, then deny their
God and worship an Idol, checking the Kings impiety, and condemning his
idolatry to his face, rather like Prophets then Courtiers. Such were their
speeches, and such their sufferings, their words so wise, their sufferings so
valorous, and all for their God, that this alone had been sufficient to have
cured Babell, had she not been incurable. Oh happy kingdom where be such
Nobles, and blessed that Court, that cherishes such Courtiers: the devil
should never have his Church, where God has but his Chapel, if it were thus
in Christian kingdoms. The people also had their hand in this good business,
they ceased not in all the time of their captivity, to use all the means they
could to bring Babel from her gentilisme, and Idolatry; and therefore here are
bold to affirm when she is at the point of her destruction. We for our parts
are no way guilty of it: nay, if she would have been ruled by us, she had never
come to this; for We would have healed her.

But how would they have healed her (may some say) what means used they? it is
soon said, We would: words are cheap. But gave they Babell nothing but
sweet words? Certainly, they were careful to use all good means: which
especially are these 3. Instruction, Example, Prayer.



1. By continual instruction, laying open their errors, discovering their
impieties, and laying before them the excellency of true religion.

2. By their continual example, practicing their own religion even before
their very faces, not fearing their scorns, and rebukes, no not the contrary
laws made purposely against the^; as we may see in the example of Daniels
thrice a day praying to his God toward Jerusalem Dan. 6. 10.
: the people also in midst of their mirth would weep when they remembered Syon
Psa. 137. 1. 2.
, and would cast away their music and deprive themselves of all comforts,
when they remembered the desolation of their religion. Which practices did no
doubt amaze the Babylonians, and had bin sufficient to have driven them into
deeper and better considerations (had they not bin incurable) and it is to be
hoped that the sight hereof did good upon some of them.

3. They endeavored to heal them by their prayers, praying continually and
desiring God to heal them: for as the Parent is said to bless his child, by
praying to God to bless him Genesis 27. per ^o^um. and 48. 15 etc. to 21.
; so one may be said to heal another, by praying that GOD may heal him. And
that they did this duty, is no question: for it was so commanded them by the
Lord; Seek the prosperity of Babylon, and pray to the Lord for it Iere. 29. 7.
. By these means, they endeavored the curing of Babylon, tho they were no
prophets: and by these means, may one private man further the salvation of
another. Thus every good man is as it were a little pastor to his neighbor: and
happy were it for the Church of God, if all private persons would perform
these duties, one to another.

The third and last circumstance is, whom they would have healed: the Text
answers; Babel: where we observe two points.

First, that the Israelites aimed not at the conversion of the great ones, and
men of State only, but even at all the people of Babell. Whereby, it is
apparent they sought not themselves: for then they would have fisht for the
great ones only or especially (as do the Jesuits, and craftier sort of Friars
at this day See Watson in his Quodlibets often.
); but they sought the salvation of souls, which they knew to be all alike
before God. For they had learned before they came at Babel, that every soul is
Gods, the soul of the son, as well as of the father Exek. 18. 4.
, and consequently of the subject and servant as well as of the king and
commander, and the meanest man's as well as the mightiest: and therefore they
endeavored the conversion of all.

The godly and conscionable Minister, must here learn to have care of the
least and poorest soul in his parish, considering it is as dear and precious
as the best. For, as good hands made it, as the best Pro. 22. 2.
: as precious blood was shed to save it, as for the greatest man's on earth Gal.
3. 28. 14
. Therefore, let them not be like those proud spirits, and carnal minded men,
that think ordinary parishes not worthy of them, and therefore will preach no
where but at the Court, or in great and solemn assemblies: nor like those, who
in their parish, will be acquainted with none, converse with none, confer
with none, visit none, but the rich and mighty; but as for the poor, they may
live and die as they can, for them. Such men might remember the blessed
apostle, who kept back nothing, but taught (not in Courts and Palaces, and
great houses only, but) through every house Act. 20. 20. verse. 31. verse. 26.
, and that he ceased not to warn every one, and stood upon it boldly, that he
was clear from the blood of all men (see: not some, but all): and in another
place expounding himself says, his continual course is to witness Gods will
both to small and great Act. 26. 22.
. He that looks for Paul's reward, at Gods hand, must thus behave himself to
Gods people, remembering his account is not for trifles, but for souls, and to
that God who has told us before hand, Every soul is mine Ezekiel. 18. 4.


The good father of the family must learn here, not himself, and his wife
only, but to see that his children, and servants and those not some of the
chief, but all, even the meanest may know and serve God. Such a man was
Abraham, he was not careful for Isaac alone, his dear son, the son of the
beloved: but oh (says he to God) that even Ishmael might live in thy sight Gen
17. 18.
: and therefore God becomes Abraham's surety, he gives his word for him; I know
Abraham that he will (not look to some of his principal officers, but)
command (not this son or that daughter, but) his sons and his family to keep
the way of the Lord Genesis 18. 19
: and yet in Abraham's house were 318. persons borne and brought up, etc. Genesis
14. 14
. More shame for the great men of this age, both in City and country (who
though they be great, and daily plot to be greater, yet keep they not so
great houses and families as Abraham did): in whose families, many of their
inferior officers, and servants, do scarce ever come to Church: And much more
shame to some parents, who being blessed of God with many children do partially
respect some of them, and seek their good of soul and body, and neglect
others, who it may be are more worthy: what would they do if they were profane
and undutiful Ishmaels, when they are so unmindful, and respectlesse even of
such as be holy, and dutiful Isaacs? but let such children comfort themselves
in this, that God their better father and best friend is no respecter of
persons. These are the ordinary faults of fathers and mothers in these days:
but assuredly, those that be heirs of Abraham's faith Gal. 3. 7.
, will distribute their love to every one, and care for the soul of their
meanest servants, and take order in their families, that al their officers,
every day (at lest in their course) may go to church, and their very
kitchinboies, and hors-boyes, may learn to know the God of their salvation 1.
Chr. 28. 9.
; that so he may be able to say with a good conscience, I found my family a
co^fused Babel of disorder and profanenes, but I have heartily endeavored to
make it a little Church: and tho my family be great, yet there is not one whom
I would not have healed.

Thus they would have healed all: but where began they? whom did they desire to
win first and principally? certainly the greatest: as namely the K. and
Cou^sellers of State. This course took Daniel, in whom (more then in any one)
this prophecy was fulfilled: who after he had done the business for which the
king sent for him, the^ fell he to the business of God, whereof is spoken in this
Text, namely to see if he could heal the king: o King (says he) thou art a
king; but there is a higher; know, know, that the heavens bear rule. Wherefore
o King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins by
repentance, etc. Lo, let there be a healing of thine error Dan. 4. 24.
. Well knew Daniel, that if once the King would abandon his Idolatry, and
embrace the truth, easily would the people be induced to follow him: So,
whereeuer is true reformation either of errors in doctrine, or corruption in
manners, it must begin at the highest; else it will be to little purpose. To
little effect, were it in the natural body, to heal the hand and foot, when
the head is deadly sick; but heal the head first, and then more easily the
body will be cured: So in the spiritual body, how should Babel be healed,
when the King will not? how should they become Christian, when the king
persists a heathen? even so in our State, how shall popery be extinguished? how
shall vain swearing, wantonness, profaning of the Sabbath, bribery, and other
the sins of this age be reformed in the body of the people, if they be suffered
to harbor in the Court, and to creep into the Kings privy Chamber? Private
persons will hardly be brought to detest those sins, that are the common
practices and recreations of great persons. Therefore we have cause to bless
God for giving us such a King, as has care of religion, and who in his own
person, is an enemy to popery, a detester of wantonness, and injustice, and
many vile sins too commonly found in persons of his place. And let us not
cease to pray, that God would confirm him in all goodness, and that he may
still go on with David to reform the sins of the greatest, and them that are
nearest him: for when a King says, No wicked person shall serve me, nor abide
in my sight; then all wicked workers will easily be destroyed out of the land
Psa. III. see the whole psalm.
. If this had been in Babel, she had been cured: but the want of this was the
cause of that that follows:

But she could not be healed.
The 2. point.
HItherto we have spoken of the first general point; namely, the loving and
holy care of Israel, They would have cured Babell: Now follows the second,
that is, the ill issue of their good labors, caused by the obstinate malice of
the Babylonians, She would not be healed; some read, she could not be healed,
some she is not healed, all to one end; for he that will not be healed, is not,
nay cannot be healed: for God heales no man, conuerts no man, saues no man^
against his will: therefore, he that will not be healed, cannot be healed; and
so Babel is incurable because she contemned the mean, and would not be healed.
The godly Israelites did all they could: but the Babylonians had their answer,
(as ready as now have the papists; Think you, you (seely Israelites) that you
are able to teach Babylon a better religion then it has? The very same defense
is daily made for popery, that Babel made for her Idolatry: and the same
exceptions make they against us, and the same arguments bring they against our
religion, which they did against Israel: as is plain to see in Y^ books of
Harding, Stapleton, Sanders, Allen etc. and of late in Persons, Kellison,
Fitzherbert, and the rest.
Is not hers of so many, and so many years continuance? was it not the
religion our forefathers lived and dyed in? and is it not general and
universal over the world, and yours but in a corner? and is not ours visible?
and does it not prosper and flourish? and is not yours condemned by the consent
of all the world? and you for holding it, justly overthrown and conquered by
us? is not your visible Temple now defaced? your public daily sacrifice
ceased, and your succession cut off? and if you have any thing left, is it not
invisible, and in secret corners? and what can you allege for your religion?
That you have many learned men. Alas poor men! for one learned Rabbine that
you have, have not we twenty? are not the Chaldeans the famoust learned men of
the world, renowned for their high wisdom, their skill in Astrology,
interpretation of dreams, and other the most secret and supernatural
Sciences? and do you think it possible that so many learned Doctors can be
deceived, nay all the world be in an error, and only you that hold a
particular faction, and a singular new found religion, by your selves, should
have the truth amongst you? Go, go, poor souls, and sing your Hebrew songs by
your selves: but meddle not with the high mysteries of the Chaldeans religion.
And what will you have more? Show if you can one nation, of your religion, but
your selves: but all the world is of ours. You will say you have a succession
from Noah, and have not we so too? you came from Shem: and came not we also
from him, or at least from some other of Noah's sons? You are but one poor
branch of Shems root: there be many others lineally descended from him,
greater nations then you are; and do any of them follow your faction? Look
into the world at this day, and see if any Nation of all that came from all the
sons of Noah be of your religion: all that came of Cham are of ours, all that
came of Iaphet are of ours, and all that came of Shem, but only your selves.
See then what fools you are to strive against so strong a stream, and to
forsake the ancient and known highway, so long, and so well trodden, and to
take and choose a singular by way of your own. For, did not all Nations walk
in our way? and was there any one Nation of your Religion, till one MOSES,
and after him one SAMVEL, and DAVID, and a few others (to make themselves
great, and to bring to pass there own purposes) made a public reuolte from
the Religion of all other Nations, and set you up first a Tabernacle, and then
a Temple of your own? Therefore you are to be deemed and condemned for
Schismatickes, who have cut your selves off from the ancient and universal
Religion of the World. And what though you can plead continuance of some
hundreths of years, yet what is that to our time? for when you can scarce
show three poor housholdes in all the earth of your Religion, (as namely, in
the days of ABRAHAM and long both before and after) then can we prove that
all the Kingdoms and Nations of the whole earth were of ours.

Never brag that Abraham was of your religion, and therefore you are ancient:
for his Father and his Grandfather were ours, and therefore we are elder.
Again, during all the time you have had your Kings and Priests, show one
nation by you converted, or one that came and joined with you, of all that
time: and tho God suffered you for a time, yet see how at the last he has
brought you down; and as you forsook us and the ancient religion, which we
will keep and maintain; so he has now given us power over you, to conquer
your kingdom and deface your religion, as it has deserved: therefore never
labor to bring us to your novelty and new fangled religion; but rather come
home to us and to the ancient religion of our forefathers: never endeavor to
seduce us into your secret and schismatic, and invisible Church; but rather
come you into the light and sunshine of our glorious, universal, and
catholic Church: never speak of healing us: heal your selves seely fools,
for you have need; as for us, we are well, we are far better then Israel can
make us.

Thus did Babell cast away the good counsel that the Israelites gave them, and
pleased themselves in the like carnal arguments, and fleshly conceits, as
Papists in their popery, and other profane men in their carnalitie, do at this
day; setting these and many more fair glosses on their religion, and think
themselves in far better case then the Israelites: and yet when God comes to
give the verdite, they are sick; and which is worse, are past healing. Here we
may learn

1 First the pitiful estate of wicked men, They are wounded; nay, they will
be wounded, but will not be healed; they will wound themselves; but neither can
heal themselves, not will let others heal the^: are not they worthy to
perish? they are in the fire, and neither will come out, nor let others pull
them out; are they not worthy to burn? being in prison, the door set open to
them, and they will not stir to come out; are they not worthy to be slaves for
ever? they are deadly sick: the Physician comes to them that is able to heal
them, and they will not hear them: are they not worthy to die? O deaf adders,
that stop their ears against the voice of the best and wisest charmers! and
yet these men are the mockers, and scorners of them that be godly, and the
discouragers of many a man in the ways of God Some seeing their worldly
prosperity, stand amazed, and envy their estate: but alas, why should any man
do so? for if their estate be rightly considered, they deserve rather to be
pitied, then either envied, or any way regarded.

Further, here we may see how it fares with Gods children in this world; often
times they must lose their labor, when they have sincerely, and zealously
endeavored the conversion of sinners. Israel would have heal Babel: but when
all is done, she will not be healed. So says Solomon, Rebuke a scorner and he
will hate thee Prou. 9. 8
. No marvel, if this be so with private men, when the Ministers and Prophets
of the Lord, find oftentimes so little profit of their great labors, that they
cry out; I have labored in vain, and spent my strength in vain Esaias. 49. 4
. And Ministers may not think much hereat: for the Prophet makes that
complaint, not in his own person only, and his fellow Prophets, but even in
the person of Christ himself, whose labor was much of it lost in this
respect. For it is apparent in the Gospel how little he prevailed with many
of his own nation, yea with the learned Rabbines the Scribes and Pharisees
Lu^e. 7. 30.
: And after all the excellent sermons made all the time before, went not Judas
away fuller of Satan then he came Ioh. 13. 27
? And to conclude, did not God himself preach from heaven, a notable sermon to
Cain? and was he not worse for it? and being hellishly enraged, instantly
after the Sermon ran out and slew his brother Began. 4. 7.
? Thus howsoever Gods word never returns in vain, but prospers in the work
whereabout the Lord does send it Esaias. 55. 11
: Yet, it is here apparent, that it is not always the savor of life to life,
but often of death to death, in whose mouth soever it is spoken.

We must hear learn, not to be discouraged in our courses of seeking men's
conuersions; Private men to practice the duties of admonition, exhortation,
etc. unto their neighbors that be out of the way: Nor Ministers, to preach
the word, with all diligence. For howsoever thy labor may be lost to some; yet
know, thy labor is never lost before God: for be it the savor of life, or of
death, it is a sweet savor to God, (says the Apostle 2. Cor. 2. 14 15. 16.
: and tho in regard of men that will not be cured, thou have labored in vain,
and spent thy strength in vain; yet, says the Prophet, My judgment is with
the Lord, and my work with my God Esa. 49. 4.
. And let not the good man of God be too much cast down, tho he see little
fruit of his great labors; remembering that JESUS CHRIST and God himself have
lost their labor upon many men: and here the Church has many years
endeavored to cure Babel, and all is in vain. For, she will not be healed: And
will she not, what then remains but this that follows?

Let us forsake her, etc.
The 3. point.
FOr, after all means used and all in vain, then what should we do but forsake
them that needs will be forsaken of God, and have nothing to do with them, who
will have no fellowship with the Lord? This is the third general point, and
touching it there be three particulars examinable, namely, 1. how Babel is to
be forsaken. 2 why 3. when

For the first, how is Babel to be forsaken when there is no more hope of
curing her? the answer is, not in love and affectionate desire to do her good:
but still the wicked man is to be pitied, still to be loved, still to be
mourned for, still must the godly man wish well to him, tho he care not for it,
but scoff at all. Thus when the Prophet had called upon the people, Ier. 13.
16. 17
Hear and give ear, be not proud, but yield and turn and repent, and give
glory to God before he send darkness, etc. He then adds: But if you will
not hear and obey, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and mine
eyes shall drop down tears, etc. Thus the good man sends up many a sigh, and
sheads many a tear for the wicked, that never give one groan for themselves.

Nor must we forsake them in prayer; but though they seem to us never so
incurable, we must still pray without ceasing to GOD for them: for that that
is impossible to us, is possible enough with the Lord (h) God forbid (says
Samuel) that I should cease to pray for you 1. Sam. 12.
: and so must we say of all, even the greatest sinners; save only them that
sin against the holy Ghost (which no private man, but only the whole Church
can discern and judge of) God forbid that I should cease to pray for them.

Neither must we forsake them by a final separation, never to come at them,
nor to assist them any more: but still we must be willing to go again, and do
our endeavor, if ever there be hope that they will be healed. Forgive (says
Christ) not seven only, but 70. times 7. times. When a sick man is froward
and impatient, then the good Physician must be the patient: and tho he have
come often, and to no purpose, yet if at last he will be healed, he must not
forsake him; so must Gods children rejoice, if after never so many repulses,
the wicked will be content at the last to hear and to be healed. Thus we must
still love and pity them, still pray for them, and still be ready to do them
good: and in these three respects we must not forsake them.

But we must forsake Babel. First in regard of conversation: we must separate
our selves from the wicked man's company and society, as far as lawfully and
conveniently we may, after we see him obstinate and incurable: it is Gods
commandment, Flee from the midst of Babel: depart out of the land of the
Chaldeans Ierem. 50. 8.
: and do not this slackly and slowly (like Lots wife Genesis 19. 26
but be as the he Gootes before the flock.

Secondly, in regard of the means: for after that by her often and obstinate
refusal, (joined with spightfull contempt both of the meane^ and the men that
brings them) she has showed her self to be a filthy swine, then pearls are
no longer to be cast before her, holy things must no more be given to such
Dogs; but they are to be left to their vomit and mire, till God show either
his mercy, or justice upon them, either in their conversion or confusion.

Thus must she be forsaken: and the reason why (which is the second point) is
double.

First, in regard of our selves: we must forsake the wicked when they are
incurable, lest in steed of doing good to them, we take hurt our selves, by
being polluted by her contagion, or made partakers of her sins; and
consequently, of her punishment. God gives this reason himself: Flee out of
the midst of Babel, and deliver every man his soul, be not destroyed in her
iniquity Ierem. 51. 6
. Therefore after that a christian man perceiues there is more danger to get
hurt from them, then hope to do good to them, he is bound no longer to stay;
nay, he is bound to leave them and look to the safety of his own soul and
body.

Secondly, in regard of the means used to heal them: which because they be
the holy ordinances of God, and precious pearls; therefore are they not to be
exposed to the contempt of wicked men, not to be trodden under the foul feet
of their perverse and scornful spirits: Both these reasons does Christ cople
together. Give not that (says he) that is holy to dogs, neither cast your
pearls before swine; least they tread them under their feet, and turning
again all to rent you Mat. 7. 6
. Christ would neither have his ordinances abused, nor his children hurt by the
wicked men.

Thus we see the manner how, and the reasons why: Now let us see the time when
Babel must be forsaken; when she is incurable, but not til then: first, long
time is to be spent, all means to be used, all ways to be tried, all patience
to be practiced, and all wisdom to be exercised, all occasions to be taken,
that probably may prevail to do them good. But if after all this, they be
incurable, and out of hope; then must we forsake them but not till then, not
till there be no hope at all: he that forsakes Babel till then, is wanting in
his duty, and has much to answer for before God. For if the Physician may
not forsake this vile body Phil. 3. 21.
as long as there is any hope of life; then how may any man forsake the soul
that is precious, and that cost so precious blood 1. Pet. 1. 19
? Surely, the spiritual Physician must never forsake a Church, a people, or a
man, as long as there is any hope of curing and converting him.

Here is condemned the practice of two sorts of men amongst us. First, such as
be now termed of the separation, formerly and usually called Brownists; who
forsake our Church, and cut off themselves from our congregations, and separate
themselves to a faction, and fashion, or as they call it, into a co^enant and
communion of their own devising; these men have made a grievous rent, and
given a deep wound into the peace of our Church: they use this place and
others like against us, and say; We would have healed you, but you will not
be healed, therefore we forsake you: but they abuse the place; therefore, I
will turn the point of this their weapon against themselves: I mean against
their errors, and this their bitter and schismatic separation. To this end I
would ask these men but 4. questions: whereunto if they can give me
satisfaction, I will be one of them.

First therefore, whereas you say that We are wounded incurably, and will not
be healed, I ask; Wherein are we deadly or incurably wounded? what
fundamental wound is in our doctrine? what deadly corruption is in our
discipline, such as eats out the heart, and life, and being of a Church? what
book of Canonical scripture receive we not? what hold we for Canonical,
that is not? what sacrament that Christ ordained do we want? and what have we
more then Christ ordained? what article of faith deny we? or what hold we for
an article of faith that is not? what fundamental heresy does our doctrine
maintain? what have we in our Church, that overthrows the being of a Church?
what is necessarily required to make a Church, that we do want? Do not say,
These be many questions: for if you will have the^ all in one general, I will
end it as I began; Wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded? if I should
walk a while on your own grounds, and grant you that which you can never
prove; yet will it not follow that we are incurably, or deadly, wounded. A man
may want a finger, or have some blemishes in his face, and yet be a strong and
perfect man, sound, and heart-whole, and able to overthrow his enemies: so, tho
there were in our Church, those wounds you speak of, yet do they not come
near the heart, they be not deadly, they may blemish the beauty, but endanger
not the life of our Church. The Churches of Corinth and Galatia, had other kind
of blemishes then ours has; (blessed be God.) Corinth doubted or erred in the
great article of the Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. The Galathians erred foully in
the high and maine point of Justification; and yet Corinth a Church of God
sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1. Corinthians. ^. 2. And Galatia, though almost
removed to another Gospel, Galathians. 1. 6. yet not withstanding a Church for
all that. Galat. 1. 2. And if you will add to these fundamental errors in
doctrine, corruptions in manners, and disorders in Gods service, you can with
no show of truth lay such to the charge of our Church, as is apparent were
rise in the Church of Corinth: and then shall Corinth be a Church, and not
England? Let the Lord be Judge betwixt you and us. Therefore, if we should
grant unto you that our Church were blemished or wounded; yet not being deadly
wounded, your separation from us is schismatic and unjust: and more hardly
deal you with our Church, then did Gods Church even with Babell; who forsook
her not till she was deadly wounded, and past life. To conclude, if Israel
might not forsake Babel till then; then what are you that dare forsake a Church
of God, wherein ye have found God, if ever ye found him yet; and wherein the
devil himself cannot show one deadly wound: Blessed be the Lord that has so
healed us.

Secondly, seeing they say that we are wounded, but as for themselves they be
healed, and therefore they must separate, and so keep the sound from the sick;
I ask them this question: Are they healed? then where were they healed? where
were they called? where were they regenerat and begotten to Christ? was it not
in the womb of this our Church, and by means of the immortal seed of Gods
word, that is daily sown in our Church, and by the ministry of those men that
were called by our Church, and yet cleave to our Church, and mourn for their
separation; and by the deaw of that blessing from above, which is daily poured
upon our assemblies, from Gods merciful right hand? Then how can they deny
that to be a true Church, a holy Church, a Church of God, wherein ordinarily
men are called, and brought to God? And how unthankful and undutiful are they
to their spiritual mother, to forsake her, and cast the dust of contempt in
her face, that bore them in her womb, and brought them forth the sons of God?
To avoid this, what can they say, but one of these two things: either that
there is indeed a true ministry of the word amongst us; but it is not
powerful to any but themselves: that we have the word truly preached, and so
as it may convert a man; but it is not the savor of life to any, but such as
come into their covenant: (but from this horrible, and hellish pride, good Lord
deliver them; or else let them be assured, such a height of pride, is sure to
have a fearful fall.) Or if not this, then must they say that they were not
called, in our Church, but since they left us: But they have bard themselves
already from that plea. For, it being objected to them that they have left our
Church, not out of conscience, but out of carnal discontents, and upon fleshly
reasons, and worldly grounds; they all stoutly answer and stiffly stand to it,
that they do it not upon any such grounds, not for any reasons of flesh and
blood; but merely and only out of conscience, and for their salvation; and that
gladly they would have stayed, but with a good conscience they could not. If
this be true, then they had conscience before they left us: then where came
they to that conscience and care of their salvation, but in our Church? Now, a
good conscience cannot be severed from regeneration and an effectual calling:
therefore, they cannot deny, but they were regenerate, and called in our
Church; unless they will say, they had no conscience when they forsook us:
which if they do, then I will yield that my question is answered.

If they grant they were called before they went, and that still they who fall
from us to them, are called; then how can that be but a true Church, wherein by
their own confession, men are ordinarily begotten to God? and how can that be
but a lawful and holy ministry, which brings men to salvation? therefore,
(upon their own grounds) they have no just cause to leave us. For that Church
and Ministry that brings a man to grace, and to faith, is able to bring him to
glory and salvation: and that which is able effectually to begin, is able
effectually to finish the good work of God in any man.

Thirdly, if they be healed, and we still deadly wounded, then I ask them: How
have they sought, and sufficiently endeavored our healing? and till they have
done all that possibly can be done for our healing, how dare they forsake us?
For if the Israelites might not forsake Babel til then; shall they forsake us,
before they have put all means to the farthest? if they be healed already, why
do they not more seriously labor the healing of others? They cannot but
know, there be many in our Church curable enough, if they could show them to
need their healing: why then do not they stay amongst us, to heal and help
us? He is no good Physician, that flies and forsakes his Patient: they
therefore if they be healers, and would heal us as they pretend, why do they
not stay with us, and show us our wounds, and apply the means to heal us? But
contrariwise, they forsake us, and run into corners and rail on us, and call
us Babylon, Antichristian, and the synagogue of the wicked, and that we are no
church, and Christ is not amongst us. Are these the plasters with which you
will heal us? is this the way to heal, to make wounds wider and deeper then
indeed they be? He is a pitiful Physician, that makes his Patient worse
then he finds him: but he is not tolerable, that makes him worse then indeed
he is, or will make him believe he is heart sick and deadly, when his finger
aketh. They allege persecution, and that therefore they cannot stay with us
but are constrained to leave us: but assuredly (were it true that they say,
that we were deadly wounded, and they able to heal us) then, seeing they
cannot say that all amongst us are incurable, they would care for no danger
that could befall their bodies, so that they might heal our souls and gain
them to God. Therefore I conclude, that if we would grant them their own
grounds, that they are as good as they pretend to be, and we as ill as they
would make us; yet notwithstanding, their separation is unchristian: because
its certain none of them can have assured testimony to his conscience, that he
has done al he can possibly for our healing: til which time no man may forsake
another; especially no christian forsake another: and least of all a private
man forsake a Church.

Fourthly, and lastly, if they will needs leave our Church, whither will they
go? To leave one thing, for another no better, is seely; but for a worse, is
folly and madness. But they will say, they leave us to take the better: then
show me a better religion, and a better Church then the Protestant Churches of
Europe are, and the religion amongst them. You will not go to the Lutheranes,
for they (you say) are worse then we: much less to the Papists, for they
apparently are worst of all: whither then? will you go to the Church of the
Lowe-countries? but they are of our confession, will you go to the Churches of
France? but they are of our confession. will you go to the Church of Geneua,
or the free Cities of the Empire? but they are of our religion. will you go to
the Church of Scotland, to the Cantons of Switzerland, to the States, and
Princes of Germany? but they are all of our confession, and so profess
themselves to be See the harmony of confessions.
. Look over all Christendom, and you shall not find a Church that condemns
ours, nor any that is not of our religion, nor any one but that professes it
self to be of the same confession with us, and not to differ from us in any
substantial or fundamental point. Whither then will you go? or what remains
for you to go unto, but unto your corners and conuenticles, where you are your
own caruers, your own Judges, your own approuers, but have not one Church in
Christendom, to approve you.

So that then it remains, it must either be granted you, that you are better
then all others, and that (notwithstanding the Gospel preached thus long,
since the revealing of Antichrist) there is not one true Church in the world
but your selves: or else you must grant that there is no better Church for you to
go unto, if you forsake us. Therefore play the wise men's part; forsake not our
church til you can show a better. And tell us not of France, Scotland, Geneua,
Zurick, Basil, etc. for they be all ours, and not yours: they will and do all
approve us as a glorious Church, and condemn you, as factious, and
sohismatical. And seeing you can find none better (all things considered) and
have none to fly to but your selves (who are the parties now in question, and
therefore no fit Judges of the matter) look well about you; and if vnaduized
zeal have caused this bitter separation, then by your return make up that
breach again, which by your revolt you made in our Church: Return again into
the bosom of the Church, ask pardon of that your Mother, who brought you
forth children of light: Come, and join with us against the Papist, the common
enemy; who, by our division has gotten ground upon us all.

Remember Peter's answer, when Christ asked the Apostles, after so many fell
from him, what (says he) Will you also go away? Alas Master, says Peter,
Whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life John, 6. 61
. So will you say, if true humility and saving grace possess you, when your
dear mother in whose womb you were conceived, and with whose breasts you have
bin fed, shall ask you (after so many reuolters to popery) what, Will you also
go away? Alas! whither should we go from thee? thou have the words, and thou
have the Sacraments, of eternal life. Yea, malice it self cannot deny but
we have them; and he who gave them us, grant we may long enjoy them Amen.

And as for you, my brethren (Brethren I call you, because I am sure we had
both one mother) look well about you, and consider of the bitter effects like
to follow, upon this your separation: remember that they will all lie heavy
upon you. And do not say, you are driven out: for if it be the Church, and if
the words of eternal life be here, nothing in the world ought to drive you from
it. Nay, your separation was wilful: therefore, let your return be voluntary:
and til then, esteem as basely and censure as sharply of us as you list; but
know, that for this division of Ruben, are great thoughts of heart Judge. 5. 15.
.

The second sort of men, whose practice is reproved by this doctrine, be such,
as refuse public places in the Church, and commonwealth, and retire
themselves into private and discontented courses, and will not be employed for
the public; because they pretend the days are evil, and many sores in our
body incurable, unless there be other order taken for their healing. To these
men I would say but two words.

1. Are the days evil? the more need have they to be amended by each ones
helping hand. And if we have any wounds in Church or state, more cause has
each one that loves the peace and health of Jerusalem, to endeavor the present
healing thereof, least they fester and grow worse.

But secondly, are the times evil? Nay, are they not made evil by thee? at
least, are they not the worse for thee and thy sins? Who can show his face
and say; I have committed no sins, that may be in part a cause to bring down
the spiritual and corporal plagues that are amongst us? Then what are they
that are so busy to complain of the times, and so slack to complain of their
sins? But it is a trick of hypocrisy, to be so eagle eied in prying into the
illness of the times, and so blind and dull in considering his own sins,
the cause of all that ill. Thou, contrariwise, out of a holy and humbled heart
confess, that seeing thy sins have made the times worse then else they would
have been, therefore thou have cause to endeavor for thy part to make them
better. Then set thy shoulder to the burden, and put thy neck to the yoke,
remembering that even Babel it self is not to be forsaken, till it be
altogether incurable, and past al hope: But being incurable (as here the text
says) she is; therefore, says the church, Let us forsake her.

And now Babell being forsaken of the Church, what remains to be expected?
nothing but vengeance and destruction.

For her judgment is come up unto heaven, etc.
The 4. point.
IN these words is laid down the last point; namely, what becomes of Babel,
when being incurable she is forsaken by the Church: she is made ready for
judgment and destruction. Here we may learn (amongst many others) two most
worthy doctrines.

First, what the wicked get by persecuting, and banishing, and seeking to root
out Gods children: surely, even nothing but the hastening of their own
destruction. The Babylonians cared not for the Israelites company: but as soon
as they were gone destruction came upon Babel. Whilst they stay, the wicked are
spared: but when they are gone, vengeance breaks out. Whilst Lot was in Sodom
it perished not: Nay, (says the Angel to him) Haste thee away, for I can do
nothing til thou be safe from amongst them Genesis 19. 22.
. See, God the good King is more careful to save one of his own servants,
then to destroy a thousand enemies: but see their madness, they mocked and
flowted this Lot, scorned him as a stranger, and many ways grieved his
righteous soul, were weary of him, and his company, and tried every way, to
make him weary of the Town; for they held it worse, as long as he was in it:
at last they have their wills, and he forsakes them; but with him their
protection is gone, and now fire, and brimstone, falls from heaven on them. So,
at this day do the wicked and worldly men: whom hate they, whom accuse they,
whom abuse they, who^ lie they in wait for, whom persecute they, whom would
they destroy, whom banish they, whom are they weary of, but of the godly men?
When they die, they bid them be gone, and wish that all were gone after them;
not knowing (poor fools) that if these men stood not in the gap, the fire of
Gods wrath had long since broken out upon them; and when they are gone, then
they are well apayed, and are glad: But alas! what have they gained? even as
much as Sodom did when they had cast out Lot.

Secondly, we may here learn, what a fearful and dangerous thing it is not
to be healed by spiritual Physic (that is) not to profit by the word of
God, nor to be converted from sin, when God gives means^ For, what is this but
an evident testimony of Gods heavy wrath, and a certain forerunner of
damnation? Will not Babylon be healed? then what follows but destruction? So
in the new Testament, If our Gospel be hid, (says Paul, it is hid to them
that perish 1. Cor. 4. 3
. For as if at noon day any man say the sun shines not, it is because he is
blind and cannot see: So, if in the sunshine of the Gospel, some see it not,
but in the midst of that light live in darkness, its certain they are blinded
by Satan, and if they continue so are marked up for just damnation. A fearful
example we have hereof in the sons of Eli, of whom the Text says, their
Father hearing of all the evil they did, called the^ and reproved them, and
gave them good and ghostly counsel, able (a man would have thought) to have
turned their hearts; especially coming from a Father, and from him that was
the Judge and Prophet of the Church: But all in vain; for, notwithstanding,
they obayed not the voice of their father: 1. Sam. 2. 25.
and mark the reason; because the Lord would s^ay them. Whereby its apparent,
there is not (ordinarily) a surer sign of a reprobate, then not to obey the
voice and word of God, nor to profit by those means that God gives a man for
his conversion.

A matter of special use to our Church, which has so long enjoyed the
Gospel: but to you of this City especially, who have long and liberally been
fed from heaven, with abundance and variety of spiritual food. Therefore, every
one look to thy self how thou profitest by these good means. For be assured,
if any congregation or particular man have use of the means and profits not,
but runs on hardened in his sins; it is because he is a vessel of Gods
wrath, and prepared for damnation: but contrariwise, he that hears and
yields, and obeieth, and repents, it is an undoubted pledge to him of his
salvation, laid up in heaven assuredly for him. Therefore, let every one take
heed: for otherwise his lot will be like Babylons; of whom we here find, that
because all means used to convert her were in vain, therefore she is now
justly destroyed, and remains a monument of misery, and a spectacle of Gods
justice, to all posterities Read, for this end, the 50. and 51. Chapt. of
Jeremy, and other places of the Prophets.
.

Thus concerning the literal Babylon we have heard, 1. How Israel would have
cured her. 2. How she will not be healed. 3. How therefore she is forsaken of
the Church. And 4. How being past cure, she is therefore destroyed.

And having thus performed the first part of my task, namely touching the old
and literal Babel: it now remains that we come to the Mystical Babylon; in
and concerning whom, all these 4. are as true as in the former.

The Second Part, touching mystical Babylon.
THat which we have heard of the literal, is also true in the mystical
Babylon, Mystical Babylon is the spiritual kingdom of darkness, the
kingdom of Satan. And this kingdom is partly temporary; which is the
kingdom of Antichrist: and partly permanent, and perpetual; and that is the
kingdom of Sin. That the kingdom of Antichrist, namely, the Church of Rome,
is mystical Babylon, I will not stand to prove, seeing it is as good as
granted by Bellarmine Bellar. de Romano pontif. lib. 3. cap. 13. In resp. ad
arg^.
and other Papists, compelled thereunto by the clear authorities of some
Fathers, but especially by the evidence of the holy Text in the Revelation;
where, by two notable arguments it is ineuitably concluded. For first, if the
mystical Babylon be the City seated on 7. hills Revel. 17. 9
(as the Text says) then Rome is Babylon, which above all or any City in the
world, is so: and that not on seven obscure or little hillocks, but seven
hills famously and notoriously known by name Mo^is Coelius. Exquilinus.
Palatinus.
. Nor is it any thing worth, to say that old Rome was indeed so seated, but
that now it is shrunk into the plain of Campo Martio. Viminalis. Quirinalis.
Auentinus. Capitolinus.
For notwithstanding that it be true for the body of the town; yet diverse
public places where Antichrist exercises his authority and tyrannical
jurisdiction, are yet to this day on those hills; as namely, and especially, the
Lateran Church and Palace: which Church one of their Popes has by Bull and
Charter made the head of all the Churches of the world; to wit Gregory the
eleventh, almost 250. years ago: and after him Pius the fourth, and of late,
Pius quintus have by public constitution confirmed the same: and in which
Church or Palace there have bin held by several Popes, some 33. provincial or
national, and 5. general Councels, all or most of them for the raising up and
establishing of Antichrists Throne: and in which the most horrible and heinous
canons were concluded against God and his Church that ever were before: as (to
name but two.)

1. That monster of transubstantiation, that the substance of bread and wine in
the sacrament cease, and is turned into the substance of Christ's body and
blood. 2. That a King, an heretic, not reforming himself and his land,
(meaning to popery), is to be deposed by the Pope, his subjects to be
discharged from his obedience, and his land to be given to Papists; to whom
the Papes gift shall be good and effectual.
This Church and Palace, besides many of inferior note, stands to this day on
the hill Coelius: and though now the Pope for his pleasure has removed himself
^uer the River to the Vaticane; yet in former times, for many hundred years,
(as Blondus himself confesses) it was the principal seat of the Popes: which
appears also by the verses written up and down the Church; especially those
that are graue^ over the marble chair, which is hard by the high altar where
the Pope sits at mass. Haec est Papalis seeds and pontificalis:
Praesidet and Christi de iure vicarius isti:
Et quia iure datur, seeds Romana vocatur:
Nec debet vere nisi solus Papa sedere:
Et quia sublimis, alij subduntur in imis.
Thus its apparent, his chief throne is upon one of the 7. hills. And it is very
obseruable, that howsoever they make their succession from Peter; and that
therefore in reason his Church should have bin chief: yet that God may show to
the world that their City is the Whore that sits on 7. hills; therefore, by
Gods just judgment they are so blinded, that they have made a Church and
Palace, that is on one of the hills, superior to that they call S. Peter's, which
is not on any of the hills; and have given it not only priority, and precedence,
but even privilege and pre-eminence above S. Peter's.

Another unanswerable reason out of the Text is; That City (says the Text) is
Babylon, which reigns over the kingdoms of the earth Reu. 17. 18.
: but Rome and no other City, at that day and long after, reigned over the
world. Therefore Rome is that Babylon.

Seeing then the holy Text cleers it, the Fathers approve it, Bellarmine
himself grants it, and the Rhemists also (upon condition we will yield that
Peter was at Rome) do willingly yield it Rhemist in 1. Pet. cap. 5.
; therefore we will not stand upon further proof. And as for their
distinction that Rome heathen is Babylon, but not Rome Christian: I answer
briefly, that if heathenish Rome be Babylon in regard of her sinnefulnesse and
persecution of the Saints; then this Rome is Babylon also, seeing in her
sinful abominations and cruel persecutions, she is nothing inferior to
old heathenish Rome: as may be easily proved and showed at large, if this time
and place required it; and as has been already showed in diverse learned
writers, and (in good part) confessed by many of their own. Now then to go
forward touching this mystical Babell; I propound these four points to be
considered: 1. That we would have healed her. 2. That she will not be cured. 3.
That therefore we ought to forsake her. 4. That God will take just vengeance on
her.


The 1. and 2. is past, the 3. is in hand, and the fourth is sure to come: its
true we would have healed her; its most true She is past cure; I hope it shall
be as true that we shall quite forsake her; and the last hastens fast on, Her
destruction is at hand and sleeps not.

For the first: That we would have cured the Papists, we dare call the world to
witness, and appeal even to God himself; and this not only desired, but
endeavored it by all good means, both in the days of that renowned Q.
Elizabeth of happy memory, and in the present government of our Sovereign
that now is.

The means we have used for their healing be diverse. 1. By instructing, and
informing them in the truth, and discovering their errors both by holy
Scriptures, and by the ancient Fathers of the best and purest times. Jewel,
Fulk, Whitakers, Rainolds, Perkins, and many other, who now sleep in Christ,
have left behind them such testimonies of this truth as shall live whilst the
world lasts, and never can be confuted; as appears in that they have not
dared to answer most of their books to this day.

Secondly, our continual prayers for them, both public, and private; in
performance of which duty, both our Church in general, and all amongst us
(that use to pray for themselves) have the testimony of a good conscience, that
they have not failed to endeavor their healing by this means. This our
diligence in this duty, so shamed them for their negligence in the same for us,
that iiij. years ago they published at Rome a form of Litanie, and public
prayer, for the perverting of the Realms of England and Scotland, to Popery.
But by the way let it be observed, that as when Cain left his frowning at his
brother, and began to make show of friendship with him, and entised him by fair
words into the fields, the^ he harbored the heauiest malice in his heart and
there slew him Genesis 4. 7.
: So when these men had conceived, and hatched at Rome the powder treason; then
to make us secure, and believe they loved us, they framed prayers for us, as
tho the worst thing they wished us were our conversion; when as indeed they
plotted the subversion of us all. He that sits in heaven, and laughed both
them and hell to scorn, for that their devise, knows we have not dealt so
with them. Well, if their Prayers hereafter come so attended, let us have their
curses, and let their prayers turn into their own bosoms.

Thirdly, we have endeavored to heal them by our example, professing and
practicing our own religion, daily in their sight: and many of our Fathers
professed it openly, even in the times when they prevailed, and gave their
lives in the fire for it. And heerin the example of noble Q. Elizabeth is
worthy of eternal memory, whose constant zeal to the truth was such, as that
al her days they could not by their brags and treasons, and curses, cause her
once to fear the^; nor by all their sleights, could ever win the least
estimation with her, nor gain an inch of ground in her heart: nay, her last
Proclamation, not two months before her death wounded them as deeply, or
rather more then ever any one before See the Proclamation published in Feb.
before h^^ death.
.

Fourthly, and lastly; we endeavored their healing, by devising and enacting
good and wholesome laws against their errors, superstitions, impieties, and
seditious courses: sometime in justice executing them, oftentimes in great
mercy suspending them; thus trying all means that might possibly persuade or
work upon them: and in this course (our State by wise foresight, and discreet
managing the laws; our Ministry by instruction and confutation, and all by
their prayers and example) did we continue to endeavor her healing, all the
happy days of Q. Elizabeth.

But especially dare we call the Lord to witness, that we have endeavored her
healing since the happy coming of his Majesty to this Crown; wherein all the
forenamed means have been used, and one more: their errors have been most
learnedly discovered, and confuted, their books and libells answered; and if
I may give my judgment of these days, the skirts of the Romish Whore were
never better discovered, her grossest absurdities and fowlest impieties never
so clearly displayed, as have been by the Divines of this present age. I spare
their names, in regard they be alive: and long may they live, to the
happiness of this Church.

And beyond all means then used, and now continued, his Majesty has used one
more; namely, admirable lenity, and extraordinary patience toward them,
notwithstanding all their ill deseruings: which as it was always great; so,
since the hellish powder treason it is incredible: for he whose patience is not
provoked, and whose just anger is not wakened by such an attempt, sure there is
something more then ordinarily humane, in that man. Neither do I think is there
a King in Christendom, that after such a treason would have left one of that
faction in his kingdom, but only his Majesty. Oh mirror of mercy! how
famously in future ages shall this princely bounty be renowned! and how fit is
he to be the Lords anointed, and to be the Lieutenant of that God whose mercy
is over all his works; seeing his mercy is so largely extended even over his
worst deserving subjects. Thus heaven has seen it, even the Lord himself
will witness with us, that as all his Church every where over the world, so
we in England for our parts, would gladly have healed Babylon, and have done
our full endeavor to that end: But now alas see the effect of our labors, all
is lost; for she is Babylon, and therefore past cure: She will not, and therefore
cannot be healed.

Some will say this is harsh and bitter: but I say it is true, and therefore is
not to be co^cealed: let her blame them that have made her incurable, and not
them that d^scouer it: and for me that affirm it, I crave not to be believed,
but rather to be reproved, if the evidence of the fact do not fully prove
what I have said.

To this end, I will first lay down a ground or two.

First, that in former times there have been great complaints of foul
deformities in the Romish Church, made by men of great learning, and such as
either are, or at least whom they say are, their own: and these deformities
not only in private persons, but in the public body; not in the members only,
but in the head of their Church. I will not stand to prove this, it being not
the end of my purpose at this time: they that look into the monuments of elder
ages do know this to be true; and whosoever will but look into the
Revelations of Saint Bridget, Bernards Epistles, Vicentius Ferrariensis, and
others of that age, will soon acknowledge it.

Another ground: these deformities were so foul and so apparent, that the
Councels of Constance, and Basil, and (of later times) that of Trent, were
called to this principal end, for the reformation of the Church both in the
head and in the members. For that of Constance, the Council it self
confesses it in the public acts thereof more then once: and for that of
Trent, howsoever they pretended it against Luther and his doctrine; yet it is
confessed by a learned Bishop of their side Espencaeus in Titum. cap. 1.
, that it was wrought out and brought to pass at last, and after much
resistance, for the reformation of the Romish Church, and even of the Popes
own Court; wherein there reigned at that time many abominable things, as one
of the better sort of Popes himself freely confessed Adrian the 6
. Upon these grounds I proceed to lay down 3. propositions, touching the
incurablenesse of Romish Babel.

1. That these Councels assembled to reform and amend, did contrariwise
establish diverse impious errors never before decreed in the world.

2. That those foul deformities in the Romish Church, both in the head and
members, and both for doctrine and manners, that were in that Church before
those Counsels, and for the redress whereof, those Councels were called, did
nevertheless, and yet do, continue unreformed.

3 That since then, in steed of redress and reformation of the evils then
found, there have contrariwise grown up in their Church more horrible and
heinous practices, and more erroneous and impious doctrines then ever before;
and at this day stand unreproved, and maintained by their Church. And these
three propositions being proved, I hope there is none but will confess that
the Romish Church, for ought that man can see is past cure, or at least, not
yet healed.

The first Proposition.
The last popish Counsels decreed worse things then any before them.
TOuching the first, I prove it by a few particulars in steed of many: and
first for the Council of Constance, that Council decreed. 2. such decrees, as
tend rather to the ruinating of all religion, and overthrowing all humane
society, then any whit to the curing of diseases either in the one or other.

For first, whereas it is known and granted, that Christ, at his last Supper
ordaining the holy Comunion, did consecrate and give it both in bread and wine,
and commanded his Ministers after him, Do this See all the Evangelists, and S.
Paul. 1. Cor. 11^ 23. etc.
: and tho it cannot be denied but that the primitive and ancient Church did so
receive it, as Christ left it; yet for all that, comes the Popish Council of
Constance, and calls it a perverse fashion, and an ill order of those that give
their people the Sacrament in both kinds: and do further decree, that,
Notwithstanding Christ ordained, and the primitive Church practiced it in both
kinds: yet now to say that it is necessary to receive it in both, shall be
heresy, and punished as heresy; that is, with death, and loss of lands, and
goods, etc. And howsoever Bellarmine Bellar. de Sacra^. Euch. lib. 4. cap. 2^.
much ashamed of the matter, will needs that the Non-obstante is not referd to
the institution in both kinds, but to the celebration after supper (and
therefore accuses Luther and others, as liars, for so reporting of the
Council) yet many others of his fellows make no bones to grant it: and if
they all denied it, the very words themselves of the Canon are plain enough.

Now, thus to decree and make a Canon, contrary to the direct institution and
commandment of Christ; what is it but to control Christ himself, and to
weaken the certainty of all truth and religion?

Secondly, whereas there can be no firm society amongst men, if oaths and
covenants (especially made by public persons) be of no force, and therefore God
himself would have the Israelites oath to the Gibeonites, performed, though it
was craftily extorted Ios. 9. 19.
; and after severely punished Saul in his posterity, for the breach of it 2.
Sam. 21. 1. 2.
: yet the Romish Council in this latter age has decreed, that Council.
Constant. sessione. 19.
Though the Emperor or King give a safe conduct, to one accused of heresy, to
come to a Council or Disputation, etc. and tho he bind and confirm that safe
conduct with any bond whatsoever, and tho the party would not have come, but
upon the assurance of the safe conduct: Yet ( hoc non obstante) this not
withstanding, he may be taken and proceeded against and burned as an heretic,
without any prejudice to the Catholic faith, etc.

If this be good divinity, that Oaths and Covenants to heretics are of no
force, and bind not the makers; then it is in vain for men to have any
dealing one with another: for if oaths be once of no force in any one thing,
they will in time be weakened in all things.

Thus this Romish Council that should have amended, has contrariewise decreed
two conclusions of monstrous impiety: and such, as (for ought I could ever
see) were never till then decreed nor received; no, not in the Romish Church it
self.

But is this reformed since? No, says a great Spanish Bishop, more then a
hundred years after this Council); it is so far from being altered, that
contrariwise, by the authority of this decree, it is now a rule in our Church
that faith made to an heretic, by a private man, is not to be kept; no, nor
if it be made by a Magistrate, as (says he) is proved by the practice of the
Council of Constance. Mark how they are healed: before it was true in public
persons; nor it is true in private men also: before it might be broken without
any fault; but now it may not be kept. See how Babylon is cured.

But the Council of Trent is of later times: has not it done much good and
reformed much ill? Nay on the other side, it has decreed and made two Canons
to the high disgrace of holy Scriptures, and much derogating from the soueraign
authority thereof; which till then were never decreed, not in the darkest times
of popery, when her ignorance and superstition was without all control: As
namely, first Council. Trident. sess. 4.
, That the Apocriphall Books of Tobiah, Judith, and the rest, shall be held
and received, of as authentical and Canonical authority, as any parts of holy
Scripture, whose authority was ever sacred.

This wrong was never offered to the holy Scriptures before: neither was there
ever any popish general Council, so presumptuous before this of Trent, that
ever durst add more books to the sacred Canon, then we received from Christ and
the Church of the old Testament. Some bold Papists say, that the Florentine
Council, before Trent, did make them Canonical: which if it had, it had bin
little material, seeing it was but a small time before Trent, scarce 100.
years: but the truth is, it did not; and therefore Bellarmine and Coccius are
more careful of their credit, and will not affirm it Bellar. tom. 1 lib. de
verbo Dei.
. So that its clear, there never was general Council that made them
Canonical before Trent, Coccius in the sauro cathol. tom. 1.
nor any provincial but one Council. C^^thag. 3.
: and they are not able to bring one Father that held them so, within 400.
years after Christ, nor very many after till of late; and contrariwise we are
able to prove, that all the Fathers for 400. years did reiecte them, and many
after; yea, the greater part of all learned Papists themselves till the
Council of Trent. And thus we see how Romish Babylon is still the elder the
worse: But this is not all: a Romish Council will never meet for one evil.
Therefore secondly they decree Council. Trident. sess. 4.
, That in all Disputations, Sermons Lectures, and to all other purposes, that
Latin translation called the vulgar, shall be held the authentical text, and
that no man presume under any pretext to refuse it.

Here is a strange decree, that the stream shall be of more virtue then the
Fountain, a translation of more authority then the Original. The former ages
never heard of this indignity: but whenever doubt was made, or difference
found, recourse was forthwith had to the Originalls for the determining of the
matter. Many learned Papists are ashamed of this, if they durst utter it.
Bellarmine and Coccius do bewray it by their slight handling of the matter; for
they would gladly prove if they could, that Hierome was the author of that
translation: but as for the magnifying of it (whosoever was the translator)
above the Originalls, they are wiser then to venture their credits upon so
false a matter, and therefore do wholly leave it upon the credit of that
conuenticle that concluded it. Neither do I wrong, to call it a Conuenticle:
for tho I should grant the whole to be a Council; yet the number that past this
bil, was so small, that I may safely call it a Conuenticle. For as an ill
motion may pass in Parliament betimes in a morning before all the house be set,
so was this bill carried at Trent. For whereas the Council in his fullness
consisted of about 300. that had voice of decision, they took the advantage at
the beginning of the Council, and carried these two bills when there were scarce
60. in the house (whereof how many went against them is uncertain) for the Pope
durst not (for one of his Crowns) have put these 2. bills, especially the
latter, to the full house: for how would they have entertained it, then when as
they had liberty of speech against it, who since their tongues were tied and
the bil passed, yet have dared (and some of them who were of the Council
themselves) even to resist the decree, Arius Montanus, Sixtus Senensis,
Oleaster, etc.
and have taken so contrary a course themselves in expounding the Scripture,
that howsoever they were tolerated for their learning whilst they lived; yet
being dead, their books are either purged, that is altered, or else reproved: So
that its apparent to all that will understand, that this decree was so far from
being established in any former ages, that it is even misliked of many of the
better sort of themselves now that it is made.

And thus I hope we have cleared it, that these two Counsels, called in the
corrupt and declining times of the Popish Church, in show to have reformed it,
have been so far from that, that contrariwise they have concluded diverse
enormous impieties that were not before: Then is not the Romish Babylon well
cured?

The second Proposition;
Popery is still as ill as ever it was.
I hasten to the second Proposition: which is, that the deformities that were
before, both in Doctrine and practice, both in head and members, and many
whereof were complained on by some of themselves, do yet remain without
redress or reformation.

For the demonstration of this Proposition, I might enlarge my self into many
particulars; but I will insist but upon few: and those I shall produce shall
not be trifles, nor triuiall, but of great moment, even touching the maine and
moral duties which a Christian man owes to his God; and which to deny is to
deny God, to falsify his word and nullify his law. And to this end, it
were no hard matter, to pass through the most of the 10. Commandments of the
Moral and eternal law: but I will stand upon some few of the principal.

In all which, my course shall be fairest for them, and safest for my self:
for I will not rely upon the credit of any reporter nor other writer, how
great soever his authority be; but produce the records themselves, and the
authentical originalls of their own books, as they stand at this day allowed
by Authority.

Now therefore, whether the Romish Babylon be yet cured or no, let the
Christian world judge by these particulars:

The first Wound.
THe pride of the Romish Antichrist, in times past, was such, that he exalted
himself, at least suffered himself to be set in the throne of God; yea, and
to be called of men God, and their Lord God The first wound; The Pope is a God,
and their Lord God.
: and this not only in private Authors, but even in his own Canon law: these
be the words in the gloss upon the extrauagants; To believe that our Lord God
the Pope, the maker of this Decretal, may not decree it as he has; may be
judged heretical.

The words are plain enough. But if any man say this is but the gloss, and
not the Text: I answer; first that the gloss is of greater authority amongst
them then any, or then many Doctors. But further, what if we find as much or
worse, out of the very Text of the Popes law it self? Look in the Decree,
the 96. distinction, there the Pope himself frames this argument, writing to
the Emperor against them that would call his Holiness to account; Its certain
that the Emperor Constantine called the Pope God. But its as clear that God
may not be judged of men. Ergo the Pope may not be judged of any man.

Thus the Pope that canonizeth so many men and women Saints, has here taken
pains to canonize himself a God, both in the Text and gloss of his own law:
his glossers call him their Lord God, and he is content to take it to
himself. Constantine (he says in the text) calls him God, and he is content
both to take it, and make good use of it. Whether this be not Herod's sin
Act. 12.
at least, let him look to it; but let us go forward. Here Babylon is sick
of a deadly evil: but is she healed? I wish she were: but I cannot show it.
The first wound not healed.
If any say she is, then let him show me that Pope, or name me that Writer,
Doctor, Inquisitor, Bishop, or any other, who by commandment or authority, or
but with the approbation of the Pope, has confuted, or but as much as reproved
this blasphemy; or show any that has reproved it, whom they have not blamed
or condemned. But that she is not cured in this point, I can make it apparent.
For look in the Canon law reuiewed, and as they pretend reformed and reprinted
of late by the authority and with the approbation of Pope Gregory the
thirteenth under his bull; where though many things be altered, or taken out
that made against the Popes primacie: yet this that makes so much against Gods
holy Majesty is not in one point helped, nor in one word altered, but still
this is good and Catholic Diuiin the Popes law, that The Pope is God, and
therefore may not be judged of men.

But will you have yet better evidence, that She is not cured? Hearken a
little: A great Italian Doctor, no less then a Bishop, writes thus to the Pope
himself (for to the Pope either the Author or his Nephew does dedicate it) no
longer then three or four years ago; From the Pope as from the Head there
do flow into the whole body of the Church, that is, into the whole Christian
world, spirits or spiritual life, yielding the feeling and fruit of heavenly
graces, and effectual motion to eternal happiness: therefore he is worthily
called (as God is) most holy and most blessed, and is worshipped and adored as
a God of all christian men.

Lo here as bad or worse then the former: the Pope is such a Head of the
Church, as infuseth spiritual life, and heavenly graces into the body of the
Church (Does Christ himself any more?) and he is worthily worshipped as a
God. And this does Pope Clement the 8. suffer to be spoken and written of
himself, and not 4. years ago to be printed under his nose at Rome; and
thence to be sent over the world: and now judge, Is not Romish Babylon well
healed? nay, rather alas, does not her wound fester and rankle more and more?
Well then seeing this is the Romish doctrine and practice, both old and new,
both long ago and now present, let us make a little use of it.

First, we see here good reason, why a Papist should hold the Pope above a
Council, and even the holy scripture it self: for the Pope is God; and we
know that God is above the Scripture.

Secondly, why also the Pope holds himself above Kings: for he is God, and God
is King of kings: in a word, no marvel why he should take appeals from all the
world, wear a triple Crown, be carried on men's shoulders, give his foot to
be kissed, dispose of kingdoms and kings at his pleasure; for he that is God
may do more then all these. And surely, we Protestants must needs grant, that
as truly as he is a God, so lawfully may he do all these. All these uses are
as good, as that is the Pope himself makes, when he says: God may not be
judged by men; but I am God, and therefore may not be judged by man: these be
his arguments: but now he shall give me leave to make but one for him and his
fellows.

The God that admits another Lord God, and to be worshipped as God; is not
the Lord JEHOVAH, the true God: for the true God is God alone Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
: but the Papists God admits of another Lord God, and to be worshipped as God;
therefore he is not the true God. If they deny the Mayor, they deny Scripture:
If the Minor, they deny their Doctrine, and their own books: if they grant
both, they are worthy of the Conclusion.

I would end this point: but I cannot omit to make one use more of this their
doctrine. It has bin made a question amongst them, whether the Pope might not
empty all Purgatory, if he see cause; and no marvel: for he being God,
surely (if there be a purgatory) God can empty it. Now to conclude, all these
do but equallize the Pope with God: but what if he have made himself greater
then God The 2. wound; The Pope has done more then God.
? I will be but the relatour, let the Reader judge.

The second Wound.
ALmost two hundred years ago, he did with public authority and after
long examination, by a great Cardinal This Cardinal was Johannes de turre
cremata: as appears in the prefaces before the book of the Revelations of S.
Brigit.
and other Commissioners, approve and after suffered to be published to the
world, a book in latin, called The Revelations of Saint Brigite.

Where it is dogmatically delivered and as a matter without question, That Pope
Gregory by his prayers lifted the heathen Emperor Traiane out of hell: and
another long before, (whom they pretend also to be theirs) delivers it more
amply, adding further that God answered the Pope thus: I have heard thy
prayers, and I grant mercy and pardon to Traiane; but see that thou hereafter
offer me no sacrifice, for an ungodly man (h). From hence I offer them this
argument to think on; The true God never delivered a damned soul out of hell:
but the Pope has delivered a soul out of hell: therefore he^ has done that,
that God never did, not for ought that is revealed ever will do.

Here is a foul wound, but is this healed up? No, The 2. wound not healed.
this book stands allowed by the the Pope: and in his Catalogue of the books
which he forbids to be read Vide Indice^ lib. prohib. per Clem. 8.
, where many a learned and godly book is condemned, this is not touched; and
therefore, as Posseuine himself (a Jesuit) graunts Posseuinus loco citato.
not two years ago, not only the book stands uncondemned, but this foul
blasphemy uncontrolled: and to show that the head of Babylon, namely, the
Pope is incurable; let it be observed, that tho many particular learned Papists
Mel. Canus. lib. 11. c. 2. Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 8. Blas. Vieg. in
Apoc. c. 6. comment. 3. sect. 3. Baronius annal. circa temp. Traianj.
have misliked, and condemned it as far as in them lies; yet to this day
was it never condemned, not the book forbidden or amended by the Pope: so
unwilling is Babylon to be healed of her wounds.

Yea, the Pope is so far from healing it; that contrariwise he suffered a
Spanish Dominican Friar to defend it: and that not in word, but writing; not
privately, but openly: not in a corner of the World, but to come to Rome within
these few years, and there even to write and publish under his nose, and by
his authority, and apology of this blasphemous fable,^ endeavoring to prove it
by many arguments, that Gregory did deliver Traian out of hell Alphonsus
Ciaconus.
.

Thus tho it contain never so great an impiety against God; yet, because it
tends to the magnifying of the Popes power and prerogative (let as many
learned men as will speak against it) it shall stand and be mayntayned: so true
it is that Babylon will not be healed of her deadliest wounds. And wonder not
tho I call them deadly; for consider of these consequences: The Pope delivered
a soul out of hell; Therefore he did that which God never did. Again, therefore
there may be redemption out of hell. Again, therefore the Popes prayers did that
which Christ's prayers never did: again, Christ says, I pray not for the world
Ioh. 17. The world, that is for the wicked and damned.
: the Pope says, but I do; Ergo the Popes pity and charity is more then
Christ's: Alas, alas, is Rome the holy Church, and sees not these blemishes? Is
she the living Church, and feels not these wounds? nay rather, is she not that
Babylon that will not be healed?

But to conclude: all this is the worse because he has razed out many
sentences, and passages out of many Authors, wherein he thought himself and
his seat to be wronged Ludou. viues: Ferus, Erasmus, Stella, Oleaster,
Espencaeus and infinite others.
; but this that so highly dishonoreth God himself, he can patiently suffer: but
had he been as zealous of Gods glory as careful of his own, then he that
forbids Espencaeus his commentaries on Titus til they be purged, and the book
called Onus Ecclesiae (absolutely without any limitatio^) because they touch
his freehold too near, would also have forbidden the Revelation of S. Bridgit,
til this foul blasphemy had been purged out: which seeing he has so
carelessly and wilfully neglected, tho his Catalogue of forbidden books has so
often been renewed It was first made by Pius 4. and so since continued renewed
and augmented till Clement the 8.
; it appears what an unworthy Vicar of God he is, who looks only to himself,
but suffers his master to be dishonored before his face: Therefore, Arise, O
Lord, maintain thine own cause.

Well then, seeing this wound is incurable, let us leave it rankling and come
to another.

The third Wound.
SOme 120. years ago, an Italian Friar witty and learned, as the most in
those days, a principal Preacher and as famous in his time as Mussus, or
Panegirola in these latter, by name Bernardinus de busto, Bernard. de busto
Marial. par. 3. ser. 3. pa^ 96. editionis Lugd. anni 517
preached this doctrine publicly, after wrote it, and sent it to. Alexander
the 6. and under his name published it, That God has divided his kingdom with
the Virgin Marie The 3. wound; God has divided his kingdom with the Virgin
Mary: And that a man may appeal from Gods justice to the mercy of the Virgin
Mary, because God has kept justice to himself, but committed his mercy to his
Mother.
^

The impiety is so execrable and seems so incredible, that I will put down the
words out of the book it self, as it was dedicated to the Pope. A man may
appeal to the Virgin Mary not only from a Tyrant, and from the devil, but
even from God himself; Namely, when he feels himself grieved or oppressed of
Gods justice: which was signified in the 5. of Ester, where it is said that
when king Assuerus was angry at the Jews, Queen Ester came in to please and
pacify him: to whom the king answered; whatsoever thou ask me, tho it be the
half of my kingdom, I will give it thee. Now, this Empress prefigured the
Empress of heaven, with whom God has divided his kingdom: For whereas God
has justice and mercy; He has reserved Justice to himself to be exercised in
this world, and has granted mercy to his Mother: therefore if any man find
himself agrieued in the court of Gods Justice, let him appeal to the Court of
the mercy of his mother.

What is this we hear? do there lie appeals from God? and from God to a
creature? Is Gods justice such, as a man may justly be agrieued at it? and
further, is Gods kingdom diuisible? and has God indeed divided his kingdom?
and divided it with a creature, yea with a woman? and has God granted his
mercy from himself to a creature? we may say with the Prophet, Oh heavens be
astonished at this: and let all Christian hearts tremble to hear such
blasphemies: and yet these be good doctrines in popery, fit for their pulpits,
and their people; and after they be preached worthy to be published to the
world. Surely if they grant these be false doctrines; then blame and shame
belongs to the Papists that preach them, write them, publish them and allow
them for Catholic doctrine: but if they stand to them as true, then mark what
conseque^ces will follow upon them: first it is here taught, that a man may
appeal from God. Hereupon this argument is easily framed, but I believe not so
easily answered;

Popery teaches there lies no appeal from the Pope: and here teaches that
there lies appeal from God.

But in reason, he from who^ no appeal can lie, is greater then he from whom
one may.

Ergo, by popish doctrine the Pope is greater then God.

This conclusion is inevitable, if their doctrine be true. Again, here it is
taught that we may appeal from God to the Virgin Mary: if that be true, let
them answer this argument;

He, unto whom appeal does lie from another^ is greater then he from whom it
is made; this is their own doctrine.

But from the Lord God appeal does lie to the Virgin Marie. Ergo, she by
popish doctrine is greater then God.

If this conclusion be heresy and blasphemy; then Bernardine de busto his
books are to be burnt, and yet they are both allowed and commended by the
Romish Church: but let us go forward.

Thirdly, here it is taught, that God has divided his kingdom with a
creature, even with a woman: This being true, here we learn many points.

First, the reason why they call her in their Service book allowed by supreme
and sovereign authority, Reginam Coelorum, the Queen of heaven; for she
that has got possession of the half of Gods kingdom, may well and worthily
be held the Queen of heaven.

Secondly, here is a very good reason, why the Church of Rome keeps the Bible
from the vulgar people, and will not have it divulged in their Mother tongues:
for if they had it in their own tongues, they would startle at this doctrine;
and when they heard it delivered in Pulpit, that God had divided his kingdom,
would soon have said, that is false doctrine: for the Psalm says, The
kingdom is the Lords Psalm. 22. 29
: and David in his thanksgiving, at the preparation for the Temple building,
confesses to God; Thine O Lord is greatness, power and glory, aeternitie and
Majesty: Thine O Lord is the kingdom and thou excellest over all 1. Chr. 29.
11.
: and if the Friar had objected that the kingdom indeed is Gods, yet not so,
but he may divide it to another; then they would have answered, that cannot
be: for he himself says, I am the Lord, etc. My glory, I will not give to
another Esa. 42. 8
: and if he still objected that to be true in the old Testament, when there
was none capable and worthy of this honor, because then the Virgin Mary was
not; they would readily answer, that in the new Testament after the Virgin
Mary was, and after she was the mother of Christ; Christ her son speaks to God
his Father, (but not to her his mother) Thine is the kingdom, power, and glory
Mat^ 6. 13.
. The kingdom is Gods: and how long? (not till she be assumed and crowned in
heaven, as they say, but) for ever and ever.

And whereas they further teach, that he has kept Justice to himself, but
committed mercy to his Mother: they would cry out upon that doctrine and him
that taught it; and tell him that they find it six and twenty times in one
psalm, that Gods mercy endures for ever Psalm. 136. in every verse.
and that his mercy is over all his works Psalm. 145. 9
: If over all; then over her also, or else she is not of his making: and if his
mercy be upon her, without which she could never have been saved: then how
dare any say, that Mercy is hers, and not Gods? And if mercy be Gods, and that
mercy of his endures his, (not for the time of the old Testament only, but)
for ever; Then it is foul and false doctrine to say, that now since Christ,
God has resigned up mercy from himself to a creature: Thus would the people
come upon him that taught this doctrine, and upon the Romish Church that
allows it: and therefore does not that Church wisely, to keep the people from
reading the holy Scriptures?

Thirdly, seeing it is doctrine current in the Romish Church, that God has
given up mercy from himself to the Virgin Marie, here is a good defense of
their Ladies Psalter: wherein they turn the Psalms from Dominus to Domina,
from GGD to our Lady: and when David says, Lord have mercy on me; they say, O
Lady have mercy on me: and in thee O Lady is my trust. They say this was
compiled by Bonaue^ture: but tho he lived in il times, yet his other writings
give cause to hope he made it not: for h^^ says, that we must take heed we
so enlarge not the excellency of the Mother, that we diminish the glory of the
son. Sure he that said so, would not be so lavish and careless of Gods
glory, as to turn the Psalms from him to a creature.

Fourthly, here we see the reason why the popish Synagogue do maime the Lords
prayer, leaving out the conclusion, For thine is the kingdom and power and
glory for ever and ever See the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 6^ and Luke the 11.
and all their Mi^^als and Breuiaries, Man^a^s and allowed primers: in all which
they cut short the Lords prayer, leaving out the words of the conclusion, for
thine is the kingdom etc.
. For if the kingdom be divided, then it is not all his for ever: no marvel
therefore, though they will have their Pater noster in Latin for their common
people; for if it were in English, there is none so simple but would see their
ungodly dealing.

But to conclude, (leaving this robbery and sacrilege, in cutting off part of
the Lords prayer, for another place and purpose) it is here evident that no
papist in the World can with a good conscience say the whole Lords prayer. For
if God have now divided his Kingdom, then how can he say with David in the
old testament 1^ Chr. 29. 11.
, and Christ in the new Mat. 6.
Thine O Lord is the kingdom for ever: therefore he must either alter the
Lords prayer and say, Thine is halfe^ the kingdom, etc. or never say it at
all: or else curse and detest his own teachers that write, and his Lord God the
Pope that allows such doctrine. Alas, poor ^oules, what should a simple
honest hearted papist do in this case! See therefore in what pitiful state
they live, who have subjected themselves to such teachers.

Lastly, let it be observed that here they teach, that there be in
spiritual matters touching the soul 2. divine Courts: the one of Justice, and
that is Gods; the other a Chancery, a Court of Mercy, and that is, Mary's;
these be their very words: and further, that if any man feel himself
agrieued in Gods Court of Justice, let him appeal to the Court of mercy of
his Mother: Oh strange divinity! Can Gods judgments be unjust, or his
proceedings erroneous and unequal? If they be not, then why do they talk of
appealing to a higher Court? For, why do Writs of error lie from one Court to
another, but that it is presupposed that they may err? and why is there a
Chauncery, but that the rigor, and extremity of the Law may be mitigated?
But if the Scripture say true in the text, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just
in thy judgments; Psalm. 119 137
Then this is blasphemy of a high nature, that there needs a Chancerie to
rectify his proceedings and mitigate his judgments. But as for this doctrine,
that the Chauncerie or Court of mercy is not Gods, but his Mothers, and that
therefore Gods judgments are to be mitigated by another, and therefore that
she and her Court are in this respect above God and his Court: These
blasphemies are so execrable and odious to Christian ears, that I hope there is
not a papist in this kingdom, that professes to know and serve God, but his
heart hates them and all that hold them.

Against all this, what can be objected but this: that he, being a private
man, spoke and wrote out of his private judgment; but this is not the general
doctrine of their teachers, not their Church. I answer, If none in the world
taught this, but this one Friar; yet how many soever knowing it, do approve,
commend, or defend it, or if they do not reprove and condemn it, it is justly
to be called their doctrine: and by the law both of God and man, it is their
sin as well as his. For, by the law of Accessaries: he that any way
approues, or knowing it and having a calling to it, reproues not a sin, makes
himself guilty of the sin: but the Romish Church, that is, the Pope knows
this heinous blasphemy; and says, that he has authority to condemn all
such: therefore, having not done so, but contrariwise, approving it, is guilty
of it.

Show me then that Pope, Bishop, or Inquisitour, that has condemned this
blasphemy, or this book for it. I produce a Pope that allowed it, namely,
Alexander the sixth, who suffered it to pass under his name, to the view and
reading of the world: let them bring one Pope since, that has condemned it: or
show one writer (not reproved by them) that ever reproved it, or (not
condemned by them) that ever condemned this blasphemy; if they do not this,
then it is apparent that in this wound, Babylon is not yet healed.

But for better evidence, that she lies rotting in this her filthiness, and
incurable in this wound The third wound not healed.
: Posseuine the Jesuit; their great and allowed Censor of al Authors, gives
his public censure of this book, to be Sermons of the excellency of the
Queen of heaven, and full of learning and godliness. And this his censure, no
man that knows the present state of their religion, can deny but that it is
the censure of their Church; and ought so to be reputed: for that work of
Posseuines was attempted, continued, and finished, and printed and reprinted
with as public and general allowance as any thing can be.

And yet for better evidence, that she is not healed, nor reformed at all: let
it be observed, tha^ this book is of so much estimation amongst them, that it
has diverse times been reprinted since Bernardine the Author set it out: as
namely in my knowledge once at Brixia in Italy, almost twenty years ago, in
three volumes, corrected and amended, as they pretend.

But that this impious doctrine is not amended, I will make it evident: for of
late, even this present year, this book and all his other works were again
printed at Colein in Germany in three volumes: which when I perceived out of
the last Catalogue, I could not rest till I had obtained this new impression
from Coleine, hoping that now at last they had (for shame righted this cause of
God, and razed out that heinous blasphemy: but having perused it, I see to my
grief, that they will not be healed; for there the very same words and
doctrine stand unreproved, uncontrolled, unaltered: nay, not so much as having
a Marginal note to explain them: but they are let to pass as good, holy, and
Catholic Romish doctrine. And that this is true I here pawn my credit to
this honorable assembly, and will be ready to justify it to any (desirous to
be informed in the particulars) by showing the books themselves, both new and
old. Which being so, I hope no man will deny, but that it is apparent she is
not healed.

And yet for the better satisfaction of all men, that as she is not yet, so
she purposes never more to be healed, nor to reform any thing, and that this
is not the private opinion of that or any other one doctor; I desire all that
love the truth to take knowledge, that of late within these seven years, an
Italian doctor a Jesuit and an approved writer, writing a story of the
miracles of our Lady of Loretto teaches even the same doctrine, and makes no
bones to bluster out almost the very same words: which for better assurance I
will put down. The Virgin Mary both will and can, is both willing and able to
deliver such, as be compassed about with dangers on all sides, and to heap
upon them all good blessings: for, Almighty God, (as far as it is lawful)
has made his Mother fellow and partaker of his divine power, and Majesty, etc.

See here the new and refined divinity of the Jesuits: what is this, but the
same with that before? for if she be made partaker and fellow with God in his
divine power and Majesty, it is no marvel, that God has committed his mercy
to her: and if from these words we look into the body of the book, we shall
find he ascribes such works and miracles to her, as can belong to none but to
him or her that is a fellow with God, or rather God himself.

And as for this clause, as far as it is lawful, is a strange word to be
spoken of God; for what can be unlawful to God, that is good, whose will is the
holiest law? If therefore it be good to make a creature fellow with him in his
deity, it must needs be lawful, and so the clause is idle. If it be not
good, but impious and contrary to the nature of God, then to think it any way
lawful, or possible to be done, is no loss then to think it any way lawful
for God to lie, or sin, or deny himself: so that take it any way, this
limitation of the Jesuit both grossly a^useth the Reader, and contains
horrible impiety against God. So far is it from being any shelter to the
blasphemy that is delivered in the whole passage.

Nor can it be said, the book wants authority: for it is formally allowed,
dedicated to the Cardinal Aldobrandin^, printed at Rome, and since often
elsewhere; and of late both the Author and his book highly commended by the
greatest Romish censurers. So that now I will end my evidence, for this point,
and dare put the matter to a Jury of any conscionable men, whether this wound
be healed yet or no.

The fourth Wound.
NOw to go forward: from the Person and Majesty of God, let us proceed to his
Holy Scriptures; and see how the Romish Church held of old, and yet holds,
and teaches of them. I will not stand upon those vile, and base speeches
uttered and written of them by Eccius, Pighius, Hosius, and many other of that
generation, for that they have been both detected and with shame enough
rejected by many reverend men of our nation, both in Latin and English
Whitaker Fulke, lewel, Reinolds, and others.
; but upon some that often have not bin touched by many, nor ever can be
sufficiently condemned by any.

In the Canon Law, the Pope spares not to disgrace the holy Scriptures in
express terms: sometimes equaling his own Constitutions with them, sometimes
preferring them.

In the decree he shameth not to affirm that The fourth wound; The Popes
decrees be equal to the Canonical Scriptures.
his decretall Epistles are numbered amongst the Canonical Scriptures Decret
did. 19. cap. 6.
, and impudently alleges Saint Augustine to prove it, who never spoke nor
meant any such thing; as in the later end of the decree they cannot but confess
with shame enough: this was his doctrine in the old impressions of the Canon
law, a hundredth years ago. But some will say, this wound is now healed: No,
look in the new impression reuiewed at the Popes commandment, and printed by
his authority within these few years, and there stand the very same words
without the least reformation in the Rubricke or title of the Chapter; The
decretall Epistles are numbered and reckoned amongst the Canonical Scriptures
The fourth wound not healed.
.

Which is the more shameful in it self, and shameless in the dooers, in as
much as in the same new edition they are forced to confess, that Augustine
(out of whom they cite the whole Chapter) did not at all mean the Popes
decretall Epistles, but the holy and Canonical Scriptures: and no marvel, for
the name of decretall Epistles of the Popes, was to get and to bear, many a
fair year after his days.

To conclude, let wise men observe here this point; how unwilling the Romish
Church is to amend or alter any thing, especially if it concern Gods honor and
not their own freehold: else, why should they maintain that blasphemy in the
Rubric and title of the Chapter, which in the body of the Chapter they
condemn? But well do they know, that many a man reads the contents of books
and chapters, which never read more. Therefore because the words of this title
give honor to his decretalls, tho they be never so dishonorable to Gods holy
Scriptures, they are suffered to stand, whereas they have put out many things
disgraceful to themselves: Thus unwilling is Babylon to be healed in any thing.

The fifth Wound.
THis does but make them equal; and that may be thought no great wound in that
Church: but shall we see a deeper and more deadly; namely, where the authority
and determination of the Pope is made higher, and of more respect then the holy
Scriptures themselves? In the same book the XL. Dictinction, the Pope
alleges for good doctrine, and canonizeth for a law, these words taken out
of one Boniface, The fifth wound. The religion of Christianity is to be
founded rather from the Popes mouth then from the holy Scriptures, that is from
Gods mouth.
. And certain^y all men do yield so much respect and reverence to the Pope of
Rome and his chair, that they require and seek for much of the discipline of
the holy Canons, and the ancient institution of Chrstian religion, rather from
the mouth of the Bishops of that See, then either from the holy Scriptures or
the old traditions: all they care for or seek after, is what he will and what
he will not; that so they may conform themselves, and frame their conversation
this way or that way, according to his will and pleasure.

Lo what doctrine is here: the discipline, nay the religion it self of
christianity is sought for rather at the mouth of the Pope, then at Gods mouth
in the holy Scriptures: and all that a Christian man cares for, is (not what
God, but) what the Pope will, and what he wills not; and according to that are
they to frame themselves: Is this a doctrine fit to be inserted in the popes
law? Is this the holy and the only true Church that teaches this? If to be
a Catholic be to hold this, and to deny this to be an heretic, I am
content to be an heretic; let who will be the Catholic: but if a true
Catholic ought to hold the doctrine of the scriptures, and to depend upon
the mouth and revealed will of God; then woe be to that Church and religion that
teaches, we may rather depend on the Popes mouth, then on Gods. But some will
say, this is healed. Nay alas, they be so far from that The fifth wound not
healed.
, that contrariwise for ought that I know, that is not to be found in the
elder editions: but I am sure it is in the later and last of all, set forth by
special authority from the Pope; from whence also I cite it at this time.

The sixth Wound.
THus I have showed, First, that the Pope makes his Decrees equal with the
Scriptures; Secondly, that they are of greater authority then the Scriptures:
Is it possible to have a worse? Yes: for the measure of her iniquity will never
be full; and therefore she goes one step higher in this impiety, and teaches
that the holy Scripture is so far inferior unto the Popes decrees, that
unless he by his authority give them strength^ they are not of credit, nor
necessary to be believed.

Let me be of no credit nor worthy to be believed, if I repeat not their words
truly out of their own book; namely, their authentical gloss upon the
Popes Decretalls: where the Text of the Decretall being no more nor less, then
only one verse of the 26. Chapter of the Proverbs, the gloss (that is, the
approved Commentary) upon that decretal is in these words; Vide Decretal, lib.
2. tit. 23. de praesu^ptionibus. cap. 1. ^ic^t.
. Observe here, that the words of the Text are not the words of the Pope,
but of SOLOMON in the Proverbs, the six and twentieth Chapter: but because
that Text of SALOMONS is here canonized by the Pope The 6. wound. The holy
Scriptures are therefore of credit and to be believed because they are allowed
and authorized by the Pope: and being so by him authorized, they are of as much
authority as if the Pope himself had been the Author of them.
Therefore it is of credit and implies necessity of being believed, (or it
binds as strongly) as if it had been pronounced or uttered by the Pope,
because we make all those things as good as our own upon which we bestow or
impart our authority.

The high and holy God, that is the Author of the holy Scriptures, be
merciful unto us, in having any thing to do with this unchristian blasphemy;
and grant that we may not any way communicate with their sins, no^ have
fellowship with this wicked work of darkness. The Impiety and Atheism that
lies in it is such, as if it had but crept into some secret pamphlet, I would
never have brought it into light: but being that it is registered in the Gloss
upon their law, a book of so great authority, and so common in the hands of
all the learned, I cannot but discharge my duty to the truth, tho it may give
vantage to the Atheist and Libertine. For what can such men think, when they
hear him that pretends to be Christ's Vicar and Peter's successor, teach that
Salomons words are not of as good authority as his be; when as Christ
himself did approve and justify himself, and all his words, and deeds, and
doctrines, by the old Testament; and that the words of God in the old
Testament do therefore bind, and are therefore to be believed, because the
Pope pleases to insert and canonize them in his law; and that being by him so
canonized, they be therefore as good as if the Pope himself had spoken them.
What I say can they judge, but that the Pope is one of their profession, a
plain Atheist, that holds the Scripture and all religion, as far as pleases
his humor and serves his turns.

And if any of his faction hold this too hard a censure, I would entreat him
to answer me but this question (grounded upon these words of his);

Whether is God the Author of the old Testament, or no? 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21
If they say no, Saint Peter answers; that Prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man: but holy men spoke as they were inspired of the holy Ghost.
If he be, then the Proverbs of Solomon, being a Canonical Book of the Old
Testament, is Gods Book; and the words of the Text are Gods words, and not
Salomons. This being so, let us then take the words as they are, in their
true and full meaning, and see what a piece of Popish divinity here is;
Observe that the words of the Text are not the words of the Pope, A strange
piece of popish doctrine, that gods word if it be authorized by the Pope, is
the^ of as good credit, as if the Pope himself had spoken it: therefore if the
Pope please not to Canonize it, then it is not^ So that either Gods word must
b^e beholden to the Pope for the authority of it, or else it has none.
but of God: but because these words of God are here canonized by the Pope,
therefore they are of credit and worthy to be believed, as well as if they had been spoken by the Pope himself.

Lo here the Pope in his own colors: this is Divinity fit to be hatched at
Rome, and to be coined in his mint^ Let the words be examined, and see what can
follow of them; but that either the Pope holds not the Proverbs to be Gods
book, but SALOMONS (which is horrible Atheism) or else if he hold them Gods,
that the words of God bear no credit, nor have authority to bind men's
conscience till the Pope do canonize them; and that Gods word in a book
known, received and granted to be Canonical, is not of as good authority in
that book, as being translated into the Popes Canon law. If he refuse both
these, then let him refuse his own law, and burn his gloss upon his
decretalls^ as containing Atheism, and Heresy in a high degree. The sixth
wound not healed.


But to go forward; Is this wound healed? Surely, if they have left it out, or
reformed it in any later impression, so it be with open confession and
detestation of the fault, it is well: But sure I am it is in the impression I
have, and in all other which I could borrow. And further I do not know any Pope,
or popish writer that has with authority and allowance condemned or reproved
this Atheism: if they know any, they may do well to produce them. Mean time,
I am also sure of this, that in stead of healing it, they have suffered their
Doctors, and Writers, continually since to speak and write almost as ill, if
not worse. In Queen Mary's time, an English Papist wrote thus Proctor in his
book called the way home to Christ printed at ^o^don in. 8.
; Religion is occasioned by Scripture: but perfected, and authorized by the
Church.

See, we are more beholden to the Church then to the Scripture, for our
Religion. About the same time Cardinal Poole out of his Pope-holy devotion is
said to have affirmed, that The written word of God is but a seed of Turcisme
Scriptura scripta est semen turcicum.
.

And certain Popish Doctors in Germany, being pressed in a disputation with
the evidence of Scripture, boldly answered, We are not tied to the Scriptures:
those goose quils do not tie us No^ pen^is illis ^n^eri ^is minime su^^^^
alligati.
.

I will not affirm both these two upon mine own credit: but they have been
charged with them both, many years ago, and never yet disprooued them. But
that that follows I speak upon knowledge.

A little after, a great English Papist pretending to summon a parliament for
popery, in his book so called, tells a story of one whom he heard, upon
reading the Book of Ecclesiastes, earnestly say, that The Book of
Ecclesiastes is a naughty book Heskins, a Doctor of di^^^^ty, in his
parliament of Christ, lib. 1. cap. 2. printed at Antwerpe 1^66^ in folio.
.

He voweth to God, and calls him to witness, that this he heard him, himself:
but what was he that spoke it, a protestant? no, a papist: and no mad fellow
nor ignorant fool, nor profane scoffer; but (says Heskins) he was a man of
worship, of gravity, of wisdom, of godly life and competent learning, able to
understand, and likewise exercised in the Scriptures: and this is all the
censure he gives of him that spoke these words.

He adds further (a little after in the same Chap.) that a popish Gentlewoman
hearing a text (out of a book that papists hold to be Scripture) which she
misliked: and being told by him (for he heard her speak the words) that the
book was Scripture; she answered, that if the Scripture had such (I will not
say what she said) words in it,

She would no more believe the Scripture; for it was naught Heskins in his
parliament, the next page after.
:

And what was she that said this? A virtuous Catholic gentlewoman (says
Heskins) and one that feared God Observe well, how a great popish doctor
co^mends that man and woman^ for de^o^t and zealous papists, who blasphemo^sly
said, that the scriptures were naught and not to be believed, and does not
reprove the parties for their blasphemy. So little does it touch a papists
heart to hear Gods word abused in the highest kind.
. (Lo, what tokens popery gives of a virtuous Catholic woman, and that
fears God). And tho Heskins cannot but grant that these are blasphemies: Yet
did he not reprove the one nor the other; but contrariwise, co^mends them both,
and turns it to the advantage of the Romish cause, and says that hereby we
may see, what a perilous thing it is for lay people to read the Scriptures.
But (with his leave) hereby we may see, what a filthy heart and vile estimation
popish doctors have of the holy scriptures, who hearing their disciples thus
horribly blaspheme them, and God in them, do not reprove it, but make use of
it; nor bury and quench them, but write and publish them, rather with an
approbation, then any detestation of them.

But will you hear his own words, and his own judgment, not related from
others (as these) but uttered out of his own heart: How little incitement to
virtue appears to be in the songs of Solomon? yea, rather how ungodly and
wanton seem they to be, in the outward face, rather teaching and provoking ( I
^raue pardon of all Christian ears) wantonness then godliness: and what can
the unlearned find, or understand in many sentences? any thing to edification
of godly life? or rather a provocation to wanton life. And after certain
sentences alleged, he concludes: The whole book is no better: like unto
these, says he, is all that book.

You have heard how the Proverbs were disgraced in the gloss upon the
decretalls, and here the Canticles: Now that Solomon may not have one book
left in credit, Heskins adds touching Ecclesiastes; What may appear more
vehement to dissuade a man from wisdom, then the book of the Preacher? how
much is wisdom, the goodl^e gift of God, abused to appearaunce in this book
Heskins in the same book and Chapter.
?

And to conclude, of another book which they hold also to be canonical
scripture, and some of them to be Salomons, he says, that The book of
Ecclesiasticus, seems to have such unseemly words in it, as an honest men
would be ashamed to speak them: and I also ( ^aith he) would be ashamed to
write them, if they were not Scripture Heskins a little after in the same
chapte^^
.

If the words be as immodest as he pretends they be: then why do they hold such
a book to be Scripture? And if they hold it to be Scripture, then how dare a
Christian man say, that it has such speeches in it, as an honest man would be
ashamed to speak or write? I leave this for them to answer: in the mean time
I go forward.

Not long after, comes Hosiu^, a great Doctor of theirs, and after a
Cardinal, and writes thus Hosius editionis vlt. tom. 20. lib. de expresso dei
verbo. page 5.
; The word of God (of it self does not, but) as it is written in the
Scriptures, it depends on the authority, testimony and approbation of the
Church: and it ought no otherwise, nor no further to be esteemed the word of
God, then as far forth as it is approved by the authority of the Church.

Lo, what doctrine here is: for hence it follows, that therefore if the
Church should not allow the new Testament it were not scripture.

Put all these together, and then it will soon appear, how pitifully this
wound is healed. Nay further if the ^ime and present occasion would give leave
to look into their latter and modern Writers, we should see by the last, and
latest of all, this wound is so far from being healed, that it rankles
further and deeper; even like an incurable leprosy, that cannot be healed: but
this may be sufficient. Therefore let us go forward to another wound.

The seventh Wound.
THey taught the people in old time, namely, for two or three hundred years
past, that images were good lay men's books: and even then, when they denied
them the Scripture as unfit for them, and obscure, and dangerous for seducing
them to heresies, were Images allowed and commended unto them as good means of
Instruction The seventh wound; Images are good lay men's books.
.

Some three hundred years ago, lived a Friar called Gulielmus Peraldus,
learned (for that time) and well approved of their Modern Censurers: he writes
thus; As the Scriptures are the books, and contain the learning of the
Clergy: so Images and the scripture are the learning and books of lay men
(p).

Lo here, how Images are associated and joined with the Bible. Search the
Scripture, says Christ: look on them; and on Images says the Pope; how
read thou, says Christ: what ^eest tho^ says the Pope: It is written says
Christ: it is painted and graven says the Pope: thy word (says David) is my
light (not the golden Cherubins): but now says Popery even in the new
Testament, The scriptures and Images are lay men's lights: What a wrong is this
to God, and what an injury to his word?

But is this healed? Oh that it were! but let the Reader judge, by that that
follows The seventh wound not healed, but made worse and worse.
.

One of their greatest Casuists, Laelius Zecchius, a great Divine, a famous
Lawyer, and of late years Penitentiary of Bresse, writing a great volume of
Cases of conscience dedicated to Pope Clement the viij. amongst many other
strange doctrines touching Images, teaches, that It is not lawful only, but
profitable to have Images in Churches; to cherish and increase charity toward
God and man, etc^ and to preserve faith; seeing Images are to be held as
books for them that be unlearned, to draw them unto knowledge, memory, and
imitation of holy and divine matters, etc. Laelius Zecchius, Summa moral^
theolog. and casu^ no^sci. tom. 2. cap. 90. art. 18. page 609.


Lo here, this doctor; who being Penitentiary, is by his place and calling to
heal wounds and satisfy Consciences, coming to touch this wound, handled it
so roughly, that in steed of healing it, he makes it sorer then it was. For
whereas Peraldus gave Scripture so much honor, as to be joined in commission
with Images, they 2. to be joint teachers of the Laity; Now comes the great
Penitentiary, and is well allowed by the Pope to leave out the scripture, as
needless, and to give all the power to Images, not only to put men in mind,
but even to cherish and increase faith and charity. And certainly, if Images
can do so, it is no marvel that Papists cast out the scriptures, and in room
thereof, do bring Images into the Churches.

But to make up the measure of this iniquity; Feuardent the famous Franciscan
^rier, yet preaching at Paris, and to whom Possevine wishes a long life,
goes one step further, and to heal up this wound perfectly, teaches this
doctrine; By sight and contemplation of Images, the common and ignorant Lay
men, do easily and in a short time learn those divine mysteries, miracles and
works, which out of the holy books they shall very hardly or not at all be
able to perceive*. Strange and fearful doctrine of popery; Images are better
and easier books for the lay people then be the scriptures.


Here now is Popery grown to his full ripeness. And mark the degrees how
this wound has been made still deeper and wider. First, they taught, the
Scripture and Images together were good books for Lay men Peraldus,
. Then, that Images without the scripture were to be accounted books for Lay
men Laelius Zecchius.
. Now at last, Images are readier and easier, and therefore better books for
Layemen then be the scriptures Feuarde^tius.
.

So then seeing this wound is so well healed, let us leave it, and search
another.

The eightth wound.
IN former ages, as superstition grew, and religion decayed, so Images began to
be worshipped more and more; and ceased not til at the last they came to this,
that every Image was to be worshipped with the same worship that was due to
him whose Image it is^ so that some three hundred years ago, or somewhat more,
it seemed by Aquinas to be their general and received doctrine, that The eight
wound; That an Image of God or a Crucifix are to be worshipped as God and
Christ, that is with divine worship.
An Image of Christ, and the cross whereon Christ died, and a Crucifixe; are
all to be worshipped with the same worship due to God and Christ Jesus, that
is with (...) Aquinas Summa par. 3 quaest. 25. ar^. 3
.

A fearful doctrine, maintaining horrible Idolatry; for nothing, but GOD, may
be worshipped with divine worship: but they teach that those creatures may
be worshipped as God himself is, that is, with divine worship: therefore
they make those creatures God: and by this argument it is apparent, that the
present religion of the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous religion, as long as
this doctrine stands unrepealed.

Let us then see, if this be healed: The eight wound not healed, but made
vvider and deeper and deadlier every day.
But alas, it is so far from being in any part reforme^^ that it is rather
the general and common received doctrine of al their approved writers. I will
not stand (as I could) to show it successively through all ages since the days
of Aquinas, til these times: but sp^ring that labor, till better leisure, I
will refer the Reader to most of the elder Authors, and insist only on some
few, and those of the latest: it being my special purpose at this time to
show that the Romish Babylon is even now not healed of her deadliest wounds.
Which in this particular I will labor a little the more fully to demonstrate
out of the modern authors, now extant and approved, because this imputation is
generally cast off with this answer; It is not so, it is but an ignorant or
malicious ^lander: for the Romish Church gives only a certain reverence to
holy Images; but does not worship them, at all, at least with no divine
worship. And some of our own profession are either so ignorant they know it
not, or so malicious, they will not confess it, or else so hollow hearted to
us, and such secret friends to them, they would not have it discovered though
it be so: for my part^ I pity the Ignorant (knowing my own weakness) I care
not for the malicious, and I hate the hollownesse of all dissembling
professors. And therefore let others cover and conceal her shame, and hide the
Whore of Babilons filthine^, as they will; I say for my self, Let the tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth if I spare to discover her skirts, and lay open
her filthiness to the world; that all men seeing her as she is, may detest and
forsake her. Therefore in the words of truth and soberness, I do here offer to
this honorable aud^ence, that I will willingly come to this place and recant it
with shame, if I prove not apparently to the judgment of every reasonable man,
that this is the common and general doctrine of the greatest number of their
best approved authors that have written in these latter days; namely, That an
image of God, or a Crucifi^ce, especially one made of the wood whereon Christ
died, or that Cross it self, are to be worshipped with (...), that is, with
the worship due unto God.

And first of all, I will in this case spare Bellarmine, Vide Bellarminum to.
2. lib. de Imag. sanctorum 2. cap^ 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. and de Council. lib. 2.
cap. 8.
seeing he (as having some grace in him) seems somewhat ashamed of the
matter, and therefore plays fast and loose: and betwixt God and his conscience
on the one side, and the Pope and his allegiance to him on the other, he
cannot tell what to say: and therefore winding himself into a labyrinth of
general and confused distinctions of per se and per acciden^, primario and
secundario, proprie and improprie, and such other which may serve for all
purposes; at last he leaves the matter as doubtful as he finds it: yet must
it be confessed, if he incline either way, it is to the worse: which (by
conference of his other writings) I think he does rather for fear, or to
please the Pope, then out of his own judgment and conscience.

Therefore leaving him, I begin with Gregory de Valentia a Jesuit, and a
Professor of divinity as Bellarmine is, of his own sect, of his own time,
and accounted by some papists more learned; but approved of all: he writes
thus; Gregor. de valent. ^om. 4. disp. 1. quaest. 24. punct. 2. page 467.
It is certain that Images are to be worshipped, so as properly the worship
shall r^st in them, not for themselves, nor for the matter, nor forms sake,
but for his sake they resemble: and in this sense they are to be worshipped so,
as they be whom they resemble; and therefore the Image of Christ, as man, is
to be worshipped with the same worship due to Christ himself.

He cannot deny, but many learned of his own ^ide teach the contrary: but
he reproo^es them all, and embraces this as the commoner and truer opinion,
and confirms it and concludes it for truth.

Next to him I produce another Jesuit, Gretserus, of the same university, and
either successor or fellow to Gregory de Valentia in the same place and
profession; he who was chosen for the papists Champion, in the famous
disputation holden at Regensperg 1600; and whom Posseuine the Jesuit calls
the very hammer of heretics: Thus he writes; Thus we have taught that the
Cross is to be worshipped: But now with what kind of worship is it to be
worshipped? We answer and affirm, according to the more common opinion and
more received in schools, that the Cross and all images, and signs of the
Cross are to be worshipped with (...), that is with divine worship.

Can any speak more plainly then both these do? Now, these be Jesuits,
and to these two I could add more: but let us see what their Summists, and
Casuists say to this matter; which are the more to be regarded, because they
pretend to write such resolutions as may settle unquiet and doubting
consciences. If therefore any poor Papist ask the Romish Confessors, and
Casuists, How far may I worship a Cross, and with what kind of worship;
hearken how they answer.

And to let one speak for all, Ia^obus de Graffijs, a Monk of great name,
and Graund Pe^itentiarie at Naples, writing (as he calls them) his Golden
decisions of cases of conscience, some 3. years ago, answers thus (g); Ia^
de graff. decis. aur. ca^. cons. tom. 1. lib 2. c^p. 2 art. 3.
Holy Images, considered as they be pieces of wood, or metal, or some such
things, are to have no honor given them: but in them another matter is looked at
namely, the image of him whom they resemble, and not the matter whereof they
are made: in which respect look what reverence or worship is due to him whose
Image it is, the very same by good right is to be bestowed on the image.

And to speak more fully and plainly, if it be possible: a little after he
adds; The first Commandment commands, that we worship every Image with the
same worship as we do him whose Image it is: for example, that we give
latria, that is divine worship, to the Image of God, and of Christ, and even to
the sign of the Cross, in as much as it brings to our mind the passion of
Christ^ and hyper dul^^ to the image of the blessed Virgin, and Dulia to the
Images of the Saints.

How now? is not Babylon well healed? What can be said against this? that these
be private men? no, they be public professors, and their books allowed with
at great authority as can be: But will you have that that is of sovereign
authority, and that may not be questioned? Then look in their public
Liturgy, which is of more credit and account then a 100. Doctors, and there you
shall find the cross saluted and prayed unto in these words Vide Breular.
Romans pa^. hyemal. in fine. Ara Crucis, lampas lucis, vera salu^ ^hominum nobis
pronum fac patronum quem tulis^i dominum. Salve lignum vitae, dignum far
mundi pretium^ Conser^sti plebi Christi crucis been ^icium.
; Thou altar of the cross, thou lamp of light, thou true salvation of men:
make thou that Lord, whom thou did bear, a loving and merciful Patron to us.
Al^^ail thou wood of life: thou that were worthy to carry the price of the
world, do thou bestow upon this congregation of Christ the fruit and benefit of
his passion.

Oh admirable doctrine! First, here is a prayer to the Cross it self (but of
that hereafter): the^ the Cross is made a mediator to Christ for us. And
surely we shall less wonder hereafter that they make Saints Mediators to
Christ; seeing here they shame not to send the wodden cross to him, to make
intercession for them: but as for that, where they give a power to the Cross
to procure Christ to be good unto us, how it can be spoken without Atheistical
blasphemy, let them answer that made it.

Further, observe how the Cross is said to have deserved to bear Christ:
surely no marvel tho Saints can mori^, when a piece of wood can merit at Gods
hands. Lastly, let all reasonable men judge what the Romish Church holds of
Christ's death; seeing they pray to a wodden Cross, to bestow the fruit and
benefit of it upon them.

But sure (will some say) this is healed: I will not deny but that in some of
their new and later Breuiaries this is left out: but thereunto I answer;

First, that it is not cured, bue covered: for to the healing of a spiritual
wound, there needs confession and public satisfaction to the Church
offended by the fault: but here is no confession of any fault nor evil, in
these words to the Cross; only they be cunningly kept out in the newer books:
so that they are ashamed of them, and yet have not the grace to confess it,
and therefore will leave it out and yet show no cause why. Now if it be
naughtt; why do they not say so, and therefore put it out? if it be good, why do
they put it out? So then it may be covered but is not cured.

Secondly, I answer that though they have left out that, yet they have kept in
as bad or worse^ for even in their newest editions, and as they say most
reformed, there is this prayer to the Cross Breuia^ium Romans auto^itate Council.
Trident. and su^mo^um pontificu^, Pij 5. and al. restitu^um, and editu^:
Sab^ato infra hebdomadam passionis, in Hymno page 302 editionis in 4. O Crux
aue spes vnica hoc passionis tempore: augepijs iustitiam reisque dona veniam.
. All hail o Cross, our only hope: we pray thee in this holy time of Lent,
increase justice or righteousness in godly men, and grant pardon to the
guilty.

Here the very wodden Cross is called upon, and prayed unto, to do that which
Christ himself could never have done, if he had not ben God. Some will say,
Surely they speak to Christ, howsoever the words seem to be spoken to the
Cross: I answer, if they direct their hearts to Christ, why then direct they
the words to the Cross? Verily Christ is worthy of both, as well as one: But I
answer further, it is a clear case that they make and direct this prayer not
to Christ, but to the very Cross it self: else lo^ Aquinas be Judge, who
makes this argument Aquinas summae par 3. q 25. art. 4.
; That is to be worshipped with divine worship, wherein we put and place the
hope of our salvation: but we place the hope of our salvation in the Cross
that Christ dyed on, for thus sings the Church ( and the^ he alleges this
place and these words) All hail o Cross, our only hope: in this time of
Lent, do thou increase righteousness in holy men, and grant pardon to
sinners: therefore the Cross is to be worshipped with divine worship.

These be his own very words, and are spoken of the Cross, and not of Christ;
as any man may see that will but look on the book it self: for, the question
in general, being concerning the adoration of Christ, he diuides the
general into six particular questions: which are these; 1. Whether Christ's
humanity be to be worshipped with the same worship as his divinity. 2. Whether
Christ's humane flesh be to be worshipped with latria. 3. Whether the adoration
or worship of latria be to be given to the Image of Christ. 4. Whether to the
cross of Christ. 5. Whether to the Mother of Christ. 6. How the Relickes of
Saints are to be worshipped.


So that we see, here is Christ and his Cross, and his Image, and his Mother
are made 4. several matters and of several and distinct consideration: then
falling into the particulars; for the 2. first questions, he argues them
negatiuely, but concludes them affirmatively; touching which two we have no
controversy with them at this time: then coming to the 3. and 4. which be
these in question; touching the Image of Christ, whether it be to be worshipped
with latria or no: he answers, that it seems no; and gives such reasons as
he nor the world is able to answer, but concludes affirmatively that it is, as
I have set down: namely, that Seeing Christ himself is to be worshipped with
the worship of latria: therefore his Image is also to be worshipped, with
latria. So coming to the fourth question, which is of the Cross, demanding
whether it be to be worshipped with latria or no; He answers, that it seems
no: but concludes affirmatively that it is; and then gives his reason as I have
aforeset it down; and from thence draws his conclusion in these words; The
cross of Christ, namely that whereon Christ was crucified, is to be worshipped
with latria, for two causes; both for the representation or resemblance it has
to Christ, as also for that it touched the body of Christ: But the sign of
that Cross, or a crucifixe, of what matter soever, is to be worshipped with
latria, only in the former respect.

These be his very words. And here by the way, observe how ridiculous and
absurd popery is, in this point: for it gives greater worship to the dead
Image and wodden cross, then to the blessed Virgin Mary the mother of Christ;
of whom he concludes in the next article, that she is by no means to be
worshipped with latria, but only with an inferior worship called hyperdulia;
and mark what wodden arguments are given for it: One, She is a reasonable
creature, and therefore must not be worshipped with latria: Lo, she must not,
because she is a reasonable creature, and yet the cross shall which is
unreasonable and dead. Another; A crucifixe is like to Christ: therefore it
shall be worshipped with latria: But is not she liker to Christ then any
cross can be?

A third; the cross did bear CHRIST, and did touch his body: therefore it
must be worshipped with latria. But did not she bear him, and touch him and
his blessed Body in a far more excellent manner then the Cross either did
or could? See what pitiful arguments be here brought to fortify this damnable
Idolatry. Who could think that so great learned doctors should thus childishlie
dally with holy thing, and be so blinded in their vndestandings? But this it
is to be drunk with the wine of the spiritual Babylons abominations.

But to return to the matter: by these words of his, Aquinas has cleared
that doubt and answered that objection made before; that these words are not
spoken to the cross or image, but to Christ: No says Aquinas; they are spoken
to the cross.

What can be said to all this? but one thing more, that in the time of
Aquinas it may be this was holden, but since then it is reformed, and now it is
not so. But I answer; this wound is not healed: for as it is thus as I have
reported in the old copies of Aquinas both Manuscript, and printed; so is it
also without the least alteration in the new and later editions, reformed and
purged as they pretend: and printed within these few years. And (which is
more evil) whereas, some thirty years ago, all Aquinas was reuiewed at Rome
by commandment of Pope Pius Q^intus, and purged and altered as they thought
good, and so printed: yet had not the Pope so much grace in him; nor so much
zeal of Christ's glory as to amend this horrible impiety, but to the
perpetual blemish of Aquinas, and everlasting shame of their Romish synagogue,
lets it stand for good current Catholic doctrine, even at this day, that A
Cross is to be worshipped with the same worship as Christ himself.

Yet if any will stand upon it, that this wound is healed, then let him show us
what Pope has condemned this doctrine; nay what popish Doctor approved by
their Church has reproved this doctrine, or taught and written the contrary.
Which where they or any other that take their part, shall not be able to show: I
contrariwise to make it manifest to all the world that this wound is not
healed, but ra^kles deeper, and spreds further, will show out of their latest
and (...) writers, that this their doctrine is rather made worse then any way
reformed. To this end, let the Reader be pleased to mark the words of a great
Doctor of theirs well approved amongst them and a spanish professor of
divinity for the order of the Cistercians: who not 7. years ago writing 2.
volumes of Commentaries, which he entitles de verbis Dominae, Of the words of
our Lady, and dedicating his book unto the Pope himself CLEMENT the viii.
has these words, But what do we speak so much of the Cross, Ioh. Chryso^t.
a visitatione, de verbis dominae. tom. 1. lib. 6. cap. ^.
seeing there is nothing used in the passion of Christ that is without honor?
the na^iles, the spear, the coat, the crown, and all such other things, are
honored so much, as that (in regard they touched Christ) men do therefore
worship them, yet not with the same worship with which we worship the Cross it
self: which inasmuch as it represents unto us the figure of Christ extended
upon it, and inasmuch as it touched the several parts of his body, and
inasmuch as it was died with a good part of his most precious blood: We do
therefore worship it with the same worship with which we adore Christ
himself; namely, with the worship of latria. For which cause it is, that we
speak to the very Cross it self, and pray unto it, as unto him that was
crucified on it, and do repose the hope of our salvation upon it hereupon the
Church sings in the liturgy, (...) words of the Cross: All hail o Cross
our only hope: in this time of ^ent do thou increase righteousness in good men,
and grant pardon to sinners, etc.

Lo^, here is a piece of refined popery indeed: we worship the Cross says he
as Christ, we speak to the Cross it self, we pray to the Cross it self,
as well as to him that died on it; and he confesses freely, that the prayer
in the liturgy or mass book is not made to Christ; but to the Cross it
self. From hence I gather these two conclusions; 1. That by P^pish religion
the Cross is a God.

This I collect thus: Latria (says Augustine) is that worship of religion,
which is due only and ^olelie to God himself: and popery it self confesses
with one consent, that prayer is a part of latria: But popish religion prays
to a wodden cross, even to the cross it self; therefore by popist religion
the wodden Cross is a God. 2. That the Cross is made a God, not by the
doctrine and judgment of their private Doctors, but of their Church and
religion.

This I collect thus: Their Missalls and Breuiaries which contain their
Liturgy are confirmed both by the Pope and the Council of Trent Vide Miss^lia
and Breuiaria omnia ab anno 70 and deinceps.
: but the Popes determination, especially together with a Council is the
public and uncontrollable act of their Church None acknowledging himself a
papist can deny this.
: Therefore the doctrine and practice in their Liturgy is not private, or such
as may be questioned, or doubted of, but public and general, and may not be
called in question. But in their late and reformed Breuiary allowed and
confirmed by the Pope and Council, they pray to the Cross and call upon the
Cross, as we heard before, and their own doctors do expound it that it is
not to Christ but to the Cross Aquinas of old; and Chrysostomus a visitatione
of late.
. Therefore by the doctrine and religion of the Church of Rome the Cross is a
God.

Bellarmine would gladly heal this wound, or at lest cover it over, and says
Bellar in tom. 2. de Imag. sanctoru^. lib. 2. c. 24. in re^p. ad argum.
; that whereas the Church prays so, surely either the cross is taken for
Christ, or else it is but a figure; as Moses says, Hear O Heavens, Deutro. 32.
No, no, say the Romish Doctors, (that wrote since Bellarmine) there is no such
matter; that prayer is to the Cross it self.

And his brother Ga. Vazq. les. de cultu adorationis. li 2^ disp. 3. cap. 4.
Jesuit, Gabriel Vazquez being also much ashamed of the matter, would gladly
help it, and to that end is constrained to confess, that there is not (as
Bellarmine says) one alone, but two figures in that prayer: which (says he)
unless they be admitted, it is an unapt and absurd prayer; for it speaks
unto the Cross as unto our God and Savior. He therefore for his part says,
he should think that by the cross they mean Christ, and pray to him, not to
the Cross: and further says, that many others think so, but he names not
one (tho in other points he is a plentiful citer of other authors): but
against him or who-euer else think so (being papists) I produce the
Cistercian Doctor Chrysostom a visitatione: who writing sinec them al For
V^zquez wrote since Bellarmine: namely, about the year 92. but this
Chrysostom wrote sinec V^zquez some seven years ago.
, and whose book is of more authority then his, For Vazquez is dedicated but to
a spanish ordinary Bishop, but Chrysostom to the Pope himself.
, answers all these doubts, and preuents all other objections; saying
plainly that in that prayer of the Church, We speak to the Cross it self,
we call upon and pray to the cross it self.

And no more nor no worse, says he, then Aquinas himself, totidem verbis
spoke before him Aquinas summa par. 3. q. 25. art. 4.
. Therefore (to conclude) til this doctrine of Aquinas be condemned for
heresy, and til this fellow that calls him self golden mouth, be adjudged as
he is, a leaden mouthed and blacke-mouthed blasphemer, and his book burnt as
heretical, and till the Romish Church have satisfied the world for this great
wrong, til then (I say) it is apparent to al men that in this wound She is not
healed.

This wound has been deep and wide, and therefore long in searching; and
seeing it is found incureable, let us us proceed.

The ninth wound.
NOt many hundred years ago, lived a Friar they called S. Francis, and
ignorant man for learning, but witty; and the more, for that his wit was
shrouded under the shadow of great simplicity: he being the founder of the
Franciscans, the Pope has suffered his favorites and followers to set him up
as another Christ The ninth wound; An Italian Friar Francis was like to Christ
in all things, and in some things did more then he, and bare S. wounds in his
body as Christ did.
, and blasphemously to compare him, and oftentimes to prefer him before
Christ himself. And to this end among many other vile ones Vide monume^ta
ordinis fratru^ Min. Salama^cae. 1511. in 4. Et firmamenta trium ordinum D.
Fra^cisci Paris. 1512. 4. and mult al.
, he suffered to be published a great volume called, The golden book of the
Conformities of the holy father S. Francis with the life of our Savior Jesus
Christ Liber aureus, inscriptus liber conformitatum vitae bea^i ac seraphici
patris Fra^cisci ad vitam Jesus Christi Domini nostri correctus and illustratus
aleremiah Bucchio ord. Min. doctore theol. Bononiae 1590.
. In which book with strange impiety first they paint in the first leaf
Christ bearing a Cross and Saint Francis following him with one as big as
his; where Christ has nothing but precedence: but after thinking that too
much, they paint one Cross, and upon it one of Christ's arms, and another of
S. Francisces, one a-crosse over the other: then begins the book; In the name
of Jesus Christ and of S. Francis: where, Jesus Christ is called our Lord and
S. Francis our blessed Father: and the Author says not, that he compiles the
book to the honor of God, or Christ, but of the foresaid holy father S.
Francis.

Then he salutes Saint Francis with a prayer(m) fit for none but God himself:
First, blasphemously calling him typical Jesus; then desiring him to cure the
sins and drive away the spiritual maladyes of their souls, and to give unto
them place in the glory of heaven.

Then he comes to the point of Conformity; and to show this the better, he
paints a tree; at the top whereof is Christ, and at the root Saint Francis:
the tree has twenty branches on the right, and twenty on the left side, and
every branch has four particular fruits; in all eighty: these are equally
divided betwixt Christ and S. Francis. 40, to the one, and 40. to the other:
and each couple or pair of these is one point of conformity betwixt Christ and
S. Francis, consisting in all upon 40. particulars; wherein they begin at the
birth and conception, nay at the very prophecies and promises made of Christ,
and so proceed to his life, his death, resurrection, and alcension: and in all
and every of these, and every thing else whatsoever may be said of Christ,
the very same do they not shame to affirm of that man Francis. For example,
thus: Christ was foretold by the Prophets: So was S. Francis. Christ was sent
from God: so was S. Francis. Thus go they over all his life, in such a manner
as there is nothing given to Christ, but bare precedence. And which surpasses
all admiration, those two things wherein Christ did most apparently, as God,
declare his power, and his love as Mediator; namely, his miracles and his
passion, even in these two is this Francis matched with Christ our Savior: nay
rather in his passion he is matched, but in his miracles advanced far before
Christ.

And first for his passion, whereas by their doctrine Christ had 5. wounds in
his body (tho indeed he had more) they make S. Francis nothing his inferior in
that point: for they say that he had wounds in his hands and feet,
proportionable to Christ's; and had certain things like nails in his feet and
hands, so divided from the flesh, that they would open from it, so as his
wounds did continually bleed; insomuch, as he was feign to put tents into
them to keep them from bleeding: which he continually did, saving on good
Friday, when always this popish Jesus did pull out his tents, and let his
wounds bleed, as the true Christ's that day did for our salvation; and this not
only in hands and feet, but that he had a wound in his side like to that in
our Savior Christ: and all this (says the book) was not fained nor
imaginary, but truly and really imprinted in his body by the power of God,
that so he might make his friend Francis like to his son Christ in all things.
And all this was not the superfluity of idle and superstitious Monks brains;
but the public act of their Church: and many Popes one after another have
allowed it, and by their bulls and cha^ters confirmed and a^ouched the truth of
this story, concerning the wounds of S. Francis; and in monument and memory
thereof, they have their holy day of the five wounds to this day established by
all authority.

Thus Christ, touching his passion, is made equal with a mortal man: and an
ignorant Erier (by the Popes divinity) is made equal with Christ in the manner
of his suffering; not in that fashion as every Christian may be, but so as none
at al, no (says this book) not S. John the Evangelist, nor the Virgin Marie
her self could be.

But if we come to his Miracles, then surely Christ must come after him; for
whereas Christ wrought a miracle, he (say they) wrought 10, and those that
Christ did are nothing to his. Christ never showed that humility and charity
and patience that S. Francis did^ Christ never gave away all his clothes till
he was stark naked, as S. Francis did For all these being too long to write in
the marge^t I must refer the Reader to the book it self, if he will not believe
me: or else let him suspend his judgment till I have leisure to exemplify
these at large by themselves.
: he never preached to beasts and birds, as Saint Francis did: he never by his
words and the sign of the Cross tamed and converted wild beasts as Saint
Francis did. All this may easily be showed and much more; but I will insist
only in one, and on that the rather, least they should take it in snuff that
I say their Father FRANCIS converted beasts: hearken therefore to the story,
and then judge and spare not.

S. Francis on a time coming to preach at the city of Eugubium Vide libru^
conformitatu^ lib. 1. conformit. 10. par. 2. page 140. Francis preaches to a
wolf. Francis^calleth the wolf brother: a couple of ravening Wolves well met.
Francis offers the wolf his brother to make peace betwixt him and the town.
The Wolf is content.
found that the said City was much troubled with a great and cruel Wolf,
that killed not their cattle only, but their people if they were unarmed.
Francis would needs go to him, to turn him from his rauenousnes: and seeing
the wolf come against him with open mouth, he made the sign of the Cross
upon him, and commanded the wolf to shut his mouth and hurt him not: the wolf
presently obeyed and fell down, as tho he had been a meek Lamb: then spoke
Francis to him and said; Brother Wolf thou have shed much blood and done much
hurt; and therefore art worthy to die, and all this City justly complains of
thee: but brother, if thou will be content I will make peace betwixt them and
thee: the wolf by wagging his tail, and moving his ears, showed that he was
very glad. Then brother Wolf, (says S. FRANCIS) seeing thou art content to
be at peace with them, I will take order that they shall give thee daily
allowance of meat, if thou will promise me hereafter to hurt no body: the
wolf bowing his head answered by signs that he would. Yea, but then
(says Francis) Brother Wolf, give me thy faith and credit that I may believe
thee^ and the wolf presently lifted up his right fore-foote and laid it in
Francis his hand, Francis bids his brother wolf give him his hand and faith
that he will perform his order.
thereby giving his faith that he would perform it. Then Brother Wolf (says
Francis) I command thee in the name of the Lord Jesus that thou go with me into
the City, and there fear not to make peace, The holy name of God fearfully
abused and taken in vain.
in the name of the Lord: the wolf forth with followed him as meek as a
Lamb. So coming into the City, all the people, together with the Magistrates
being assembled, S. Francis made unto them an excellent Sermon, Brother wolf
stands by, whilst S. Francis preaches to the people.
the wolf being by: which being done he said to them these words;

This Brother of mine, this Wolf that stands here, has promised me, and
upon his promise has given me his faith that he will be friends with you, and
do no more hurt; provided that you shall daily give him an allowance and
portion of meat: which if you do for your parts, then will I be surety for my
Brother Wolf that he shall perform the conditions on his part required. Then
said S. Francis; Brother Wolf, Francis is surety for his brother wolf to the
town.
it is reason that as thou did before, so here before all this people thou give
me thy faith again, that thou will keep the covenants on thy part: and the
wolf immediately lift up his right fore-foot, and laid it in the hand of S.
Francis, his surety, in the sight of all the people, and so gave his faith
again: Brother wolf gives his faith again.
and then all the people shouted and wondered, and praised God for sending S.
Francis amongst them by whose merits they were delivered from the cruel wolf.
And from that day forward, the people to the wolf and wolf to the people,
performed their covenants made by S. Francis: and the wolf lived 2. years
after Francis was gone, Brother wolf lives in the town, and takes his meat
at the doors.
and went up and down the streets, and took his meat, from door to door,
hurting no man, and was well and daintily fed; and there was never so much as a
dog that barked at him. And at last, after 2. years, Brother Wolf Brother
wolf dies and is lamented.
being stricken in years dyed, for whose death the Citizens did very much
lament.

Here is a miracle worth the marking. Now let all Huguenots, and Heretics
show such a miracle in their religion; no, no, they never can do it: And no
marvel; for Jesus Christ, who is the King and Captain of their religion, never
did the like in his time to this Which S. Francis the king and captain of the
Franciscans Francisce Iesuty dice dux formaque Minorum.
has here done.

If the time would give leave, I could bring 20. more as impious, as
incredible, and as absurd in their kind as this: but leaving it to a further
opportunity, and referring the learned to the book it self, I proceed.

What may be said to all this? are not these wide and woeful wounds? Ierem. 7.
12^
Oh! but they are healed; I may answer as the Prophet does: Were they ashamed
when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not ashamed. 18 The ninth
wound not healed.
For whereas this book was written above two hundred years ago by
Bartholomeus^ Pisanus, a Franciscan Friar; it was then not only suffered to
pass to public view in those days of darkness and superstition, but now of
late within less then 20. years when one would have thought they would (if
not repented of the impieties, yet) have been ashamed of the absurdities; they
contrariwise have reprinted the Book The new edition i^ at Bononie in Italy.
1590. and is dedicated to a Cardinal: in this edition is all that I have
alleged.
, and have not taken out nor reformed one word of all these euilles, nor of
many more, which do so directly disgrace the merits of Christ Jesus: only
some things have they altered, which they thought might make against
themselves, but not one of these which do so far dishonor God and Christ
and all religion. Compare together the old and new books, who will; and he
shall find this to be true: wherefore the conclusion is, that this wound is
far from being healed. Let us then go forward; and see if we can find one
wound healed in the Roman Church.

The tenth Wound.
TWo or three hundred years ago, (19) The tenth wound. The Pope may give
Indulgences for 20000. years and grant men power to redeem souls out of
Purgatory.
the Popes indulgences did grow to that height of rotten ripeness, that all
men of understanding, even of his own brood, were ashamed of it: and many a
one of the wiser sort, even in these mystie times, did see and laugh at the
nakedness of Popery in that point; the excess whereof grew so great, as they
cannot deny but it gave at last an occasion of LVTHERS reuolte from them.
There is a Manuscript extant, written some two hundred years ago, and another
not much differing from it, some 130. years ago printed at Rome, containing a
catalogue only of those Indulgences belonging to the parish Churches of Rome,
amongst which (they say) are 7. principal: let us but consider of some few He
that wa^ts this book let him look in Hospinian de Templis. lib. 2. c. 28. page
348. editonis Ti^ur 603. where he shall find both mention of the book and a
particular recital of a great part of it.
.

In the Laterane Church, it is granted thus by Pope Boniface; If any Pilgrim
come for devotion to this Church, he shall be absolved from all his sins. And
in the Chapel there called sanctum sanctorum there is full and true remission
of all sin ^. And one day in the year, which is the day of the dedication of
the Church, there is full remission of all sins both a poena and culpa: and
this Indulgence is so certain (says the book) that when the Pope first
pronounced it, the Angels in the hearing of all the people said Amen. Angels
say Amen, to the Popes indulgences: but they should first prove, that God says
Ame^ to them; for else the Angels will not, unless it be the evil Angels.


If these things be true, then it is strange that all Papists in the world are
not saved: for he that has full remission of al sins, both a poena and
culpa, dying in that state cannot be damned. And certainly, he that for the
obtaining thereof, will not take the pains to visit that Church one day in a
year, is not worthy of salvation.

In Saint Peter's Church, there be every day eight and forty years of
pardon, which is in one year above fifteen thousand years: Every day of
the Annuntiation there be one thousand years; and he that with devotion
goes up Saint Peter's stairs, has for every step seven years of pardon.
Surely purgatory pains are not so fearful as they bear the world in hand;
if going up two and twenty-steppes may purchase releasement of a hundred and
fifty years thereof. And if these seem too little, Alexander the Pope like a
liberal Lord opens his treasure, and gives to every step a thousand years:
So that now there is not a Papist in the world that needs to be in Purgatory
one day except he will: XXij. thousand years of pardon granted for going up
2^. steps If the Pope say true in this, no Papist need to come in purgatory.
For, for going up twenty two steps with devotion, he may be released out of
Purgatory, for two and twenty thousand years: and I hope they do not think the
World will last so long, and Purgatory (they say) ends with the World.

Further, Three doors of one Church in Rome of so great virtue that whosoever
goes through them shall be as free from sin as when he was newly baptized.
whosoever will go through the 3. doors of the Laterane Church, shall be as
free from al his sins as he was the hour he was baptized. Likewise at the
Altar in Saint Peter's Church, there be xiiii. thousand years of pardon and
deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory.

And in the Church of Saint Lawrence, whosoever visits that Church every
Thursday for a year, and sits upon the stone whereon Saint Lawrence was
broiled, Oh what a great power, the Pope has, who can give power to another so
easily to deliver souls out of purgatory.
shall deliver one soul out of Purgatory.

And in the Church of saint John, at the gate called Porta Latina, a man either
by saying a Mass, or causing it to be said, may deliver one soul out of
Purgatory.

Are these true? How easy purgatory might be emptied by Popish doctrine.
then why is there one soul left in purgatory? or else where is the charity of
the Papists (which they so much brag of) seeing so easily they may deliver
so many thousand souls out of purgatory in one year? Certainly, if these be
true as they be written, then granting that there is a purgatory, it might
soon be emptied.

But if it be false, fabulous and frivolous, and has no other end but to mock
poor people and to suck out their silver; then what a Religion is that which
maintains such dealings? especially seeing this is not the deed of any
private men, but of the Popes themselves: nor a few, but even all since
Boniface the eight.

Thus we have searched deep into a foul and filthy wound. Now what remains?
but to see if it be healed yet, or no. The tenth wound not healed, but grows
more desperate and deadly to this day.


But alas, Babylon will not be healed: for as they feared not to put these
tricks upon the people, 100. and 200. years ago, in the times of
superstition; so have they presumed even still in these days of light to do
the like. And as the whore is shameless in her sin, so is this whore of
Babylon in her impiety; for she has not at all amended this enormity, nor in
any sort reformed it, but rather lets it grow from bad, to worse. For evidence
whereof, let any man read Onuphrius Pauvinius Vide Oauphrium Pauuinium, de
praecipuis vrbis Romae sanctioribus b^silicis quas septem Ecclesias vulgo
vocant Colon. 1584. passim.
, who not past 24. years ago, has written (with public authority) a book to
this very purpose of the seven principal Churches of Rome, and of the
indulgences belonging to them; wherein all that is delivered before is auerred,
and much more added: some part whereof I would put down, save for that it may
be reserved to a further purpose and fitter opportunity. And for better
evidence, that as yet she has not, so she purposes never to heal up this
wound; within these two years they have allowed and published with authority,
the pilgrimage or voyages of Seigneur Villamont, Les voyages du S^^de Villamont
diuisez en^trois livies: derniere edition, reueuce and augme^^ee etc. A. Ar^as.
1605. vide (inter alia) ibrum 1 cap. 12. etc.
, one of the Gentlemen of the French Kings Chamber; wherein the poor deceived
Gentleman, out of his superstitious devotion having visited all those Churches,
and made himself (as he says) blessed by being partaker of all the
indulgences thereto belonging; and having ascended those holy stairs to
every step whereof belong a thousand years of pardon: after all, returning
home at last much poorer, but nothing wiser then he went, he wrote a book of
his voyage and pilgrimage to Jerusalem: and taking Rome in his way, he
describes at large the Indulgences granted of old, and at this day in force, to
the Churches in Rome. Which book (being written in French) whosoever list to
read, will soon confess, that in this wound the Romish Babylon is not yet
healed.

The eleventh Wound.
ANd heerunto I will add another wound, because it is so near to this, in
popish consang^inity. The eleue^th wound; Granting of Indulgences and thousands
of years, and deliverance of Souls out of purgatory, to Beads, Medals,
Crosses, Pictures and such like toys being blessed and hallowed by the Popes
holy hands.


The wiser sort of Popes, and the rest of the craftier politicians in that
hierarchy, perceiving that all the Nations of the earth, (many of them being
so far distant) could not come to their market of Indulgences being kept in
Rome, therefore lest they should lose their traffic into those parts, they
devised a way, that seeing a great part of the world could not come to Rome,
Rome should send to them: To which end, out of his bounty and spiritual
liberality, for the incredible good of men's souls, the Pope ordained that
certain Crucifixes, and Medalls, and Agnus dei The principal of all these
toys i^ the Agnus dei, which every one may not make, but only the Pope: not
he always, but only at E^^^^nor at every Easter but the first next his
entrance, and every seventh Easter after: nor of any matte^, ^^^in any manner,
but precisely of such simples, and with such: ceremonies as are prescribed for
that purpose; which together with the prayers (or rather coniurations) then to
be used are to be seen in the book called Caeremoniale po^tif. lib. 1. And
he that has not that book, let him look in the Commentaries of Peter Matthew
upon the Constitutions of Gregory the 13. Constit the 1.
and holy Beads and other such ^ewels, should be first consecrated and
hallowed by the hands of his Holiness, and have all the holiness powered upon
them that he can spare, and further should have annexed unto them all those
mighty Indulgences, or the like, that are granted unto the Churches and
stations at Rome: and by this means they could sell an Agnus dei, that is, a
little piece of white wax^ or a Crucifixe of a little metal, it may be brass
or copper (such as the Jesuits of late sent into England by thousands at once,
as good enough to serve the English Catholics), or a little medal, or a
little beade or bugle, or other matter of no more value: these toys and
trinkets, I say they can sell by this means, and every day do utter at a
higher rate then the Ieweller can his pearls or his diamonds.

Thus did not only the former Popes gull the people of elder ages in those
times of ignorance, making them believe that these toys so hallowed and
blessed by them, were of such virtue as Christ's blood it self could be of no
more; as one of them sending an Agnus dei to an Emperor, shamed not to write
to him, that This Agnus dei breaks off sins even as the blood of Christ:

But even in these times of light and knowledge, these owls dare still fly
abrdade: and even of late, nay every year, the Pope shameth not to set his
trumperies to sale, annexing unto the^ such large and liberal Indulgences, as
Christ's own blood can have no more The eleventh wound not healed.
. I could insist upon late and notorious examples practiced even at home and
upon our own Nation: but I spare them at this time, because the proofs thereof
tho never so certain to us, are not so authentical to the^, as be these two
examples, I shall now produce; one of them touching Poland, the other France.

For Poland: Not many years ago, The eleventh wound not healed.
Pope Clement the eight granted as follows, as is to be seen in printed
coppies.

Vide libiu^ inscriptum E^uangel^um ^omanum, edit. anno. 1600.
Indulgences granted by the Holiness of our most Holy Father, Pope Clement
the eight, At The Instance of the most Illustrious and most reverend Lord
Cardinal Radziuillius, Bishop of Cracowe, and Legate in Polande, Unto Certain
Holy Beads, Crosses, Medals and Images.

1. Whosoever, having one of these holy beads etc. shall say over the
Rosarie, being confessed, or having a purpose to confess once a month, shall
for every time he does so, obtain v. years of pardon. 2. But if he do
every day after examination of his Conscience, say three Pater nosters and
three Aue Mary's etc. shall have ten years. 3. But if he use every day to
say over the Psalter of our Lady, shall for every Saturday weekelie obtain a
hundred years. 4. He that shall thrice in a week say over the Rosary of our
Lady, and confess and communicate, and pray, shall obtain a plenarie, that
is, a full remission of all all sins. 5. And whosoever in the hour and point of
death shall but say in his heart, when he cannot speak with his tongue, the
name Jesus, shall have a plenarie and full forgiveness of all his sins: provided
that he have one of these blessed and holy Beads, Medals, Crucifixes or
Pictures.
*All these Indulgences may be procured and obtained, by having either about a
man, or lying before him one or more of these holy Medalles, Crosses, Beads,
or Images, and observing what is before appointed: and his Holinesses will is,
that they shall be of force to all kind of men and in every place. Printed at
Rome by the Printer of his Holinesses privy Chamber, Paulus Bladus, 1592. Lo
here how Babylon is healed: If a man at the point of death, can in his mind
but think of Jesus, he shall have full forgiveness of all his sins, if he
have one of these holy Crosses, or Beads about him. And is this the Divinity
of the Romish Church? is this procured by a Cardinal and granted by the Pope?
then answer me but one word: Shall the thinking or naming of Jesus, without
true faith and repentance, save him tho he have a hundredth of these holy
Grains about him? or if he do truly repent and believe in CHRIST, though he
have not one of these, shall he not be saved?

If those both be true; (as who dare deny them?) then phie upon these
Impostors and deceivers, who by these their Atheistical mockeries expose
religion to all contempt: and these things being so common and notorious, no
marvel tho Italy, where (these are ri^est) be so full of Atheists.

Concerning France: Of late years Peroun the French Cardinal, having made a
costly Journey to Rome, coming home, procured of the Pope (for the bearing of
his charges) to be the bearer of certain hallowed and holy matters,
consecrated and blessed by the Pope, in such a fashion, as if that were true
the Pope says, he were more then mad that would not (as the wise Merchant)
sell all he has to buie one of them.

(d) Indulgences granted by the Holiness of our most Holy Father, Pope
Clement the eight, Unto Holy Beads, Rosaries, Crosses, Crucifixes, Medals and
Images, being hallowed and blessed by his own holy hands, At the Instance of
the Reverend Father and Lord, James Dauie, Bishop of Eureux, Counselor to the
King in his Council of Estate, and also of his private Counsel and principal
Almoner to his Majesty. 1. 1. A hundredth years of pardon, at an easy rate.
*Whosoever having one of these beads, etc. shall do any work of mercy
corporal or spiritual, or hear a Mass or a Sermon, or shall but do
reverence to the Sacrament, or to a Cross, or to a holy Image, shall obtain a
hundredth years of pardon. See what a bountiful, father, the Pope is. Who would
offer less for a hundredth years? surely he that will not do thus much, he is
worthy to lie and fry in purgatory. 2. Whosoever shall confess and
communicate, or being a Priest, shall besides his mass, say deuoutely one
Pater noster, or one Aue Mary, for the Catholic Church, or for the holy
Father, or for the King of France, or for the peace of France, or for the
conversion of Heretics, or other sinners: shall have for every time he does
this a plenarie indulgence, and remission of al his sins; so as he have about
him one of these holy beads, grains, or Crucifixes.

And what if one want all these trumperies, shall he not have forgiveness, if
he do truly believe and repent? Oh when will Babylon be ashamed of such
abomination? 3. Whosoever shall kiss one of these beads, etc. with devotion,
shall have for every time he does so, ten years of pardon. 4. Whosoever has
one of them about him, and prays for the success of the Catholic Romish
religion, or for the K. of France, shall be (so often as he does so) partaker of
all the Sacrifices, Prayers, and Fasts and other good works done in any Abbey,
as well as if he were a particular member of the same society. 5. He that has
one of these about him, if he be in danger of death, or in the battle, or in
any place where he cannot go to confession, and shall with contritio^ but
repeat these words, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, or name the holy name Jesus,
shall have forgiveness of all his sins, and be discharged both a poena and a
culpa. *His holiness graunts that these indulgences shall be good for all men,
and in all places; but conditionally, that those that be not Frenchmen, shall
pray for the King and Realm of France: Except always the holy Beads; for
those are limited to belong only to France, and to be good to none but only
French men. Imprinted at Rome with license, etc.

I have named some, but not all; look for the rest in the book: but in them all
let it be observed, that there is not the least mention of faith in Christ, nor
once so much as the name of it, nor any relation to Christ, nor his holy
merits. No, these are well if they may be understood: and yet these men (if
they be not Atheists) do know that all these their large promises are but
wind; and their Indulgences but foam and froth, if there be not lively faith
and true repentance: and if these be in a man, then let us see that Pope,
Cardinal, or other Papist, who dare say that he shall not have full remission
that never saw nor touched one of their blessed beads nor hallowed Grains.
Thus we see how far Babylon is from being healed in this point.

The twelfth and last wound, concerning the first Table, shall be concerning the
Sacraments: both which are horribly perverted and profaned by Romish doctrine
and practice.

The twelfth wound.
FIrst, The 13. wound; The popish Church baptizeth Belles.
Baptism is profanely applied, not to reasonable creatures only, men and
women, according to the Institution Mat. 28. 19.
; but even to an unreasonable and dead creature. For example: they use to
baptize bells, in most points so as Christians do children, and in some points
with much more ceremony and solemnity.

Bellarmin is ashamed of it, and would willingly hide and cover it, tho he
cannot cure it: but if he were not a Cardinal and a Jesuit, he would be
ashamed to cloak it with so loud a lie, as he does: for (says he) Bellar. de
Romans Po^t. To^. 1. lib. 4. cap. 12.
it is a false slander of the Heretics; we do not baptize bells, neither in
respect of the name, nor the matter of baptism: look says he the book of the
Pontificale; there is no such matter: only (says he) we bless them as we do
Chuches, Altars, Crosses, and other things, etc.

Is it true? then let us follow Bellarmines advise, and look into the Vide
librum inscriptu^ Pontificale Romanu^, autoritate pontificia impressum Venetiis
1520. lib 2. cap. de Benedictione ^igni vel campanae.
Pontificale: and omitting the name or word, let us stand upon the matter of
Baptism. Compare therefore their baptism of a child and a Bell together, and
see then whether it may not be truly said they baptize Bells.

1.
The Child must first be baptized, before it can be accounted one of the
Church. The Bell must first be blessed, before it may be hung in the steeple.
2.
The Child must be baptized by a Minister, or a Priest. The Bell must, by a
bishop, or his deputy.
3.
For a Childs baptism must be used holy water, cream, salt, oil, spettle,
and many such. The Bells baptism or blessing must also be in holy water, oil,
salt, cream, tapers for light, etc.
4.
They give the Child a name. So do they to the Bell.
5.
The Child must have Godfathers, etc. So must the Bell; and they be persons of
great note.
6.
The Child must be washed in water. So must the Bell; and that by none but the
Bishop and Priests.
7.
The Child must be crossed. So must the Bell.
8.
The Child must be anointed. So must the Bell.
9.
The Child must be baptized, in the name of the Trinity. So the Bell is washed
and anointed in the name of the Trinity.
10.
They pray for the Child. So do they for the Bell.
11.
At the Childs baptism the Scripture is read: So at the washing of the Bell,
more psalms are read, then at a Childs baptism; also a Gospel:
12

And public prayers made^ and more prayers are made, and (excepting salvation)
greater things are prayed for, and more blessings on the bell, then be for a
child.

For better evidence heerof, and because the book is not easy to come by, take
here a part of the prayers they use to that purpose. Lord, grant that
wheresoever this holy Bell thus (baptized, or) washed and blessed shall sound,
all deceits of Satan, al fantasies, al danger of whirlwindes, thunders,
lightnings, and tempests, may be driven away, and that devotion may increase
in Christian men when they hear it: O Lord sa^ctifie it by the holy Spirit;
that when it sounds in thy peoples ears, their faith and devotion may
increase, the devil may be affraied, and tremble and fly away at the sound
of it. O Lord pour upon it thy heavenly blessing, that the fiery darts of the
Devil, may be made to fly backward at the sound thereof, and that it may
deliver from danger of wind, thunder, etc. And grant Lord that all that come
to the Church at the sound of it, may be free from all temptations of the
Devil. O Lord infuse into it the heavenly dew of the holy Ghost, that the
devil may always fly away before the sound of it, etc.

Thus at Bellarmines request we have looked into the Popes Pontificale; and let
the Reader judge what we have found: he rebukes us for laying it to their
charge that they baptize bells, and for proof that they do not, sends us to the
Pontificale. But surely he thought that we could not have seen the book, else
he would never have referred us thereu^to: for upon sight thereof, it is
apparent to be a more solemn baptism then that of the child is; for the
solemnity is longer, the Ceremonies more, the prayers to greater purpose, the
minister of greater place, then be required to a Childs baptism^ and every
thing does so concur in it that is in baptism, that Bellarmin himself
confesses tho the pope does not, yet others generally do call it the baptizing
of belles, because they see them sprinkled with water, and have names given
them Bellar. tom. 1. de Romans pont lib. 4. cap. 12. Nomen Baptism^non a
Pontificibus sed a vulgo campanarum benedictioni acco^modatur etc. quia vide^t
eas aqua aspergiet e^s nomina imponi, etc.
.

But it is not the name we stand upon, but the matter: concerning which,
whereas they pray that the sound of that bell, so washed and sanctified as
before, may drive away the devil and all his fiery darts, I would ask
Bellarmine, or any of his Chaplains, whether this be spoken in jest or in
earnest, in formality as words of course, or in faith as a holy prayer. If they
know the prayer to be impossible, not to have any warrant, but meerlie to be
a State Ceremony, and done to amaze the poor people etc. then it appears
they be Cozeners and Atheists, that make religion a pretense to all their
purposes: But if it be in earnest, and they know it to be a prayer of faith,
and have warrant from Gods word for it, then it is possible enough to drive
away the devil and all his temptations out of a kingdom: for so many Belles
might be hallowed and washed, as might hang, one within the reach of another
sound; and so if the words of this prayer be true, a Devil might not stay in
the realm: and that Realm were very worthy to have the Devils company, that
would not willingly be at the cost to have so many bells though they were of
silver, and to have them baptized though it were in costly water.

To conclude, Bellarmine pleases to sport him self a little with us and
says; The Heretics object to us that we baptize belles: but its marvel
(says he) that they do not also say, we catechize and instruct them, that
so they may sound out the Articles of Faith: But it is very likely, the
Jesuit had not seen or not well perused the Pontificale: for if he had, he
might have found that they pray to GOD to give the HOLY GHOST to the Bell, to
bless it, to sanctify it, to purify it, to pour heavenly blessings upon
it, and the dew of Gods grace. Certainly if this be a lawful an apt and
fit prayer for the bell, they may also catechize it: for it is doubtless as
capable of instruction from man, as of any spiritual and heavenly blessing
from God.

Thus it is proved, I hope, that the Romish Church (in some sort for the name,
but especially for the matter) does baptize Bells.

It remains but to see The twelfth wound not healed; for the Romish Church
still baptizeth Belles.
if this wound be healed, or no.

But I answer, this was not the superstition of the old and ignorant times
only, but is even the present impiety of that Church: for of late, Clement the
eight, pretending to have the Pontifical reuiewed and reformed, caused it to
be printed at Rome before his face Vide Pontificale Roma^um Clementis 8. Pont.
Max. ius^u restitutum atque ed tum Romae 1895. et legatur eiusdem Clementis
Constitutio ibid. praefixa, pro eiusdem libri authoritate and approbatione.
by his authority, in a fair letter, and with most goodly pictures: and indeed
many things are left that might make against the Pope, and many added that may
make for him.

But as for this blasphemy and abuse of Gods holy Sacrament, it stands
untouched, unaltered, and allowed for a good and Catholic practice in every
particular as I have before set it down, and in many more: Oh BABYLON,
BABYLON, when will thou be healed?

The other sore of this wound is touching the Lords Supper The other sore of
the 12. wound; That though Christ ordained the contrary; yet it is not
necessary for Christians of the Laity to have the sacrament in both kinds, but
only the bread and not the Cup.
.) which they maime and mangle, sacrilegiously taking the Cup from the whole
Laity. This wound is not very deep, for it is not old: but it is wide, for
it is general: and it is a foul one; for it maimeth the Sacrament, and
crosses Christ's own Institution. They were a hatching it sometime before: but
at last the monster was brought forth in the Council of Constance; when they
decreed thus, Council. Constant. sess. 13.
That notwithstanding Christ ordained the Sacrament in both kinds, and tho the
eldest Church did so receive it, yet for all that, this custom is lawfully and
laudably brought into the Church, that the laity shall receive but in one kind
only, and that whosoever shall hold the contrary, shall be proceeded against as
heretics: and all Priests are commanded under pain of excommunication, that
they give not the Cup to the laity: and they that do, and recant not, shall
be punished as heretics.

This wound has Bellarmine, and other of the craftier sort of them, sought to
cover but not to cure: and it would satisfy a man in this point tho he wauered
before, to see how slily and superficially he deals in this question Bellar.
de sacra^. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 26. tom. 3.
. This abuse is so horrible, the injury to the Sacrament, and the wrong to the
laity so notorious, the absurdity and impiety of the practice so without all
color of defense, that if they were not without grace and past hope of
recovery, and such as have resolved to amend nothing, they would have reformed
this long ago.

But heerby it is apparent they are plain Statesmen and Politicians, who have
nothing else in their head, but to maintain the height of their hierarchy, and
Majesty of their Monarchy. Even this one particular is sufficient to make
demonstration hereof; seeing they will not amend that which they see and know to
be contrary to Christ's Institution; and whereof many of the better sort of
themselves are utterly ashamed.

But it is so far from being healed at all, that it is rather worse and worse
The latter sore of the 12 wound not yet healed, hut spreades further.
. Look in their new edition of the Counsels this last year, and there is no
reformation of this evil Vide postremam edit. Council. per Bininu^. Colon. 1^06.
Council. Constant sess. 13. in 2. part tomi ter^ii. p. 1589.
, no plaster laid upon this sore, not so much as a marginall note to qualify
the Non-obstante to Christ's Institution; but rather all is made worse then it
was before in the former and elder impressions.

Nay, it is so far from being healed, that contrariwise it is made daily a
wider and deeper wound: For now it is made in that Church a sin against the
first Commandment of the moral law, for a man to receive the Sacrament in
both kinds Vide libru^ inscriptu^ Excercitiu^ pietatis in gratiam studiosorum,
aut^ritate Cardinalis Radzivilii, scriptum and editum. Colon. 92. in cap. de
methodo recte confitendi.
. So then seeing we know Christ appointed it in both kinds, and now the Romish
Church prohibites it under pain of mortal sin; alas what hope is there that
this Church will ever be reformed, that condemns the obedience to Christ's
institution and commandment, as a deadly sin?

Let us now proceed to such wounds, as may be more properly referred to the
second Table of the moral law.

The thirteenth Wound.
TOuching wilful murder, it has been their doctrine and practice, since the
misty times of ignorance, that The 13. wound; That it is lawful to have
sanctuaries for wilful murder.
Churches and Churchyards, and Bishops houses, and some such other places be
sanctuaries, that is, places for refuge for the offender; unto which if he do
fly, and settle himself, he cannot, nor may not be prosecuted by course of
law and justice but is there safe, as long as it pleases the Clergy to
retain him.

Thus writes Pope Innocent the 3. in his Decretalls to the King of Scotland,
who in those evil days (poor man) held himself not of power to punish
malefactors of his own kingdom that had taken sanctuary, until he had sent
to the Pope for his advise. Corp. Iuris Canonici Decretal. li. 3. tit. 49. cap.
6.
To your question Sir (says the Pope) I answer thus; If he that has taken
sanctuary be a freeman, then is he not to be taken violently out of the
Church, not tho he have committed never so grievous crimes: neither may he be
condemned thereupon either to death or other^punishment; but the Clergi^, and
governors of that Church are to obtain for him liberty and safety of life
and limme etc.

Some may here object, that afterward in the decretall he makes exception of
some crimes: true, of night robbers, but not of murderers. Neither was this
proper to Italy or to Scotland, but the general sore of al nations. In
England we had many, but especially 3. most famous sanctuaries:

One at Beuerley, in Yorke-shire, erected by K Athelstane, where in the Church
was set a chair of stone, and this inscription written over it; This stone
chair is called Freedstoole, that is, the chair Vide Brita^nia^ Camdeni in
Com. Ebor.
of peace, whereunto if one that is guilty do fly and sit in it, he shall have
all-sufficient security.

Another at Battle Abbie in Sussex, where the Conqueror won the victory: and
in memory thereof, building that Abbey, he endowed it (with the popes consent)
amongst others with this privilege Vide eunde^ Camdenum, in com. Sussex.
; If any thief or Murderer, or any other malefactor (whatsoever his fault
be) for fear of death do fly and come to this Church, he shall not be hurt
by any means; but shall be dismissed, and let go again with safety and
freedom. And further it shall be lawful for the Abbot of the said Church, in
all places wheresoever he shall hap to com^, to save one thief from the
gallows.

These be the very words of the Charter.

The third and not the least was at Westminster: whereof there is often and
famous mention in our Chronicles, as being a place of frequent and ordinary
refuge for great Malefactors; and the name remains there to this day. And these
were not so much the facts of ignorant and superstitious Kings, as the general
received doctrine of the Romish teachers, and the public deed of their Popes
them selves Vide decretal. Sext. and Clement: in tit. de ecclesiarum and
coemeterioru^ immunitatibus, etc.
.

This was so in the old time (will some say) but now it is otherwise. I
answer: Nay, this is not healed, but rather is much worse. To this end, let us
consider a little of some of their latest and principal writers in this case
The 13. wou^d not healed; for Popery allows sanctuaries for wilful murder
still.
. A great Clarke of Rome; a favorite of Pope Gregory's the xiiii. and one of
his principal Secretaries, some 12. years ago writes a great volume of this
and other Immunities, which he says by their religion belong to holy persons
and places; let us observe a few of his words Vide Anaslasium Germoniu^ de
sacrorum immunitatibus. lib. 3. cap. 16. art. 1. etc.
. Not Clergy men only, but even the very Churches themselves have their
privilege: for Malefactors flying to them, are in a sort made sacred or holy
thereby; insomuch as they may not be taken away thence, nor be cast into
prison, nor be touched in life, nor lim, but shall there be safe from all
pursuers, as in a Castle or most strong hold, etc.

And not only puts he down this for Catholic doctrine, but he will also
needs have it to be ex iure diuino: and whereas Couarruvias (as learned as
himself at least) disproues it very sufficiently Didac. Couarruvias. variarum
resolut. lib. 2. cap. 20. Number. 2. v. 2 and 3.
and concludes it to be but de iure positivo, this dearling of the Popes will
not suffer so much amendment as this, but condemns Couarruvias, tho he cannot
confute his reasons, and concludes it to be de iure diuino. Idem Germonius
ibid. art. 7.
.

And whereas one Johannes Ferrariensis, a famous and learned Lawyer, argues
soundly and truly that Churches should not receive murderers not be
sa^ctuaries for thieves, seeing Christ cast out even buyers and sellers which
are not so ill Ioh. Pet. de Ferrar. practica Papiensis. cap de forma inquisi.
verse. ex his potest.
; The Popes Secretary, scornfully casts away both his opinion and his reason
Germonius ibid. art. 15.
; yet is he never able to overthrow either the truth of his opinion, or
strength of his reason: but so unwilling are they to be healed in any thing,
that if any one of them do begin to see the truth, and do but glaunce at it,
or incline to it, presently he is nipt in the head and condemned, as here the
old Lawyer is reproved by the later; and when he would have had this wound
healed, this favorite of the popes will not suffer him, but answers that his
reason is naught and not worth a rush.

And yet not content, he goes further, and faith; that not only Churches
consecrated, but tho they be not as yet consecrated Idem ibid. art 23. 24.
, yet they be sanctuaries: and not the Church only, but even the Churchyard;
yea tho it be disioyned from the Church Idem ibid. art 30. and 34.
.

Nay further, that even hospitalls Idem ibid. art. 27.
, yea private Chapels in men's houses, if they were built by the Bishops
authority Ide^ ibid. art. 29.
, have privilege of sanctuary to receive a murderer flying unto them. And
least murder should not find sufficient shelter in Romish religion, he tells
us further, that even the Bishops Palace is a sanctuary, if a murderer fly unto
it, if it be within 40. pases of the Church; or (tho it be more then 40.
pases off) if it have a Chapel in it lde^ ibid. art^ 43 etc.
. And yet further, if a murderer going to execution, after a just sentence, or
before trial, being pursued, do meet a Priest carrying his breaden God, and
do fly to him, he is privileged from the power of the law Ide^ ibid. art. 52.
.

And least we should think it strange, to give this honor to the Church that
is Gods house, or to the bread which they say is their God, he goes yet one
step further, and tells us that Ide^ Germonius ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6. art. 51.
etc.
, A Cardinal of Rome not only is so holy a person in himself, that he may
not be touched without sacrilege; but if a murderer or malefactor, that is
carrying to executiou, have the good hap to meet a Cardinal, and can touch
either his hat or his robes, he is discharged from the sentence of the law.

Lo, here is a holy person, indeed; a Cardinals coat, or hat, shall have
more privilege then had either the coat or the flesh it self of Christ
Jesus: he would not deliver any murderers from death, only one he delivered;
namely, Barrabas, but he himself died in his room See the story of the
passion.
: and if my Lords the Cardinals should do so, surely they would meet no
murderers in the street.

But to go forward; the law says, the Murderer shall die Genesis 9. 6.
; and Christ says, he came not to dissolve the law^ but to fulfill it Math.
5. ^8.
: but the Cardinals will not fulfill the law, but dissolve it. The Murderer
shall die, says God: true, says the Pope, unless he hap to touch the hem
of one of my Cardinals coats; for the^ he is acquitted.

But is this healed and reformed? nay alas: one Antonius Corsetus, a learned
Lawyer, misliking this, because as he says truly (l); this being so, there
will be an occasion given of much evil, and bloody men will hereby take liberty
to offend: He is not suffered to make any motion for reforming of anything,
but is contrariwise turned away with this censure, that his reasons are slender
and nothing worth. And thus, when he is dashed out of countenance, who would
have healed this wound, then comes the Popes Secretary (a true child of
Babylon that will not be healed) and to make the wound wider and deeper, brings
a reason for this power of Cardinals, worthy of himself Idem Germonius ibid.
cap. 6. art. 51.
; If (says he) the Virgin-vestals in Rome heathenish had this power, that if a
person condemned met one of them in his way to execution, and could get to
touch them, he was thereby delivered from death; as he proves out of Aul.
Gellius Aul. Gellius, noct. At. lib. 10 cap^ 15.
: Then much more ought the Cardinals to have this honor in Rome being now
Christian.

Yea, but is there not danger to multiply murders, and defeat the law by this
means? for may nor a Cardinal come for favor, and on set purpose? may he not
be entreated? may he not be corrupt and be hired to come? There be now also
many Cardinals, about 60. or 70. if any of all these be in the^ streets,
murderers may escape; and there be few days, wherein some of these stir
not abroad. To all these material objections, what does he answer? surely an
easy answer has he for all: This privilege belongs, Germonius Ibid. art.
52.
without all question, to the Cardinals person, if he come by chance, and not
on set purpose: for so it was also in the case of the Virgins vestall.

But how shall it appear, that he comes not purposely? In that case, the
vestall Virgins, that never might swear, were put to their oath Aul. Gellius
ibid.
.

But for all that (says this Popes dearling) my Lords the Cardinals may not
swear, they may not be so disparaged as to be put to their oaths. How shall
it then appear? he must (says he Germonius ibid. art. 53.
be believed upon his bare word. So then if a Cardinal have but the conscience
to tell a lie (which, how small a thing it is in popery, and how many excuses
it has, who knows not?) the^ it is here apparent, that the vilest thief, and
murderer in a country, may easily escape the halter at Rome.

Now to conclude, see how many helps there be for a Murderer in Romish
religion; first by places, then by persons privileged. Were this so in London
how should any murderer be brought to the bar or to execution: for no street
could he pass through but he shall find one of these five places.
Places privileged be, 1. a Church, 2. a Churchyard, 3. an Hospital, 4. a
Bishops house. 5. a private Chapel; all these shall deliver a man from
trial. Persons privileged be, first, a Cardinal riding by: which because it
is but in few places; therefore the second is a Priest carrying the Sacrament,
and that is in every town: To touch either of these, does deliver from death a
murderer condemned by law.

Thus we see, a bloody Church is a defender of blood and murder; for let any
wise man consider, how many thousand murders in a year, may be sheltred and
shuffled over by these means. And yet sanctuaries are but one means to cloak
murder; they have many more (not so fit to be stood upon at this time); but
the end, and effect of them all is this, that poisoning, stabbing, killing, and
all kind of bloud-shedding is so rife in popish States, that the better sort of
themselves do bitterly complain of it. Oleaster a spanish Inquisitor (and
therefore not partial on our side) has these words; Vide Hieronimu^ ab
Oleastro inquisitorem vlissiponens. in suis Comment, in Pentat: ^n cap. 4.
Genes. page 17.
I see daily ( says he) murders are committed: but I do not see the murderers
are punished: for we have at this day a thousand ways to excuse murderers;
whereof one is to appeal to the Church, and to say he is a Clergy man, and
presently to get from the Pope such Judges or Commissioners, as themselves
will, who by and by discharge and absolve them, upon a little punishment or
none at all, and thus murders are multiplied every day, etc.

Let these words be well observed, and what he was that spoke them; and if this
be so, so far from Rome as Portingale is, the^ we may easily judge how the
world goes at Rome and near unto it.

Against all this what can be said? that this Anastasius is an author suborned
by us? Nay, Posseuine the Jesuit will for that answer for us, having
canonized him in his catologue of catholic Doctors Possev. Ies. appar. sac.
tom lit. A.
: what then? that he is but a triuiall fellow; and of no credit nor authority?
Nor so: for he was public professor of the Popes law, at Turin, and in great
office and authority both with Gregory the 14. and Clement the 8. idem.
Posseu. ibid.
and his books be dedicated to the Popes and Cardinals, printed at Rome with
sovereign authority, and special commendation. Nay, the pope himself with his
own mouth commended the book to the Cardinals, and said that the whole
Clergy, and the Council of Cardinals by name were greatly beholden to the
Author for it Vide eiusdem Anastasij Epistolam dedicat. ad Gregorium 14. Pont.
Max.
: So that it is more then impudency for any papist, to make question of the
authority of his doctrine.

What then can be said? that these sanctuaries stand indeed allowed for some
faults, but not for murder? Indeed if it were so, the fault were less: but the
truth is otherwise.

For tho it be certain and confessed by themselves, that by the civil law,
Murderers, and Rauishers, and Adulterers are excepted In Quod fi delinquentes
Authent demand princip.
; Yet Germonius shameth not to answer that the Civil law is corrected in this
point by the popes law, and that therefore we are to stand to it Germonius de
sacroru^ immunitatibus, lib 3. cap. 16^7. etc.
and not to the Civil law. Now who are excepted by the popes law? only night
robbers, and setters of high ways Germonius ibid. art. 56, ex lure Canonico
and communi sententia.
: but as for murderers, adulterers, and rauishers, these find favor in the
popes law; for they be Amici Curiae but thieves and robbers are not so: and
therefore this Germonius concludes that tho the Scripture be plain and many
Doctors; yet, a murderer is not to be taken out of sanctuary, unless there
be more then murder, as deceit and treachery. What then may be said? that this
Germonius is but one Doctor, and his opinion is not to be taken for a
doctrine. I answer, his judgment is allowed by the Pope himself, and his
opinions are fortified with consent of other popish Doctors: But that we may
see he walks not alone in this way; one Stephanus Durantus, writing also of
late, of the rites of the Romish Church, delivers the same for a general
doctrine of that church: tho he being a Frenchman, is therefore the bolder,
and says that neither in France nor in England they have been permitted by
the kings with such absolute allowance as elsewhere. Stephanus Durantus de
ritibus ecclesiae catholic Rom^ (...) ad Gregor. ^4 vid li. 1. ^a art. 10.
Such says he is the honor and immunity of Churches, that malefactors flying
to them may not be taken out, nor have any violence offered them.

This book also is of special authority, dedicated to P. Gregory the ^4. and
by him accepted with special allowance: and in a Bull or constitution of his,
he affirms it is a work serving greatly for Gods glory, and the edification
of Christian people, and that it is approved and allowed by the great Mr. of
his palace, to whom belongs the sovereign and highest authority to censure
all sort of books.

And last of al Iacobus de Graffiis, the great Casuist and Grand
Poenitentiarie, within these 7. years has determined this question; affirming
that the murderer may not be taken out of the Church, no not tho he broke
prison and fled thither, unless it were murder joined with treachery and
treason Iacobus de Graffijs decis. aur. cas cons. to 1. cap. 48. libri secu^di
art. 5. 6^ 7.
.

Thus we see how Babylon is healed in this wound. And hereby it is apparent to
all that will see, that she is a bloody Babylon; and as in many other respects
for her cruelty, so this way also, for this doctrine and practice, she is a
bloody sinagogue: and no marvel tho the holy Ghost say, that in her is found
the blood, not only of the Prophets and Saints, but of all that were slain upon
the earth Revel 18. 24
. For as she has made her self the principal agent in shedding the blood of
Saints and Martyrs: so has she made her self accessory by this her doctrine
and practice, to all the murders and bludshed upon the earth: for, to maintain
so many refuges and defenses for a sin, is to maintain the sin it self.
Therefore leaving this bloody Church weltring, and wallowing, and bathing her
self in blood, let us proceed to that remains.

The fourteenth Wound.
TOuching the honorable estate of marriage, and the dishonor of it, which is
adultery and fornication, it is lamentable to see what is the doctrine and
practice of the Romish Church. For first, they give a public and open
toleration of the stews, wherein whoredom is practiced as daily and commonly,
as other civil and lawful actions The 14. wound; Romish Reliligio^ permits
stews publickelie.
: nay their rent is rated and duly paid, (a part of it) to the Pope, or as
he shall appoint it: Thus complains and cries out Agrippa, a man of no mean
place, nor ordinary understanding, among themselves. Cornel. Agrippa de
vanitate scient. cap. 64.
The Corinthians (says he) and Cyprians, and Babylonians, and other heathen
Graecians did increase their revenue, by the gain of the stews, which in
Italy also is at this day no rare nor unusual matter: for the whores of Rome
do pay weekelie to the pope a Iulio a piece (about six pence sterling) the
whole revenue whereof in the year, does often exceed the sum of twenty
thousand Ducats, etc.

Alas will some say, the pope cannot hinder this: therefore seeing he cannot
help, he has used (such was the wisdom of elder ages) to make the best use
he can of an ill matter.

But I answer; first the holy Ghost commands us to have nothing to do with an
ill matter, but keep us far from it Exodus 23. 7. Ephesians, 5. 11.
, though we cannot hinder it. Again, if the pope could not hinder it, yet he
can refuse to have any gain from it; and so he would, but that he thinks it
sweet: but if he were of David's religion who would not drink that drink,
that cost men the venture of their lives 2. Sam. 23. 14.
, surely he would not take that gain that costs men and women their souls.

But I answer further, He could and might hinder it, and will not. If he
himself and his favorites speak truth; he wants no power for nothing that he
will do: therefore for reforming the stews, it is clear he wants will, but no
power. He whose power stretches through purgatory, reaches even to hell,
does it not reach to Rome his own seat? Can he empty purgatory and not the
stews? can he command the devils, and not whores? can he dispose of kingdoms
and depose kings when he sees cause, and cannot he or sees he no cause to
depose the stews? Against Gods truth, and us the professors of it, whom he
calls heretics, he wants no will, and therefore he wants no power. Let him
punish whoredom, as he does that, that he calls heresy (tho it be the
truth): let it be as unlawful in Rome to keep or frequent stews, as to have
a Protestant Church, and then we should soon see as few, and fewer whores in
Rome, then there be good Protestants. But whoredom is none of the underminers
of his State, nor enemies of his Crown as our religion is: therefore our
religion must down when stews must stand. But some will further object, If
this have bin so, it is the fault or corruption of his officers, and not to be
imputed to his Holiness. But I answer: the pope uses not to be so negligent of
his estate, as not to look at a reueneue of 20000. ducats a year. And to
take away al cause of this cavil, and to make it more apparent that the pope
is the head of the whore of Babylon; Pope Sixtus 4. scarce 120^ years ago, Ad
perpetuamrei memoriam: to his everlasting honor.
built a stews in Rome, of his own erection and foundation, so says the same
Agrippa. Cornel. Agrip. de vanit. scient. cap. 64.
Licurgus and Solon, heathen law-giuers, erected public stews: but that is no
marvel, for of late years, pope Sixtus the fourth builded a goodly stews Rome.

Lo here, the Popes Holiness, the founder of a College of devils, a stews for
whores: surely because he scorned ordinary company, he built that for himself
and his Princes and his peers, the Cardinals: who if their own brethren say
true, make it nothing dainty to be conversant with courtizans. Thus we see it
confessed and proved by a learned papist, that a 100. years ago stews were
maintained, nay erected by the pope: and that he takes gain and rent of them.
If any man object against Agrippa, as no competent witness: I answer, the pope
indeed has prohibited Vide indicem. lib prohibit. Clementis 8. in litera. H.
his books to be read; but it had been more reason to have disproued and
confuted his assertions: but let the pope condemn him as he will, for his bold
speaking of truth; it is known to all that know him, or his books, he was a
papist for the most part: and whatsoever he was, he had no reason to belly the
pope; we hired him not, we thank him not for any thing but truth: yet for more
certainty hereof, hearken to another, who being an Inquisitor, is beyond all
exception that way.

Thus complains Oleaster (a Spanish Doctor), upon that text of Deuteronomy
Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
thou shall not bring into my house the hire of a whore; for it is abominable.
Oleaster in Comment. suis in Pentateu. in Deuteronomy. cap. 23. fol. 270.
Filthy gains, says he, were ever abominable to God, and therefore he forbids
to bring into his house the hire of a whore. But now in the new Testament, when
the Church and Ministers thereof should be much more clean, and pure then
before, al manner of filthy gains are accepted and taken; how vile so ever they
be, and whencesoeuer they come.

Thus all gain is sweet, and al rent welcome to the Pope, tho it come from
whores: so true a friend to stews and whores is the whore of Babylon.

But will some say, this might be so in the elder times that were of more
liberty, because al was quiet: but now since Luther rose, and the Church has
bin wakened by heretics, this wound is healed.

No, this wound is not healed: as I will prove by their late and modern
writers. The 14. wou^d not healed: for the Romish religion, doctrine and
practice tolerate stews still.


Nauarrus one of their greatest Canonists of this last age, and one whom the
popes held worthy to be called to Rome, for his continual advise and direction
Martinus Azp^l. Nauar. Hisp. Iuris canonici scie^tis. idemque theolog. insignis
etc. Haec Poss^^ in apparatu sac. tom 2. lit. M.
deals very plainly in this matter, and says, that Nau Manua^l. c. 17. nu. 195.
It is lawful for the magistrate to permit whores and stews to be in some
convenient part of the city. And in some places he says that patro^s and
officers are appointed for them, and houses are let and rented to them deerer
then to honest women. And he confe^^eth, that in Rome, houses are daily let
out to whoors; the Pope both seeing it and suffering it, and that of long time
it has been so. And that the confessors do absolve and so have ever done those
Landlords so disposing of their houses to whores, yea though they have no
purpose to abstain from letting them to these vile persons.

See here a piece of spanish devotion and modesty: Surely, no marvel though
this man were sent for, from Spain to Rome: for it seems by this doctrine he
was for the Popes tooth, and much more for his Cardinals.

Alphonsus Viualdus, another learned Spaniarde, wrote a book of matters of
conscience not long ago, of so great account amongst them that they call it
the golden Candlestick. It has been often printed, and within these 7. years
was by the popes special commission purged, and reprinted: he writes thus
Martinus Alphonsus Vivaldus, the ol^ Iuris canon, professor, and
poenitentiarius mayor, etc. In Candelabro aureo. tit. de Confessione, numero 60.
. First, he makes a question, whether in the yearly excommunication pronounced
by the Bishop, against the^ that do not confess and communicate, whores in the
stews be comprehended, or no: and he resolves that they be not, tho they
neither confess nor do communicate; and gives his reasons. 1. For that whores
in the Romish Church, be never published nor denounced excommunicate. 2. No man
refuses their company, notwithstanding that yearly excommunication: and
concludes further, that though one continue a whore for twenty years long,
yet does she not incur the Cens^ures of the Romish Church.

Oh excellent doctrine, and fit for the Romish Church! but all this will some say
is salued by this that follows. Nay, contrariwise say I, the wound is made
worse; and by the craft of that that follows, observe the subtilty, and
iniquity of Romish teachers: for this is done (says he) in detestation of
their ill life: the Church does so detest their manner of life, that she will
not think them worthy of her censures; oh notable shift! are they too bad to
be punished, and not too bad to be suffered? does the Romish Clergy think them
so vile that way, and yet allow them? see the iniquity and filthiness of this
religion.

Thus its apparent by the great Confessor Viualdus, that the Romish Church
excommunicats not common whoores, nor them that go to them: and another as
great a Clark as himself, says, it is the common opinion lac. de Graffijs.
tom. 1. lib 1 cap 9. art. 8. and 9.
.

But yet to show better that this wound is not healed, hark a little what the
grand penitentiary, Iacobus de Graffijs, says; Iacobus de Graffiis decisaur.
cas. cons. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 75. art, 3. et 4. page 348.
But if fornication be a sin, then why does the Church her self permit
stews, and consequently fornication, which is a mortal sin? I answer (says
he) that the Church sometime tolerateth a less evil present that she may
avoid a greater evil to come, that is probable to fall out: and this he
proves out of the Canon law; and so concludes that the Church does tolerate
stews and whores, to avoid greater sins: not approving the sin of
fornication; but by conniuence, or dissimulation tolerates it, that so she may
restrain and keep young men from adulteries, incests, and other crimes of
that kind: then he goes further to prove his conclusion; which he does out of
the practice of heathen lawgiuers, and by the civil law, and would prove it
out of the Fathers and then to make up the measure of his iniquity, he adds
that the law does so far forth tolerate fornications in stews that it takes
order to compel the whoores to refuse no man, if he offer her, her pay: the
words are too bad to be repeated in english.

And to show that he is a true child of that Babylon that will never be healed,
and that he is as graceless in this point as his mother, afterward in his 2.
tome (which he put out in his more mature years) he has again the same
doctrine in as ill or worse words; Idem Graffius ibid. tom. 2. li. 3. c. 28.
art. 36.


And to conclude, the better to encourage women to be whores, and the better to
please their carnal and wicked minds, Cardinal Tollet a Jesuit, out of his
Iesuitical modesty, and his Cardinallike respect to the stews, delivers this
doctrine; Fra^ Tolletus Ies. Cardinal. Instructio sacerdotum. lib. 5. cap. 17.
art. 3
That Whores, taking money of men, for their sin, be they married or unmarried,
tho it be never so much above their due, are not bound to restore any of it
again, if it be once given them; and gives a reason for it because, says he,
this action is not against justice, etc.

Certainly the stews are much beholden to Cardinal Tollet for this doctrine:
but, what Justice and modesty, and the Church, and the truth and God himself
do owe him for it, he feels before this time, except he repented. Obijt
Tolletus. Romae. 1596


Thus it is the present doctrine of the Romish Church that she allows stews
by public toleration, to avoid greater evils, and censureth not the whores
for it; nay, ties them by a law to refuse no man, and ties men by a law to pay
the hire; and for this end allows them Courts, Judges, and Officers, and
takes part of the benefit arising. Now, that their practice is according to
this doctrine, I appeal to all that have traveled in those parts where
popery reigns; as Spain, Italy, etc. And further to give one evidence out
of my own reading for the practice, Iacobus de Graffijs tells us plainly in
these words, Iacobus de Graff decis. aur. cas. cons. tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 28.
art. 20.
It is lawful for Lords and owners of houses to let out their houses to
whores, even whom they know so to be, so it be with this mind, not purposelie
that they may sin, but with this that the women may get their living, and be
able to pay them good rents. Now tho they know they will get their own living,
and pay them their rent out of whordom, yet if they have a dislike of the sin,
they may do it lawfully: and such, says he, is the common practice at Rome.

Thus both for Romish doctrine and practice, it is apparent that stews are
allowed to this day, and common whores not censured.

Against all this but one thing can be objected; namely, that al these be
private doctors that teach the doctrine, and secular princes that allow the
practice, I answer, the^ let us see what the pope does. Does he supply the
negligence of other Bishops? they do not excommunicate the^: does he? No, no,
he is as bad or worse then the worst. Princes tolerate them, so does he Nay, by
the places alleged before, it is manifest that it is not princes, but the Pope
and the Church that tolerates and permittes the^, and princes permit them,
because the Church does.
; they in their kingdoms, he in Rome: they build them houses, so did he: they
take part of their gain, so does he: the Bishops excommunicate them not, no
more does he to this day. For this end we are to know, that besides all
particular and personal excommunications, he uses once a year, that he may
meet with all his enemies at once, and pay them at one payment, to
excommunicate together all such sorts and kinds of people, as he holds his
enemies. But are whoores any of them? no such matter: nay these be they; Vide
Bullam Coenae in Co^stit. Romans po^t. per Petru^ Mathaeu^ ed. inter Co^stitut.
Sixti quinti pa. 883.
1. Caluinists, Lutherans, and such heretics. 2. All that appeal from the Pope
to a general Council. 3. Forgers and Falsifiers of the popes hand, or seal.
4. All that hurt and hinder Pilgrims that come to Rome. 5. Al lay men that
draw Clergymen to their Courts, or would bring them under their jurisdiction.
6. All that hinder the jurisdiction of the Clergy. 7. All that seize upon any
lands belonging to the Pope, etc.


These and such other like to the number of 17. or 18. be the enemies against
who^ the Pope has cause to plant his ordinance; but as for whores, and stews
and such other heinous transgressors of the moral law, these never hurt the
Romish Church, and therefore she bends not her power against them.

So then, seeing popery and the stews are so linked, that (we perceive) do
what we can; man cannot separate those whom the devil has joined together:
let us then leave the stews in Rome, and the Pope in his stews; and mourning
for their misery, let us proceed.

The fifteenth Wound.
THe next wound is this: That whereas God has ever allowed and honored
marriage, in the old, and new Testament; and Concubines were never allowed in
the old, and absolutely condemned in the new: Now comes popery, and makes it
as lawful to have a Concubine as a Wife The 15. wound; He that has not a wife
may have a Concubine.
and this is done by no private persons, but the Popes law it self. Thus says
the Canon; Decret did. 34. cap. 4.
He that has not a wife, but for a wife or instead of a wife, a Concubine, let
him not for that be kept from the Communion; yet so as that he be content
with one woman, either a wife or a concubine.

Is not here a piece of good licentious popery? I know they say they have
this from the first council of Toledo, which is ancient: true, but what if
Spain, not long ago converted to the faith, was not purged as yet from these
dregs of heathenisme, and Judaism; are they therefore fit to be taken up by the
Pope, and inserted in his law, as a Canon to bind and direct for ever? If they
think that poor provincial Council (but of 19. Bishops) be a sufficient
warrant for this decree, then why take they not all? and why put they it not
down a wife or a Concubine, as it pleases him; for so it is in the words of
the Council Council. General. per Binniu^. Col. 1607. tom. 1. pa. 560. In
Council. 1. Tolet. cap. 17.
.

I know also, that they have coined a distinction, whereby they would cover
this wound, and say that a Concubine here is to be taken for a woman whom a
man has, and keeps with the affection of a Husband; only in outward fashion
and solemnity she is not a wife, nor publicly married: but I answer, the
best of it is naught if we did grant them all they say: but distinguish as
they can, the words are so plain, that the suttlest distinction they can
devise, will be too short a cloak to cover the shame of it: nay the shame of
this Canon is written in the forehead of it: for the Rubric or contents,
written with red letters, is worse then the text it self; Vide decretu^ cum
glossa, editionis lugdun. in fol. 1510 did. 34. cap. 4. Is, qui non habet
vxore^, loco illius debet habere concubinam.
He that has not a wife, ought, or at least may have, a Concubine in her
reome.

These be the very words in the impression at Lions, 1510. tho I confess the
Divines of Paris, having a little more care what past their hands, ashamed of
the word debet (that is, ought to have) put it out and put in liceat, that is,
he may have Vide decretu^ edit^ Parisiens. in fol. anni 1507. ibid. Is qui non
habet vxorem, loco illius, concubinam habere liceat.
: but take the best of all, and is it not bad enough? well let us go forward;
this wound is old and wide, and deep.

But is it yet healed? No, not to this day The 15 wou^d not yet healed^ for
still by the Popes Canon law he that has not a Wife may have a Concubine.
; for the Popes Canon law was of late years commanded by the Pope to be
corrected and purged, as well the Text as the Gloss: and is this amended, or
left out as being false and filthy doctrine? No: other places indeed are
altered, for the greater vantage and honor of the Pope: but this dishonorable
Canon, so disgraceful to Gods law, stands untouched in this new and last
editio^ of al Vide corpus iuris Canonici, authoritate Gregorij. 13. po^t max^
eme^datum et editum. 91. et 600.
: only the Rubric, or title, or Contents, whereof we spoke before is altered
thus; Ibid. did. 34. cap. 4. Is qui non habet vxorem sed loco illius
concubinam, a communione no^^ repellitur.
He that has not a wife, but for a wife a Concubine, is not repelled from the
Communion.

Thus it is amended; but in a poor fashion, as we may see. But what may the
Church of Rome mean to amend the Rubric or title, and not the Text? Surely
because they know many a one hastily runs over the Contents, and titles of
books and Chapters, who never look into the body of the books themselves. But
take this wound healed as it is: Is this good divinity at Rome, that he who
has no wife, but in a wives stead keeps a Concubine, shall not for that be
kept from the Communion? Is not this a holy table of the Romish Sacrament, from
which he shall not be forbidden that openly keeps a whore, in room of a wife?
Certainly this wound is notably healed: let us then go forward to the next.

The sixteenth Wound.
WE have heard that a Wife is made equal to a concubine: but what is she be
made worse then a Whore, an Adultresse, or a common strumpet? None dare say
this, none dare undertake this, but the Whore of Babylon: but she dare. For
this is her doctrine, that it is a less sin for many men to lie with another
man's wife, or a common whore; then it is to marry a wife of their own The 16.
wound; Some man had better lie with another man's wife, or keep a whor^, then
marry a wife of his own.
. Marriage which God has made so honorable, has bin of long time disgraced in
popery; but not in this high measure (I speak of) abused, that I know, till
these latter and more shameless times that the whore has got her a brazen
face.

In Luthers time, not yet a 100. years ago, lived one Albertus Pighius, one
of the Popes Champions Albert Pighius scripsit in Lutherum^ etc de ecclesia
catholica been meritus. Posse^ appar. ^ac. tom 1. lit. A.
, who for the defense of that hierarchy and maintenance of the cause, amongst
other his bold and blasphemous assertions, teaches this hoggish and hateful
doctrine; Pighius explicatio controuersiarum: contr^u. 15. de Caelib. et coniug
Sacerdo^ 215. edit. Parisi. 1549.
Go to (says he) suppose all that vowed continency, do not keep it so well as
they should: What the^? had they better marry? Nay assuredly: for we must
resist the temptation by all means we can: but if sometime we be too remiss,
and so by infirmity of the flesh do fall (into fornication or etc.) Certainly
this is a less sin and more tolerable offense, the^ it is to marry; for this
is wholly to cast off Gods yoke: not that we allow fornication (in it self);
but here we compare a slip or fall of infirmity to marriage, which in this case
we account no better then a resolved, or deliberate, or continual Incest,
utterly without all shame.

Here is a piece of holy popery indeed: but it is pope-holy, that is, beastly
and profane; so filthy that I had rather the particulars were considered of by
a man's own discretion, then deciphered by me. But let us see if this be
healed or no: For the Jesuits may say, this Pighius wrote so hoggishly in
licentious times, and when we were in the egg and scarce hatched For the
Jesuits order was established by Paul the 3. and this book of Pighius
published within 3 years together, namely, about the year. 1540.
; for had we then been in that power and place as now, we would have restrained
him.

But the truth is, that contrariwise this impious and filthy doctrine was
obscurely and timorously broched by Pighius; but has been since bouldly and
plainly blustered out by the Jesuits: The 16. wound not healed^ for this is
still the doctrine of the Romish Church.
: he brought forth an imperfect heap, but they have lickt it and brought it
to form and perfection. Costerus a Jesuit of great name amongst them Vide
Poss. appar. sac. to^. 1. lit. T.
writing a book, fit to be (as he calls it, and they esteem it) in every
Catholics hand, delivers this for sound and dogmatical doctrine. Costerus,
Enchiridion controuersiaru^ etc. cap. de coelibatupropos. ^. p. 528.
A Priest^ if he commit fornication, or keep a whore at home, though he sin
grievously, yet sins he more grievously if he marry a wife.

This is one of his propositions or conclusions. But he wrote this many years
ago: is it not since healed? No, the book has indeed bin often printed, and
with many alterations. Vide Posseuinum ibid.
. But this stands in his last impression untouched, as a doctrine for the Pope
to glory in: which I speak not at randon, but upon too good ground. For this
doctrine, and the writer of it have been often reproved by our Divines: but in
stead of reformation, Costerus has been defended, and the doctrine justified
by other of his learned brethren. I will name but one example. Chamier a
learned French Minister objected it to the Jesuits at Turnoue; and it is at
large defended by Ignatius Armandus, the principal of the College there, for
Catholic and good doctrine. Vide Epistolas Iesuiticas, part. 2. in epistola 1.
Iesuitae Ignatii ad Chamierum. page 33. etc.
The Epistles on both sides are in print to be seen. And if these be not of
authority sufficient, let Bellarmine come to help them. Thus he teaches:
Bellarm. to^. 2. lib. 2. de Monachis, cap 30 page 545.
That speech of the Apostle (They that cannot contain let them marry: for it
is better to marry then to burn) cannot be rightly said of them that have
vowed: for both are naught, both to burn and to marry: yea it is worse of the
two to marry, whatsoever the Protestant babble to the contrary.

And a little after in the same Chapter: She that marries after a single vow,
contracteth indeed a true Matrimony, yet in some sort she sins more then
she that plays the whore.

Thus this pope-holy doctrine is now brought to ripenes and perfection, by the
diligence, devotion, and modesty of the Jesuits. But they have a reason for
all this, so good and so strong, as they think, that thereby all is well
healed: for, say they, fornication or whoring we do not simply allow to be
better then marriage, but in respect that a man has before made a vow not to
marry, Bellar. ibid Costerus ibid Ignatius ibid.
therefore to marry after the vow, is to break promise with God. A notable
reason, if it be well considered: for here by it is apparent that popery
teaches her people to vow against marriage, but not against fornication;
against wives, but not against whores. Alas, alas, what doctrine is this, does
marriage break their vow, and not fornication? God keep a^l Christians from
such vows. But that this true I say, let Bellarmine judge. Bellar^ ibid
She that marries after a simple vow, in some sort sins more grievously
then she that commits fornication, because (mark his reason) she that
marries makes her self unable to keep her vow, which she does not that
commits fornication.

Thus it is plain: Popery voweth against marriage, not against whoredom,
adultery nor fornication. And thus three great Jesuits have made good what
Pighius taught, and that more plainly and palpably then he did. And to make up
a mess of Jesuits, Posseuinus their grand Censor, coming to give his censure
of Pighius, Posseuinus in Appar. sac. tom. 1. lit. A.
finds many faults and errors in his books: but as for this he has nothing
to say against it, but passes it over as good, holy, catholic Romish
doctrine: therefore seeing (as Bellarmine said before, say we what we can) they
will not forsake, nor amend this doctrine, let them keep it; and let it be
one of the sweet flowers of the Popes Garland.

The seventeenth Wound.
THe next wo^nd is near akin to this, The 17. wound. Priests in popery may
not marry, but are permitted to keep their whores, under a yeerelie rent.
namely, that their Chuch having always forbidden marriage to their Clergy,
has notwithstanding either tolerated and permitted them concubines, or at
least not punished it to reformation.

Thus was it complained of almost an hundred years ago, by the Germane
nation, then being papists. Vide Centum grauamina Germanicae nationis: grauamen
75. and 91.
In most places ( say they) Bishops and their Officials do tolerate and suffer
the Priests to have concubines, under payment of a certain annual rent of
money, and further do even permit them to keep their whores openly, and have
them in their houses, and to beget children of them etc.

Of these and certain other grieuances (one hundred in all) the Germane nation
complained to their Bishops and Clergy, in their own Diets or Parliaments
held at home. But having no redress they went further, and about the year
1522. complained to the Popes Legates and Nuntios at Noremberg, who gave them
good words, and promised they would make report thereof to his Holiness, and
procure them a gracious answer. But having long waited to no end, they
published their grieuances and sent them to the Pope, craving with much
humility, audience, redress and reformation; promising upon that condition,
they would still and ever show themselves dutiful and obedient children to the
Pope, and all whom he set over them: but if they had no redress, they assured
him they could not, nor would endure them longer. Hereupon the Pope, not
willing to venture the loss of so fair a child as Germany, pacified them
for a time with goodly promises. But what re^ormation followed in whole or in
any part, the stories of those ages make it apparent. But for the particular I
have in hand, The 17. wou^d not healed: for still in popery to this day, their
Clergy are forbidden marriage, but whores and co^cubines are not taken from
them.
what notable reformation was wrought herein, let a Bishop of their owne^
Espencaeus, as wise and learned as that age did yield, let him, I say, deliver
for me; who forty years after, writing of this matter says: Espencaeus de
Continentia lib. 2. cap. 7 page 17^.
In stead of pure and honest single life, succeeded impure fornication, and
filthy keeping of concubines, in such sort as neither can they be concealed for
multitude, nor seek they to be, they are so shameless. Nay of later times this
tolerancie has spread further, insomuch as in some places, both Clergy and
laity have their whores permitted the^, under a yearly rent: whereof ( says
he) the Germane nation complained long ago too truly and upon too great cause.

But was not this wound healed, and this abuse reformed upon this complaint of
Espencaeus? A man might have thought it would, and the rather seeing he was a
man of so great esteem in those days, not in France only; but even in the
Court of Rome. Espencaeus was in special favor with Pope Paul the 4. insomuch
as after much consultation had with him, he found him so wise and learned a
man, as he had made him Cardinal if he had lived: this is apparent in his
books de Continent. lib. 3. cap. 4. and in his co^mentary on Titus. cap. 1.
page 91.
But what amendment insued, let himself tell us in his Commentary upon Titus,
which he wrote many years after his former book. Our Bishops and Archdeacons,
etc. (in Popery) when they ride their visitations, do not so much punish the
evil doers, (for which end the visitations were first ordained) as rake up
silver, and suck it both from laity and Clergy, under false and fained
prete^ces of jurisdiction: but it is most filthy of all that they suffer them
to keep their whores in their houses, and have children of them, at a certain
annual and yeerlie rent, etc.

This is the healing and reformation wrought in those days. Oh but (will some
say) that is 40. years ago, sure it is better in these latter days. Indeed
this enormitie was so general and so scandalous, that even the Council of
Trent it self was ashamed, and made great ado for reformation of it. Vide
Council Tr^d ^es^ 24. cap. 8.
But what effect it took, how they executed it, and what is done in the
matter, let another Bishop of theirs tell us, who in these late days, scarce
seven years ago, Henricus Cuickius: Rutemundensis Episcopus scripsit speculum
concubinariorum, Sacerdotum, Monachorum and Clericoru^: Colon. 8599.
found it to be so common and shameless a sin al over all the low countries,
(where Popery reigned) not only in secular, but even in Monks, Friars and
regular priests, that he writes a book against the sin, bitterly but justly
inueighing against it, and showing how dangerous and damnable a sin it is:
and so much the more (says he) because it is so common and little regarded,
and so far are they from shaming with it, that ( mark how it is healed) they
will take their concubines and whores, and carry them up and down the country
(as men do their wives) to feasts and meetings, and challenge place and
precedence for them as for honest Matrones) And further freely confesses (but
with great grief and shame) that there be very few in their Clergy, free
from this crime. Idem Cuickius, in prae fatione eiusdem libri.


The eighteenth wound.
The 18. wound: Such priests as be contine^t and have no whores, yet must pay a
yearly rent as they that have, because they may have if they will.
And no marvel though there be but few of their Clergy that have not
concubines, seeing they take that course they do with them, which is such as
though they would inuit, nay hire, or rather press and provoke men to the
sin. For was it not also complained on at the same time by the Germans, that
Grauamiua 100. Ger. grau. 91.
Not only those Priests that had their whores paid yearly rent for it, but
eue^ those that were co^tinent and would have no Concubines, yet for all that
must pay the rent? for, say they, my Lord the Bishop has need of it, and
cause to employ much money: therefore pay you must, and then be it at your
own choice, whether you will have a concubine or no.

What is this but even to try men's strengths, and as it were to press them to
the sin: for he that either by constitution is unfit, or out of moral
honesty will not, or out of conscience dare not keep a concubine, seeing he
must pay his rent as well as he that does, will not this make him say to
himself, I see this is done by my superiors, they have more learning and
knowledge then I: I am to follow them, and may rather trust them then mine own
conceit: and certainly if it were so great a sin as I have imagined it to
be, our Bishops would not take a yearly rent to suffer it; and if they would,
yet his Holiness, it being so old and so notorious a practice, would have
reformed it long ere this. Therefore seeing the case stands thus, and that I
must and do pay, doubtless I will not pay for nothing, etc. Surely he must
have a great measure of grace, that living under popish subjection, can resist
this temptation and the like: and therefore no marvel though, as themselves
confess, not one of their Clergy of a great number that has not his whores in
corners, or else publicly in their houses Erasmus living about that time, or
soon after, complains of it, and says: Erasmus annotat. in 1. Tim. 3.
Eee that considers the state of these times how innumerable the number is of
such Monks and Priests as live in open whoredom and incest, would think it
perhaps more convenient to give leave to such as cannot contain, rather to
marry then, etc.

And not long after him flourished Cassander, a man of great name and account in
his time, both for wisdom and learning: and he finding the world still worse
in this point, confesses Cassander lib. Consult. art. 23. cap. 1.
Now the world is come to this pass, that a man shall not find scarce one of a
hundred that keeps himself free from this fault.

Thus we see the fruit of this their practice to take rent for concubines, and
to make them pay that had none, that almost none of their Clergy, but are
stained with this pollution.

But is this healed? The 18. wou^d not healed: for such as have no concubines
must pay their rent because they may have, if they will.
No, says Espencaeus, it is too horrible to believe. But it is too true, that
Espencaeus de Conti. lib. 2. cap 7.
Those that be continent and will have none, yet are compelled to pay the whole
tax or rent, and so have it lawful and in their choice to have a concubine or
to have none: Oh execrable abomination, etc.

Thus here was no amendment for forty years after the villainy was discovered,
and the grieuance complained of: and that there was nothing done in the days
of Espencaeus, which was for some 10 years more, we may see by his words in his
other book. Idemi^ Titum. ca. p. 67.
They take the rent not only of those that have concubines, but in some places
even of the^ that have none; for ( say they) he may have if he will, therefore
let him pay for his liberty: and though there be so many of these Priests that
live thus, yet where is there any one of them punished otherwise then thus by
the purse? etc.

Since the time of Espencaeus, whether this wound be healed or no, I cannot
tell: and therefore if any of that side can show me any good authority that now
it is reformed, and that either no Priests pay yeerelie rent for concubines at
all, or at least not those that have none; I shall be willing to hear it, and
to see that any thing at all is amended But whosoever will but look^ into their
latest Cas^ists and S^mmists, as be Tollet the Cardinal, lac. de Graffi^s, Loel
Zecchius, Baptista Corradus, Berarduccius, Raphael de Caesare, ^^amas and
others, will find it more then suspicious (though now they cover it more
cunningly then formerly they did) that this wound is far from being healed.
. Mean time I have proved it apparently that till that time it was not
amended: and whosoever reads the Low country Bishop Cuickius his book
aforenamed, written but seven years ago, will judge it as ill in these days
still, as it was in the time of Espencaeus the French Bishop.

These Authors I have named, having some remorse of conscience and fear of
God, ingenuouslie and honestly wished that rather marriage might be permitted
then whoordom should so prevail over the world. But what has bin done? They
for their labor are ill spoken of when they are dead, their books partly
prohibited to be read at al, partly purged and altered as they list; Opera
Erasmi, Espencaei, Cassandri prohibentur donec expurgentur. Vide Indicem lib.
prohibit. per Clem. 8. and Indices expurgatorios. Hisp. and Belg.
; and for the matter it self, marriage is still forbidden, whooredome still
practiced and winkt at, if not permitted, stews still tolerated, and that
under the Popes nose, and no where so much as even in Rome it self: and still
this doctrine is Catholic and current, They had better go to whoores then
marry. And why (alas) all this, but because Marriage has bin an enemy to the
Popes Crown and dignity? but stews, adultery and fornication never were. Let
us hasten forward.

I must needs say (if I say truly) I could discover many more of these
particular old festring wounds, not as yet healed; but this time will not well
permit it: therefore referring it to a further opportunity, I will stand but
upon one particular more, and so come to a general, which shall conclude all.

The ninteenth Wound.
IT has bin long ago laid to their charge The 19. wound: Their Liturgy is full
of blasphemy: their Legend full of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition.
that their Liturgies are full of idolatry and blasphemies, their Legends full
of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition: which I will not at this time
(being almost past) stand particularly to prove; seeing for their Liturgy
and Ceremonies, the Pope himself, Vide Bullas Clem. and de Pontificali, anno
9^. and de Ceremoniali anno. 1600.
or else his Conuenticle at Trent Vide Council Triden^^ Sess. vlt. Dec. 4.
have granted it, and pretended that they should be reformed; and touching
their lives of Saints and their Legends, a great Doctor of their own long ago
found them so full of ridiculous absurdities, impieties and untruths, that he
affirmed him to be a man Ludouicus Vi^^es. lib. 2. de Cause. corrupt. art. de
Lu^bardica historia.
of a brazen face, and a leaden heart that wrote them. Now al these three sorts
of books are in show reformed of late: but the truth is, there is never a
material vvound healed, but rather a number made worse.

1. For their Liturgy and service either public or private, it is contained in
their books called, Missalia, Breuiaria, Officia, Manualia, Portiforia, and
such other: all these have been reuiewed, and (as they say) corrected since
the Council of Trent. Vide Bullas Pontif. praefixas. Missal. and
Breuiareditionis 70. and post.
But let them be examined and compared together, and I dare say, that for one
evil taken out there is another put in, and ten stand vnremooued, and that
both in diverse pictures, as also for points of doctrine, they are as ill as the
former, Compare for this end the Missals, breuiaries Manuals and Primeri,
printed before the Council of Tre^t, with those printed since.
at the least.

2. Their Ceremonies of state, or as they say, of devotion, are contained in
the books called, Pontificale Romanum, and Ceremoniale Romanum Add heereunto
also their Processionale, Rationale, and Sacerdotale Romanum.
: wherein what apish to yes there be, what absurdities, what superstitions,
sometimes ridiculous, sometimes impious, is incredible to them that see it not:
insomuch as some Papists, Vide Epistolam Alberti Castellani ad Leonem 10.
praefiram Po^t^f^ vlt edit. Vene^.
yea the later Popes, Vide Bullas praed. Clem. 8.
have not spared to confess that they need great reformation, and therefore
undertook that work themselves. But if a man did see how they have amended
them, they would out of this one (if there were no more evidences) conclude,
that Rome is that Babylon that will never be healed: for look into the
Pontificale, and the Ceremoniale; which were reformed, and are indeed much
altered by the authority of Clement the eightth and printed at Rome within
these few years; and you shall find some small deformities taken away, but
many great enormities suffered to stand, and some put in that were not that
there before: Compare for this end the Po^tificale and Ceremoniale, new and old.
which I will not stand at this time to particularise, (40) The 19. wound not
healed: for all these are as bad still, as before.
both because the particulars are so many, and also for that, seeing the
books being so rare are not for each man's reading, it may hap hereafter that
the exact comparison of them together, the old with the new, may be a work of
it self not unworthy of some men's labors.

3. These were read in the Churches when the Scriptures were kept out.
Their stories, or tales, are comprised in the books called, Speculum
exemplorum. Vitae Sanctoru^, Lege^da, Festiualia, etc. These also are lately
reformed as they pretend. But how? If any would know what is done herein, take
but one example. The Jesuits in the Low countries, pretending these Legends or
stories needed much reformation, took the matter upon themselves, because it
was of great weight and consequence, and appointed it to some of their
society to be reformed, and now of la^e they have published it at Doway, some
two or three years ago, and would make us believe that it is amended in
innumerable places. Vide libru^ intitulatum: Magnum speculum exemplorum, ab
innumeris me^dis, etc. vindicatum per quendam Patrem e societate Jesus and per
eundem locupletatu^: Duaci. anno 1605.
But if any man have lost any time in turning over their Legends, and perusing
the prodigious stories there laid down, let him venture even a little more,
and compare this new reformed Speculum exemplorum, with the former; and if he
find as impious and ridiculous Legends, as improbable, and as impossible tales
in that, as in the other; the^ let him make report what good reformers the
Jesuits be, and how well the Romish Church is healed in this wound. To this
end compare the old Speculum exe^plorum or the Legend with the new Magnum
speculu^ exemplorum, set out by the lesuites this last year.
The conclusion is, that the Missals and Breuiaries, though undertaken by
Trent; the Pontifical and Ceremoniale, though undertaken by the Pope; the
Legend and Speculum, though undertaken by the Jesuits, and all in show
reformed; yet stand all at this day as foul and deformed, and though some
things be taken out, yet (all laid together) as bad or worse then they were
before.

These straits of time hinder me from enlarging my self any further: therefore
to conclude, and wrap up all in one generalll exception:

The twentieth wound.
THe last point wherewith I will charge the Romish Church and religion, is not
so fitly to be called a wound, as a leprosy, or a general consumption; but
all to one end: for as it is no difference upon the matter, whether a man be
deep and desperately wounded, or have a leprosy over all the body, or a
general consumption, for both are deadly, and both incureable: so is it in
this case; wherein the exception I take against them, is, that their Church and
State declined long ago, into that general corruption and universal pollution
in all estates, The 20. wound. A general corruption of manners in all estates.
That the profaneness, licentiousness, and sinfulness of all sorts of
people in that Church, both head and members, is like a spirtuall leprosy
without, or a general consumption within, threatening ruin to the whole body.
This point is worthy to be enlarged: but I must defer it, and refer the
Reader to the records of antiquity, I mean such as be their own men, but
having some remorse of conscience, and fear of God did confess freely, and
bitterly deplore the misery that the sinfulness of the popish Church, and
religion would bring upon all the world. Let them read (that have them,) these
books named in the margent, Vide Gersonis opera passim. Reuelationes
Brigittae^ Vincentij Ferrariens. prognostic. Petru^ de Aliaco de reformatione
eccl. Nicolai de Clemangiis opera: in Bibliotheca Patrum, editionis primae.
and those that have them not, it may be shortly they may have some help
therein, and then you will grant with me, that former and better times,
confessed that which I now lay to their charge.

I will insist particularly but upon two: the one of so great antiquity,
Poem^ta Walteri Mapes. Maillardi and Menotti Sermones. Holcot in Sapient. lect.
82. and passim. and Onus Ecclesiae passim
the other of so great authority, as both are beyond exception. Some 400 years
ago lived a Monk learned for those times, called (as Posseuine confesses Vide
Posseu. in Appar. sae. In apped. priori ad tom. 1. lit. B.
Bernardus Morlanensis: he wrote three books of the contempt of the world, in
an artificial kind of Poetry, but much more artificially describing, and
zealously deploring the sinfulness of the Romish Church, and state in those
days, from the head to the foot, describing particula^lie their adulteries,
drunkenness, ambition, idleness, dissimulation, deceits, cosenages, murders,
whooredomes of all estates: then particularly for their Clergy, their
ignorance and negligence, their Sodomie, their Simonie and other corruptions in
attaining places in the Church; and then at last coming to Rome it self, so
lays open the filthiness of the whore of Babylon, as it is doubtful whether
her sinfulness be more hateful then his boldness is admirable. Let him that
would be able to answer all their false slanders, which they lay to the charge
and disgrace of Protestant Churches; and to retort upon themselves their
objection of the lives of our Professors; and he that would see the Church and
state of Rome in her her own natural colors; let him, I say, read but that
one Author: who beside that he is Manuscript in many Libraries, was also
published at Amsterdam, or somewhere near thereabouts, this present year 1607.

And after he has discovered her corruptions, and laid open her sins from
head to foot, then he urges her vehemently to repentance and reformation:
which because he sees no hope of, but that still she falls from evil to
worse; therefore he denounces Gods judgments against her, and assures her,
that vengeance, ruin and destruction shall fall upon her. Some part of his
own words I have here put down in Latin, but not in English, because the
sins he lays against her are such, as some of them are better unnamed then
reproved. What can they say to it? Is he some fained and forged new found
Author, devised by some of us, or was he some late writer hired by Luther, or
suborned by Calvin to rail on the pope or popery? Nay, Posseuine the Jesuit
confesses in the place aforenamed (and if he did not, it is well enough known
by other good and ancient records) he was a professed Monk, and lived above
four hundred years ago: therefore his testimony in this case is beyond
exception.

Now whether these wounds and corruptions in the Romish Church and state were
healed, in the subsequent ages, or no; if any man doubt, let him look upon the
Authors named before, who lived in the ages succeeding, one after another.
Gualterus Mapus, and their Saint Brigid, not much more then a hundred years
after him: about 100. years after them, Bonauenture and Wicklieffe: about a
hundred years after them, Gerson, Clemangius, Vincentius, and others: these if
any man look upon, he shall see that those wounds stood unhealed, and those
corruptions unreformed, until we come to the year 1500 namely to this last
age of all: and though Posseuine maliciously conceal the name of Gualter
Mapes, because he is too plain, yet he cannot deny, but many, whereof some he
names, Posseu. Appar. sac. to^. 2. lit. I. Iacobus Iunterbeck German Carthus.
anno. 1460. scripsit auisamentum ad papam. pro reformatione Ecclesiae, etc.
did in all ages write to the Pope for reformation, and told him plainly
what would follow if he did not reform the Church.

Now what good all these men could do, and what reformation followed at last,
let a pope himself speak, one of the honestest hearts that ever had the
hindrance, to be a Pope, Adrian the 6. the best that was these many years, and
of whom (if it be possible of any) there was expectation of some reformation
in the Church: for, as Peter Matthew in his life confesses, he was not so
proud, nor covetous, as most of them are. Petr. Matthaeus in Co^ment^ suis ad
papales co^stitut. de Adriano 6.
How he found the Romish Church when he came to it, and how he left it at his
sudden taking from it, judge by his own pitiful and passionate speech, which
he commanded his Nuntio to deliver from him, and in his name to the assembly
of the States of Germany, in their Imperial parliament, about the year 1522.
These be his words as Epencaeus a learned Bishop of their own reports.

Tell them from us, that we freely confess, God has sent this trouble and
affliction upon the Church, for the sins of men, and especially of Priests
and prelates, from whose sins (the scriptures are plain) be derived the
sins of the people: therefore our Savior (about to heal and reform
Jerusalem a diseased city) first enters into the Temple, that first of all he
may correct the sins of the Clergy (especially concerning buying the good
Physician, who begins to heal a wound at the root and bottom.

We know, that for many years there have been many abominations eue^ in this
holy Apostolic seat, abuses in the carriage of matters spiritual, excessive
enormities in our commadements, and in a word, all things turned topsy turuy,
and from ill to worse; and no marvel if the disease grow from the head into
the members, that is, from the popes into common persons.

I confess, all we (that is, all prelates of the Clergy) have gone out of the
way, each one into our own ways, neither has there been of a long time any
that did good: therefore there is good reason that we all give glory to God,
and humble our selves, eu^^ our souls unto him: let each one of us remember
whence we are fallen and rather judge our selves, then stand to be judged of
God in his wrath and fury.

Wherein, for our parts, make promise in our name that we will give all
diligence, that first of all this our Court of Rome may be reformed; from which
it is likely all this mischief has proceeded: that so, health and reformation
may begin there, to the good example of al, whence the corruption first bred,
and spread to the ill example and hurt of all. To the furtherance and effecting
of which happy reformation, we hold our selves so much the more straightly
obliged, by how much the more earnestly we see the whole world to expect and
desire it.

These were the words of this good man, too good to be a Pope, at least too
good to be long a Pope: for after that he had so much forgot himself, and his
papal dignity, and the honor of his Apostolical seat (which cannot err nor
do amiss, as he like a fool confessed) to grant, that not the Church
alone, but the holy Court of Rome did need reformation, forthwith there was
order taken that he should not trouble the world nor disgrace his place any
longer; for shortly after he died: and for his sake, they provided that their
seat should never be so far abused and abased again by any plain hearted
Northren man, Since Adria^, have bin. 15. Popes, but all Italians.
making sure from that day to this, that the Popedom should not be trusted out
of the hands of an Italian, lest he should ever have a thought of reformation.
For what followed after all this? Was there any reformation in the Romish
Church? were any of the evils and diseases, confessed by Adrian, redressed? I
had rather Espencaeus their own Bishop should tell, then I: which because he
does very largely, I will contract it into a compendium and hope that some will
take pains to put all that wise and learned discourse of his, into our vulgar
tongue: the rather for that it contains much matter of great moment, and yet
not vulgarly known to this day. Mean time the effect of it is this:

Legatur Espencaeus in Comment. ad Titum cap. 1. a page 65. ad. 91.
That after all Christendom had complained of the enormous and intolerable
grieuances, sustained from the Pope and his Court of Rome, al which and more
the good pope Adrian had confessed (but was taken away, lest he had redressed)
and after at their motion, he had intended a Council should be called for
reformation: all this determined by his death. His successor Clement the 7. was
not so idle to hearken to such toys, nor give way to such innouations, he
would have no Council, he saw no cause of reformation. But from his successor
Paul the 3. plain necessity did wring out an unwilling consent: and so after
many difficulties, the Council of Trent was called, wherein first of all this
point of reformation was so urged, that a Committee was chosen of nine
principal Divines, some of them Cardinals, to consider what reformation was
requisite in the Church. Who after mature deliberation, plainly told the pope,
that all these evils proceeded from the abuses reigning in the Court of Rome:
and concluding something for reformation of pluralities (one only abuse) the
pope did so interpret it, and alter it, when it came to him, as it did no good
but hurt. He then dying, and the Council being intermitted, was set on foot
again by his successor Julius the 3. who also confessed there were innumerable
abuses in administering the Sacraments: but when it came to reform them,
instead thereof he suspended the Council; though many Bishops that desired
reformation, did protest against it, affirming confidently that they had not as
yet dispatched one of the businesses, for which they had assembled: but the
pope prevailed, and so for ten years it was discontinued. And at last being
again assembled by Pius the fourth, he made show he would refer the whole
matter of reformation to the Fathers of the Council: but when it came to
trial, it was with a prouiso, that, First, they should not meddle with the
Court of Rome: Secondly, that in their reformation, laid upon other persons and
places, they should always enact it thus; Saving always holy and untouched
the Authority of the Apostolical Sea: for which their courtesy to him and his
seat, he afterward gave them thanks in an Ora^ion in the Consistory at Rome,
assuring them (out it was in the word of a Pope) that he would be more rigide
and severe in purging his own Court, and house and offices, then they would
have been. With these good words, the pope dissolved the Council. But from
that day to this (says this Bishop) through these so many years, nothing is
done, nothing is changed, nothing is amended in the Church: and no marvel
(says he) for nothing have they amended in Rome under their own nose, where
they might reform any thing if they had conscience and will to do it. So that
now, seeing all is finally referred and reserved to the Pope, there is (says
he) no more hope of any reformation left, nor any thing else remains, but to
see one misery after another fall upon the Apostolical seat, and the whole
Church of Rome: to which let all good Christians say Amen.

These and many more words, to this purpose, has this wise and learned Bishop.
Out of all which I conclude: Therefore 30. or 40. years ago in the days of
Espencaeus, the Church of Rome, being found and confessed to be most
fearfully corrupt, is not healed no^ reformed, nay that al hope of reforma^n
is now taken away. Since which time, I shall thank him that will show me
that there has been any public and general reformation of the notorious
abuses in that Church: provided he prove it out of as good records, For as
for the third point I have undertaken, namely, that in stead of being healed
and reformed, there have contrariwise grown up in the Romish Church, more
horrible and heinous practices, more erroneous and impious doctrines, then ever
before were known or heard of, and at this day stand maintained^ at least
unreproved by their church: This, IN say, I must be constrained to refer to a
peculiar Treatise by it self.
and with as fair evidence, as I have done the contrary. Which as I should
rejoice in my heart once to behold: so till then I must needs with grief of
heart conclude, that The Romish Church is that Babylon that will not be healed.

And will she not? what then remains? but as our text leads us, Let us forsake
her.

But how? not in love or affection; let us never cease to wish to her as to our
own souls: nor let us cease to pray for her, publicly and privately; yea let
us bless her when she curses us.

But let us (as we have well begun) proceed to separate our selves from her
society, and empty our Church and kingdom of her and hers. And if they say we
be schismatiks for separating from her: we answer nay; she is the schismatike
that has separated herself from Christ.

Now therefore you honorable Magistrates and Judges of this nation, set your
shoulders to the work of your God, rouse up your spirits to execute the good
laws your selves and your forefathers have enacted: our laws are enough and
good enough, they want nothing but execution, and that belongs to you: unto
which duty we of the Ministry do exhort you in the Lord: execute our laws
against them, yet rather against popery then the papists: remember the blessed
promise in the Psalm; though it was spoken of literal Babylon, Psalm. 137. 8. 9.
it has a mystical and true relation to spiritual Babylon: O daughter of
Babylon, worthy to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou
have served us, yea blessed shall he be that takes thy young children and
dasheth them against the stones. Oh pull this blessing on your heads, kill her
infants, that is, her errors, impieties, superstitions, blasphemies,
idolatries, equivocations, treasons, etc. these be her Impes, her natural
brood; but, now they are of more age and grown to greatness, the more danger
is there of them, and more cause to kill them; which if you do with diligence
and discretion, you see you draw a blessing from heaven upon your selves. If
you do not, you do for a time maintain pricks in your eyes, and thorns in
your sides, and your negligence will provoke the great and just Lord, to take
the matte^ into his own hands: which as he has already, not only threatened,
but begun, so he will, (though he defer it till his own time) bring it to
full execution: For Her judgment is come up into heaven, and lifted up to the
clouds.

And then when she has drunk up the d^egges of the cup of Gods wrath, and by
the breath of his mouth is fearfully confounded, then I say, shall all her
Merchants and al her lovers (whereof we have too many that lurk amongst us,
and even some that notwithstanding will needs be of us) be ashamed for their
loving of her, whom they see God hated; and for their laboring so basely to
cover her filthy skirts, which God would have to her shame discovered to the
view of the world: and then shall they shrink to bear a part of her
punishment, which so much delighted to wallow with her in her pollution.
Therefore let the holy Ghost make the conclusion, and give us our last lesson:
Go out of her my people, and be not partakers of her sins, Revel. 18. 4.
least you receive of her plagues. From both which, the good Lord deliver us.
Amen.

And thus much for the kingdom of Antichrist.

There is also another mystical Babylon, and that is the kingdom of sin,
the throne whereof is in this world; for hell is the place of execution, rather
then of sinning: of this also is this text verified: for we do naturally
(without grace) so love this world, that though we find it miserable and
confused; yet by our sensuality, and daily devising and practicing new
pleasures, we endeavor to heal it, and to make it a paradise, and they that
are bewitched with it, would here set up their rests. But when all is done that
can be, it cannot be healed, but it is still a very Babel of confusion and
disorder, a miserable world, a vale of tears, and a sea of trouble and
turmoile to whosoever has the sweetest portion of it. Therefore though we be
in it, 1. Cor. 7 31.
yet let us use it as though we used it not, let us not set our hearts upon,
but let us for sake it, and go every one to his own country, that is to our
blessed inheritance the kingdom of heaven, that is a Christians man's country:
for as for this world, her sins are so vile, that her judgment is gone up
unto heaven, and God will assuredly destroy it. But there is a better world,
even an inheritance, immortal, undefiled, and that fades not, which is
reserved in heaven for us: 1. Pet. 14.
hereof we are borne heirs by grace in Christ. Therefore forsaking the wicked
Babylon of this world in our hearts and affections (seeing it is past cure) let
us aspire after that, and long to have our parts in it.

Now there are also besides these two great Babels, certain other little
petty Babylons, namely, incureable sins amongst us, which are Babels, or
atleast daughters of Babylon, and sprigs of that cursed root. As,

1. That great Sacrilege and Church-robbing committed by Impropriations, (in
which case at this day almost half of this kingdom is) whereby it comes to
pass (above any other one means) that an ignorant and vnteaching Ministry is
set over a great part of our people; which is the sourse and fountain of all
other evils in our Church: this is a deep wound, yet once was it cureable
enough, namely, when the Abbeys were first dissolved; and since was it cureable
enough: but now (alas) how incurable it is, and by the crafty plots of the
devil how incureable it is made, more and more, he observes but little that
sees not. Oh happy he that can say in his conscience, I would have cured this
daughter of Babell: and happy also he (though not so much) that has had no
hand in making this wound incurarable: such plots and devises arise out of
hell, and heaven will confound them, though the earth for a time bear the
burden of them. Mean time, unless the Kings Majesty vouchsafe to take the
matter into his hands, and to heal the wounds that he never made; (otherwise
it is incureable; or as the Kings evil, to be healed by none but by a King)
till then we may say with grief of heart; It is an impe of Babylon that will
not be healed.

2. The ungodly Plays and Enterludes so rise in this nation; what are they but
a Bastard of Babylon, a daughter of error and confusion, a hellish device (the
devils own recreation, to mock at holy things) by him delivered to the
Heathen, from them to the Papists, and from them to us? Of this evil and
plague, the Church of God in all ages can say, truly and with a good
conscience, we would have healed her. The ancient Fathers, in the time of the
Primitive Church, spared no pains to discover the vileness and unlawfulness
of them Tertullian: Cyprian: Chrysostom. etc. Deuteronomy 22. 5.
: in these latter days, many holy and learned men have labored by preaching,
writing, and conferring to have healed them, and never was there Divine of note
and learning, that I know, that durst so far prostitute his credit as to
write for them. They know all this, and that God accounts it abomination for a
man to put on woman's apparel, and that the ancient Fathers expound that place
against them: Cyprian: Chrysostom. Sexta Synod^ in Trull. Can. 62.
they know that Cyprian resolved, (being asked the question) Cyprian^ in
Epistola 61. Oh that all players would read that Epistle, and regard it^
that a player ought not to come to the Lords table; and that he that teaches
children to play, is not an instructor, but a spoiler and destroyer of
c^ildre^: they know they have no calling, but are in the (...) warts on the
hand, or blemishes in the (...) they know, that therefore they are saine to
sh^^ud themselves under such shelters, as at the hou^e of death, and day of
judgment, will prove but fig leaves: ^^^y know they are defended with the
same arguments, as the stews in Rome be, and little better defense can be
made for them, being as they are.

All this they are daily made to know, but all in vain, they be children of
Babylon that will not be healed. Nay, they grow worse, and worse; for now they
bring religion and holy things upon the stage: no marvel though the worthiest
and mightiest men escape not, when God himself is so abused: Two hypocrites
must be brought forth; In a Church in London, every day in the week prayers,
and a sermon at 6. of the clock in the morning: ablessed and rare example.
and how shall they be described but by these names, Nicolas S. Ant^^ngs,
Simon Saint Maryoueries? Thus hypocrisy a child of hell must bear the names
of two Churches of God, and two wherein Gods name is called on publicly every
day in the year, and in one of them his blessed word preached every day (an
example scarce matchable in the world): yet these two, wherein Gods name is
thus glorified, and our Church and State honored; shall be by these
miser^ants thus dishonored, and that not on the stage ^nely, but even in
print. Oh what times are we east into, that such a wickedness should pass
vnpunished^ I speak nothing of their continual profaneness in their phrases,
and sometime Atheism and blasphemy, no^ of their continual profaning of the
Sabbath, which generally in the country is their play day, and oftentimes Gods
divine service hindered, or cut shorter to make room and give time for the
devils service.

Are they thus incurable? then happy he that puts to his hand to pull down
this tower of Babell, this daughter of confusion; happy he that helps to heal
this wound in our State: but most happy that Magistrate, who, like zealous
Phin^hes, takes some just vengeance on that public dishonor laid upon our
Churches. But if we be negligent in this cause of God, then he himself will
take the matter into his own hand, whose Church, whose religion, whose holy
ordinances and most holy name are daily profaned by them: for as their
iniquities are heinous, and their blasphemies against heaven; so doubtless
their judgment is gone up unto heaven and lifted up unto the clouds. So
wishing their repentance, I proceed.

3. The horrible abuse of the Sabbath day, in this city, and over this
kingdom: in some places by Faires and Markets, by May-games and Moricedancers,
by Wakes and Feasts: in all places (almost) by buying and selling, and
bargaining: in this city by cariages in and out, by selling betimes in the
morning and after dinner: by playing in the streets, and in the fields.

Often has this bin complained of, and some have endeavored to heal it: but it
is an Impe of Babylon that will not be healed, but rather it creepes as a
canker through our whole State, from the foot to the head. But let us take
heed: for it will ear out the heart and life of a State, Ierem. 17.
even this one sin. Did not our Fathers thus (says noble Nehemiah) and
therefore God brought all this evil upon us? Nehem. vlt.
See; captivity, destruction, and desolation of a goodly and flourishing settled
kingdom, for the public profaning of the Sabbath: O therefore happy he that
puts to his helping hands to heal this wound, which yet is cureable enough, if
we would do our duties: for the Commandment is, thou and all within thy
gates, The fourth Commandment.
Keep my Sabbath. Now who is there within this Realm, but is within the gates
of the Kings house? who within this City, but within the gates of the Lord
Mayor? who any where, but is of some man's family, and within some man's gates?
If then Fathers and Magistrates would look to all within their gates, this
sin could not be so grievous, this wound not so wide and desperate as it is.
Therefore you my Lord Mayor be exhorted to attempt the healing of this wound,
in your year; set before your eyes, the noble example of worthy Nehemiah:
Nehem. vlt.
it will excite you to this holy duty; and then at the end of your year, you
may with the comfort of a good conscience say with him; Remember me O my God
in goodness, Nehem. vlt. 1^
according to all that I have done for this people. But if we still neglect
this cause of God, and suffer his Sabbath daily thus to be profaned; then let
us look for nothing but continuance and increase of these grievous plagues
that have so long lien upon us: and let us be assured, God will take the
matter into his own hands, and some way or other get himself glory upon us.
For he will lose his honor at no man's hand: but whosoever will not glorify
him in his conversion, he will glorify his own name upon him in his
confusion. Which heavy judgment that God may turn from us, let us turn to
him, etc.

FINIS.

