PATHMOS: OR, A COMMENTARY ON THE REVELATION of Saint JOHN, divided into three
several Prophecies. THE FIRST PROPHECY contained in the fourth, fifth, sixth
and seventh Chapters. By Mr. WILLIAM COWPER, Bishop of Galloway.

Abacuk 2. 3. The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last it shall
speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait: for it shall surely come, and
shall not stay. LONDON, Printed by George Purslow, for John Budge, and are to
be sold at the sign of the green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, my Lord of Binning: President of the College of
JUSTICE; Secretary to his Majesty, and one of his Highness most Honorable
Privy Council in both the Kingdoms.
MY LORD;
THIS Prophecy was properly compared by Primasius, to a precious Gemme, or
Oriental Pearl, not found in the clifts of rocks, or shells of fishes but
sent from Heaven for a Present to the Church on Earth, by Jesus the splendour of
the glory of his Father, and (...). Hebr. 1. 3. Luke 1. 78. (...).
that bright Orient, which has visited us from on high. He gives it in a
Loue-token to his Church, who for it gave himself to the death. Doubtless it
must be some great Present, which is sent from so great a King, by the hand of
that Servant whom he loved best in the world.

This Jewel has come in the hands of many, who being strangers, not
acquainted with Canaan, from which it came, have out of wrong conception judged
it to be adulterine. But all the Lords Lapidaries, who have seen the precious
stones, wherewith the walls of Heavenly Jerusalem are garnished, have easily
perceived this to be from heaven also; yea, and among all the rest, most
admirable, for it partakes with all these, both in color and virtue, and
serves Saints, not for decoration only, but declaration also of many secrets,
which greatly concern their state.

Of old, Vrim and Thummim were placed by God in that Pectorall of the high
Priest, called by the Jews, Hosen, by the Greeks (...): but what it was, or
how by it God gave answer to his people Israel, many Divines in that point are
diuinators, speaking more out of conjecture, then certain knowledge.

Josephus records, that these stones by Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 3. c. 12.
change of their color, gave signification of things to fall out; either
adverse or prosperous. Sigonius in his Treatise of the Hebrews Sigon. de
repub. Heb. lib. 5.
Republic, seems to have followed him. The report that Suidas brings from an
uncertain Author, is as uncertain as the Author, that if battle was
imminent, the stones turned red; if death was foretold, they turned black; if
no change of estate was to ensue, then the stones changed not their color at
all. One thing is sure, God by them gave answer to his servants that sought
him, as may be cleared by many places of Scripture.

But of this book we may boldly affirm, that it is indeed a heavenly Oracle,
foretelling in types, the truth of things, as they were to fall out to the
worlds end: at the first it shows a white color, importing comfortable grace
by the Gospel now, and immortal glory hereafter. Incontinent it turns to a
red color, foreshewing bloody persecutions which Saints must suffer, before
they enjoy the Crown. Then again it appears with a black color, to declare
that blackenesse of wrath temporal and eternal, which abides the enemies of
the Church.

In some parts it looks dark, in others, clear like the Crystal, yet
through all, more or less transparent, and therewith variable with sundry
sheddes, among which most apparent are three several ranks of Seuens,
stretching themselves in most comely order through this Jewel, and wherein the
Lord has secretly enclosed treasures of manifold wisdom. In the Seals
unsealed, secrets are disclosed: In the Trumpets, battles are denounced: In the
Uials, plagues are powered out. The purpose in these three is not one, yet by a
comely proportion and correspondence, do they answer one to another.

Many have handled this Jewel, not to find it by their labor, (that were
impossible) but to find themselves by the value of it. For that cause among
others, I have also looked upon it, truly for none other end, but that I might
learn from it; and now what I have seen, I show, submitting my self to the
Church, for whose profit I have taken these pains. If the light of the book
hereby be any way increased, and comfort arise to the good Christian, the
praise is the Lords, and under God thanks is due to your Lordship; for by your
loving counsel and care, I have been relieved of many intricate matters of
Law, and found the greater leisure and liberty both, to attend my studies. Thus
has your Lordship been a Mecaenas to me indeed. Good men oftentimes are
forced to express great affections by small means, and so now it fares with
me; yet I trust your Lordship will esteem of me, not as I am, but as I desire
to be on your behalf.

But it is no reason I should requite deeds with words. I know, your Lordship
does neither like them, nor need them. Where Virtue gives out her beams, even
her enemies are forced to acknowledge her glory: yet thus much out of duty must
I speak, that by many Coards of love has your God bound you to be thankful
to him. Virtue is weak without some adversity, neither can that felicity be
found on earth, that communicates not with some cross. Some are raised to
wealth, but the less regarded by reason of their base Lineage: Some, Noble by
parentage, but depressed with poverty: many beautified both with Nobility and
riches, who want the delight of children; others have the comfort of children,
but with the turning of a few years, they turn crosses unto them; there is no
estate so prosperous, against which there is not just cause of complaint: Thus
runs the common current of worldly courses here on earth.

But will your Lordship turn your eyes a little from others, and look to your
self; you shall see what cause your Lordship has above others to say with
David, Many ways has the Lord been beneficial to his Servant, being for
Lineage descended of a wise, and worthy Father, of an Honorable Family, famous
among many others of that most flourishing Trybe of Hammilton; Honorable also
for the places of honor which you possess, but much more for the virtue
whereby you have worthily deserved them; for it is a greater thing to deserve
Honor, then to have it, but where by Virtue it is obtained, by Wisdom
increased, and by good Government retained, (all which are evident in your
Lordship:) What can be more? Your children (thanks be to God) no crosses, but
comforts, like branches of the Olive, Psalm. 127. 3.
promised to such as fear God, they stretch out themselves from the sides of
your Tabie, and without disparagement, are matched with the mighty Cedars of
the Land.

For your self I have nothing to say, but that which I know, no man can
gainsay: If quickenesse of ingine, vigor of ready wit, wisdom in words,
discretion in deeds, secrecy in thoughts beseeming a Secretary, fidelity in
service of your Sovereign; surety in friendship, modesty in all your
behavior: If education of your children in true Religion: If good example in
the observance of God his public worship every Sabbath: If indefatigable
pains in your Calling, for the good of the public State, wherein nothing can
be seen all the days of the week, but Catenati labores mutandi semper
grauioribus; so that justly it may be admired how in so weak a body, such
restless labor of mind may be sustained. If all these (I say) may commend any
man, then has your Lordshippe witnesses enough to speak for you, and needs not
the testimony of others.

Lo now, what a heap of good things has the Lord multiplied upon you! what
remains, but that you consider with David, What shall I render to the Lord for
Psalm. 116. 12.
all his benefits toward me? He himself will give you the answer; My
well-doing extends not to the Lord, but Psalm. 16.
to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the Excellent, all my delight is
in them.

Great cause had David to love Jonathan, he could not get himself to requite
his kindness, but he enquired if any man were left of the house of Saul, that
he might show him mercy for Ionathans sake: 2. Sam. 9. 1. 2.
and when he understood that he had a weak son, Mephibosheth, lame of both
his feet, he despised him not for his inability, but advanced him for
Ionathans sake, Verse. 11. 13.
to eat at his own table, as one of the Kings sons.

My Lord; our Jonathan is the Lord Jesus: we have not himself, but for his
sake we are bound to show mercy to his Mephibosheths; these are the Levites,
the Widow, the Fatherless, the Poor, the Stranger, and the Oppressed. Let
not the Leuite want the comfort of the Law in his righteous cause: Look with a
tender eye to the upright action of weak and impotent men; God is a righteous
Judge to all men, but he has taken these above others, under his singular
protection. Think it your honor and happiness also to be a Protector of
them. So shall your Lordship prosper still, and God shall stablish blessings
upon you, and your posterity. I will pray to God for it, and so rest.

Your Lordships to be commanded, William B. of Galloway.

Of my Lord of Galloway his learned Commentary on the Revelation.
TO this admired Discouerer give place,
Ye who first tamed the Sea, the Winds outranne,
And matched the Days bright Coachman in your race,
Americus, Columbus, Magellan.
It is most true, that your ingenious care
And well-spent pains, another world brought forth;
For Beasts, Birds, Trees, for Gemmes and Metals rare,
Yet all being earth, was but of earthly worth.
He a more precious World to us descryes,
Rich in more Treasure then both Indes contain:
Fair in more beauty then man's wit can feign,
Whose Sun not sets, whose people never dies.
Earth should your Brows deck with stil-verdant Bays,
But Heavens crown his with Stars immortal rays.
Master William Drumond of Sawthorn-denne.

Another.
REapers, not few, did labor in this field,
And it to them great store of fruit did yield:
But here comes one apace behind them all,
To gather up what by their hand did fall.
Peruse his stuff, and thou shall for thy gaining
Find, more then others Harust to be his gleaning.
I. A.

PATHMOS. A COMMENTARY UPON THE FIRST Prophecy of the Revelation of S. John,
contained in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters.
Mine Help is in the Name of the LORD. THE whole books of holy The books of
holy Scripture are of three ranks, rendering a threefold fruit.
Scripture are of three ranks, Historical, Doctrinall, Prophetical, they
being so denominate from the principal matter in them contained. Of all these
coniunctly, arises unto us, a threefold fruit: the first, of Conversion, the
1 Of Conversion.
second, of Consolation, the third, of Confirmation. The first, once for all,
is touched by the Psalmist: The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul. Psalm. 19. 7.
The second, by the Apostle; Whatsoever things Romans 15. 4.
are written, are written for our learning, that we through patience, and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. It is true indeed, Many are the
troubles 2 Of Consolation.
of the righteous, yet against every cross, the Lord has given us in his
Word, sufficient consolation. Psalm. 34. 19.
The third is set down by our Savior; These 3 Of Confirmation.
things have I said unto you, that ye should not be offended, that when the
hour shall come, ye might Ioh. 16. 4.
remember that I told you of them. And this fruit of confirmation, we have
especially by books Prophetical.

Of this nature is this book, as is clear by the This book of the Revelation
is Prophetical*
titles given unto it, for in the first verse of the first Chapter, it is
called an Apocalypse or Revelation, that is, an opening, or uncovering of
things, which were hid, and secret before: and in the fourth verse it is called
A Prophecy: Thus have we it not only a Prophecy, or prediction of things to
come, but a prophecy revealed, and expounded, partly by Christ, and partly by
the Angel.

And this is to be noted, that where other books And it serves especially to
confirm us in the faith.
of holy Scripture are written to instruct us in the faith, and to teach us,
what we must do, if we would be saved; this book is written, not so much to
instruct us in the faith (though in part it do that also) as to confirm us in
it, that for no violent persecution following it, for no fraudulent heresy by
deceit impugning it, for no external change befalling the Church, for no
prosperous prevailing of the enemies thereof (as for a time will appear to the
world) we should forsake that faith, which the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles
have taught us in the Gospel.

The Author of it, is God the Father, from him This book the Father gives to
the Son, the Son to an Angel, and the Angel to Saint John, that he might give
it to the Church*
it comes by this order: the Father gives it to the Son, the Son to an
Angel, the Angel gives it to S. John, and S. John sends it to the Church.
The matter whereof it entreates, is comprised in this short sum: In it God
shows to his servants things, which must shortly be done, namely, Revel. 1. 1.
concerning the Church, her persecutions by enemies, The general matter of
this Prophecy.
the changes and mutations of the visible state thereof, defections of
Apostates, illusions of Heretics, fearful eclypses of the light of the
Gospel: All these were to fall out in that hour of tentation to come upon all
the world, for Reu. 3. 10.
trial of them that dwell upon the earth. And in this Prophecy are distinctly
foretold by the Lord, that his Saints and servants in all ages might be
confirmed against them, when they should see them come to pass, knowing that
they fall not out by accident, nor by the will or power of man, but according
to the determinate counsel of God, who has also letten his Church see
beforehand a comfortable out-gate, and end of them all.

And as both for the Matter, and Author, this The time when this book was
written, commends it greatly to us.
book should be welcome to us, so the circumstance of the time does greatly
commend it. It was sent unto us after the Ascension of our Lord, and is the
last breath of the Spirit wherewith he inspired the Writers of holy Scripture.
No Scripture is to be expected after this. It is the last Louetoken of our
Lord, and loving Husband, after which he will write no more unto us, but will
come himself: he has sent it to us with the Disciple, whom he loved best, and
who was the last, and longest liver of all the Disciples.

Kind children remember best the words The last words of our Lord, should be
best remembered.
spoken by their fathers on their deathbed: and if it were possible that after
death, they could receive any information from them, O, in what estimation
would they have it! All the words of our Lord should be laid up in our hearts;
but specially these which he uttered in the time of his death and Passion: and
most of all, these, by which now after his Resurrection and Ascension, he
speaks unto us. There are many now a days companions to the rich Glutton,
and his brethren, they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, but Luke 16. 31.
if one came from the dead, then would they amend their lives. This is a
Proverb frequent in their An answer to Atheists, who will have one from the
dead to teach them.
mouths: but now this excuse also is taken from them: Our Lord Jesus is risen
from the dead, and after his resurrection witnesses unto us, what fearful
wrath is reserved for the wicked, what unspeakable joy prepared for the godly;
if for all this they will not believe, nor amend their lives, are they not
worthy of the greater condemnation? About threescore years after his
ascension, our Lord sent this Revelation.


In the eighteenth year of the Emperor Tyberius, our Lord suffered for our
sins, he rose again from the dead, ascended on high, and led captivity
captive. About the foureteenth year of Ephe. 4. 8.
Domitian gave he this Revelation to S. John in the I Will Pathmos: so witnesses
Irenaeus; Non multun^ (...). lib. 5. (...). (...).
ante temporis Apocalypsin vidit Ioannes, sed poene sub nostro saeculo ad finem
Domitiani imperii: It is not long (said he) since S. John saw this Revelation,
but almost in our own days, about the end of the Domitian Empire: fifty
days after his Ascension he sent down that promised Spirit the Comforter:
Buchol^er. chronol.
So fifty years and ten after that, he sent down this comfortable Book of
Prophecy, containing a general project and view of all the estates of his
Church until the worlds end.

Doubtless, this has proceeded of his loving To keep his Church from
fainting under trouble, till he come himself.
kindness toward his poor Church: he foresaw the great and manifold
troubles, that were to befall her; he knew it was to be a long time (in respect
of us) between his Ascension, and second coming; that therefore his Church
should not faint, our Lord and Love, has sent us this Present, and
Loue-letter, that we may run unto it, as Aaron, and the Church of old did to
the Oracle, to know what shall be the end of all these battles of Saints
militant here on earth; and specially of these perturbations raised this day
against the Church, by Mahomet in the East, and Antichrist in the West.

We are not then to suffer our selves to be spoiled, By two scandals would
satan scarre us from this book.
and defrauded of the comfort contained in this book, by these instruments of
the Serpent, who either disclaim the authority of this book, or then would
scarre us from it, by a pretense of the obscurity thereof; for these are the
two scandals which offend many, and make them, if not utterly to reject, at
least too lightly, and mis-regard this heavenly Present.

As for the first, albeit there need no testimony 1 By denying authority of it.
of man, where Divine Authority gives out the decree, Blessed is he who reads,
and they who hear the words of this prophecy; yet man may very well Reu. 1. 3.
be brought in against man, and what has been said by any against it, is
easily disproued by that, which others, more ancient, and more worthy credit,
have spoken for it. Justinius Martyr, Reuelationem Justin. Mar^n Dialog. (...)
tryph. cont. Iudcos.
hanc Ioanni, qui vnus erat Apostolorum Christi, factam esse testatur: Iustine
Martyr, who wrote about an hundred and fifty years after Christ, witnesses
that this Revelation was made to S. John, who was one of Christ his Disciples.
Irenaeus ten years after him, in the place cited before, Iren. lib. 5. cont.
Valen.
affirms the same. With them S. Ambrose Ambros. lib. 3. de S. Sancto, cap.
21. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 17.
and S. Augustine do concur; Nec illud mediocre, quod de throno Dei exire
sluuium legimus, sic enim habes, dicente Ioanne Euangelista; that which is
written, Reu. 22. of a river of the water of life flowing from the Throne,
Ambrose takes it up plainly, as written to S. John the Evangelist. Augustine,
as I have said, has the like. But this point I leave, as being sufficiently
handled by the Writers of our Cotter. prolegom. in Apoc.
time; namely, and at greatest length, by Cotterius.

The other scandal of obscurity is easily removed, 2 By pretending the
obscurity of it.
if the exposition of the prophecy run not before the execution thereof. It
was hard to the Fathers of the first ages to understand this book so clearly,
as now by Gods grace, his servants may. No marvel though S. Jerome in Ierom.
epist. ad Paulin.
his time said of it, that the Apocalypse had tot Sacramenta, quot verba, as
many mysteries, as words; for Prophecies, before they be accomplished, are
Aenigmata, that is, riddles, or dark, and obscure sentences, but when they are
fulfilled, Tunc liquidam Iren. lib. 4. ca. 43.
habent, and certam expositionem, then have they a clear, and sure exposition.
Yet S. Augustine mitigates that difficulty alleged by S. Jerome, and leaves us
some better hopes: he grants this, In Apocalypsi multa obscure dicuntur, vt
mentem legentis exerceant; that in the Revelation many things are difficult,
whereby the minds of those, who read it, may be exercised: yet to encourage
us, he subioyneth, Pauca tamen in co sunt, ex quorum Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib.
20. cap. 17.
manifestatione indagentur caetera cum labor, that there are some things in it
so plainly manifested, as that they may lead us to the understanding of the
rest, if we take pains to learn them.

Victorinus, Primasius, and others, who wrote It was hard for Fathers of the
first age to understand this book.
above a thousand years since upon this book, are indeed to be praised for
their pains. Glory be to God, out of all their labors, some light arises to
this prophecy: but let the Reader remember, that they are not always to be
followed in their sense: Certius est, and sine periculo sustinere adimpletionem
Iren. lib. 5. cont. Valent.
prophetiae, quam diuinare: It is more sure to await the accomplishment of the
prophecy, then to divine of it beforehand. What made John the Baptist, a
greater Prophet then Esaias, or any other More easy now, in respect that in a
great part it i^ accomplished.
that went before him? Nothing but the difference of times; for he saw that
present and perfected, which Prophets before told was to be done, and would be
accomplished. And the same is the reason, why the meanest now in the Kingdom
of Math. 11. 11.
God is greater then the Baptist: And why men now in the holy Calling, are able
to show more clearly the meaning of this prophecy, then others more famous,
and worthy Lights could have done before.

But to conclude this point. In the entry of this God will have this book read,
and revealed, and not concealed.
book (as I said) a blessing is pronounced upon them, that read, or hear the
words of this prophecy, and in the end of it, a special command is given to
S. John, Seal not the words of the Revel. 22. 10.
Prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand, wherein the Lord evidently
declares, that he will not have this book conceiled and hid, but handled, and
reueiled. This is sufficient to stop the mouths of all them, who under
whatsoever pretense give out, that this book should not be meddled with at
all. What else is this, but to close that, which Christ has opened, to
conceal that which God has revealed, and in a word to seal up the Prophecy,
which the Lord expressly has commanded* not to be sealed?

Yet is it to be observed, that many both of the Popish Doctors cannot
understand this Prophecy.
ancient, and modern Writers, expounding this book, do rather obscure it,
then open it, forcing it violently to follow their conceits, not submitting
themselves humbly to follow it. The Jesuits of Rhemes have commented upon it;
In like manner the Jesuits, Franciscus Ribera, and Blasius Viega: but as none
of them agree one with another, so all of them are strangers from the right
sense of this Prophecy: Neither is it possible that such as are possessed with
the spirit of Antichrist, can see the true meaning of this Revelation; for our
Lord sends it to be revealed to his servants. As the As the Jews loved the
name of Christ, but hated himself:
Jews loved the name of Christ, but hated himself, not knowing him, when he
was among them; For if they had known him, they would not have crucified 1.
Cor. 2. 8.
the God of glory; And even unto this day in reading Moses and the Prophets,
who bear witness of Christ, their most learned Rabbines cannot see Christ: For
(as says the Apostle) their minds are 2. Cor. 3. 15.
covered with a veil.

So the Papists, notwithstanding they hate the So Papists hate the name of
Antichrist, but honor himself:
very name of Antichrist, yet do they honor himself; they read, and
interpret this prophecy, which points out Antichrist plainly, in all his
marks, and designeth his Chair, and Seat of Residence, to be Rome, the
City situate upon seven Hills, and ruler of the earth, when S. John wrote
this Revelation; yet do not the most learned among them rightly conceive it,
but labor all Yea, they defend Antichrist by the same Arguments by which Jews
impugned Christ.
they can, to cover and obscure it.

Yea, by the same arguments Popish Doctors defend their Antichrist, by which
Rabbis, or Jewish Doctors impugned Christ: for was not this their great
reason, which they used against our Lord, Do any of the Rulers or Pharisees
believe in him? John 7. 48, 49.
But this people who know not the Law, are cursed. And truly strange it is,
among all the Noblemen of the Jews, we read of none, who did believe in
him, but Joseph of Arimathea; and of all their learned Pharisees, we read of
none, who believed in him, but Nicodemus. Was this a good argument then, that
Christ could not be the Christ, because Rulers and Pharisees believed not in
him? What better, I pray you, is the argument of Papists now, The Pope cannot
be Antichrist. Why? Do Kings, or great men? do Doctors or learned men of their
Church believe so? But let not us be deceived with such shadows.

Shall we have the faith of Christ in respect of persons? Shall we judge of
truth, and untruth, by the multitude, greatness, and learning of them, who are
with it, or against it? Or shall the naked The doctrine of Christ and
Antichrist are two Mysteries, which many learned understand not.
name, and usurped title of a Church, be sufficient to impugn the Church?
There are many great in the world, of small account with the Lord; there are
many learned in Humanity, mere ignorants in Divinity. The doctrine of Christ
is called, A mystery of godliness; the doctrine of Antichrist 1. Tim. 3. 16.
is also called, A mystery of iniquity. Both are 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
mysteries: and great Doctors, in respect of humane literature and reputation,
may be ignorant of both. I thank thee, O Father, that have hid these Math. 11.
25.
things from wise men, and have revealed them to babes, and sucklings.

But to return, where these Romish Doctors in exposition of this book fall
upon any point of Romish Doctors should be handled, as Primasius did the
heretic Ticonius.
truth, we shall do with them, as Primasius professes he had done with
Ticonius the Donatist, who wrote upon this book of the Revelation before him,
he made choice of the good, and rejected the evil, for these are his words:
Sicut enim pretiosa Primas. Prolego^. in Apoc.
in stercore gemma, a prudente debet colligi, curari, and dignitati ingenuae
restitui; ita vndecunque veritas clareat, catholicae deferenda est vnitati,
huic enim soli competit, quicquid veritas etiam foris personarit: just namque
fides, a perfidis colligit, quod sui iuris esse cognouerit: For as a precious
pearl in a dunghill, if a wise man see it, he will take it up, purge it, and
restore it to the former beauty; so verity wheresoever, is to be referred unto
catholic unity; for to the Church only, belongs all that, which truth has
sounded, even by these who are without: and justly may faith gather from
Infidels any thing which she knows to be her own. And this for Heretical
Writers upon this book.

As for other orthodoxe Writers, concerning Difference among Doctors of the
reformed Church, is only about the method of the book.
the faith, I acknowledge that the Church has been greatly benefited by their
godly labors. Every one of them brings by course some measure of light to
clear this Prophecy: where they are miscarried, it is for not perceiving the
method, and order which the Spirit of God uses in it, but enforcing upon it a
method of their own, have in many things rather expressed their own mind,
then opened the meaning of this Prophecy, as shall (God willing) be declared
hereafter. To whom, lest I do any wrong, I will in one view present to the
Reader a short abridgement of every one of their works, that have come in mine
hands, and thereafter set down that, which it has pleased* God to communicate
unto me, and in all humility will submit it to the judgment and correction of
the Church.

The greatest difference will be about the method, Otherwise for the matter,
they all sound out one voice.
which as it seems to me, the very natural course of the Prophecy, and
thread of the Text it self proposes unto us. As for the matter it self, and
substance of the Prophecy, all the Doctors of the Churches reformed agree in
one sweet harmony: All their pens are like the Pitchers of G^deon, his three
hundred soldiers rattling, Judge. 7. 19.
sounding, yea importing present terror, and destruction to their enemies the
Midianites and Amal^kites, who were without number: All their tongues are like
the Trumpets of Rams Horns, Josh. 6.
blowing with one consent the downfall of the walls of Jericho: contemptible
means in the eyes of their enemies, yet the power of God was with them. Some
of their Trumpets are shriller, and some of them softer, but all sound out one
thing: The Pope is Antichrist, Rome is Babel, the Popish Church is the Whore of
Babel; whom the Lord Reu. 17. 16.
shall make desolate, even by temporal judgments here upon earth.

The Writers upon this Prophecy, which I I have seen, are these.
A Catalogue of Writers on the Revelation, seen by the Author, and a short
abridgement of their Commentaries.
THe eldest is Victorinus, Episcopus Pictaniensis, Bishop of Poytiers; He lived
after our Lord two hundred and seventy years. I find him at the 1 Lived,
year 270. after our Lord.
end of Theophilactus his Commentaries upon the Epistles, and some Prophets,
printed at Paris in the year 1548. He shortly paraphrases the Prophecy
according to the order of the Chapters.

Primasius, an Africane Bishop is next unto him. 2 Lived, year 440.
Some thinks, as Trithemius testifies, that he was the disciple of S.
Augustine. He lived about the year of our Lord 440. and was Bishop of Vtica:
he diuides this Prophecy into two books, one contained in the first twelve
Chapters, the other in the rest to the end: more particularly again, he parts
the whole in fine books: His book is printed Coloniae, anno 1535.

Hugo Cardinalis lived about the year 1240. 3 Lived, year 1240.
he diuides the book into seven visions, as many other also do. The first
vision is in the first three chapters, the second, from the fourth to the
eight, the third, from the eight to the twelfth, the fourth, from it to the
fifteenth; the fifth, from it to the eighteenth; the sixth, in the eighteen,
nineteen, and 4 Author, and time, uncertain.
twenty; the seventh, in the two last chapters.

An old Manuscript, Folio, expressing no certain Author: in most things it is
consonant to Hugo. 5 Printed year 1555.


Dionysius Carthusianus, printed at Paris, in the year 1555, handles this
book according to the order of the Chapters, and warnes the Reader in his
Prologue, that it is Prophetalis liber, a Prophetical book, yet not without
good doctrine; for, albeit, says he, in the new Testament, some books be
Legal, namely, the four Evangelists; others again be Historical, as the
Acts of the Apostles; and others Sapientiall, such as the Epistles, and this
only Prophetical, Certum tamen est in quolibet genere librorum istorum,
aliqua de aliorum librorum materia contineri: yet it is most certain, that in
anyone of these sort of books, the matter of other books is also some-way
contained. 6 Printed, time not expressed.


Lyra has a short Paraphrase on the Revelation.

D. Doctor Chytraeus, his book Printed at Viteberg, 7 Printed year 1571.
in the year 1571. diuides this Prophecy into seven Visions. The first
presents a clear description of Christ, supreme King, and high Priest of his
Church, and opens up the state and form of Church-gouernment in this life;
this Vision is contained in the first three Chapters. The second is from the
fourth Chapter to the eight. The third from the eight to the twelfth, wherein
corruptions of doctrine, and heresies which were to fall out, are by sound of
Trumpet foretold unto the Church. The fourth, from the twelfth to the
fifteenth, foresheweth the battle of the Church with the Dragon, and with the
new and old Roman Empire, wherein we have also a discovery of Antichrist. The
fifth is in the fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters, containing the vials of wrath,
powered out upon the worshippers of the Beast. The sixth Vision is from the
seventeenth Chapter to the one and twentieth; and it intreates of the
punishment of Antichrist. The seventh and last is a Vision of the Church
Triumphant, in the two last Chapters. 8 Printed year 1573.


Bullingerus his book printed at London, in the year 1573. a judicious, and
solid Writer agrees with them, who divide this Prophecy into seven Visions.

Alphonsus Conradus Mantuanus, his book printed 9 Printed year 1560.
Basileae in the year 1560. He dedicates it to the mighty Monarch of heaven
and earth, The Lord Jesus Christ, and follows them who diuides this Prophecy
in seven Visions.

D. Guilielmus Fulco Anglus, a learned, and modest 10 Printed year 1573.
Writer, his book printed at London in the year 1573. diuides this Prophecy
in three Visions. The first is in the first three Chapters, the second from the
fourth to the twelfth, the third from it to the end.

Aretius Bernensis, in the year 1584. goes also 11 Printed year 1584.
with them who parts this book into seven Visions.

Collado, printed Morgiis, in the year 1584. will 12 Printed year 1584.
have the Apocalypse to be a collection of threefold sort of signs, tending
all to one and the selfsame purpose, to wit, Seals, Trumpets, and Vials;
these three signify al one thing: so that, in his judgment, the matter of the
first Seal, first Trumpet, and first Vial, is all one, and so he thinks also
of the rest.

James Brocard, his judgment is, that in the 13 Uncertain.
Revelation those things are handled, and in distinct order set forth, which
Moses and the Prophets have written of the state of the Gospel, and of the
latter times. In a word, he calls it a conclusion, and sum of the holy
Scripture, in, and about those things which concern Prophecy, and leads them
to the end of the works of God. And he will have this in such so^ a Prophecy
of things to come, that those which are past, be also understood: with other
things, not much pertinent to this Prophecy.

Leo Jude, a Tigurine Preacher, translated out of 14 The time not set down.
Dutch into English by Edmond Allen, about this same time wrote a pretty and
godly Paraphrase upon this book, according to the order of the Chapters.

Iunius, printed at Heidelberg, in the year 15 Printed year 1591.
1591. the Prophetical part of this book, says he, begins at the fourth
Chapter, and is distinguished into two Histories, whereof the one he makes to
be common and general, pertaining to the whole world, from the fourth to the
tenth Chapter; the other a special Prophecy, containing the estate of the
Church Militant, from the tenth Chapter, to the two and twentieth.

Carolus Gallus, printed at Leiden, in the year 16 Printed year 1592.
1592. will have the whole time, from the days of S. John to the last Day,
divided into seven ages, which by four sundry pleasant pictures, as he calls
them, or representations, are proposed unto us: First, in the seven Epistles:
Next, in the seven Seals: Thirdly, in seven Trumpets: Lastly, in seven Vials.
By these four pictures, the lively image of Divine Providence, governing his
Church through all the seven ages, is figured unto us. The seven ages he
diuides this way: the first is from S. John his days to Constantine, the
second from Constantine to Phocas, the third from Phocas to Carolus Magnus, the
fourth from Carolus to Conradus the first, the fifth from that to Rodolphus, the
sixth from Rodolphus to Carolus Quintus, the seventh, from him to the second
coming of the great King, The Lord Jesus Christ.

Fox, an Englishman, printed in the year 1596. 17 Printed year 1596.
contents him with this general: that nothing in time past has, or in time to
come shall fall out in the Church, whereof we have not a lively delineation in
this Book, plainly represented to the eyes, and ears of them who look upon
it, that it may most justly be doubted, whether this book be a Prophecy, or
an Ecclesiastical History, wherein things to fall out, are set down, as if
they were already fallen out; neither have they otherwise fallen out, then this
Prophecy has pronounced beforehand; for according unto it things come to
pass.

George Gifford, Englishman, printed at London, in 18 Printed year 1596.
the year 1596. he makes this Book to be a prophecy, which opens the
state of things to come from Christ his days, to his second coming. From the
fourth Chapter to the twelfth, in his judgment, there is one Vision, which
from the twelfth again to the end, is more largely, and clearly explaned. He
is a modest, and a godly Writer.

Forthaeus, an Englishman also, printed at London, 19 Printed year 1597.
in the year 1597. makes two parts of the Revelation. The first is a
description of the present estate of the Church, as it was in the days of S.
John, and this is contained in the first three Chapters. The other is a
Prophecy of the estate of the Church to come, and it is twofold: First, of
the Church Militant, to the one and twentieth Chapter, then of the Church
Triumphant, in the two last Chapters. The Prophecy of the Church Militant has
two parts; first, a Vision in the fourth and fifth Chapters; next, a prediction
of things to come, distinguished into four times; the first, from S. John his
days to Constantine the Great; these are declared in the six Seals. The
second, from the days of Constantine, to the restitution of the Gospel: these
are contained in the six Trumpets, whereof four are less tentations; the
first of Arius, the second of Constantius, and Julian the Apostate, the third
of Macedontus, the fourth of Nestorius, the other two proclaim greater
troubles to come upon the Church by the Pope, in the fifth Trumpet, and Mahomet
in the sixth. The third is from the restitution of the Gospel, to the end of
the world. The fourth is at the end of the world in the seventh Trumpet, in the
fifteenth verse of the eleventh chapter: and thus ends the first Prophecy of
the Church Militant. The second Prophecy of the Church Militant her estate is
from the twelfth Chapter to the one and twentieth, and it is of two times,
first, from the birth of Christ to the year 1320, next, from that year unto
this day: This for the second Prophecy; a plainer exposition whereof we have
set down, Chapters seventeen, eighteen, nineteen.

Jesuits of Rhemes in their new Testament, printed 20 Printed year 1601.
in the year 1601* have some Marginal Notes, and Observations on this book:
whereof we shall speak, God-willing, as they occur.

Franciscus Ribera Jesuit, printed at Antwerpe, in 21 Printed year 1603.
the year 1603. in his Commentary upon the tenth chapter, at the end, diuides
this Prophecy into two parts; the first is contained in the first eleven
chapters, declaring such calamities as were to fall out until the coming of
Antichrist; the other is extended from the twelfth chapter to the end, and is a
particular Prophecy of Antichrist, and of the troubles the Church was to
suffer by him; concluding with a prediction of the last Judgment, and of the
blessed estate of Saints.

Blasius Viega, Jesuit, printed Coloniae Agrippinae, 22 Printed year 1603.
in the year 1603. diuides this Prophecy into seven Visions.

Dent, Englishman, printed at London, in the year 23 Printed year 1607.
1607. In this book, says he, for the general matter of it, we have large
and lively descriptions of Christ his Person, and Offices; of the Church, and
Ministers thereof; of the persecutions which it must sustain; and of God his
merciful providence delivering it in all extremities.

William Symonds, printed at London, in the year 24 Printed year 1606.
1606. intitulates his Commentary, Pisgah Euangelica: he confesses himself,
in his Epistle Dedicatory, that the manner of his Exposition is somewhat new,
which will be easily granted of any that reads it. He protests in like manner,
that he has fully satisfied himself, whereof the less hope remains that he
shall satisfy others. One thing I must say, by his leave, it seems strange
he has not been afraid to inuert the order, not of chapters only, but
verses also: he has iumbled them one through another in most confused manner,
and beaten them, as we say, into an Hotch-Potch: But God is the God of order,
and not of confusion.

Ioannes Winckelmannus, printed at Francfort in 25 Printed year 1609.
the year 1609. follows them who part this prophecy into seven Visions.

Grasserus a Germane, printed Tiguri, in the year 26 Printed year 1610.
1610. reduces this whole Book unto these three: first, the manifold means
that Satan uses to subvert the Church, and stablish his own Kingdom:
Secondly, the great judgments of God, by which he shall plague the world for
opponing themselves to the Gospel: Thirdly, remedies given to Saints to
comfort, and confirm them against the difficulties of their pilgrimage. Of
these three (says he) consists this book.

John Napeir, Lord of Merchistoun, our Countryman, 27 Printed year 1611.
worthily renowned, as peerless indeed, for many other his learned works,
and specially for his great pains taken upon this book, out of rare learning,
and singular Ingene, which are not commonly found in men of great rank.
Cotterius gives him great praise, but takes it back again too suddenly to
himself: He compares the Revelation to a golden Mine. Naiperus aurifodinam
inuenit, Vignerus ostendit, Ego vero aurum inde erui: Naiper found it, Vigner
has showed it, but I (says he) have dug, and wrought the gold out of it.
He has resolved this book by a marvelous Artifice, that it is not unlike a
building standing upon six and thirty proppes, or pillars; these are his
propositions, so ingenuously indented, and combyned one with another, that the
fall of one, imports the destruction of all. Most certain it is, that his
pains have been exceeding profitable, for the discovering of many hard, and
obscure places of this Prophecy. The Exemplar which I have seen, is printed
at London, in the year 1611.

Mathias Hoe has a large Commentary on the 28 Printed year 1611.
Revelation, printed Lipsiae, anno 1611.

Raphael Eglinus, Tigurinus, printed also in the 29 Printed year 1611.
year 1611, parts this Prophecy into three, according to Christ his three
Offices: his Prophetical office he expresses in the first three Chapters; his
Priestly Office, from the fourth Chapter to the foureteenth; his Kingly Office,
from that to the end: But this Method, with those of Dent, and Grasserus, are
too general, and may convene almost to any other book of holy Scripture, as
well as unto this.

Brightmannus Anglus, printed in the year 1612. 30 Printed year 1612.
diuides this book into a Preface and an Epistle. The Epistle contains first,
an Inscription, secondly, a Narration, thirdly, a Conclusion. The Narration is,
first, of particular Churches, secondly, of all Churches; and that first, by a
general Type of all the three periods in the fourth chapter, next, by an
opened book, the dignity whereof is declared in the fifth chapter. The events
foreshewed by the opening of the book, are of three ranks, the first declared
in the seven Seals; the second events, partly greater, partly smaller, are
declared in the seven Trumpets; and the third events are in the seven Vials.
He intitulates his book Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, that is, The Revelation of
the Revelation: a stately style, promising much, which would to God he had
performed: but in very truth, the right name of it is (...), that is, the
obscuration of the Revelation. Types properly belonging to Christ, are
accommodate to men. Who can patiently hear this, that the Angel, having the
seal of the living God, is Constantine the Great? Or that the Angel, who
offers up the prayers of all Saints, is Constantine the Great? This is, as it
seems, to put violent hands in the book, and force it to follow the fantasy
of man, as hereafter by this, and many other more, shall be, God willing, at
greater length declared. I reserve ^o the man that Christian love and
reverence, that becomes in the Lord; but he must give me leave to plead for
this prophecy, which, as a most precious pearl, our Lord in these last times
has presented in a Loue-token to his Church. It is a grief to see how the
comfort given therein is empaired, the majesty and amplitude thereof
restrained, by binding it to particular persons and times.

Peter du Mouline, Minister of the reformed 31 Printed year 1613.
Church in Paris, his book printed at Oxford in the year 1613. intreates, and
shows the accomplishment of the Prophecy, from the twelfth chapter to the
eighteenth.

Piscator, printed Herbornae, in the year 1613. 32 Printed year 1613.
diuides this book into three parts: first, a preface or preparation to the
seven Epistles, in the first chapter: Next, a Narration of the estate of the
Church, first, Militant, present then, and that was after to follow, then
Triumphant. Thirdly, a conclusion, from the sixth verse of the two and twentieth
chapter, to the end.

Patrike Forbes, Lord of Corse, our Countreyman, 33 Printed year 1613.
a godly and learned Pastor, his book printed at London, in the year 1613.
lays down a plain and easy method of this prophecy. Beside the Inscription
and conclusion, the body of the book consists for the most part (says he) of
a prophetical Narration, and it is twofold: First, of things which then were:
Next, of things to be done thereafter. And this Prophecy of things to be done,
has first a general Introduction, in the fourth and fifth chapters, then a
special Story in the rest. In the Seals, are types of the first sorrows
wherewith God shall plague the world for rejecting the Gospel; the six
Trumpets denounce second sorrows, and the seventh affoordeth seven Vials of
the last wrath, for full and final destruction of the enemies.

Piscator has a short Analysis, with Notes on 34 Printed year 1613.
every chapter, printed Herbornae Nassouiorum, anno, 1613.

Cotterius, a learned Writer, his book printed 35 Printed year 1615.
at Somer, in the year 1615, makes this Revelation threefold; 1. Apocalypsis
expansa, 2. Contracta, 3. Restricta: A Revelation extended, contracted,
restrained. The large, or extended Revelation, contains a clear Exposition of
all things; this continues from the fourth chapter, to the ninth verse of the
nineteenth, and it is divided into ten Classes. The Revelation contracted
repeats these same things more shortly, and is contained in the rest of the
nineteenth chapter, this he diuides into three Classes. The Revelation
restricted is yet more narrow then the preceding; this he places in the one
and twentieth, and a part of the two and twentieth chapters, and this contains
but one singular Class.

Petrus Artopaeus, has first a short Introduction 36 Printed year 1549.
for understanding this Prophecy, and after, a short explication of every
chapter in order. The sum of all he comprises in these few words: Christus,
quia olim discedens in coelos, promisit se semper Ecclesiae suae adfore,
consolabundus apparens reuelat ei, suae Ecclesiae formam, fortunam, and
successionem ad finem mundi vsque. Because Jesus Christ, when he ascended to
heaven, promised that he would be with his Church at all times, in
comfortable manner, he appears here unto her, and reueales her form, fortune,
or accidents to befall her, her succession unto the worlds end. And this he
does under several types, images, or representations, partly particular, as in
the first, second, and third chapters; partly general, as in the fourth,
fifth, sixth and seventh, etc. whereof some figureth heretics, some tyrants,
some the Church, and some the Monarchy: His book is printed at Frankford in
the year, 1549.

Ioannes Auentrotus, a Gentleman, as it seems 37 Printed year 1615.
of good credit, has some discourses upon this Prophecy, by way of an Epistle
sent to the King of Spain, and presented, as he writes, by the Duke of Lerma,
and graciously received of the King: he seems to restrain it somewhat
strictly to the Belgic Battle, the blame whereof he casts on the Pope, not
sparing to affirm, that these wars shall hasten the end of Antichrist his
grandeur. He witnesses of himself, that he lived a long time in the Canarie
Isles, plunged in the puddle of Papistry: at length by reading the Council of
Trent, and conferring it with holy Scripture, he found a direct discordance of
the one from the other, and thereupon resolved to transport his house into the
Low Countries. By the way he visited the Court of Spain, where he spared not
to communicate his mind to the Duke of Lerma, and Andreas de Prada, the Kings
Secretary, not only concerning matters pertaining to State, but Religion
also; these concerning Religion, the Duke of Lerma willed him to communicate by
himself to the King: the King for that cause appointed Andreas de Prada to
confer with him for his better information. As the Author reports, this
Secretaric was a man who feared God, loved truth, and was not far from the
knowledge thereof. In the conference he was twice moved to confess, By your
Arguments, says he, it is not impossible but that the Pope must be Antichrist;
yet did he counsel him rather to write his mind in his own Country, then
there: whereupon the Author went forward in his journey, and having
accomplished it, he writes from England, in the year 1610. October. 12. another
pithic Epistle against the Kingdom of Antichrist, which as he says, the
foresaid Secretary, according to his promise, presented to the King of Spain.
In it he boldly affirms, Romanam Religionem falsam esso doctrinam, Papam
Antichristum, and Bellum Belgicum regni Antichristi sinem suturum esse. In this
last point only, as I said, he seems too strictly to restrain this
Prophecy. I have written this at the greater length, that we may remember, how
in all parts, of all sorts of persons, God has his own; yea, even there where
Satan has his Revel.
Throne; and that it is not a difficill thing to the Lord, to open a door for
the Revelation of his Gospel, among the most desperate enemies thereof, when
his appointed time shall come. Let the Pope, and his Tulipantic Frogs assure
themselves, that they who this day are their greatest friends, shall (ere it be
long) become their most fearful foes: for so long shall the Kings of the Reu.
17. 17.
earth give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled:
That being done, They Ver. 16.
shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate. By the course of things, to
natural men it may seem to be far otherwise: but let us wait upon the
word of the Lord, which is most sure, and cannot fail. His Epistle is printed
at Amsterdam, in the year 1615.

Richard Barnard, Englishman, his Treatise printed 38 Printed year 1617.
at London, in the year 1617. contains some generals, which he Intitulates, A
Key of Knowledge, for the opening of the secret Mysteries of S. John's mystical
Revelation: The first of his Contents is, that the Book of the Revelation is
to be diligently studied of all sorts, in these last times: The second, that it
is an Apocalypsis, and not an Apocrypsis, but a Mystery made manifest: The
third is, what has made this Book till these latter times, so obscure;
wherein the obscurity lies, and to whom chiefly it becomes so hard to be
understood: The fourth, what is to be done, to come to the understanding
thereof, to remove the obscurities, and so rightly to expound the same: Lastly,
he sets down an interpretation of all the most difficult things in the
chapter, throughout the whole Prophecy.

John Bal^, Englishman. in his Preface has a 39 Printed, but time, and place,
not expressed.
short method, and sum of the first ten chapters: from the eleventh to the
end, a larger Commentary, which he intulates, The Image of both Churches.
Where, and when his book was printed, is not expressed.

D. Broughton, printed at London, In the end of 40 Printed at London.
his learned Treatise, intitulat, Consent of Scripture, has a short discourse
upon this Prophecy, wherein he clears the chief doubts, and difficulties
thereof.

JAMES King of Great Britain, etc. was the 41 Printed at London 1616.
last of them, that came in my hands, but with all reason may be reckoned in
among the first, and the best. Among many other his Highness works, no less
Rare, then Royal, there is a learned Paraphrase upon this book of the
Revelation: Beside that, in his Praemonition to Christian Kings and Princes,
his Majesty has handled the Controversies of this time concerning Religion,
like a profound and sound Theolog, and by invincible reasons has proved out of
this Prophecy, that the Pope is Antichrist. Thus stands his Highness in the
forefront of Ieho^ah his battle, fighting for Israel: like another David, he
has given that Romish Goliath, with Arguments, like flinty stones slung out of
the Word, a deadly wound, whereof he shall never recover. His Majesty has
begun to make naked the Whore, and to discover her filthiness, masked before
with the veil of hypocritical holiness. He has sounded the Trumpet in the
ears of the Emperor, Kings, Princes, and Free Estates through all
Christendom. The Lord waken their hearts to execute the determinate judgment,
fore-prophecied in this Book upon the Beast, and his Babel.

Pare^s his learned and judicious Commentary 42 Printed anno. 1618.
on the Revelation, came in my sight, after that I had nearly absolved this
first Prophecy.

Two Necessary Cautions, or Caueats, to be considered in the exposition of
this Book.
The first Caution.
WE must beware of two extremities in That the Prophecy be not limited to
particular persons and times.
the handling of this Prophecy; first, that we limit not these Visions so
particularly unto times, and persons, as many do; whereby they have greatly
empaired the Majesty, and Amplitude of this Revelation. For example, one among
many, is the first Seal, which shows our Lord The first Seal by some
restrained, for time, too narrowly.
riding on his white Horse, like a Conqueror, no larger, in respect of time,
then from the Baptism of Christ, to the destruction of Jerusalem. I know,
Forthaeus, and others, extend it larger, and will have it reach from the days
of Christ, to the days of Constantine; but this also is too narrow counting:
The Church should be deprived of great comfort, if the Conqueror, riding on
the white horse, were pinched, and bounded within so short a time. But the
certain truth is, Our Lord Jesus mounted, by the opening of the first Seal,
upon his white horse, shall so continue riding through the world at his own
pleasure, till he have gathered in his Saints, till he Overcome, and make his
enemies his foote-stoole.

This will be manifest, if we compare the end The time of the first Seal
continues to the worlds end.
of this Prophecy with the beginning thereof. In the entry of this Prophecy,
at the opening of the first Seal, The Rider on the white Horse appears: in
the end of it, there he appears again; I saw Reu. 19. 11, 12, 13.
heaven opened, and behold, a white Horse, and he that sat upon him, was
called Faithful, and True, and in righteousness he does judge, and make
war, etc. He was clothed in a Vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is called,
The Word of God. All the time of the battle he is not known under this Type:
shall we therefore think he was not sighting, nor shooting his Arrows? No,
his Vesture in the second apparition, is a witness of his victory, and As the
Rider on the white, appears in the beginning; so also in the end of the
battle.
slaughter of his enemies.

This might have told them, that the Lord Jesus, who comes out in the first
Seal, riding on a white horse, and of whom it is so expressly said, that He
went forth conquering, that he might overcome; Reu. 6. 2.
was to continue so, till he had done the work, for which he comes forth;
that is, perfected his Saints, and subdued his enemies. We must not limit so
short a time to so great a work: they who do so, defraud the Church (as we
have said) of a great and ample comfort: For The white Horse this same day is
still riding among us.
even in our own days, and among our selves (blessed be his name for it) this
Conqueror is riding, and shall so continue to the worlds end; yet the time of
the first Seal lasts, as also of the subsequent Seals following it, which
shall (God willing) hereafter be declared, that the Seals opens up the
general course of things, till the day of Judgment; and within narrower
bounds should they not be restrained.

What shall I speak of other grosser interpretations, How this Prophecy by
some, in ridiculous manner, is restrained to particular persons.
whereunto many are driven, by binding this Prophecy to particular persons.
Can the four Beasts be four Evangelists? Then S. John behooued to be one of
the four, or else ye must make them five Evangelists; for every one of the
four prepares him. Or shall the first Beast be Quadratus? Shall the second
be Justinius? etc. Shall the Angel coming from the East, who has the Seal of
the living God, be Constantine the Great? Or shall the Angel, that offers up
the prayers of all Saints, be Constantine the Great also? He was great indeed*
but this is to make him too great. Shall the Angel coming out of the Temple,
be Thomas Cromwell, Lord of Essex? Or the Angel having power over the fire, be
Thomas Cranmer? Or shall the type of the Harvest and Vintage be appropriate to
England? Why has Brightman broached such opinions, without all hope, or help
of verity?

I know, the persons whom he has named, are No reasonable men will appropriate
to themselves, that which is common to the Church.
famous and honorable; and that the Lord has a flourishing Church in England,
his name be praised therefore: But I am assured, the reverend Bishops, the
learned Doctors, and Divines there, will not vindicate that to themselves,
which is common to the whole Church. It were tedious to repeat all of this
sort, whereby common types are accomodate unto private persons: which is not
the fault of Brightman only (though most part of them be forged in his own
brain) but of many others also.

And thus, as about the accommodation of This Prophecy goes not on, by one
continual course of time interrupted.
public Types, to private persons, they are miscarried; so, in binding this
Prophecy to one interrupted and continual course of time, taking up one
chapter in time to be always posterior to another, they have greatly erred also.
For the Revelation is not one Prophecy, but a Prophecy often repeated: So S.
Augustine takes it up, Siceadem Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, ca. 20. lib. 17
multis modis repetit Ioannes in Apocalypsi, vt alta, atque alia dicere
videatur, cum aliter, atque aliter haec ipsa dicere inuestigetur: that in this
Book the same things are many ways repeated. And Primasius, if he was, as
Trithemius records, disciple to S. Augustine, seems to have learned it from
him; Howeuer it be, he has mostiudiciously observed, that S. John, Totum
tempus ecclesiae Primas in Apoc.
diuersis figuris repetit enarrandum: the whole time and state of the Church is
repeated here by Saint But is a Prophecy sundry times, and sundry wares
repeated.
John under diverse Types and Figures. We will join both these, that in this
Prophecy we have not only alia atque alta, but eadem aliter atque aliter.
Sundry times is the state of the Church here deducted from the days of Christ,
to the day of Judgment; when one Prophecy is ended, another begins: one of
them in order is after another, but all of them are of like length concerning
time: For, as I have said, every one of them foretells the state of the Church
from Christ his days, till his second Coming.

This is a maine point most needful to be observed This is proved by the
judgment of Interpreters contrary minded.
for the understanding of this Book: the neglect, or not observation of it,
has bred unto many Writers inextricable difficulties; which may be tried by
this one Argument; that they, who go through this Prophecy by one continual
course of time, making always the former chapter prior in time to the
subsequent, when they come to the twelfth chapter, there they find themselves
straited, they are forced there to interrupt their course, and to come back
again unto the days When they come to the twelfth chapter, they are forced to
begin again.
of Christ and state of the Church Primitive. For, as I have said, at the
twelfth chapter begins a new Prophecy of the estate of the Church. Let the
judicious Reader consider their Commentaries, and he shall see it to be as I
have said. The twelfth chapter begins as high, as the first Seal, their
judgment against it serves to confirm mine, that the course of this Prophecy
proceeds not by time interrupted: as if one chapter contained the story of
matters from such a year to such a year, and the next in like manner, as by
some is particularly set down.

The second Caution.
THe other extremetie to be eschewed is, that These three Prophecies must not
be confounded into one, which some Writers do.
we confound not these distinct Prophecies into one, to make the seven Seals,
the seven Trumpets, and the seven Vials to be all one, as Collado, and some
others do. It is true, they do all agree in this general, that they declare
the estate of the Church, God his working for it, and against his enemies, yet
both for their matter, and manner, they are distinct Prophecies, and have (as
we have said) alia atque alia, and eadem aliter atque aliter: So that we are
not to think that no other matter is in the first Trumpet, then was in the
first Seal; or that no other thing is in the first Vial, then was in the first
Trumpet, and first Seal, as shall now, God willing, be made more plain.

The Method of this Book, as it is taken up by the Author.
TO show then the natural method of this Book, This book is a Prophecy of
things which are, and are to come.
that is, a method not enforced upon it, but plainly laid open, and given unto
us by the Prophecy it self: We pass by the first part, containing a general
Preface of the whole Book, in the first three verses of the first chapter, and
the last part containing the Conclusion of the book, from the sixth verse of the
last chapter, to the end. The body of the Book it self contains a Prophecy,
(...), of things which are, (to wit, when this Prophecy was given) and of
things which are to come. This general method is laid down by the Lord
himself, Write, says he, (...), things which are, and the Reu. 1. 19.
things which shall be hereafter.

Let not this be thought strange; for there is Prophecy in General is not
only of things to come, but of things, both past, and present.
not only a Prophecy of things to come, as was that Prophecy of Esaias,
Daniel, and others, in which sense the word of Prophecy is commonly taken: but
there is a Prophecy also of things past: such was that Prophecy of Moses,
whereby he plainly Genesis 1.
showed forth the creation of the world, which was done about two thousand,
three hundred, and seventy three years before that himself came into the
world: and there is in like manner a prophecy of things present, as that, by
which Ahiiah the 1. King. 14. 6.
Silonite discovered the wife of Jeroboam disguised; and that of Elisha, when
his spirit went with Gehazi, 2. King. 5. 27.
and saw him take the bribe from Naaman the Syrian. Of this sort, is this first
prophecy of Saint In the first three chapters, is a Prophecy of things
present, when S. John lived.
John, contained in the first three chapters of this Book; for in it, the
present estate of the Church, as it was in the days of Saint John, is laid
open, not as it seemed to be, but as it was in very deed; for some of them, who
had a name that they were living, are declared by this prophecy to be dead, as
the Church of Sardis. But we are to remember that this prophecy is in such
sort written for the Church at that time, that it serves also for all other
Churches to the worlds end. And this prophecy has before it a convenient
vision of preparation, from the ninth verse of the first chapter to the end;
and then after the preparatorie Vision, follows the prophecy it self,
contained in the second and third chapters. This for the first Prophecy of
this Book, which is, Of things that are.

The other Prophecy, of things which are to The Prophecy of things to come,
is from the fourth chapter, to the sixth verse of the last.
come, continues from the fourth chapter unto the sixth verse of the last
chapter: and this Prophecy has, first, a Vision of Preparation; secondly,
Visions of Prediction. The Vision of Preparation is in the fourth and fifth
chapter: For, this we lay for a ground, that these two chapters contain no
Vision of Prediction, but only of Preparation; for prediction is not made
before the Before it there is a Preparatorie Vision, chapter 4. and 5.
opening of the Seals. This method, ye see, makes it self, as the first
Prophecy, Of things which are, had a convenient Preparatorie Vision going
before it: so this second, and great Prophecy, of things which are to come,
has a Preparatory Vision preceding it, very fit, and convenient for the
subsequent predictions, as (God willing) we shall show when we enter to the
fourth chapter.

This second Prophecy then of things which After, it begins the Visions of
Prediction at the sixth chapter.
are to come, begins at the sixth chapter, and it is twofold: first, a
prophecy of the estate of the Church Militant to the worlds end, and this
continues to the one and twentieth chapter. The other is a prophecy of the
victory, glory, and eternal felicity of the Church Triumphant, in the one and
twentieth, and beginning of the two and twentieth chapters. In this, all the
Interpreters agree, and make no question; except that some will have the fourth
and fifth chapters to contain Visions of Prediction, as well as the rest,
which (as we have said) cannot be; for, the opening of the Seals, out of which
comes the discovery of things to come, begins at the sixth chapter.

Now to take up rightly the Method of the Prophecy The Visions of Prediction
are three, the state of the Church being foretold three times.
of the estate of the Church Militant, let us keep in mind that ground laid
by S. Augustine and Primasius, that it is, Prophetia saepius repetita, not one
continual Prophecy, but a Prophecy repeated; and that, not doubled only, as
was the dream of Pharaoh, to show the certainety of the Genesis 41. 32.
Vision, but tripled; all the three Visions foretelling the estate of the
Church in a different manner; yea, and of a different matter one from another;
except that the last Vision, or third Prophecy, which is of Antichrist, is
doubled, the one not much different from the other in matter, but in the manner
of handling.

The whole Visions of this Prophecy concerning A reason of this method taken
out of the Prophecy it self.
things to come, in the Church Militant, are three, every one of them diducing
in a diverse manner, the state of the Church from the days of Christ to his
second Coming. The light that led me to this order, did break out of the
bosom of the Book it self, and the attentive Reader may easily perceive that,
which by diligent reading was conceived by me; that, every one of these three
Prophecies is concluded with a prophetical description of the day of
Judgment, under such Types, as it was represented to S. John. I would
therefore warn the Reader, who desires to understand this Book, that when he
comes to the description of the day of Judgment, he stand there, and
resolve with himself, that the Prophecy which follows it, begins again,
as we say, ab O^o, to show out the estate of the Church in matter, as I said,
or then in manner different from the former.

The first Prophecy is General, and ends in the The first Prophecy is
General, c. 6. and 7.
sixth chapter, with a prophetical prediction of the day of Judgment in the
sixth Seal; all the difficulty will be about this, but we will show our
reasons when we come to it. The second Prophecy The second is Special, chap.
8, 9, 10, 11.
beginning at the eighth chapter, is more Special, and is concluded in the end
of the eleventh chapter, with a prophetical Narration again of the day of
Judgment, which no man can deny. The The third is Particular, from the 12.
chap. to the 22.
third Prophecy, beginning at the twelfth chapter, is Particular, for it
leaves all other enemies, and points at Antichrist; and at the end of the
twentieth chapter, ver. 11. it is concluded with a Prophetical Representation
of the day of Judgment, so clearly, that (I hope) it shall have no
contradictor.

The first Prophecy, which is General.
How the first Prophecy in effect is a General Prognostication, telling,
THe first Prophecy in effect is a general Prognostication, proposing a
short, and summary view of the state of the Church, specially under violent
persecution, to the worlds end, which is this. In the first Seal is declared
how Christ 1 That Christ will go through the world with his Gospel.
shall go through the world, riding upon the Ministry of the Word, preaching
the Gospel by his servants, where, and when it pleases him. In 2 The world
will persecute Preachers and Professors of it.
the second Seal we are forewarned, that this shall not be without trouble;
for Satan and his instruments, shadowed by the Rider on the red Horse, shall in
bloody manner persecute the Preachers, 3 For the which God will plague the
world by temporal judgments.
and Professors of the Gospel. Yet are we told in the third and fourth Seal,
that they shall not escape unpunished; for thereupon follows the black and
the pale Horse, with their Riders; figuring famine, pestilence, and other
horrible plagues of God, that shall come on the world for contempt of the
Gospel. And because the sword, famine, pestilence, do not so go through the
world, that the godly are exempted from them: In the fifth Seal, the estate of
Saints 4 But will secure his Saints from wrath to come.
troubled on earth, for the testimony of Jesus, is set down in most
comfortable manner: and then, as they tried in the fifth Seal, for the day of
revenge 5 In which, at last, the wicked shall perish desperately.
and judgment; so, at the opening of the sixth Seal, the horrible day of Doom
appears to the terror of the wicked.

We are not then to bind any of these Seals, No Seal, except the sixth,
should be restrained to a particular time.
except the sixth, to a determinate time, but take them up as extended to all
times, during the worlds endurance: Far less, to expound these Riders on the
Horses of Roman Emperors, and other particular persons, as we have showed
before.

In this first Prophecy there is no difficulty, except In this Method, no
difficulty is, but about the sixth Seal:
about the sixth seal, whether or not it does fore-shew the day of Judgment,
and about the seventh chapter, how it follows and depends on the sixth, and
how it is a pendicle of the first Prophecy. Concerning the first, we hold
thus, Which some will have to be a Prophecy of Apostacy: others, of a
te^porall judgment: but neither can be.
that the sixth seal contains a prophetical prediction of the last Day.
Against this, there are two opinions: Some think that it is a Prophecy of
heresies, apostasies, and defections from the faith: Others, that it is a
prophecy of some fearful temporal judgment; but neither of these are to be
received.

The Text it self militats directly against the That it is not a Prophecy of
Apostasy, is proved out of the Text.
first opinion, that the darkening of the Sun and Moon, the falling of the
Stars, admits not any Allegorical interpretation of any darkness to
come by Heresy, and Apostasy; for it is plainly said in the fifteenth verse,
that Kings, Great Men, and Captains, were afraid, when they saw the fearful
change of the creatures, they hid themselves in dens: Shall we think here
that it was Apostasy, and Heresy, obscuring the light of the Gospel, that
made them to cry out, Mountains, Reu. 6. 16.
fall upon us, and cover us. No, so far were they from all fear for that
matter, that by the contrary they rejoiced in it: Emperors, I mean great
men, and Captains, being themselves, chief Authors, Actors, and Allowers of
these Heresies, which darkened the Sun. Yea, it is very well known, that
they, either by allurements, entised others, or by violence forced them to make
Apostasy and Defection from the Truth.

Neither is it to be understood, to be a denuntiation A threefold reason,
proving that the sixth Seal imports not a denunciation of judgment temporal.
of any temporal, or external judgment for these reasons: First, there is
here an universal change made of all creatures in heaven and in earth: Next,
all the persons of the wicked, not of one Nation or Kingdom, but of all, are
universally here judged, and that under seven ranks: Thirdly, it is expressly
called in the Text, The great Day of the Lord his wrath. The like style, I
know, is also given to days of temporal judgment; yet conioyne this with the
rest of the Reasons, and compare it with other places, where we find the like
phrase, the matter shall be clear.

Since the seven Vials are the seven last plagues, Proved also by similitude of
phrases used in the seventh Vial, importing the last Wrath.
of force we must grant, that the last Vial powers out the last wrath of that
great Day, which concludes all wrath in this life, and begins that endless
wrath in the life to come. The warning premitted to the Vial, is the ordinary
and accustomed warning before the day of Judgment, Behold, I come as a Thief:
Beside that, the speech Reu. 16. 15.
there, is like unto the speech here, Every I Will fled Ver. 20.
away, and the Mountains were not found. But more clearly in the twentieth
chapter, where none will deny that he speaks of the day of Judgment, where
he says; I saw one, from whose Reu. 20. 11.
face fled away both earth and heaven. The similitude of phrases used in all
these places, shows, that this sixth seal also is to be understood of the day
of Judgment.

But most clearly of all does it appear, out of But most of all clearly
proved by comparing this, with the like Prophecy of our Savior.
that prediction made by our Savior, in which, after he has made mention of
great Persecutions, Apostasies, Heresies, and false Christ's which were to come,
he sub-ioynes, Immediately after the tribulation of these days, shall the
Sun be darkened, Math. 24. 29.
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from
heaven. There he uses the same speeches, which are used here; and that in
them he points at the day of Judgment, is plain, out of that which
follows: Then shall Ver. 30. 31.
appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and then shall all the Tribes
of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
of heaven with Power and great Glory, and he shall send his Angels with the
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together the Elect from the
four winds, from the one end of heaven to the other. These places, conferred
one with another, let us see, that the sixth seal is to be expounded of the day
of Judgment. The most judicious Interpreters are of this mind also, as (God
willing) shall be declared, when we come to the opening up of the Seals.

Now, as for the other difficulty, concerning How the seventh chapter is a
pendicle of the sixth.
the seventh chapter, we resolve it thus; that the seventh chapter is a
pendicle of the sixth, containing per (...) a larger explication of the fifth
and sixth Seals, which the judicious Reader will easily perceive. In the fifth
Seal, Saints cry for judgment on their enemies. The answer is given them,
that they should rest for a little season, t^ll their brethren were fulfilled.
Incontinent in the sixth Seal, S. John sees represented unto him that terrible
day of Judgment for which Saints cried. Reu. 6. 11.
The cause why, the Judgment longed for by Saints, and seen by S. John is
delayed, is plain, out of the seventh chapter. For, in the beginning
Containing a larger explanation of the fifth and sixth Seals.
of that chapter he sees the Angels, executors of that last Judgment,
prepared, Standing at the four winds, as S. Matthew speaks; Or, at the four
corners of the earth, as S. John speaks, ready to fold it up like an old
Garment, as the Psalmist calls it, but that they are commanded to stay till the
servants of God be gathered, and sealed, as was answered to the cry of Saints
in the fifth Seal. This is the only difficulty in the method of this first
Prophecy, the like whereof occurres not in any of the rest; yet, let that be
pondered without prejudice, which I have said, and the matter shall be plain.
Needful was it, that the Seal, showing out the cry of slain Martyrs, and the
answer given them, should be explayned, by a more full declaration of their
felicity in heaven: and that the Tragical end of the wicked in the sixth Seal,
should have set against it the Triumphant estate of the godly in heaven; all
which, at length, is done, in the seventh chapter, and therefore I count it a
pendicle of the sixth. To conclude then; in the sixth and seventh chapter we have
the first Prophecy of this Book, and it is General.

The second Prophecy, which is more Special.
THE second Prophecy comes, out of the The second Prophecy reaches from the
eighth chapter, to the twelfth.
bosom of the seventh Seal. It begins at the eighth chapter, and continues
to the twelfth. It consists of seven Trumpets, whereof six contain six
several Proclamations, made from heaven by Jesus Christ, the great Captain of
his Church, fore-warning his Saints and Soldiers upon earth, of battles which
he foresaw coming against them, he sends out his Heralds to blow the
Trumpet, and sound the Alarm, that his Saints might be wakened, and armed to
resist their enemies. The seventh Trumpet, in the end of the eleventh chapter,
concludes this Prophecy with a denunciation of that great Day of Judgment,
which shall decide this Controversy between the Church, and her enemies, and
shall put an end to all.

This Prophecy I call more Special then the It denounces battle to the
Church, by fraudulent heretics.
former: The former has forewarned us, especially, of troubles by violent
persecution, that shall follow the preaching and professing of the Gospel.
Here we are foretold of somewhat more, to wit, that the Church has to fight
against sundry fraudulent heretics, by whom Satan shall labor to pervert the
faith of Jesus: Which I will Yet the first violent persecution was not without
heresy; and the second fraudulent, not without heresy.
not so to be understood, as if the first violent troubles of the Church were
altogether void of fraudulent heresies; or, that the second troubles of the
Church by fraudulent heresies, were without all violence: but we so distinguish
them, because in the one, the enemy fights against the Church, especially by
the sword; in the other, he fights against it, especially by heresy.

The first ground we laid before, is still to be The first Trumpet for time,
goes as high as the first Seal.
kept: we must not knit this Prophecy to the former, according to the course
of time; I mean, as if it were posterior to the other in respect of time: For
the first Trumpet, in respect of time, goes up as high, as the first Seal,
yet containing a new Revelation of another matter, then that which was
fore-shewed in the Seals; to wit, as I said, the troubles which the Church was
to suffer, even to the darkening of her light, and obscuring of her visible
face, by deceitful heresies.

Where we are to observe another thing, which In the Trumpets God comes not out
in hostility against his enemies, but warnes his Church of enemies coming
against her.
has in this point miscarried many learned Interpreters. They have conceited,
that in the Tru^pets, the Lord comes forth in hostility against the enemies
of his Church, and take these things sounded by the Trumpets, to be great
evils, plagues, and punishments denounced to the world for contempt of the
Gospel; whereas, in very deed, they point out the enemy coming in hostility,
ranged in several battles to fight against the Church. It is true, the Lord
after this comes out in open battle against his enemies, but not here in
this place.

Mark it yet over again (for these grounds, How the Tru^pets and Vials differ.
whereupon the Prophecy stands, would be deeppondered; if once we understand
them, the Prophecy will be the plainer.) The Trumpets and Vials differ this
manner of way. In the Trumpets, Satan by his Instruments, comes out in
arrayed battle against the Church: Lest they should annoy her by sudden
invasion, or secret In the one, wicked men fight against the Church, in the
other, God fights against the wicked:
ambushment, the Lord Jesus, Captain of his people, warnes them by sound of
Trumpet, of the enemy approaching; he tells what troops they are, what
stratagems they use, what armor they fight with, that his Saints may be armed
to resist them. In the Vials again, the Lord comes forth in araied battle
against the enemies of his Church, rendering plagues proportional to these
sins, by which they impugned and corrupted true doctrine. This not being
considered, has moved many judicious men to think, that for time and matter,
the Trumpets and Vials are both one, but in truth they are not.

For clearing this matter once for all, let us remember, And renders to them
judgment proportional to their sins.
how in the most obscure Prophecies of this Book, the Lord has secretly laid
down a key, which if men can find, they shall be the more able by it to open
the Prophecy. Read the fifth and sixth verses of the sixteenth chapter, Lord,
Reu. 16. 5, 6.
thou art just, because thou have judged these things, for they shed the blood
of the Saints and Prophets, and therefore have thou given them blood to drink.
In the Trumpets, the wicked give battle to the Lord; In the Vials, the Lord
judges, and repaies them with plagues proportional, and correspondent to their
sins. It shall be made plain to him that reads without prejudice; compare
every Trumpet with the correspondent Vial, and ye shall see, in the one, men
impugning the Truth of God, and in the other, God plaguing them
correspondently. In the Trumpets, Antichrist rises This will be made plain
by comparing every Trumpet with the correspondent Vial.
by degrees, till he come to his height; in the Vials, God casts him down by
degrees. To leave the rest, and compare but one: In the fifth Trumpet,
Antichrist following his forerunners, comes forth like a fallen Star,
opens the bottomless pit, and brings out a smoke which darkeneth both the
Sun, and the Air; that is, both the light of the Gospel, and glory of the
Church: for which, the righteous Judge, in the fifth Vial, powers out wrath
on the Kingdom of the Beast, and darkneth his Throne; the like throughout all,
the attentive Reader may observe, comparing every Trumpet with the
correspondent Vial. Thus in the Trumpets and Vials, have we several
Prophecies of several times, and matters, yet standing in a relation the one
to the other; the practices of the enemy against the Church being pointed out
in the Trumpets, their punishments proportional coming from God, expounded in
the Vials. I have the oftener, and more plainly repeated this, because I know
how difficill a thing it is to draw men from their fore-stalled, and
preconceiued The Prophecy has before it a Preface,
opinions.

Now the parts of this Prophecy are two: first, we have a Preface, in the
first five Verses of the And has in it self two parts.
eighth; next, we have the Prophecy it self continuing to the end of the
eleventh. The Prophecy 1 A Prophecy of the darkening of the light by heresy.
has two parts: first, a prediction of the darkning of the light of the
Gospel, and obscuring of the face of the Church visible, by heresies; this we
have in the eighth and ninth chapters. Next, a 2 A Prophecy of the restitution
of the Gospel and Church to her former beauty.
prediction of the restitution of the Gospel again, and of the Church to her
former avowed liberty, so I mean; for it was never, nor cannot utterly be
abolished. This is comfortably represented by the commandment given to S.
John, to Revel. 10. 10.
eat the little book, and to go and prophecy again; as also by the
measuring of the Temple, figuring the building and restitution of the Church,
defaced before by Antichrist, bereft and spoiled of Revel. 11. 1.
holy Scripture contained in the little Book, and of these spiritual
Ornaments, which made her glorious in the eyes of God, and comfortable to the
hearts of men. This restitution of the light, and reformation of the Church,
after the horrible darkness wherein our Fathers before us were plunged, is a
working in our days, praised be God for it: And this second part is contained
in the tenth and eleventh chapters, in the end whereof this second Prophecy is
concluded, with a Prophetical Prefiguration of the day of Judgment.

The third Proph^ie, which is Particular.
THE third Prophecy of this Book begins The third Prophecy is Particular.
at the twelfth chapter, and continues to the end of the twentieth. It is more
Particular then any of the former; for in it the Spirit of God passing by all
other enemies, or then in it touching them very lightly, insists at more length
In it troubles of the Church by Antichrist, are particularly foretold.
then he has done in any of the two preceding Prophecies, to fore-warne his
Church of the troubles she was to suffer under Antichrist. And this, the
Adversaries themselves are forced to confess, that this Prophecy, from the
twelfth chapter forward, is a prophecy of Antichrist; so Viega and Ribera do
affirm before their Commentary on the twelfth: and it is necessarily to be
observed, for that which (God willing) after we shall hear.

The order observed in this Prophecy, is this, For this, Satan in his
restless opposition to the Church, is first described in the twelfth chapter.
shortly: first the Capital and Arch-enemie of the Church, to wit, Satan, the
Serpent, that old Dragon, is at length described in the twelfth chapter: His
restless fighting against the Church, figured there by a Woman, without
intermission, or yielding, even when he is overcome, is plainly set down in
five several Battles. Here let me remember the Christian Reader, for
commendation, and confirmation of our Method, that those Interpreters, who
follow on this Prophecy by one continual course of time, when they come to
the twelfth chapter, are forced to go back again to the days of Christ: the
Book makes so plain and easy method for it self, that men cannot win by
it.

Next, in the thirteenth chapter, we have described Then his two instruments
figured by two Beasts in the 13. chapter.
Satan his two principal Instruments, by whom he fights against the Church:
these are figured by two Beasts, the one Beast having seven Heads and ten
Horns, described from the first verse to the eleventh: This Beast signifies
the Whereof the first is Rome, under Emperors.
Whole State of Rome, opposite unto Christ, under whatsoever Title, Head, or
Name: and this manner of way, that whole State opposite to Christ, being
considered in one Incorporation, as making The other is Rome under Popes.
up one Beast, the Apostate Pope is described in the first Beast, and makes up
the seventh, and the last Head thereof.

But here two things are to be considered, that Why the Beast is described with
seven Heads, seeing two of them only troubled the Christian Church.
albeit the troubles of the Christian Church proceed from the two last heads of
the first Beast, to wit, from persecuting Emperors, and persecuting Popes, for
in the days of S. John, the first five Heads of the Beast were gone, and away,
as he witnesses, chapter 17. verse 10. Yet that the Beast might be the better
known, he is described with all his Heads, whereof persecuting Emperors,
governing the State Roman, opposite to Christ, was the sixth Head, and
persecuting Popes coming in the Emperors place, when he was turned away, made
up the seventh Head.

The other thing to be marked here, is, that albeit The Pope is the seventh
Head of the first Beast, and yet described in the second Beast by himself.
the Pope be described in the first Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, as
being the seventh Head of the Beast, yea, and the Mouth thereof; yet because
the Lord Jesus fore* saw, that the Papal Power was to be the last, the
longest, the greatest, and most dangerous enemy of the Church, under the shadow
of a Christian profession, it pleases the Lord, for the greater comfort, and
confirmation of his Church, to figure that Kingdom of Popes in a Vision by it
self, and that under the type of another Beast, having two Horns like the
Lamb, but speaking like the Dragon.

The plain, and particular Prophecy of Antichrist, The Pope in the second
Beast, is described in the last part of the 13. chapter.
or Apostate Popes, in their Kingdom, opponing themselves coueredly, and by a
consequent; for he as a Mystical enemy, is described from the thirteenth
verse of the eleventh chapter, to the end thereof, he is described from his
original, from his qualities, from his working power, from his great success,
and from his mystical name. His beginning was base, but by degrees he grew to
that height, that He caused all, Revel. 13. 16.
both small and great, rich, and poor, free, and bond, to receive his mark in
their right hand, or in their forehead; And that under no less pain, then the
loss of life, or liberty. Here the Pope is at his height, and in the very
top, and ru^fe of his pride.

But from the end of the thirteenth chapter, to At the foureteenth, a party
appears to the Pope, whereupon follows the Popes destruction.
the end of the twentieth, comes in a Prophecy of the fall, and destruction
of the Pope. In the thirteenth chapter, the Beast looking like a Lamb with his
two Horns, seemed to overrule all, a few excepted, whose Names are written in
the Lambs book of Life: there we saw him in such Revel. 13. 8.
grandeur, that all the world followed him, wondered at him, and worshipped
him: But in the foureteenth, there appears a party against that counterfeit
Lamb, to wit, the true Lamb of God, The Lord Jesus, standing on Mount S^on,
with his Warriors; fewer by many, then the followers of the two horned Beast,
but more worthy.

And this Prophecy of the Pope his destruction, we have it: first, in
typical, or figurative speech, The Prophecy of the Pope his destruction is
two-sold.
to the end of the sixteenth chapter: Next, in more plain, and simple
speeches, from the end of the twentieth, to the one and twentieth, inclusiue;
for 1 It is set down in speeches Typical.
the first, the true Lamb enters into battle with the counterfeit, and
ouercomes him.

Before the battle there go; first, four Proclamations, Where, first there
preceeds preparation, then there follows execution, in the 15. and 16.
chapters.
made by heavenly Heralds in the foureteenth chapter. After them, in the
foureteenth verse, he who before appeared like a Lamb, comes out a crowned
King, armed with iudiciarie power against his enemies. Then in the fifteenth
chapter, before he proceed to judgment, Saints in most comfortable manner are
secured first, and Angels, Messengers, and Executors of Gods wrath upon the
Beast, are called, prepared, and furnished for that work. All this preparation
being made before, then in the sixeteenth follows the execution; the Vials of
Gods wrath, according to the tenor of his proclamation, are powered out upon
the Beast, and them that worship him. There, by degrees, a man may see the
Kingdom of Antichrist to decay, as he grew by degrees. The seventh Trumpet
brings with it the consummation of all, and concludes the first Prophecy of
Antichrist his destruction, foretold under typical and figurative speeches.

The other Prophecy of his destruction, is, in 2 It is set down in speeches
simple.
speeches more simple, plain, and more pungent then the other; and this
reaches from the seventeenth chapter, to the end of the one and twentieth. It
pleases the Lord Jesus to double this Prophecy, because it concerns us most
in these last times, that he might leave this comfort with his Church, and
assure his servants that Babylon shall fall; yea, is fallen. Rome, the Seat,
and Throne of the Beast, shall be ouer-turned, and made desolate, even in this
present life.

Natural men, and blinded Papists make a scorn The presumption of blinded
Papists, scorneth at the ruin of Rome.
of this, when they hear it; yea, they think it impossible, considering that
the Whore of Babel has so many confederates, even the mighty Kings, and
Monarchs of the earth, who have devoted themselves to defend and maintain the
Church of Rome. Upon these hopes, the Church of Rome is confident, and
contemns this Prophecy. In her own mind she sits, as her Grandmother
in the East, Old Babel did, like a Queen, and thinks Reu. 18. 7.
with her self, I shall never be moved: But the Lord ^re has said the
contrary; and not only has said it, but confirms it: for, a mighty Angel
takes Revel. 18. 21.
up a stone, like a great Millstone, and casts it But the destruction there of
is concluded by the Lord.
into the Sea, saying, Thus, with violence, shall the great City Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be sound no more at all. When they raise that
Millstone again out of the Sea, then shall I think it possible that they may
repair the ruins of their Babel: but that can never be. If they will consider
how within these hundred years, the Waters of Revel. 16. 1:
their Euphrates have been dried; and how the Lord has darkened the Throne of
the Beast, they might learn of that which is past, what they may look for in
the time to come. Their Dagon is fallen 1. Sam. 5. 3.
before the Arc, they do what they can to set him up again, but he shall fall
more and more; and his last fall shall be the greatest.

Certain it is, that this Babel spoken of in the Jesuits do well, in time to
enquire for a new Seat for their Pope.
Revelation, is Rome; which the greatest Doctors of the Romish Church are
forced to acknowledge, and themselves see it will be made desolate, and the
Pope cast out of it: but this Babel is the whoorish Church of Rome, which, God
willing, shall be made plain hereafter. They glory in their new conquest of
Roman Catholics, among the Indians, and our Antipodes: they do well, in time
to provide a Temple for their Dagon, and a new Palace for their Pope, since Rome
cannot retain him. If Wickedness should have a house, it is Zach. 5. 11.
meetest she build in Shinar, not in Sion. Their Pope will be most honored,
where he is least known: Not in these parts, where the light of the Gospel
has discoured his hypocrisy, and declared him to be a ravening Woolfe, under
Sheeps clothing.

Let not them therefore flatter themselves in A warning to Papists.
their riches; in the multitude of their friends, and blind followers; or, in
their confederate Kings, and Princes: Let them not, upon these motives, put the
evil day far from them: For her plague Amos 6. 3. Revel. 18. 8.
shall come in one day, death, mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly
burnt with fire. Let Papists, priding themselves in the power of flesh, mark
what follows, Strong is the Lord who judges her. Where the Lord pursues, is
the strength of man able to protect or defend? This is the sum of the third
Prophecy, which we pray the Lord hasten to perform, for the glory of his
Name, and comfort of his poor afflicted Church.

THE FOVRTH AND FIFTH CHAPTERS HAVE A TWO FOLD Vision of Preparation: The sixth
and seventh have the first Vision of Prediction.
CHAP. IIII.
LEAVING the Interpretation The fourth, and fifth chapter have no Visions of
prediction, but only of Preparation.
of the first three chapters, which are plain, we begin at this fourth: and in
the entry lay this for a ground; that in the fourth and fifth chapters, there
is no Vision of Prediction, but only a Vision of Preparation for the
subsequent Predictions. As the first Prophecy of the present estate of the
Church, described in the seven Epistles, had a convenient Preparatorie Vision
going before it: so has the second in like manner. The Preparatorie Vision
going before the first Prophecy was this, I saw Reu. 1. 12, 13, 14.
seven golden Candlestickes, and in the midst of the seven golden
Candlestickes one like the Son of man, etc. This served to prepare both S.
John, and The first Prophecy of things which are, had before it, a Preparatory
Vision.
the Church, to receive this Revelation reverently, and certainly to believe
it, considering that he received this Vision, not from one who knew not the
state of the Church; for he, who gives the warning, walks in the midst of
the seven Candlestickes, and has eyes like unto flames of fire, Revel. 1. 14.
which by no covering can be holden out from looking, and piercing into the
heart of every man.

And no less convenient is this Preparatory So the second Prophecy of things
to come, has before it a conueni^t Preparatory Vision, and that twofold.
Vision, premitted before the second Prophecy, if we consider both the parts
thereof: For in the fourth chapter there is a Vision of the Majesty of God the
Creator, who as he made the world, so is he here described sitting upon his
Throne, and the glassie Sea, figuring the world before him, 1 A Vision of God
the Creator, ruling all, chap. 4.
which he rules and governs at his good pleasure, directing all the changes,
and troubles thereof, to his own determinate end, for which the whole Church
gives unto him the praise of a powerful, faithful, and provident Creator and
Conseruer. Angels go before, and Saints redeemed follow after: Thou a^ worthy,
O Lord, to receive Verse 11.
glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are, and were created. Again, in the fifth chapter there is 2 A
Vision of God the Redeemer, revealing all to his Church, chapter 5.
a Vision of the Majesty of Christ the Redeemer, exercising his Prophetical
Office to the comfort of the Church; for he takes the sealed Book out of the
hand of him, who sits on the Throne; he opens it, and reueales to his Church,
such things, as in the wise counsel and providence of God, were concluded to
be done concerning her, for which the whole Church, both of Angels and Men,
renders unto him the praise of a glorious Redeemer; Thou art worthy to take the
Book, and Reu. 5. 9.
open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy Blood. In the first Song, which is sung to the praise of God the Creator,
Angels begin, and Saints redeemed follow. In the second, which is sung to the
praise of God the Redeemer, Saints redeemed go before, and their Song is
seconded by Angels, and all creatures.

Now these two being joined together, it shall How both these Preparatory
Visions are properly convenient to the Vision of Prediction subsequent.
appear easily, how this preparatorie Vision prepares a way to the Prophecy,
and renders a complete comfort to the Church. He is to speak in the Prophecy
following, of fearful troubles, tentations and battles, by violent
Persecutors, and fraudulent Heretics; but that the Church should not be
discouraged therewith, this Vision is permitted: wherein first is declared,
that howsoever the world be a turbulent Sea, yet all the waltrings and
mutations thereof, are governed by him that sits upon the Throne. Nothing falls
out by accident, or by the will of man: and all these, as they are ruled by the
Father, so are they revealed to the Church by the Son; and we are told of
them beforehand, that when they come to John 16. 1.
pass, we should not be offended.

The judicious and indifferent Reader may clearly perceive, this to be the
very natural order and method of these two chapters: they contain an
Introduction to the Prophecy; but they are far mistaken, who seek a
prophetical prediction in them.

VERSE. 1. After this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven, and
the first Voice which I heard, was, as it were of a Trumpet talking with me,
which said, Come up hither, and I will show thee things, which must be
hereafter.
AFTER this.] This is to be referred to the The time wherein Saint John saw
this Vision.
order of the Visions, not to the interuall, or long distance of time; for all
these Visions, S. John saw them in one day: I was in the Spirit on Revel. 1.
the Lords Day, and I heard behind me a great Voice: and yet, Quaelibet visio
suam habuit morulam, every Carthus.
Vision had the own space of time; by order, one after another, are they
revealed unto him, yet so, that upon one day, and in one trance he saw all; and
this he signifies in the entry.

As to the manner of his sight, what way S. John A threefold ^ight.
saw these Visions, because frequent mention is made of it in this Prophecy,
it is expedient, that once for all we speak of it. There is a threefold 1
Natural, common to the creature.
sight: 1. Natural, 2. Prophetical. 3. Spiritual. The Natural sight is
common both to good and evil; this is that sight we have by the eye of God
seen in his works: For the invisible things of God, Romans 1. 10.
that is his eternal Power and Godhead, are seen, and understood by the
things he has made.

The second sight is Prophetical, yet common 2 Supernatural, or Prophetical;
this is made by revelation, representation, or both.
also both to good and evil; I mean not to all, but some of every one of
them, for Balaam had it: this is a sight of things to come, made by Revelation,
Representation, or both. A sight of things to come by Representation, was
offered to Numb. 24.
Pharaoh, and to Nabuchadnezzar, but they wanted the revelation of it; they
could tell what they saw, but could not tell what it signified, till it was
declared; to the one, by Joseph; to the other by Genesis 41. Dan. 2.
Daniel. Sometime again, there is a sight of things to come showed to the
servants of God by Revelation, without Representation: such a sight many of the
Prophets had: But here, to Saint John, things to come are showed both the
ways: first, by Representation, next by Revelation. In the manner of his
Vision, three things must be observed, that it was, Interna, Imaginaria,
Intellectualis: It was first, Carthus.
Internal, by the mind; for his bodily senses How the sight which S John saw,
was Internal, Imaginary, Intellectual.
were now asleep, his spirit, for a time, having after a sort, derelinquished
his body: Next, it was Imaginary, for by types, similitudes, resemblances, and
figures of corporal, and material things, formed in his mind, were they
represented to him. Thirdly, it was Intellectual; for by heavenly
illumination, S. John was taught, and informed to understand truly, what these
Types, Similitudes and Figures did represent and signify; otherwise he had
not been a Prophet, nor able to show to the Church, that which he understood
not himself. I mark this, to stop the blasphemous mouths of some Atheists,
who in disgrace of this Prophecy, have been bold to say, that S. John
understood not what he wrote to the Churches.

The third sight is Spiritual, and singular, pertaining 3 Spiritual, proper
to Saints, chosen and called.
to Saints only, called and chosen: This is a sight of Gods fatherly and
merciful Face, shining upon us in Christ, bringing with it to our fowls joy
unspeakable and glorious. And this sight we have in this life, but in the
least degree: for now we see that glory of God, but in a mirror, 2. Cor. 3.
18.
through a veil, darkely; so that, in comparison of that sight which we shall
have hereafter, the Spirit of God accounts this sight to be no sight: We walk
not by sight, but by faith; And S. 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Peter affirms, We have not yet seen him; but 1. Pet. 1.
S. John says, When he shall appear, we shall see 1. John 3. 2.
him as he is; Yet even the sight that now we have by faith, sustaines us,
that we faint not: yea, makes us to rejoice in him with joy unspeakable and
glorious. 1. Pet. 1. 8.


The first sight is no comfort, without the third: For oh! How pitiful is the
estate of that man, who has an eye to see the Sun, and has not an The
natural sight can be no comfort without the spiritual.
eye to see Him that made the Sun? Yea, the second is not comfortable without
the third. What auailes it to foresee, and foretell things to come, and not
to foresee that Wrath which is to come, that thou may eschew it? Balaam was
a Numb. 24.
great Prophet, to point out Jesus Christ unto others, in whom he had no part
himself: He foresaw that the death of righteous men was happy, and wished it
to himself, but he had not true Light to lead him in that life, which might
bring him to a happy death. Thus, in the third sight only, stands the comfort
of Christians. Simeons sight makes Simeons Song, and sends away Saints out
of the body, rejoicing in the midst of the dolours of death. All these three
sights had Saint John, but here he sees these Visions by the second sight.

Now this sight is relative to the sight he saw before, After this I looked;
and it renders this lesson: S. John having used well the Revelation he
received in the first Vision, and having delivered Two things increase grace in
a Preacher.
it faithfully to the Church, as he was commanded, gets now another Vision
reueiled to him. 1 Conscientious using of that which he has.
Two things increase heavenly revelations in a Preacher: First, if he use well
the talent received already, Nec enim alimonia haec distribuendo Ber. in Psalm.
qui habitat.
minuitur, sed potius augetur ministrando: For heavenly 2 Careful craving of
that, which he has not.
food is not diminished by the distribution thereof, but rather is augmented.
Next, if he look up to God by fervent prayer, and seek more; as here S. John
does, he shall never want comfortable matter to deliver, in God his Name, to
the Church. But alack, where men come out, Prompt^ docere, quod non didicerunt,
ready to teach that which they have not learned; looking down, to give unto
people, not first looking up, to seek from the Lord: what hope of a blessing is
there to such a Ministry?

And behold, a door was opened.] By this Metaphorical No entrance can we have
to things heavenly, except God open the door.
speech, S. John will signify unto us, that an entrance, and clear sight of
these heavenly Mysteries was made unto him by the calling of God, which
otherwise were hid, and locked up from him, like excellent things in the Palace
of a King, whereof no sight is gotten till the door be opened, and men licensed
to enter in. So S. Paul by the Opening of a door of faith to the Gentiles, will
Acts 14. 27.
express that entrance to the faith, which Gentiles had gotten by his
Ministry, and by the great 2. Cor. 6. 9.
door, and effectual opened to him at Ephesus, and at Troas, and by the
opened door of utterance to speak 2. Cor. 2. 12.
the Mystery of Christ; for which, he wills the Colossians to pray, he
understands that a clear and easy entrance to these Mysteries may be made to
him by the Lord, and a ready way prepared in the hearts of people, to convey
these Mysteries, as it were, in by a door unto them. Heaven in this place
cannot signify the Militant Church.


In Heaven.] Hugo, Carthusian, and others of that sort, by the Door understand
Christ, and by heaven, the Church: it is a truth, that Christ and his Church
sometime are so figured, but it is not the truth of this place. I marvel what
should have moved Cotterius, a judicious and learned Writer; to follow them;
This Heaven (says he) is, Ecclesia in qua Deus habitat, the Church wherein
God dwells, and the Voice which spoke unto S. John, Verbum est quo vocamur in
Ecclesiam* It is the Word, by which we are called to the Church. All by
purpose, for was S. John now in Pathmos to be called to the communion of the
Church. But leaving this, when we shall come (if the Lord please) to such
places of this Prophecy, where the Heaven is a type of the Church Militant, or
Triumphant, we shall show the reason thereof.

But here, that we may understand with sobriety, Heaven three ways taken in
holy Scripture.
let us consider how Saint John speaks, as he saw: He saw not this Vision in
the Earth, nor in the Air, but in the heaven was it represented to him. It is
true, most part of things prophesied here, were to be performed on the earth,
but they are fore-shewed in the heavens, to tell us, that the earth, and all
things which fall out therein, are ruled by the Decree of Heaven. To make this
yet more clear, let us be remembered that in holy Scripture, Heaven is sundry
ways taken; First, 1 For the Church Triumphant.
for the Church Triumphant, their place, and their persons are both expressed by
the name of Heaven; as, when it is said the two Witnesses were Reu. 11.
taken up into heaven. Next, for the Church Militant, 2 For the Church Militant.
in the Gospel, and in this Revelation, commonly called Heaven: But in this,
and many other places of this Prophecy, Heaven is taken for that typical 3
For the Church representative.
representation of heaven made to him in this Prophecy. For it is to be
noted, and observed, as a necessary rule, that in these Visions S. John speaks
of things according as he saw them represented in types (as we have spoken
before) yet so, that every type has a truth correspondent to it, and it
requires great discretion to accommodate every Type to the own truth.

Which is not done by them, who in this place S. John learned not these
mysteries in the Church militant, nor from it, but for it.
expound heaven to be the Church Militant: for S. John saw not, nor learned not
these Mysteries in the Church, nor yet from the Church, he saw them
represented to him in heaven, to be revealed to the Church. In a word, he got
it indeed for the Church Militant, but not from it. Neither is there any more
reason to say that heaven here is the Church Militant, then to say that these
things which S. Paul saw, when he was ravished to the third heaven, he saw
them in the Church: for at 2. Cor. 12. 2, 4.
this time also, was S. John ravished and transported in Spirit.

Always we learn here, that we can have no The Lord who taught him to know
them, must also teach us, or else we cannot learn them.
knowledge of heavenly things, unless the Lord open the door, and discover
them unto us. The Jews every Saturday, read in their Synagogues a part of
Moses, and the Prophets; these point with the finger unto Christ, but they
cannot see 2. Cor. 3.
him, for a Veil covers their minds, till the Lord illuminate them. We do
therefore pray the Lord our God, who opened the door to S. John, through which
he saw these Visions, to open a door to us also, by which we may have
entrance to understand them, for the glory of his name, and comfort of his
Church.

And the first Voice which I heard, etc.] Upon Of the voice which S. John heard.
this place Victorinus observes, that it was one Spirit which spoke in the
Prophets of old, and in the Apostles now. Cotterius, in the first Vision (says
he) John heard a Voice speaking only, but here, a Voice speaking with S.
John, quo non obscure innuitur verbi (quod personam suam habet) and nostri
communio; whereby the communion of the Word with us is not obscurely declared.
Both these are good points of Divinity, but too hardly picked out of this
place. The more soberly we handle the Prophecy, we shall understand it the
better.

S. John here tells us no more, but that by a How this voice was uttered, we
need not enquire.
Voice sounding lowdly in his hearing, he was prepared to behold these things
which God was to show him. How God did utter this Voice to him, it were but
curiosity for us to enquire; Deo namque qui nostris loquendi legibus astrictus
non est, liberum est loqui quomodocunque voluerit: The Lord is not bound to our
manner of speaking, as Cotterius has well observed, it is free to the Lord to
speak what manner of way he will. This we may Sufficient is it for us, that
S. John understood it, and makes us also to understand it.
be sure of, and it should content us that his servant understood very well
what the Voice said to him, which we may perceive by his own declaring of it
unto us. And now out of this, the lesson arises; The Apostle looked up to God
in the beginning of this Verse, desirous to see more, and now the Lord offers
not only new sight to his eye, but new information to his care: We never
turn our hearts truly to the Lord, but he is ready to meet us; All his
children find this in experience. Certainly, if we would be more If we wait
on God, he shall reveal himself unto us.
homely with our God, we should soon find him more familiar with us. But
alas, our sin is, we wait not upon him, and intertaine not a spiritual
fellowship with him. How shall we see, that delight not in the light? And how
shall we be replenished with that grace which ouerflowes in him, so long as we
are careless, and negligent to come to him? This is the ground of all our
evil, neglect of the spiritual worship, neglect to wait upon the Lord. God
give us eyes to see it, and hearts to mend it.

As it were of a Trumpet.] The Voice sounds How this voice is compared to the
sound of a Trumpet.
(said one) like a Trumpet; Quia inuitabat Ioannem ad praelium contra diaboli
temptamenta, contra mundi blandimenta, contra carnis oblectamenta: Manuscript.
because it inuites S. John to battle against the tentations of the devil,
the allurements of the world, the pleasures of the flesh. No question, S. John
was a good Soldier of Jesus, and had fought these battles courageously; but
this goes further, he is stirred up by this Trumpet to hear a Proclamation
made in heaven of such battles, as his Saints had to fight upon earth to the
worlds end, that he might fore-warne the Church of them.

The lesson here arising is, that the Voice whereby The voice of God is loud,
and lively.
God speaks to his own, is loud, lively and powerful, to waken them out of
the dead sleep of their sin. That same Word of the Lord preached, which to a
natural man is but foolishness, Romans 1.
and a dead letter which he understands not, to the child of God, is the power
of God; it is lively, and Heb. 4. 12.
mighty in operation. The hour shall come, and now Ioh. 5. 25.
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear it shall live. Miserable are they that cannot hear it, nor yet be
wakened by it.


O how miserable are they, to whom this Voice sounds and they hear it not, and
the Trumpet of the lively Word wakneth them not! For if they continue in this
estate, and their sleep be unto death, what remains, but a fearful Trumpet
of doom, which whether they will or not, they shall be forced to hear,
denouncing to them the judgment of endless condemnation. But to A sweet
voice, by which God speaks to his own.
return, our ground is, God in his merciful dealing with his servants, what
ever he have to do with them, speaks to them in such sort, that he causes
them both to understand, and also to obey him. This S. John declares, when he
says, the Voice was like the voice of a Trumpet, because by it he was
wakened, moved, and stirred up to hear attentively and with reverence.

Saying, Come up hither.] Non corporis motu, sed He must go out of himself,
that would go up unto God.
mentis intuitu: Come up, not by motion of the body, but attention of the mind.
Here then Saint John his calling is renewed to him again: he must be a
separate man, and after a sort, go out of himself, and go up unto God to be
familiar with him, who would see the things of God. This is required of every
Christian, if he would be the Spouse of Christ, joined in marriage with him:
Forget thy own people and thy fathers house, so shall Psalm. 45. 10.
the King have pleasure in thy beauty: How much more then is it requisite in
Christian Preachers? Did Moses see the pattern of the Tabernacle, till Exodus
20.
he went up to the Mount? Or did the Lord talk familiarly with Joshua and
Moses, till first they put off their shoes? And shall any Preacher now A
warning to Preachers.
think to be familiar with God, and powerful with his people, unless he
learn this lesson first, that here first is given to S. John, Come up hither?

Again, the voice of God, when he talks to The voice of God calls men to
come up.
his people is, Come up. Satan's voice on the contrary, Fall down. Cast thy
self down: That presumptuous Beast durst speak so to our Savior, what
marvel then he dare speak so to his servants? The Lord would have thee to
come up, and enjoy all the good which he has to communicate to thee. Satan
would have thee to go down, that thou may be partaker of his remediless
condemnation. He himself for his sin was cast out of heaven, He is now
reserved in Jude 6. 2. Pet. 2.
chains under darkness, to the judgment of the great Day. And he knows
that when the time of his complete judgment shall come, he will be cast into
utter darkness, and all his care is to draw man downe-ward with him into the
same Satan's voice calls them downe-ward.
condemnation. There is no restitution for him, mercy never was, never will be
preached to him; neither can he seek it, neither will he get: The most that
ever he craved, was a Supersedere: Why Math. 8. 22.
will thou torment us before the time? he is condemned in his own conscience,
and knows that intolerable, and inevitable torment abides him. We read that
the Lord talked with Satan, but never called Job 1.
upon him to come up, since that first he fell down.

But blessed be the Lord, it is his voice to his God his voice to apostate man
is, Come to me.
own, Come to me: notwithstanding ye have fallen from me, yet Come to me; ye
have sinned, but if ye be weary of sin, I will refresh you. It Math. 11. 28.
was the answer of Christ to the Disciples of John Baptist, when they asked,
Master, where dwell thou? Come and see, said our Lord: and still he
speaks unto all his beloved, as here he does to one of his beloved, Come up
hither, not to get new revelations to be showed unto others; but, Come up
hither, to get a new and a full sight of my promised glory to your self. Yea,
such is the goodness of our God, that not only he calls upon us, and bids us
come, but causes us to come: Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest
to Psalm. 65. 4.
come to thee. Now blessed be the Lord who has This voice never sounded to
apostate Angels.
given us mercy after we had sinned, which he has denied to reprobate Angels
and men; and after we had fallen, has raised us up again to inherit heavenly
places, where he has condemned them unto utter darkness. And the Lord, who
every day calls us to come to him, draw us upward, and cause us to come
according as he calls.

And I will show thee things which must be, etc.] God his predictions are
arguments of his Providence.
Prediction of things to come made by God, are undoubted arguments, that they
fall not out by hap, but as they are ruled by his Providence, who fore-tels
them: therefore the Lord vendicates this praise to himself, that he only can
tell things which are to come. Show the things that are to Esaias 41. 23.
come hereafter, that we may knew that ye are gods: thereby also declaring
that none but the Lord can truly foretell things to come. As for Satan's
Predictions, Satan his predictio^s, wherefrom come they.
they are either out of experience, which has taught him by the collection of
natural causes, to foresee the effects arising of them, or else he has them
by revelation from God. It was easy for Satan to foretell the death of Achab
2. Chro. 18. 19.
in the battle against the Aramites; for he heard the decree of his
destruction given out in the Court of heaven, and himself was directed as a Or
Sargeant.
Burrio, to execute it.

They are miserably blinded, who consult with Miserable are they who consult
with Satan about things to come.
Satan to know things to come: from so cursed, and wicked a spirit as he is,
good tidings came never unto any, nor never shall. When his Responses are
peremptory, then are they deadly, like that which he gave unto Saul, To morrow
at this time 1. Sam. 28. 19.
thou shall be with me. Otherwise they are deceitful, like that which he
gave Heraclius; Gentem Magdeburg. c^.
circumcisam ipsius Imperium vastaturam, That a circumcised Nation should
destroy his Empire. Whereupon Heraclius persecuted Jews and Christians, but had
no mind that Mahumetists were circumcised also, who were indeed the
destruction of the Empire. But to return, it is not so with the Lord, his
knowledge is not acquired by experience, nor derived from any other; For who
Romans 11.
was his counselor? In the volume of his book are all Psalm. 40. 7.
things written, that ever took fashion; he knows with one look all his
creatures, what and when they were, are, or will be, what they can do, or what
shall be done with them. He is all Understanding, and of himself, and by
himself; He sees all things as they are, has been, or shall be.

Which must be done.] This is for our comfort, Things foretold in this
Prophecy, must be done.
that the things prophesied in this Book must be done. Scornful men think
it impossible, the power of Antichrist, and his Confederates is so great, and
they ask how it can be? But where the Lord says, that he will do a thing, it
sets not man to enquire, How shall it be done? O but now, says the mocking
and faithless Papist, God works no miracles; this was the word of one of that
sort, when the Spanish Armado approached to our Coasts: not content to triumph
over men, but over the very heavens, as though the Lords Arm were shortened.
The Lord now a days, said he, works no miracles: But how then was that Armado
destroyed? Invincible, marrowlesse, An answer to profane mockers, who think
they shall not be done.
matchless in their judgment was it, in respect of man. Who did it then? Was
it not the hand of God from heaven which overthrew them? Be silent therefore, O
ye blasphemous mouths, ask not, how can these things be done. It is
sufficient the Lord has said, They must be done. None of the words of the Lord
shall fall to the ground. As himself is unchangeable, so are his decrees;
figured therefore to Zachary by Mountains of Brass. Zach. 6. 1.
Babylon assuredly shall fall, Rome shall be ruined, the Whore shall be
condemned; the Kings of the earth, which now give their Kingdoms to the Beast,
shall, ere it be long, hate the Whore, and strip her naked: God shall put it in
their hearts to do so. This is foretold in this Prophecy, and here the Lord
says, They must be done.

Here then we have the general matter of this This Prophecy is not to be
understood of things past, under the old Testament.
Prophecy: it is a prediction from this fourth chapter, of things which
shortly must be done hereafter: here we have Persecutiones, and tribulationes
Ecclesiae, and postea consolationes and remunerationes Manuscript.
maiores: first, the persecutions and tribulations of the Church, afterward
consolations, and large remunerations thereof. They are far mistaken
therefore, who expound this Prophecy of the four Monarchies, and refer it
to things done in the old Testament.

VERSE. 2. And immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, a Throne was set in
heaven, and [One] sat on the Throne.
AS the Lord called upon his servant S. John, (...) him come up; namely, to the
sight of greater Visions, then bad been revealed to him in the first Vision; so
now he carries him up, and the God works in his children that which he craves.
calling of God is effectual in him. Thus the Lord works that in his
children, which he craves of them, and what he commands, he causes them do it.

How this was done, he declares, when he How is it to be understood that S.
John was in the Spirit?
says, I was in the Spirit, that is, Alienatus ab omni exteriorum sensuum vsu,
atque ecstasi mentis raptus in intensissimam eorum, quae mihi ostendebantur
considerationem: divorced from the use of the external Carthus.
senses, I was ravished to an inward consideration of these things which were
showed unto Haym^.
me. He says he was in the Spirit, Non quod esset absque corpore, sed quia
nihil per corpus vidit, audiuit, sensit: Not that he wanted a body, but Not
that he wanted a body, but it was left senseless for a time, the soul being
intended to heavenly things.
because in all these Visions he heard, and he saw, and he felt nothing by the
body: Spiritus eius docendus a spiritu docente assumptus est, vt alta, and
mystica posset intueri: his spirit that was to be taught, is assumed and
carried up by the Spirit of the Lord that taught him, to the contemplation of
higher and more divine Mysteries, then could be learned by bodily sense. In a
word, his body being relinquished for a time, and left senseless, the Visions
are presented to his spirit, it being unable at one time, both to animate the
earthly and inferior body, and to conceive heavenly and superior mysteries
revealed unto it. This he means when he says, I was in the Spirit; not that
the soul as yet was dissolved from the body, but because, in respect of
operation, it did not animate the body after the wonted manner.

The body is a great impediment to the familiar The body, as it is now, is a
great impediment to the souls familiar fellowship with God.
conversation of the soul with the Lord. The soul cannot at one time exercise
her ordinary office in the body, and feel the Lords extraordinary presence
also: and therefore the Lord, when he would reveal his secrets to his servants
in most familiar manner, has been accustomed to cast them for a time into a
trance (as we speak) to seuocate their minds from their bodies: the function
of the soul being suspended toward the body, that she might intend all her
powers toward This is illustrate by a similitude.
the Lord. So did he with Ezechiel and Daniel. Yea, even in our daily
Christian conversation we find, that as the fish Remora, when it cleaues to the
side of the ship under sail, retardeth the course thereof: so is it with the
body, when the soul would ascend and mount up to the Lord, the body draws it
back and holds it down: therefore, Caro animae est Remora, said Nazianzen,
flesh is the stay, and hinderance of the soul.

And this may be best seen in the exercise of And proved to the godly by their
experience, specially in prayer.
prayer: when the spiritual life is strongest, then is the natural weak. If
the desires of the soul be fervently intended toward God, the eye sees not
those objects, the ear hears not those sounds which are near unto them: But
when again natural
necessity forces the soul to return to a familiarity with the body, then her
familiarity with the Lord relents, and is interrupted. This lets us see first,
that heavenly Mysteries transcend the capacity of man, till God make us able to
conceive them, above any ability that is in nature; if S. John had not been
ravished in the spirit, after a divine manner, he could not have understood
these divine things. And again, we may perceive the truth of that, No man can
see the Lord, and live. This should make us well content in the day of death,
to lay aside our bodies, that we may ascend to the Lord; for, as S. Luke said
of the death of Christ, it is true of all Christians: The day of our death, is
the day of our assumption up into heaven.

And behold, a Throne.] Before, Godspake to the We must first hear the Lord,
before we can see him.
ear of S. John: now he offers a Vision to his eye. This is the Lords order,
and we must observe it. Would thou see the Lord, be content first to hear
him. Auditus gradus est ad visum; hearing Ber. in Cant. ser. 41.
is a step to seeing: As we have heard, so have we seen. If first we hear,
as we should, no doubt, Psalm. 48. 8.
but next we shall see, what we would. They who delight not now to hear the
Lord, shall not be delighted hereafter with the sight of his joyful face. And
this for the order: now to the matter.

We have here, in a Vision, represented the How a Throne is ascribed to God.
glorious Majesty of the Ruler of the world governing all things therein,
according to his gracious pleasure. And first, S. John sees a Throne figuring
Kingly Power and Authority: Next, a Why this Throne is said to be in heaven.
Throne in heaven, expressing the supremacy, and height of his Government, his
Throne is above all the Thrones of Kings in the world. By him the decrees of
men are established, he ratifies, or reuokes them at his pleasure, and is
countable unto none. His Holiness also hereby is expressed, God will not do
wickedly, neither will he pervert Job 34. 11, 12.
judgment, he renders the work of a man unto him, and causes every man to
find according to his ways, said Elihu. The Judge of all the world cannot
Genesis 18. 25.
do unrighteously, said Abraham. Thirdly, above The seeling of the Throne.
the Throne is a Rainbow, like a stately seeling. Fourthly, about the Throne
are twenty and four Elders, figuring the Church of the living God, a glorious
Court, wherein there are none but Seniors The Court that compasses this Throne.
and Kings, far surmounting in glory all the Courts of the world. Fifthly,
between the Throne, and the circle of Seniors, in the midst of the Throne, and
round about the Throne, were four living creatures, full of eyes, all having
wings, shadowing the company of innumerable Angels. Solomon his Throne was of
Iuory, underpropped 1. King. 10.
with carved Lions, but nothing comparable to these living, understanding, and
speedily flying Cherubims, which execute the will of this great and everliving
King. Sixthly, before A glassie Sea before the Throne.
the Throne, there is a glassie Sea, like Crystal, representing this sragill,
and waltring world, which as it was made by the Lord, so also is it ruled and
governed by him, he sees all things in it, and governs all the incident
mutations and changes thereof, unto his own determinate end. This is the sum
of the Vision.

Which, as I said, is a preparatoire vision for How this preparatorie Vision is
proper for the subsequent predictions.
the subsequent visions of prediction, wherein because the Lord is to foreshew
sore troubles, many changes and gre^uous accidents that were to fall out in the
world for the exercise of his poor Church; In the entry he draws us up to
look to himself, as unto a glorious King sitting on his Throne, ruling the
world, which is before him, with great power and wisdom, so that nothing falls
out in it by chance, but according to his providence, neither is it satan's
malice, nor man his wit that carries sway in the world, to draw the event of
things which way they will. No, no, satan and men in all their purposes and
plots are ouer-ruled by the Lord, and he works all things according to the
good pleasure of his own will, for his own glory, and comfort of his Church.

Thus in the beginning have we a strong confirmation of our faith, and are
conveniently prepared to receive the Prophecy following with faith and
reverence, assuring our selves, that according to it, the event of things will
be, because it comes, and is revealed from him who rules the world. The sight
of God sitting on his Throne, dis^ipates all doubtings, and fears arising from
the greatness of men.


And doubtless, if our eyes were opened to see that glorious sight of the
supreme Majesty ruling all things at his will, as here saint John saw it, or at
least, if we will look into it with the eyes of faith, it would dissipate all
these doubtings and fears which come in our minds, arising from the greatness
of Mahomet, the power of the Pope, and of blinded Princes, enemies to the
Gospel of Christ, banding, and confederating themselves against the Psalm 2.
Lord, and his anointed. When the servant of Elisha was afraid at the huge Army
of Aramites which compassed Dothan, his Master comforted him, Fear not (said
he) there are more with us, then are against us. And when according to the
prayer of Elisha, the Lord opened his eyes, then he saw that the Mountains
were full of horses, and chariots of fire, round about Elisha, stronger to
defend him, then the Aramites were to pursue him.

No less should we be comforted against all A strong bulwark against the
fear of flesh.
terror of flesh, if our eyes were opened to see this glorious Majesty that
saint John saw, for what are all Kings of the earth compared with him? When he
pleases, he cuts off the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76. 12.
and is terrible unto them. Let us rest in him, God is Psalm. 46. 1.
our hope and strength, and help in trouble ready to be found. We will not
fear though the earth should be moved, and Mountains fall in the mids of
the Sea. For the Throne of our God stands stable. It is a pitiful blindness,
that worms of the earth should take up a banner against him whose Throne is in
heaven. Their Propositions are proud, Let us cast Psalm. 2.
Gene. 11.
off the yoke of the Lord. And again, Let us build a Man has proud
Propositions, weak assumption, of these come fectlesse conclusions.
tower, whose top may reach into heaven. But their assumption of means to make
good their Proposition is but weak, they have but brick and clay to mount up
their Fort against heaven, They are flesh, not spirit, dust before the wind,
stubble before the Esaias 31. 3.
fire. Thus of a proud proposition, and weak assumption, (...)
nothing follows in all their intentions, but a falls and fectlesse conclusion.
God disappoints their thoughts, and turns all their deeds to the fulfilling of
his own will.

This Vision in the judgment of Hugo, Lyra, How this Vision is expounded by
some Interpreters.
whom some of the recents follow, is expounded to be a representation of God
his constant and gracious administration of the Church militant, these will have
the Heaven here to signify the church, the Throne to be true Religion, the
glassie sea, to be Baptism, or as others thinks, Doctrine: the four living
creatures full of eyes, to be Pastors; which hereafter, God willing, in the
particular explanation shall be declared to be far otherwise.

This will not be found the right accommodation The right accommodation of
these types.
of this type, we rest in that we have spoken, as being the very truth of this
type. For the further clearing whereof, look back and call to mind that
which has been said on the first verse, A door opened in heaven; We are not
yet come to the Prophecy, wherein the state of the Church both militant, and
triumphant is set down^ we are but in the entry of the prophecy, wherein the
author of the prophecy, God the Father, and reueal^r of it, God the Son, are
in most glorious manner represented, so far forth as may prepare the Church
to receive and believe this prophecy, considering from whom it comes. So that
heaven in this place, is neither the Church militant, nor the Church
triumphant, nor yet the place thereof, but it is that representative heaven
made to Saint John in his ecstasy, wherein a glorious adumbration of the divine
Majesty ruling all, is made unto him, and from whom he receives revelation in
types, of such truths as hereafter were to be performed concerning the Church
both militant and triumphant. It is needful for the Reader attentively to
consider this, that he may understand that which perhaps I have not
sufficiently explaned, and yet is most needful to be known. Here there is no
Vision of Prediction, but of Preparation.

And one sat one the Throne.] He says simply he No man can sufficiently
declare that, which the Lord i^.
saw one sitting (...), he tells not who, he gives him no name; God is (...),
without name, at least his name is Marvelous, no name can tell what he is. He
cannot (said Arethas) be defined, as he that is invisible, and unmeasurable,
and he sees him sitting as a Judge, of a quiet and vnperturbed mind, not moved
with affections, as men are, or passions that preiudge equity. These are far
from the Lord, he sits, hearing all causes, discerning, decreeing, and
working all, after his own most holy will.

VERSE. 3. And he that sat, was to look upon, like a Jasper, and a Sardine
stone, and there was a rainebow round about the Throne, in sight like unto an
Emerald. And therefore is he shadowed in such manner, as it pleased himself to
appear.

WE have here, first a description of the glorious Majesty of GOD, sitting on
his Throne, and ruling the world. Next, of the honorable court that attends
him, and compasses his Throne. Saint John has said before, that one sat upon
the Throne: this doubtless is the Lord, of whom neither Saint John nor any
other creature, Man, nor Angel, can speak as he is, but is forced to shadow
him unto us, according to that representation whereby it pleases the Lord to
show himself. Bern.
Apparet Deus quibus vult, et sicuti vult, sed non sicuti est. God appears to
whom he will, and as he will, not as he is. For if he appeared as he is, then
should he appear in one manner, for GOD is one: but we know, that many manner
of ways has he been represented.

Concerning the Jasper and the Sardine, diverse Diverse opinions concerning the
Jasper and Sardine
things are alleged by the Interpreters. Iaspidis color, est aquae, Sardii
ignis, the color of the Jasper is the color of water, the color of the
Sardine is the color of fire; figuring two great judgments of God, quorum
vnum in cataclysmo, aliud Victorinus. Primasius in Apocal.
consummabitur per ignem, whereof the one was made by water in the Deluge,
the other shall be made by fire.

Others, by these two stones understand the two Berengandus. Haymo. Carthusi^s.
natures of Christ. Iaspis viridem habet colorem, quae supra omnes colores
sensus maxim comfortat, diuinitatem notat, the Jasper has a green color,
which above all colors does most comfort the senses, and it signifies the
divinity of Christ. Sardius rubrum habet colorem, quia humanitas rubricata
fuit sanguine passionis, the Sardine has a red color, figuring the humane
nature of Christ, which was made red and bloody by the Passion.

Hitherto agrees that of Epiphanius, that Sardius Epiph^. lib. de (...)
lapidibus.
qui Babylonius etiam dicitur, rusus lapis est, and qui sanguinis propemodu^
colorem referat, pellucidus est, et tumoribus, et vulneribus ferro inslictis
medetur, the Sardine, which is also called the Babylonian, is a red stone,
showing the color of blood, it is bright and helps tumors in wounds inflicted
with weapons of iron. This might properly agree to Christ The three persons of
the blessed Trinity represented here.
but he is not here described. Yet there are some who will have the whole three
persons of the blessed Trinity shadowed here. By the Jasper, quae gemmarum est
matter, which is the mother of precious Brightman.
stones, they will have the Father represented, by the Sardine, quae carneo
color rubet, and carneolus dicitur, which has a red fleshie hiew, the Son
is represented: and by the Emerald, the holy Ghost. All these are according to
the analogy of faith, and not against the truth of this Text.

Unto them we add with other Divines this also. The Jasper being a precious
stone of green The eternity of God figured by the Jasper.
color, figureth his eternity. He is ever lively and flourishing, without
fading or decaying, he changes not, yea no shadow of change is in him. The Iam.
1. 17. Psalm. 102. 16.
heavens wax old as a garment, but thou art the same. And this living and
refreshing vortue he communicates to his Saints, He keeps their souls in
life. They who are planted in the courts of the Lords house, Psalm. 92. 13.
flourish in their old days. He renewes them then, even when they are
decaying, they cannot be undone by death, who by grace are in followshippe with
him, who lives for ever.

The Sardine again is a precious stone of a red The justice of God figured by
the Sardine
color, representing another property of the Divine nature, which is his
justice, in regard whereof he is unto the wicked A consuming fire. Yet the
Hebr. 12. 29.
Naturalist has observed, Sardium oleo hebetari: sic Plin. lib. 37. ca. 7.
iustitia Dei, per misericordiaeoleum mitigatur, that the Sardine is blunted by
oil, it makes it relent of the rednes: and so is the justice of GOD mitigated
with the oil of his mercy, for mercy rejoices against James 2. 13.
judgment, therefore with these two, Saint John sees a third.

And there was a rainbow round about the Throne,] The mercy of God keeping
covenant, shadowed by the rainebowe.
like a bowed and circular ^eeling, not of many colors, as is in the natural
rainebow, which are caused by the beams of the Sun, striking into the watery
cloud just over against it, but it is all of one color, like unto an Emerald,
which is also a precious stone of a most comfortable green color. Hereby is
figured, that our God is always mindful of his covenant, his mercy endures
from generation to generation, over the^ that fear him. The glory of his
Majesty, the stateliness of his Throne, the terror of his Justice, should not
discourage us, for we are under the Covenant of his mercy, he cannot forget it,
for it is before him, and compasses his Throne.

If he keeps the common and temporal Covenant He keeps the temporal and
common covenant, much more the eternal.
made with all mankind, whereof the Rainebowe is a sign, much more may we be
assured will he keep his special and eternal Covenant, which in Jesus Christ
he has bound up with his own Elect. Gene. 9. 14.


Hitherto tends that most solemn and sweet asseueration of the Lord, recorded
by Jeremy, Thus Iere. 31. 35, 36.
says the Lord, who gives the Sun for a light to the day, and the courses of
the Moon, and of the Stars for a light to the night. Who breaks the Sea
when the waves thereof roar, his Name is the Lord of hosts. If these
ordinances depart out of my sight, says the Lord, then shall the seed of
Israel cease from being a Nation before me for ever.

It is a proper, and comfortable meditation of A comfortable meditation
concerning the Rainbow.
that worthy man Peter Martyr, speaking of the military bow, when the battle
is ended, and peace is made, ye shall neither see a string bended on the bow,
nor an arrow in it, at least the men of war carry it so, that the horns
thereof are downward to the earth; but when they fight, it is otherwise, Peter
Martyr in Genes.
then they bend their bow, and draw the horns of it together, that they may
shoot arrows at the face of their enemies. Even so, Deus omnibus pacatis,
neruum coelest^ arcui dempsit, sagittas abstulit, and cornua eius versus terram
deiecit. The Lord, peace being now made between him, and mankind, has taken
away both striug and arrows from the heavenly Bow; for we see none of these
in it, and lets the horns of his Bow hang downward to the earth, in token
he comes not in warfare against man, but walking with him in the way of peace.
The creatures declare that God is but defined, not what he is, Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 31.


Howeuer it be, we will conclude this point with Bernard, Tanta haec formarum
varietas et specierum numerositas in rebus conditis, quid nisi radij sunt
Deitatis, monstrantes quidem, quia vere sit, a quo sunt, non tamen quid sit
prorsus definientes: itaque de ipso vides, sed non ipsum. This numerous and
great variety of forms and kinds in things created, what are they but
certain beams of the Deity, declaring that in very truth he is, from who^
they are, and yet not defining what he is; in seeing them, thou see somewhat
of his, but not himself.

Sure it is the Lord here dimits himself to our capacity, when he borrowes
similitudes from these stones to express himself, they being so Earthly
Kings borrow glory from the creature, not so the Lord.
far inferior to himself, as the smallest creature is inferior to the
Creator: for whatsoever beauty these stones, or any other creature has, God
gave it unto them, how then should he borrow beauty from them? Indeed the
Kings of the earth borrow their glory from creatures, and when they are most
richly apparrelled, they are greatest beggars, clothed with that which is not
their own, and will not continue with them: Let the^ be adorned with Jasper,
Sardine, Emerald, and such like, in the midst of these a man may see death in
their mortal faces: Man in his best estate is but vanity, Psalm. 39. 5.
and their greatest glory is but grass, compared to the glory of our God.

And here also we are warned, how far by our Adam by the knowledge he had of
the Creator, knew perfectly the creature.
sin we have fallen from our original glory, wherein our God created us. Our
father Adam was made Lord of the creatures, and by the knowledge, wherewith God
endued him, he knew the Lord, and the creature also. At one court he imposed
names to them all according to their nature; the knowledge which he had of God,
led him to the knowledge of the creature, and it was not by the creature that
he learned the knowledge of the Creator; but now man is sent to the school of
the creature, and Now man learnes by the creature to know the Creator.
put back, as we say, to his ABC, to learn the glory, goodness, and providence
of the Creator by looking to the creature: and when all is done, so void now
by nature is man of the knowledge of God, that he cannot conceive, concerning
God, that which Yet is he not able to conceive that which the creature can
teach him.
the creature does teach him. Solomon attained not to the knowledge of Adam,
and yet the quickest Naturalist comes short of the knowledge of Solomon: They
write of the Jasper, Sardine, and Emerald, but because we know them not, as
they are, therefore can we not fully know, what here, by them, is figured unto
us: which has been with great modesty observed by our Countryman, P. Forbes
of Corse.

VERSE. 4. And round about the Throne were four and twenty Seats, and upon
the Seats, I saw four and twenty Elders, sitting, clothed in white raiment,
and they had on their heads, Crowns of gold.
WE have heard the description of this glorious Three sorts of creatures in
the heavenly Court.
King, Creator, Conseruer, and Ruler of the world: now follows a description
of his Court, wherein are three sorts of creatures; some, in whom he rules:
these are Saints redeemed of the Lord, figured here by four and twenty Elders;
some, over whom he rules: these are the men of the world, and all other
creatures therein, represented by a glassie Sea, before the Throne: for his
Saints are said to stand on the Chap. 15. 2.
glassie Sea; some, in whom, and by whom he rules: these are holy Angels,
whereof such as are principal, are figured here by four living creatures,
full of eyes before and behind, and within, etc. These four and twenty Elders,
are not four and twenty Books.


I am not to darken the minds of men by variety of interpretations; and to
make contradiction to such as deserve it here, were a tedious labor. This one
thing seems most strange to any that considers the Text, and seeks light to
expound it out of it self; how men should have been miscarried to expound
these four and twenty Elders of the four and twenty Books of the old
Testament. Cotterius brings his warrant from Jerome, Haec, inquit, est
antiquissima fides, vt videre Hieron. Prolog. Galeato.
est apud Hieronymum: This, says he, is the most ancient faith, as may be
seen by Jerome: he might also have said more, that Jerome borrowed this
interpretation from Victorine, an hundred years before Jerome; and Jerome also
writes the Prologue before Victorines Commentaries on this Book, out of it: it
is like that Jerome borrowed this exposition from Victorine, thus Cotterius
might have made this opinion more ancient then Jerome. But Primasius, who lived
not long after Jerome, considering the Text better, follows none of them, as
after ye shall hear. More reason had our Writers to disassent from
Berengandus, long after any of them, considering that Carthusianus, a man of
his own fellowship, leaves him as Primasius left Jerome.

The truth then is, these four and twenty Elders represent But they represent
the whole company of redeemed Saints.
the whole Church of God Militant, and Triumphant; this always being observed,
that the spirit of God speaks of this Church, not only as now it is, but
hereafter also as it will be: Or as now it is in Gods decree, or hereafter shall
be in the execution of his decree; or then, as it was represented to S. John
in this Vision. As for the number of four and twenty, whether the spirit of
God alludes in it to David his policy in distributing such as served in the
Sanctuary, in four and twenty classes and orders; or to such as ruled the
Kings house, who were also agreeable to this order; or then (which is more
probable) to the twelve Patriarchs, and twelve Apostles, the matter is all
one; for sure, this certain number is put for the full and complete, yet
uncertain number of his Saints.

The Spirit of God expounds himself so clearly, So the Spirit of God himself
does expound them, Chap. 5. ver. 9.
that I marvel how men have not marked it; for in the song of the four and
twenty Elders do they not acknowledge that Christ had redeemed them to God by
his blood, out of every Kindred and People, and Tongue and Nation, and had made
them Kings and Priests unto God? Hereupon have the learned Divines of old, and
later times, founded Primasius. Bullingerus. Chytroeus. Collado. Aretius.
Iunius. Forbesius.
this most sound interpretation, that these four and twenty Elders represent
Totum Ecclesie gregem. Otherwise how can these words agree to the four and
twenty Books of the old Testament? Where if any retire to this refuge, that
when they speak of the four and twenty Books of the old Testament, they
understand the writers of these Books, and Professors of them: then I pray
them tell me, where are the Writers and Professors of the new Testament, since
this Prophecy principally concerns them? But what shall I say? It is not
given unto any one to see all. Cotterius, who with great industry ^ifteth and
searches the words of this Prophecy, when he comes to that place, Thou have
made us Kings and Priests to our God, is forced to pass them over with
silence. For how can they agree with to the books of the old Testament? Are
they made Kings and Priests unto God?

What is good in Victorine, Jerome, or any other of the ancient Fathers, we
willingly receive it, and thank God for it, but still reserve this liberty
which God has given us, that whatsoever is most agreeable to his Word, shall
be most welcome to us. The dross of the Fathers under shadow The dross of the
Fathers is not to be received for good gold.
of their antiquity, must not always be intruded upon the Church for fine gold,
it should be tried by the touchstone of truth more ancient then they. And sure
it is, where the holy Scripture expounds it self, no authority of man should
be received against it. But that the Ancients also did see this light of God
out of this place, that the twenty four Elders represent the whole Church, I
only bring in the testimony of Primasius. Per Primas. in Apoc.
seniores totam Ecclesiam intelligit, viginti quatuor autem complexus est
simul, tanquam duodecim Tribus Primasius his judgment concerning the four and
twenty Elders.
Israel duplicans, propter geminum Testamentum, quia and in nolio, and in
veteri eadem formatur Ecclesia. By the Elders he understands the whole Church,
where he conioynes four and twenty together, as it were doubling the twelve
Tribes of Israel, for the two Testaments, because both in the old and new
Testament, one and the selfsame Church is formed.

But to proceed. In this Vision S. John sees the The Church is a circle, in the
midst whereof is the Lord.
Church represented in a circle or circumference, in the midst whereof is the
Lord, sitting on his Throne, none of them are excluded from his presence, and
his favorable face is manifested to them all. So large is this heavenly
Amphitheatre, that albeit they be to us innumerable, who sit in it, yet none of
them is any impediment to another sight: for the Lord is in the midst of his
Saints; so witnesses himself, Where two or three Math. 18. 20.
are gathered in my name, I shall be in the midst of them. Such was the form
of Israel their assembly, their Courts did circuit but the Temple, except Psalm.
76. 11.
upon the West. Vow and perform your vows unto the Lord your God, all ye
that are round about him. When Israel camped in the Wilderness, Number. 2.
they were cast in form of a quadrant, three of their Tribes were on every
quarter, and in the midst of them was the Arc; but here the Church Some are
nearer the Throne, then others, but all enjoy his sight.
is cast in form of a circle, in the midst whereof God has his Throne. All
enjoy his presence to their full contentment, though there be some nearer his
Throne then others; for, without the circle of the four living creatures,
representing principal Angels, there stands a great number of other Angels,
singing praise to the Lord. Now as for the four and twenty Seats, let that
be remembered which we have said of the number of the Elders, and the same is
to be understood of the number of their Seats: let us not think there are no
more seats for Saints, but four and twenty. In my Fathers house are many
Mansions, said our Ioh. 14. 2.
Savior.

Here the doubt is, how Seats and Crowns are How Seats and Crowns are
ascribed to the Church Militant.
ascribed to the Church Militant, since we are yet under the cross, and not
come to the Crown. Of this I gave warning before, that the Church is described
here, not as she is simply, but as she will be, or as she is in the decree of
God, and is here in the Vision represented to S. John. Now the Saints in their
pilgrimage full of wanderings, have no permanent seats, they are chased from
Cities into the Wilderness, and accounted the offscourings of the world,
(...): but do Satan, 1. Cor. 4. 13.
and his instruments what they can, the Church is, and shall be glorious,
every member thereof has a seat and resting place in unspeakable glory
prepared for them. If therefore we faint by looking to the Church in her
ignominy, in her wanderings and persecutions now under the cross; let us look
up here, and take a view of that glorious estate, whereunto in Gods counsel
they are ordained, and which now in part she enioyes, and in all her members
shall hereafter fully enjoy.

Now one part of her is like the half darkened The Church properly compared to
the Moon.
body of the Moon, which is obscured, when the other half shines most
brightly, but the Sun of righteousness shall illuminate the obscured part
also, then shall her glory be complete fully. No malice of the devil, no
weakness of Saints militant, no power of hell, nor pride of persecuting
enemies, shall be able to hinder this: Let this comfort sustain us against all
bitterness of our present crosses.

And upon.] Now follows a larger description Why thev who sit on the Seat, are
called Elders.
of them who sit on the Seats: they are called Elders, they are said to be
clothed in white Raiment, and to have Crowns of gold upon their heads. See
what a glorious Court the Court of Heaven is; all the Courtiers there are
Seniors, Kings, and Priests: first, they are said to be Seniors, not for their
number of years, but for the ripeness of their judgment. Here we are
Infants, and the little Babes of Jesus, but his grace makes us to 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
grow till we become Seniors: by this grace children now die, as if they were
an hundred years old, Esaias 65. 20.
and the efficacy of his blessing shall complete us there; none ignorant
through young age, none impotent through old age, shall be there; all shall
attain to the fullness of Christ's age, and be perfect in him.

Clothed in white raiment.] Their garments declare The white raiment of Saints
is their twofold righteousness.
them to be Priests also. This white Raiment is afterward called Finelynnen,
and is there expounded to be the Righteousness of Saints: and 1 One imputed.
this is twofold; one imputed, by which Saints are justified, and this is
perfect; for it is the righteousness of Christ given unto Saints, by the free
gift of God, and apprehended of them by faith; and in this sense it is not
aliena, as Papists tauntingly and ignorantly call it, but propria sanctorum
iustitia; it is not the righteousness of another, but their own; by as good
right as any other good they have, may be called their own; namely, by the
free donation of God. The other righteousness 2 Another, inherent.
is inherent in Saints, and this in such as are Triumphant, is perfect as
concerning their souls, wherein no spot nor wrinkle remains; but in such as
are Militant is imperfect, yet growing and increasing daily to perfection. More
concerning this white linen, and where from the similitude seems to be
borrowed, see chap. 15. ver. 6.

And on their heads Crowns of gold.] This betokens Their Crowns note their
Royal Dignity.
their Royal or Kingly dignity; all the Saints are Kings to their God. Such as
have foughten the battle, do now enjoy the Crown; such whose war-fare is not
yet accomplished, are sure of the victory: for, we run not as uncertain,
but certain, 1. Cor. 9. 26.
and we know, that through, him who loved us, Romans 8.
we are more then Conquerors.

VERSE. 5. And out of the Throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and
Voices, and there were seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne, which
are the seven Spirits of God.
HEre is shadowed to us a twofold operation of the Majesty of God sitting on
the A twofold operation of God, here is figured.
Throne; the one terrible to his enemies; the other gracious and comfortable to
his Saints: his judgments upon the adversaries are expressed by 1 One terrible
to his enemies, compared to lightning.
three names, Lightnings, Thundrings, Voices: they are compared to Lightnings,
because they are speedy, and incuitable; for this same cause also, they are
compared to Arrows, ^ee s^ out his Psalm. 18. 14.
^rrowes and scattered them, and he sent out Lightnings, and disco^sited them.
Next, they are compared 2 To Thundering.
to Thundrings, because they terrify, and afray men; The Lord thundered in the
heavens, and Psalm. 18. 13.
the Highest gave his voice, hai^e-stones, and coals of fire. He proclaimed
his Law with Thunder, and Israel was afraid; yea, Moses trembled for fear. If
Exodus 20.
the Proclamation be so terrible, what will the execution thereof be? For this
cause, Amos speaking of God coming to judgment, uses these words, The Lord
shall rear from Sion, and utter Amos 1. 2.
his voice from Jerusalem. The two sons of Zebedeus, Mark. 3.
James and John were called Boanerges, the sons of Thunder, for their
dreadful, and powerful delivery of the fearful judgments of God. It is a
beastly stupidity in man, not to humble himself when the God of glory
thundreth. It is Psalm. 29. 3.
recorded of Caligula, albeit he despised all Divinity, Su^ ca. 5.
yet was he afraid of the Thunder; and that he was wont, Ad minima fulgura
caput obuoluere, ad maiora vero proripere se ex strato, and sub lectum se
condere: at the least Thunder to cover his head, and at the noise of the
greater, to hurl out of his resting place, and hide himself under his bed:
but the wrath figured here by Thunder is much more to be feared. Thirdly, they
are called 3 To Voices.
Voices, namely; such voices whereby he speaks to the wicked in displeasure:
Then shall he speak Psalm. 2. 5.
to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

The other operation is figured by seven burning The other gracious, and
comfortable to his own children.
Lamps of fire, expounded to be the seven Spirits of God: Thus are represented
the working of God, in communicating by his seuenfold Spirit, grace to his
Saints, to illuminate, to quicken, and to purge them. That grace is compared to
fire, is plain in holy Scripture; One comes Mat. 3. 11.
after me, who shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. At the
feast of Pentecost the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, in the
similitude of fiery cloven tongues. And this Spirit Acts 2.
being one, is said to be seven, or seuen-fold, to express that fullness and
perfection of grace, which is in him, and to Saints communicate by him. And the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Esaias 11. 2.
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and of might, the
spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. There are diversity of
graces, 1. Cor. 12. 4.
but flowing all from one Spirit. Again, they are expressed by seven, to note
the continual influence and communication of grace by the Spirit unto Saints.

VERSE. 6. And before the Throne there was a Sea of glass, like unto
Crystal; and in the midds of the Throne, and round about the Throne, were
four beasts full of eyes before and behind.
HItherto we have heard a description of those The glassie S^a is a figure of
this world.
creatures, over whom, and in whom GOD rules as King of Saints. Now follows a
description of another sort of creatures over whom he rules: for this Glassie
sea figureth not Angels, as says Arethas; nor yet Baptism, as Victorine,
Beda, and Haymo say; nor yet the holy Scripture, as thinks Ioachimus. Which two
last opinions are followed by many late Writers; but it figures this World, and
all creatures therein, who like a round Crystal Globe are before the Throne.
That waters in this Prophecy figure people, see in that place, The Revel. 17.
15.
waters which thou saw, are people, Nations, multitudes, and tongues. The
world sometime figured by the Moon:


Sometime the Lord figureth the world by the Moon, which is subject to
continual changes. The woman representing the Church, is clothed with the
Sun, but has the Moon under her feet: to shadow unto us, how all
true-hearted Christians are contemners of the world, they trample upon it,
contenting themselves with Jesus Christ, and resting in him, as in their glory.

Sometime also the world is figured by the Sea, And sometime by the Sea, which
is ever waltring, and never stands in o^ estate.
as here, and in the fourteenth chapter; the sea is always tumbling and
waltring, it stands never stable in one estate; the waves thereof which now are
highest, are incontinent lowest, overcome as it were with the force and fury
of others: thus they dash one against another, and are never at rest. So is it
with men in this world, uncertain, and unstable is their estate; rich this
day, poor to morrow, now a King, incontinent a captive, highest in the Court
this day, like Haman, highest to morrow Ester. 7.
on the gallows. This day the King leanes on the shoulder of the Samaritane
Prince, the next day 2. King 7.
the people tramples him under their feet. Neither is it simply represented by
a sea, of which type see more chap. 16. verse 3. but by a glassie sea, to
declare the fragilitie thereof; it has a fair and splendent show, but no
solidity: the best thing in it is man, yet is he but like a vessel of glass,
most easily broken, as daily experience declares.

And thirdly, it is said to be like unto Crystal, It is christalline
transparent, because all things in it are manifest to the Lord.
which is transparent, so that a man looking into it, sees through it, and
every mo^e therein is manifest unto him. This does properly express that
clear and lively sight, which the Lord has of most secret things done in the
world. All things are naked Heb. 4. 13.
(...), and manifest unto his sight. (...), opened up, and as it were spelled
out. Natural men may restrain his providence within the heaven* This is the
voice of Atheists, The Lord walks Job. 22.
in the circle of heaven, the clouds hide him, that he cannot see. They are
like unto foolish children, who if they hide their own face that they see not,
doc think that none sees them. But they have an answer from the Psalmist, The
Lord has his dwelling Psalm. 139.
on high, yet he abases himself to behold things in hoauen, and in earth, the
darkness is no darkness, but to him darkness and the light are both alike.

This also should waken us to the practice of that A dehortation from the love
of this world.
Apostolic precept, Use this world, as if (...) used it not. Since the world is
resembled to a sea, let us consider, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
how the sea is a good element for navigations, and transportation of men from
one Country to another, but evil for habitation. Men are gladdest, when their
course is shortest on the sea, and their hearts are at their hauening place,
long before their Barks can carry their bodies unto it.
We should so live in this world, as passing through it to our heavenly
harbor, soiourning in it, but not dwelling in it. The greatest pleasures of
The best pleasures thereof, are like the salt waters of the Sea.
this world are like the waters of the sea, salt, bitter, and unwholesome to
drink. He is in the worst estate that has his belly most full of them. Let
us look to them with lothsomnesse; but above all, beware we drink not of them
with greedines, for they will prove deadly at the length.

And in the midds of the Throne, and etc.] Follows Angels described, 1. From
their place. 2. From their nature. 3. From their number. 4. From their
properties. 5. From their function.
a description of the third and most excellent sort of creatures pertaining to
the Court of the great King: these are holy Angels, in whom, and by whom God
rules, and they are described, first from their place, next from their nature,
which is to be taken out of their name; thirdly, from their number, fourthly,
from their properties, and lastly, from their function.

Some by these four beasts, understand the four How by the four beasts, some
understand the four Evangelists.
Evangelists. It were easy to show whom they follow in this opinion, but
needless. It was hard for the first Fathers, such as Victorine and others, who
wrote upon this book, to understand it, so long before the accomplishment
thereof. And as for others in the middle Age, wherein the Church was darkened
with Popery, they are not much to be regarded; for no man endued with the
spirit of error shall understand this book, yet all these trot on in this
common Commentary, and will have these four beasts four Evangelists. But this
is to be lamented, that now in so clear a light, so many worthy men should
have been miscarried by them out of the way.

But leaving them, we have first to clear, that But in truth they figure the
company and order of principal Angels.
these creatures figure Angels, and such Angels as in precellencie of dignity,
and prerogati^e of place, are nearer unto the Throne, then other Angels be; for
in the fifth chapter, ver. 11. after the song of the four living creatures,
follows the song of many Angels, that are said to be there in a circle without
them: and in the 15. chapter ver. 7. one of the four gives unto the seven
Angels, their Vials full of the wrath of God; their first testimony proves
that the four, being namely put for the whole order, have the precellencie of
place; the other proves they have the prerogati^e of dignity.

Yet to come nearer, many of the Interpreters This Vision compared with the
like in Ezechiel, will be the more easily understood.
do agree, that in this Vision, allusion is made to that which Ezechiel in his
first chapter sets down; for in this Prophecy the Spirit of God every
where follows the phrase, and alludes to Ezech. 1.
the Visions of Prophecies in the old Testament: and of this judgment are
Iunius, Foxus, Merchiston, Grasserus, Ribera, with many others. Now, in that
Vision is showed to Ezechiel, how he that sits on the Throne rules all by the
ministry of his holy Angels, there they are figured the same The four Beasts
in the original, are four living creatures.
manner of way, to wit, by the Lion, a Man, a Bullock, and an Eagle; except
that there, every one of them is figured all these four ways; these that here
are called (...), there are called (...), living creatures: and that in all the
English Translations whatsoever, they are translated Beasts, the cause seems
to be in the penury of our Language, that has not any proper word to
distinguish (...) from (...). Always that these are Angels And are expounded by
the Spirit of God, to be Cherubims.
Ezechiel expounds himself, chap. 10. ver. 20. And the Beast that I saw under
the God of Israel, I understood that they were Cherubims. Ezechiel saw his
Ezech. 10. 20.
Vision in the captivity of Babel, at the River Chebar: and S. John saw his
Vision being banished by Domitian, into the I Will Pathmos: one truth by the same
types is represented to both: so the one very well may serve for a Commentary
to the other, to let us see that these creatures are indeed neither Beasts nor
men, but Cherubims, or Angels.

Now to come to their description; we have The place of these holy Angels, they
are in the midst of the Throne and round about it.
first to consider the place wherein S. John sees them, In the midst of the
Throne, and round about the Throne: For understanding of this, take up the
Throne to appear a little lifted up from the earth; in the midst under it are
the bodies of these creatures, and at every corner look out their faces, so
are they both in the midst of the Throne, and round about it. This glorious
Ruler has his The Throne of God is compassed with Angels, not for any need,
but to show his glory, and to comfort his Church.
Throne compassed with holy Angels, not that he needs any of them, but for the
greater comfort of his Church; as also to show the great glory of his Majesty.
Many Aramites came against Elisha in Dothan, his servant was discouraged, so
was not himself; There are more (said he) with us then are 1. King. 10. 20.
against us. And many (may we say) are our enemies visible, and invisible; but
more and stronger are the servants of our God, who stand for us. Solomon
builded a Throne, the like of it was not in any Kingdom, it ascended by six
steps, and on every side were graven Lions ouer-guilt with gold, but they were
without life, and could not punish the Kings enemies: But our King his Throne
is compassed with Angels more terrible and strong then Lions, to tear his
enemies in pieces at his commandment. He sent but one of them against
Senacheribs* Army, and another Esaias 37. 36.
against the Kingdom of Egypt, no power of man could resist them.

This for their place: the second thing in their What Angels are as concerning
their nature.
description is their nature, to be taken up, as I said out of their names
(...), living creatures, figured by Men and Lions, but indeed as I have showed,
are Angels. Their name here is general and common to all creatures, that have
life, but compare it with other places, and ye shall see they are Spirits, He
creates his Spirits, his Psalm. 104. 4.
Messengers. An Angel then is a Spirit, but Spiritus creatus completus. When I
call him a Spirit, I distinguish him from Lions, Bullockes, Eagles, that have
bodies without spirits; when I call him a created spirit, I distinguish him
from God who is a Spirit, but the Spirit the Creator of all, or as Moses calls
him, The God of the Spirits of all flesh. Numb. 16. 22.
And when I say that an Angel is a spirit complete, it is to distinguish him
from the spirit of man, which to the complete subsistence thereof requires
August. Enchirid. cap. 18.
a body, which Angels do not, called therefore by Augustine, Personae.

The third thing pointed at in their description, Of the number of Angels.
is their number: they are said to be four, to shadow their sufficiency for
their administration and execution of Gods will through all the four corners
of the world; but not as if they were only Dan. 7. 10.
four, and no more; for thousand thousands minister to him, and ten thousand
thousands stand before him. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand; Psalm. 68.
yea, The company of Angels is innumerable, says Heb. 12. 22.
the Apostle; and so they are indeed in respect of us, howsoever to the Lord,
their number be definite, and certain.

The fourth thing in their description, is their The properties of Angels.
properties, many manner of ways figured to us; they are said to have eyes
before, eyes behind, and in the eighth verse, eyes within, figuring their
manifold knowledge; for which also Nazianzen Nazian. orat. 2. de Th^o*.
called them Secundaria lumina, secondary lights: there is a threefold sight,
which they never want; a sight of God, a sight of themselves, How they are said
to have eyes before, eyes behind, and eyes within them.
and a sight of the creature; by their eyes before, they look unto God,
delighting to behold his face continually, from it are they styled Aphnim. By
their eyes within, they look always to themselves; by their eyes behind, they
look to the creature, whereunto God sends them, they know and understand them,
and what they have to do with them. If at any time according to the
commandment given them, they come forth to execute their message, either of
Mercy, or Justice,
on the creature, then do they in such sort look to the creature, that their
eye is never turned from the Lord their Creator: Nunquam sic for as exeunt
Gregor. Moral.
a diuina visione, vt internae contemplationis gaudijs priuentur; they never
come out in such sort from the sight of the Divine Majesty, that they are
deprived of the joys of internal contemplation, which they have by beholding
him.

Oh! that we had these threefold eyes, that we Lamentable is our estate for
the want of this threefold sight.
might know the Lord, and delight continually to behold him, that we might know
the creature so, that in looking to it, we were not entangled with it; and
thirdly, that we might know ourselves. But alas, here is our misery, our eyes
are behind us, we see the works of God better then we see God himself,
whereof it comes to pass, that we delight our selves more in the creatures,
then in the Lord who made them: we look so to the creature, that we lose the
sight of the Creator; yea, by beholding things without us, we forget those
which are within us. Solomon says, A wise man's eyes are in his forehead, and
his heart is at his right hand. What wisdom then can be in us, who are still
looking back to those things which of force we must leave behind us; and will
not look forward to the Lord, with whom we hope to remain for ever?

VERSE. 7. And the first Beast was like a Lion, and the second Beast was like a
Calfe, and the third Beast had a face like a man, and the fourth Beast was like
a flying Eagle.
HE insists still in the description of their properties; Why Angels are
represented by Men, Lions, Bullocks, and Eagles.
he says that they were represented to him like Men, Lions, Bullockes, and
Eagles; not that Angels have any such shape of themselves, as I have showed
before, but to declare unto us, that whatsoever is excellent in the best
creatures of the world, Angels have it: they have understanding like Men; they
have animositie, and courage like Lions; strength, for labor, like the
Bullock, or Ox; celerity, and swiftness, like the Eagle: thus are they
understanding, courageous, laborious, and agill creatures. And it is to be
observed, that these properties, which are several in the creatures, are
Ezech. 1.
coniunct in the Angels, and therefore in Ezekiel his Vision to every one of
them, all these four faces, faces of these creatures are ascribed. The
manifold wisdom of God appears in the variety of his creatures.


The manifold wisdom of God appears in the variety of his creatures. All the
Naturalists in the world, have not, shall not, attain to this one thing, to
know how many sorts of creatures the Lord has made: but this does yet much
more commend his wisdom, that he has distinguished every one of them from
another, so that every creature has in it a several stamp of the singular
goodness and wisdom of God: not Not in the great only, but in the smallest
also.
they of the greater sort only, such as the Elephant in the Land, and
Leuiathan in the Sea; but the smaller sort, such as the Be and the Emmet, for
our God is not mole, sed virtute magnus: in his biggest creatures he has left
some token of his incomparable strength; in his smaller creatures again has
he left some shadow of his marvelous wisdom. But, as I said, all these
sparkles of divine goodness and wisdom, which here are scattered severally
among the creatures on earth, are all to be found amassed and conjoined
together in the Angels of heaven. All which What assurance we have of good
things provided for us hereafter.
should lead us up further to consider; Since such variety of good things are
provided for us, and we see them in this world, what shall we look for in the
world to come? Through faith we understand Heb. 11. 3.
that the worlds were framed by the word of God. Let us not think, there is
not a world after this, far be that from us; but let us look for a better: we
see the beauty of this world, but let us be assured, the beauty of the other is
such, as the eye saw never. Our best things here, are but shadows of those
better which are above. The Lord strengthen our faith to believe. Always this I
have spoken out of this ground, that the Spirit of God not finding one creature
on earth meet to represent that variable good which is in Angels, does join
four of the best together, which yet all do come far short of the excellency
of Angels.

VERSE. 8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings, and they were full
of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God almighty, who was, and is, and is to come.
THE last of their properties, they are said to Six wings are ascrybed to every
one of these Angils.
have six wings every one of them. To what end wings are ascribed to them,
Esaias does tell us, With two they cover their face, with two they cover their
Esaias 6. 2.
With two wings they cover their fac^: these are 1 An humble estimation of
themselves. 2 A reverent estimation of the Lord.
feet, and with two they fly. The wings wherewith they co^er their face, are
first an humble estimation of themselves, next, a reverent, and great
estimation of the glorious majesty of the Lord their GOD. They acknowledge his
glory greater then that they can behold it, they are nearest the throne but
fardest from pride. Among men we use to say, that Familiarity engenders
contempt: it is not so with the Lord, they who are most familiar with him, do
most of all reverence and fear him. The only cause why men are so bold to
dishonor the Lord, and to use his Name without any reverence, is, for that they
are strangers from him, they know him not, and are not acquainted with his
Majesty.

Hitherto tends that similitude of Saint Chrysostom, (...), Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom. 26.
etc.

For even as the quicker our sight is, the better Heavenly creatures are most
humble.
we learn, and perceive how far we are distant from the heaven; whereas to
a dim eye, the heaven seems to be neere-hand, and hard upon it: even so, the
more we excel in virtue and holiness, the more we perceive what a great
difference is between the Lord and us; yea his best creatures are nothing in
comparison of his glorious Majesty.

Let this serve for a warning to these presumptuous Hereby are condemned
Pharisaicall and Popish spirits, who dare stand up with uncovered face, and
glory of their merits.
Pharisaicall spirits, Semipelagian Papists, who dare stand before the Lord,
and glory of their fastings, of their alms, of their merits, of their
justification by their works, and of their perfect observance of the Law. The
holy Angels cover their faces, and acknowledge their insufficiency in
comparison of the Divine Majesty, and thou vile worm of the earth, wilt glory
of thy sufficiency. Vae generationi huic miserae, cui sufficere videtur Ber.
Ser. cont. vitium ingratitud.
insufficientia sua: Woe be to this miserable sort of people, to whom their
insufficiency seems sufficient.

It is not the least part of true Philosophy, for a man to know himself; and
only he knows himself best, who esteems himself to be nothing. Abraham
called himself dust and ashes: Genesis 18.
and David esteemed himself to be but a worm, (...), and all Saints,
Chrysostom. in Mat. ^om 26.
says Saint Chrysostom, after this same manner, abase and cast down
themselves. But they who with the Apostat Angels will exalt themselves, will
contend with Michael, and presume above that which indeed they are, let them
here see of what spirit they are.

The two wings wherewith they fly, note first The two wings wherewith they
fly.
their sublimitie, they are no creeping, but flying creatures. Under the Law,
profane worldlings 1 Their sublime disposition, they are no creeping things.
were figured by unclean beasts, that creep on the earth with all four: they
are cursed with the curse of the Serpent, they lick the dust of the earth: but
Christians should be like unto Angels, not creeping, but flying creatures. A
bird, so long 2 Their willing readiness to obey.
as it is flying above, is in no danger of the snare. Many snares has Satan
that crafty Hunter laid for us: the best way to eschew them, is, that our
hearts frequently fly upward toward the Lord.

Next, their willing readiness to execute the will of the Lord without delay.
S. Bernard makes By the two wings Bernard understands knowledge and devotion.
Bern. de verbis Esaiae Sermon. 4.
the two wings of these* Angels, to be Knowledge and Devotion; these are also
good for us to fly withal: Leuat cognitionis ala, sed sola non sufficit, the
wing of knowledge lifts us up, but it alone is not sufficient. As the bird that
has but one wing, the more it strives to fly, the more it falls, Ruit
citius quae vna tantum ala volare contendit: To strive to fly with one wing,
is the ready way to fall.
So he that has knowledge without devotion, the more he seeks to ascend, the
more he fails.

Natural Philosophers may stand for an example, Romans 1.
who knowing God, did not glorify him, but vanished in their own cogitations,
and became fools. And let devotion again be never so zealous and fervent, yet
without knowledge it cannot carry us upward: Zelus absque scienti^, quo
vehementius irruit, eo gra^ius corruit, for zeal without knowledge, the hotter
it is, the more hindersome it is.

The two wings wherewith they cover their The wings wherewith they cover their
feet, are sanctity, and modesty.
feet, figures their sanctity and modesty, they are conversant with men
according as God employes them, but communicate not with the sins of men,
they defile not their feet with our pollutions, but have them always couerd:
As the Sun gives his light to most filthy places, but participates not of
their uncleanness, so is it with Angels. But alas, far are we from this
perfection, it is a difficill thing to live in the company of profane men, and
not be infected by them: If we be not burnt with their fire, hardly shall we
escape vnblacked with their smoke.

The other wing for covering their feet, is their Modesty, whereby they dimit
themselves to our capacity: they appear with bodies and colors, white,
sprickled, and red, having indeed neither zach. 1.
bodies nor colors, yet are men astonished and confounded at their lowest
apparitions: So far are we degenerate from our first estate, that we cannot
now abide the most modest, and base apparition of an Angel.

And they ceased not day nor night, saying;] In In the last place they are
described from their function, they are not wea^y in praising God.
the last place we have their function described, which is a continual and
incessant praising of God; they are not weary, being always delighted with new
matter of joy flowing from the sight of God; for as many eyes as they have,
they can never comprehend that infinite goodness which is in him: new sights
make them always to renew praises unto God, and in this they stand as paterns
unto us, teaching us to practice these precepts, Rejoice 1. These. 5. 16, 16,
17, 18.
evermore, Pray continually, In all things give thanks. We should always pray,
for we never want cause; we should always give thanks, for if we can observe it,
we never want matter. Prayer and praise Prayer and praise are good parts of
divine worship, but praise the most excellent of the two.
are two excellent parts of Divine worship, but of the two, praise is the most
heavenly and Angelike virtue. In prayer a man respects himself, seeking from
GOD, that which he cannot want; but in praise man respects God, giving unto
the Lord that which is due to him. Again, prayer pertaines to this life
principally, et est eg^ntium ac miserorum, praise pertains to the life to
come, et est beatoru^ ac glori^icatorum. Let us therefore learn of Angels to
praise the Lord, beginning that upon earth, which shall be our continual
exercise in the heaven.

The tenor of their song follows, wherein three Three things in their song do
they ascribe to the Lord.
things are attributed to God, 1. Holiness, 2. Omnipotency, 3. Eternity. The
first of these has one word thrice repeated, and that as Esaias says, with an
Antiphonie, or answering of one Angel to another, Esaias 6. Ang. de side ad Pet.
cap. 1.
Vnum Iehouam celebrant repetendo vnum and idem (Sanctus) Trinum agnosc^nt ter
repetendo, quod vni tribuerunt: they acknowledge one GOD, whom they esteem
only holy, and repeating one thing thrice, a Trinity they acknowledge in that
blessed Unity of the Godhead; but this mystery is better warranted by other,
and more pla^e testimonies of holy Scripture. But to return, the Lord is so
holy, that he is holiness it self. As the 1 Holiness, which is so proper to
him, that there is none so holy, as the Lord.
Sun is among the lights of the firmament, so is the holy Lord among his
Saints or holy ones; what light they have, is no light if it be compared with
the Sun, they hide themselves when the Sun shines, and all the holiness
of most holy creatures, is nothing in comparison of the thrice holy Lord. At
his brightness Angels cover their faces; they are holy by creation, redeemed
ones are holy by communication, other things are also holy by separation, as
was Ierusalems Temple of old, and now are the elements in both the Sacraments
holy; but none, neither Angel, man, nor any other creature, holy like the Lord.

The next thing they ascribe unto him, is Omnipotency, 2 Omnipotency
consisting in these two: 1. That he can do what hewil. 2. That against his
nature and truth he can do nothing.
which consists in these two; First, that he can do whatsoever he will. Next,
that against his own nature and truth, he cannot do: for that were impotencie,
and not omnipotency: He can not lie, nor deny himself, nor come against his
own Word. The first of these renders instruction for Atheists; the other for
Papists. It is a common question of profane men, whereby they impugn the truth
of Gods promises, How can this Mouths of Atheists who call Gods power in
question, bound up.
be? The Samaritan Prince, when he heard Elizeus prophecy of plenty of
victual, that should be in Samaria on the morrow, though the day before it was
sore pinched with Famine, most disdainefully answered him, Though the Lord
would 2. King. 7. 2.
make windows in heaven, can this thing come to pass? There the Lord says,
This I will do: and man by the contrary, This the Lord cannot do: but the
Lord was and will be found true, and every man a liar.

Yea, the very dear children of God, out of the Weakness of Saints helped by
the consideration of God his omnipotency. Genesis 18.
remanents of their infidelity, oftentimes fall into the like transgression.
When the Angel promised Sara a child, she received it with the like answer, How
can this be, since I am waxed old? Yea, when the Lord promised to give Israel
flesh enough for a month, Moses distrusted it, Shall all the Sheep and Numb.
11. 22.
Beeues be slain for them to find them? or shall all the fish of the Sea be
gathered to suffice them? But they in effect received one answer, Is the hand
of the Lord Esa. 50. 3.
shortened, or is there any thing impossible to the Lord? Consider who he is
that says he will do, and all such doubts shall cease, which makes men
enquire, How can this be done?

The other renders instruction for Papists; they Papists abuse the omnipotency
of God, in making it militant against his truth.
urge Gods omnipotency, to prove their newfound, and fond transubstantiation,
but to no purpose; for in this they make his power to fight against his will,
and to reuerse his own Word, and the plain Articles of our faith. They
enforce upon us that we deny Gods omnipotency, but without cause; this fault
is their own, and not ours, They limit the Holy One of Israel, and indeed deny
Psalm. 78. 41.
his power, when they say, He cannot give us the body of Christ, except he
create it of bread. We verily believe, that in the holy Sacrament there is a
real donation made of Jesus Christ to all reverent and right Receivers, that
bread is the body of Christ, that wine is the blood of Christ. God is always
as good as his Word, and gives us no less, then he says he gives us. But for
all this, there is no reason why we should bind the Lord to transubstantiate
the Bread, as if without transubstantiation of the bread, he were not able to
give unto us the body of Jesus.

Now the third and last thing for which they 3 They ascribe to him the praise
of eternity.
praise the Lord, is his Eternity, and everlasting Being, Who was, and who
is, and who is to come. This is a circumlocution of his Name, I am, expounded
more plainly in the next words, He lives for evermore. Solus vere est, qui
nec a (fuit) Bern. in Cont. Scrm. 31.
praeciditur, nec ab (crit) expungitur. (crit) non tollit illi esse ab aeterno,
nec (fuit) tollit illi esse What great comfort comes to the Church by the
consideration of God his eternity. Eccles. 1. Heb. 1. 11.
in aeternum. Being is so proper unto God, that when I say, He was, it takes
not away that he is, and will be: and when I say that He will be, it takes not
away that he was and is. And this serves greatly for the comfort of the Church
of God, One generation passes, and another comes, (said Solomon,) The
Heavens shall perish, but the Lord does remain. He that was with Noah in the
Arc, with Israel in the Red Sea, with Daniel in the den, with the children in
the fire, with Joseph in the prison, with Elisha in Dothan, enclosed by
Aramites with Ezechia in Jerusalem, besieged by Chaldees, he is still in his
Church this day, and will be for ever.

VERSE. 9. And when these living creatures gave glory and honor, and thanks
to him that sat on the Thron^, which lives for euer-more.
THe song of Angels is seconded by the song The song of Angels is soconded by
the song of redeemed Saints.
of redeemed Saints, one of them prouokes another to praise GOD. It should be
with us on earth, as it is with them in heaven, every Christian should provoke
another to piety: so Saint Paul 2. Cor. 9. 2. Thus one of us should provoke
another to plety.
praises the Corinthians, that their zeal had provoked many. But now most part
of men live, as if they were set in the world to be censurers of all men,
examples to none, they will neither provoke others to good, nor be provoked by
them, yea even in the holy assemblies, there they are silent, if not worse
exercised, when others beside them are praising the Lord.

Three things these living creatures are said to In their song they give three
things to the Lord.
give unto the Lord, Glory, honor, thanks. Where first it comes to be
considered, how is it that any creature, either Angel, or man, can give unto
the Lord, Who has given to him first, and it shall be recompensed? Romans 11. 35.
But there is a great difference between these two, God giving to the creature,
and the creature giving to God. When God gives, he gives to the creature
that which it had not; Angels, men, and all creatures, have their being of
him; but the creatures giving to God, is an acknowledging of that in Him, which
He has already; and this is the sacrifice of praise, or then if it be a
sacrifice of distribution, either to the Great difference between these two,
man his giving to God, and Gods giving to man Heb. 13. 1. Chro. 29. 14.
poor, or any good work, wherein the Lord may have glory, as we are
commanded: To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is pleased. This is also a giving unto God: but as David calls it, is a
giving to God of that, which God his own hand has given to thee; for what
have thou that thou have not received?

The first of these sacrifices men of this age can willingly give to the Lord,
that is, the praise of all the goods they have: but in the second they are more
sparing. They will not give back to the Lord, the use of that which his hand
has given them: fair profession, like the show that Fig Tree made a far
off, but no fruit; whereof it comes to pass, that the glorious Gospel of
Christ is evil spoken of by our enemies, because we do not adorn it with our
good works.

Now, concerning the difference between glory, (...), honor, (...), and
thanks, (...), it is plainly showed by Musculus and others, I insist not in it.

VERSE. 10. The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the
Throne, and worshipped him who lives for evermore, and cast their Crowns
before the Throne, saying.
THeir behavior in praising God, is noted to No dishonor to the most
honorable creatures, to kneel to the Lord.
be threefold: first, they fall down and humble themselves before God,
teaching us by their example to do the like: It is no dishonor for the most
honorable men of the world to kneel; yea, to prostrate themselves before the
Lord. Come, let Psalm. 95. 6.
us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Next, they worship him that lives for evermore: The true Church worships no
creature, neither Angel, not man. Gal. 4. 8. (...).
the true Church worships no creature, neither Angel, nor man, in themselves,
nor in their Image; neither the worship of (...), nor yet (...): since the
Galathians are convinced by Saint Paul, for giving the worship of (...) to such
as by nature, are no Gods; how can Papists be excused? Since all their defense
for the worship of creatures is this, that they worship them not with the
service of (...), which, say they, is due to God, but only of (...), which may
be given to creatures. How weak a distinction this is, appears by that I
have said; Papists affirm, that they may do lawfully that, which Saint Paul
rebuked as unlawful in the Galathians.

And last of all they are said, to cast their But gives to the Lord all the
glory of their salvation
Crowns before the Throne; they empty themselves of all glory, merit, and
worthiness whatsoever, that they may give the praise thereof unto the Lord.
This is in effect the song of all Saints, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
to thy Name Psalm. 115. 1.
be the praise.

VERSE. 11. Saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, for
thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and have been
created.
AFter he has spoken of their behavior, he Creation, was a short Providence,
and Providence a long creation.
subioynes their Song, wherein they acknowledge the Lord only worthy to
receive glory, and honor, and power, and that for two causes; first, for the
benefit of creation, by which all things were made; next, of provident
conservation, by which all things are still conserved; for so are their words,
They are, and they have been created. Creation was a short Providence,
producing all things in their kinds; Providence again, is a perpetual
Creation, conseruing all things in their kinds: as he gave unto all their
first being; so he bears Heb. 1. 3.
up all things by his mighty word.

Creation is a benefit common to all creatures, Creation common to all
creatures, not so the comfort of creation.
but the comfort of it is not common; for they, who have lost the dignity of
their first estate, shall wish one day that they had never been created; or,
that they could again be turned into nothing. But as here these Seniors praise
him for their creation; so, in the next chapter they praise him for their
Redemption: And indeed, they only find comfort in creation, who, with the
benefit of creation have also received the benefit of Redemption; for then
Creation is a step to Glorification, and a mean of the execution of the decree
of their Predestination to life: for if, first, we had not been created, how
should we have been redeemed and glorified?

Again, since he is the Creator of all according What reason we have to serve
God for our creation.
to his own will, when we look unto beasts, and other creatures inferior to
us, let us praise him, for that it was his will to make us understanding men.
And again, when we look to many men, whose conversation is beastly, they being
strangers from Ephesians. 2.
the life of God, let us much more praise him, who has made us new men; since
all is of his will, what matter of unspeakable comfort have we, that he has
made us children of his good will, that is, to whom he is well willed in
Christ? And because our weakness is great, let this serve us for a spur Loath
should* we be to displease the Lord, who made us for his own pleasure. Psalm.
104. 31. Genesis 1. Genesis 6.
to sanctification; since the Lord has made us for his own pleasure, how loath
should we be to displease him? It is said of the Lord, Let the Lord rejoice in
all his works: so, when he looked to his works, he saw that they were all
good; but when he considered man, It repents me (said the Lord) that I made
man, for he is but flesh, and the imaginations of his heart are only evil
continually. Oh! how should this humble us, that where the Lord has joy in all
the rest of his creatures, he is grieved at man, by reason of his
transgression! and how loath should we be to displease the Lord our God, who for
his pleasure and good will has made us, and out of his abundant love has
also redeemed us!

CHAP. V.
VERSE. 1. And I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne, a
Book written within, and on the backe-side sealed with seven Seals.
THE first part of the Preparatorie Vision, preceding the Prophecies which are
to follow, we have heard in the former chapter: wherein S. John sees the
Majesty of God the Creator, sitting on his Throne, ruling the world The second
part of the Preparato^ie Vision, containing a description of God the Redeemer:
according to his holy will. Nothing therein falls out by fortune, or accident,
but all comes according to his Decree, written and registered in his Book. Now
follows the other part of the Preparatorie Vision; wherein S. John sees the
Majesty of God the Redeemer, take the Book out of the hand of him that sits on
the Throne; and open it, that he might reveal to his Church, her troubles and
battles that were abiding her unto the end of the world. The Vision Preparatory
is very Revealing things to come, for the comfort of his Church.
proportional to the Prophecy following: As if the Lord this way did prepare
his servant; I am to let thee see fearful changes, sore troubles by
fraudulent and violent enemies, that shall persecute my poor Church; but warn
thou them, that they be not discouraged; Thou see, who sits at the Rudder of
the world, and rules all the tumultuous waves of the glassie Sea therein:
Nothing falls out but according as I have decreed, and the event of things shall
be according as my Son has reueiled out of this Book, to my Saints. This
is the sum of all: The rage of man shall turn to the praise of GOD: Psalm.
76. 10.
The LORD shall have glory, his Church victory, and the Enemies thereof shame
and confusion.

Three things have we in this chapter: first, a description The parts of this
Chapter.
of this Book of the Revelation: secondly, a description of the Lamb of God,
who opens it: thirdly, thanks giving for it both of men and Angels.

And I saw.] We may perceive here in The familiarity of God with his Saints
once begun, still increases.
the entry, how new sights, and new Revelations are multiplied upon Saint John;
the Lord began to be familiar with him, and still he continues: for whom he
loves, he loves to the end, and causes them to increase with the increasings
of God, like the Sun ascending to the noonetyde of the day. Balaam and Balac
both may conspire Numb. 22.
to curse Israel, but it cannot be; Putiphar may imprison Joseph, but God shall
be with him. Genesis 39. Reu. 1. 9.
Domitian may banish S. John unto Pathmos from the fellowship of men, but not
from the favor of God; even there shall the Lord be familiar with him. What
Isaac spoke of Jacob, stands as a sure decree to all the Saints of God, I have
blessed him, Genesis 27. 33.
and he shall be blessed.

Of the manner of this sight, we have spoken We walk not here by sight, but
by says.
once for all in the beginning of the fourth chapter. No doubt many of the
Lords dear children wish they could see the like; such a sight as S. John saw,
or S. Paul saw when he was ravished into the third heavens: The one tells us
what he saw; for it was showed unto him, that he might show it to the Church:
The other tells not what he saw; yea, professes that the sight he saw is more
then ever man heard or saw, or man his heart is able to understand; and this is
to provoke us to long for that Day, wherein we shall be capable of this sight.
In the mean time, if we see not such sights, as they saw, let us reverence the
Lords dispensation: now we walk by faith, not by sight; the time when 2. Cor.
5. 7.
we shall see, is coming; now happy are we, if we do believe.

A Book.] We must still remember, that in all How the Lord is said to have a
Book.
this Prophecy, the Lord dimits himself to use such forms, and
representations, as we are best able to conceive. Properly God has no book,
^e needs not any such help of memory; but allusion here is made to Kings, who
have beside them books containing Laws whereby they rule their people, or
else the ancient Acts and Monuments Ester 6. 1. In it allusion is made to the
manner of Kings, who have their Registers.
of their Kingdom, as was that book, out of which Ahasuerus learned, what good
service Mordecai had done unto him. The Lord has his book also, but far
exceeding theirs; for they have only a Register of things which'are done, they
cannot tell what is to be done, and far less can they prevent it: but the
Lord has in his Book a perfect record of all things, which have been, are,
or shall be to the worlds end, they are all appointed by himself.

Now what is meant by this book, is not agreed This book cannot be the old
Testament
upon by the Interpreters. Victorine, whom many follow, calls it the old
Testament. Others more generally, the whole Scripture. But was not that Book
opened till now? And is it not plainly told Saint John by the Angel, that the
things foretold in this book, are such as were shortly to come to pass, not
such as had been done before?

What Cotterius had for him by this book to Other strange opinions concerning
this Book.
understand vitam, life, and by the strong Angel to understand Legem, or the
Law, which none can fulfill, we leave it to himself, and his opinion also. The
matter is so plain out of the course of the Text, that it is strange, men will
not take light out of Gods hand, when he offers it unto them: for does not the
Son^ take this book from the Father? Does he not open the seals thereof, and
let Saint John see what was written in it. Is it not the But in truth the book
is this same book of the Revelation.
very first and authentike volume of this Book of the Revelation, the copy and
transumpt whereof Saint John draws out as he is commanded, and sends it to the
Church? all the whole circumstances of the Prophecy make it so clear, that it
is strange how men too much enamored with their own co^ceptions should not have
perceived it.

But because in holy Scripture often mention Books in holy Scripture are of
two sorts.
occurres of sundry Books which are ascribed to God, let us once for all
remember, they are to be reduced to one of these two sorts; they are either 1
Metaphorical, and these are either universal, or special.
metaphorical, or material; the first so called in respect of the metaphor or
borrowed speech; the other so called in respect of the matter. The metaphorike
books, are either universal or special; universal are two, one mentioned by
David, Psalm. 139. 16.
In thy book were all things written, which in continuance of time were
fashioned. And this book is the most large, as being a perfect register of all
things, all persons, of all times, and this is the Book of Universal are two.
Prescience. The other is the book of Conscience, which albeit it be not so
large as the first, yet I call it Universal, because all men without exception
have it, they write it with their own hand, and have it in their own
custody, and therefore shall not be able to speak any thing against the
testimony thereof. Special books again are also two, one Special are al. so
two. Genesis 32. 32. Malach. 3. 16.
called by Moses, The book of life, containing a roll of all Gods Elect: the
other called by Malachy, A book of remembrance, wherein the Lord registers the
words and works of the wicked: this book God has in his keeping, and it is
every way conform, and varies not from the book of conscience that the wicked
have. The book material 2 The other sort of books are material.
is the Bible, whereof this book of the Revelation is a part. S. John sees it
first here in this vision, and then, as I said, extracts the just copy of it,
and sends it to the Churches.

Written within and without.] For understanding The form of books used among
the Ancients, different from ours.
of this, we must know that the form of books they used of old, was not like
ours; they were long Roules, every sheet at the end of another extending in
length, folded and rouled up about a piece of tree, or some other such thing;
they might conveniently be distinguished by seals: for the seal of the first
being opened, all written in it might easily have been read; the rest not so,
until the remaining seals were opened also: they were commonly written on the
one side, except where the abundance of matter forced them to write on the
back, then were they called (...). In the sixth chapter, it is said that Plin.
lib. 3. epist.
the heavens passed away like a scrole: for a scrole of parchment being opened
and spread out in length, if it be let go by him that holds it, returns
speedily into a round again. Ezekiel makes mention of the like Roll of a
book spread before him, written within and without. And as to Ezekiel the
Ezech. 2. 9.
Lord presented a roll, containing that which he had to show unto Israel, and
was after written in the book of Ezekiel, It a hoc loco per librum Iohanni
Carthus.
ostensum intelligitur scientia ^orum, quae Iohanni fuerant de futuro statu
Ecclesiae reuelanda, quae and nunc in hoc Apocalypsis volumine sant descripta:
So here by a book showed to S. John, is understood the knowledge of these
things which were to be revealed to Saint John concerning the estate of the
Church to come, and which now are described in this book of the Revelation.

Always, that S. John sees this book written within What means the writing of
this book without, and within.
and without, it is to declare unto us, that it is a complete Prophecy, there
is no blanke paper in this book to be filled up by any other: or if there
were, who is this in heaven, or in earth, that can reveal that unto us, which
Jesus Christ our blessed Savior has not revealed? None at all: we are not to
look for any other Revelation or Prophecy after this, til the Day come
wherein Christ our Lord shall be revealed in his glory.

Sealed with seven Seals.] The Seals declare The book is sealed, for surety
and secrecy.
first, the surety, next, the secrecy of this Prophecy; Surety: it is the
manner of Kings to seal their decrees which they will have executed: so this
book is sealed, to show that the Lord will surely accomplish that which is
written in it. It is a Decree more sure then any of the Medes and Persians.
Dan. 6. 8. Obscurity of Scripture pretended by Papists.


Again, the Seals declare the secrecy thereof: here are mysteries locked up
from the understanding of Angels and men, if the Lord had not opened them, and
revealed them unto us. The Jesuit Viega carpeth advantage here, to instifie
that calumny of the Church of Rome, whereby they blot the Scripture with
obscurity, and he brings many reasons to prove that it was expedient the holy
Scripture should be penned in obscure manner. But I pray you lis not this
unsure reasoning, The book of the Revelation is obscure, therefore all the books
They look to the seals wherewith the book is closed, but not to the Lamb who
opened them.
of holy Scripture are obscure? And since they can look to the Seals wherewith
the book is closed, and complain of obscurity; why will they not look to the
Lamb who opens the book, and give him thanks, who of a closed book, makes
it an open book, and gives to it the name of a Revelation? Lastly, as we have
said before, this book was written, not so much to inform us in the faith, as
to confirm us in it, that we should not leave the faith for these manifold
troubles which in this book are foretold us, that were to follow our faith. It
is sufficient for us, that in these books wherein the Lord teaches us the way of
salvation, he speaks so plainly, that the entrance into his Word shows
Psalm. 119. 130.
light, and gives understanding to the simple: The In books of Scripture
written for our instruction in the faith, God speaks plainly. Aug. de doct.
Chr. lib. 2. c. 9.
waters thereof in some places are so shallow, that a child may go through,
though in others so deep, that an Elephant may swim. In his quae aperte
posita su^t in Scriptura, inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem,
moresque viuendi, spem scilicet, and charitatem. What need men carpe at these
places which are obscure, since in these which are plainly written, all things
are to be found that contain Faith and good manners; to wit, Hope and
Charity, said Augustine? Number igitur Deus, and Lactant. l. 6. c. 21.
mentis and vocis, and linguae Artifex diserte loqui non potest? imo vero summa
prouidentia carere voluit fuco ea quae diuina sunt, vt omnes intelligerent,
quae ipse omnibus loquebatur: Shall we think (said Lactantius) that God, who is
the Artificer and Maker both of the mind and voice, and of the tongue, cannot
This pretext of obscurity of holy Scripture is but a covering of their
misliking.
speak plainly? No, but by the contrary he has most wisely provided that
his words should be plain, without colored deceit, that all men may
understand these things which he speaks unto all. I will not therefore
answer Viega and his associates, with Chrysostom: Praetextus iste pigritiae
vetamen, Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
but rather will say it is malitiae velamen; this pretext of the obscurity of
Scripture is but a covering of their slothfulnes, but rather it is a covering
of their maliciousness: because the Scripture rebukes them, therefore they
rebuke it; they do what they can to obscure it, because it obscureth their
kingdom.

VERSE. 2. And I saw a strong Angel, who preached with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?
IN the first verse we have seen the description It is Christ his singular
glory: none but he can open this book.
of this book: now begins the second part of this chapter, wherein we have
him described, who opens the book; first, from his singular supereminence,
that none other was found able to open the book: this appears by the Angel
his proclamation, Who is worthy to open the Book? The answer is subioyned in a
negation, None in heaven, etc. So this does greatly magnify the glory of
Jesus; that He, and He only has done that unto us and for us, which none in
heaven nor in earth were able to have done.

The Offices of the Messiah are three: he is the The offices of Christ are 3:
Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical.
King, the Priest, and Prophet of his Church. If these be compared among
themselves, the Prophetical Office will be found the least. As our High
Priest, he had to satisfy the justice of God for us, and make atonement for
our sins: As our King, hehath delivered us from the oppression of our
enemies, visible and invisible, and rules our hearts by the scepter of his
Grace: As our Prophet, he has revealed to us in his holy Scripture the whole
counsel of God concerning our salvation, and in this Prophecy has forewarned
his Church of such troubles as were imminent unto her, which none in heaven nor
in earth was able to do. Now, since the last and least of the The last, and
least of the 3. can be done by none, but by himself.
three cannot be done by any creature, what blasphemy is it to say, that men
may do the greatest, that is by their own sufferings and doings make
satisfaction to the justice of God, as the Romish Church vainly and wickedly
do affirm?

For they teach that Christ has not revealed Papists derogate from the
perfection of Christ his prophetical office. Council. Trident. Ses. 2.
the whole counsel of God; that the Scriptures are imperfect, and are to be
supplied by Traditions, quas Ecclesia Catholica suscipit, ac veneratur pari
pietatis affectu and reuerentia, scilicet, atqui ipsum verbum scriptum: which
the Catholic Church embraces, and honors, with the same affection of piety
and reverence, which is due to the written Word it self. But I pray them: Who
is able But let them tell who can (...) that, which Jesus has not (...).
to teach that, which the great Doctor of the Church has not taught? If there
be any Seal of the Book which Christ has not opened, who is this that is
able to open it? Either they must confess, none in heaven, sarre less in
earth, can do it; or else they must falsify this Angel, which is impossible;
or then manifest themselves to be falsisiers, which is evident. All Antiquity
pleads the perfection of holy Scripture against them. Religio vera in scriptis
Apostolorum, and Prophetarum Justin. ^xord. in Tryph.
continetur descripta, qui soli, quid in Deo sit, viderunt: True Religion is
described in the writings of the Apostles and Prophets, who only did see what
is in God. Credere debemus quod Scripturae Ir^n. lib. 2. c. 47.
perfectae sunt, quippe a verbo Dei, and Spiritu eius Antiquity pleads the
perfection of holy Scripture. Ibid.
dictae: We ought to believe that the Scriptures are perfect, as being endited
by the Word and Spirit of God. His niti firma est Petra, his derelictis, alijs
niti quibuslibet doctrinis, est in effusa arena aedisicare; To depend on the
holy Scripture, is to build on a sure Rock; but to leave them, and depend upon
any other doctrine, is to build upon sand. Si fidelis est Dominus in omnibus
sermonibus Basil. in Ser. de Fidei cons^nsit.
suis, and fidelia omnia mandata eius, manifesta est elapsio a side, and
superbiae crimen, aut reprobare quid ex his quae scripta sunt, aut
superinducere quid, ex non scriptis. Since God is faithful in all his words,
and all his commandments are true, it is a manifest falling from the faith,
either to reject any thing that is written, or to receive any thing that is not
written. Many more might be added, but that it were tedious.

But their other assertion is much more blasphemous. But most blasphemous are
they, in affirming that he has not perfectly done the Office of an High Priest
Is the satisfaction that Christ has made to the Father for us, imperfect?
Must it be supplied by humane satisfactions? Did not the Cup, which our Savior
drank for our sins in the Garden, make his Soul heavy, and his Body to
sweat blood? Who is it that dare drink out that which our Savior has left
vndrunken? If the brimme of the cup so troubled him, who is able to drink out
the bottom? Certainly none at all. If the most holy man that ever lived, were
appointed to bear the punishment that is due to one of his smallest sins, it
would utterly confound him. If they knew this, and were touched with the
smallest sense of the wrath of God, they would close their blasphemous mouths
from speaking of the insufficiency of Christ his satisfaction, or of any help
or supply, to be adjoined to his merits.

VERSE. 3. And no man in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, was able to
open the Book, nor to look thereupon.
THE answer of the Angels Proclamation is The negative answer excludes all
creatures.
here subioyned in a strong negation, that none in heaven, nor in earth, nor
under the earth, could open the Book. This speech has in it a Prophetical
amplification, which makes the amplification the stronger to exclude all
creatures from this dignity, that it may be reserved to Jesus Christ alone, he
only is worthy to open the Book.

The Jesuits of Rhemes show themselves ridiculous Jesuits contrary to their
own doctrine, expound this of Limbus patrum.
in the exposition of this place: these are their words: He speaks not of the
damned in hell, of whom there could be no question, but of the faithful in
Abraham's bosom, and in Purgatory. I pray you is there any question at all,
when he had said, None in heaven could do it, what needed him to subioyne, Nor
in earth? Was there any question that could be found on earth worthy to open
the Book, since none in heaven could do it? Is this spoken by way of question?
No, but (as I have said) it imports a strong negation. Now as to your
faithful, that you bring in here to be in Limbo, which wrongfully ye call
Abraham's Bosom; was Abraham, or any of the faithful, at this time in Limbo?
According to your doctrine, when Christ descended to hell, then he harried
hell, he left not a soul there, but loosed them all out of that prison. This
Proclamation was more then fifty years after Christ's resurrection, and will
ye now have any faithful souls to be still there, even contrary to your
own doctrine? And no less ridiculous are they, in expounding these, under the
earth, of their Purgatory.
No better is your other allegation, of your faithful in Purgatory: Since none
in heaven could open this Book, I am sure it was never the Angels purpose to
seek any in any house of hell to do it. It is your shame, that in so impudent
a manner, against so clear light, ye abuse and deceive the world with your
forgeries.

VERSE. 4. Then I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to
read the Book, neither to look thereon.
IN this is declared the loving affection of S. John How all kind Christians
are affected with the least loss, and troubles, which befall the Church.
toward the Church: he mournes for that she should be deprived of the comfort
of this Revelation: all that are true and feeling members of the Church, are
grieved for the troubles of the Church; her wants, her losses, and the least
obscuring of her glory, is the matter of their mourning: and of all losses,
they apprehend this most, the want of the comfort of the Word; for Pro. 11. 14.
Examples hereof in old Eli.
where no Vision is, there the people perish. Eli was not so much moved at the
report of the death of his two sons, as when he heard that the Ark of the Lord was captiued, Then he fell from his 1. Sam. 4 18. In his daughter.
seat backward, and died: And his daughter in Law, when she in like manner
heard that the Arc was captiued, brake her heart through displeasure,
notwithstanding they comforted her, because she had born a son; yet she
answered not, nor regarded it, but named the child Ichabod, No glory, saying,
1. Sam. 4. 20, 21
The glory is departed from Israel.

Nehemiah was (for himself) in a good estate in In Nehemiah. Nehem. 1. 2.
Nehem. 2. 1.
the service of King Artashaste: but when Hanani told him of the desolation of
Jerusalem, the sorrow of his heart made his countenance sad before the King;
the welfare of Jerusalem was dearer unto him, then the welfare of his own
estate. But now the Church is full of bastard children, who have no compassion
of her estate; if they, as the Prophet speaks of carnal Israelites, be at
ease themselves, Amos 6. 1, 6.
they sorrow not for the affliction of Joseph.

Again, here is a plain difference, between To Christians the opening of the
Bible is a joy, to Antichristians a grief.
such as are inspired with the Spirit of Christ, and others possessed with the
spirit of Antichrist: the opening of the Bible to the one is a matter of their
joy; to the other, a matter of their grief. John weeps because the Book was
closed; Antichrist and his crew grudge, and rage this day, because the Book is
opened. These are the brood of these Heretics, whom Tertullian of old called
Lucifugae, they hate the light, because it conuinceth them of darkness.

VERSE. 5. And one of the Elders said unto me, Weep not, behold the Lion,
which is of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has obtained to open the
Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof.
WE have heard before S. John mourning: Consolation comes to the godly after
their mourning.
now we hear him comforted: This is God his order; Blessed are they who
mourn, for they shall be comforted: Mourning must go before consolation*
sorrowful tears are the seed of plentiful joy: No man puts new wine into
old bottels: Math. 9. 17. Cant. 1. 1.
The consolations of the Lord are better then wine, they comfort, they refresh,
they strengthen the soul; but the old heart is not capable of them: we must
therefore by mourning empty our hearts of our old sins, before the Lord
replenish them with his new consolations: They went weeping and Psalm. 126. 6.
carried precious seed, but, they shall return with joy, end bring their
sheaues.

The matter of his comfort is taken from All comfort is in Christ, none without
him in the creature.
Christ; so long as he looked to the creatures, he found nothing but matter of
mourning: so shall it be with all them who seek comfort in the creature, as it
was with that woman diseased of the bloody issue; she spent all that she had on
the Physicians, but in vain, she was never healed of her disease till she came
to Christ.

And here we have Christ two ways described, The description of Christ is
taken out of holy Scriptures.
first, as Saint John hears of him; secondly, as he sees him. The Elder who
describes him, speaks of Christ out of Moses and the Prophets, so do all they
who speak by the Spirit of God: Nec ipsi Tertul. de praescrip. (...).
quidem Apostoli de suo arbitrio, quicquam quod inducerent, eligerunt. Yea the
Apostles themselves took not this liberty, to bring into the Church anything
of their own, but as they received from Christ, so they delivered to us. Hic
primum per Prophetas, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 2.
deinde per s^ipsum, postea per Apostolos, quantum satis esse i^dicauit,
loquutus est. And Christ Jesus, first by his Prophets, next by himself, last
by his Apostles, has spoken as much as he thought to be sufficient: so that
now, Non relictus est hominum Hilar. lib. 7. de trinit* ^om.
eloquiis de Dei rebus, alius praeterqua^ Dei sermo. There is no other speech
of divine things left unto man, but the Word of God. Let no man be wise above
that which is written. That he calls our Lord, The Lion which is of the Tribe
of Judah; he takes it from Moses, and again, that he calls him The root of
David, he takes it from Esaias.

He is called a Lion, to the terror of his enemies Why Christ is called a Lion.
and comfort of his own. Satan is called also by Saint Peter, A devouring
Lion, but like the Lion 1. Pet. 5. 8.
which Samson slew, and that other which David slew, and pulled his sheep out
of his mouth. These were sigures of our Lord, who has overcome the Devil, and
trampleth Satan under the feet of his Romans 16. 20.
Saints. It was a fearful sight at the first which Joshua saw at Jericho, a
man standing before him with a sword in his hand: but when Joshua demanded, Art
thou on our side, or against us? and received Joshua 5. 9, 10.
this answer, As a Captain of the Lords host I am now come: out of all doubt
it did greatly confirm him. And here at the first it may seem fearful,
that Christ is called a Lion: but mark that in the And yet such a Lion, as is
also a Lamb.
next verse he is called a Lamb. A Lion he is in respect of his enemies, to
vanquish them, and tear them in pieces. A Lamb he is in respect of his
me^knesse, patience, and willingness to suffer for his own. And therefore he
is not simply called a Lion, but A Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Naturallists have observed, that Lions are not cruel against their own kind;
yea they spare beasts of another kind that subject themselves unto them. If we
be the true Israelites of God, and submit our selves unto him, the Lion of Judah
his Tribe shall not be terrible unto us; the greater his power is, the greater
shall be our comfort.

The other style given unto him, is The root of Why Christ is called the Root
of David.
David; where it comes to be considered how Christ is called the Root of
David, since by the Prophet Esaias, he is called a graffe, or branch Esa. 11. 1.
and 10.
springing out of the root of Iesse. Yea there, in one chapter the Messia is
called the root of Iesse, and How the Messia was the root of Iesse, and Iesse
the root of the Messia.
Iesse again the root of the Messia; but this is in different respects. He is
a branch springing out of the stock of Iesse, for from him he took his
humane nature: and he is also a stock, into the which Iesse and all his fathers
according to the flesh had their being. As man, he took his flesh from them,
as God, he gave them their being. This is the question which our Savior
demanded of the Pharisees and they could not answer, How the Messia could be
David his son, and also David his Lord, Math. 22. 43. Psalm. 110. 1.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy
foot stool. For as Man, he is the son of David, and so is the branch: but
as God, he is David his Lord, and so is the root.

And that our Lord was made man of the seed What comfort we have that our Lord
was made man of the seed of man once sinful.
of David, is most comfortable for us, he might have created a new nature,
which had never sinned, but now he has assumed the nature that was once
sinful, and has fully separated it from sin, to join it in a personal, and
eternal union with his own divine nature; for the holy Ghost, who
ouershadowed the Virgin, could very well discern between the seed of David,
in the Virgins womb, and the sinful corruption of that seed: He took the
seed without the sin, and of it formed the body of Jesus; and therefore
Theod^ret bringing in Fla^anus, expounding the Angels words to Mary, speaks in
this manner, Non cogites corporalem Theodoret. dialog. 1. cap. 26.
contactum, nec consuetudinem coni^galem expecta: nam tuus Fabricator templum
suum corporeum, quod ex te nascetur, fabricabit: think not of any corporal
touching, look not for any carnal conjunction: He that made thee, will make to
himself a bodily temple, which shall be borne of thee, (...). And this should
serve Cap. 25. It assures us, that at length he shall separate our nature from
all sin.
to assure us that he, who has assumed our nature, and sanctified it fully
from all sin, that it might be united to himself, shall in his own good time
free our nature from all corruption of sin, and present us without spot or
blame to his Father, that we Ephesians. 5. 27.
may live a happy life, in holy fellowship and communion for ever with him.

The Papists not understanding this doctrine, Papists not understanding this,
do foolishly affirm that the Virgin Mary was without all sin.
spoil us of this comfort, in affirming that the virgin Mary, of whom our Lord
took our nature, was without sin. A false doctrine, unknown to antiquity.
It began in the days of Bernard, he cries out against it in his Epistle to
the Chanons of Lions, as against a novelty, a temeritie, and a superstition,
Lubenter gloriosa Virgo tal^ carebit honor, Bern. (...). 174.
the blessed and glorious Virgin willingly will want such an honor as this:
Solus enim Dominus Ibid.
Jesus de Spiritu sancto conceptus est, qui et solus ant^conceptum sanctus, quo
excepto, de c^tero vniuersos respicit ex Adam natos, quod vnus humiliter de
seipso, v^raciter consitetur, In miquitatibus (inquiens) conceptus A new
doctrine and a false, flatly convinced by antiquity.
sum, and in peccatis concepit me matter mea. For only the Lord Jesus was
conceived of the holy Ghost, and he also only before conception was holy,
he being excepted, that pertaines to all, who are borne of Adam, which one of
them humbly and truly confesses of himself, saying, I was borne in iniquity,
and in sin my Mother Psalm. 51. 5.
has conceived me.

Solus Christus dicere potuit, Ecce Princeps mundi John 14. Aug. tract. in
Joan. 41. cap. 8.
veniet, and in me nihil inven^et, de s^o dici poterat, qui non nouerat
peccatum. Only Jesus could say, Behold, the Prince of this world comes, and
finds nothing in me: It could be said of none but of him who knevv no
sin.

Again, Licet Christi conceptio sit munda, and absque Anselm. lib. 2. cap. 16.
carnalis delectationis peccato, Virgo tamen ipsa vnde assumptus est, in
iniquitatibus conc^pta est, quia and ipsa in Adamo peccauit, in quo omnes
peccauerunt. Albeit the conception of Christ was clean, and without all sin
of carnal delectation, yet the Virgin of whom he came, was herself conceived
in sin, begotten and borne a sinful woman, of sinful Parents: And who can
bring a clean thing out of silthinesse? Job 14. 4.
there is not one, to wit, among men. This is the only prerogative of Jesus,
that he was conceived of the holy Ghost.

VERSE. 6. Then I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the Throne, and of the four
living creatures, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb, as if he had
been killed, which had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven
Spirits of God sent into all the world.
AS before S. John heard of Christ by the ear, Many Christians by information,
not by inspiration.
so now he sees him by the eye. Information of the Church by the Word, is
necessary to go before: but then get we sure comfort, when God opens our
heart and our eyes to see, and to feel those things which we have heard: but
in this age there are many Christians by outward information, who as yet have
not been taught of God by by inward inspiration: these hear the Testimony of
God, but it is not confirmed in them. 1. Cor. 1. 6.


Now the place where S. John sees the Lord Jesus, is the midst of the throne. O
what a comfort is here for us, that our Savior and elder brother, clothed
with our nature, sits now in the midst of the throne! He has sent his
Spirit down into the earth, and carried our flesh up into heaven, Great
comfort, that our elder brother, clothed with our nature, is in the midst of
the throne.
and thereby has possessed us in our heavenly inheritance. And again, since
we have him there an Advocate, and an Agent for us, what should we fear, or
what need is there to seek any other to entreat for us?

A Lamb.] Under the Law was our Savior Christ figured by a Lamb, to express
his meekness and patience in suffering.
figured oftentimes by a Lamb, and the Paschall Lamb, and the Lamb offered
in the daily sacrifice morning and evening; these were types of Christ Jesus,
and according thereunto is He here represented to S. John, and by this type
first his meekness in patient suffering is expressed unto us: for as a Lamb
he was dumb before the shearer. Esa. 53. 7.
And next, the great profit and vtility redounding And next, to express the
great benefit that from him redounds to us.
to us by him, is declared unto us; for all the good that is in him, is
imparted and communicate unto us, Lacte eius pascimur, vellere tegimur,
sanguine purgamur; By his milk we are nourished, by his blood we are purged,
by the fleece of his wool we are covered, we put him on as the garment of our
righteousness. Since Jason and his Argonaut^e endured such travails for
obtaining that golden fleece at Colchis, (so did fabulous writers call it:)
what shame is it for us to refuse greater pains, that we may be made
partakers of this golden, and indeed most precious fleece of the Lamb, in
whom we may have all good things, whereof we stand in need.

As if he had been slain.] This speech renders Christ was indeed, and really
slain.
no patrocinie to those fantastic men, who think Christ was not slain, but
some other for him; for in the ninth verse following, the chief reason why
Saints acknowledge praise to be due to the Lamb, is, Because thou wast killed.
We are therefore to observe, that these articles do not always import a
similitude, but the very certainety, The manner of speech ( as if he had been
slain) imports that he was surely slain. Ioh. 1. 14.
and truth of the thing it self, as when Saint John says, We saw his glory,
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God: (...): The meaning is, we saw
him shining in such glory, as is competent to the only begotten Son of God.
And again, when the Apostle says, ^. Cor. 3. 18.
We are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, (...): that is, according to the powerful operation of the Spirit of
the Lord. And so here, when he says, I saw (...), a Lamb as if he had been
killed: the meaning is, I saw a Lamb, who indeed and verily was killed.

And this manner of speech imports these Christ was slain, but so. that he
lived again.
things: first, that albeit our Lord was slain, and that Satan and his
Instruments thought, that by death they had utterly undone him; yet was it far
otherwise: for by his resurrection on the third day, He was declared mightily
to be the Son of Romans 1. 4.
God, and not under the power of death: and therefore, in this Vision he is
represented rather like unto one that was slain, then utterly slain indeed.
Next, as our Savior, after his resurrection, appeared to S. Thomas with the
scarres of his Why he appeared after his resurrection with the scarres of his
wounds.
wounds in his blessed Body, so may we religiously think he appears in this
Vision to S. John; yea, even in the last Day he shall show his Body, which was
pierced, to the great terror of his enemies, and comfort of his own. Neither
is this This is no argument of impotency in him, but rather proves his mighty
power.
to be thought any dishonor to Christ, or impotency, that he appears in the
similitude of a wounded man; but rather the high praise of his love, in that
for his Church her sake, he was content to be wounded to the death: And no
less great commendation of his power, who overcame his enemies by that same
death, by which they thought to overcome him. Serpens mortuus Macar. hom. 11.
vi^os Serpents superabat, and Christus mortuus Serpentem in cord viuentem
superauit: That Serpent which had no life, overcame those living Serpents which
stung the Israelites; and Christ, by dying overcame that Serpent the devil,
who lived in our heart. Magna quidem infirmitas mori, sed plane Bern. de
passione Domini.
sic mori virtus immensa est: It is indeed a great infirmity to die; but so to
die, as by dying to destroy death, is an exceeding great power. Horns in
Scripture signisie power: For these se^ Horns are ascribed to Christ.


Which had seven Horns.] Horns, in holy Scripture, oftentimes signify power,
fortitude, and Empyring: they are taken both in good and in cuill part; for, to
the wicked are ascribed Horns, whereby they push the Saints; and here Zach. 1.
seven Horns are ascribed to Christ, figuring the perfection of his strength,
and power, and absolute authority, whereby he protects his Saints. Sometime
there is attributed to him only one Sometime one Horn is attributed unto
Christ. Psalm. 92. 10.
Horn; for so the Kingdom of the Messia, and his exaltation to it, is
compared by David to the lifting up of the Horn of the Unicorn; Thou shall
exalt my Horn like the Unicorns, and I shall be anointed with fresh oil.
Naturalists write of the Three properties of the Unicorn his Horn.
Unicorns Horn, that of all other, it is the most firm and solid; secondly,
the most pleasant; and thirdly, the most profitable, as being a sovereign
preservative against all poison: The Beasts of the field, as they record,
attend till the Unicorn dip his horn in the water, then come they and drink.
Properly therefore is the Kingdom of Christ expressed by the Unicorns Horn,
of all other the most firm and durable, the most beautiful, the most
profitable; He has changed the bitter waters of Marah, and made them sweet;
neither is there any thing so deadly, which his Horn heals not, and makes it
to serve for the salvation of his own.

And seven eyes.] As in his seven Horns his Seven Eyes ascribed to Christ, to
show his most perfect wisdom.
complete power is signified, so in his seven Eyes, his complete Wisdom.
These two do greatly commend the royal authority of our King: He is wise, and
will do nothing that he should not; for he sees all, and knows perfectly the
quality of every creature, and the estate of every cause. Again, he is strong,
and able to do whatsoever he will.

His Eyes are of two sorts: Eyes of Providence, He has Eyes of Prouidece,
these look to all, and Eyes of Grace, these look to his own children.
and Eyes of Grace: by his eyes of Providence he looks unto all things, and
there is no place nor people in the world, to whom these Eyes are not extended;
but by the Eyes of his Grace he looks to his own, as he did to Jerusalem
restored, and sends them this blessing Grace: Grace be Zach. 4. 7.
unto it: And herein has the Lord magnified his mercy toward us, above many
other more mighty Kingdoms in the world; that where, by the Eyes of his
Providence he looks unto the rest, he has cast the Eyes of his Mercy and
Grace upon us: The Lord has not dealt so with every Nation. Psalm. 147. 20.


Yet more plainly: In the Text, these seven Christ received fullness of grace,
that he might give to his Church. Ioh. 3. 34.
Eyes are expounded to be the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the
earth. Seven is the number of perfection, noting that fullness of grace which
is in the Lamb; for he received not the Spirit by measure; and what he has
received, he retains not to himself; but, as here is said, he sends it out,
that of his fullness we might all receive grace for grace.

And hereof comes the continuance, and Hereof comes the conservation of the
Church on earth, because It is furnished from the heaven.
conservation of the Church upon earth, because it is continually furnished
with grace from the Lamb, he has the seven Stars in his hand, and holds
them out to such parts of the world, as pleases him: he furnishes graces of
his Spirit to his servants the Preachers, according to the times Reu. 1. 16.
wherein they live; yea, and to every one of his Saints in particular. This
same Lord, who once according to his promise sent down the holy Spirit in a
visible manner upon his Apostles, in the similitude of fiery cloven Tongues,
does daily send him from the Throne of Grace in an invisible manner: And this
was properly figured in a Vision to Zachary, wherein he saw a golden ^ach. 4.
2, 3. This is figured in Zachary his Vision of the Golden Candles^lcke.
Candlestick with seven Lamps, every Lamp having a several pipe, through the
which Oil for intertainement of the light in every Lamp is conveyed from the
two Olives, which stand before the Ruler of the world. Let therefore Satan and
his instruments rage as they list, let them labor what they can to put out the
light of the Candlestick; yea, let them presume that it is possible for them to
root out the very name of Israel from under Psalm. 83. 4.
heaven, yet it cannot be: for the stability and continuance of the holy
Ministry in the Church, with light and grace in it, stands in this, that it
is furnished from heaven, the Eyes of the Lamb look on his Saints, and he
sends down his Spirit upon them; and from the Ruler of the world, the oil of
Grace is, by secret pipes and conduits conveyed to his Candlestick on earth:
And who is able to interrupt the course thereof?

VERSE. 7. And he came and took the Book out of the right hand of him, that
sits upon the Trone.
HEre, in effect, no other thing is represented, then that which was openly
proclaimed from heaven: first, at Jordan; next, upon Mount Tab^, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him: For by this Type the Lord
Jesus Christ only authorized to be the great and public Doctor of his Church.
is declared to be the only Doctor of his Church, who receives the Book from
the Father, and out of it reueales to his Church the counsel of God, which
neither Angel nor man was able to do. As Moses went up to the Mount, and
received Math. 17.
Exodus 32.
the Tables of the Law, and gave them to Israel: so our Mediator, who came from
the bosom of the Father, has brought down to us the knowledge of his Will.
Let us not presume to go up to the Mountain, to enquire any thing which our
Moses has not taught us, left we die; let us remember our place, and stand
low: we are disciples, bound by divine Proclamation to hear him, whom the
Father has sent unto us, if we would be saved.

VERSE. 8. And when he had taken the Book, the four living creatures, and
the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harps
and golden vials, full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.
NOw follows the third part of this Chapter, The third part of the chapter
containing a threefold thanksgiving.
containing a threefold thanksgiving for the benefit of this Revelation. The
first song is sung by Angels, and redeemed Saints coniunctly, in 1 Of Angels.
the eight, ninth and tenth verses. The second is sung by Angels severally, in
the eleventh and 2 Of Saints redeemed.
twelfth verses. The third, by all creatures in their kind, in the thirteenth
verse, whereunto Angels 3 Of all creatures.
again and redeemed Saints say Amen in the last verse.

Cotterius confesses that this place did trouble him greatly; and no marvel,
for the four beasts he expounds to be Veritas Euangelit quadri^ormis, the
fourefold verity of the Gospel. No marvel This verse vexe^h them who expound
the some and twenty Elders to be four and twenty books.
therefore, as I have said, that both he, and others, who expound the four and
twenty Elders to be four and twenty books, find themselves straited with
this place, wherein the Spirit of God plainly expounds himself, that the
four and twenty Elders are they, whom God has redeemed by his blood out of
every kindred, tongue, people, and Nation.

But leaving them, this comes here first to be observed, that as before they
fell down and worshipped The divinity of Christ proved, in that Angels do
worship him.
the Ruler of the World, that sits upon the Throne, so now they fall down and
worship the Lamb. Saint Paul uses this as an argument to prove the divinity
of Christ Jesus, taken out of the 97. Psalm, Consider how great is he, of
whom it Heb. 1. 5.
is said, Let all the Angels of heaven worship him. Let Heretics therefore be
silent; since the whole Congregation of Angels, and Saints redeemed, worship
him as GOD.

In this thanksgiving, these four circumstances Four circumstances to be
considered in this song of Angels.
are to be considered. First, who are the Musicians that sing. Next, with what
gesture. Thirdly, what are their musical instruments. And lastly, what is
their song.

The Musicians are four living creatures, representing 1 Who are the
Musicians, figured by four beasts.
the principal order of Angels nearest unto the Throne, and four and twenty
Elders representing the whole Church and company of Saints redeemed. By nature
Angels and men were at variance; for man having become by sin an enemy unto
God, had the Angels enemies unto him: a figure whereof we have in that Angel
Genesis 3. 24.
who stood with a sword in the entry of Paradise, Angels and men at variance
before, now sing one song.
to hold Adam out of it: but now man being reconciled to God by Jesus, Angels
are also reconciled with man; For it pleased the Father to set at Colos. 1. 20.
peace through the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the
things in heaven: so that now they agree in one harmony to praise the Lord.
Yea, strange it is, that they who before were figured by Lions, Bullocks,
Eagles, and men, are now brought in singing one song. This is to magnify Yea
creatures of most contrary kind, by Christ are made to concord.
the effectual virtue of the Redeemer, who has reconciled God and man, Angel
and man, yea man with man; so that most sierce and barbarous natures are now
made peaceable, meek and loving one to another, by the power of his grace.

And this is it which was foretold by Esaias of the This is that wonderful peace
foretold by Esaiah, fulfilled by Messia Esa. 11. 6.
kingdom of the Messia: The Wolse shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard
shall lie with the Kidde, the Calfe and the Lion shall feed together.
Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of Christ Jesus, Clemens Alex. in
exbor. ad G^es.
calls him Nouum quendam Citharaedum. What the Grecians spoke of their Orpheus,
that by the sweet harmony of his music, he did mitigate and tame the most wild
and furious beasts, is only and in truth done by our Christ, Solus ipse feras
mansuefacit, for wild beasts of all sorts are tamed by him. Volucres, flying
fowls, that is, wicked men carried aloft upon the wings of vanity, them he
makes solid, and establishes their hearts by grace; Serpents, creeping
things, figuring deceivers with their subtle wiles, them he makes upright. He
tameth Leones and Lupos, Lions and ravening wolves, cruel and bloody men, he
turns into meek and merciful men. Such a ravening Wolf was S. Paul of the
Tribe of Benjamin; but Christ Jesus, of a Persecuter, converted him to a
Preacher. Yea lapides et ligna, such as worshipped stocks and stones, and had
no more spiritual life in them then stones have, has he raised, quickened, and
made them children to Abraham. What then shall we say Miserable are they, who
now under the Kingdom of Christ cannot be moved to peace.
of these men, who for small offenses by no means can be reconciled to their
brethren? Surely they are yet strangers from this grace; in conceit they fly
higher then Angels, in stubbornness harder then stones: in fiercenes of nature
more barbarous then beasts are they, who by the grace of Jesus are not tamed,
and made loving to their brethren.

The second circumstance is their gesture in 2 The second circumstance notes
their gesture in praising God, as it was represented to Saint John.
worshipping, noted in these words, They fell down before the Lamb; for still
Saint John speaks of these things, as they appeared to him in the Vision.
Always by their example, they learn us with humbled hearts and bodies to
praise the Lord, which as it is a duty whereunto we are bound, for 2. Cor. 6.
20.
so says the Apostle, Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in
your body, and spirit, for they are Gods: so it renders to our selves very
great comfort: for the time is at hand, wherein our bodies must be committed to
the grave, then the tongue will be silenced, the eye closed, and no member of
the body will be able to do, as now it may. So long therefore as we have the
use of them, let us make them weapons of righteousness for the service Romans 6.
of our God: let the eye mourn for sin, and Bodily humiliation required in
the service of our God, and how it is comfortable for our selves, so to do.
look up for mercy; let the hands be lifted up, as an evening sacrifice; let
the tongue speak to his praise; let the knees bow unto him that made the^.
Thus if we use them, so long as we have them to his honor, we may rest
assured, that he will honor them, since his promise is, I will honor them that
honor 1. Sam. 2. 30.
me. Even in the grave shall the Lord watch over them, to keep the very dust of
them. And howsoever the body be sown in dishonor, yet shall it 1. Cor. 15. 43.
be raised in glory; it was the temple of the holy Ghost, and he will not fail
to restore and reedifie it. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
Romans 8. 11.
dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, because that his Spirit dwells in you.

The third circumstance, is of the instruments 3 The instruments wherewith they
praise God. 1. Harpes. 2. Vials.
which they use in his praises. It is said, Every one of them had Harps and
golden Vials full of odours, none of them wants, every one of them have. It
contents them not that their companions praise God beside them, every one of
them have their own Harp, and praise God for themselves. Let us learn of
them, how we should behave our selves in the assembly of Saints. Under the Law
no man might appear empty before the Lord: it is now a greater sin under
the Gospel, to come to the House of God, and no sacrifice in our heart to
offer unto the Lord. Let us take heed to our Every Angel has his instrument
for Gods praise, learning every man to do the like.
selves, the Lord knows his own. Israelites in whom there is no guile, when
they sacrifice, then he smells a sweet savor: hypocrites he knows also,
that sit in the seat of sacrificers, but offer no sacrifice to the Lord; they
may mask themselves, Ioh. 1.
but the Lord cannot be deceived, for he knows Genesis 8. 21.
them as they are, and will deal with them, as they deal with him; With the
upright, thou will show Psalm. 18.
thy self upright: and, The Lord will do well to those that be good, and true
in their hearts. But those that Psalm. 125. 5.
turn aside by their crooked ways, the Lord will lead with the workers of
iniquity.

Their Harps note two things; first, the great Their harpes do note two things.
joy they have in praising GOD. There is no joy on earth comparable to that,
which is found 1 The great joy they have in praising God.
in the praising of GOD, and praying unto him. When our Savior prayed, then
was his countenance changed: when David played upon Mat. 17.
the Harp, the evil spirit that troubled Saul, departed 1. Sam. 16. 23.
from him: and when we get hearts to pray, or praise the Lord, do we not find
by experience, that then our troubles are mitigated, our perturbations
pacified? then Satan is confounded, and we our selves are comforted: these are
the sweet effects of the souls harping unto God.

Again, it notes the sweet harmony, and concent 2 The sweet harmony and
concent that is among them. Psalm. 133. 1.
that is among them: They are many, and have several Harpes, but all agree in
one sound, and Song: O how good, and how comely a thing it is for brethren to
dwell together! O how great is the glory of Saints, when they all speak one
thing, and all mind one thing!

This was the happiness of the Primitive Act. 1.
Church, the multitude of believers was of one heart, but shortly after were
they divided, by an unnecessary 1. Cor. 1.
schism; Some said, I am Paul's, and some, I am Apollos. The like preposterous
zeal makes a great distemperature, and discordant sound in many Professors of
our time, without any cause. The evil is more then we can mend, at least, let
us Sin of this age, that the bond of love is broken by them, who prosesse one
faith.
mourn for it, and pray, Thy will, O Lord, be done in earth, as it is in
heaven: And let every man take heed unto himself; he is a sacrilegious renter
of the Church, who breaks the bond of love with his brother, in whom he sees
no rupture of the unity of faith.

But for our further instruction, let us know, that The right Harp of a
Christian is his Heart.
the Harp of a Christian, wherewith he praises God, is his Heart; the strings
of the Harp are the affections of the Heart, which must be well tuned and
prepared, before they can make any melody to the Lord; My heart is prepared,
and I will sing, Psalm. 57.
said David. Then is the heart like unto a ten stringed Then is the Heart well
tuned, when it answers the Lord in obedience to his Law.
Instrument, when it is inclined to the obedience of God his ten commandments;
for as a Musical Instrument makes no pleasant complete sound, if any string
thereof be broken; so the heart of man, if it be possessed, and thralled with
any vice, cannot rightly praise the Lord. The truth is, we can keep no
commandment of the Law, as we should, this is the perfection of degrees, which
in this life no man can attain unto: This a Christian does in perfection of
parts, not of degrees.
yet has the Christian a begun obedience to all the commandments of God,
which is the perfection of parts: Both these are true, the most perfect
Christian cannot keep one of the Lords commandments as he should, and so we
deny unto him the perfection of degrees; and yet he keeps all the
commandments of God by a begun obedience, and so we grant to him the
perfection of parts; for there is no grace needful to salvation, but every
true Christian has some part, and measure thereof.

Bastard Professors cannot make this melody, Bastard Professors reproved.
they flatter themselves because they are free of some sins, when
notwithstanding they are captiued by other great sins, which reign in them,
and command them. The commandments of the Law are so linked together, that he
who transgresses Iam. 2. 10.
one, transgresses all. If one string of this Instrument be broken, all the
rest are distempered: and therefore do tehy far deceive themselves, who
divide the Law: In some things they are content to subject themselves unto it;
in others, usurp a liberty to break it, which will never be allowed. These
answer the Lord, as an Echo does They answer the Lord, as the Echo does a
man's voice.
the voice of a man, it resounds in part, but not wholly: or like Naaman, are
content to serve God, but with an exception, or reservation of some sins,
which they cannot, nor will not cast siom them. There is no man so evil, but
in some things he will seem to be good: but this is not the good, which the
Lord requires; such evil diuiders can make no concord of spiritual Music to
the Lord.

Now with their Harpes, they are said to have With their Harpes they have also
golden Vials.
golden Vials full of Odours; and those Odours are expounded by the Lord, to be
the Prayers of the Saints, which opens a clear entrance to these words,
which otherwise had been more obscure. A Vial is a vessel narrow beneath,
wide above: now this Vial being also a figure of the The heart should be like
a Vial, and wherein.
Heart, shows how the heart of man should be enlarged toward things which are
above, but contracted beneath; open toward God, but closed toward the world,
and things therein. Therefore the Church is compared to a Garden enclosed,
Cant. 4. 12.
wherein nothing can enter, but that which comes from above. And the Vials are
said to be It should be golden; that is, holy and pure.
of gold, because the Heart, that praises the Lord, should be holy and pure: I
will that men pray every where lifting up pure hands: As also to show, 2. Tim.
2. 8.
that a pure heart, praising the Lord, is precious and honorable in the eyes
of God: For vessels of gold, and vessels of honor, are put by the Apostle 2.
Tim. 2. 20.
for one and the same.

These Vials are said to be full of Odours, which Prayers of Saints, figured by
sweet Odours.
are expounded to be the prayers of Saints: So were they figured under the
Law, by sweet Incense; and such as were spiritual among the Jews understood
this very well, that it was not the external sweet Odor wherein the Lord
delighted: they used the Ceremonial Incense, but neglected not the Spiritual
Incense figured thereby, as is evident out of David his prayer; Let my prayer
Psalm. 141. 2.
be directed before thee as Incense: And properly is prayer figured by Incense;
Quia sursum fertur oration, and coelestia quaerit: for the fume thereof ascends,
and seeks heavenly things: As also because it is sweet and pleasant to the
Lord. The prayers of Saints are odoriferous and pleasant smells unto the Lord;
as when Noah sacrificed, the Lord smelled a sweet savor of rest. Genesis 8. 21.


But the Bride, and the Bridegroom have their Both the Bride and Bridegroom
have their own Odours.
own Odours, which either of them presents to other. The Perfumes and sweet
Ointments of Christ, are two; first, his Merits, for he is the Angel having a
Golden Censor full of Odours, Revel. 8. 3.
and these ascend to his Father: secondly, his Christ has twofold Odours: One
that ascends to God his Father; Cant. 1. Another that descends to his brethren.
How the smell of these Odours should allure us.
Compassions are called sweet Ointments, and these descend upon his brethren:
Thy Name is as an Ointment powered out, says the Church to her Savior. His
Compassions are not locked up in his Treasury, like precious Ointment enclosed
in a Box, but they are compared to Ointment powered out, the fragrant smell
whereof should allure us to love him, and run after him. His sweet mercies
declared upon so many, stand for examples to us, to confirm us in assurance of
the like mercy, if repenting of our sins we turn to the Lord. The Lepers
came to him, and were cleansed; the Blind cried to him, and received their
sight; the Paralitique was carried to him, and was healed; the Adulteress was
brought to him, and was absolved; the Persecutor of Saints was pardoned, his
own disciple that denied him; yea, the Jews who crucified him, were converted
and received to mercy: In odore horum curremus post Bernard.
te: There are sweet Ointments powered out, and in the savor of them will we
run after thee. We are more then senseless, if the sweet smell of them allure
us not also to come, that we may be refreshed by them.

The Church has in like manner her twofold How the Church has also twofold
Odours.
Odours: First the Odor of Contrition; next, of Thanksgiving: the
ingredients, whereof the Odor of Contrition is made, are our sins, and 1
Odours of Contrition, and what are the ingredients thereof.
a godly sorrow for them, every child of God gathers together in one handful
his sins, not sparing any that he knows, or can remember, and in the Mortar
of a sorrowful heart, he brayes them with the Pestell of Contrition, and with
the Publican beats on his breast, whereof a sweet and pleasant savor
ascends to the Lord. The other 2 Odours of Thanksgiving, and what are the
ingredients thereof.
Perfume has no ingredients, but Gods sweet Mercies, with a godly rejoicing in
them. Now these Mercies are so many, that none can count them in order; yet the
Saints, so far, as of weakness they may, gather them together in one mass,
by diligent meditation of them, they are stirred up to thanksgiving; and this
is a sweet smelling sacrifice unto the Lord.

The Jesuits of Rhemes abuse this place, to This place abused by Papists, to
defend prayer unto Saints departed. Rhemists.
prove the lawfulness of their prayers unto Saints departed: for so they write
upon it: It is plain here, that the Saints in heaven offer up the prayers of
faithful and holy persons on earth, and that they have knowledge of our
affairs and desires. But this Text offers not any such thing, as we shall
show at length. These Saints represent the whole Church Militant and
Triumphant, every one of them is said to have their own Vial, and no word here
of any prayers made by any of them for others; beside, that the knowledge of
our desires appertains to none but the Lord, who searches the reins and the
heart.

This doubt cannot be loosed, by saying that the Four sorts of prayer
mentioned in holy Scripture.
Saints departed offer up thanksgiving; for the word used here, is not (...),
but (...). Some make this answer, but indeed it takes not away the doubt; for
understanding therefore of this place, we must know that there are four sorts
of prayer reckoned here by the Apostle: the first is (...), a prayer for
auerting of evil; the second is (...), a prayer for some good that is lacking;
the third is (...), a prayer; whereby one of us 1. Tim. 2.
prays for another; and the fourth is (...), a prayer whereby we give thanks
to God.

All these four sorts are used by Saints militant: Of these four two only are
ascribed to Saints triumphant.
two of them only are ascribed to Saints triumphant, namely, (...), and (...),
thanksgiving, and supplication, for the good which they want. Where if it be
asked, What good want they who Saints triumphant want two things for which they
pray.
are in heaven, for which they have need to pray? The answer is, They want a
twofold good, which God has promised, and they long to enjoy. First, they
want their bodies, without which the souls 1 They want their bodies.
in heaven cannot have full joy; for by their first creation they were joined
together, as inseparable companions not to be divided, if they had not fallen
in the transgression; therefore it is, that the one cannot be fully contented,
wanting the other, for which to fulfill their joy, they pray for restitution of
their bodies. Secondly, they want their 2 They want their brethren
brethren, the remanent members of Christ his mystical body, requisite
necessarily to their perfection: for God has so provided, that they without
us Heb. 11. 40.
should not be perfected. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, have Without these they cannot
be perfected.
great joy in heaven, but not full joy, because they will not be perfected
without their brethren. That therefore the mystical body of Christ may be
co^plete, and so their joy fulfilled, they pray for Christ his second coming,
which cannot be, till the last and youngest of the sons of God be borne, and
brought to the fellowship of Jesus Christ. And this is made clear hereafter,
when the souls under the Altar are brought in crying, How long, O Reave. 6.
They cannot pray for our particular necessities.
Lord, how long, etc! For this is the voice of them who want something they
would feign have, and yet are sure to enjoy it. Thus we see then, that the
prayers of Saints triumphant are general, they pray for their bodies and
brethren; but to gather of this that they know our necessitios* our particular
tentations, far less our secret desires, is but a doting dream: and if we
shall a little insist in this same metaplior of Odor, or Incense, it shall
discover their error more clearly. This same place by three arguments improues
prayer to Saints.


For first, Incense offered to God, might not be made, but in such a manner and
with such ingredients as God himself commanded; teaching us, Exodus 30.
that prayer unto God should be made, not as we 1 Incense might be made no
other way then God commanded: so prayer, etc.
fancy to our selves, but as he has commanded us. Now, if we shall look
to this commandment, it directs us to pray unto God, and to none other; there
is the voice of God the Father, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou Psalm. 50.
shall glorify me. There again is the instruction of God the Son, When ye
pray, pray in this manner, Math. 6. 9.
Our Father which art in heaven; and there is the direction of God the holy
Ghost; he teaches us in our prayer to cry Abba, Father. No word here Romans 8.
of any prayer to Abraham, Moses, or Esaias, to Cherubim, or Seraphim, to Angels,
or Saints departed.

Secondly, Incense might not be burnt but upon 2 Incense might not be burnt but
upon the golden Altar: so prayer may not be offered to God in the name of any
but Jesus.
the golden Altar only, whereof there was but one, figuring the Lord Jesus;
teaching us that our prayers may not be offered to God in the name of any
other, but Jesus Christ only; For there is not any other name under Heaven, by
which we may be saved; and, In him only is the Father well pleased. Math. 17.
5.


Thirdly, it was not lawful for any man to make 3 Incense made for the Lord,
might not be applied to any but to the Lord. So prayer, etc.
an odor for his own pleasure, or private use, of those gummes whereof the
Lord commanded his Incense to be made, and that under a most strait penalty;
for so stands the Law, Ye shall not make unto you any composition like to this
Perfume, it shall be holy for the Lord: whosoever shall make like unto Exodus
30. 37, 38
that, to smell thereof, even he shall be cut off from his people. And this
does plainly teach us, that no creature should smell the savor of our Prayer:
it is the Incense holy to the Lord, and appertains to our God only.

Thus we see, how Papists when they seek patrocinie What patrocinie Papists
find in Scripture.
for their errors from holy Scripture, do it with no better success, then
Ioab did, when he made his refuge to the horns of the Altar; he fled unto
it, to seek the safety of his life; but he was pulled from it, and executed
to the death: so they, when they bring in Scripture to defend their errors, do
in effect bring it, to destory themselves.

But to leave them: let us consider for our comfort, Why prayer is compared to
perfume.
how our prayer is compared to a perfume. All the spices of Myrrh, Cynamon,
and what* is most excellent on earth, cannot make such a perfume; from heaven
it comes, and unto heaven it returns. O what a great mercy is this! we are
not yet able to ascend our selves, and yet have we this liberty and privilege,
as to send our Ambassadors in our name before us, which are so welcome to the
divine Majesty, that he accounts of them, as of sweet odor and perfume sent
up unto him. Let us mark this: for many times the weak Comfort for a
Christian when he faints in prayer.
Christian faints, and becomes remiss in prayer, because he disesteemes of his
own prayer. This is a policy and tentation of the old Serpent, to make thee
neglect that which he knows to be most hurtful to himself, most helpful to
thee, and most acceptable to thy God; but do it not: Noli vilipendere Bern.
or ationem tuam, quoniam ille, ad quem or as, non vilipendit; Do not vilipend
thine own prayer; for he to whom thou prayest, vilipends it not: it is a sweet
odor unto the Lord.

VERSE. 9. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
Book, and to open the scales thereof, because thou wast killed, and have
redeemed us to GOD by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and Nation.
THe fourth point to be considered here, is their The fourth circumstance is
their song.
Song, which now follows. It is called a new Song; not as some Divines
think, because it is an Euangelike song: for even under the Law they had their
new songs. Sing unto him a new Psalm. 33. 3.
song, sing cheerfully with a loud voice. And again, He has put in my mouth
a new song of praise to our Psalm. 40. 3.
God. And again, Sing unto the Lord a new song, Esa. 42. 10.
and his praise from the ends of the earth. Both before the Law, and under it,
they had the Gospel; yea their ceremonial law was Euangelium inuolutum, a
Gospel enclosed in ceremonies and figures.

It is therefore called a new song, first, in comparison For three causes is
their song called a new song.
of the preceding song, which we have in the end of the fourth chapter; there
they praised him for the benefit of Creation, here they praise 1
him for the benefit of Redemption. Secondly, it 2
is called a new song, as his Majesty has well observed, because our
Redemption ought to be new and fresh in the hearts of all them, that would be
accounted thankful. Thirdly, it is called a new song, in respect 3
of the new affection, wherewith Saints praise God; and this new affection
arises of new sight of mercies, which are discovered to Saints, so often as they
look into the work of Redemption, the height, the depth, the length, and
breadth of this love of God cannot be comprehended. But as the redeemed Saints
get new sight and sense of it, so out of renewed affections do they sing a new
song to the Lord.

But because Angels also sing their part of this New matter of joy ministered to
Saints and Angels, makes always a new song.
new song, we must see how it is competent to them; what benefit they have by
the Redemption of Jesus, we shall hear shortly; only now we touch the new
song; they, and redeemed Saints glorified in heaven, cannot but sing a new
song, because they find always in GOD new matter of joy, which moves them with
renewed affections to praise him. So infinite a Good is the Lord, that they
find always new good coming from the Lord to refresh them, not that at any
time they have weariness, but for the variety of joys wherewith they are
continually delighted: for in Psalm. 36. 8.
his face is the fulness of joy. He satisfies his Saints with the fatness of
his house, and gives them drink out of the River of his pleasure.

Properly here is a River of pleasure, ascribed to Change of joy in heaven
without weariness, or want of joy, expressed by rivers of pleasure.
the Lord: for his joys flow continually, they never dry up nor decay; after
present joy, succeeds other joy, like water in a lively River succeeding to
water: there is change of joys, without want of joys, they are not weary of
that which they have, and yet by looking on his face, are comforted with that
which they had not. How can they then but sing always a new song? O happy life,
wherein Angels, and the spirits of just and perfect Heb. 12. 23.
men are satiate, and satisfied by looking to that Image whereunto once they
were made! and here is our only comfort, that when we awake, we Psalm. 17. 15.
shall be satisfied with that Image. O Lord hasten that day.

There is nothing on earth so excellent, but continual Earthly pleasure, if it
be perpetual, becomes painful.
looking on it, breeds a lothing and disdain of it. Truth it is, many are the
pleasures which God has placed in the creatures, for the comfort of man even
upon earth: but we may know by experience, that the greatest pleasures here,
and the most beautiful and delectable sights the creature can render, if they
be perpetual, they become painful. It is not so with the joys of heaven, it
is not so with the sight of the Creator; the Angels, who for their continual
beholding of his face are called Aphnim, are never weary to behold him,
because, as we have said, every new sight brings with it new delight, and new
pleasure.

Thou art worthy.] The tenor of their song follows, In the tenor of their song
they give all worthiness to Christ.
wherein, as before they cast their golden Crowns before him that sits upon
the Throne, so now they ascribe all worthiness to the Lamb: the Angels of
heaven acknowledge it, Saints militant and triumphant confess it; no other
voice is heard in the true Church, but Thou art worthy: both Angel and man
empty themselves of all praise, yea of all opinion, or conceit of worthiness or
merit; the contrary voice heard in the Popes Church, proves it Antichristian.
The chair of None but he should sit in the chair of merit.
merit is proper to Christ, none, without Laesae Maiestatis, may sit down in it
but himself. The benefit of his merit belongs to all his Saints; the praise of
worthiness and meriting is reserved only to himself; eand this appears more
evidently, by the reason which they subioyne.

Because thou wast killed.] To whom should the For he only was killed for us.
praise of a Redeemer be given? To him only that was killed for us. Saint Paul
asks a question of the Schismatiques of Corinth, Was Paul crucified for you?
He could not abide that some of them should be called Paulists, some Petrists,
and some Apolimists, he would not have them named from any other, but
Christians from Christ, because neither Paul, nor Peter, nor Apollo was
crucified A proper question for Papists.
for them, but Christ Jesus only. And this same were good to ask of the
Papists of our time, Was* Franciscus, or Dominicus, or Bernardus crucified for
you? How is it then that you will be called some of you Franciscans,
Dominicans, and Bernardins?

But this is a small thing, in respect of these greater He suffered him alone,
not helped nor comforted by by any of his disciples.
injuries done to him; they will have other Mediators joined with Christ, other
merits mixed with his merits; but I pray them answer S. Paul his question, Was
any other crucified for you? And po^der this reason of the Saints, Thou art
worthy, because thou wast killed. Why then join ye others in the work of
Redemption with him? Sure it is, He alone troad the Wine Press of the wrath
Esa. 63. 3
of God for us. When he entered into the Garden to his agony, he took his
three Disciples with Math. 26.
him, Peter, James and John: but did they help him? No, he craved no more of
them, but that they should watch and pray with him; yet when he Why then
should not the praise of a redeemer be reserved to him only?
was sweating blood for anguish, they were sleeping; and when he went to the
Cross, did they not all forsake him? yea did not Peter deny him?

Since he only suffered for us, to whom should we give the praise of a worthy
Redeemer, by whose merits we are saved, but to him only? This is the Song of
the whole Church, Worthy is the Lamb, because he was killed, and the
worthiness of another shall we never acknowledge. Super omnia Ber. in Cant.
ser. 20.
amabilem te mihi reddit (bone Jesus) calix quem bibisti, opus nostrae
Redemptionis amorem nostrum totum facile vindicat sibi: Above all (sweet
Jesus) The work of our redemption makes us debtors to Jesus, in more then we
are worth.
the cup which thou drankst, makes thee worthy to be loved of me. And the work
of our Redemption challenges unto it self, all our whole love, no part of it
being reserved to our selves, or unto any other. Yea, when we have given him
our whole love, and all that we are, yet stand we debt-bound to him in so
much more, as he that died for us, is more then we are. What then shall we
talk of any worthiness, but his?

And has redeemed us.] There is the effect of By the death of Jesus we have
liberty and life.
Christ's death, to wit, our Redemption. We were under a most fearful
servitude and bondage of Satan and sin, we sold our selves to them most
foolishly: now has our Lord bought us again, and redeemed us, Not with any
corruptible thing, 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19.
as gold or silver, but by the precious blood of the Lamb of God unspotted.
The greatness of the price given for us, may tell us how great his love was
toward us, who has redeemed us; as also how desperate our danger was, from
which we could not be any other way delivered. Other The work of our
Redemption most marvelous.
Kings make conquest by sheading the blood of their people; but Jesus Christ
has conquered for us by the sheading of his own blood: A most rare and
marvelous thing, and such as has not been heard of before; The Physician
drinks the bitter potion, and the Patient is cured. But of this, and many
notable maruels, to be marked in the work of our Redemption, we have spoken
in that Treatise on the eighth to the Romans, and elsewhere.

Unto God.] We are loosed from the bondage Christian liberty how abused by
Libertines.
of Satan, that we should be bound servants to our God: So Zachary in his
Song, God has Luke 1. 74.
showed mercy toward us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, should serve him without fear. Let Libertines mark it, who turn the
grace of God into wantonness, living a loose and dissolute life; in as much as
they are not bound unto God, they manifestly declare that they are not as yet
loosed from the Devil. Si Christianus Ber. in Cont. Scr. 15.
es, vt nominaris, sicut particeps es nominis, eris etiam particeps vnctionis:
If thou be a Christian, as thou art named one, as thou art partaker of the
name, so will thou also be of the unction. If thou be a Christian, then Put on
the Lord Jesus, and Romans 13.
study to be like unto him: For, Christianis^nus imitatio Basil bexam. ho^. 10.
est Diuinae Naturae: True Christianity is an imitation of the Divine Nature.

Out of every kindred.] There is the amplitude The benefit of Redemption is
very ample, Act. 10. 34. Yet is not Universal.
of this Redemption; it is not limited within any Kingdom, not within Canaan.
Now of a truth I perceive that God is no accepter of persons. Yet universality
is here excluded. They say not, He has redeemed every Nation and Tribe, but
some out of every Nation and Tribe. The secret Decree of God his Election is
executed by his Calling, whereby out of the whole lump and mass of lost
mankind, he separateth, culleth, and chooses out to himself, so many as in
his secret counsel he has chosen to salvation. But to eschew repetition, the
Reader who pleases, may look concerning this purpose, that which is written
of the golden Chain, on the eighth to the Romans, verse thirty.

VERSE. 10. And has made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall
reign upon earth.
THE benefits we have by our Redemption, By Christ we are not only delivered
from evil, but advanced to undeserved good.
are twofold; for not only are we delivered from that evil and miserable
estate, wherein we were, but are also advanced to an high, and glorious
estate, whereof here is mention made: he has saved us from wrath we justly
deserved, and has advanced us to grace, and glory, which we could never
deserve. Pharaoh his Baker would Genesis 40.
have thought it great favor, if the King had but spared his life; but the
Butler was not only delivered from death, but advanced to the service of his
King. Not unlike is our case, God make us thankful for it. What we are in
goodness, the Lord has made us.


And has made us.] What we are in goodness, the Lord has made us, We made
not our selves, we helped nothing to our first creation, far less to our
second. It is folly to dream of a power in Nature, by which man of his own
free will is able to do good, and make himself congruous for the receiving of
grace. Noli te extollere supra Aug. de verb. Apos. Scr. 10.
Deum: Confitere illi, qui fecit te: Extol not thy self above God, but give
glory to him that made thee. Nam si ille nos fecit homines, nos autem ipsi nos
fecimus saluos, aliquid maius illo fecimus: Popish presumption of man his
freewill by nature to do good, confuted by Fathers and Councels.
For if he made us men, and we have made our selves righteous men, then have
we done somewhat more then he. N^mo recreat, nisi qui and creat; nemo
reficit, nisi qui and fecit: None can create over again, but he who created
us first; none can renew us, but he who made us. Deus est qui operatur in nobis
velle and perficere: It is God who works in us the will and the deed, that
thou might have a will inclined to good; his Calling went before thee to
work it, and his Mercy did prevent thee. To think otherwise, is, as Augustine
said, Superbus error, A proud error. Aug. de temp. Ser. 123.
Firmiter rene n^llam tibi facultatem inesse posse voluntatis a^t operis, nisi
id gratuito munere diuinae miserationis Fulgent. ad Gallam, epist. 2.
accipias. Hold this for certain, that there can be in thee no power either to
will, or work any thing that good is, unless thou receive it freely of the
mercy of God. I conclude all with the testimony of that famous Council: Si
quis Council. Aurisia. ca^ in Gallia cont. (...). cap. 7.
per naturae vigorem bonum aliquod, quod ad salutem pertinet vitae aeternae,
cogitare aut eligere se posse confirmat, absque illuminatione and inspiratione
Sp. Sancti, haeretic^ fallitur spiritu. If any man affirm, that Papists by
this Decree discerned heretics.
by the strength of Nature he is able to think or choose any good pertaining to
eternal salvation, without the illumination and inspiration of the holy
Spirit, he is deceived with an heretical spirit. Ab eo quod formauit Deus
mutauit Adam, sed Ibid.
in peius, per iniquitatem suam: Adam changed himself from that which God made
him, but he changed himself to the worse by his iniquity. Ab ^o quod operatur,
iniquitas mutatur fidelis, sed in mel^s per gratiam Dei: from that which
iniquity works, the Christian is changed, but to the better by the grace of
God. Illa mutatio fuit praeuaricatoris primi, haec secundum Psalmistam mutatio
dexterae Excelsi: The first change from good to evil was made by the first
Transgressor: the second change, as the Psalmist says, from evil to good, is
made by the right hand of the most High. And so in this Hymn redeemed Saints
confess it; Thou have made us.

Kings and Priests.] There is the dignity whereunto we are called, enclosed in
two the most honorable Offices that ever were in the world, to wit, The good
estate whereunto we are advanced by Christ, is comprised in two benefits.
the Kingdom and Priesthood: S. Peter ioynes them both in one, when he calls
us, A Royal Priesthood. As Kings we should fight the battles of the Lord
against Satan and Sin. And here fortitude especially is required, with
spiritual wisdom. 1. Pet. 2. 9.
Non enim viribus, sed prudenti^ Diuina vincitur serpens: So long as we are
wise in God to believe 1 In this, that we are made Kings unto our God.
his Word, we are strong to resist Satan, and he is not able to overcome us;
but if we forget the counsel of his Word, we easily become a prey to our
Adversary. If we consider that we are called to be Kings to our God, and hope
to reign for ever with him in heaven, we will think shame to render our
selves captives to Satan. Let us look back to our first creation; Animal es,
O homo, Basil. hexam. ^om. 10.
principatu decoratum, vt quid seruis affectibus? Princeps creaturarum
constitutus es, and dignitatem Our first Cretion, our present Vocation, our
future Glorification, tells us we should not be servants to sin, etc.
tuam abiicis: Thou art a creature, O man, in thy first creation decored with
Princely power, why seruest thou thy affections? Thou wast made the Lord of all
creatures, and castest away thy own dignity. Will we again look forward to
our future glorification: Non sperare potest coeleste regnum, Bern. de
perseq^t. sustinenda. cap. 11.
cui supra propria membra regnare non datur: What hope can he have to enjoy the
Kingdom of heaven, who reigns not over his own members upon earth? Thus our
first creation, our present vocation, our future glorification, all of them
require of us, that like spiritual Kings, we should subdue and overcome the
Devil, the world, and the flesh; He that overcomes, shall sit Reu. 3. 21.
with me in my Throne.

Our Priesthood again consists in offering up 2 In this, that we are made
Priests unto our God.
sacrifices to God: and these may be reduced to three sorts; first, that we
offer up our hearts to the Lord; this is the great sacrifice, without which the
Pro. 23. 26. Three sacrifices offer we to God.
Lord will accept nothing from us: My son, give me thy heart. Next, that we
offer up our bodies unto him, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of Ro^.
12. 1. Cor, Corpus, and Bona: Heart, Body* and Goods.
God, that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable serving of God: and this is done, when we
make the members of our body weapons of righteousness Romans 6. 13.
to God. These are two then, Cor and Corpus, the heart and the body: the Lord
will have the service of them both. Thirdly, that we offer our goods unto him,
as his glory and the necessity of his Saints do require it; and this third
sacrifice willingly follows, where the other two go before: My son, honor
God with the first fruits of Pro. 3. 9.
all thy increase. To do good, and to distribute forget Heb. 13.
not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. But now But locked hearts, and
linked hands, have the men of this Gene^ation.
the hearts of men are locked up, and their hands are linked; they fear to
give, lest they have not enough for themselves, and the poor also; but it is
far otherwise, thy portion shall never perish by giving out in ordinary
charity to the poor: Quic quid in pauperes contuleris, in coeli thesauris
Greg^. Nysse^. orat. de pa^peribus (...).
reconditum in^enies; what-euer thou bestowest on the poor, thou shall find
it laid up in the heavenly Treasures. Clementia, dum licet, clementiam acquire,
by showing mercy, when thou may, Nazian. orat. 43. in nou^ dominicam.
purchase mercy to thy self. These are all agreeable to holy Scripture; Make
thee friends of the riches of iniquity, that they may receive you into the
everlasting Tabernacles, said our Savior. So also the Apostle, that by
distributing and giving to the poor, men lay up in store for themselves a good
1. Tim. 6. 19.
foundation for the time to come.

And we shall reign upon earth.] Upon this The error of the Millenaries has
no warrant here.
place the Chiliasts ground their error, that after the Day of Judgment, the
Saints shall dwell on earth a thousand years, at which time that Prophecy,
and others like it, shall be sulfilled, The Psalm. 37. 11.
meek shall possess the earth. And with this opinion, Math. 5. 5.
many worthy Fathers in the Primitive Church were overtaken. The Turks also
dream of an earthly Paradise: But let them pass.

For understanding the true sense and meaning By the earth here, we may
understand the wicked dwellers on earth.
of this place, we are to know, that the earth in holy Scripture is sometime
taken for the men that are in it. David calls them the men of this world: these
are they who (as our Savior says) have their portion in this life: Saint John
commonly calls them Psalm. 17. 14.
in this Book, The Inhabitants of the earth. These men are enemies to the
children of God, and persecute They now account Saints the off-scourings of the
earth, but Saints at last shall reign over them.
them with all their power; they account them the Off-scourings of the earth,
and unworthy to dwell in it: But the Lord at length shall exalt his Saints, and
their enemies shall be made their footstool: Yea, the soles of their feet the
Lord shall lift up above the heads of their greatest enemies; for the wicked
shall stand still upon the earth, when the godly shall be ravished and caught
up into the Air: yea, the wicked themselves 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
shall see it, and shall be vexed with horrible fear, when they see the man
honored, whom they despised, and shall say within themselves, This is he whom
sometime we had in derision, we Wisd. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5.
sooles thought his life madness, and his end without honor; how is he
counted among the children of God! and his portion is among Saints. Now for
this benefit, which the Saints are sure to enjoy, to wit, their final
victory, and glorious exaltation above all their enemies, they here praise the
Lord: and so has his Majesty most iudiciously expounded this difficult place;
We shall reign over the earth, at the last and general Judgment. And this
exposition is both very comfortable for Saints now lying under the oppression
of their enemies, and agrees well with the Analogy of faith.

Otherwise, if we take the word properly for Orby the earth we may understand
this same earthly element.
this same earth wherein we soiourne, then S. Peter tells us, that we have to
look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness: They
2. Pet. 3.
lost their original virtue and beauty by our transgression, and shall
receive it again, and more, at our restitution: So are we taught by S. Paul,
The Romans 8.
fervent desire of the creature waits when the sons of God shall be
reucaled; for then, The creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God; and then both
heaven and earth renewed, shall be the proper possession of Saints renewed.
Where if any man demand, To what use shall this earth How Saints may be said to
reign in it, or to what use can it serve in that Day.
and visible heavens serve in that Kingdom of glory? The answer is, We shall
know it, when we shall see it; for if the Lord will restore them to stand as
monuments and witnesses of that first goodness which he showed us in the
Creation, and we lost in the Transgression, and he has restored again, with
much more, in our Redemption, who can say against it? But lest we seem to pry
within the Arc, let our care be rather to prepare our selves, then beforehand
curiously to enquire of it, that which now we cannot understand: and let us
remember that answer which Photinus, the predecessor of Irenaeus, gave to the
Proconsull, when he demanded of him who God was? He answered, Et tu, si dignus
^ueris, videbis; A pretty answer of Photinus to the Proconsull.
Even thou, if thou be worthy, or meet for it, shall see him. So we, if we be
renewed men, shall know to what use in that Day, these new heavens and new
earth shall serve unto us.

Now there remains one doubt to be cleared A doubt moved, how Angels praise
God for Redemption, and answered,
here, how is this Canticle convenient for Angels, seeing they fell not? how
can they praise God for Redemption by his blood? The answer is; first, in the
Song, the Thanksgiving may be distinguished from the reason of the Thanks:
Thou art 1 By distinguishing the Thanksgiving from the Reason.
worthy to take the Book, and open the Scales thereof: there the
thanksgiving, which is fitting both for Angels and redeemed Saints to give
unto the Lamb: but the reason, Because thou wast killed, more proper for
redeemed Saints. Secondly, the Angels are also members of the Church, they call
themselves our brethren, I am thy fellow servant, Revel. 19. 10.
and one of thy brethren which have the testimony of Jesus. And again, by the
Apostle to the Hebrews they are reckoned to be of one body, and one fellowship
with us: We are come to the Heb. 12. 21.
celestial Jerusalem, and company of innumerable Angels.

Now as in the natural body all the members 2 Angels and we are of one
incorporation, and for our Redemption the give thanks to God.
have their own mutual compassion; when one is wounded, the rest mourn with
it and for it: and again, all of them have their own mutual contentment and
congratulation in the good of others; so that if one member be restored which
was hurt, the rest (albeit they were not hurt) rejoice with it: So may we
think that it is in the Mystical Body, and that the Angels, being of one
fellowship with us, glorify God for our restitution; for since our Savior
teaches us, that they have joy in the conversion of one sinner, much Luke 15.
7.
more may we think they have joy in the Redemption of the whole company of Gods
Elect.

Thirdly, the Angels have their own interest 3 They have their own benefit
by Redemption.
in the benefit of Redemption: As all things were created by him, which are in
heaven and in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, Col. 1. 16. and 20.
or Principalities, or Powers: so by him are all things reconciled and set at
peace by the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and things in
heaven. Calvin expounds this both of Angels and Men: let the judicious Reader
wisely consider his words, and he shall see, that albeit there was no enmity
between Angels and the Lord, because they sinned not; yet for the setting of
them at a perfect peace, it was needful they should be For that grace of
Christ, which raised man when he fell, kept Angels that they fell not.
made sure of their perseverance in the state of innocence, which benefit
they had not by their creation; for the fall of some of them proves, that of
their own nature they are (...), mutable by will, but that same grace of
Jesus, which raised up Elect Men, when they had fallen, confirms Elect Angels,
that now they cannot fall: Qui erexit hominem lapsum, dedit Angelo stanti ne
Ber. in Cant.
laberetur. I leave that of Cyrillus: Dicimus nos ex Ser. 22.
Cyril. Catech. 2.
part quadam de Deierga nos bonitate, sed nescimus quanta ille, and Angelis
condonauerit, indulget enim and illis quandoquidem ipse tantum vnus est, qui
peccare non possit: who thinks that the Lord uses his own indulgence toward
Angels, it being his own only and proper glory that he cannot sin.
Fulgentius agrees with Bernard, none other keeps the Angels that they fall
not, but the same grace which restored man when he had fallen. Vna Fulgent. ad
Trasim. lib. 2.
in vtroque gratia operata est, in hoc vt surgeret, in Angelo ne caderet: One
grace wrought in both, in Man that he might rise, and in the Angel that he
did not fall. Thus are Angels benefited by the death of Jesus Christ.

VERSE. 11. Then I beheld, and heard the voice of many Angels round about the
Throne, and about the living creatures, and the Elders, and they were thousand
thousands.
THe second part of the thanksgiving is sung by The second song is sung by
Angels only, and in it are four circumstances.
Angels only, where we have these four circumstances; First, who they are
that sing; Secondly, in what place of the Heavenly Court appear they to Saint
John; Thirdly, their number; and lastly, what is their song.

They who sing this part, are plainly called Angels, 1 The first circumstance,
who sings this Song, to wit, Angels inferior to the first company.
different both in place, and as it seems, in dignity, from the four living
creatures, whom we expounded to be a principal and chief company of Angels
nearest to the Throne: And S. John ranketh them, as they appeared unto him.
That there is order among Angels is out of question. Some has been bold to set
down the manner thereof out of Dionysius Areopagita, whom the learned justly
suspect; for the Fathers of that age had not so soon forgotten that Apostolic
precept, Let none presume above that which is written. 1. Cor. 4. 6.


Elias, who comments upon Nazianzen, distinguishes Elias presumes to set down
the order of Angels.
the whole company of Angels into three ranks, and places three orders in
every one of them. In the first, Cherubims, Seraphims, and Elias in Nazian*
orat. 2. de Theolo.
Thrones. In the second, Dominions, Armies, and Powers. In the third,
Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. But these are naked speculations,
neither warranted by Scripture nor reason. It had been better for him to have
kept the bounds of Nazianzen his modesty, Angelis pro suae naturae, Nazianzen,
and Augustine speak more sparingly and modestly.
et ordinis ratione, tanta pulchritudinis copia est impressa, vt secundaria
quaedam lumina sint. There is imprinted in Angels according to their nature,
and order, such abundance of shining beauty, as Nazian.
Ibid.
makes them secondarie lights: he acknowledges among them a distinction, and
an order, yea diversity of orders, but takes not upon him to determine it. And
the like modesty uses Augustine, Aug. cap. 11. cont. Priscilian.
Qui fatetur se rationem huius distinctionis ignorare, who confesses that he
knows not the reason of this distinction.

Their place is described to be about the Throne, 2 The second circumstance is
of the place in which they appear.
because they are the Guard of the great King which attend him; not for his
defense, but for the execution of his will: For thousand thousands minister
unto him, and ten thousand thousands stand before Dan. 7. 10.
him. But about the Church represented by four About the Throne, to serve the
Lord Psalm. 34. 7.
and twenty Elders are they placed, as a Guard appointed for our protection and
defense. The Angels of the Lord pitch their tents round about them But about
Saints, to figure they are our guard.
who fear him. These compassed Elisha in Dothan, to keep him from invasion of
the Syrian horses and Chariots. How great their power is, the destruction of
Pharao his first borne by one Angel, and of Senacherib his Army by another,
may witness unto us. David had a strong guard of Cherethits and Pelethits; but
the best of his Worthies were not comparable to one of these Warriers. Here
then is our comfort, that as Damones Ecclesiam Carthus.
circumeunt ad deuorandum, ita Angeli eam circumeunt, vt custodiant. As Satan
with his legions of wicked spirits goes about seeking to devour us: so these
Angels and heavenly Armies stand about us to defend, and are as an invincible
hedge between Satan and the Saints.

The third circumstance is of their number; of 3 The third circumstance is of
their number.
it we have spoken, Chap. 4. 6.

VERSE. 12. Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and praise.
THe fourth circumstance in this second thanksgiving 4 The fourth circumstance
is their song* Wherein we have
made by Angels only, is the song it self, wherein we have to consider two
things; the matter, and the manner. For the manner of their singing, it is said
to be with a loud voice. How 1 The manner.
voices are ascribed to them, they being spirits, we have spoken before; only
now, the loud voice notes their intention, readiness, and great feruencie in
praising the Lord.

The matter of their song is subioyned, Worthy is 2 The matter.
the Lamb. Where still it is to be remembered, how both Angels, and elect Men,
denude themselves of all worthiness, and ascribe it to the Lamb, to the great
shame of these wretched worms upon earth, who dare usurp to themselves the
praise of worthiness, and glory in the merit of their works.

These Angels differ in place and order from the first company, but all agree
in one song, Worthy is the Lamb. And again, that Angels worship the Lamb,
but refuse to be worshipped of men, condemns that (...), of the blind Papists,
who will enforce a worship on Angels, which they refuse, and acknowledge only
to be due to the Lord.

As before, the Lamb appeared with seven Before, they gave him seven styles,
and now they give him a seuenfold praise.
Eyes, and seven Horns, so now a seuen-fold praise do Angels give unto him;
1. Of power, 2. Riches, 3. Wisdom, 4. Strength, 5. Honor, 6. Glory and
praise. They understood the types which they saw; they make their song
respondent to his apparition. In his Eyes they acknowledge his wisdom; in his
Horns, power, and strength, and riches; and for these, praise, and honor, and
glory they give unto him. He is a full and complete Savior, worthy of
seuen-fold praise, because of his seuen-fold, that is, his manifold, yea, his
full, and complete grace, which superabounds in him, and is powered forth
abundantly unto us. He has not love, but he has also power; what crave we
more, but that he is most willing, because of his love, He was killed for us:
and most able, because of his power, to help us in all our necessities?

Again, this redundant speech in praising of Saints inflamed with the love of
God, cannot satisfy themselves in praising him.
God, naming one thing many manner of ways, is to teach us, how Saints
inflamed with the love of God, cannot find words enough, nor satifie themselves
in praising of God. And this was shadowed before, when it was said, They sung
with a loud voice: for what is the loud voice of a spirit, but ^ruens
des^erium, the fervent desire of it? et tanto Gregor. moral. 2. cap. 6.
maiore^ voce^ in aure^ incircumscripti spiritus exprimit, quanto se in eius
desiderium before ^undit. And here that one thing is named many manner of
ways, as power, and strength, praise, honor and glory; their like fervent
desire in praising God is declared. And all this may most justly rebuke our
coldness This may make us ashamed of our coldness in praising God.
in praising God: we discharge all that whole service many a time with one
word; which were yet tolerable, if our affections were greater, though our
words are few: but in these exercises how readily faint we? we pray as if we
desired not to prevail; and we praise, as if we were not careful whether
the Lord hear or not: and therefore we send our thanksgiving away, but our
fervent affection goes not with it* such a prayer cannot pierce the clouds,
far less bring down an answer.

Is there any thing thou should think more upon in prayer, then that thou
art speaking with God? or is there any thing thou should desire more, then
to find thy self accepted of him? Quomodo te a Deo audiri postulas, cum te,
ipse non audias? How can thou desire the Lord to hear thee in praying, when
thou hear not thy self? Vis Deum memorem esse tui cum rogas, cum tuipse
memor Cyprian. de orat. Domini.
tui* non sit? will thou have the Lord mindful of thee, when thou requestest
him, and thou in requesting him, have no mind of thy self? This is a common
sin of this age; the Lord remove it.

VERSE. 13. And all the creatures, which are in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I say, Praise,
honor, and glory, and power be to him that sits on the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for evermore.
THe third part of the thanksgiving, is sung by The third part of the song is
sung by creatures of all sorts.
creatures, and that of all sorts, and with one common consent: for this
distribution of the creatures in these, which are in heaven, in earth, under
the earth, and in the sea, is a prophetical amplification frequently used in
Scripture, to show the co^course of all creatures to praise God in their kind:
as ye may see, Psalm 148. Now these creatures What voice creatures without
sense or reason can have.
here, are such as are without sense or reason; to wit, the Sun, the Moon,
the Fire, the Air, the Water, the Earth, and all that in them is, after their
sort do praise the Lord, and they have a voice of their own, which is well
enough understood by him that made them. As they groan for Romans 8.
the bondage under which our sin has subdued them: so long they to see the
sons of God restored to their liberty, for then shall they be restored also:
and for this benefit the creatures have by our Redemption, as they were cast
into bondage by our transgression, they have their own rejoicing, and praising
of God. But for this, we refer the willing Reader to that which we have
written on the eighth to the Romans, and now proceed to the conclusion of this
Song.

VERSE. 14. And the four living creatures said, Amen. And the four and twenty
Elders fell down, and worshipped him that lives for evermore.
NOw are we come to the conclusion of the The Song is concluded by them who
began it.
Song: they who began it, to wit, Angels, and redeemed Saints coniunctly, do
also conclude it. In all this heavenly action, we still see, that the example
of one, prouokes another to praise God, teaching us our duty, not to be silent
when others beside us are praising the Lord. If we cannot with our mouths, at
least let us with our hearts make melody to the Lord, and say Amen to the song
of our brethren.

The Angels ratify the praises given to God, by Amen, Is a note of affirmation,
saying Amen. This particle is sometime a note of affirmation, as when our
Savior says, Amen, Amen, Mat. 23. 36:
I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation: that is,
certainly and without doubt As also of confirmation.
they shall come. Sometime again it is a note of confirmation, or
comprecation, as when the Apostle reproues preaching or praying in an unknown
language, he uses this reason, How shall he that 1. Cor. 14. 16.
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing
he knows not what thou say? Of this it is clear, that in the Primitive
Church, Used by people in the Primitive Church after preaching, or prayer.
after preaching and prayer, the custom of the people was to say Amen; in
token that not only they consented, but also wished from God the same good
things which he before had either mentioned in the Preaching, or desired in
the Prayer. But this many of our Professors think needless now to be
required; but for mine own part, I would wish them in this, and other laudable
customs, to be less nyce and scrupulous then they are.

The style they give unto the Lord, has been A living Lord, is Gods proper
style.
entreated before, Our GOD is a living Lord in him self, In Deo idem sunt
viuens et vita, and Carthus.
he gives being and life to all things that are and live.

A threefold life flows from the Lord; First, of And of the threefold life,
which flows from him.
Nature. Secondly, of Grace. Thirdly, of Glory. Natures life is either
Vegetative, Sensible, or Reasonable. Little cause have they to rejoice, who
have no more but it. For in the Vegetative life, plants and trees of the earth
excel man. In the Sensitive life, beasts and fowls are quicker in any sense
then man. And for the Reasonable life, Pagans and heathen Philosophers have
far exceeded even those who are named Christians.

All our comfort then stands in this life of Grace now, and life of glory
hereafter. The Lord make us partakers of them for Christ's sake.

CHAP. VI.
VERSE 1. After I beheld, when the Lamb had opened one of the Scales, and
heard one of the four living creatures say, as it were the noise of Thunder,
Come and see.
THE Vision of Preparation At the sixth chapter begins the Visions of
prediction, which are three.
being ended in the two preceding Chapters, as we have declared before: now
follows the Visions of Prediction, foretelling things which shortly must be
done; And these are three, every one of them diducing the estate of the Church
to the second coming of Christ unto Judgment: As at more length we have
showed in Prolegomenis, wherein the general Method of the Revelation is
shortly set down.

The first Prophetical Vision is contained in The first in the sixth and
seventh chapters.
this sixth, and the seventh Chapter following; for the seventh is an appendix
of this, and has in it a larger explication of the fifth and sixth Seal, as
(God willing) we shall hear: so then the first Prophecy is absolved in six
Seals, whereof the last concludes with the Day of Judgment; for the seventh
Seal has in her bosom the seven Trumpets, which make up the second Prophecy
of this Book, beginning at the eighth Chapter; The second from the eighth to
the twelfth.
for till then, the seventh Seal is not opened, and continuing to the end of
the eleventh, there it concludes with the Day of Judgment. The third The
third from the 12. to the 21.
Prophecy begins at the twelfth, and continues to the one and twentieth;
whereof, if the Lord please, we will speak hereafter.

This first Prophecy, as I said, is general, for The first Prophecy is a
general Prognostication of the estate of things to the worlds end: Whereof the
sum is, Christ will go by his Gospel through the world, till he overcome.
it contains a general Prognostication, and presents to us a view of the
estate of things, as they will be to the worlds end: whereof the sum is,
Christ shall go through the world upon the Ministry of his Word, preaching the
Gospel where, and when it best pleases him. This is prophesied in the first
Seal, like a crowned King, and Conqueror, he has gone out long ago upon
his White Horse, and so shall he continue till he overcome. But this
victory, let not the Church look that it shall be without blood; for Satan
and his Instruments, figured by the Red The world will persecute the Gospel.
Horse, and one riding on it, shall in most cruel manner persecute the
Preachers and Professors of the Gospel; and this is fore-shewed in the second
For contempt of it God shall plague the world.
Seal: but they shall not escape unpunished: for the Lord shall send out the
Black Horse, as is told in the third Seal; and the Pale Horse, who comes out
at the opening of the fourth Seal: By these two, famine and pestilence, under
which all other horrible plagues of God are comprehended, shall the Lord be
revenged on the world, for contempt of his Gospel.

And because in these troubles many of the In these persecutions and plagues,
Saints may be exercised, but the Lord shall secure them.
Saints of God shall suffer bodily death, it is declared in the fifth Seal, how
their souls rest in peace with God, till the number of their brethren be
fulfilled; and then, as they cry for judgment, so the great and last Day of
Judgment The Day of Judgment shall conclude all.
shall come, as we see in the sixth Seal: for we shall see in the next Chapter,
that the only cause, why Angels delay the execution of the last wrath, for
which the Souls of Martyrs under the Altar cry unto God, is, that the servants
of the Lord are not yet sealed: which being once done, then shall the Lord
recompense trouble to them that troubled 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7.
his Church; as in most fearful manner is declared in the sixth Seal, but
shall render to his troubled Saints rest, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, as at length, and most comfortably
is set down in the next Chapter, from the tenth verse to the end. And this,
any judicious man that will read without The seventh Chapter contains a
larger explication of the fifth and sixth Seal.
pre-conceiued opinion, may easily consider that the seventh chapter has in it
no Prophetical Prediction, but only a larger explanation of the fifth Seal,
in which Martyrs are willed to wait, till their fellow-seruants be sealed: and
the secure, and happy estate of Saints even in suffering; yea, their glorious
and joyful estate after suffering, is at great length expressed, before the
comfortless estate of the wicked, whereunto the sixth Seal delivers them, be
touched at all. Thus have we the sum of this first and general Prophecy.

Now before the opening of the first four Three things noted in S. John his
preparation, before the opening of the Seals.
Seals, S. John is prepared: where we have these circumstances; first, what
was S. John doing, when this Vision was presented to him; to wit, Beholding:
secondly, who prepares and wakeneth him, One of the four living Creatures: and
thirdly, what says he to him, Come, and see.

The first is noted in these words, After I beheld. 1 What was S. John doing at
this time, to wit, Beholding; and what his beholding imports.
S. John hitherto has seen many glorious Visions, and yet now he looks for
more. Sure it is, that every sight of heavenly things which Saints get,
prouokes them to a desire of more; for there is not a greater argument of grace
received, then a fervent desire of further grace. Beside the desire, this
beholding imports a constant consideration without wearying, or wavering: a
stable and fixed mind, with a perfect heart, is required in them who would
learn things heavenly. The natural eye, if it be closed, or if it be
Circumactus, tumbling and waltring in the head; or then, if it look
negligently, cannot see nor take up those things which are before it; and so is
it with the eye of the soul; if it attend not steadfastly, and carefully to
heavenly things, it cannot perceive, nor understand them.

The second circumstance is, by whom is he By whom is S. John prepared for the
receiving of this Vision.
prepared, that is, by one of the four living creatures; that is the first of
the four, as the learned Interpreters have sufficiently cleared. They who
expound these four living Creatures, to signify the whole order of
Preachers, by the first of them understand, the first Preachers after the
Apostles; namely, Quadratus, and Aristides, Ahentenses of the Church of Athens;
By the second again, Justinius Martyr, and Melito Sardenses, of the Church of
Sardis. But this unto me (with the reverence I These four Beasts who prepare
S. John cannot be Preachers, and why?
owe to so laborious men) seems an idle speculation: or, if they will, a
Divination, without Divinity, or warrant of the Word: For S. John here is sent
out to waken Preachers and Professors. In the seven Epistles he warnes every
Preacher of his duty; and in the Prophecy of things to come, he fore-warnes
and arms Preachers and all Christians, of such battles as are before them. And
how these Interpreters will bring in Preachers to be wakeners and warners of S.
John, I understand not. Neither yet can they be the four Evangelists; for S.
John was an Evangelist himself.


Others again, who by the 4. Beasts understand 4. Evangelists, as Haymo,
Berengandus, Carthusianus, with many others before them, and many also after
them, have here occasion, if they will embrace it, to correct themselues^: for
there are here four one after another, who waken S. John: if they be four
Evangelists, then Saint John must be the fifth, or else ye must say that he
warned himself* Ribera the Jesuit is the only man of any that I have seen,
who moves the doubt: for he Ribera perceiues the reason, and yet against his
light pursues it, not willing to quit the common fantasy of his fellows.
dotes with the rest of his fellows, in that common conceit, that the 4.
Beasts are the 4. Evangelists; he sees here a manifest light arguing the
contrary, yet does he what he can, to defend that which he had learned from the
dark Lights and Doctors of Rome. It would pity a man, to see how he pyneth
himself in wrestling against a clear verity: Therefore we adhere to our
former interpretation, that these four Beasts signify a company of principal
Angels, who are nearest the Throne, and that by one of them S. John is wakened
and prepared; For albeit the Lord in his ordinary working teaches men by the
Ministry of Men, and not by Angels; yet in his extraordinary working, so
long as his Wisdom thought expedient to use it, he has taught men, even by
Angels.

And in that the Voice of the Angel who wakeneth The first Voice that wakened
S. John, was like a Trumpet, the next like Thunder.
him, is said to have been like the noise of Thunder, it is first for the
matter it self, to tell us that great and fearful things are here foretold
unto us; next, for the person of S. John, to whom they are revealed, that he
might be stirred up to receive them the more reverently, he was at the first
wakened with a Voice like a Trumpet, and now he is wakened with a Noise like
Thunder. And this, done to him a divine man and heavenly disposed, may and
should warn us of our great weakness, Great need have we to be wakened. when
God speaks to us.
sluggishnesse, and senseless security. O what need have we to be wakened, as
often as the Lord is content to speak unto us! Peter, James and John,
notwithstanding they had seen the glory of Christ transfigurate on the
Mountain, yet being with him in the Garden, albeit he required nothing of the^
but that they would watch and pray; he burdened them not to drink of his
bitter cup, but only willed them to pray, yet they fell asleep: and albeit he
wakened them both the first and second time, yet the third time he came, and
found them sleeping again. In them let us see our own weakness; we have
need, not once, but often to be wakened, or else the Lord may speak, but we
shall hear in vain, and sleep in careless security.

The third circumstance is the warning it self 3 The warning it self, Come
and see.
which is given him, Come and see. Our Savior has the same dictum to the two
Disciples of S. John, Ioh. 1. 39.
who demanded of him, Rabbi, where dwelst thou? This notable sentence, used
also by Christ, has in it two things.
Come and see, said our Lord. A summary and short sentence, yet indeed the
sum of all: the one is a precept for this life, Come; All duties the Lord
requires of thee, are comprised in this one word, 1 A precept for this life,
Come.
Come; for it imports that we must go out of our selves, and follow our Lord.
The other is a promise for the life to come: And see; except we come, we 2 A
promise for the life to come; And see.
cannot see, and when we come, we shall see, that which the eye never saw, and
the ear never heard: All our Duty here, stands in coming; all our Reward
there, shall be in seeing. But this warning of But in this place it is not to
be taken so largely.
the Angel to S. John is not so general, only tells him, that unless he
come, he cannot see: we must forget all things beside, we must forsake our
selves, and go out of our selves, or else the Lord cannot, nor will not be
familiar with us, to acquaint our souls with the comfortable knowledge of
things heavenly and spiritual.

VERSE. 2. Therefore I beheld, and lo, there was a White Horse, and he that
sat on him, had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
conquering, that he might overcome.
WE come now to the opening of the first Six points considered in the opening
of the first Seal.
Seal, wherein these six points are to be considered: first, the Rider:
secondly, his Horse: thirdly, the color of his Horse: fourthly, his Armor:
fifthly, his Ornaments: sixthly, his Errand.

Viega the Jesuit will have these Horses to be the 1 The Rider; he is no Roman
Emperor, as blinded Roman Doctors do imagine.
Roman Empire; the Riders on them to be sundry Emperors; and this Rider on
them to be sundry Emperors; and this Rider on the white Horse he says, is
Caius Caligula: Thus the Seraphic Doctors of Rome, are like men groping in
darkness, writing what they will, but without a warrant. That this Rider on the
white Horse is the Lord Jesus, is clear out of the 19. Chap. Here in the
beginning of the battle he appears riding on a white horse, and there Reu. 19.
11, 12.
again near the end of the Battle, he appears with But that he is the Lord
Jesus is proved by Scripture.
his Warriors riding on a white Horse, and it is told us, that this Rider and
mighty Conqueror, he is faithful and true, and in righteousness he does
judge and make war, and his Name is called, The Word of God, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. If men would confer Scripture with Scripture, there would no
place be left to their idle speculations: And this same collation of these two
places, reproues them who limit the Rider on the white Horse, unto a certain
time; some to the destruction of Jerusalem, and others to the days of
Constantine; they defraud the Church of great comfort; for so long shall this
valiant man of war fight on Horseback, till he have made all his enemies
his footestoole, and delivered his Saints from their oppression.

If it be demanded here, seeing Christ is the Christ is so infinite a Good,
that it is no marvel, if in one Vision he be many ways figured.
opener of the Seal, how is he also revealed by the Seal? The answer is
easy, Jesus Christ is so infinite a Good, and his blessing so manifold, that
many manner of ways is he shadowed unto us; yea, in one, and the selfsame
Vision sundry ways figured: He is the Reuealer, and the Thing revealed; the
Teacher, and the Matter which is taught; the Sacrifice, and the Sacrificer; the
Way, and He who guides us in the way. Certainly, if we knew what an
incomparable jewel Jesus is, we would with the Apostle, account all things
dung, in Phil. 3. ^.
comparison of him.

The next point is the Horse whereupon Christ 2 The second point is, the White
Horse.
rides: the exposition of this is to be sought from the Psalmist, where
Christ, even as here, is described going out, like a valiant King; Gird thy
sword Psalm. 45. 3, 4.
upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty, and prosper with thy glory, ride upon the word
of truth, meekness, and righteousness, etc. So the Horse, whereupon this
Conqueror is carried through the world, is the Ministry of the Word.
Primasius by the This figureth the Ministry of the Word.
Horse understands Apostles and Preachers. Ministers, without the Word, are not
to be received; and the Word without a Minister able to preach it, is not
profitable: These two, the Lord in his most wise dispensation has joined
together: For it has pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to 1. Cor.
1. 21.
save them who believe. The Horse then is the Ministry of the Word. The
Gospel preached is the Chariot and Horses, whereby this King is carried
through the world. As in the government of the world he uses the Ministry
of Angels; so in the gathering and governing of his Church, he uses the
Ministry of Preachers; Who can Romans 10. 14.
hear but by Preaching, and who can preach, except they be sent?

These are figured by Horses: first, for the courage Good Preachers resemble
Horses in courage.
wherewith they are endued; This is observed by the Lord himself, as a
special property of the Horse: He mocketh at fear, and is not afraid, Job*
39. 25.
he turns not back from the sword. And doubtless Preachers, in whom Christ
is, and upon whom he rides, are valiant, and courageous men; Ezech. 3. 9.
Their forehead is like the Adamant, and harder then the Flint: They fear no
death, they faint for no They are far from timidity:
trouble, that can follow them in the service of Christ. Notable was that
answer of Andrew the Apostle, when Egeas Governor of Patris, vpbraided him
with the death of the Cross: he answered, that he would never have preached
the honor and glory of the Cross, if he had feared it. And as the servants of
God are far from that timiditie which makes men unfaithful in the cause of
God; so are they as far from temerity, whereby And as far from temerity.
men ignorantly zealous, are precipitate, and carried headlong to accelerate
for every light conceit of their brain, trouble on themselves: Their zeal is
like a fire kindled of stubble or straw, which makes a fair blaze for the
time, but because it has no matter to maintain it, vanishes incontinent, and
ends in ungracious smoking. I wish we had no example of any such among us:
it is a shame to the Gospel, to speak the one day, and retreat the other. A
wrong cause will never furnish strength in trouble: wisdom requires that men
beforehand should ponder and consider well the cause, for which they will
resolve to suffer affliction.

Again, Preachers are figured by Horses: and The type of Horses is used to
show how Christ propagates the Gospel speedily.
Christ going forth to conquer, appears riding on a Horse, to note the speed
and celerity which he was to use in propagation of the Gospel. And indeed it
is wonderful, to see how in a short time the Lord Jesus ran through the
world by the Ministry of his Word, ouercomming and subduing to his obedience
most mighty Kingdoms by most weak Instruments. This is well observed by
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, and Martyr, Ecce a Domini Cyprian de duplici
Martyrio.
Redempt^ris temporibus anni effluxerunt plus minus 240. iamque huius vitis
palmites latius se sparserunt, quam Romanum Imperium. It is little more or
less (says he) of two hundred and forty years, since the days of Christ the
Redeemer, and The Tongue of Christ his Preachers did more prevail to subdue
the world, then the hands of Romans could with the sword
yet in this time the Church has spread out her Branches larger, then the
Roman Empire: Et qu^s nulla ferri vis domare potuit, emollit sanguis Agni
candidi; and they whom no power of the sword was able to daunt, are made
peaceable and tame by the blood of the unspotted Lamb. Among many of that
sort, how the Lord has been merciful to Scotland, in that, about sixteen
hundred years, this Conqueror with his white Horse entered in among us, and
subjected us to himself, whom the Romans could never subject to their Empire:
I have at large declared in that Treatise, Entitled, Six days conference
between a Catholic Christian, and a Catholic Roman.

And again, as the Horse is bridled and ruled, Preachers should be bridled,
ruled, and turned, as he who rides on them will command them.
and turned here or there, by him that rides upon it, and is not left to
himself to wander where-away he will: so is it with Preachers of the Gospel,
they are directed to Countries, Kingdoms, and Cities, at the good pleasure of
Christ; they neither come nor go by accident, but by the providence of God. A
notable example hereof we have in S. Paul, he was of purpose to go to
Bithinia, but the Spirit suffered him not; yea, commanded Act. 16.
him to go to Macedonia. And albeit now the Lord does not inform his servants
by such extraordinary revelations; yet does he still work with them in the
same manner, appointing them to such places and people, as in his Wisdom he
thinks most expedient. Take heed to the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Act. 20.
Overseers; and they are as stars in the right hand of Revel. 1.
Jesus, they shine not but where he holds out his hand, and sends them. This
is a warning to Preachers, if they look to have their Ministry blessed of the
Lord; let them not go where the calling of God leads them not.

Other riders are helped by their horses, but here Other riders are helped by
their horse, but here the horse is helped by the rider.
the horse is helped by the rider; for what is a Preacher, if Christ be not
with him, and work in him? he is like a Pen without a hand, it can write
nothing; a tongue without a heart, it can speak nothing; a musical instrument
without one to touch it, can make no sound at all: We are not able 2. Cor. 3. 5.
of our selves sufficiently to think a good thought, all For a Preacher can do
no good without Jesus help.
our sufficiency is of God. Since it is so, our care should be to carry our Lord
always in our Conscience; how should we wait upon him? how should we most
carefully keep him, since without him we are able to do nothing?

It is written of Bucephalus, the horse of Alexander, that he would suffer
none to ride upon him, but his own master; whether that be true or not, sure
it is, this is most true, Preachers should not be Asses like Issachar, couching
down to receive All Christians should take heed, that none but Christ, ride
on them, and rule them.
every burden that any man will lay upon them, but they are horses for Christ
only to ride upon.

Yea all other Christians in their callings, are also to look unto this, that
the commandment and direction of their ways be reserved only to Origin.
hom. ^. in Cant.
Jesus Christ: Beatae animae quae dorsum suum cur^arunt, vt suscipiant Sessore^
verbum Dei, and fraenacius patiuntur, vt quocunque ipse voluerit flectat eas,
quia non iam propria voluntate incedunt, sed ad omnia ducuntur and reducuntur
voluntate Sessoris. Blessed are the souls which bow their backs to receive
The Word of God to ride upon them, who are content to be bridled by him, and
turned where-away he will: these walk not after their own will, but are
turned hither and thither, at the good pleasure of him who rides upon them.

But to return and conclude this second point: Preachers are such horses as
have need both of bridle and spur.
As there is no horse which needs not the spur and the bridle, the one to
stir him forward, the other to govern him in the right way; that he go not
where-away he will himself, but as the rider directs him. So is it with
Preachers; we are many times inclined to faint, and loyter in our calling; to
waken us, some Cananites must be stirred up to be pricks in our sides, or else
within us God stirs up our own Conscience to put upon us. And as to the
other he bridles the mouths of his servants, he opens them to speak how, and
when he pleases: In that hour it shall be given you what ye shall Mat. 10. 19.
20.
say; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks
in you. Again, he closes their Preachers transported by Jesus from one place,
yea from one purpose to another, whereof themselves know not.
mouth, when he sees it expedient. So said he to Ezekiel, I shall cause thy
tongue clean to the roof of thy mouth. In a word, as I said before, that he
carries Preachers from place to place, according to his pleasure; so in
preaching, he carries them from purpose to purpose; he puts in their heads
that which they intended not to have spoken, he makes them forget that which
they thought sure to have delivered, and so ouer-rules their memory, and
bridles their mouth, that still he makes them his own purpose. Happy, yea
thrice happy are they, who this way are ruled by the Lord.

A notable example hereof we have in Augustine: Example hereof in Saint
Augustine.
for Possidonius records of him, that in a certain Sermon his memory failed
him, and that beside Possidon. de vita Augustini.
his intention and purpose, he fell out into a discourse against the
Manichaeans. When he was come home, he demanded of them who dined with him,
if they had marked it? They said, indeed they had: to whom he answered, Credo
quod forte aliquem errantem in populo, Dominus per nostram obliuionem, et
errorem doceri, and curari voluerit. It may be, as I think, that by my
oblivion, and miscarrying from my purpose to speak against that heresy, GOD
will have some among the people to be taught, and cured of it. Nam in eius manu
sunt, et nos, et Sermones nostri, for in his hand are both our selves, and our
speeches, to frame them as he will. And so indeed it was as the man of God
took it; for within two days, Firmus a Manichaean came to him, and showed him
how by the same Sermon he had been converted. Vnde stupentes glorificauimus
sanctum eius nomen, qui cum voluerit, et vnde voluerit, et quomodo voluerit, et
per scientes et nescientes, salutem Sanctorum operatur. Whereupon, they who
were in Augustines company, much astonished, glorified the holy It is the Lords
praise to work that by Preachers, which Preachers know not.
Name of God, who when he will, and as he will, by witting and unwitting
Preachers, works the salvation of Saints.

Let this glory be reserved to the Lord, he works salvation oftentimes by
Preachers, that Preachers know not of themselves. The Preacher knows not your
troubles, your tentations, nor the estate of your souls, yet every Professor
prepared reverently to hear, thinks that the Preacher speaks unto him; but
this, as I have said, is the finger of God, who by the ministry of one,
speaks, and works in many, as he will.

The third point is the color of the horse: he is 3 The third point is, the
color of the horse which is white; noting two things.
said to be a white horse; the white color notes two things: first, purity
and holiness that should be in Preachers: the Lord will not ride upon unclean
beasts, nor have his Name carried through the world by profane men; he will
not, he cannot 1 The purity and holiness which should be in Preachers.
work with an unsanctified Ministry. A fearful example whereof we have ^in
Ophni and Phinees, two sons of Eli, with the wickedness of their lives they
had made the people to abhor the sacrifices 1. Sam. 2. 17.
of God, yet thought they to cover the injury Mal. 2. 16.
under the garment of God, and to save themselves in battle against the
Philistims, by bearing the Ark of God on their shoulders: yet was the Lord so
displeased with them, that he chose rather to suffer his Arc to be captiued
of uncircumcised Philistims, then to maintain it in the hands of so profane
men as they were: they suffered their just deserved punishment, but the Lord
pleaded the cause of his own glory, and brought home the Arc again. Let them
therefore be clean, who carry the vessels of the Lord: let us study to be
holy, the Lord will not ride but upon white horses: Vita munda ipsa est luce
fulgentior, a holy life Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 15.
is brighter then light it self.

Secondly, the white color signifies the ioyfulnesse 2 The white color notes
the ioyfulnesse of the message which they bring.
of the message which they bring, there is no black nor doleful thing in it.
In holy Scripture, when Angels appeared to bring good tidings, we find them
clothed in white; and among men it has been customably used for a sign of
gladness. The Emperors of Rome in their solemn triumphs had their Chariots
drawn with Pompon. Laetu^.
white horses. Pomponius writes of the horse which drew Dioclesian his Chariot,
Quod candore cum niue certabant, that in whitenes they contended with the
snow: So then, by the white Horse, the Gospel Zach. 9. 9.
is declared to be a joyful message. Rejoice, O Sion, for thy King comes
riding unto thee, and that upon his white Horse, in token of joy to his own,
and triumphant victory over his enemies. Great joy was in Jerusalem, when David
brought the Arc into it. Great joy in Samaria, when Philip preached the Gospel
unto them. Beautiful are Acts. 8. 8.
Esaias. 52. 7.
the feet of them, who bring the glad tidings of peace. But miserable are they,
who find neither peace nor joy in the preaching of the Gospel; these may be
sure, that doleful tidings abide them.

The fourth point to be considered here, is his Armor, He had a bow. No
mention is made here 4 The fourth point concerns the armor of him that rides:
Bow and Arrows.
of arrows; but in the 45. Psalm arrows are ascribed to him, without mention
of a bow, Thine arrows are sharp to pierce the heart of the Kings enemies.
Thus collation of Scripture, is the best interpretation of Scripture. In old
time the chief weapons used in war, were bows and slings; the Psalm. 45. 5.
one we may see out of the Psalmist, The children of Psalm. 78. 9.
Ephraim being armed, and shooting with the bow, turned back in the day of
battle: the other out of the book of Judges, The Beniamites had seven hundred
Judges 20. 16.
chosen men, who could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not fail.

Our Lord then is a man of war, an expert Archer, Our Lord is an expert
Archer.
he hitteth the mark whereat he shoots, and fails not: it is long ere he
bend his bow, and when he has bended, the longer he draws, the deeper he
fastneth his arrow: quo diutius expectat, districtius iudicabit: Let not wicked
men please themselves in their sins, because the Lord spares to shoot at
them: The Lord laughes the wicked to Psalm. 37. 13.
Romans 2. 4.
scorn, because he sees his day coming. Let the patience of God lead men to
repentance: for except Psalm. 7. 12, 13.
they turn, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has prepared him
deadly weapons, and will ordain his arrows for them that persecute his
Saints. Two sorts of Arrows has our Lord Jesus


Two sorts of arrows shootes the Lord, first, arrows of judgment against the
wicked; these 1 Of judgment which he shoots at his enemies.
he fastneth so deeply in the souls of his enemies, and bodies also, that
repine as they will, they cannot shake off the sense of his wrath, but are
confounded therewith. Such an arrow shot he at Judas, he might not abide, but
desperately hanged himself, which yet helped not to release him of his pain.
Such an arrow directed he in the battle against Julian, as forced that
scornful Apostate to confess, that he fought against an invincible
Conqueror, Vicisti tandem Galilaee.

Next, he has arrows of mercy, which he 2 Of mercy, which he directs
toward his own: and these are two.
shootes at his own, and wherewith he vvounds them, that he may cure them;
and these are of two sorts: the one works a sense of sin with fear of
wrath, for so he works with his children to terrify 1 One by which he wounds
them.
them with the sense of wrath, that he may waken them to eschew the wrath to
come. Such arrows shot he at David: Thine arrows have light Psalm. 38. 2.
upon me, and thy hand lies upon me. He expounds himself incontinent: For
mine iniquities are gone Verse 4.
over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. Such arrows
also shot he at Job. The Job. 6. 4.
arrows of the Almighty are in me, the venim whereof does drink up my spirit,
and the terrors of GOD fight against me. These are sharp, and fearful, and
heavy for the present, but healthful and profitable in the end.

I note it for this cause, that the children of God should not suffer
themselves to be overcome with grief, when they are exercised with such
terrors of mind. 2 Another, by which he cures them, and pricketh them to
himself.


The other sort of his arrows, works in his Saints a sense of mercy which
ingendreth love, he fastneth their hearts, and knits them to himself, that they
wander no more from him. Of these speaks the Church, Vulnerata sum amore, I
am wounded and sick with love. By these arrows, Amor Aug. in Psalm. 118
excitatur, interitus non co^paratur, love is vvakened, destruction is not
procured. In a word, these are the two operations of the Spirit, whereby GOD
works the salvation of his children. Ye have not received Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage to fear again, but ye have received the Spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. He begins to fear and terrify us;
these are his first arrows: but in the end he comforts us; these are his
second arrows: many of them may the Lord shoot at us.

The fist point touched here, is his ornament, A 5 The fist point is his
orname^t, to wit, a crown on his head.
crown was given unto him. Two sundry ways find we Christ crowned, They
platted a Crown of thorns, and put upon his head. Thorns are the fruit of our
sins, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, thorns and Math. 27. 29.
Genesis 3. 17, 18.
thistles shall it bear unto thee. These are the best Christ two ways crowned.
flowers which the earth could give, were it not that by Jesus the curse is
removed; and of these cursed fruits of the earth, our sins procured a garland
to be set upon the head of our Lord. Quale, Tertul. de corona militis.
oro, sertum pro vtroque sexu subiit, ex spinis opinor, and tribulis in figuram
delictorum nostroru^, we should never think of that thornie, and pricking
crown set upon the head of the God of glory, but our souls should be humbled,
and our hearts pricked with sorrow for our sins which procured it. The other
is a crown of glory, But now we see Jesus crowned Heb. 2. 9.
with glory and honor. Except we be content to bear the first with him, we
shall not be partakers of the second. No man is crowned, except he 2. Tim. 2.
5.
strine as he ought.

The last point is his errand, He went forth conquering, 6 The sixth point,
his errand for which he comes forth 'riding.
that he might overcome.] (...). Here are two words, one in the present time,
the other in the future, declaring that from the beginning he has been
victorious, and so will be to the end: and herein stands his victory, to
deliver his Saints from the hand of their enemies, till at length he make his
enemies his footstool. This is his errand, and he shall continue This
Conqueror shall continually ride, till he have done his errand, overcome his
enemies, and persited Saints
riding, and fighting upon his white horse, till he have fully finished and
done it.

They are therefore much mistaken, as we said before, who bound the course of
the white horse within certain years, some to the destruction of Jerusalem,
and some to the days of Constantine. They who so limit him, spoil the Church
of great comfort: but say they what they will, we say with this Prophecy, Our
Conqueror is still riding on his white horse, and so shall continue, until he
overcome.

And we have yet here this further comfort, that This Conqueror is sure of
victory, before he enter into battle.
where other Warriers go out to battle with a carnal considence, which
often fails them, as we may see in Senacherib, Antiochus, and many such; our
Captain and Conqueror comes out not to a doubtful battle, the event whereof
is uncertain, but as a crowned and victorious King, sure at the last to
overcome. Many of his enemies has he put down by his hand already, and
covered their face with shame. Where are now the first Persecuters? no better
success shall the remanent have. The enmity was proclaimed in Paradise, and
therewith the event foretold, The seed of the Woman Genesis 3.
shall bruise the head of the Serpent. Victory is sure, 1. Cor. 9. 26.
for we fight not as men uncertain, but certain. Great opposition in all ages
has bin made to this crowned King, yea many times would it seem his white
horse has been slain under him: The Baptist beheaded, Steven stoned, Peter
executed, Preachers martyred, but he has still others in readiness. Paul may be
bound, the Word of the Lord cannot be bound. This King shall furnish horses,
armor, and all needful for the battle, till he obtain the victory. It should
greatly animate us to the battle, that we are sure beforehand, Jesus Christ
in the ministry of his Word shall prevail, oppose who will.

VERSE. 3. And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second living
creature say, Come and see.
AT the opening of the second seal, the second The second seal soreshewes,
that bloody persecution will follow preaching
Vision is exhibited to the Church, warning them, that the happy success of
the Gospel, foretold in the first seal, will not be without bloody
persecution; for Satan shall stir up the bloody beasts on whom he rides, to
afflict such as carry the Name and testimony of Christ through the world: but
what they intend by way of persecution against the Church, the Lord shall turn
it into a plague, by which they themselves shall be punished: and therefore are
the Saints forewarned of it, that they may be prepared for patient suffering,
when the Persecution shall come.

In this verse the preparation goes before, and The second living creature that
prepares Saint John, is not Justinius, etc.
in the next verse the Vision follows. In the preparation, Saint John is
warned by the second of the living creatures, to attend the opening of the
second seal. They who expound the four living creatures to be the Preachers
of the Word, as by the first they understand Quadratus and Aristides,
Athenienses, so by the second, they understand Justinius Martyr, and Melito
Sardensis, by the third, Tertullian, and by the fourth, Cyprian Martyr, and
Bishop of Carthage.

But we have showed before, that as these four living creatures cannot be the
four Evangelists, Nor yet any other Preacher.
because Saint John himself was one of the four Evangelists: so no more can
they be Preachers; for Saint John is here sent to waken up both Preachers and
Professors, to the patient suffering of troubles, which here are foretold unto
them. We adhere therefore to our former exposition, that these living creatures
are Angels, adding this unto it, that this first Prophecy being general,
should neither be bound to particular times nor persons; for even in our own
days, the rider on the white horse, rides still, and the red horse follows
the white to persecute him; as the bloody murders, and treasonable plots in
France, Germany, England, and other parts of Christendom, may witness.

VERSE. 4. And there went out another horse, that was red, and power was given
to him that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should
kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.
AT the opening of the second seal, Saint John Comforts and crosses mixed one
with another here upon earth.
sees a sight far different from the first; the first sight was comfortable,
but doleful are these which follow. Our co^forts on earth are not without
crosses, nor yet our crosses, thanks be to God, without comforts.

Always we are forewarned here, that persecution Long prosperity and preaching
of the Gospel seldom go together.
will follow preaching; we must not always promise to our selves prosperous and
pleasant things. When David was anointed King, all the Philistims came out in
battle to seek him: he was a 2. Sam. 5. 17.
type of our Lord. When Jesus was borne in Bethleem, Mat. 2. 3.
Herod and all Jerusalem were aghast; and so soon as he was baptized, Satan
tempted him. It warnes us, says S. Chrysostom, that we also will give our
names unto Christ, we must prepare our selves both to be persecuted of men, and
tempted of Satan. Ab ipsis vitae initiis ad tentationes praeparamur, cum
cernimus ab ipsis Christ's incunabilis istud effectum, etc.

Long and marvelous peace have we had; great Gods indulgence toward us in our
marvelous peace.
has been the Lords mercy toward us; where shall we find, that the White
Horse has ridden so long, and the red horse not following him, as here in this
Country? where has there been so long preaching without heresy or
persecution, as among us?

Satan a far off has shaken his bloody sword Satan a far off has shaken his
bloody sword at us, but the Lord has bridled him.
at us, but the Lord has restrained him, and bridled his bloody beasts, that
they could not come near us. The Spanish Army threatened to execute upon us the
bloody decree of the Council of Trent, but the Lord drowned them before our
eyes, as he drowned the Egyptians in the sight of Exodus 14. 30.
Israel. The remanent of them he humbled also before us, and brought them into
our streets, that they, who purposed to make us prove their merciless
cruelty, might prove our Christian He dealt in our days with the Spanish
army, as he did of old with the Syrian.
pity and compassion; as the Syrians, who came to destroy Samaria, by the
marvelous working of God were brought within the Ports thereof, they were
refreshed with meat and drink, and sent home again; so moved the Lord our
hearts to do unto them. God make us thankful for it, and give us grace to
prepare our selves the more carefully for the day of affliction, because the
Lord hitherto has so long and lovingly spared us. The red horse signifies
bloody persecuters, and the rider is Satan.


As the white horse signifies Preachers, by whose ministry Jesus is carried
through the world; so the red horse signifies bloody Persecuters, and he who
rides upon them, is Satan a liar, and murderer ever John. 8.
from the beginning. The type tells us, that bastard Bastard religion is
always cruel.
religion is always cruel, examples of all ages prove it. Cain a bastard and
false worshipper, he slew Abel a true sacrificer; Ismael mocked Isaac and Esau
persecuted Jacob. Verberari Christianorum Athanas. ad solit. ^itam degentes.
proprium est, slag^llare autem Pilati, and Caiaphae sunt officia. To suffer,
is the property of Christians: To you it is given not only to believe, but to
suffer also, but to persecute and scourge, are the practices of Pilate and
Caiaphas.

The Jesuit Coster, in the Preface of his Encheridion The church of Rome that
now is, is not like the Primitive Church of Rome.
testifies, that albeit the Christians of the Primitive Church were of a
sufficient number to give battle to the persecuting Emperors, yet they chose
rather to propagate the Gospel, by patient suffering the shedding of their own
blood, the^by shedding the blood of their Persecuters, Ita Catholicos pia
quaedam Coster. praesat. enchirid.
tenuit misericordia. Such was then the tender mercy of Catholics. But I pray
him tell me, where was this tender mercy in pretended Catholics Roman, at
the murder of Paris? Is it Their bloody teeth show them to be wolves, not
sheep.
not clear by his own confession, that the Church of Rome present, is far
degenerate from Rome primitive. If there were not any other argument against
them, their bloody teeth may testify that they are not the Sheep of Jesus,
but ravening Wolves. But of this we have spoken elsewhere. Satan thirsts for
blood, and when he gets it, blood is his destruction.


Satan thirsts for blood, and when he has gotten it, blood is his
destruction. He thought all should go well, and his kingdom should be in
peace, if once he had Jesus Christ crucified; but Christ by death destroyed
him, who had the power of death; and he thinks by shedding the blood of
Saints, to raze the Christian name out of the earth, but he is far deceived,
for it has proved true in all times, which Tertullian by experience marked in
his time, Sanguis Martyrum semen est Ecclesiae, the blood of Martyrs is the
seed of the Church. This is the bush that burns, but cannot The Church cannot
be consumed by the cross.
be consumed by fire; it is the Arc tossed by water, but still preuailes
against the water. Continual were the persecutions of the Church Primitive,
Niceph. l. 3. c. 22.
yet Christians increased daily, deeply rooted in the doctrine of the Apostles,
and watered plentiously with the blood of Saints. And again, The more cruelty
(said Iustine) is used against us, the Justin. Mar. in dialog. cum Tryph.
more the number of Belieuers is increased. No otherwise then if a man cut the
Vine tree, the better the branches thereof grow: for the Vine tree planted by
God and Christ, is his people.

And power was given him.] This is for the comfort Enemies of the Church cannot
do the harm that they would.
of the Church, that howsoever her enemies be many, and most malicious, yet
they can do no more then according to the power GOD gives Mat. 10. 30.
them. Yea and all the hairs of your head are numbered, not one of them can
fall to the ground, but by the will of your heavenly Father. Times ne pereas,
cuius capillus Aug. hom. 14.
non peribit? Art thou afraid lest thou perish, since a hair of thine head
cannot perish? When Pilat had bragged of his power to Jesus, our Lord gave him
this answer, Thou could have no power Ioh. 19. 11.
over me at all, if it were not given thee from above. Yea Satan himself
confessed, that albeit many times Job. 1.
he assaied to have harmed Job, yet he could not, because the Lord was an
hedge unto him. He is indeed a roaring Lion, going about, seeking whom he Satan
is a Lion, but reserved in chains 2. Pet. 2. 4.
may devour, but he cannot so much as enter into swine, till the Lord give him
license, he is reserved in chains, which hinders, and restraines his malice.
There are two chains upon him which bind him, and other two which torment him:
but of these we have spoken, Romans 8.

To take peace from the earth.] I marvel what How far this place is mistaken
by some.
moved Brightman to say, that in the second seal, Non agitur de persecutione
Ecclesiae, sed de tempestate Brightm. in hunc lo^.
bellorum, qua orbis terrarum concutietur. There is no mention of the
persecution of the Church, but of troublesome wars, wherewith the world shall
be shaken. His reason is from this word, The Rider on the red horse has power
to take peace from the earth; that is, from the men of the world, figured by
the earth, not from the Church, which is figured by heaven: as if commotions of
Kingdoms imported not a disturbance of the peace of the Church; yet in few
lines after he clean forgets himself, for thus he writes, Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, grauem in Christianos persecutionem mouit, quam, vt compesceret
secundum Animal, Justinius scilicet vocem suam edidit: that Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, moved a heavy persecution against the Christians, to pacify and
stay it, Iustine Martyr uttered his voice, but it was the bullocks voice, it
prevailed not, as did the first Voice, to wit, of the Lion. It is a pity to
see learned men miscarried with such idle speculations, and Commentaries, which
neither agree with the Text, nor with their own words; but leaving him:

This peace which the first executor of Gods Persecuters may take away peace
external
wrath takes from the earth, is peace external, and the Spirit of God
purposely so speaks, that most cruel persecutors can do no more but take
peace from the earth, that is peace external: for as for that inward peace of
God, worldly men never had Not internal.
it, and so it cannot be taken from them. Our Ioh. 14. 27.
Lord has left it in Legacy to his Church, My peace I leave you; and that
with assurance, that none can take it from them: Yet the breaking of peace
external brings in with it persecution of the external estate of Christians;
so our Savior witnesses himself, I came not to bring peace, but the Math.
10. 21.
sword. What shall ensue hereof? See of that which he subioynes, Brother shall
betray the brother to the death, and the father the son, and children shall
rise against their parents, and cause them to die. Of this it is clear, how
the disturbance of external peace by the sword, imports a persecution of the
Church.

As true Religion binds us to God, so it divorces Peace between people of
diverse Religions, cannot be settled by granting liberty of conscience.
us from them, were they never so nearly bound to us in respect of nature, who
are enemies to the Truth of God: therefore is Leui praised, that in the cause
of God, he said to his father and mother, I know you not. And of this it is
evident, that to procure external peace in a Kingdom, by granting, as they
call it, liberty of conscience, is an unwise policy; the Ark of God and Dagon
will not both stand in one Temple: Jacob and Esau will not agree in one womb:
Diversity of Religion puts Fathers, Brethren, and Children by the ears, every
one of them against others: How then can it make peace?

And that they should kill one another.] Persecuters Persecuters are profitable
to persecuted Saints.
are profitable to them whom they persecute, but indeed pernicious to
themselves: They are, as the coals, which melts and sineth the gold, but
consume themselves; they are compared by the Psalmist to a Rasor, Nouacula,
quae non admittitur, Psalm. 52. 2.
Aug. ser. 6.
nisi ad supers^ua nostra, which only cuts away our superfluities, but even in
so doing they But most pernicious to themselves.
are hurtful and pernicious to themselves: which our Savior properly
expressed, when he said to S. Paul a Persecutor; It is hard for thee to kick
against Act. 9. 5.
the prick. Durum calcitranti non stimulo, by persecuting my Saints, thou
procurest hurt to thy self. Stories of all ages prove this, that the wicked
drawing their sword against Saints, have turned it in the end, either on
themselves, for the cruelty of psalm. 7. 16.
the wicked shall fall upon his own pate; or else one of them against another:
So Eusebius witnesses Eusebius. lib. ^. c. 7.
This is cleared by the Story of all times.
of Pilate: Factus est suiipsius and iudex, and vindex: he was made both his
own Judge, and his own Burrio. Nero, after he had persecuted many Christians
to the death, is pursued by Galba, and sticks himself; Galba is slain by
Otho; and shortly after, Otho is slain by Vitellius. Domitian, who banished S.
John, and employed his servants, and subjects to persecute Christians, was
murdered by two of his own Domestics, not without the counsel of his wife.
Maximinus and his son rent asunder by his own suddarts, they all crying with
one voice, Ex pess^mo genere ne catu^um quidem esse seruandum. Look to
Valerian, and Dioclesian, and all the rest of that sort, and ye shall see the
sword of persecuters, in Gods righteous judgments, turned upon themselves.

VERSE. 5. And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third living
creature say, Come and see. Then I beheld, and lo, a Black Horse, and he that
sat on him, had Balances in his hand.
IN the opening of the third Seal, we have first, In the third Seal the
contempt of the Gospel is punished with the plague of famine.
the Preparation, the same which was premitted before the opening of the former
two; then we have the Vision it self, wherein the Lord threatens the world
with the plague of famine for contempt of the Gospel. This plague is first
propounded in a type, ver. 5. next, expounded in a plain speech, ver. 6. In
the Type, there is a black Horse, and the Rider thereupon having Balances in
his Under the type of a black Horse, and a Rider with Balances.
hand. This is a Vision far different from the first; the white Horse comes
into the world, and a crowned Conqueror riding upon him, he is not received,
but on the contrary persecuted: to punish their sin, now comes in the black
Horse; for sure it is, black and doleful tidings are abiding them, who will
not receive the joyful tidings of the Gospel.

This plague of famine is figured by a black Blackness of Visage, an effect
of famine. Lam. 4. 7.
Horse, from the effect thereof; for it blackneth the most beautiful
countenances of men: The Nazarites of Jerusalem, which were purer then the
snow, whiter then the milk, their visage is blacker then the coals. If the
Lord withdraw from man the comfort of his creatures, his courage, strength,
countenance, and all fails him. Alas that foolish Silly man cannot consist
without Gods creatures; how can he then endure if he want himself?
man cannot consider this! Since he cannot endure to want the comfort of the
least of God creatures, how is he able to endure the want of God his own
favorable face? If the Sun refuse to shine unto thee; if the Air deny thee
respiration or breathing; if the Earth deny thee her fruits; does not vain man
turn into nothing? How then can he be but utterly confounded, if the Lord
shall cast down his countenance upon him? according to that of the Psalmist,
When thou with Psalm. 39. 11.
rebukes do chastise man for iniquity, thou as a moth make his beauty to
consume.

Yea, the comfort of all creatures, though thou Yea, all creatures cannot
comfort man, if the Lord look angry at him.
had them, were not able to uphold thee, if the Lord in his anger look down
upon thee. A fearful example hereof we have in Baltasar, the last of the
Assyrian Monarchs, who having about Dan. 5.
him all worldly comforts that the heart of man could crave, yet when the Lord
wakened his conscience, and wrote his doom with three fingers of an hand upon
the wall over against him, his countenance changed, his flesh trembled, his
knees smote one against the other, his spirit was perturbed, and none of his
comforts could comfort him. Since it is so, that we cannot endure to An
Exhortation to make peace with our God.
want his creatures, far less can we live, if we want himself: will we
still provoke the Lord to wrath by our sins? Are we stronger then he? that
1. Cor. 10. 42.
any way we should be able to bear the force of his indignation? Why then are
we not more careful to make peace with him? Thou can not resist him; why
will thou not be reconciled with him? God give us wise, and understanding
hearts, that in time we may consider of it.

This plague of famine comes in into the third Plague of Famine is not to be
limited to any definite time.
room, and is not to be limited within any definite time; for as the course of
the white Horse shall continue to the worlds end; so, where he is rejected, the
Black and the Pale shall follow, acaccording as it pleases the Lord to appoint
them. Cotterius, who assigns seven years, and Cotterius assigns seven
years, and no more, to every Seal.
no more, to every Seal, confesses he cannot prove that this plague of
famine threatened here, should be restrained to seven years only; and so it
is indeed; for where the red Horse follows the White, to persecute the
Preachers and Professors of the Gospel, it is a righteous thing with God to
send in the Black and the Pale Horses to plague them: They who despise the
Bread of Life, are justly punished, when bread needful for the body is taken
from them. Seek first the Kingdom of Math. 6. 33.
heaven, and all other things shall be ministered unto you; They who despise the
bread of Life, are justly plagued with want of earthly bread.
And on the contrary, where men will not receive the Kingdom of God offered
unto them, all other things, which they would have, shall be taken from them:
They shall not enjoy the comforts of the earth, who despise the pleasures of
heaven, proclaimed and preached by the Gospel.

The blind world blames the Gospel most The world blames the Gospel
wrongfully for plagues which come for the contempt of the Gospel.
wrongfully, as if it were the cause, why men are plagued with famine, and
pestilence: but we see, the true cause is the persecution and contempt of the
Gospel. So the Jews of old, ignorantly gloried, as the Papists do now, that
there was wealth enough, when they worshipped the Queen of heaven: Ier. 44. 17.
And Infidels in the Primitive Church imputed Famine, Pest, and such like, to
the Christians: But here the true causes of wealth, and of want, are
discovered to us.

And yet still they object, that Famine and The objection of Ethnickes.
Pestilence cannot be plagues sent upon the world for contempt of the Gospel,
because Preachers and Professors of the Gospel are not exempted from them.

But this is easily answered: for good men and An answer to it.
evil, as in one and the selfe-fame action, so also in one and the selfe-fame
passion, are far different one from another: Cain and Abel sacrificed, yet
was the one accepted, the other rejected; their hands wrought alike, but not
their hearts. Judas said, I have sinned, in betraying Christ; Peter, I have
sinned, in denying Christ: Alike in confession, but not in contrition, and
confidence. Two Good men and evil in the like sufferings and actions, are yet
very unlike.
Malefactors crucified with Christ, the one continuing in his sin, blasphemed
him; the other by grace converted from his sin, blessed him. There ye have
in like action and like passion, an unlike disposition: Quicunque boni, malique
pariter afflict^ Aug. de ciuita^ De^. lib. 1. c. 8.
sunt, non ideo ipsi distincti non sunt: quia distinctum non est, quod vtrique
perpessi sunt, manet tamen dissimilitudo passorum, etiam in similitudine
passionum, and licet sub eodem tormento, non est idem virtus and vitium; Good
and evil men are not therefore not distinguished, because it is not
distinguished which they suffer: There is a great dissimilitude of the
sufferers, even in the similitude of suffering, and under one and the
selfe-fame torment, yet are not virtue and vice one and the same. The same
answer before him, gave Cyprian to the Ethnickes, when they objected the like
to Christians: Think not (says he) that ye and we, because we both suffer
in the like afflictions, are therefore alike; when we are stricken like you,
yet are we not like; Ne putes participem esse poenae tuae, quem non vides
participem doloris tui; think him not partaker of thy punishment, whom thou
see not partaker of thy pain. The Balance in the hand of the Ruler notes


Now the Rider on this black Horse is said to have a Balance in his hand:
first, in token of penury, and scarcity, he gives bread unto men, not 1
Scarcity of Bread.
by measure, but by weight, which is according to the curse threatened in the
Law: When I shall break Leuit. 26. 6.
the staff of your bread, then ten women shall bake your bread in one Oven,
and they shall deliver your bread again by weight, and ye shall eat, and not
be satisfied. A token of great scarcity, when in one Oven, as much bread is
baked, as must serve seven Families; and which yet is worse, They shall eat,
and not be satisfied.

Secondly, the Balance in the hand of him who 2 The equity of Gods Judgments.
brings this plague of Famine, notes the equity of God in the execution of his
Judgments, he makes his plagues proportional to the sins of men, and in
punishing them does nothing unrighteously. Hitherto tend these borrowed
speeches of Lines, Measures, and Cups, used in holy Scripture, to express the
moderation and equity of God; even in punishing, he keeps a measure, a rule,
and order. But in the execution of mercy it is far otherwise; for our best
service is not worth the least of his mercies: our recompense is not by lines
nor measures: but as our Savior speaks, A good measure pressed down, and
shaken together, Luke 6. 28.
and running over, shall be given unto you. The Lord shall do to us
abundantly above all we can ask or think; Much more above all that we have
done.

VERSE. 6. And I heard a Voice in the midst of the four living creatures say,
A measure of Wheat for a penny, and three measures of Barley for a penny: and
Oil, and Wine hurt thou not.
NOW follows the exposition of the former The Type siguring famine expounded
in plain speech.
Type, wherein by a Proclamation from the Throne, or the Lamb that sits
thereon, the plague threatened here, is declared to be famine and dearth. The
Choenix, in the judgment of all Interpreters, is such a measure of dry corn,
as might serve to be bread for a day unto one man: The penie again was the
ordinary wages of a common Labourer for a day; as is clear out of the Parable
of the Math. 20.
Vineyard, and those who labored in it. So great then shall the Dearth be,
that a man laboring all the day long, shall be able to gain no more bread,
then may suffice his own belly.

And yet it is to be marked, that the famine threatened Famine threatened here,
is not in the highest degree*
here, is not in the highest degree, wherewith afterward the sins of men
provoked the Lord to punish them: For here Wine and Oil are spared, which in
greater famines have been altogether taken away; for except smaller judgments
be contemned, the Lord proceeds not unto greater: Mercy pleases him, rather
then judgment: but if mercy be despised, the judgment is doubled, according
to that threatening; If ye will not for all these Leu. 26. 18.
things obey me, I will punish you seven times more, according to your sins:
and if ye walk stubbornely Ver. 21. 24, 28, 29.
against me, and will not obey me, then will I walk stubbornely against you in
mine anger, and ye shall eat the flesh of your sons and daughters. Such was
the famine inflicted upon Samaria and Jerusalem, that tender women have been
forced for hunger to eat their children, not of a span long. A Lam. 2. 20.
horrible thing to hear, that the Infant new come out of the womb, should be
devoured at the mouth, and sent into the womb again; yet, as I said, Jeremy
records it to have been done at the first destruction of Jerusalem by the
Caldeans; and Josephus records the same at the second destruction thereof by
the Romans.

But since this Prophecy, and the time thereof, Examples of more horrible
famine following this, upon man's impenitencie.
this plague has increased above that which here is denounced. Among many
others, fearful was that Famine which fell out in the days of Justinian,
hunger ouercomming humane affection, forced man to feed upon the flesh of man.
It is Fox. t^m. 1. page 108.
recorded that two women were found to have slain and eaten seventeen men;
and men debilitat, and weakened with famine, bowing themselves to creep on
their knees and arms, that with their teeth they might pull any green fruit
of the earth; after the manner of beasts, fell down and tumbled over for lack
of strength, and so died, there being none to bury them. When we read of the
like of these fearful judgments, it should stir us up to praise the Lord
for his great indulgence and patience toward us, who notwithstanding our great
sins against his Majesty, yet has he not visited us with the like plagues,
his holy Name be praised therefore, and the Lord give us grace, that his
patience may lead us to repentance. Romans 2. 4.


VERSE. 7. 8. And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the Voice of the
fourth living creature, say, Come and see. And I looked, and behold, a Pale
Horse, and his name that sat on him, was Death, and Hell followed after him,
and power was given unto him over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with
Sword, and with Hunger, and with Beasts of the earth.
AS the sound of the Trumpet, when the Lord Wrath of God increases like a fire,
if it be not slackned in time.
by it proclaimed his Law on Mount Sinai, waxed louder, and louder; so here the
denunciation of his judgments waxes greater and greater; for his wrath
increases like a fire, where it is not slackned, and quenched with the tears
of repentance. Hitherto the plague of the sword and famine has been threatened
to take vengeance on man for contempt of the Gospel; now follows the plague
of pestilence and devouring Beasts.

Yet is it to be marked, that mercy is first offered Mercy is first offered,
before judgment be executed.
before judgment: the Rider on the White Horse comes with the message of
mercy, grace, and peace; if men receive it not, then the Lord proceeds to
judgment. Under the Law, as the people passed over Jordan, there were six of
their Tribes, or principal men chosen out of the^, and appointed to stand on
Mount Gerizzim to bless the people, if they should Deuteronomy. 27. 12, 13
obey; other six again to stand upon Mount Ebal, to curse them, if they
should rebel. Under the Gospel our Savior began his preaching, first, with
blessings, but after proceeded to denuntiation of Mat. 5. 2, 3, 4.
woes. The Apostle to the same purpose says, We Exodus 19. 13.
are not come to the Mount, that might not be touched: But we are come to Mount
Sion, etc. As the Lord Heb. 12. 18.
allures by mercy, so he terrifies by judgment: if mercy cannot move us,
judgment shall confound us, and that so much the more, because mercy was first
offered, and we refused it.

In the opening of this Seal, we have, first, the The order observed in the
opening of this seal.
Preparation: Secondly, the Vision it self: and Thirdly, an exposition both of
this Vision, and the proceeding. The preparation contained in the seventh
verse, is coincedent with the former, and I pass it. In the Vision it self we
have three things, first, the Horse his color is pale; next, the Rider, his
name is Death: thirdly, his Page or footman following him, is called Hell.

The Pale Horse is a Type of Pestilence, and all The pale horse a type of
pestilence and other strange diseases.
other strange, and uncouth diseases: so is it expounded in the words
following, which give us a sufficient vvarrant to exclude all other
interpretations. Pestilence is one of the Lords ordinary Examples thereof.
judgments, whereby he hu^bleth the pride of man, When I send my four sore
judgments upon Jerusalem, Ezech. 21. 14.
the Sword, Famine, the noisome beast, and Pestilence. Here it is threatened,
afterward at diverse times executed, as the History records, which iustifies
Oros. lib. 7. ca 9.
this Prophecy. In the year of our Lord four score, Vespasian being
Emperor, such a Pest Niceph. l. 3. c. 11.
plagued Rome, that for many days ten thousand people died in a day. In the
year two hundred three and fifty, Decius a vile Persecuter, there was no Oros.
lib. 7. c. 21.
Province in all the Roman Empire, no City, no House, which Pestilence
pursued not. In the year Aue^tin. lib. 2*
two hundred six and fifty, Valerian another bloody Persecuter being Emperor,
such a Pest invaded Alexandria, that famous City of Egypt, that in so Eusebius.
lib. 7. c. 21
populous a Town there were not so many Citizens to be found, as before the
Pest it had Canos The indulgence of God toward us in this Land, with a warning
to repent.
senes, ancient men of white hairs. It were tedious to repeat all; we want
not domestic warnings; the Light of the Gospel has come among us, but for
our unthankfulness, the Red Horse, the Black, and the Pale, now and then have
visited us; though we must confess to the glory of God his mercy, that in most
gentle manner the Lord has chastised us: yet have we need to remember that
warning of the Gospel; Behold, thou art made Ioh. 5. 14.
whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: for certainly, our
forgetfulness of the Lords bypast gentle corrections, our unthankfulness for
his present mercies, may justly fear us, that the Lord is to enter in a
sharper course against us, if we amend not. And this for the Pale Horse.

Now he who rides upon him, is named Death; we Why Death is figured by a Rider
on Horse back.
have here then Death brought in riding on Horseback, to signify the celerity
and speed wherewith he posteth upon the wicked, howsoever they sleep in
careless security, and put the evil day f^r from Amos 6. 3.
them; yea, and think with themselves, that they Esaias 28.
are in covenant with death and hell; yet go where they will, ride where they
will, go and ride as they please, Death goes and rides with them, he posteth
He spurreth speedily, and preuents men.
after them, and many a time he spurreth before them, and preuents them; in
the midst of their purposes, and resolutions, which they think without doubt
to accomplish, he cuts them away. An example whereof we have in that rich man,
who resolved with himself that he would enlarge his Barnes, foolishly
conceiting he had good enough for many years, but it was told him: O fool,
this night they will take away thy soul from Luke 12. 20.
thee.

There is no remedy against this, but to prepare Best remedy for us, is to
mount upon the White Horse, and prevent death.
our selves in time, to prevent death, le^t he prevent us. Let us mount on
Horseback in time, and go before him. Our Conqueror and Captain Christ
Jesus rides on a White Horse, all his followers walk in his colors; for they
are all said to ride upon White Horses. If we ride on the white Reu. 19.
Horses, and be in fellowship with Jesus, the Rider on the Pale shall not be
able to hurt us: for there is no Romans 8. 1.
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus; he may bite our heel, and lick
the dust of our earth, but the Lord shall preserve the soul of his servants.
Let us ascend in our affection, let us cast the anchor of our souls within the
Veil, and fasten it upon the Rock Christ Jesus; so shall we be sure, that
this Death, which has Hell following him, shall not come nee^e us.

For now this is the third point to be considered Death has a Page following
him, named Hell.
in the Type, that this Rider on the Pale Horse, named Death, has a Page
following him, called Hell. The word Hades in the Greek, and Sheol in the
Hebrew, signifies sometime the Grave, and sometime the place of the damned,
where there is utter darkness, and no light at all. The learned Interpreter
Beza retains the word Infernus, or Hell; it follows Death, said Victorine,
Victorin. in Apoc.
waiting for the devouring of many souls. For Hell in this place cannot
signify the Grave, and why?
if in this place the word should only signify the Grave, the judgment were
not great, since the Grave follows the death both of good men and evil: And
sure, it is nothing common to them; both can be called the proper punishment of
sin. Here then is the greatness of this Plague, that the contemners of the
Gospel shall be punished with such a Death, as has Hell following it: For as
there is a double Death, first and second, As there is a double Death; so a
double Hell.
so there is a double Pit or Hell; one for the body, to wit, the Grave, this is
Temporal; another for the soul and body also, most properly called Hell, the
place of the damned; this is Eternal. Of it speaks the Psalmist: The wicked
Psalm. 9. 17.
shall turn into Hell, and all Nations that forget God. Peccatorum mors mala
est, the death of sinners is evil, said Bernard: First, for the loss of the
world, they loved it well, and cannot without great sorrow want it, but it is
Peior in dissolutione Ber. ser. 41. ex par^s.
carnis; it is worse in regard of dissolution of soul and body; yet is it
Pessima in tormentis inserni, worst of all in respect of the torments of hell
which follow it: But the souls of the righteous Dout. 33. 3.
Wisd. 3. 1.
are in the hands of the Lord, and no torment shall touch them. This for the
Type it self.

Now follows the exposition of it, And power The type of the pale Horse and
the rest plainly expounded in the Text.
was given to them, etc, The relative (...) is plural; showing that we have
here an exposition, not only of the Pale, but of the Red, and Black also. This
is made plain by the words following, Power was given them* to wit, to the Red
Horse, and.
his Rider, to kill with the Sword; to the Black Horse, and his Rider, to kill
with Famine; to the Pale Horse, and his Rider, to kill with Pestilence, and
devouring Beasts. The Spirit of God so Other expositions therefore are not to
be received.
plainly expounds himself, that it is a wonder how men, out of their own
conceits can forge another exposition, not taking heed to the Text, which
expounds it self.

All these Executors of wrath come out, we see, A limited commission is for all
these executors of wrath.
with a limited commission; he who executes the plague of Famine, is licenced to
smite the wheat and the Barley, but not the Wine and Oil, and this Rider on
the pale Horse is not permitted to smite all the wicked, but only a fourth
part: thus are all the temporal judgments of God mitigated: for (as I have
said) neither are all the wicked punished here, neither yet is the full measure
of wrath executed on such as are punished: Na^ si nunc omne peccatu^ manifesta
Aug. de ^itate D^. lib. 1. c. 8.
plecteretur poena, nihil vltimo iudicio reseruari putaretur, rursus si nullum
peccatum nunc puniret aperte Diuinitas, nulla esse prouidentia Diuina
crederetur. Some judgments God executes now, to witness Why some wicked m^
are plagued now, and some spared.
to the world, that there is a God, who judges righteously in earth, and some
he spares now, to tell us that there is a judgment to come. But in the Psalm.
58. 11.
last Judgment it shall not be so: none of the wicked shall be spared there,
and none of their judgments shall be mitigated there; but the vials of full
wrath due to their sins shall be powered upon them.

Now if it be so, that in punishing the wicked Corrections of Gods children
are with measure.
in this life, the Lord uses a mitigation, how much more may we be assured,
that in correcting his children with the same rods, the Lord will use
moderation and measure. And this should serve for an answer to the wicked, who
think the less of these external judgments, because godly men are subject
to the same. Let them hear what the Prophet says, Has the Lord smitten
Israel, as he Esaias 27. 6, 7, 8.
smote those who smote him? in measure in the branches thereof will he contend
with it, after that he has corrected his own, yet Jacob shall take root, and
Israel shall flourish. He only cuts away the superstuitie of their branches,
but conserues themselves to immortality and life. In death they renew their
youth like the Eagle, but he strikes the wicked at He deals not so with the
wicked.
the root, and cuts them away from all hope of life, light, and joy. Yea these
same afflictions which P^imas. in Apoc.
the godly do suffer at the hands of wicked men, Deus sum bonus ad suorum
redigens vtilitatem, oportunitatem nobis praebet spiritualium triumphorum: the
Lord turns them so to the good of his own, that they become to them the
matter and causes of their spiritual tryumphes.

And to this same purpose, notable is that speech Good things prepared for good
men, whereof the wicked shall not be partakers.
of Augustine, Placuit diuinae prouidentiae praeparare in posterum bona justice,
quibus non fr^entur iniusti, et mala impiis, quibus non excruciabuntur boni: It
has pleased the Divine providence to prepare for good men in the time to come,
good things, whereof Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 1. c. 8.
the wicked shall not be partakers: as also to prepare evil things for the
wicked, with which the godly shall not be tormented. Ista vero temporalia bona,
et mala vtrisque voluit esse co^munia. But concerning But the temporal good
and evil of this life is common to both.
the good, and evil things of this temporal life, God will have them alike
common both to good men, and evil, that such good as wicked men have, should
not be esteemed the greatest good, and such evil as godly men suffer, should
not be esteemed the greatest evil. That great good prepared for the godly,
wicked men shall never see it; and that great evil prepared for the wicked,
shall never come upon the godly.

The last plague threatened here, is the plague of Devouring beasts, one of Gods
ordinary plagues.
devouring beasts; one of God his ordinary judgments whereby he punishes the
pride of man. The creatures are appointed to serve us; yea al of them, from the
Angel to the creeping worm, offers their service to us, if we will serve the
Lord our God: so has he promised, I will make a covenant Hos. 2. 18.
for them with the wild beasts, and with the foul of the heaven, and with
that which creeps upon the earth. Otherwise, if we rebel against him, they
are all armed against us, to execute his vengeance upon us.

This plague of devouring beasts, we shall find threatened in the Law, executed
also on the idolatrous Leuit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28.
Samaritans, on the disobedient prophet, on Ezech. 14.
the two and forty children who mocked Elisha; 2. Kings 17. 25.
two Bears out of the wood devoured them. And since the time of this
Prophecy, how God has punished men by most contemptible beasts, see Plinius;
he records that a town of Spain was Plin. lib 8. ca. 29.
undermined by the Conies: another in Thessalia Examples of base beasts
punishing the pride of man.
by the Modewart, a town in France oppressed with Paddocks, they forced the
inhabitants to forsake their own houses: and in Gyaro, a City in the I Will of
the Ciclades, the inhabitants were so persecuted with the Mice, that they were
also feign to leave it. Thus can the Lord by his basest creatures abase the
high and lofty conceits of men.

Now to conclude these first four seals, this is One thing God offers to men,
and men will not have it.
to be observed: there is one thing which God offreth, and the world will not
receive it: there are three things for this, that the world would have, and God
will not give them. The Lord offers by the ministry of his Gospel mercy and
grace: this is one thing, and yet such a one, as has all needful Three things
that men would have from God, and God will not give them.
things following it, but the worldly sort cares not for it: Instead of it
three things they seek, 1. Outward peace. 2. Worldly wealth. 3. Bodily health.
But none of these three shall they enjoy. They will not accept of peace offered
from heaven, and the Lord takes from them the peace of the earth: they
disdain, and loathe the bread of life, and God takes from them the bread of
corn; A just recompense.
they care not for the health of their soul, and the Lord takes from them the
health of their bodies. Let us be wise, and welcome the first message, for they
who despise it, multiply sorrows upon themselves. Psalm. 16. 4.
Psalm. 32. 10.


VERSE. 9. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the
souls of them, that were killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintained.
BEcause both good men and evil are inuolued Comfort to Saints suffering
death, is brought in by the fifth seal.
in the same external calamities, and the sword, famine, and pestilence, which
are sent upon the wicked, ouertakes also many a time the children of God,
therefore for their comfort, their happy state after this life is here
discovered, by the opening of this seal; and a difference is declared between
their death, and the death of the wicked, even when their death to the
judgment of man seems to be one; for where Hell follows the death of the
one, the other by the same death, are transported to a blessed fellowship with
Christ in heaven.

I saw the souls.] He saw not this sight with his A sight which Saints out of
the body have of God and of themselves.
natural eyes, his bodily senses at this time were suspended, and he was
ravished in the Spirit, and by it he saw this sight. A strange manner of speech,
that a soul should see souls; yet comparing this sight, with the sight which
Saint Paul saw, when he was ravished to the third Heaven, it teaches us, that
there is a sight which Saints out of the body have of GOD, and a mutual
sight also, whereby souls know one another, which we are not able to
conceive, nor know, till we learn it by experience.

It is commonly asked by many, whether if or An answer to them, who ask if
Saints shall know one another in heaven Mat. 5. 8.
not, we shall know one another in heaven; but it were better for us all
carefully to purge our hearts in time, and prepare them for that sight. Blessed
are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God: and Whosoever 1. John 3. 3.
has this hope in him, purges himself, as God is pure. Let it be an answer to
us all, which Photinus Bishop of Lions gave to the Proconsull, when he
demanded who God was: the other answered, Et tu si dignus fueris, videbis.
Thou; if thou be Two examples proving probably, that it will be so.
meet for it, shall see who he is. Adam was sleeping when God formed Euah of a
ribbe of his side, he knew it not, but when he wakened, incontinent he knew
her, albeit none informed him, what she was: This is now bone of my bone, and
flesh of my flesh: and Genesis 2. 23.
in the transfiguration, wherein our Lord gave to his disciples a glance of the
glory to come, Peter, James, and John, knew Moses and Elias, whom they Mat. 17.
had never seen before.

By these examples, learned Divines have been induced to think, that Saints
shall know other in Heaven; yea Adam, Abraham, and that blessed fellowship of
Patriarchs and Prophets, shall not But our knowledge there shall be far
different from that which we have now.
be unknown to us. The Lord shall let us want nothing that may increase our
joy, yet so, that our knowledge shall be without all carnal affection, and all
our joy shall ever be in God, the fountain, and Father of mercy to them and us
also.

Always here we have an evident argument for An argument for the immortality of
the Soul.
the immortality of the soul; it dies not with the body, it sleeps not, but
lives without the body a blessed life, albeit not perfect without it. Yea even
when it is in the body to give life unto it, we may perceive by experience,
that it has a life of it own without it: for when the body is asleep, and
lies under the shadow of death, and all the senses thereof are suspended from
their natural functions, the soul has its own lively operation, meditation,
and discoursing. And since so is that Connexa Athanas.
corpori extra corpus viuit, when it is knit to the body, it lives without the
body, why shall we doubt, but that when it is dissolved, and separate from the
body, it shall still live by it self?

The place wherein he sees them, is noted to be Altars honored with relikes of
Martyrs, have no warrant here.
Under the Altar; by which the Jesuit Viega wandering clean from the truth,
understands the places, where the bodies of Martyrs lie buried. It contents him
not to have their superstitious Altars honored with the bones, or relics of
Martyrs; he will have their souls there also: at least, coming to it, when
they are inuocated, and called upon. But this Altar is called in the next
verse, This Altar, under which souls rest, is the Lord Jesus.
A place of their rest, or residence, from which they have not a going, nor a
returning again unto it. But to leave such Doctors with their doting dreams,
this altar signifies the Lord Jesus, in whose happy fellowship and society now
they live sub Carthus, in hunc locum.
Altari, id est, in secretario laudis aeternae, quod est sublime Altar
triumphantis Ecclesiae, vel sub Christi custodia, et quiet. This Altar is in
heaven, not in earth, it is the high Altar of the Church triumphant, their
souls are in custody and quiet rest with Christ.

Again, another of their own so expounds it, Sub Altari, id est, sub
protectione, et confortio Christi, Hugo Cardinal.
Under the Altar, that is, under the protection and fellowship of Christ. This
Altar is otherwise called Luke 23.
Paradise, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Luke 16.
and The bosom of Abraham; and the hands of the Lord, Into thine hands, O
Lord, I commend my Psalm. 30. Revel. 7.
spirit. It is also called A place before the Throne, where the Lord, and the
Lamb, and the seuenfold John 17. 24.
Spirit is. Of it speaks our Savior, Father, I will that those whom thou have
given me, be where I am. This is the place of glorified souls.

Neither do those Divines reason very divinely, How Christ is both the
sacrifice, the sacrificer, and the Altar.
who say, Christ cannot be this Altar, because he is the Sacrifice; for he is
both the Sacrifice, the Sacrificer, and the Altar: For he offered himself by
Heb. 9. 14.
his eternal Spirit. There it is plain, that he is the Sacrifice, or thing
offered, and the Sacrificer also. The Altar in like manner he must be, for the
Altar sanctifies the Sacrifice. Now by none other was our Savior sanctified
but by himself: none other Altar could commend him, or make him acceptable to
his Father; his Divinity sanctified his humanity, and his humanity was offered
by his Divinity, and upon it. Therefore to say that another, not himself can
sacrifice him, or that he can be sacrificed upon any other Altar, but upon
himself, is as great blasphemy, as to bring in another sacrifice, whereby the
justice of God may be satisfied. Let presumptuous blinded Mass Priests
consider this.

That were killed.] that is, he saw the souls of Death compared to
Nebuchadnezzars fire.
those bodies that were killed for the Word of God. Death then (we see)
strikes but the body: Fear not them who kill the body, and can do no more.
Mat. 10. 28.
It is like to Nebuchadnezzar his fire, which burnt the cords wherewith the
three children were It burns our bands, but hurts not our selves.
bound, but burnt not their bodies: so death can do no more but loose our
bands, and set our souls at liberty. What shall separate us from the love of
Romans 8. 35. 36.
Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or peril, or sword?
No, in all these things we are more then Conquerors, through him that loved
us. For I am persuaded, neither death, nor life can separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ. Let it come, and disioyne the soul from the body,
that it may No religion so false, but it has some to defend it, and dye for it.
conioyne us with Christ.

For the Word of God.] There is no Religion so false, but it has its own
Patrones who will defend it, yea, and dare die for it. Satan, as he has his
own Apostles, so has he also his own Martyrs; Martyrs Satanicae virtutis;
we must always take heed to the cause of suffering. Non poena, sed causa facit
Martyrem: therefore he ioynes these two, For the Word, and testimony which
they maintained. It is nothing to stand to a testimony, nay, though thou
should die for it, unless thou justify by the Word, that thy testimony is
true.

VERSE. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long Lord, Holy and
True! Do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?
NOW follows in this Verse the supplication, The crying of Saints, notes their
fervent desire.
which these souls of Martyrs send up to God, and in the next verse, the
answer which is given the^. The voice by which they send up their supplication,
is called a crying; not vocal, but spiritual, noting the feruencie of their
desires: for the words of souls, whereby they speak unto God, are their
fervent desires* Magnus eorum clamor, magnum est Greg. lib. 2. Moral. cap. 6.
desiderium tum Resurrectionis, tum Iudicii: Their great cry, is their great
desire, both of the Resurrection, and of the Judgment to come: A small desire
makes but a small voice in the Lords ears, but a seruent desire causes a loud
voice. Animarum Ibid.
igitur verba ipsa sunt desideria: si desiderium sermo non esset, non diceret
Propheta, Desiderium cordis eorum andiuit auris tua; that is, If the Psalm. 10.
17.
desire of the soul were not a speech unto God, the Prophet would not have
said, Thou have heard the desire of their heart.

How long, Lord!] It is here demanded, How is How Saints cry for vengeance.
this, that Saints cry for vengeance? Are we not commanded to love our enemies,
and to pray for them? To this some Divines answer, that it is not they, but the
sins of the wicked done to them, that cries for a vengeance. And they
observe, that there are four crying sins: first, the filthy sin of Four
sorts of crying sins.
Sodom, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorah is Genesis 18. 20, 21
great, I will go down now and see, whether if or not they have done
altogether according to the cry, which is come unto me. Next, the oppression of
the widow and fatherless, Thou shall not trouble any widow nor Exodus 22. 22,
23
fatherless child: if thou trouble such, and he cry unto me, I will hear his
cry. Thirdly, the detaining fraudulently of the wages of worke-men, is also a
crying sin. Thou shall give an hired servant his Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15
hire for his day: for he is poor, and therewith sustaineth his life, lest he
cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. And again, The hire
of Iam. 5. 4.
the laborers, holden back by fraud, cries, and enters into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts. Fourthly, innocent blood cries to the Lord for vengeance against
them that shed it: The voice of thy brothers Genesis 4. 10.
blood cries to me from the ground. And so here the blood of Martyrs cries.
They cry not out of passion or private revenge, but out of zeal unto God his
glory.


But there is here further to be added, that this cry of theirs, is their own,
and proceeds not of any passion, or desire of their private revenge, but only
of a zeal to the glory of God, whose holiness and truth they desire to be
manifested; as may be perceived by the titles they give the Lord in their
prayer: Non carnali sensu credendum est, eos animositate Primas. in hunc locum.
vltionis accendi, sed manifestum est, contra potestatem, and regnum peccati or
ass, Adueniat regnum tuum: We are not with carnal sense to believe, that
they were kindled with any heat of revenge; it is manifest, they pray against
the kingdom of sin: And in effect the sum of their prayer is, Lord, let
thy Kingdom come. Quid est; animas Greg. Moral. 2. cap. 6.
vindictae petitionem dicere, nisi diem extremum Iudicii, and resurrectionem
corporum desiderare? What else is it, that Saints are said to cry for to be
avenged, but that they earnestly desire the day of Judgment, and Resurrection
of their bodies? Manuscript. Saints are so conjoined to the Lord, that to his
will, and not their own, they conform themselves.
Hoc dicunt non poenam malis optando, sed voluntati Dei se conformando, de
cuius impletione gaudent: ita enim sunt coniuncti Deo, vt de omni volito Dei
gaudeant, etiam in poenis parentum, iuxta illud, Laetabitur iustus, cum viderit
vindictam: so they pray not, wishing punishment to evil men, but conforming
themselves to the will of God; for they are so conjoined unto God, that they
rejoice in every thing which is his will; yea, and it were the punishment of
their parents; according to that, The righteous Psalm. 58. 10, 11.
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, and men shall say, Verily there is
fruit for the righteous, and there is a God that judges in the earth.

They give unto the Lord two Titles, Holy, and True. It is customable to Saints
in their prayers unto God, to give unto the Lord such styles, as in In prayer,
Saints give God such Styles, as may best move him, and assure them of a good
answer.
effect contain arguments, both to move the Lord to hear them, and to
confirm themselves in the assurance of a favorable answer: and so do they
here; Because thou Lord, art Holy, thou can not let iniquity escape
unpunished for ever: The Lord will not take the wicked by the hand, neither
has Psalm. 94. 20.
his Throne any fellowship with iniquity. And because thou art True, thou
can not but perform thy word of Mercy, promised to thine own, and of
Judgment, threatened against the wicked.

How long! Is the voice of them who want Felicity of Saints Triumphant, is not
yet complete, and why?
something which they would earnestly have, and assuredly expect; they want
their bodies, they want their brethren, for these they cry, as we have showed
before: They have now peace and joy in heaven, but not perfect, so long as they
want these two, God having so provided, that they without us Heb. 11. 40.
should not be perfected. Neque enim praestari dec^t Bern. in sesto omnium
sanct. ser. 2, 3.
integram beatitudinem, d^nec sit homo integer, cui detur, nec perfectione
donari Ecclesiam imperfectam; For it was not seemly that complete felicity
should be given, till the man be complete to whom it is to be given, nor yet
that an imperfect Church should be gifted with perfection. But because the
Jesuit Ribera sees this sentence Ribera in hunc locum.
to destroy the Invocation of Saints, he will have it Heretical, and spares
not to Some worthy Fathers charged by Ribera for Heretics, falsely.
charge Irenaeus, Teytulltan, Origin, Ambrose, Bernard, with Luther and Calvin,
as Heretics, because, according to the manifest truth of holy Scripture, they
maintain with the Apostle, that Saints departed, howsoever they be glorified,
yet are not perfected, till the day of Judgment, and resurrection come. Now
concerning prayers made by them who are in heaven, we have spoken before.

Judge and avenge.] These are two works proper God first judges, then he
auenges: In all his process cognition goes before execution.
to the Lord: first, he judges: this pertaines to Cognition; then he auenges:
this pertaines to Execution: This order of process the Lord always keeps, as
ye may see in his first Judicial Court against Adam, Euah, Satan, Serpent: as
likewise in his proceeding against Sodom; learning all Judges Genesis 18. 25.
to try before they give sentence. Abraham called him, The Judge of all the
world, who cannot do unrighteously: The Psalmist again styles him, O God
Psalm. 94. 1.
the Auenger. It is a sacrilegious violation of his glory, for any flesh to
usurp these offices. Judge To judge, and revenge, appertains to the Lord.
not, lest ye be judged, says our Savior. Who art thou that iudgest another
man's servant? he stands, or falls Math. 7. 1.
to his Master, says the Apostle. And as for vengeance, Romans 14. 4.
It is mine, says the Lord, and I will repay. Yet Romans 12. 19.
proud flesh will presume to judge, where it cannot avenge, and oft-times is
stirred up to avenge, if not with the hands, at least with the tongue, where
they cannot judge. These know not they offer strange fire to the Lord, with
Nadab and Abihu, which at length will not fail to return, and consume
themselves.

On them that dwell in the earth.] Oftentimes in Why worldly men are called
Inhabitants of the earth.
this Book are the wicked described to be indwellers of the earth: Non solum
corporis habitatione, sed mentis affectione; not only in regard of their
corporal habitation, but much more for their affection: which is altogether
set upon earth; it is their Jericho, pleasant for situation; but let them
remember, 2. King. 2.
the waters thereof are deadly, and their ground barren; their diuitiae, and
deliciae, will both deceive them at length. But of this see.

VERSE. 11. And long white Robes were given unto them, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants
and brethren, that should be killed, even as they were, were fulfilled.
IN the last Verse we heard the prayer of Saints; A heart set to pray, is a
forerunner of a favorable answer.
now follows the answer which the Lord gives them. Their prayer is not powered
out in vain* when the Lord disposes the heart to pray, it is a sure token of
a favorable answer to follow: this is the Lords praise, Thou preparest the
heart, and bendest thine ear unto them.

The answer of their supplication is two ways Answer to Saints is given here:
first, by a sign of white Robes: secondly, by Speech.
given; first, by a sign, long white Robes were given unto them; next, by
plain speech, it was said unto them, that they should rest till their fellow
servants were fulfilled. The white Robe is sometime a type of the
righteousness of Christ, and sometime a What their white Robe signifies.
type of the reward thereof. He that overcomes, shall be clothed in white
Array; no darkness, nor Reu. 3. 5.
sorrow in heaven, all is full of light, joy, and happiness: and these Robes
are said to be given unto them. What before they knew by faith, now they know
by feeling: that promised reward is now put in their hand, and possession; here
they had it in spe, there they have it in re: and more particularly Saints know
that in heaven, by sight and feeling, which here they know by faith.
it is said, that the Robes were given to every one: innumerable Saints shall
be gathered together into heaven, every one of them shall have a Crown, every
one of them shall have a white Robe; none of them all shall be ouerseene, but
all shall be filled with joy and glory.

And it was said unto them.] Dictum est, id est, God speaks unto souls by
inspiring them Aug. ser. 1. de Sanct.
inspiratum est; for the Voice, whereby the Lord speaks unto the souls of his
Saints, is the inspiration of his Spirit. This for the manner of the answer.
The matter or effect is, that they should rest for a little season. The whole
time, from the days of S. John, to the Lords second Coming, is called a
little Season, and by this same Evangelist in his Epistles, The last Time; it
was little then: and 1. Ioh. 2. 18.
short it must needs be, and far less now. The number of Saints, sealing the
testimony of Christ with their blood, has been greatly augmented since the
days of Domitian; every Kingdom, and Nation, that has received the Gospel,
has rendered Last Day, now is not far off.
their Witnesses and Martyrs, in confirmation of the truth thereof. The day of
the Lord is not now far of; God prepare us for it.

Again, it is clear out of this place, that the Last day delayed, till Saints
be accomplished.
only cause why Christ's second Coming is delayed, is, because the number of
his Saints, is not yet accomplished. The blind world understands not this, and
therefore persecute they the Saints of God, and would have them clean rooted
out of the earth; But in so doing they are like Samson, who pulled down the
house of Dagon Foolish are the wicked who persecute Saints.
upon himself, to his destruction, by taking away the pillars that vpheld it.
For as Sodom was spared no longer, but till Lot was out of it; so if the Lots,
Judge. 16. 30.
Genesis 19.
or Elect ones of the Lord were once fulfilled, and gathered out of the world,
certainly it should continue and endure no longer.

Two styles are given by this heavenly Oracle to Saints Militant here on earth,
both very comfortable: We are called Brethren and fellowseruants Saints called
brethren for three causes.
with them who are in heaven. There is one Father, of whom is named the whole
Family both 1 They have all one Father.
in heaven and earth. All the servants of that Family, are the sons of God,
and all brethren among Ephesians. 3. 15.
themselves, and their Brotherhood is most excellent; for first, they are all
quickened 2 They are all quickened by one Spirit.
by one Spirit, which cannot be said of any other brethren: Among natural
brethren, every one has his own spirit; but for Spiritual or Christian
Brethren, they are all quickened with Galat. 4. 26.
one Spirit. Secondly, all Christians have one 3 They are all borne to one
inheritance.
Father, and one Mother, Jerusalem which is above: And thirdly, they have all
one inheritance; natural brethren cannot all be the heirs of their father;
but Christians, as they are all the sons of God, so are they all the heirs
of God: neither is the inheritance diminished by communication thereof unto so
many.

The other is, that we are called their fellow-seruants: How all Saints are
fellow-seruants.
so also do they acknowledge themselves to be our fellow-seruants, Conseruus
tuus sum, I am Revel. 22. 9.
thy fellow servant, said the Angel to Saint John. Angels then and Saints
glorified, are not our Patroni, Angels are not our patrons, but our patterns of
whom we should learn.
sed Conserui, they are not our Patrons, that by our prayers to them, we
should seek protection from them, but they are our fellow-seruants: and this
should stir us up in all carfulness to be answerable to our name, that we
may serve and praise the Lord our God, and every way do his holy will in
earth, as it is done by them in Heaven.

Again, it is here evident, that the number of Number of Saints is known to God
Saints elected, and to be glorified, is known unto God, as will appear more
plainly in the subsequent Chapter; he has them all in a roll, and it is true
of them all, which our Savior said of his elect Disciples, I have lost none of
those who^ thou have given me. They are not known unto us, only the Lord
knows who are his; yet is every particular 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Christian bound to make sure to himself, that he is of that number. Prove
your selves, whether 2. Cor. 13. 5.
ye are in the faith: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be reprobates? The foundation, and ground of our salvation
is in God his unchangeable love, and that remains Yet should cuety Saint make
sure to himself, that he is of that number.
sure, but the tokens of salvation are in us: this is the seal of his
foundation, Let every one that calls on the Name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. And by these tokens are we to examine our selves, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
whether we be of that number or no: According to that of Saint Peter, Make
sure your calling and 2. Pet. 1. 1. 10.
election by wel-dooing.

VERSE. 12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and loc, there was
a great Earthquake, and the Sun was as black as sackcloth, and the Moon
like blood.
IN the first four seals, we have the general The sum of the sixth seal.
course of things, as they are to continue to the end foreshewed unto us. In
the last two, the general end of all mankind, and that twofold, according to
their two ranks and estates; the happy end of the godly discovered in the fist
seal, and at greater length explained in the seventh Chapter; the tragical
and doleful end of the wicked, foreshewed in this sixth seal.

And this follows the former very properly. In In the fist seal (...) (...)
for judgment, in the sixth God answere^ them
the fist seal, the souls of Saints cry to God, that he would avenge their
blood; there the Lord promised to do it: and now the number of Saints being
fulfilled and sealed, the Lord comes forth in terrible manner to perform it,
by executing his last full and final wrath upon the wicked; which iudiciously
has been observed by his Majesty: The sixth seal is an accomplishment of
that dissolution Iaco. Rex ^rit.
craved, and promised in the fist seal. The order lets For the cry of Saints
moves the Lord much.
us see, how the Lord is much moved with the cry of his Saints. If that
unrighteous Judge, who neither feared God, nor man, answered the Luke 18.
widow, because she cried instantly upon him, how much more will the Judge of
all the world, who Genesis 18. 25.
cannot do unrighteously, hear his Saints, who cry unto him night and day?
Certainly, he will be avenged of their enemies. Precious in the sight of the
Psalm. 116. 15.
Lord is the death of his Saints.

This Vision by some Interpreters is expounded The sixth seal should not be
expounded allegorically, for two reasons.
allegorically, as if it foreshewed defections, Apostasies, darkning of the
light of the Gospel, and obscuring of the face of the Church visible; this I
confess is analogall to faith, but not to this Prophecy, for two causes,
first, because the darkning of the Gospel, figured by the darkning of the Sun,
1* Because the prophecy of apostasy comes not in here, but in the subsequent
ptophecy.
and the Apostasies of Preachers and Professors figured by the falling of
stars, is particularly foreshewed in the vision of the tru^pets, which
contain the second Prophecy. The other reason is more pungent, for it is said
here plainly, that at the darkning of the Sun and Moon, at the departure 2
Apostasy could not terrify great men, as here themselves being authors and
actors of it.
of heaven, and falling of stars, Kings, Great men, and Captains were
terribly afraid, and therefore cannot it be understood of Apostasy, and
defection, whereof they themselves were both authors and actors. Was it the
obscuring of the light of the Gospel, that made them to cry out, Rocks and
Mountains, fall upon us and cover us? It can stand with no sense: for so far
were they from all fear for that matter, that by the contrary they rejoiced in
it, and did what they could to extinguish the Gospel, and erect heresies, to
force Preachers and Professors unto defection: and in so doing, they thought
they did good service unto God.

Others again take it for a denuntiation of some Neither is this sixth seal to
be understood of a temporal judgment.
external and temporal judgment, such as was executed on Persecutors, and
specially upon Dioclesian. It is true, that in the holy Scripture many of the
phrases used here, are used also to express fearful temporal judgments,
threatened against particular states, and persons of wicked men.

Look the denuntiation of judgment against Babel and Egypt; to express the
horror of their Esaias 13. 10.
plagues, mention is made of the darkning of the Ezech. 32. 7.
Sun, and Moon, etc. And in the Prophecy of the destruction of Samaria,
idolatrous Apostates Hos. 10. 7.
are brought in, crying, Hills and Mountains, Luke 23. 30.
fall upon us and cover us. The same phrases are also used, to express the
terror of the destruction of Jerusalem; but these make nothing against our
exposition; for temporal judgments being types and figures of the great and
general Judgment, properly does the Spirit of GOD borrow the phrases of holy
Scripture, used in denuntiation of the one, to express the horror of the other.

Now, because this is a special note and maine point, the right understanding
whereof, will give Arguments moving some Interpreters to think* that the sixth
seal cannot import the Day of Judgment, are answered.
light to the method of the whole Prophecy: we are to know, that the reason
moving sundry learned Interpreters to think that this seal cannot be
expounded of the Day of Judgment, is, for that there are many Prophecies
following, which must be fulfilled before that Day; but this difficulty shall
easily be removed, if they consider the ground we have already laid out of
Primasius, that the Revelation is Prophetia saepius repetita, a Prophecy
sundry times repeated, and diverse ways diducing the estate of the Church, from
the days of Christ, to his second Coming again. And even they who will
have it one continued Prophecy, the later Chapter being always posterior in
time to the matter of the Chapter preceding, as they think, are forced to
interrupt that course, and change their mind, when they come to the twelfth
Chapter, for there they are drawn back Arguments proving that it is to be
expounded of the Day of Judgment.
again, to the first beginning of the days of Christ.

But to return, this sixth seal concludes this first general Prophecy, with
a Prophetical denuntiation of the Day of Judgment, and so we 1 The seventh
seal for etels nothing as the rest doc, but introduces seven trumpets to
foretell.
expound it, for these reasons, besides others, which we have showed before.
First, the seventh seal has no proper prediction of it own, as the preceding
six have, but contains in the bosom thereof seven Trumpets, proclaiming for
matter a new Prophecy, different from the former. 2 The sixth seal brings an
universal change of al creatures.


Next, here is an universal change of all creatures in Heaven and Earth,
which never was, nor never will be, but at the day of Judgment. Thirdly, all
the persons of the wicked are 3 All the wicked universally are judged in it.
here universally judged without exception; no Babylonians, nor Egyptians, nor
Israelites only, but all the wicked, Every free man, every bond man.

Fourthly, it is expressly called in the Text, The 4 It is plainly said to be
the great Day of the Lord.
great Day of the Lords wrath. And lastly, the like prediction made by our
Savior, serves for a clear Commentary, to lead us to expound this of the day
of Judgment.

For after our Lord has foretold of great persecutions, 5 Collation of this
place with the words of our Savior, proves that it is so.
apostasies, heresies, and of false Christ's, which were to come, he subioynes,
And immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her light: and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of Mat. 24. 29.
heaven shall be shaken. Now that these speeches are Luke 21. 25.
not to be taken allegorically, but properly, as containing Mark 13. 24.
a prediction of that fearful concussion of this Universe, which shall be
made in that great Day of the Lord, is most evident by that which follows;
Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Who can deny this to point out the
Day of Judgment?
man in the heaven, etc. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of the
Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, and
from the one end of heaven to the other. Thus is our Commentary made clear,
that this mutation of the creature foretold here, shall fall out in that great
Day, wherein the Lord Jesus shall judge the quick Terror of the last Day two
ways described.
and dead.

This terror of the day of Judgment, is described from twofold terrible
effects thereof; first, upon the creature insensible, Earth, Isles, Mountains,
Heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars, ver. 12. 13. 14. Next, 1 From the effects thereof on
the insensible creature.
upon the creature reasonable, but reprobate of all sorts, ver. 15. 16. 17. For
the first, it is said, There was a great Earthquake. The word in the Original
imports more, (...), a co^cussion of the Universe, 2 Upon reasonable creatures,
but reprobates of all sorts.
or whole fabric of the world. As to earthquake it is either ordinary,
proceeding of natural causes, air enclosed in the bosom of the earth, or
else extraordinary, an angry and fearful God, Earthquake is either ordinary,
or extraordinary.
shaking the earth with his powerful hand, as was that, when Christ our Lord
was crucified.

The darkning of the Sun in like manner, is Darkning of the Sun likewise is
either natural or supernatural.
either natural, when by interposition of the Moon between the Sun and the
Earth, the light of the Sun is eclipsed, and cut off from some parts of the
earth; or else it is supernatural, such as was that darkning of the Sun
when our Lord was crucified: For when the sixth hour was come, darkness Mark
15. 33.
arose over all the Land until the ninth. Which moueci Dionysius Areopagita,
then an Ethnic Philosopher, but after converted by Saint Paul, and made a
Christian: after he (...) considered that the darkness could not be natural,
he guae out this sentence of it, Aut Deus nature patitur, ant mundi machina
dissoluetur: Either the God of nature now suffers, or the world now must be
dissolved.

And the Moon was like blood.] As the Sun in The bloody Moon what it means.
that day shall cast down his countenance upon the wicked, and refuse to give
them light, because they refused the most comfortable light of the Gospel; so
shall the Moon persecure them with the terrible looks of a bloody face,
because they shed the blood of the Saints of God.

VERSE. 13. And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, as a figtree casts
her green figs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind.
THe judgment still increases, and terror thereof: All creatures conspire to
serve the Lord in punishing his enemies.
wherein we may see, how all creatures both in heaven and earth, offer their
service to the Creator for the execution of his just vengeance upon the wicked.
Every one of them sights in their course against the enemies of the Lord: the
earth tembles under them, and reeles to and fro, as unable any longer to bear
the burden of their iniquity, and shall not rest, till at length she open her
mouth and swallow them. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, shall refuse to
comfort them with their light. Thus at one time shall they find the Creator,
and all his creatures against them.

It is true, that even now the wicked are under Now the wicked are under wrath,
but having the comfort of the creature, they feel it not.
wrath, yet think they their estate good enough; for they love the creature
more then the Creator. So long as they enjoy the comfort of the creature, and
feel not the indignation of the Creator, as shortly they will do, in their
misery they blosse themselves, Romans 1.
but in the end, when all creatures shall forsake them, and the Lord, the
righteous Judge of But at last the creature also shall forsake them.
the world shall come in anger to pursue them, yea and their own conscience
shall also witness against them. Then shall their unhappy estate be discovered
to themselves, and they shall cry, as after follows, Rocks and Mountains fall
upon us, Psalm. 73.
and cover us. And this should serve for a warning to us, since the comfort of
all creatures will fail us, Since comfort of creatures will fail all flesh,
let us in time seek the Creator.
yea thy own heart and flesh will fail thee. Let us seek the Lord in time,
then shall we be sure of David his comfort, God, the portion of my soul, will
never fail me.

Set our hearts upon that which is permanent, but let us not rest in things
vanishing. Who will dwell willingly in a ruinous habitation? Si in Cypria. de
mortal.
habitaculo tuo parietes vetustate nutarent, tecta desuper tremerent, domus iam
fagitata aedificiis senectute labentibus, ruinam proximam minaretur, nonne omni
celeritate migrares? If in thy habitation, the wales through age were
nodding dovvneward, the rooffe above thee were trembling, and the whole house
now weary and worn with length of time, were presently like to fall upon
thee, would thou not without delay remove and flitte out of it, and in
time seek for a better? Such a building is this World, all the powers thereof
shortly will be shaken: let us strive for that Kingdom which cannot be
shaken, and let us Heb. 12. 28.
have grace, whereby we may so serve GOD, that we may please him with
reverence and fear.

But to come to the point, the falling of the Stars falling like figs,
Stars is illustrated by a similitude, They fall as a a fig tree casts
her green figs, when it is shaken with a mighty wind. Noting to us two
things, first, the absolute and dreadful power of God over all his creatures;
the Stars sixed by the hand of God in the firmament, how easily are they
shaken out by the same hand? Oh foolish is that man, Teaches us, that no state
can stand, when God shakes it.
who thinks to stablish to himself a state on earth* without the Lord, since
Stars in the heaven, and Mountains of the earth, are removed out of their
places at his displeasure. What is the strength of a man, if the Lord lay his
hand on him, but like a fig shaken with a mighty wind? The like has Nahum in
his Prophecy against the Assyrians. All thy Nahum. 3. 12.
strong Cities shall be like the first ripe figs of the figtree; if they be
shaken, they fall in the mouth of the eater.

The other thing here pointed out, is, that where The world shall fall, yet it
come to a ripe age.
it is said, the Stars shall fall like green Figs, it notes unto us, that
the world shall not fall through maturitie, or ripe age* as though it were not
able to continue longer, if the Lord would let it, but it shall fall like fruit
unripe, violently cast down. And this is it which our Savior signifies unto
us, when he says, that for the Elects sake these days shall be shortened.

VERSE. 14. And Heaven departed away as a scrole, when it is rolled, and every
Mountain and I Will were moved out of their place.
THe lights of these visible Heavens, Sun, Heaven departing like a scrole,
expounded.
Moon and Stars, which are principal ornaments thereof, being removed, it
is now said, that the Heavens themselves departed like a scrole; which once
rolled up, and then extended, if it be remitted and let go, runs again
together. It is now spread out like a curtain covering the earth, but shall
then be drawn by, that the angry face of God against the wicked may be
discovered.

For the better understanding of this, we are to These creatures shall not
perish in their substance, but be changed in their qualities.
know, that these creatures shall not be destroyed in respect of their
substance, but changed as concerning their quality. The Apostle S. Paul makes
this clear, The creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Romans 8. 21.
sons of God. Now they are subject to vanity, then shall they be delivered
from vanity and bondage, unto the which our sins subdued them, and be restored
unto liberty. A new Livery shall be given They like servants shall receive a
new livery, when the Kings son shall marry his Spouse.
them in that day, wherein the Son of the great King shall marry his Spouse, and
the sons of God shall be possessed in their Fathers promised inheritance.
They, as servants shall be changed into a better estate then this is wherein
now they are. And this exposition is confirmed also by the Psalmist, Thou Psalm.
102. 25, 26
have laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine
hands, they shall perish, but thou This is cleared by the Psalmist, and Saint
Peter.
shall endure, they shall wax old as does a garment, as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed.

In like manner Saint Peter, when he has said 2. Pet. 3. 10.
that The heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up,
incontinent after subioynes by way of an exposition, But we 2. Pet. 3. 13.
look for new heavens and a new earth, according to his promise wherein
dwells righteousness. All these make it clear, that a change shall be of
their quality, not a destruction of their substance. GOD made them of nothing,
to show his glorious power, and will not suffer them to be annihilate, or
turned into nothing, but still will have them reserved and renewed for
declaration of his greater glory.

For sure it is, that every loss which by Satan Every loss which man has
received from sin and Satan, shall be repaired by Jesus.
and sin, has befallen unto man, or to the creature by Gods ordinance
appointed to serve man, shall be restored by Jesus the Savior, he shall cure
every vvound that our Adversary has given unto us, or to them which are
ours; so shall the power and wisdom of our GOD be magnified, and the
impotencie and malice of the Devil be manifested.

I speak not here of Reprobates, nor of the This is not to be extended to
Reprobates and excrements of the earth.
curses and excrements of the earth; to these the promised deliverance
appertains not. But of this, he who pleases, may see more in our Treatise on
the eighth to the Romans; where that question, To what use can heaven and earth
serve us in that day? is also someway touched.

VERSE. 15. And the Kings of the earth, and great men, and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman,
hid themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the Mountains.
WE have here the terrible effects which the The terror which the last day
shall work in the reasonable, but reprobate creature.
last Day will produce upon the creatures insensible and unreasonable; now it
follows how it shall affect the reasonable creature also, yet such only as
are reprobate, with terrible horror and fear.

Seven ranks are here reckoned out, containing Seven ranks of men, containing
all combinations wherein flesh can have confidence.
all the combinations wherein flesh can have any confidence: for first, here
are Kings; GOD will judge them before others, whom now he has set above
others: with the Lord there is no exception of persons. Romans 2. 11.


Kings have with the^ their great men, or Princes, these also are not without
rich men, yet more is required to resist a pursuing power; they have also with
them chief Captains, or Captains over thousands; but because Captains
cannot do much without soldiers, there is here also following them bands of
mighty men, and with these, all sorts of common people, both bond and free.
Here is all, that flesh can afford to defend themselves against the power of
any, who would pursue them.

But how weak man is in his best estate, when Yet when they are all joined,
they cannot resist judgment.
he has gathered all his strength, and combined all his forces, may be seen
here. What do they? what resistance make they, when the Lord comes to judge
them? they are but like Modiwarts, or beasts of the earth, running to hide
themselves in holes, in dens, and rocks of the Mountains. In the ruff of
their pride they seem to themselves to be matchless: Pharaoh dare ask, Who
is the Lord? Exodus 5. 2.
and Rabsache will blaspheme, Is your God able to deliver 2. Chro. 32. 14.
A glass for proud flesh to look into.
you? Iezabel, Antiochus, Julian, and such like, think it nothing to wage
battle with the Lord. But consider the end; let all flesh look into this
Mirror, and in time learn to embrace the counsel of God: Be wise now
therefore, ye Kings, be learned, Psalm 2. 10, 11, 12
ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling,
kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his wrath
shall suddenly burn. Blessed are all that trust in him.

VERSE. 16. And said to the Mountames and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the presence of him, that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb.
TWo things here we have, first, to whom do The wicked in their distress,
cry to the creature.
the Reprobates run in this desperate estate: next, what do they crave. They
run to the creature, Rocks and Mountains; But have they ears to hear, or can
they protect when the Lord pursues? This is their blindness, they loved the
creature, more then the Creator. In their necessity they seek comfort in the
creature, but can find none: a just recompense of their error.

But why do they not cry to the Lord? Surely For their conscience they dare
not run to their Creator.
because they dare not; they see nothing in him but wrath, which their own
consciences tell them, they have most justly deserved: they find within
themselves a condemnatorie sentence, which they know cannot be recalled.

Let us in time seek mercy, so long as it may be found; the day before the
Trumpet blow, mercy will be preached unto men, but they who receive it not
yet then, shall never find it afterward. By their folly let us learn wisdom.
The only rock of our refuge is the Lord Jesus Christ: if we run to him in
time, he shall hide us, and save us from that fearful wrath which is to
come.

The Roman Doctors upon this place build What a sure ground is here for
Papists, to build their invocation of creatures.
up, as they think, a sure ground for their invocation of creatures: they said
to the Mountains, that is, to the Saints: and to the Rocks, that is, to the
confirmed Angels, Hide us from the Lamb. And hitherto they abuse that place of
the Psalmist, I Hugo. Card. in Apoc.
lift mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence comes Psalm. 121. 1.
mine help* that is, to the Saints. What a gross ignorance is this? Will
Saints and Angels go between the Lord and the wicked, when they shall be
judged? Shall they not rather assist the Lord in judging them? Know ye not that
the Saints 1. Cor. 6. 2.
shall judge the world? Or what do they mean to propose that unto them for
imitation, which is here condemned in the wicked, as uttered by them in their
desperation?

These and such like, are the sundry foundations, vvhereupon stand the pillars
of Papistry. A twofold error in them is here manifest, They lay another 1. Cor.
3. 11, 12.
foundation then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And again,
pretend of Christ what they will, sure it is they build not upon him, gold, and
silver, but stubble and hay, which will not abide the trial of the fire.

But now what crave they? that the Rocks and The desperate folly of reprobates:
they cry to the creature, as if it could hide them from the Lord.
Mountains would fall upon them, and hide them from the presence of him that
sits upon the throne? O desperate folly, can Mountains hide thee from the
Lord? Are they not a part of that Crystal Globe which is before the Throne,
and is transparent to the Lord; they lived all their days out of Gods
presence; not that his eye did not behold them, and mark them in all their
ways, but their eyes looked not up to him, and therefore now may they not
abide his presence. Let us They lived not in Gods presence, and now they cannot
abide it.
leave them, and learn at David; when he had considered with himself, that
there was no flying from the Lord: Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Psalm.
139. 7.
or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? He betook him to this resolution;
I set the Lord always Psalm. 16. 8.
before me, he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. Since we
cannot flee from the Lord, let us flee to him, there is no defense against his
unsupportable wrath, but to hide us under the mantle of his mercy.

There are two fears which trouble two sorts Two fears trouble two sorts of
men.
of men; the fear of Sin, and the fear of Death, which is the punishment of
sin: the godly, in The godly fear their sins, and therefore fear not
death, when it comes
their life fear nothing so much as sin; they fight continually against it,
they desire nothing more then to be quit of it: O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7. 24.
And therefore is it, that having overcome sin, they fear not death, when it
comes, more then a Serpent that wants a sting. The wicked on the contrary,
in their life fear nothing but death, they fly it, as the center of their
sorrows; Pro. 10. 23.
because they cannot eschew it, all their The wicked fear not sin, but death:
but in the end they shall be feign to seek death.
care is to prolong it; as for sin they fear it not; It is a pastime to a
fool to do wickedly. But when their Terme-Day comes, and conscience wakens
against them to pursue them for their sins, and lets them see wrath due to
their sins, then seek they Death as a remedy Psalm. 37. 13.
of their sorrows, but shall not find it; yea, they would undergo the most
painful death, even to be pressed quick to the death by the weight of
Mountains, that they might be freed of the heavy burden of their sins.

VERSE. 17. For the great Day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?
THe day of Judgment is called A great Day of The last Day, a great Day of
wrath, and why?
wrath. First, because all the children of wrath shall be judged in that Day,
none excepted. Next, because all the Vialls of Gods wrath shall then be powered
upon them; an universal deluge of all the plagues of God shall then ouerflow
them: The wicked put the evil day far from them, the unfaithful Amos 6. 3.
servant thinks his Master will not come: Mockers will say, Where is the
promise of his coming? 2. Pet. 3. 3.
As the kinsmen of Lot regarded not his praediction Judgment to come scorned
by the wicked, vainly.
of Sodoms destruction, ab vno dicebatur, a multis ridebatur, it was spoken by
one, and scorned by many: but they felt the force and fury of that scorching
fire shortly after: so no less assuredly shall all the wicked, who repent not,
feel the weight of that terrible wrath both on their soulos and bodies; they
shall confess at length, The great Day of his wrath is come, that Day, which
we despised, that Day which we scorned, that Day which we thought would never
be; That Day of the Lord is now come.

Two things perturbe, and confound the wicked: Two things shall terrify the
wicked, in that last Day.
The one is without them, the terrible presence of the Judge, or wrath of the
Lamb: He that is a Lamb to his own, looks to the wicked 1 Without the^,
the sight of the Judge.
like a devouring Lion. And not without cause is the name of a Lamb here
attributed to the Judge; for sure it is, that judgment justly inflicted, will
not torment the wicked so much, as mercy wilfully despised. Terrible will it be
to them when they look to the Lamb, who has given mercy to so many, and so
many times offered mercy to themselves, and now see him refuse all mercy to
them, because they despised it; justly, shall the meek face of the Lamb be
turned to them in the terrible face of a Lion: and (as I said) mercy despised,
shall torment them more then judgment
inflicted.

The other thing that perturbes the wicked, is 2 Within them, a guilty
conscience.
within them, a sensible infirmity in themselves through the guilty
conscience, that makes them unable to stand before the Lord; Who can stand? The
wicked are as the chafe which the wind drives Psalm. 1. 4, 5.
away, they shall not stand in judgment. Let us beware of both these: see we
despise not mercy offered; let us carefully purge our conscience: Who shall
ascend into the Mountain of the Lord? Who Psalm. 24. 4.
shall stand in his holy place? He that has innocent hands, and a pure heart:
So shall that Day of the Lord, fearful to the wicked, be unto us a joyful
day of Redemption, and of sweet Refreshment: The Lord grant we may so find it.

CHAP. VII.
VERSE 1. And after that, I saw four Angels stand on the four corners of the
earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the winds should not blow on
Earth, nor Sea, nor any Tree.
THIS Chapter is a pendicle of the precedent, and appertains The dependence of
the seventh Chapter upon the sixth.
to the first Prophecy of this Book, which we called General. In it, per
Anabasin, we have a larger explication of the fifth and sixth It has a larger
explication of the fifth and sixth Seals
Seals; with a notable consolation for the godly, presently subioyned after
the Prediction of that most fearful, desperate, and comfortless end of the
wicked, which shortly will come upon them. For there we heard all manner of
reprobate men sorrowfully lamenting and crying, that Mountains might cover
them. Here we are all told, that the godly shall not be inuolued with them in
their desperate estate, the Lord by his own Seal separates them from the
wicked, and foreshewes that happy estate wherein they shall live for ever, and
ever.

The Chapter has two parts: the first enlarges Two parts of this chapter.
that which has been briefly set down in the fifth and sixth Seal; for in the
fifth Seal, Saints cry for a 1 In the first is declared, how the last Judgment
is delayed, till Saints be sealed:
dissolution of the world, and for final judgment, to avenge their blood on
them who dwell on earth: there they are desired to rest, until their
fellow-seruants were fulfilled. In the sixth Seal, that dissolution of the
world, and judgment on the wicked, craved by Saints, and promised by the Lord,
is represented to S. John. Both these, in the first part of this seventh
Chapter are more clearly expounded. For first, S. John sees four Angels
standing at the four corners of the earth, ready to ouerturne the world, and
to fold it up like an old Vesture, as was figured in the sixth Seal: and this
we have, ver. 1. Next, these Angels are inhibited and forbidden to destroy the
world, until the servants of God be first sealed, and secured, as was promised
in the fifth Seal: and this we have, 2 In the second, the happy condition of
Saints is declared, directly contrary to the miserable condition of the wicked,
in the sixth Seal.
ver. 2. 3. together with the number of them that are sealed, till we come to
the thirteenth verse. From that to the end, is described the happy condition
of Saints, set down in plain terms, and directly opposite to that woeful
condition of Reprobates, mentioned in the sixth Seal: so this, from ver. 15. to
the end, makes up the second part of this Chapter: The first part letting us
see, how the world is conserved, till Saints be fulfilled and sealed: the other
part showing us their joyful and happy estate.

Wherein it is very comfortable to observe the A short opposition marked of
these two, for the greater comfort of Saints.
opposition which is made between the miserable estate of the wicked, in the
end of the sixth chapter, and happy estate of Saints, in the end of this
seventh: They had shed the blood of the servants of God, and therefore the
Moon with a bloody face looks upon them, and all creatures concur to be
avenged of them. Here the Saints come safe through all these tribulations, and
make their Robes white in the blood of the Lamb: There the Sun waxed black,
and withdrew his light from the wicked; here Saints have no need of the light
of the Sun, for the Lamb gouernes them, ver. 16. 17. And the glory of God,
Reu. 21. 23.
and the Lamb is their light. Again, there the wicked fly from the presence
of God, and may not abide it; but here Saints are in the presence of the Throne
of God, ver. 15. There the wicked cry, that Mountains might hide them from him
that sits on the Throne: but here, he that sits on the Throne, dwells
among his Saints, and they serve him for ever, ver. 15.

These things thus compared together, may let This evidently shows the seventh
Chapter to be a pendicle of the sixth.
the judicious Reader see, how this Chapter is a proper pendicle of the sixth,
explaining at length some things shortly, and obscurely set down in the
former. So that in these two Chapters we have the first Prophecy of this
Book, which I call general, absolved; and in the beginning of the eighth
Chapter, we are to look for a second Prophecy, which continues to the twelfth.

And I saw four Angels.] This Verse, as I have What the four Angels at the
four corners of the earth do signify.
said, lets us see, how the Angels standing at the four corners of the earth,
are ready to ouerturne the world, and to fold it up like an old Vesture, if the
Lord did not stay them. That they are said to be four, is a certain number
for an uncertain, yet imports it that they are sufficient; for one, at every
corner of a sheet, or vesture, as the Psalmist Psalm. 102. 26.
terms this Universe, are able enough to fold it up.

What these Angels are, whether good or evil, God does his work, both by good
and evil Angels.
is disputed among the Divines, but without a cause: for sometime by good
Angels the Lord punishes evil men, as was done to the Egyptians, Sodomites
and Assyrians: sometime by evil Angels he exercises good men: so S. Paul was
buffeted with an Angel of Satan; for marvelous is the Lord in working with
his Saints: Satan in his fighting against them, fights for them, and destroies
himself into them.

But that these are good Angels, appears by But that these are good Angels,
may appear out of the Text.
the speech which Christ uses unto them, ver. 2. Hurt not the earth, till we
have sealed the servants of our God in their forehead: he speaks to Angels,
he speaks of Saints redeemed, and inuolueth them both in the fellowship of
one God with himself. Beside this, the execution of that last Judgment is
commonly ascribed to the holy Angels; The Lord shall descend from heaven with a
showt, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
and with the Voice of the Arch-Angell, and with the Trumpet of God. And
again, When the Son of Math. 25. 32.
man shall come in his glory, the holy Angels shall also come with him, then
shall the sheep be separated from the Goats. That this shall be done by
Angels, is evident in the Parable of the Harvest; The Math. 13. 39.
Harvest is the end of the world, the Reapers are the Angels. And to this same
purpose Angels here are brought in, as executors of the last Judgment, to
ouer-turne the world.

Holding the four winds of the earth.] I leave This verse is not to be
expounded allegorically.
here those allegorical interpretations, whereby this is expounded to be the
restraint of the Gospel, which is the breathing of the holy Spirit for the
salvation of the Elect. This agrees to the Analogy of faith, but comes not in
pertinently here; for these spiritual plagues are severally and distinctly
foretold by themselves in the second Prophecy beginning at the eighth chapter,
whereas this first general Prophecy denounces plagues corporal, or
external, sword, famine, pestilence, beasts, whereby the Lord punishes the
contempt of his Gospel, Preached to the world by him who rides upon the White
Horse.

We still keep our former ground, that by the The restraining of the wind, is
a type of the dissolution of the world.
holding of the winds, that they blow not, a dissolution of the world, and
destruction of all creatures therein is here declared: for if we shall compare
the four Elements among themselves, albeit at all we can want none of them,
yet the most necessary, at least, which we may want shortest space, is the
Air, for it is by respiration that every thing lives, which is endued with
sense: take breath away from man, and beast, they perish incontinent; and such
as have the vegetative life, as No living thing can endure, without motion of
the Air.
trees, or plants, without motion of the Air, they wither and decay: yea,
without it, the fire burns not, the Sea moves not, but putrifies and stinkes,
and the creatures which are therein die. So much worth to man and the creature,
is this one, among the smallest of Gods benefits, even the benefit of the
Air; which Pisida properly called a gift, that could not be gotten for silver:
But man, not considering what he has, cannot be thankful. Always, this
withholding of the winds, that they blow not, which the Angels are ready to
do, if they were not stayed by a superior power, imports (as we have said)
the destruction of the world, and all creatures therein contained, which shall
stand no longer, then the Saints of God be once accomplished.

VERSE 2. And I saw another Angel come up from the East, which had the Seal
of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom
power was given to hurt the earth.
THE Angels being thus in readiness to fold up the world like an old Garment,
as S. David calls it: and it being as easy to them to do it, as An inhibition
served on these Angels, who are ready to fold up this world.
it is for four men having the four ends of a sheet, to fold it together,
are now discharged by a commandment from Jesus Christ, till the servants of
God be sealed in their foreheads.

In it, we have first a description of him, who A description of him who serves
the inhibition.
sorues the inhibition, and next the inhibition it self. Concerning him, three
things are noted unto us: first, that he is an Angel: next, that he comes
from the East: thirdly, that he has the Seal of the living God. By this
Angel we understand This Angel is Jesus Christ.
the Lord Jesus Christ, called by the Prophet Malachie, The Angel of the
Covenant. It is a ridiculous Mal. 3. 1.
thing to expound it of Constantine the Great: He A ridiculous thing to expound
it of Constantine.
was a Monarch great indeed, but this greatness is more then can be competent
to a creature: And this stilo is given to Christ, not to express his Nature,
for he assumed not the Nature of Angels: Heb. 2. 16.
but to express his Office; for he is that Wonderful, Counselor, The
Prince of Peace, the Esaias 9. 6.
great Ambassador come from the bosom of the Christ is an Angel, or
Ambassador sent from God to worms of the earth.
Father, to declare unto us the whole counsel of God concerning our salvation.
O, how should we love him, who has so dearly loved us! how should we honor
him, who has so highly honored us! when he made us, he beautified us with his
own Image; when he redeemed us, he assumed man his Nature, not Angels Nature;
neither did he refuse to come down to us with the embassage of mercy, grace,
and peace from the Father. The A dangerous thing to despise him.
condemnation of the Jews was great enough, because they beat, and stoned, and
killed such Messengers Mat. 21. 36, 37, 38.
as God sent unto them; but much greater, because they also killed his Son.
Has the Lord any greater to send us? Or may we look for any other message then
this? Take heed we despise him not.

Secondly, he is said to come from the East: Alluding Christ is said to come
from the East, Mal. 2. 4.
to that which Malachie speaks of our Lord, Unto you that fear my Name, shall
arise the Sun of righteousness: and as Zachary, the father of John Luke 1.
78.
the Baptist calls him, he is that Anatole, Orient, or Dayspring, which has
visited us from on high. Our Lord is indeed that bright shining Sun, To show
that he is the bright Sun of Righteousness.
ever rising, never going down, whose light-some countenance ever looks on
his Church, to conserve, beautify, and illuminate her. If the Lord should stay
the light of this natural Sun with our Antipodes, and not suffer it every
morning to arise to us from the East, as it does; how comfortless were our
estate? Palpable, and heavy darkness should still cover the face of our
earth: But much more miserable had our condition been, if this Sun of
Righteousness had not shined upon us; but now, praised be the Lord, The people
which Esaias 9. 2.
sat in darkness, sees great light; and to them, who Math. 4. 16.
sat in the region, and shadow of death, light is risen up. Many famous
Countries lying East, are under What a great mercy of God is it, that this* Sun
arising from the Orient, shines unto us.
horrible darkness: but to us now from the East, light is come unto the West;
long may it continue with us. It is reported of them who dwell near under the
North Pole, that they have darkness half a year together; when the Sun
returns to them, they run to tops of Mountains, where they may get the
first sight thereof, and welcome it with great joy. How then should we welcome
this Angel coming from the East to illuminate our souls with his heavenly
light, which makes us a joyful day, which shall never any more be interchanged
with a night? Oh, that we could, as we should, rejoice in this light! Oh, that
we would walk in it, and cast away the works Romans 13. 12.
of darkness! for now the night is past, and our day is begun: But alas, we
know not the day of our visitation; this is the condemnation of many in this
age; That the light is come, but they love darkness, Ioh. 3. 19.
better then light.

Thirdly, he is said to have the Seal of the living The Lord Jesus keeps the
privy Seal of the great King his Father.
God. The allusion is made here to Kings of the earth, who have their own
Secretaries, and Keepers of their Seal. Our Lord Jesus is privy to all the
secret counsel of his Father, and he is the keeper of the privy Seal of the
great King, and with it he stampeth none but such as are in the Book of Life,
which is the Roll of Gods Elect. He has also external Seals, such as are
Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Supper; with these he marketh all that are
in the Church visible. The Ministry The Ministry of external Seals, he
concredits to his servants 1. Cor. 3. 6.
of the external Seals he concredits to his servants; but the inward and
privy Seal he reserueth to himself. Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but
God gives the increase* John may Baptize with water, but Christ is he who
baptizeth with the Math. 3. 11.
Holy Ghost.

The Jesuits of Rhemes will have this Seal The Rhemists make this Seal to be
the sign of the Cross.
an allusion to the sign of the Cross, which the faithful be^re in their
foreheads: and for confirmation thereof they cite Augustine. What use the
sign of the Cross had among the Ancients, we are not Aug. in Joan. tract. 43.
now to dispute; but to say that the sign of the Cross, is this Seal of the
living God, is a childish Which cannot be: for many Reprobates may be signed
with the sign of the Cross.
and ridiculous folly; for the Seal of God here spoken of, is proper to Gods
Elect, and so cannot be the sign of the Cross, wherewith many Reprobates may
be marked; Qui male operatur, Aug. de temp. ser. 215.
si se emendare noluerit, quando se signat, peccatum illius non minuitur, sed
augetur: He who lives evil, and amendeth not, when he signeth himself, his
sin is not diminished, but augmented. And again, Nesciunt miseri, quod dum
Ibid.
se signant, and de malo opere se non reuocant, includunt in se daemones magis,
quam excludunt: Those miserable men who will not recall themselves from doing
of evil, and yet will sign themselves with the sign of the Cross, they know
not, that by so doing they rather include Devils within them, then exclude
them. So that the Whereas this Seal of God, belongs to the Elect only.
sign of the Cross cannot be this Seal of God, wherewith none but the
servants of GOD are marked.

Now, that we may know what it is, let us consider What a Seal is, how it
serves to discern one thing from another.
that a Seal is a note of appropriation, whereby a man marketh that, which is
his own, with his own mark, that it may be discerned from that, which is not
his. Thus Merchants put their mark on their own Wares in a Ship: and
Sheepe-heards likewise put their mark on their own sheep, to distinguish
them from others of the Flock, which are not theirs. It imports And to conform
the thing sealed to the Seal.
also a conforming of the thing sealed, unto the scale, wherewith it is sealed,
as we shall hear. Hitherto tends that of Saint Augustine: Signare Aug. in
Joan. c. 6. tract. 25.
quid est, nisi proprium aliquid ponere? Ideo rei ponis signum, ne res cum
aliis confusa, a te non possit agnosci. What is it to seal a thing, but to put
something, or some note of thine own upon it, whereby it may be discerned from
others?

The Father is said to have sealed the Son: the How Christ is sealed of the
Father.
Son again is said to seal his Saints and Servants by the holy Spirit. The
first is clear: for him has the Father sealed, that is, Proprium quiddam Ioh.
6.
dedit, ne caeteris comparetur hominibus: He August. ibid.
gave him something of his own, to distinguish him from other men. It is true,
the Lord Jesus is He has the Seal of God two ways.
a Man indeed, yet such, as has an incomparable note of super-excellence above
other men. For this Seal of the living God, Christ has it; first, 1
Essentially.
Essentially, then Ministerially. Essentially he has it, for he is the Image
of the invisible God, and Col. 1. 15.
engraven character of his Person: He has life in Heb. 1. 3.
Ioh. 5. 26.
himself, as the Father has life in himself. He has it also as Mediator,
ministerially, to communicate 2 Ministerially.
it unto others, not in that degree whereby he possesses it himself, that is
impossible, but in a certain similitude; for he gives life to Ioh. 5. 21.
whom he will, as the Father quickneth whom he will. And thus he seals his
own, by imprinting in them his own similitude and image, by the holy Spirit.

What then is the Seal of the living God, but the What the Seal of God is.
Image of the living God, which the Lord Jesus by his holy Spirit, stampes and
engraues in the souls of his Saints? This the Apostle tells us plainly: It is
God, who stablisheth us with you in Christ, and 2. Cor. 1. 21, 22.
has anointed us, and has sealed us, and has given the earnest of his Spirit
in our hearts. And again, Ephesians. 1. 13.
After that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. And
yet again, Grieve not the Ephesians. 4. 30.
holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. Of all
these it is clear, that, as I have said, The Seal of God, is the Image of
God, stamped in the souls of his children, by the holy Spirit.

This was our first glory, that we were created The Image of God was our
first, and will be our last glory.
to the Image of our God: Satan and our selves did miserably deface it, but now
(by the grace of Jesus) in our Redemption, it is again graciously restored.
They who want this Seal, the Lord will not acknowledge them to be his, Away
Math. 7. 23.
from me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. And if we our selves
would know whether this Seal has stamped us or not, let us look to our own
disposition; for every seal leaves such an imprinted form in that which it
seals, as it has in itself. The Lord is holy, he is light, he is just,
merciful, meek, long-suffering, if How we may know if God have sealed us.
he has communicated his Image to us, then will he make us some way to
resemble our Father: we shall become holy, light in the Lord, righteous toward
all men, merciful, meek, long-suffering, and ready to forgive: for what else
is Christianisinus, Gregor. Nyssen. de professione Christian^.
but imitatio diuinae naturae? Christianity, but an imitation of the Divine
Nature. In a word, look the fruits of the Spirit, and of the flesh, as Gal. 5.
19, 20.
they are reckoned out, and opposed to other by the Apostle. If the Lord have
sealed us with his Seal, then shall the fruits of the Spirit be manifest in
us; if otherwise the fruits of the flesh be predominant, sure it is, thou are
not sealed by the holy Spirit: for such as are sealed by him, he makes them
like unto himself.

Now this Seal, they are said to have it in their This Seal, Saints have it
first in their hearts, next in their foreheads.
foreheads, because it emboldeneth them to stand to the public confession of
Christ: First, as I have showed, he seals them in their hearts, and next, in
their foreheads: No terror, no intreatment can move them to deny the Lord
Jesus. He that denies me before men, I shall deny him before Math. 10.
my Father in heaven. I am not ashamed of the Romans 1.
Gospel of Jesus, said S. Paul. Innumerable proofs hereof we have in
Confessors and Martyrs of all times. There is a notable example given hereof A
memorable example of the Martyr Sanctus.
by Sanctus the Martyr, in the persecution under Commodus, when it was demanded
of him, what his name was? He answered, Christianus sum; and to all questions
demanded of him, of his Country and Parents, he gave only this answer,
Christianus sum.

Let us try our selves, whether we have this seal God will not acknowledge
those for his, who want this seal.
or not: where we find a beginning thereof, let us carefully conserve it, that
the lineaments of that image be not defaced by the deepnesse of Satan, and
deceit of our own sinful corruption* for the want of this seal, will make
the Lord deny his own creature in that Day, Depart from me, ye workers Luke*
13. 27.
of iniquity, I know you not. The silver which is not stricken with the Kings
stamp, is counted adulterous, and not received in his treasure, Sic anima
Macar. hom. 30.
que imaginem Christi non habet, in coelestes thesauros non ingredietur: so the
soul which has not the image of Christ, shall not be laid up in the heavenly
treasures.

And he cried:] By his crying with a loud voice, Christ his crying, notes his
fervent love to his own, Psalm. 121. 4.
nothing else is noted, but the earnestness and great care, which the Lord
Jesus has to conserve his Saints: He is the watchman of Israel, who neither
slambers nor sleeps. He cries for us, when we And his absolute authority over
the creatures.
cannot cry for our selves. And again, his absolute authority over the
creature, is hereby declared unto us: he commands, and forbids as he
pleases, and what he will, is done. This is it which the faith of that
Centurion so highly commended by Jesus, acknowledged in our Lord; Speak the
Mat. 8. 8, 9.
word only, and my servant shall be healed; for I have also soldiers under
me, and I say to one, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes:
and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.

VERSE 3. Saying, Hurt ye not the Earth, nor the Sea, nor the Trees, till we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.
NOw follows the Commandment it self; the The tenor of Christ's inhibition.
tenor of it is, Let the creatures still continue in their natural course,
change them not, dissolve not the World; for the inferior part of the Universe
is here put for the whole: and how long he will have the world to continue, is
declared; Till we have sealed the servants of our God.

How Saints are the pillars of the Earth, that Christ, Angels and Saints
redeemed, al are in one fellowship.
uphold it so long as they are in it, we have showed in the fist seal. If for
the Saints sake, he will not let the earth to be hurt, far less will he
suffer themselves to be hurt. Now comfortable is it, that the Lord speaking to
Angels, and speaking of Saints, speaks in this manner, The servants of our
God; Inuoluing his holy Angels, and his redeemed Saints all in one fellowship
and society with himself, according to that, I go to my God, and John 20. 17.
your God, my Father, and your Father. We are made fellows in a most high
and honorable incorporation with Christ and his Angels. The Lord give us grace
to walk worthy of our calling.

VERSE. 4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed, an hundred and
four and forty thousand of all the Tribes of the children of Israel.
What the Lord propounds, he disposes Our God does what he says he will
do.
also, and what he promises, that he performs. Now for the further comfort
of the Church, the Lord Jesus is brought in, taking a view of his people, and
sealing such as are his own, as he promised he would do. For the seal, thus
only we have to say more; He seals his Saints in three places, in their
heart, 2. Cor. 1. 22. in their head, or forehead, as here, and in their arm,
Set me as a seal on thine heart, and as a signet on thy Cant. 8. 6.
arm.

I know, some Divines take this to be the How Christ seals his Saints in
their heart, forehead and in their arm.
voice of the Church to Christ; it may as well be the voice of Christ to the
Church. For what in love he promises to his Spouse, in love also he requires
of her. Christus est signaculum in cord, in Amb. lib. de Isai. and anima cap.
8.
front, in brachio, Christ to his Saints is a seal in their heart, in their
forehead, and in their arm. In cord, vt semper diligamus; in front, vt
semper confiteamur; Ibid.
in brachio, vt semper operemur; in our heart he seals us, and causes us t^
love him; in our forehead he seals us, and causes us to confess him; in our
arm he seals us, and causes us to work in our calling, and bring out the
fruits of righteousness for the glory of his Name.

But alas, few are they whose hearts do love Few such now in this age.
him: few who in time of trouble would confess him, because few in time of
peace have an arm to do any good for his glory. The mouths of most Professors
are open to confess him, their hands are closed, impotent, like him in the
Gospel, who had the withered hand: they can do no good for Mat. 12. 10.
him. An argument that they are not yet rightly sealed.

That Saint John says, he heard the number of Saints of God are particularly
known to himself.
them who were sealed, is greatly for our comfort. The Lord has the definite
number of his Saints, He knows who are his, we may be sure, as our Proverb
is, None of them shall be lost in the telling. It is written of Cyrus, that he
knew the names of all them who were in his Army: much more does the Lord know
his. All the hairs of your head Mat. 10. 30.
are numbered, says our Savior. Since he has numbered our hairs, and by his
providence keeps us, that one of them fall not to the ground, much more may we
think, that he will keep our selves: for he has us in his Register, and
engraven on the palms of his hands, so that he cannot forget us.

The persons numbered, are distinguished into The persons sealed are partly
Jews, partly Gentiles.
two ranks, Jews and Gentiles: for under these two, all mankind redeemed are
comprehended. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every Romans 1. 16.
The Jews are numbered first, because they were first in the covenant.
one that belieueth, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian.

The Jews are put first, because they are our elder brethren, and were first
in the covenant before us. Sixteen hundred years dwelt the Lord in the tents
of Sem, and was first styled The God of Sem; now they lie out for a time: or to
speak with the Apostle, Obstinacy in a part is come unto Israel, Romans 11. 25.
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And now other sixteen hundred
years has the Lord bin the God of Iapheth, and has persuaded Iapheth to
dwell Genesis 9. 27.
in the Tents of Sem, according as Noah prophesies. And here the Apostle
about the end of the seals, brings in their Conversion and Calling again,
which seems more fully to be handled by the Apostle in that eleventh to the
Romans. Romans 11.
This remains yet to be done before the second coming of Christ: let us love
them, pity them, and pray for them, that the veil may be taken from their
mind, and they may come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Their number is first generally set down: of all Their number first
generally, then particularly is set down.
the Tribes were sealed an hundred, forty and four thousand: and then
particularly, of every Tribe were sealed twelve thousand, which makes up the
general number aforesaid, of an hundred forty, and four thousand; not that we
are to think there is no mo, nor fewer of every Tribe, but a definite number
is put for an indefinite.

We see then, that of all ranks and states of men, Of all ranks of people, God
has his own.
God has his own, suppose unknown unto men; Eliiah was a great Prophet, yet
was he deceived in this, that he thought, there was no worshipper of God in
his days, but himself: the Lord told him, he had seven thousand in Israel,
that is, many thousands, who had not bowed their knee to Baal.

And yet howsoever there be a great number Many are the Elect, but Reprobates
many more.
of Gods Elect, yet are they few in comparison of the Reprobate; and this is to
be collected out of this definite number: for what is an hundred forty and
four thousand, in respect of all the thousands of Israel? In the days of
Moses, there were six hundred thousand fighting men who came out of Egypt. In
the days of David they were increased 1. Chro. 21. 5, 6.
to fifteen hundred thousand, and more, of men able to draw sword. And here of
all ages, only a How the few number of them, who are saved, should waken us.
hundred and forty four thousand are sealed to eternal life, to teach us they
are few, in comparison of the rest. So Augustine understands that place of
August. hoin. 48.
Jeremy, I shall take you one of a City, and two of a Jeremy 3. 14.
Tribe, and shall bring you to Sion. There is a narrow shifting, few are taken,
in respect of them who are left. Though the number of Israel were as the sand
of Esaias 10. 21.
the Sea, yet shall but a remnant be saved. This is Romans 9. 27.
more plainly for all, spoken by our Savior. It is Mat. 7. 13, 14.
the wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction, and many there be
which go in there at: but the gate is strait, and the way is narrow, that
leads unto life, and few there be that find it. This should waken us to take
heed to our selves, the fewer they 2. Peter 1. 10.
be who are to be saved, the more careful should Why one order in reckoning
out the tribes of Israel is not always observed by the holy Spirit
we be to make sure our calling and election by well doing.

As to the order observed in the reckoning out of these Tribes, we are to
know, that sometime they are reckoned according to that order which Jacob
their Father kept in blessing them: Sometime again they are reckoned according
to their excellency, as here, Judah had the prerogative of dignity: for it is
certain, The Lord sprang out of Judah. Sometime the order of their nativity is
observed; and so Aaron had them graven in twelve precious stones upon his
breast, to present them unto the Lord: Figuring by a sweer relation, the Lord
Jesus, presenting his Saints to the Father, in more effectual, and comfortable
a manner: and then Ruben is first, Simeon second, Leui third, Judah Prerogatives
of flesh and blood respected in earth, not so in heaven.
fourth: but here they are not so numbered, for in the kingdom of Heaven,
prerogatives of birth, or blood, will not be respected. It is good reason that
in this life such dignities should make a distinction among men, and cause one
to be preferred before another, but it will not be so there; There is neither
Jew nor Grecian, there is neither Gal. 3. 28.
bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus.

VERSE. 5. Of the Tribe of Judah, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of
Ruben, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Gad, were sealed twelve
thousand. VERSE. 6. Of the Tribe of Aser, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
Tribe of Nephtali, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Manasse, were
sealed twelve thousand. VERSE. 7. Of the Tribe of Simeon, were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the Tribe of Leui, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of
Issachar, were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Zabulon, were sealed
twelve thousand. VERSE. 8. Of the Tribe of Joseph, were sealed twelve thousand.
Of the Tribe of Benjamin, were sealed twelve thousand.
COncerning these Tribes, it is needless for us to speak particularly of
that, which may be found written of them in the holy story. Primasius and
others, run out here upon Allegories, not very pertinent to this purpose; we
will only speak a little of the nomination of Leui, and the omission of Dan.

Leui had no inheritance in earthly Canaan, Leui had no inheritance in earthly
Canaan, but has here a portion in heavenly Canaan.
they were dispersed in Judah, and scattered in Israel: that they might teach
Jacob the judgments, and Israel the Law of the Lord: yet now have they their
portion in heavenly Canaan with the rest. Let this serve for a comfort to the
Lords servants, who Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
are set over others to teach them the way of salvation, A comfort for
preachers, who are hardly entreated here
and to minister spiritual things unto them, who will not so much as requite
them with corporal entertainment of their worldly things: what thou want at
the hands of men, the Lord shall recompense it. Laban defrauded Jacob of his
wages, notwithstanding that he served him faithfully, but the Lord paid him,
and recompensed all his losses.

Again, albeit the Tribe of Leui, as we have said, The Tribe of Leui taught the
Tribes, yet no more of the^ are sealed, then of the rest. A warning to Preachers.
had the charge to teach all the rest of the Tribes, yet are no more sealed,
then of other Tribes: all were Teachers, but all are not sealed. Hereof
arises a caution for Preachers, and a comfort for Professors. They are not all
saved who are of the holy calling, not all Priests, not all Prophets, not all
Apostles, not all Preachers: a profane man may be in the holy calling, but will
it profit him? No more then the Arc did Ophni and Phinees. Yet Preachers, if
they be faithful, shall not want their great reward: For they who turn many
to Dan. 12. 2.
righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever.

Professors again, let them not be discouraged, Comfort for Professors; let
them not be discouraged, because they are not Preachers.
though they be not called to be Preachers; they are not of Leui his Tribe, yet
is it sufficient for their salvation, if they be of Judah his Tribe, and called
to be Saints. Neither shall they be deprived of this dignity, to be
Fellovv-helpers Heb. 13.
of Preachers, if they love them, pray for them, help them, counsel them,
comfort them, that they may do the work of God with joy, and not with grief.

So Saint Paul gives this commendation to Aquila and Priscilla, that they were
^his fellow-helpers Romans 16.
in Christ, they could not preach the Gospel, yet receive they this praise,
that they were Saint Paul his fellow-helpers in preaching.

Now as concerning the omission of Dan, the Why the Tribe of Dan is here
omitted.
reason of this given by Jesuits is, because as they allege, Antichrist was
to come of Dan. But with as good a warrant might they say, that Antichrist
shall come of Ephraim; for he is omitted also. Antichrist, say they, shall come
three years and an half before the second coming of Christ, and no sooner.
At this time the Tribe of Dan had not brought out the Antichrist: and will
Jesuits have The dream of Papists, that Antichrist should come of Dan, is
confuted.
the Lord here to deprive them of their dignity for sins to be done? it being
a common equity, which the Lord keeps in all his ways; the sin is first
committed by the wicked, before that judgment by the Lord be executed upon
them. He has spared wicked men, as he did the Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15. 2.
many years after they had sinned: they sinned in the days of Moses, they are
punished in the days of Samuel, four hundred years after: but that the Lord
has punished a people sixteen hundred years, and more, before they committed
the sin, as this doting divinity of Jesuits would make us to believe, it
has not been heard, and is without all example. When the Jews shall get
another Christ, then the Jesuits shall get another Antichrist.


But when the Jews shall get another Christ, for whom they look to come out
of the Tribe of Judah, then shall the Jesuits get another Antichrist, for whom
they look, out of the Tribe of Dan; and that shall never be.

They cite Ambrose for confirmation of their opinion: Amb. de benidict.
he says it indeed, but shows no warrant for Patriarch. cap. 7.
it; we willingly embrace the Fathers gold, but will not gather their dross,
according to that ancient rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, Doctors should be
received* Vincent. de Nonat. hare^. ca. 23.
with the Faith of the Church: but we must not with the Doctors leave the Faith
of the Church. It is Satan his subtilty, with a fable of a false Antichrist to
blind the world, that they should not know the true Antichrist, who indeed is
come already. The wiser, and more learned among them are ashamed of this fable,
and are forced by the evidence of Scripture to confess, that Antichrist is not
to sit in Ierusalems Temple; but it may very well be, that he shall sit at
Rome, as, God-willing, shall be declared hereafter.

The true causes of Dan his omission, we are rather Dan omitted for two causes.
to think to be these two: first, of all the 12. 1 For their Idolatry.
Tribes they fell first to Idolatry, and continued therein until the day of the
captivity of the Land, as is Judge. 18. 30.
plainly told us in the eighteenth of Judges. Secondly, they were careless to
provide for themselves, inheritance in Canaan, after that the remnant Judge. 18.
1.
Tribes were all settled, yet had they a great part of their inheritance to
seek. Now we must 2 For their neglect to possess themselves in Canaan.
remember, that earthly Canaan to them was a type of the heavenly Canaan; they
were careless of the one, and now* no more remembered in the roll of them that
shall be in the other.

It is a dangerous thing to despise types of mercy when God offers them: for
by so doing, men deprive themselves of the Truth figured by them. A dangerous
thing* to despise any type of God his mercy offered.
Carnal Jews counted no more of Canaan, and regarded nothing but the
commodity of the soil for habitation, and benefits temporal, which they
enjoyed therein: but such as were spiritual, loved Heb. 11.
it much more, because it was a type and pledge of better. A necessary warning
for the men of this A warning to Non-recu sants.
age, who esteem it a small sin, or no sin, to neglect the holy Communion,
wherein the Lord gives earthly types of heavenly things: they think little of
them, with Naaman the Syrian, that the waters of Jordan are no better then the
waters of Damascus: but he, till he learned to reverence the means ordained
by God, was not healed of his Leprosy: and they cannot come to the
participation of the Truth, so long as they despise the types thereof. Yet as
the most general threatening Most general threatenings have in them included
exceptions.
of judgment has included in it an exception, so are we not to think that
here all Danites are excluded from the benefit of this seal: for Samson of the
tribe of Dan, had the honor to be a Judge in Israel, Heb. 11.
and is reckoned by the Apostle in the Catalogue of them who were renowned for
their faith. Only the omission of Dan teaches us, how far the Lord
abhors and detesteth Idolatry: and we are not to stretch it further, and to
gather out of it, a determinate exclusion from mercy and grace of all
particular persons belonging to that Tribe.

Now concerning Ephraim, we know that Jeroboam, Ephraim why omitted out of
this catalogue.
who first rent the ten tribes from the kingdom of David, and erected them in a
several kingdom, in the days of Rehobo^m, was of the Tribe of Ephraim: he
founded his kingdom upon idolatry, fearing if the people had reforted to the
Temple, which was in Judah, they would in time r^uolt again to the house of
David. He raised up two Calves, one in Bethel, the other in Dan, and so not
only became an Apostat himself, but also drew all the ten Tribes to
defection, and therefore is he commonly in holy Scripture remembered with this
note to his shame, that he caused Israel to sin.

That sinful kingdom, as the Prophet calls it, The endurance of Isreal's
Kingdom with the number of their Kings.
continued but two hundred, fifty and eight years. The number of their Kings,
all this time were nineteen Kings, every one of them more wicked and
idolatrous then another. The Lord for this shook Hos. 5.
them like a Reed beaten with the wind, and consumed them like a Moth. So that
among ninet^en Kings, nine or ten times was the blood Royal changed; yet
never any one of them learned by example of Gods wrath upon others, to repent
of their idolatry, and return to the Lord.

They kept precisely the fundamental Law of It was founded on Idolatry, and
could not stand.
the Kingdom laid by Jeroboam, and would not forsake the calves of Dan and
Bethel, but it was to their own destruction. Woe to him, that build^ his Abac.
2. 12. 1. Ki. 15. etc. 16
house by iniquity. The tragical and tu^ultary state of Isreal's Kingdom, from
the beginning of it to the end.


Jeroboam their first King, had a son Nadab, but none mo of his race enjoyed
the kingdom. (...) of another blood, slaieth Nadab, and reigns in his stead.
Ela also his son succeeds after him, but Zimri of another blood cutteth
away Elah.

And he had scarce sitten down in the royal chair seven days, when Omri of
ano^er blood dispatched him. Omri has three of his race that succeedes him in
his kingdom: Achab the son of Omri* Ochosi^ the son of Achab, and Ioram the
Their Blood Royal changed nine or ten times, being of all but ninteene Kings.
brother of Ochosiah: Then comes in Iehu of another blood, he slayes Ioram,
and all the posterity of Achab, and has four after himself lineally
succeeding him, to wit, Ioach^, his son again Ioas, and his son Jeroboam
the second, and his Never a one of their stocks but two continewes to the
third generation.
son Zacharias: he scarce reigned six months, when Shallum of another blood
slays him, and reigns in his stead. Menahen again of another blood, he
slays Shallum, after Menahe^ reigns 2. Kings 15. 23.
his son Pekahiah two years; then Pekah of another blood, the son of
Remaliah, he slaieth Pekahiah* then Hoshea of another blood, he conspires
against him, and slaieth Pekah: he is the last of the 2. Kings. 17.
Kings, for the Lord raised up Salmaneser against him, who destroyed Samaria,
the chief City of the kingdom of Israel, and carried away the whole ten tribes
in captivity to Assyria. Thus was their idolatry the destruction of their
kingdom, where they thought by it to stablish it.

If any man think, this cannot be the true cause Why Ephraims Tribe is more
guilty then the rest.
why Ephraim is omitted in this Catalogue, because the other Tribes were
involued in the same Apostasy with Ephraim, let him consider that their first
King Jeroboam of Ephraim, led all the rest unto this horrible defection, and
therefore (as I said) is always remembered with this reproach, That he made
Israel to sin.

But in this I will contend with no man. Sure it A warning to Kingdoms and
houses to beware of Idolatry.
is, it should be a warning to all States and Kingdoms, to beware of Idolatry,
specially of Apostasy, and corruption of Gods vvorshippe, and namely in such a
Land, where God is purely worshipped beside them. This sin shakes and
subuerteth houses from the foundation, and makes the^ to spew out their old
inheritors: men of a base and uncouth blood, possess the place of ancient
Nobles. Proofs hereof are many in this Land, whereof I cease to speak.

VERSE. 9. After these things, I beheld, and ^o, a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations and kinreds, and people and tongues, stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white long robes, and
Palms in their hands.
Having spoken of the sealing of Jews, lest we Follows the sealing of the
Gentiles.
should think the salvation of God belonged to the Jews only, here are
brought in an innumerable company of Gentiles, who do also belong to the
election of God. Concerning them, 3. things Concerning them, three things are
set down.
are noted unto us: first, their multitude, for it is said, No man could number
them. Next, their variety, they are of all Nations and people. Thirdly, their
unity in their action and song, common to them all. These three coniunctly do
greatly augment the glory and felicity of Saints redeemed.

As for their multitude, The Lord promised to 1 Their multitude.
make the seed of Abraham, in number like the stars of heaven, and sand of the
sea. Some of the Fathers, Gen 22. 17.
by the stars of heaven, will have Israelites to be figured, and by the sand
of the sea, Gentiles. Howeuer (...)
that be, it is plain out of this place, that the number of elected Gentiles,
does far exceed the number of elected Jews.

Multitude, as I said, does greatly increase the How multitude increases the
glory of Saints.
glory of Saints. Every one of them by themselves are beautiful, glorious, and
marvelous creatures: but all of them coniunctly in one multitude and
fellowship, make their beauty and glory far greater. For one of them
hinders not another, one of them derogates not from another: it is so with
multitudes of men on earth, but not so with the multitude of Saints in heaven;
the more in number they be, the greater is the joy and glory of all. Thus in the
first creation, the Lord considering every one of his works severally, said of
them, And Genesis 1. 31.
the Lord saw it was good. But when he looked upon all coniunctly, then it is
said, And God saw all that he had made, and lo, it was very good. Their
variety is 2 Their variety.
noted here, that they were of all nations, kindreds, people, and tongues, and
yet their variety is no impediment to their unity, for they all sing one song,
as we shall hear shortly. Of this we learn, that the Church The Church is not
bound to any one nation or place, as Papists will have it only Roman.
in not bound to any one nation or place, as the Donatists of old would have it
included in such places of Afric as pleased them, and Papists now will
acknowledge no church but Roman. Shall Churches of other Nations and Tongues,
be no Churches, because they are not Roman? I know, all Churches are of one
communion; but the band of their communion is their faith in Christ, who is the
head of them all, and not their profession of subjection to the Sea of Rome,
that is but the Beast his usurpation, and can no way be showed or proved to
descend from Divine dispensation.

Shall that most ancient Church of the East, composed The Greek Church a
famous Church, albeit no Roman.
of Grecians, a Nation acknowledged by her adversaries, to be a Mother Church;
in whose language the new Testament was written of Syrians, Orat. Corn* (...).
Bit^n. in (...). Trident.
in which tongue the Son of God pronounced his Oracles: of Slauonians,
Russians, (...), and others, in whose bosom are almost all the Apostolic
Seas, and in whose Jurisdiction were celebrate souen* Universal Councel^*
shall (...) East Church (I say) be no Church, because it speaks not the Roman
tongue? Or shall the Patriarch of Constantinople, President thereof, be no
Patriarch, because he is not subject to the Pope of Rome? No: sure it is, many
thousands of good Christians are among them: Or shall the South The South
Church a famous Church, albeit no Roman.
Church, which contains the Nubians, and the Abyssines, subjects of the King
of Ethiop, otherwise called Prester-Iohn, beside many other sca^ered in Egypt,
Arabia, Caldea, with their Primate resident in Caire, called Patriarch of
Alexandria, and his deputy, or substitute in Ethiop, called Abu^, that is, Our
Father; who look for the remission of their sins in the blood of Jesus, and
have their Leiturgies, not so agreeable to the Church of Rome, as to the
Churches reformed. And beside those, shall the Christian Churches in the North,
and East, such like.
Christians of Tartaria in the North, Pers^, and the Kingdoms of the East
Indies, with their Prelate, resident at Seleucia; Shall all these be no
Churches, no Christians? Since they hold the Christian faith: suppose with
different Ceremonies; Shall these be rejected, because they are not Roman, and
profess not subjection to the Bishop of Rome?

I speak not of the Churches reformed in Germany, The reformed Churches of
Europe are not Roman, yet neither new, nor Heretical.
England, Scotland, France, Flanders, Swethia, Poland* I know the Church of
Rome accounts these for heretical: But it is now more then three hundred
years, since Reinerius an Inquisitor gave unto them this testimony, atleast
to their fathers, and predecessors: They called them Waldenses, See Fulke on
the Revel. c. 17
Leonistae, and by other such like opprobrious names: But this Sect has been
of longer continuance then any other: for some say it has endured since the
time of Siluester; others say it has endured, since the Apostles time:
Secondly, it is more general then any other, for there is almost no Land, to
which this Sect does not creep: Thirdly, all other Sects do bring in an
horror with the haynousnesse of their blasphemies against God, but this Sect
of the Leonists has a great show of godliness, because they live justly
before men, and believe all things well concerning God, and all the Articles
contained in the Creed: Only they blaspheme, and hate the Church of Rome. It
is not then to be thought, that the Christian Church of Gentiles, is to be
restrained to the Church of Rome: No, but the Christian Church has in her
bosom, some of all Nations, Kindreds, People, and Tongues, who keep the faith
of Jesus; and are not for that no Christians, because not Roman.

Stood before the Throne.] Their standing, notes Standing of Saints, notes two
things.
their firmness, and stabilitie in glory, they shall never fall from it
again. Adam was created in a 1 Their stability in glory:
happy estate, he continued not long in it; he had his salvation in his own
keeping, and he easily lost it; but with Saints redeemed it is not so.
Secondly, 2 Their gracious acceptance and favor which they have of God.
it notes that they are in great favor with the Lord, gracious and acceptable
to him. They are not licenced to stand in the presence of Princes, with whom
Princes are displeased; therefore Haman, when they saw the King angry with him,
they covered his face, and carried him out to the Gibbet, and hanged him. In
the end of the last Chapter the wicked cried out, Who can stand? but here
Saints are brought in standing before the Throne: For the Lord loves them, he
delights in his Saints; yea, he has promised that he himself shall be a
Crown of glory, and Diadem of Esaias 28. 5.
beauty to his people. But of this (God willing) more hereafter. And thirdly,
their standing may impor^ their promptness and readiness to attend the
praise, and the service of the Lord our God.

Clothed in long white Robes.] The white Robe is The white Robe, noreth first
their purity:
ascribed to them, to note, first, that they are holy, pure, and undefiled: for
Christ loved his Church, Ephe. 5. 25, 26, 27.
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, that he make it unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy, and without blame. So are the souls glorified in heaven, and so shall
our bodies be also, without any spot of uncleanness, and therefore represented
to S. John covered with Re^. 14. 5.
white Robes.

Next, the white Robe has in it some signification Secondly* their immortality
and glory.
of their blessed estate in glory, and immortality: St^la immortalitas est
aeternae* beatitudinis Sanctis collata: It is an immortality of eternal
beatitu^e Gregor. in Psalm.
conferred to Saints. So also S. Augustine understands Aug. scr. 11. de Sa^ct.
by it, Mercedem (...), and gaudium ^oelestis patriae, that eternal reward and
joy of our heavenly Country, whereby Saints shall shine more bright and
glorious, then the Sun in the firmament.

For the better understanding of this, let us consider God^ Spirit borrowes
similitudes from most excellent things in Nature.
how the Spirit of God, to express the glory, and greatness of spiritual
things, customably draws similitudes from most excellent things that are in
Nature. The Naturalists write of a certain kind of linen, called by the
Grecians (...), by the Latins Linum viuum, because it Linum asbesti^um.
cannot be burnt with fire, but rather is more A rare sort of linen recorded
by Pan^irol
clearly purged by the fire then it can be by washing in the water; the fire
cannot consume it, but still makes it the more clean and beautiful. Regum
funera in eiusmodi adurebantur tunicis, ne corporis Pancirol.
fa^illa cum reliquo misceretur cinere: The bodies of Kings were burnt in coats
made of this linen, that the dust of their bodies should not be mingled with
the ashes of the fire, wherein they were burnt, but might the more commodiously
be conserved by themselves, and laid up in such vessels, wherein they were
accustomed to keep them.

To this purpose, Plinius also records, that he And by Plinius also.
saw, Ex hoc line, ardentes in focis con^tuiorum mappas, sordibus exustis,
splendentes igni magis quam possent aquis: in the time of great Banquets, their
Plin. lib. 19. c. 1.
Table-cloathes burnt, and made brighter, and cleaner by the fire, then they
could be by water. He grants indeed that such linen, even then, was rare to be
gotten, but being once obtained, it was worth the price of most precious
jewels. Now we scarce hear tell of it in the world: Always we may very well
think, that the Spirit of GOD alludes unto it, when he brings Saints
clothed with white. The judicious Reader may easily consider, how the
comparison is proper.

Lastly, they are said to have Palms in their Palm Tree, a sign of victory.
hands. The Palm Tree has ever been used for a sign of victory: Quid per
Palmas, nisi praemia Gregor. hom. 17. in Ezech.
victoriae designantur, Palmae quippe dari solent vincentibus? Naturalists have
observed, that there is in the Palm a certain peculiar property, agreeable to
the nature of stout, and Noblemen; namely, that it is not borne down by any
weight can be laid upon it; but rather it rises up against the weight, and
bears it upward. Aulus Gellius cites as Authors for this, Aristotle, Aul.
Gell. n^ct. Attic. li. 3. ca. 6. Plin. lib. 13. c. 4. and lib. 16. c. 24.
and Plutarch: The same is also recorded by Plinius, to be a rare and precious
Tree for many other respects.

Always, it properly represents the fortitude of Christians are made stronger by
afflictions.
Christians, who cannot be borne down with the heavy burden of afflictions,
but rather are made stronger by them, and more able to resist all our
spiritual adversaries, till at length they become More then Conquerours
through Christ. Our life Romans 8.
(said Job) on earth is a war-fare, yet even in fighting, many a time God makes
us victorious: Every temporal victory in particular temptations now, is a
pledge to us, that we shall get full and final victory at the last. Now we
have not peace without war, not yet war without peace; Sunt nobis An. b^os.
epist. lib. 2. epist. 7. ad S^plicianum.
quaedam, and in pace praelia, and in bello pax: But we are sure the end of our
battles shall be victory; in token whereof, there are Crowns prepared for our
heads, white Robes for our bodies, and Palms to be put in our hands.

But let it be marked, that the white garment The Palm is not without the
white garment.
and the Palm go together: for it is innocence, and a good conscience, which
makes strength in the time of our trouble, and gets victory at the last. No
man is crowned, except he strive, as he 2. Tim. 2. 5.
ought to do. We forget, that the Kingdom of And victory comes not without
figh^ in a good conscience.
heaven suffers violence. Alas, great is our security, we will not fight, and
yet we look for the Palm! The Husbandman must labor, before he Ver. 6.
receive the fruits. We look for the fruits, and will not labor: we think
it easy to go into heaven, as if the door thereof were to be opened at every
onset; and remember not how the five foolish Virgins were excluded. No
unclean Reu. 21. 27.
thing can enter into heavenly Jerusalem. Polluted hearts have no hands that
can bear the Palm. Coelum res est, quae vitam altam, alios mores, aliamque
(...) postulat. Heaven is a thing, which requires another kind of life, other
sort of manners, yea, and another creation.

VERSE. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes of our
God, that sits on the Throne, and of the Lamb.
THeir thanksgiving now is subioyned, wherein In their thanksgiving see;
first, the manner; next, the matter.
we have to consider two things; first, the manner; next, the matter thereof:
for the manner, it is said that they cried with a loud voice, noting how Saints
praise the Lord with a fervent affection; Praises of God should be with
feruencie.
and this feruencie of their affection proceeds from the sense of their great
deliverance. Alas, the only cause of our coldness in praising, and praying
unto God, is our senslesenesse; we feel not our bondage, we know not that
great deliverance, and glorious liberty of the sons of GOD, into which we
look to be advanced; therefore is it, that we mourn not for the one, and cry
not, as we should, for the other.

Let us learn at them, that in praying, and Prayers loud, not for the voice,
but the affection.
praising of God there should be a loud Voice: not for the vocal sound, but in
respect of the intended affection. Oration multa debet esse, loquntio Aug. ad
Proba^.
pauca: Our prayer should be much, and our talk little; and then is our prayer
much, when our heart is enlarged to desire much: Et hoc lachrymis Amb. s^r. 46.
de poenit. Pet.
magis, quam verbis, sletuque magis, quam affatu agendum est: and that by
tears, rather then talk. Vtiliores sunt lachrymarum preces, quam sermonum:
sermo non totum pro^ert negotium, lachryma totum prodit affectum: Better are
the prayers of tears, then In prayer, tears ate better then talk.
of speech: The speech cannot declare the whole matter, but the tears may
bewray the whole affection. No Incense, or sweet Odor, smells without fire:
and no praise nor prayer avails, if it be not seruent. The fire that burnt
Incense on the golden Altar, was brought from the brazen Altar of Burnt
Offering, wherein was fire continually. Leuit. 6.
If there be not a contrition in our heart The heart must be the Altar of
Burnt Offering, before it can be the Altar of Incense.
for sin, what fervent praising of God can be for our deliverance from
sin? The heart must first be the Altar of Burnt Offering; or else it cannot
be the golden Altar for offering Sweet Incense. But these Saints are said to
have come out of tribulation, ver. 14. They know what dangers they have past,
they see to what dignity they are advanced, and therefore praise God with
feruency, Crying alowd.

Saying.] We heard before of their multitude, and variety, now we may see
their unity; they 3 Their variety with unity makes a pleasant harmony.
all sing one Song: they are every one of them, as I said, by themselves,
beautiful and glorious; but so much the more beautiful, as they are many and
diverse agreeing all in one unity. As in a Musical Instrument the sound is
sweeter, if the strings be many, yet concordant. Nam s^nus s^auissimus Aug. in
Psalm. 148.
^it ex diuersis, non aduersis sonis ita and sancti habebunt tune differentias
suas: consonantes, non dissonantes: So is it with Saints, howsoever different
in regard of many sorts of people, whereof they consist; yet agree they all in
one sweet consonance and harmony among themselves.

Salvation.] In this one word of salvation, they All the glory of salvation,
Saints ascribe to the Lord.
comprise the whole benefits of our Redemption: the greatness of this
salvation will best be known by looking to that threefold condemnation from
which God has delivered us, and whereof we have spoken, Romans 8. ver. 1. All
the glory of our salvation they ascribe to the Lord, and to none other: they
look neither to Angel nor man, but give the glory of salvation to the mercies
of God, and merits of the Lamb. The discordance Popish Hymns are discordant
from the song of Saints.
of Popish Hymns from this Song of Saints, shows them to be Antichristian;
for in all their songs and prayers, there sounds an uncouth voice of the
merits of men; yea, in their Masse-booke they are not ashamed to pray, that
they may come to heaven by another blood, then the blood of the Lamb. Their
distinction of principally, and secondarily, will not free them of blasphemy.
Our salvation, say they, principally is from God, and the Lamb, but
secondarily it must be helped by our own merits, and the merits of others.
No such word have we in this heavenly Song: If they would sing this Song with
us, and say Amen to it, as Angels do in the next verse, Controversies between
Christian Catholics, and them that will be called Catholics Roman, were
the more easily ended: But heresies must be, that such as 1. Cor. 11. 19.
are approved, may be tried.

VERSE. 11. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
Elders, and the four living creatures, and they fell before the Throne on
their faces, and worshipped God.
THE former thanksgiving of Saints, is here Song of Saints is seconded by
Angels.
seconded by Angels, not only saying Amen, and so approving that which
redeemed Saints have said before; but also v. 12. subioyne to this same purpose
a new Thanksgiving of their own: where, first, we have to observe the order
of the The comely and comfortable order of the Court of heaven.
heavenly Court: first, we have the Throne, upon which sits the blessed
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the seuen-fold Spirit proceeding from
both. O what a comfort is it, in the sight of Angels, and Saints redeemed, the
Man Jesus, Redeemer of Saints, sits on the Throne with the Father! next to
the Throne are the sour living creatures, representing the chief and
principal order of Angels, as we have showed, chap. 4. Then about them stand
the four and twenty Elders, representing the whole Church of Saints redeemed:
and then in a circle about them, stands the whole company of other Angels.
What great comfort we have of this, has been declared in the 4. chapter.

Stood round about the Throne.] In the ninth verse it has been said, that
redeemed Saints stood before the Throne; now Angels are also said to Angels
stand, and never fell.
stand about the Throne. They stand, and never fell, grace preserved them; we
fell, and were in the transgression: but grace raised us up again, and makes
us now to stand before the Throne. O what Man fell, and of mercy irraised up
again to stand.
a mercy has the Lord showed upon us! If we would know it, let us look to
the Reprobate Angels: Of them so says S. Jude, The Angels who Jude 6.
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved
in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great Day.
To this same purpose also says Saint Peter, God spared 2. Pet. 2. 4.
not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered
them into chains of darkness, to be keps unto damnation: yet man that
sinned, the Lord has spared; he fell from his first estate, as the Angels
did, yet did not the Lord cast him down to hell, nor deliver him to Chains of
darkness, as he did them; but mercifully has raised him up again, and made
him to sit in the heavenly Ephesians. 1. 6.
places in Christ Jesus: And now he stands before the Throne, in the company
of these blessed and elect Angels, that stand and neuerfell. Let us meditate
upon this mercy, which our narrow hearts can never sufficiently understand. Oh
that we were, as we should, thankful for it!

And they fell on their faces.] Before, the Angels Bodily humiliation required
in Divine worship.
were said to cover their faces with wings; now again they fall on their
faces: noting no other thing then their humble reverence in praising God, and
recommending the reverence of bodily humiliation to us in the worshipping of
God. It is written of S. James the Apostle, that his knees The practice of S.
James in prayer.
with frequent kneeling, and his forehead with often bowing it to the ground
in the time of prayer, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 5.
obduruisse callo, were become so hard, vt nihil fere a Cameli pedibus, si
duritiem spectes, discreparent, that they differed not in hardness from the
knees or feet of a Camel. But now men are become so delicate, that they think
it reverence enough to discover the head: to fall on their face, they will not;
yea, scarce bow the knee to the ground, to honor the Lord.

Now when they fall on their face, it is said, They Worship belongs to God
only.
worshipped God. In all this Court of heaven there is no worshipping of Angels,
Patriarchs, or Apostles; all the sound of their voices, is for to give the
Lord the glory of salvation; and all the gesture they use, is to give worship
to the Lord only, and none other.

VERSE. 12. Saying, Amen: Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and
honor, and power, and might, be to our God for evermore. Amen.
THE former Song of Saints is now approved Angels approve the Song of Saints.
by Angels, and they say Amen unto it; they will give no part of the glory of
salvation to any man; they will take none of it to themselves. The consent of
the Catholic Church consisting of Men and Angels, we have in the preceding
confession. Papists glory in their multitude, Papists account us heretics,
for singing with Angels and Saints.
and call this confession Heretical, which reserues the glory of salvation to
God only: but there are more with us, then with them; all the Angels of heaven
say Amen unto it: Let us keep the tenor of the heavenly Song, choosing rather
to be falsely named Heretics, with Saints and Angels, then falsely named
Catholics with Papists, who can never praise the Lord freely, and fully, but
reserve a part of his glory to the creature. Concerning the use of the particle
Amen, we have spoken before.

Praise and glory.] It contents them not by saying, Not enough to hear God
praised by others, thou must also by thy self praise him.
Amen, to approve the Song of Saints, but they will also praise God by
themselves. A warning to many of our cold Professors, who will sit in the
Church to hear God praised, but not open their mouth to praise him themselves.
And further, since Angels rejoice, and give thanks to God for our salvation;
yea, at the conversion of one sinner Since Angels give God thanks for our
salvation, much more should we give thanks for our own.
they are said to rejoice; how much more should we rejoice in our own
salvation? They are joyful that we are adjoined to their fellowship, from
which many of their fellow-Angels, in respect of creation fell away, and shall
not we rejoice, that the Lord has raised us up, and made us companions Luke
15. 7.
to the Angels?

The heap of words which they use, notes again Babbling in prayer reproved.
their zeal; and, as it were, insatiable delight in praising God: there can
never enough be said to his praise: but we must beware of babbling, and idle
repetitions; then are the words of our mouth acceptable unto God, when they are
thrust out by the affections of our heart. Otherwise, let us remember Solomon
his warning; Be not rash with thy Eccles. 5. 1.
mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing before God: for God is in
the heaven, and thou art on the earth, therefore let thy words be few.

VERSE. 13. And one of the Elders spoke, saying unto me, What are these, who
are arrayed in long white Robes? and whence come they?
IN the remanent of this Chapter, we have the How, and why God is said to
demand any thing.
felicity of sealed Saints, some-way described unto us: The occasion hereof is
offered by a question moved by one of the twenty four Elders, and S. John his
answer unto it. The Senior moves the question to S. John, Who are these? not
that he was ignorant, who they were, but that he might teach S. John, as after
follows: this is the end of all divine Interrogatories. The Lord demanded of
Adam, Where art thou? And of Ca^, Genesis 3. 9.
What have thou done? He knew where Adam was, Genesis 4. 10.
and what Cain had done, better then themselves: but he asks not to get
knowledge, but to give it to them, of whom he asks. Concerning the Senior,
let the Reader, who pleases, look back to the fourth Chapter.

VERSE. 14. And I said unto him, Lord, thou know: and he said to me, These
are they, which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their long
Robes, and have made their long Robes white in the blood of the Lamb.
IN S. John his answer we have two things: his Most heavenly and holy creatures
are most humble.
humility in acknowledging his own ignorance, Lord, thou know, as for me I
know not. He was an Apostle, best beloved of Jesus; he was excellent for the
notable revelations which he had from the Lord; yet we see, glorified Saints
do far exceed in knowledge the most excellent men that are upon earth; for,
we do but know in part, we 2. Cor. 5. 7.
walk by faith, not by sight, but they behold the glory 2. Cor. 3. 18.
of the Lord with open face. Let us hasten and prepare our selves to be in that
company, whom the brightness of the Lord does fully illuminate; where no
error, no darkness is, no ignorance of any thing, which is either needful,
or comfortable for them to know.

In the mean time, if we would grow in knowledge, let us with S. John profess
our ignorance; It is for such only, who are meek scholars, to learn
heavenly things; Them that be meek, will Psalm. 25. 9.
the Lord guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way. Conceit of
knowledge is a fore enemy Conceit of knowledge, a sore enemy to knowledge.
unto true knowledge: Wisdom cannot enter into a proud heart. We see none
more empty of heavenly knowledge, then are they, who in their own conceit
and opinion, excel others in it.

Again, his reverence may be seen in the style which he gives him, Lord,
thou know: He knew he was one of these Elders, whom he heard confess
before, that they were redeemed by the blood of the Lamb: he saw Crowns upon
every one of their heads, and therefore gives him a style of honor properly
competent unto Glorified Saints are indeed Kings and Lords.
him. Indeed glorified Saints are truly Kings, and Lords: They are freed from
all servitude, and bondage; they triumph victoriously, and are more then
Conquerours over the Devil, the Romans 8.
World, the Flesh, and all their spiritual enemies.

And he said unto me.] That is, Ad anim^ How the Lord speaks to a soul.
meae admirationem, seu dispositionem conuenienter loquutus est; he spoke
conveniently to the Carthus.
disposition of my soul, and I did clearly understand him: He told me, that
those whom I saw clothed in white, with Palms in their hands, were redeemed
Saints, who had come out of great tribulation. This cannot, as Ambrose has
This cannot be understood of Militant Saints, they are not yet come out of
tribulation.
observed on these words, be understood of Saints Militant, as some do expound
it; for so long as their warfare lasts, they are still in tribulation, and
cannot be said in this life to come out of tribulation. Man is borne unto
trauatle, as the sparks Job. 5. 7.
s^ye upward: but unto the godly, death puts an end to all their troubles.
Neither can this be Neither can it be meant of Martyrs only.
meant of Martyrs only, as some will have it, but of all blessed Saints
washed, and cleansed in the blood of the Lamb: Qui etsi Martyrium Primas. in
Apoc.
non in publico actu habere videntur, coram Deo tamen habere probantur in
habitu: who albeit, in respect of the public act, they seem not to have the
honor of Martyrdom, yet in respect of the habit, and their willing
disposition to it, they are approved before God to have it, as says Primasius.

Which came.] The word being read, as it may be How the Court of heaven
increases continually*
in the present time, (...), that come; leads us to consider, that in all
ages, from all parts of the world, there is an ascending of souls up into
heaven: that Court of the great King increases continually, till the number of
his Saints be fulfilled, and the Mansions Ioh. 14.
of our Fathers house be plenished. Some Angels forsook their first
Habitation; but we see, the Lord wants not servants to praise and glorify him.

His Court shall not be the thinner, though reprobate men desperately forsake
him: and comfortable is it to meditate here, what great joy elect Angels and
glorified Saints have, in the continual coming, and increasing of others
their fellow-seruants, to praise and serve the Lord with them.

Out of great tribulation.] There is the Lords By the cross God brings his
children to the crown.
working with his Own; from the cross he carries them to the Crown, from
tribulation to the Throne; he intreates them most hardly on the earth, whom
he intends to exalt most highly in the heaven. Let us not therefore fear, nor
be offended at our afflictions, For by many tribulations must we enter into the
kingdom of God.

Tribulation is like that furnace of Egypt, wherein Tribulation compared to the
sur^ace of Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar his oven.
the Lord fined his Israelites, and Nebuchadnezar his Oven, the fire whereof
burnt their bands, but not themselves. It is the Lords Flayle, whereby he beats
away the chafe from the wheat, he threshes it, that he may purge it, prepare
it, and How it is the Lords Flayle and his Winepresse.
make it meet to be laid up in his Garner. It is the Lords Wine Press, out of
which he presses wine and oil for himself, (...), Sicut pondere Primas. in
Apoc.
praelorum adhibito, oleum diligenticura conficitur, et per trituram tribulae
recondendum horreo frumentum colligitur, sic per exercitia pressurarum fidelium
numer us eliquatur. The word that here is translated tribulation, imports a
pressing out: for as the juice of the Olive and berry is pressed out by the
weight of the press; so by the exercise of Tribulation, the number of faithful
ones comes out, and increases daily.

Besides this, let militant Saints in their afflictions Tribulation as it has
an ingate, so it has an outgate.
remember this comfort, that as tribulation has an in-gate, so has it also an
out-gate; these are they who come out of tribulation: if tribulation had an
in-gate, and not an out-gate, we might justly be discouraged; but this place
plainly tells us the contrary, and Saints by experience find it true. Many are
the troubles of the righteous, but God delivers Psalm. 34. 19.
them out of them all. Israel had forty two stations in forty years wandering
through the wilderness: from Marah they marched unto Helim: After the bitter
station of Marah, comes a sweet^ station in Helim.
in Marah were bitter waters, which sore afflicted them: in Helim were twelve
fountains of sweet waters, and seventy Palme-trees, which much comforted them.
If for the present thy station be the place of bitter affliction, bear it
patiently, and the Lord shall transport thee shortly into another station, where
he shall refresh thee with the sweet water of consolation.

Neither are Saints said to be in tribulation only, Tribulation of Saints, is
measured by the Lord.
but in great tribulation: but let not this discourage us: The Lord weighs
the weight of the winds: Job. 28. 25.
they blow not one puff more then he has appointed. The Lord rules the
raging of the Sea, it Psalm. 89. 9.
proceeds not one foot beyond the bounds limited it by the Lord. What-euer be
the malice of Satan or his instruments, the Lord bridleth them, they cannot
increase our crosses more then the Lord permits. Rabsache may rail and blast
out blasphemous boastings, but the Lord has a hook in his nose-thrils.

Since all our troubles are moderated by the Lord, let us not grudge, nor
murmr, or think they are too heavy, or too great. Physicians are Patience in
in affliction recommended
not reproved for giving a greater dose of Pills unto one, then to another,
according to the diversity of their dispositions: and shall not this praise be
reserved to the Lord, that he knows best what measure of trouble is meetest
for his children? But of this, how our troubles are measured in quantity,
quality, and time, we have spoken in our Treatise on the eighth to the Romans.

And have washed.] Washing presupposes that Man by nature two ways is
unclean.
they were unclean before: so are we all two manner of ways; First, in
respect of our conception, I 1 In respect of conception.
was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my Mother conceived me. Here is the
filthiness of original sin, Who can bring a clean thing out of that which
Psalm. 51. 5. Job 14. 4.
is unclean? Yet is there a washing to take away this uncleanness, I saw
thee polluted in thine own Ezec. 16. 6, 8, 9.
blood, but I spread my skirts over thee, and covered thy filthiness, and
washed thee with water.

Next, we are unclean, through the filthiness 2 In respect of conversation.
contracted in our conversation: and this is the pollution of actual sin,
Who can say, I have made clean my heart, I am clean from sin? If we Prou.
20. 9.
say we have no sin, we are liars, and the truth is not in us. And this daily
polluting of our selves with sundry sorts of sins, requires daily purgation.
This was figured by these typical oblations commanded in the Law, which were
indeed as Augustine calls them, lotiones laruatae, shadows of another thing,
warning us to wash our selves daily in that fountain opened to the house of
David for sin, Zach. 12.
and for uncleanness.

Of all this we see that sin is a vile and loathsome Sin is a loathsome
uncleanness.
filthiness. Oh that we could see it as it is^ It is that leprosy, which
infecteth the blood, the skin, Leuit. 13. 27. 39
the garments, the house, and all that a man has. It is more ugly and
abominable, then a menstruous cloth. Our righteousness is like a menstruous
cloth, Esaias 64. 6.
said Esaias. Whereunto then shall our righteousness be compared? It is pity to
see how we are blinded and deceived with the deceit of sin. We can abide
Delicate men can abide no uncleanness in any thing that serves them: And yet
are not gricued to carry an unclean soul.
no uncleanness in our body, in our garments, in our meat, in our drink, in our
houses, in the vessels wherewith we are served, yet we fear not at the
uncleanness of sin. What a folly is this, thou will have all things clean,
yet have no care to have thy soul clean? thou can not abide spots in thy
face, and yet wilt not abandon the filthiness of thine heart. Great need have
we to be washed: for we are told that no unclean thing can Revel. 21. 27.
enter into heavenly Ierasalem. And that which our Savior said to Saint Peter,
Except I wash thee, thou Ioh. 13. 8, 9.
shall have no part with me. Oh that it could move us, as it moved him^ for he
answered, Lord, rather Threefold washing needful for us, 1. of the feet. 2. of
the head. 3. of the hands.
then I should be deprived fro^thy fellowship, wash not my feet only, but also
my hands and my head. In all these are we unclean: our feet are our sinful
affections; by our head, understand our proud imaginations, and in our hands
our unclean actions. In all these we have need to be washed and purged.

It had been better for us, if we had needed no Felicity of man begins at
the forgiveness of sins.
purgation at all, Sed mansisset nobis integra dignitas illa, a qua per amarum
peccati gustum excidimus: but this is the glory of elect Angels, that they
never Nazi. orat. 26. in plagam grand^s
sinned. Now, our nearest happiness is, to have our sins forgiven, and
washed away in the blood of the Lamb: Blessed is he whose wickedness is
forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1.
etc.

Yet remains it to be considered, how this action How Saints are said to wash
themselves.
of washing is ascribed unto them: They have washed their garments. When David
had defiled himself with vile adultery and murder, he prayed to the Lord in
this manner, Wash me thoroughly Psalm. 51. 2.
from my sin, and cleanse me from mine iniquity. But here it is said, that
the Saints have washed their own robes. For resolution of this, it is to be
noted, that in all the works of our salvation, which by commandment of God are
enjoined to us, we should and must be dooers, not idle loyterers, but workers,
Work out your salvation in fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12.


A necessary observation for this age, wherein In all the work of salvation we
must be doers.
all men look for salvation, but never consider with themselves, as those
Jews, and that Iaylor did, What shall we do that we may be saved? They cast
all Acts 3. Acts 16.
the burden upon the Lord, but will not be bound to any duty; they require that
which he promises, but remember not what he requires of them.

True it is, that the principal worker is the Lord, God is the principal
worker of our salvation.
He is the author and finisher of our faith; without him we can do nothing.
Yet when he works for us, he works in us, and with us: As that most
comfortable word used by the Apostle (...), imports, whereof we have spoken at
more length on the eighth to the Romans. When he works with us, he causes
us also to work with him for our selves, For he works in us both the will
and the Phil. 2. 13.
deed.

And hereby may ye know, that the Lord in Hereby we know that he is working
our salvation, when he works in us both the will and the deed.
mercy is working your salvation, when he works in you both a will, and a
deed to do all that ye can, that ye may be saved, sorrowing for sins past,
ever fearful for sins to come, continual in prayer, fervent in
thanksgiving, and every way careful to keep your selves in your spirit, and
so Mal. 2. 15.
to be at peace with GOD, and under the sense of his love.

Their garments,] or their robes here come What need have the robes of Saints
of washing, since Christ is their garmen^
to be considered. Seeing the garments of Saints is the righteousness of
Christ, according to that, Put ye on the Lord Jesus, and again, Christ is made
unto us righteousness, how is it that their garments Romans 13.
need washing? Truth it is indeed, the righteousness of Jesus imputed to us,
by which we are justified, is perfect, holy, like unto himself, without all
spot, or blemish: but our inherent righteousness, Our impured righteousness
needs no washing, but the inherent only.
which by his Spirit he works in us, and whereby we are sanctified, in this
life is imperfit, and not without spot, but all the defects thereof are
destroyed in death by the clensing virtue of the blood of Jesus, and we then
shall be presented blameless to the Lord. Our Lord has fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law for us, but he shall also fulfill Romans ^. 3.
it in us; and this is it which here is to be understood by the washing of
their garments.

And made them white in the blood of, etc.] The Christians are all Lambs.
Lamb, as we have spoken before, is the Lord Jesus, who takes away the sins
of the world: his Disciples are also called Lambs, Behold, I send you Mat. 10.
forth as Lambs in the midst of Wolves, yea all Christians are so called,
Peter, love thou me? feed my Lambs: they are also called, the Light of the
world, but not that true Light which lights every man that Ioh. 1. 9.
comes into the world; and so he is called a Lamb But Christ is a Lamb in
another sense.
in a special respect, Agnus singulariter, solus sine macula, non cuius
maculae abstersae sunt, sed cuius macula Aug. in Joan. tract. 7.
nulla fuerit, only without spot, not because they are washed away, but because
he had none to wash away: Agnus quem lupi timent, qui l^onem occisus, Ibid.
occidit, a Lamb of whom Wolves are afraid, and who being slain, slew the
Lion. But of him we have spoken before.

As to his blood the efficacy thereof appears in The blood of Christ is
medicinal to them who shed it.
this, that it is medicinal to them who shed it; the same Jews of whom S.
Peter says, that they crucisied Christ by the preaching of his Cross, were
Act. 2. 36, 4.
converted to the faith of Christ three thousand of them at one Sermon,
Ipsoredempti sanguine, quem Aug. in Joan. tract. 92.
fuderunt, redeemed by the same blood which themselves shed: Sic enim Christi
sanguis in remissionem peccatorum Jesus est, vt ipsum etiam peccatum del^re
possit, quofusus est. For the blood of Christ was in such sort shed for the
remission of sins, that it is able to put away that same sin, by which it
was shed.

What a wonder is this? the Physician comes to How all the works of our
redemption are wonderful.
cure a frantique patient: the frantique slayes the Physician, and yet the
Phisician, of his blood makes a sufficient medicine to cure the frantique,
qualis insania eius, qui medicum occidit, quanta vero Aug. de verb. Apostoli.
Ser. 8.
bonitas, and potentia medici, qui de sanguine suo, insano interfectori suo
medicamentum fecit! O how great was his madness, who slew his mediciner! and
how great is the goodness, and power of the mediciner, who of his own blood
has made a healing medicament to him that shed it.

Yea the very manner of phrase used by the Seignior, Other blood desiles: the
blood of Christ cleanses.
or Elder, lets us see, how the work of our redemption wrought by the blood of
Jesus, is full of miracles: for is not this strange, that where all other blood
defiles and pollutes that whereupon it lights, this blood purifies, and
cleanses them on whom it lights? Other blood makes the whitest linen ugly,
unpleasant, and loathsome to behold: but this blood makes a menstruous cloth,
pleasant, and white; Though your sins were as crimson, Esaias 1. 18.
they shall be made white as snow, though they were red as scarlet, they shall be
made white as wool.

But to this cleansing of us, there is no need of The sprinkling of his blood
is spiritual.
the natural, or corporal sprinkling of that blood upon us; No, the
sprinkling of that blood, that purifies us, is spiritual, Let us draw near
with a Heb. 10.
true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil
conscience.

No word here is, as we see, of any Papal purgations, Papal purgations are
filthy pollutions.
Indulgences, or fire of Purgatory, or holy Water: these are the Merchandise
and wares of whoorish Babel, such trumperie is not known in heavenly
Jerusalem, only the blood of Jesus must wash thee. All other washing pollutes,
and defiles thee, Though thou wash thee with ^itre, and take thee Ier. 2. 22.
much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God. But,
the blood of Jesus cleanses us from 1. John 1. 7.
all sin.

With Scripture, Fathers are consonant to cry Purgatory expurgat out of the
Bible by the Fathers.
out against this blasphemous purgation of sin, by any infernal fire, Piorum
anim^ recta in beatas se^es, impiorum in gehennam abeunt: the souls of Optat.
Milcui^inus.
godly men go the high way into heaven: the wicked straight unto hell. Anima
vbicunque e^olauerit Macar. hom. 22.
e corpore, aut a daemonibus in infernum, aut ab Angelis in coelum abrip^tur;
the soul, so soon as it flees out of the body, is either reft and carried to
hell by Devils, or to heaven by Angels. Sin they grant is forgiven here, but
the punishment of it must be sustained there: Against this let them mark what
S. Cyprian says, Quando istine excessum fuerit, Cyprian* ad De^.
nullus iam poenitenti^ locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus, vita hic aut
tenetur, aut amittitur: from the time we go out of this life, there is no more
place of repentance, nor effect of satisfaction by suffering: here life is
either kept, or lost. Qualem te inuenit Deus cum C^p-Ser. de immort.
vocat, talem pariter, and indicat; such as God finds thee, when by death he
calls on thee, such he judges thee. Vnusquisque cum causa sua dormit, and cum
causa Aug. in Joan. Tract. 49.
sua resurget; every man sleeps with his cause, and with his cause shall he
rise again: there is no changing, nor bettering of it between his death, and
his resurrection. Postqua^ discesserimus, non est in nobis Chrysostom. hom. 2. de
^azaro.
situm poenitere, neque commissadiluere: From time we go out of this life, we
are not able to repent, nor to wash away the sins, which we have done. It
were tedious to rehearse all.

And therefore I return, and conclude this point. Christ's blood has a
threefold virtue.
In the blood of Christ, there is a threefold virtue. First, a purging virtue:
next, a protecting virtue: 1 A purging virtue.
thirdly, a pacifying virtue. What need have we the^ of any other thing, or to
seek any other merit, or blood beside his? Of his purging virtue we have 2 A
protecting virtue.
spoken already. His protecting virtue may be learned from the Paschal Lamb,
which was a type of Christ Jesus. When God slew all the firstborn in every
house of Egypt, by his destroying Angel, such houses as had the posts of their
doors sprinkled with blood, were spared. The Lord Jesus shall be a covering to
his Saints, to save them from that 3 A pacifying virtue.
wrath, wherein the wicked shall perish. His pacifying virtue is touched by the
Apostle, Being justified Romans 5.
by faith, we have peace with God. And again, The Heb. 12. 24.
blood of Christ cries for better things, then the blood of Abel. But let us
take heed unto our selves, unless we feel his purging virtue, who naturally
are unclean, the comfort of his protecting, and pacifying virtue cannot be ours.

VERSE. 15. Therefore are they in the presence of the Throne of God, and serve
him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne, will dwell
among them.
THe S^ignior having declared to Saint John, Felicity of Saints glorified, is
two ways described:
what these were, whom he saw clothed in white garments, with palms in their
hands, to wit, redeemed 1 They have abundance of all good.
Saints, not militant, but having ended their warrefare, and gotten the
victory, not under tribulation, but come out of tribulation: He now
proceeds, 2 They have deliverance from all evil.
and shortly describes their felicitic, and happy estate, wherein now they are,
and that, in two points: First, in the affluence, and abundance, which they
have of al good: next, in their freedom, and exemption from all evil.

In this verse three things are set down concerning Three things touched
concerning Saints glorified.
them: First, where are they? In the presence of the Throne of God. Next, what
do they there? they serve him day and night. Thirdly, what get they for that?
He that sits on the Throne, will dwell among them. By this phrase the
unspeakable joy communicated to them by the Lord, is figured.

This can not be understood of any estate of the Why this can not be
understood of any state of the Church here on earth.
Church militant here on earth, neither of Jews converted, nor other
Christians delivered from the tyrannic of Antichrist, as some Interpreters will
have it. These words are not competent to Saints militant, they hunger no more,
they thirst no more, and God shall wipe away allteares from their eyes.

In this valley of tears, when shall we? when should we be without tears?
Blessed are they who hunger and Mat. 5. 6.
thirst now for righteousness, they shall be satisfied. Now we hunger, and are
blessed; there they hunger no more, but are fully satisfied. The Millenaries of
old had an opinion somewhat like this, that Saints after Christ his coming,
for a thousand years should possess the earth by themselves, without all
tribulation: but neither before his coming, nor after, is any such quiet
estate of the Church here upon earth, warranted by the holy Scripture.

Therefore.] This is relative to the words immediately A warning to presumptuous
professors.
preceding, They have made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb:
therefore are they in the presence of God. There is no fellowship with God,
but by the Lord Jesus. Every man in this presumptuous age, says that he has
Jesus: but Jesus is a Physician of great value: If thou have him, he will
cleanse thee from the filthy leprosy of thy sins. Art thou not cleansed
then? have* thou not Jesus? and without him, thou can not be admitted into
the comfortable presence of God.

The last Chapter was concluded with the tragical Life of the godly and wicked
have different courses, and different ends.
and fearful end of the wicked. The day of the Lords wrath is come, and who
can stand (said they?) The wicked shall not stand in judgment, but shall be
banished from the presence of his glory. But here we Psalm. 1.
see how the godlystand before the Throne, and are in the presence of God. As
their courses in their life are contrary to other, so shall their ends be. God
give us grace to make choice of the best.

For we see before us, the way, wherein they walked, Without sanctification, we
cannot stand before the Lord.
and the order which they observed, who now are in the kingdom of heaven;
first, they are washed in the blood of Christ, and then they are in the
presence of God: if we would come, where they are, let us keep the course,
wherein they walked. Before Joseph was presented unto Pharao, his head Genesis 41.
14.
was shaven, his nails were pared, his garments changed: and must not we cut
away from us our superfluities, before we be admitted into the presence Hest.
2. 12.
of God? Esther was six months purified with oil of myrrh, and other six
months with sweet odors, before she was married with Ahasuerus* And shall we
think to be where the Lord is, without a similitude with him? Or what
similitude can we have with that holy One, except that first we be washed and
cleansed from our natural uncleanness?

In the presence of God. There is a threefold presence A threefold presence of
God.
of God. First, a presence of his goodness: next, a presence of his grace: and
thirdly, a presence of his glory, whereof here is spoken.

The presence of his goodness he grants unto 1 A presence of his goodness,
this is granted to all men.
all men in the utter Court of his Palace: for he makes the Sun to shine,
and the rain to fall upon the just, and the unjust. Who may not see the
goodness of the Lord in the manifold good creatures, Mat. 5. 45.
which he has created? The earth is full Romans 1. 20.
of his goodness; yea, the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal
power, and godhead, are seen in the creation of the world. The light of this
presence has learned natural men many things concerning God: by it the
Platonies saw, Deum omnia ista fecisse, Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 8. ca. 6.
and a null^ fieri potuisse, that God had made all these things, and could not
be made of any other himself; yea they ascended far higher to understand
much more concerning the nature of God, as more at large is set down in that
same place by Saint Augustine. And yet all this knowledge gotten in the court,
or school of the creature, did but make them to be without excuse, because
that when they Romans 1. ^1.
knew God, they glorified him not as God.

The presence of his grace he gives to his ^ A presence of his grace: this is
granted to none, but his Saints.
Saints, specially in their holy assemblies, there by the preaching of his
Word, and operation of his holy Spirit, he shows himself a gracious,
merciful, and reconciled God to them in Christ: they seek him, and worship
him in Spirit, and truth; and he speaks peace unto them, and secretly Psalm.
85. 9.
by his holy Spirit witnesses unto their hearts, that he is their Father, that
is, his little Sanctuary, Ezech. 11. 16. And that especially in the holy
asse^blies.
I mean his Church, narrower by much, then the utter great court, as I have
called it, in that wherein all men see his goodness, in this he is familiar
with his Saints, and they only see, and feel his grace.

Of this presence speaks David: for in his banishment he longed for it. My
soul thirsts for Psalm. 42. 2, 4.
GOD, even for the living God, when shall I come, and appear before the
presence of God? and what presence he means of, he expounds himself, That he
might go with the multitude, and lead them into the house of God, with the
voice of singing, and praise: for God in a special manner appears in the
assembly of his Saints, according to his promise: but this presence is not
perceived, but of his own secret ones, who seek his face.

The presence of his glory is given to Saints triumphant 3 A presence of his
glory granted to Saints in heaven.
in the heaven. The Lord gives grace and glory, but first grace, and then
glory: from grace in earth, yea and by it, he leads them up to glory Psalm. 84.
11.
in heaven.

Of this presence of glory, this place is to be understood, according to that,
In thy face is the fullness Psalm. 16. 10, 11.
of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. And again, O how
excellent is they mercy, O God! therefore the children of men trust under the
Psalm. 36. 7, 8, 9.
shadow of thy wings: they shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine
house, and thou shall give them drink out of the rivers of thy pleasure. Here
not only have There are rivers of pleasure flowing from an everlasting
fountain.
we pleasure, but rivers of pleasures, yet such as can never be exhausted: for
it is subioyned, With thee is the well of life. So long as the fountain or
spring lasts, the river cannot decay. God is that great fountain or
bottomless deep: from him comes the rivers of pleasures, to all that stand
about him. The Queen of Sheba said of Solomon 1. Kings 10. 8.
his servants, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand ever
before thee, and hear thy wisdom: but much more truly may it be spoken of
the servants of our God, who stand about his Throne* Blessed are they who dwell
in thine house. Psalm. 84. 4.
Now follows:

They serve him night and day in his Temple.] Exercise of Saints glorified, is
to serve God without intermission.
We have heard of the place wherein they are: the second part of the verse
shortly describes their exercise, They serve God, and that without all
fainting, wearying, or intermission, night and day. This imports no
vicissitude, but a continuance, and perpetuity; Dies and nox, vicissitud^nem,
sed Aug. ser. 11. d^ Sanct.
perpetuitatem significant. Because all our time turns upon day and night,
therefore many a time uses the Spirit of God this phrase, Day and night, to
express as much, as for ever and ever. In the heavens there is nothing but a
Day, no No change neither of time nor state, in heaven.
change of their glorious, and lightsome estate by time. In the Hell, there is
nothing but a Night, perpetual darkness, no change of their horrible and
comfortless estate, by time. In the Earth there is a day and a night, and a
vicissitude and change of every estate, by time. That mention is made of a
Temple, we are not to think there is any material Temple in heaven; but an
allusion is made to the Temple of Jerusalem, wherein his servants served him
day and night.

And this word of service notes, that they are Their service is sweet, no way
laborious.
now fully become the Lords, they have resigned themselves altogether to do his
will, there is not now in them any deed, nor desire of any thing that may
offend him; they wait upon him, they look steadfastly to him, they delight in
him, they praise him without ceasing; this is their service, Non est labor^osa,
sed amabilis, and optanda haec seruitus, Aug. Ibid.
It is not a painful service, or laborious, but to be loved, and longed for,
Seruitus h^c dulcissima Carthus.
merces est seruitutis praesentis laboriosae, this service is a most sweet
reward of our present laborious service.

Among men, the name of a servant is counted Servants of God are most honorable
cre^turos.
vnhonorable, and a base thing think they it to serve another: but since the
most honorable creatures, elect Angels, and Men, delight to serve him, let us
not be ashamed to profess ourselves his servants. David was a great King; yet
he counts more, and reioyces oftener in it, that he was a servant of God,
then a King over his people: And S. Paul was a Chosen vessel unto God: Act. 9.
15.
yet his ordinary style is, Paul the servant of Jesus Christ. And indeed, it
is more honorable to be a servant of Christ, then to be a Monarch of the world
without him; Seruire Deo est regnare; In For he is a King and a freeman, who
is Gods servant.
very deed he is a freeman, yea, and a King, who is Gods servant; He
trampleth under feet the devil, the world, and the flesh; he is Lord of his
affections, yea, and of all creatures; he can use them, but will not come
under the power of any of them: and yet so blind are worldlings, that they
account Christ his service to be bondage, and his Law a yoke, whereas in truth
it is the Law Psalm. ^.
of Liberty. and men without it, not subject to it, are in most miserable
bondage.

For he that will not serve the Lord, shall be A servant of servants is he,
who is not a servant of God
like cursed Cham, a servant of servants: He shall serve many masters instead
of one: O quam multos Dominos habet, qui vnum non habet* and that in a Ambros.
service, wherein there is no comfort, for which there is no reward, and after
which, no time set for manumission, or liberty. Any other servant, that has an
evil Master, sometime may be sold to another, and he will be glad of it: But
the servant The servant of sin desires not to change his Master.
of sin is so blinded, that albeit of all slau^ he be the most miserable, yet
he is content with it, and desires not to change his Master. And again, any
other servant, oppressed with the tyranny of a Master, sometime will deliver
himself, by flying from him: But the servant of sin, whereaway He gets no
leave to rest him.
shall he flee? Secum trahit Dominum suum, quocunque fugerit, non fugit
seipsam mala conscientia, Aug. in Joan. tract. 41.
he draws his oppressor with him, flee where he will, an evil conscience
cannot flee from it self: And as for a reward of his service, where And he
may look for a miserable reward*
is it? Voluptas transit^, peccatum manet, praeterit quod delectabat, remansit
quod pungat, the pleasure passes, the sin abides still; that is gone which
delighted him, and for which he sinned; that remains, which disquiets him and
torments him, to wit, guiltiness, the fruit of his sin, that is the worm
which g^aweth his conscience: what shall we then do, but cry out, and confess
with the same Father: O miserabilis seruitus peccat^! O miserable, and
unprofitable, and every way comfortless service of sin! And on the
contrary, O happy, joyful, fruitful, and every way most comfortable, the
service of Jesus Christ our Savior!

Yet concerning this point, there is but one Familiarity with God, increases a
reverence of God.
question to be moved: Said not our Savior to his Disciples, Henceforth I call
you not servants, but friends? How then are redeemed and glorified Ioh. 15. 15.
Saints called servants? I answer, This notes their advancement to a new and
high dignity, but derogates not from their old debt-bound duty. Familiarity
with God takes not away reverence: It it engenders not, as our Proverb is,
contempt; no, there is none who reuerenceth him more, then they with whom he
is most familiar; and no^e more ready to serve him, then they who have found
him most merciful to them; so these two styles, Friends and Servants, are not
repugnant the one to the other.

And again, if it be demanded, How serve they him for ever in his Temple? Said
not our Savior, The servant abides not in the house for ever? Ioh. 8. 25.
He had said immediately before, He that commits How are Saints said to
serve God for, ever, seeing Christ said, that servants abides not in the house
for ever.
sin, is the servant of sin: and then terrible is that which follows, The
servant abides not in the house for ever. What then, shall the Lamb, who is
without sin, be in the house himself alone? Shall no sinners come there?
Shall he be a King, and Lord without Subjects; Cui haerebit caput, si non erit
corpus? Where shall the Aug. in Joan. tract. 41.
head be, if it have not a body? Oh; but mark what immediately he subioynes,
Filius autem manebit in aeternum, the Son shall abide in the house for ever.

Non sine causa and terruit, and spem dedit, It is not without cause, said S.
Augustine, that in one They are in such sort servants, that they are also
sons.
sentence he has both terrified us, and comforted us; he has terrified us,
that we should not love sin; he has comforted us, that we should Ibid.
not despair for sin. If ye demand then, where is our hope, since we are
sinners, and the Lord has said, The servant abides not in the house for ever,
for he is a servant that commits sin? Here is your hope, and hearken unto it,
The Son abides in the house for ever: If we were but servants, and not
sons, we had cause of discouragement; but here is our comfort, we were
servants, but now are become sons: If the Son make you Ioh. 8. 36.
free, ye shall be free indeed; such servants are we now, as are freemen
also.

And he, that sits on the Throne, will dwell, etc.] The reward of Saints is,
that God dwells among them.
This is the third, and last part of this verse: as they serve him, so he most
graciously recompenseth them, noted here by this speech, that he dwells among
them: The phrase imports the communication of all good. For, among men, where
Kings Where Kings dwell, there is abundance of all good that is in the
Kingdom.
have their dwelling, there is the abundance of every good thing, that can be
had in the Kingdom; but much more is here signified, yea, infinitely more.
Ahasuerus, one of the momentanean Est. 1. 4, 5.
Monarchs of the earth, made a feast to his Princes of an hundred and seven and
twenty Provinces; the feast lasted an hundred and four score The Banquet made
by King Ahasuerus, was very glorious.
days, and seven days again for the common people; all this he did, that he
might show the riches and glory of his Kingdom, and honor of his great
Majesty: and his Majesty shortly after, turned into dust, and ashes. Why then
do I bring him in? To make a comparison? No way. What is the light of a
halfe-peny candle to the Sun? Yet have I spoken of him, that, if we can, from
small things, we may ascend to the consideration But not comparable to the
Banquet which the Lord shall make to his Saints.
of greater. What a great feast must this be, which the Lord shall make in
heaven to his Saints? He dwells among them, he flitteth not, he is their
King for ever: and they are not gathered out of an hundred and seven twenty
Provinces, but out of all Nations, Tongues and Languages: This Feast is not for
an hundred, four score and seven days, but for ever, and ever. O happy
habitation! O dwelling full of delight!

The word which the Spirit of God here uses, How God dwells with his Saints
on earth.
imports all this, and much more then we can conceive: (...) he shall be as a
Tent or Tabernacle to spread over them, to obumbrate them, and protect them.
The like is promised in other places, I will dwell among them, and walk 2.
Cor. 6. 16.
there, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. In this life the
Lord dwells in his Saints, and with them, d^rigendo ad finem adipiscendum,
Carthus.
guiding, and directing them to the end, whereunto he has ordained them; but
in heaven he dwells How he dwells with his Saints in heaven.
with his Saints, Conseruandoeos in fine adepto, conseruing them in that end,
and happy estate, whereunto his grace has brought them. But, as I said, what
great glory, and joy, Saints have by the Lord hsi dwelling among them, cannot
now be understood. Moses was but forty days with the Lord on Mount Sinai, and
his face, when he came down, shined so brightly, that his people might not
behold him. How then shall the glory of the Lord his lightsome countenance
illuminate them, with whom he shall dwell for ever?

Always, the use of all is, they serve him, and The good of all service that
Saints make to God, redoundeth to themselves.
he dwells among them, to satiate and replenish them with his joys and
pleasures: their service wants not the own recompense, yea, all the benefit
of their service redounds to themselves: where we must observe a great
difference between the service of God, and of man; other Masters seek, and
entertain servants for some vantage to themselves: for who will maintain
servants, but for their own ease and commodity? It is not so with the Lord,
his servants can profit him nothing, all the benefit redounds to himself.
This David humbly does acknowledge, My goodness Psalm. 16. 1.
extends not to thee: And again, when he had offered liberally for the
building of the Temple, then said he, Who am I, and what are my people, 1.
Chro. 29. 14
that we should be able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things
come of thee, and of thine own hand have we given thee. The like of this has
Job, May a man be profitable to the Lord? Is it any thing Job 22.
Our service is not profitable to the Lord, and can do^ him no good. Job 35. 6.
to the Almighty, that thou art righteous, or is it pr^fitable to him, that
thou make thy ways upright? But yet more clearly explaines he the same in
another place; If thou sin, what do thou against him? If thou be righteous,
what do thou to him? Or what receives he at thine hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man, as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man:
But the All-sufficient Majesty of God, is neither increased by thy good, nor
empaired by thine evil. Why then (will ye demand) does he seek service?
Only that, of his Yet he seeks it, that he may do us good for it.
superaboundant goodness he may have occasion to bless thee; If he crave
any thing from thee, it is not because he needs thee, but because thou
need him; he seeks, to the end that he may give. Oh, that we would
consider this, and so be encouraged to serve our God! Even in this life, the
wages which he has already paid us in hand, should encourage us to serve him.
He may justly demand of us, Who among Mal. 1. 10.
you all does open the door of my Temple for nothing? We can never serve him
sufficiently for that which he has given us already: but the wages paid, are
nothing in comparison of those which are promised.

VERSE. 16. They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, nor yet any heat.
THE description of the felicity of Saints in Felicity of Saints still
described.
heaven, having finished their warrefare on earth, still continues. They shall
hunger and thirst no more. In that he says no, no more, he tells us, he is
comparing that life which is to come, with this which we have now. In this life
the dearest Many are the wants and miseries of this life.
Saints of God are oftentimes most hardly handled: So S. Paul professes of
himself, that he was 2. Cor. 11. 37.
often times in weariness and painfulness, in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness. And again, that in great necessities and distresses, he approved
himself ^. Cor. 6. 4.
the Minister of God. And in that notable gloriation, that nothing is able to
separate us from Romans 8. 35.
the love of God, he would not have made mention of persecution, famine,
nakedness, if in this life the Saints of GOD were not subject unto them.

But all these miseries end with our mortal But they all take an end at death.
life, no relike of them shall remain in the heaven, Ibi non est paupertatis
metus, non ^gritudinis Aug. in fes^o ^mnium Sanct. ser. 37.
imbecillitas, no fear of famine, no sense of sickness, there nullum cibi
desiderium, no desire of meat there: and how can there be a want of that,
whereof there is not so much as a desire? Ibi est vita sine morte, ibi iuuentus
sine senectute, lux Aug. ad frat. in e^mo, ser. 49.
sine tenebris, gaudium sine tristitia, voluntas sine i^iuria, regnum sine
commutatione: There we shall have life without death, youth without old age,
light without darkness, joy without sadness, will without all wrong, a
kingdom without any kind of exchange.

In this life hunger and thirst comes not of The vanity of this present life
wherein may it be perceived.
want only, but of wealth also: let there be given thee such abundance, as
thou desire, yet can it not keep thee from hunger and thirst, and in this
appears the vanity of our life present, that it has need of daily help and
supply: feed as thou will now, thou becommest hungry ere it be long: drink as
thou will, thou shall thirst again, yea the abundance of drink rather
increases, then quenches thy thirst. The same creatures which we daily use for
the help of our silly life, tell us, if we would hear them, that we cannot
live long; such a life as they have, they must lose it, before they can nourish
ours: if we use them not, they putrify and corrupt of their own accord, and
when we have used them most abundantly, yet (as I said) can they not keep us
from hungring and thirsting again.

Thus the helps of our life proclaim to us the vanity of our life, it is a
vanishing shadow, and cannot continue.

All our life is but a course of exchanges for a All our life is but a course
of excha^ges, like the Sea and Sun.
time, and be sure, a very short time: a man may say, he has enough, but
comes short of that which here is spoken, that he wills No more. If vvcc
look to the Sea, it ebbeth and flows every day. If we look to the Moon,
it waxes and waineth every Month. If we look to the Sun, it comes and
returns every year; all creatures teach us, that in our life there is a
flowing and an ebbing, a waxing and a waining, a coming and a going; all by a
continual change are turned in their course; but after this life, it shall not
be so any more. They shall hunger and thirst no more. Hic omnes morb^
laboramus, qui Aug. d^ temp. s^. 74.
tandem ad mortem diducit: We have in all estates here a sickness, which at
length leads The life to come is not so.
unto death: sanitas immortalitas erit, our sanity or health shall be our
immortality, there we shall be sick no more. Yet should it warn us so long as
we live here, to walk circumspectly: It is a point Ephesians. 5. 15.
of true Wisdom and Valor, inter transeuntia stare.

Neither shall the Sun light upon them, etc.] Sun here signifies not heat of
persecution.
That is true which some of the Interpreters have, that the Sun and heat
thereof in holy Scripture is used many times, to signify the heat of
persecution. And it is indeed out of all question, that Saints in heaven have
past all danger of persecution: but because they expound this of the estate of
the Church militant, I do but remit them to their own warrants.

The simple meaning is, that Saints glorified in Saints glorified feel neither
the commodity, nor incommodity of the creature.
the heaven, shall neither need the commodity of the creature, nor feel the
incommodity thereof. The Sun is a very excellent creature, yea a Mother and
Nurse of the creatures, by the heat and warmenesse thereof; but there we
shall have no benefit by it, we shall surmount the sphere of the Sun, and
leave it under our feet, yea the face of every Saint there, shall shine like
the Sun in the noonday, That City has no need of the Sun, nor Revel.
21. 23.
of the Moon to shine into it: for the glory of God does light it, and the
Lamb is the light thereof. Ibi iugis Aug. in sesto omni^ Sanct. s^r. 37
est splendour, non is, qui nunc est, sed tanto clarior, quanto foelicior; In
heaven there is a perpetual splendour, not such as we have now, but so much
more bright then this, as it is more happy then this.

Nor any heat.] They feel no incommodity of Heat of the Sun hurtful to many
people.
the creature: the heat of the Sun intended, parches and burns them who are
under Torrida Zona, and to many other people, extreme heat of the Sun
engenders many diseases: for this cause the Lord provided for Israel in the
wilderness, not to guide them only, but to guard them also from the heat of
the Sun. So also he provided a Gourd for Jonas to shadow him from the
burning heat of the Sun: but no such thing shall be there to trouble us.

VERSE. 17. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the Throne, shall govern
them, and shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters, and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.
HE proceeds in the description of their felicity, In that life we shall need
no help of the creature, for God shall be al in all unto us.
and sets down the great cause thereof, to wit, that the Lord shall feed them,
illuminate them, govern, and comfort them, not by his creatures, as he does
now, but by himself. Now great comfort have we by the creature, we shall not
need them there, the Lord shall be all in all unto us, and he shall give us
vita^ aternam, non de his quae condidit, sed de seipso: Aug. (...). Dei lib.
10. (...). 28.
life eternal, not of things which he has made, but of himself: Q^icunque
hic varia quaeris, ipse tibi Aug. S^. 4.
vnus erit omnia: whosoever thou art, that here seeks many and diverse things,
remember that there thou shall have one for all, who shall abundantly satisfy
and content thee.

The Lamb shall govern them.] The word What a Pastor Christ Jesus is.
(...) imports, that he shall do the duty of a Sheepe-heard unto them, and
govern them, as a Sheepe-heard governs his Flock: Strange is the manner of
speech, but comfortable is the matter itself, that the Lord is here brought in
to be a Sheepe-heard, or Pastor of Lambs; for our Lord has none in his
Flock, but Lambs indeed: He has none in his Flock, but Lambs.
Feed my Lambs: He tameth, and makes meek all that are his, were they before
fierce, and cruel, like Lions; were they ravening Wolves, such, as S. Paul
was, answerable to the bloody badge of his Tribe, Benjamin, A ravening Wolf;
Before his Genesis 50.
conversion it was said of him, that he breathed out Act. 9. 1.
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord; yet from the time
that he became one of Yea, he turns Wolves and Lions, and makes them Lambs.
Christ's, he laid aside his cruel nature, and became meek, peaceable, and
patient, like a Lamb. Take heed above all things that we be partakers of the
love, humility, and meekness of Christ, that thereby we may know we are his;
such as bite one another, and devour one another, are as yet but carnal, and
strangers from the fellowship of Jesus.

And he shall lead them to the Fountain, etc.] Joys of heaven figured by
water.
Waters signify refreshing joys, which Saints shall have there in great
abundance: He that Ioh. 4. 14.
drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst any more, but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water springing up
into eternal life: The springing, and flowing of the water, notes the
abundance of it, according to that; I am come, that they might have life, Ioh.
10. 10.
and have it in abundance: therefore is their exceeding great joy called
Rivers of pleasure: and Psalm. 36.
again, A pure River of the water of life proceeding Revel. 22. 1.
from the Throne of God, runs through the streets of heavenly Jerusalem.
But here mention is made of the Fountain from which these waters flow, to show
that our joy there shall not come mediately from the creature, as we have said,
but immediately from God, the Author, and Fountain of all our felicity.

Shall lead them.] Even in this life the Lord How God shall lead us in
heaven, we cannot now understand.
leads us. All the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, they all cry to
be governed by him: Send thy Light, and thy Truth, let them lead me; and now
we feel that he leads us, monendo and monendo, Psalm. 43. 3.
as we have showed on the eighth to the Romans. But how he shall govern us,
and lead us there; how we shall follow the Lamb whereeuer he goes, we shall
best know, when we come there: it is a joyful thing now to be led by him; we
shall find it more joyful then; Si sic bonus es Ber. in Cant. s^r. 47.
quaerentibus te, qualis eris assequentibus? since he is so good to the^, who
seek him, as we have all cause to confess, how good will he be to the^, who
find him?

And God shall wipe away all tears, etc.] This A comfortable change of our
state, from misery to immortal glory.
manner of speech imports a most comfortable change of their estate from
misery, and all cause of mourning, to joy, and all fullness of felicity: and
this the Spirit of God expresses by a most significant phrase, when he says;
Mortality shall 2. Cor. 1. 15.
be swallowed up of immortality; that is, it shall be devoured, and utterly
abolished, as if it had never been, no foote-step of mortality or misery shall
be seen there, no voice of mourning heard there.

Some of the Ancients by proper similitudes The glorious change of Saints in
the life to come, illustrated by similitudes.
do illustrate this. Sicut stilla aquae modico infusa vino, deficere a se tota
videtur, dum and saporem vini induit, and colorem, as a drop of water infused
into wine, looks no more like that, which it was, but Ber. Ser. de diligendo
Deum.
takes on it both the taste, and color of the wine: Et sicut ferrum ignitum,
and candens igni simillimum fit, pristina propriaque forma exutum: And as iron
put in a hot burning fire, becomes most like unto the fire, and loses the
old, and proper form thereof; Et sicut solis luce perfus^s aer in eandem
transformatur luminis claritatem, ade^, vt non tam illuminatus, quam lumen
ipsum esse videatur; And as the Air, when the light of the Sun is diffunded
through it, is trans-formed into the brightness of his light, so that it
seems to be not so much enlightened, as a light it self. At midnight the
air is a dark body, in the day it is lightsome, and looks as if it were
light it self: so shall the Saints of God glorified in heaven, be changed from
that which they are now, and transformed into the similitude of that glory,
whereunto they shall be advanced then.

Always mourning here is meetest for Saints; Mourning here is meetest for Saints
for how shall the Lord wipe away tears from their eyes, who never shed them?
and how shall he gather these tears into his bottell, which thou never
powredst out? The world counts it a womanly affection to mourn: but our
Savior has said, Blessed are they who mourn now, for they Math. 5. 4.
shall be comforted. David was a very valiant man, he slew the Lion, and
overcame Goliath the Philistim, and yet He watered his bed with Mourning for
sin pleases the Lord.
tears in the night, and in the day mingled his cup with tears. Simon the
Pharise at one time made Psalm. 6.
a banquet to the Lord of the best delicates he had, and Marie gave him a
Desert of tears from her penitent heart. Our Lord was better pleased with
Marie her tears, then with Simon his delicates.

Though we were not compassed with many What great cause of mourning have we.
miseries, and ouerladen with a heavy burden of sins, in both which we have
great matter and cause of mourning, yet our very absence from that great
felicity, which in this life we cannot enjoy, should move us to mourn. Non
satis futura Ber. in cap. (...). (...). 2.
gandia concupiscis, si ^a quotidie non postulas cum lachrymis, minus tibi not
a sunt, si non renuit consolari anima tua, don^c veniant: Thou desire not, as
thou should, these joys to come, if thou do not crave them every day with
tears; thou know them not, if thy soul refuse not all other comfort, till
thou enjoy them to replenish thee: fruitless, and vain, yea, quickly
vanishing are the greatest pleasures of this life.

Hardness of heart, and senseless security, is the Hardness of heart, the
Mother-sinne of this age.
Mother-sinne of this age. The children of Cain by the light of nature learned
how to work in brass, and Iron; and men by their wit, and ingene, Genesis 4.
can make the hardest metals receive impression, but cannot in like manner
molli^ie their hard hearts, to receive the stamp of holy Impression from the
Lord. At the third stroke, the Rock rendered water unto Moses, but (alas) for
many strokes will not our hearts render tears of contrition to the Lord.

It requires a continual care, to work upon the The heart of man would be
labored continually.
heart, to labor it, and make it soft, that it may yield to the seal of God,
and receive the portraiture of his image: If we in a good conscience use the
means diligently, the Lord will not let us want a blessing, but will graciously
perform unto his children, that promise made in the new Covenant, I shall take
the stony heart away from them, and give them a heart of flesh.

To conclude all, since we hear so great and glorious Life to come should be
longed for.
things spoken of that City of our God, that new and heavenly Jerusalem, both
here, and in the twenty one, and twenty Chapters of this prophesic: is it not a
lamentable folly, to forget Sion, and Psalm. 137.
to sit down, and sing by the rivers of Babel, wherein we are but captives?
Shall we neglect that life, for the love of any thing, which we can enjoy here?
It is a pretty meditation of S. Basil: If thou had st, Folly to neglect the
life to come, for love of this.
says he, two children, where of the younger by certain knowledge were not
able to live; the elder again were most lively: would thou be so foolish, as
to spend all thy ear and thy substance upon the dead child, and reserve
nothing for the other? Si melioricuncta dare nolueris, divide saltem ex aequo:
If Basil. Ser. 3. in diuit^s auaros.
thou will not give all to the best and eldest, at least divide it equally
between them.

Thy two children are thy two lives: the one temporal, the other eternal: the
eldest is life eternal: it was ordained for us before the foundations of the
world were laid: this child is lively, neither subject to death, nor any kind
of disease: the younger child is life temporal, a languishing life: deadly
diseased is this child, and will not live. Shall we therefore be so foolish,
as to care for that, which cannot be conserved, and neglect the other which
endures for ever, and is able, if it be ours, to conserve us also, in a most
happy, and immortal fellowship with our God in Christ, for ever, and ever?
The Lord make us wise in time, to consider this, that we may make choice of the
best.

AMEN.
FINIS.
A Table of the principal points of Doctrine handled in this Treatise.
A
ABsolute Authority due to God. p. 281 Adam knew the creature by the Creator:
Now his sons are sent to the creature, to learn the Creator. 88 Eternity, is
God his proper praise; and of the comfort by it coming to the Church. 106
Affliction makes a Christian stronger. 302 Altars honored with relics of
Martyrs. 238. Altar under which souls rest, what it is. 239 Amen, what it
signifies, and how used in the Primitive Church. Angels described. 109. Why
they are said to compass the Throne, 103. Their properties, 105. their nature
and number: 104. 105. Why represented by Men, Lions, Bullockes and Eagles, 107.
Their threefold Eyes. 105. Their six wings what they are. 111. 112. Their
function. 112. Angels and men were at variance, but now they sing one song.
151. Angels stand and never fell: Man fell, and is raised up to stand. 180. How
they praise God for Redemption. 179. What benefit they have by it. Ibid. Their
Order. 181. Their Place. 182. Their Song. 183. They are our Patterns. 249.
Four Angels at the four corners of the earth, what they signify. 271
Antichrist defended by Papists by such arguments as wherewith the Jews
impugned Christ. 10. He is not to come from Dan. 290. His name hated by
Papists, but himself honored. 9. Then shall Jesuits get another Antichrist
then the Pope, when Jews get another Christ then Jesus. 290 Arrows of
judgment and mercy. 206. 207 Air, a necessary Element for all living
creatures. 273. Angustine his memory how it failed him in a Sermon. 203
Atheists answered, who cry for one from the dead. 4. Their mouths stopped.
104.
B
BAnquet in heaven. 334 Beasts four, signify not Preachers, nor yet the four
Evangelists. 193. Two Beasts by which Satan ^ights against the Church. 50. Why
the first Beast is described with seven heads, since two of them only
persecuted the Church. 51 Devouring Beasts a plague, and examples thereof. 234.
235. The four Beasts cannot be the four Evangelists. 103. 104. But are Types
of principal Angels. 103 Blood of Christ medicinal. ^20. All blood pollu^,
but the blood of Jesus cleanses, 321. It has a threefold virtue. 323 Body,
a burden depressing the soul. 76 Book two ways taken in holy Scripture. 126.
The opening thereof a joy to Christians, a grief to Antichristians. 136 Book
written within and without, what it means. 128 How God is said to have a
Book. 124. Strange opinions concerning it. 125. What it is, 126. Two scandals
laid on the Book of the Revelation* 6. Use, Author, and time of it. 2. 3. 4. 5
Book of the Revelation authentike. 5. Obscurity thereof. 6. A proper method
thereof taken out of it self. 35. 36. 38 Bread of life. 222 Brotherhood
Christian. 248
C
CAndlestick of gold what it sigureth. 148 Catalogue of Writers on the
Revelation. 13 Christ his name loved by the Jews, but himself hated. 10 his
Office^. 133. From him comes all comfort, none from the creature. 137. Why a
Lion and a Lamb. 138. 139. His description. 137. He is the root of Iesse, and
Iesse the root of Christ. 139. He was made man, of the seed of man, once
sinful. 140. He i^ on the Throne with the Father. 143. Christ was really
slain, 194. yet lived again. Ibid. He has seven Eyes. 146. Why he appeared
with scarres of his wounds? 145. No impotencie, but power showed therein* Ibid.
His Eyes of Providence and Eyes of Grace. 147. His Divinity. 146. He received
full grace, that he might give it. 147. He is the great* Doctor. 149. Christ,
Angels, and Saints redeemed, are all in one fellowship. 282. How he is an
Angel. 274 Christ keeps his Fathers privy Seal, 276. How he comes from
the East. 269. His fervent love. 281. He repaires every loss that Satan has
inflicted by sin. 260. He is the Sacrifice, the Sacrificer, and the Altar.
239 Christ many ways figured. 205. A good Archer, and what are his Bow and
Arrows. 206. Two ways crowned. 208 Christians by information, not
inspiration. 142. None should ride on a Christian, but Christ. 201. He should
make sure his own salvation. 249 Christians are Lambs, but Christ is a Lamb
in another sense. 320. They are Kings and Priests, and should not serve sin.
174. 175 Church cannot be consumed by the Cross. 215. nor hurt by her enemies.
Ibid. It is not bound to one place. 296. 297. Churches professing Christianity
in the world. 298. The Church is a circle, 92. Compared to the Moon 94.
Prosperity thereof dear to true Christians. 135. The true Church worships no
creatures. 119. Church on earth conserved from heaven. 184 Come and see. 192
Comforts and crosses intermixed. 212 Corrections. 229 Conscience corrupted dare
not run to God. 265. 266 Condition of good and evil men, contrary in this
life, and after it. 270 Con^ntine the Great, made too great. 274 Court of
heaven increases daily. 313. The comely order of it. 89. 314 Conversion. 1
Contrition. 160 Concord by Christ made among creatures of most contrary kinds.
152 Consolation. 2. It follows mourning. 137 Confirmation. 2 Covenant
temporal and common. 86 Creatures declare that God is, but define not what he
is. 87. They teach more then man can learn. 88. What a voice the insensible
creature has. 185. All creatures concur to punish the wicked. 256 Creation
is a short Providence 120. Creation is common, not so the comfort of Creation.
Ibid. How it binds us to serve God. 121 Cross, a way to the Crown. 306
Crying sins. 242
D
DAN, why omitted. 291. 292 Day of Judgment. 247. 248. 264. Scorned by the
wicked. 266. Delayed until Saints be perfected. 269. Terrible to the wicked.
266 Death figured by an Horseman, and why. 228. His Page. Ibid. and 231. It is
double. Ibid. Comfort against it. 236. It is compared to Nebuchadnezzars ^e.
^40. It ends our misery. 331 Doctrine of Christ and Antichrist, two Mysteries.
10 Doctors of the reformed Church agree all in the matter, differ only in the
Method of the Revelation. 11 Dwelling of God with his Saints in earth, and in
heaven. 334
E
EArthquake. 255 Elders twenty four, cannot signifio Books. 90. 91. 150. What
they are. 90. Primasius judgment concerning them. 92. Why they are so called.
90. 91. Their Crowns. 93. 94 Ephraim why omitted. 292. 293 Examples of
devouring Beasts. 235 Executors of wrath, have all a limited Commission. 232
F
FAmine. 229. 220. 221. Horrible examples of it. 226 Fathers not to be followed
in all things. 92. The Fathers of the first age could hardly understand the
Revelation. 7. They are falsely charged for Heretics by Jesuits. 244. Fear,
a bulwark against it. 80. What good and what evil, men sear most. 265
Free Will. 172
G
GOD works in his children that which he craves of them. 77. Why sometimes
he is put without a name. 182. His Eternity, Justice, and Mercy. 84. 85. His
operation terrible. 96. Gracious. 97. His manifold wisdom seen in the
variety of his works. 107 God gives to man, and man to God, but in different
manners. 118. He is a living Lord. 188. How he is said to demand any thing.
310. He judges, and he auengeth. 245 God, how he speaks unto souls. 247.
310. 311. He works both by good and evil Angels. 271. He does what he
says. 283 Go to God we cannot, except we go out of our selves. 69 Gospel has
a speedy course. 199. It is a joyful message, 205. Wrongfully blamed by the
world. 222 Good men, and evil, under the like crosses, the one unlike the
other. 223. Good and evil temporal, is common to good and evil men. 234. But
good things are to come to good men, which the wicked shall never see. Ibid.
Glory of Saints how increased. 296 Glorified Saints are Kings indeed. 312
H
HAnds linked, and hearts locked in this age. 175 Harp of a Christian is his
heart. 154. 156. when is it well tuned? 155. 156 Hardness of heart. 345 Heart
resembled by a golden Vial. 158. Heart disposed to pray, a forerunner of
grace. 246. It must be the Altar of Burnt-offering, before it can be the Altar
of Incense. 304 Helim after Marah, what it is. 315 Hell. 231 Heaven three ways
taken in holy Scripture. 65. Heavenly things how to be learned. 64. Heaven
departing like a scroll. 259 Holiness proper to God. 114 Horns, what they
signify in Scripture. 145. 146 Horse white, a type of Preachers. 204. The
white Horse continues to the end of the Battle. 209 Humility. 109. 110 Hymns
of Papists discordant from songs of Saints. 305 Hiding from God cannot be. 265
Hearing of God must go before seeing. 77 Heavy wrath abides the wicked 233.
234. 256
I
Jasper stone. 83. 84 Idolatry destroys Kingdoms and houses. 297 Jews first
in the Covenant. 284 Their Tribes not always reckoned in order. 286. 287
Jesuits do well to enquire for a new Seat for their Pope. 55 Image of God is
our first and last glory. 279 Joy of heaven how expressed. 166 Judge and revenge
belong to God. 245 Judgments of God righteous. 224
K
KIngs earthly not like the Lord. 87. 88 Kneeling due to God. 119. And
comfortable for our selves. 153. Kneeling in prayer recommended by S. James his
example. 308 Knowledge that Saints have in heaven. 247. Conceit of knowledge
is a sore enemy to true knowledge. 312
L
LEui his comfort. 288 Liberty of conscience. 217 218 Liberty Christian abused
by Libertines. 170 Limbus patrum ^lumbat. 134 Linen of a rare sort. 300 Love
broken by them, who profess one faith. 155. 156 Life to come affoords good
things. 108. Life threefold gives the Lord. 188. Life of good and evil men
have different courses and ends. 325. Life present vain. 338. and miserable.
Ibid. Life to come. 325. Happy state of Saints there. 334. Felicity of it. 336.
How God shall lead us in it. 342. How we shall be changed, 343 How to be
preferred to this life. 346.
M
MAN unclean, both for conception, and conversation. 316. He has proud
Propositions, weak Assumptions, vain, and fruitless Conclusions. 80. How
weak he is in his strongest estate. 258. Man cannot consist without Gods
creatures: how can he then want himself? 220 Marie not without sin. 141.
142 Mercy first offered, yer judgment be executed. 227. Contempt of mercy a
sore sin. 292. Mercy of God to this I Will. 275 Meriting virtue is personal and
proper to Christ. 164 Mirror for man to look into. 262 Ministers of the Word
should be far from timidity, as far from timerity. 198. 199 Millinaries
error. 176 Mourning is good now. 347. Just causes thereof. Ibid.
N
NEw Song. 150. 151. 165 Number of elect. 286
O
OBedience of bastard Christians i^perfect. 157. compa^d (...)* Echo. Ibid.
(...) the Bride, and Bridegroom, and sundry sorts which both of them have.
158. 159 Omnipotency of God, wherein it consists. 114. Great help of our
faith. 106* abused by Papists. Ibid.
P
PAtience. 316 Papists admonished. 55. Reproved by Angels. 110. Their prayer to
creatures well warranted. 264. They count us Heretics, for singing with
Angels and Saints. 309. Papal Purgations are possutions. 314 Palm Tree a
sign of victory. 301 Peace marvelous in our time. 213. 222. 152. 153*
Persecutors may take away pea^ (...), not internal. 217. They are profitable
to Saints, but pernicious to themselves, 218. and foolish. 248 Persecution
follows Preaching. 210 Perfection of parts we have, not of degrees. 156
Pestilence. 228 Prayer, and praise compared, 113. Prayers are sweet Odours.
158. 159. They should not be made unto Saints. 160 161. Four sorts of prayer.
Ibid. Comfort against weak prayer. 164. What styles to God should be used in
prayer. 244. Force of prayer. 255. In prayer, tears are better then talk.
304. Babbling in prayer reproved. 310 Praises of God should be fervent. 185.
Coldness in praising God rebuked. ^bid. In praising of God every Christian
should have his part. 153. 154 Preachers grace how it grows. 63. A warning to
Preachers. 70. They are compared to horses sadled and bridled by Christ, 202.
can do nothing without Christ, 202. 203. The virtue of their tou^g 200. They
need both bridle and spur, 202. How they are transported by Christ, both in
respect of place and preaching, 202. 203. Christ works by them that which
themselves know not. 204 Preachers should be holy. 204. Their comfort. 288
Preaching and ^all Peace seldom go together. 210 Predictions, divine
arguments of divine providence. 72 Presence of God is threefold in goodness,
in grace, in glory, 326. terible to the wicked. 261 Prophecy is of things
past, present, and to come. 35. Prophecy of the Revelation not to be limited
to particular times and persons. 29. It goes not by one interrupted course of
time. 32. but is sundry times, and sundry ways repeated. 33. It consists of
three prophecies, which cannot be confounded, 34. 37. 38 39. 44. 48. 49. it is
not to be understood of things past in the old Testament. 71 Professors not to
be discouraged, for that they are not Preachers. 209. Presumptuous professors
warned. 325 Prerogatives carnal not to be respected in heaven. 287 Pope is the
seventh head of the first beast, and yet the second beast also. 51. His
opposite is Christ. ibid.
Q
QVestion for Papists. 168.
R
RAinebow. 86 Redemption is marvelous, and what benefits we have by it. 170.
171. It (...) v^ debtors to Christ in more then we are worth. 169. It is not
universal, 171. wonderful many ways. 321 Religion bastard is always cruel.
204. wants not its own Martyrs. 241 Recusants rebuked. 292 Righteousness
imputed, and inherent. 319. 320 Roman Doctors cannot understand the
Revelation, and why. 80. How they are to be handled in handling this book. 11.
They are ravening Wolves. 214 Roman state opposite to Christ under Emperors is
the first beast, under Popes the second. 50. 51
S
Salvation, the glory thereof, is the Lords. 300 Sanctus the Martyr. 280 Saints
sealed in their hearts and foreheads. 280. 283. Particularly they are known to
God. 284. their stability in glory and favor with God. 299. Felicity of Saints
glorified. 224. 328 329. They need no creature. 339. Saints are both servants
and sons to God. 333. How they shall know others in heaven. 237. 238. Saints,
some nearer the Throne then others. 93. Militant Saints how they are said to
have crowns. 93. 94 Saints triumphant not yet perfected. 161. 162. How they
pray. 158. How said to reign upon earth. 177. 178. Al Saints are
fellow-seruants 249. Their number. ibid. Sanctification. 326 Sacrifices of a
Christian, are three. 175 Sardine stone. 83 Satan a restless enemy. 50. His
predictions. 72. None should consult with him. ibid. He is a sore enemy to our
Peace. 213. He is a Lion, but chayned. 216 Satan thirsts for blood, and blood
is his destruction, 214 215 Seal what it is in general. 274. Seal of God
what it is, ibid. How Christ is sealed of the Father. 278. He has the seal of
God two ways, ibid. How we may know if God has sealed us. 279. 280. Such as
want his Seal, are not his. 281. Seal internal, Christ keeps it, his
servants have the external. 276 Seals seven contain a general
prognostication of things to come. 39. The first seal too narrowly limited by
some. 29. 31. It continues to the worlds end. 30. None of all the seals but the
sixth is bound to a particular time. 40. Sixth seal how to be acco^modated. 40.
41. 251. 252. Sum of the seals. 190. Fist and sixth seals explaned in the
seventh chapter. 43. Seals limited to seven years. 221 Seventh chapter a
pendicle of the sixth. 43. 268 Service of God commended. 329. 330 Servants of
Satan and sin, how (...). (...)* The profit of all service we do to God,
redounds to our selu^. 335. Not to God. ibid. Yet he craves it, that he may
do us good for it. 336 Scripture has three sorts of books. 1. Obscurity
thereof. 128. Why Papists call it obscure. 129. Perfection of it. 132 Sight
threefold. 161. Natural sight is no comfort without the spiritual. 63. Sight
which S. John saw, was internal, imaginary, and intellectual. 61. Sight of
God what it does. 79. Who shall get it. 178. Sight that Saints have ^ur of the
body. 237 ^igne of the Cross. 277 Similitudes of holy Scripture are from most
excellent things in Nature. 300 ^inne an uncleanness. 317 Song of Saints why
called a new Song. 165 Souls immortality. 238 Spirit, how S. John was in the
Spirit. 75 Spanish Army handled not unlike the Syrians of old. 213 Stars
falling like figs, what they signify. 258 Sun darkened. 249. The heat
thereof hurtful to many. 340
T
Thanksgiving. 160. 310 Throne of God. 77. Court about it and before it. 78
Threatenings most general admit exceptions. 292 Three things men would have
from God, and he will not give them: 235. Because men will not receive one
thing which God offers to men. Ibid. Tribulation in this life. 315. It is
Nebuchadnezzars fire, Gods Flayle and Wine Press. 314. As it has an in-gate,
so an out-gate. 305. It is measured by God. 307 Trinity in the Godhead. 84.
113 Types should be rightly accommodated. 77. 78
V
VAriety with unity, makes the sweeter Harmony. 305 Victory cannot be without
fighting. 302. Figured by the Palm Tree. 294 Victory is sure to Saints, yer
ever they fight. 209. 210 Vision preparatory in the fourth and fifth chapter.
57. Properly preparing for the Visions of Prediction. 59. 79 Voice of God
calls men upward, Satan's on the contrary. 70. Voice of Gods mercy sounded to
apostate man, never to apostate Angel. 71 Now it is a Trumpet, and a Thunder.
194. 68. The Voice which S. John heard, how it was vttored. 67. Loud and
li^ely. 69. Miserable are they who hear it not. 67 Vials and Trumpets how they
differ. 46. 47
W
WAlking here is by faith, not by sight. 1^4 Washing threefold, whereof we
stand in need. 317. How is it that Saints need washing, since Christ is their
garment: 319. And how Saints are said to wash themselves. 318 White Raiment.
95. 247. 299. 300 Wicked men, why some of them are plagued now, and some
spared. 233. They want the Creator now, and shortly shall also want the
creature. 256. 257. In their trouble they run to the creature. 256 Words last
of our Lord should be best remembered. 4 Work with God should we, in the work
of our salvation. 319 World figured by a glassic Sea, and the Moon. 98. 99.
Best pleasures thereof like waters of the salt Sea. 101. It shall fall yer it be
rip^. ^58. How all creatures in it shall be changed in the lost Day* 259
Worldlings called Inhabitants of the earth, and why? ^46 Worship due to God
only. 308 Wrath of God is a fire. 227
FINIS.

