THE DEFENSE OF CONSTANTINE: WITH A TREATISE OF the Popes temporal Monarchy.

Wherein, besides diverse passages, touching other Counsels, both General and
Provincial, the second Roman Synod, under Siluester, is declared to be a mere
Fiction and Forgery.

By Richard Crakanthorp, Doctor of DIVINITY.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for John Teage, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Golden-Ball. 1621.

TO THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, AND Religious Prince, JAMES by the Grace of God,
King of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
GIVE me leave Most gracious Sovereign, in all humble and submissiue manner,
to present unto your Princely view, or but lay down at your Royal foot, this
Pledge both of my service to God and his Church, and of my dutiful and most
loyal affection to your sacred Majesty. Of whom more fitly might I seek
Patronage for this Defense of Constantine, then of him who is indeed the Great
Constantine of these latter Ages? Betwixt whom, and the ancient Constantine,
there is in all Eminency of Honor and Heroical virtues so great and so fair
a correspondence, that who so looks on either of both, may in him as in a
resplendent Glass, behold the full and lively portraiture of the other. Both
descended of most Princely Progenitors: Both borne and bred in this most happy
Island: Both Inheritors and Possessors of the Imperial Crown of great
Britain: Both by treacheries of malignant enemies to the Gospel, first in
tender Constantinus iuuenculus detentus in custodia a Galerio Aur. vict. in
Constant.
years, then in riper Insidiae contra illum comparatae semel iterumque Eus.
lib. 1. de vit. Colist. ca. ^4.
age, most dangerously assaulted: Both by Gods only hand, Deus omnem dotum and
fallaciam pate ^eat. Eus. lib. 10. hist. ca. 8.
most graciously (and your Majesty even miraculously) delivered and preserved
for those most happy works, which by your sacred persons he would effect:
Both richly beautified with Prudence, Justice, Clemency, Magnanimity, and all
other Ornaments of Regal Majesty; especially with Piety, which being the
Fountain and Foundation of all other virtues, shines in every part of the
lines of both. Constantine his Love to God such, that as himself Eus. l. 2 de
vit Constable. ca. 13
preferred God before his very soul; so he gave this as his Idem lib. 4 cap. 35
chiefest Instruction to his children, that they also should prefer the
knowledge of God, and his holy Religion, before all worldly wealth, yea before
the Empire. His Love to Gods Messengers and holy Bishops such, that he had Idem
lib. ^ ca. 52.
them at his own table, had them in his iourneies (as Guardians Idem lib. 2
ca. 4
of his soul, whersoeuer he went: and looking on them not as Idem lib. ^ cap.
35.
at men, but as at Christ, whom he considered and beheld in them, he most
honored those, who had sustained most dishonor for Christ, as he declared in
B. Paphnutius, who having lost his right eye, and use of his left thigh for the
name of Christ, yet this blind and lame Paphnutius: Would Ruff. lib. (...) ca.
4.
he often call into his Palace, nor only most lovingly embrace him, but
believing Theol. lib. 1. ca. 11.
that he should (as no doubt he did) suck a blessing from those blemishes, he
would with greedy kisses cherish the disgraced place of that eye, which was
pulled out for the profession of Christ. His Love to Gods service such, that
both for Praying, he bestowed whole Eus. lib. 4. ca. 57.
nights therein, and himself also, as a most Quasi ^acerdos quid am sacra
faciebat. lib. eod. ca. 11.
holy Priest, did with zeal and feruency, offer up that Incense of a devout
and religious soul unto God: and for hearing Gods Word, his attentive
affection and reverence thereunto, was far more then ordinary. Eusebius
relates, Id. lib. eod. ca. 33
how while himself preached before the Emperor, he though being in dutiful
manner requested by Eusebius; not only refused to sit down, but when Eusebius
fearing to be too tedious, intended abruptly to break off his speech, the
Emperor would not permit him so to do, but exhorted him to proceed to the end
of his Sermon* and when Eusebius the second time entreated him to sit down and
take some ease, the Emperor again refusing, with a sad and severe countenance
answered, It is not fit, either with negligence or irreuerence, to hear the
Word of God. His love to the Churches and Houses of God such, that almost
euerywhere Eus. lib. 3. ca. 47.
throughout his Empire, he either builded new, or repaired and enlarged the
decayed Churches, and that with such beauty and Munificence, that he spared
Id. lib. 2. ca 44.
no cost in so pious a Work. His Love to the peace of Gods Church such: that
he not only took away Ruff. lib. 1. ca. 2.
the occasions of quarrels among Bishops, but to prevent contentions himself
sat Eus. lib. 3. ca. 10.
in their Synodall assemblies; yea sat there, as the Bishop Id lib. 1 ca. 37
and lib 4. ca. 24.
of them all, and by his vigilance and prudence, reduced all both to unity in
faith, and amity in affection. As the like sincere Love unto God, to his holy
Bishops, and to the peace and prosperity of his Church, is relucent in your
Majesty, and by innumerable demonstrations made evident unto all: So in the
manner and means of propugning and propagating the faith, it may be truly
said, to the immortal honor of your sacred Person, that neither Constantine,
nor any other Prince or Emperor is a match therein. Constatine like David, a
King of War, by the sword of battle subdued the pride and rage of
persecuting Tyrants, and so with the borders of his Empire, enlarged the
profession of Christ: your Majesty like Solomon, a King of Peace, by that depth
of divine and inexpressible knowledge and wisdom, wherewith the God of Heaven
has filled your sacred breast, with the Sword of Gods Spirit, subduing the
Pride, Idolatries, and Impieties of that Man of Sin, has made glorious the
true faith of Christ, not only in, and beyond the bounds of your own, and the
Roman Empire, but from Great Britain, even to the utmost borders of the
Earth. Constantine for his great learning and love unto it, is most highly and
most justly renowned. His vacant times Id. lib. 4. ca. 29.
he bestowed in writing of most useful Treatises, which custom he continued
Id. ca. 29.
even to his last age. The excellency of whose writings may be easily
discerned, partly by that one Oration, ad coetum Sanctorum, which demonstrates
an heart, fraught with all humane and divine knowledge: partly by that auidity
which whole lb. ca. 29.
multitudes had, who flocked to hear his Princely and divine discourses. But
in truth, what are these, to those so many (...)? to those exact and never
sufficiently admired Apologeticals of the Faith? to those divine and inimitable
meditations, to those innumerable and mellifluous Orations, which have, and
still do flow from the vnemptied Fountain of your Majesty's sacred tongue and
pen? which even enforce all judicious and religious Hearers and Readers of
them, to break forth into those patheticall admirations of the Queen of
Sheba. It 2. Chron. 9. 5. etc.
was a true word which I heard of thy sayings and of thy wisdom: but behold
the one half thereof was not told unto me. Happy are thy men, and happy are
thy servants, which stand before thee always, and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be
the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on his Throne, as King instead
of the Lord thy God Because thy God loved Israel, to establish it for ever,
therefore has he made thee King ever them, to execute Judgment and Justice.
This Eminency of Piety, Knowledge and Wisdom, as in all true Christian and
Religous hearts it has, and will ever most deservedly purchase both Honor and
Admiration: So from the sons of Belial, and enemies to the faith of Christ.
What else could be expected, but the bitter scoffs and scurrill Calumnies of
of their most virulent and venomous tongues? In which kind of base and reuiling
Oratory, the Iulians, Zosimi, and other heathen Maligners of Constantine, do
by many degrees, come short of the modern Pacentij Parsonij, and Scioppij of
this age: all whose names shall rot and become as dung on the Earth, when the
unblemished Honor and the most blessed names of the two Constantines, shall as
an ointment of most precious Spickrard be powered throughout the whole Church
of God: For God himself has foretold 1. sam. ^. 30.
of both. Them that honononr me will I honor: but they that despise me shall
be despised. What in this Treatise I have now said, either for the Honor and
Defense of the former Constantine, or in discovery of that forged Roman Synod,
which abetting the calumnies devised against him, was the first occasion of the
whole discourse, or of the Popes temporal Monarchy, which utterly subuerts the
Imperial Dignity and Rights both of Constantine and all other Princes; I do
here, most Gracious Sovereign, with all humility both of mind and body, lay
down before your sacred Majesty; in few, but fervent words, beseeching the God
of glory that after a long and most happy Reign here upon earth, your Majesty
not leaving but exchanging this earthly, with an heavenly Diadem, may both
reign here in your Princely and Most blessed Issue so long as the World
endures, and being crowned with Immortality, may shine as the Sun in the
brightness of celestial glory for evermore.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject, Ri: Crakanthorp.

The Contents of the Chapters in the first part, which is the defense of
Constantine.
THe first reason proving the second Roman Synod under Siluester to be a
forgery, taken from the persons supposed to have bin assembled therein. Ca. 1
The second reason proving the same Roman Synod to be a forgery, taken firom
the Acts and Canons thereof. Cap. 2. The third reason proving the same Synod to
be a forgery, taken from the time when this Council is said to have been
held. Cap. 3. The fourth reason proving the same to be a forgery taken from the
supposed murder of Crispus by his father Constantine. Cap. 4. The fifth reason
proving the same Synod to be a forgery taken from the supposed leprosy of
Constantine. Cap. 5. The sixth reason proving the same Synod to be a forgery,
taken from the Baptism of Constantine by Pope Siluester. Cap. 6. The seventh
reason proving the same Synod to be a forgery taken from the Donation of
Constantine, and first of the Charter or Edict thereof. Cap. 7. That
Constantine made no such Donation as they pretend, and the reasons of Gretzer
to prove that Donation refuted. Cap. 8. Three reasons to prove that Constantine
never made any such Donation as they pretend, either by word or writing. Cap.
9. Seven witnesses alleged by Doctor Marta for proof of Constantines Donation
examined: namely the first Nicen Douncell, Eusebius Caesariensis, Jerome, Pope
Damasus, the acts of Siluester, Pope Gelasius and Isidore. Cap. 10. The credit
of four Popes and two Councels, aledged for proof of the Donation examined:
namely Hadrian 1. Leo 9. Eugenius 3. and Nicholas 3. the second Nicene and the
Council at Constance. Cap. 11. Sixteen other witnesses, alleged for proof
of Constantines Donation, examined: namely, Anselm, Iuo, Deus dedit,
Adalhardus, Mart. Polonus, Antoninus, Vincentius, Beluac. Sigibert, Ado,
Gotofrid. Otho Frising. Photius, Balsamon, Damianus, Bernard and Litprandus
Cremonensis. Ca. 12. Thirty Lawyers, Ciuilians and Canonists alleged by Marta,
to prove the Donation of Constantine, and an answer unto them. Cap. 13. The
testimonies of eight Emperors, Zeno, Justinian Charles the 1. Lewis, Henry the
2. Otho the 4. Fredrick the 2. and Charles the 4. alleged by Marta a^
witnesses of Constantines Donation examined Cap. 14. Four reasons brought by
Doctor Marta, and Cardinal Albanus for the Donation made by Constantine in the
pretended Edict, refuted. Cap. 15.
The Contents of the Chapters in the second part, which is, Of the Popes
Temporal Monarchy.
OF the Popes Temporal Monarchy, and what important consequents do ensue
thereof. Cap. 1. That Christ had no such Temporal Monarchy as is now claimed
for the Pope. Cap. 2. That Christ gave no Temporal Monarchy to Peter nor to
any of his Apostles, nor any of their successors. Cap. 3. That the Popes
temporal monarchy is condemned by the judgment of the Primitive Church, and
of general Councels: as also by the Fathers and learned writers who lived from
the 500. year after Christ. Ca. 4 That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Fathers and learned writers who lived from the 500. to the
1000. year after Christ. Cap. 5. That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers, who lived from the 1000. to the
1100. year after Christ. Cap. 6. That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers who lived from the year 1100. to
the year 1200. after Christ. Ca. 7. That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers who lived from the year 1200. to
the year 1300. after Christ. Ca. 8 That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers who lived from the year 1300. to
the year 1400. after Christ. Cap. 9. That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers who lived from the year 1400. to
the year 1500. after Christ. Cap. 10 That the Popes temporal monarchy is
condemned by the Bishops and learned writers who lived from the year 1500. to
the year 1620. Cap. 11. That the Popes temporal Monarchy is condemned by the
Emperors, Kings, and Imperial states, in the several ages of the Church.
Cap. 12.
Errata haec corrigat beneuolus lector.
Part 1. in Textu.
Page 16. line 15. Arts read Arles. page 64. line 1 does represent, read,
does scarce represent. p. 65. lin. 14. 600. r. 1600. p. 78. lin. 29. much
bewrayes. r. much more bewrayes. p. 209. l. 29. Constantius. ^. Constans. p.
^^0. l. 22. dele as, p. 260. l 1. would. r. as they would. p. 262. l. 21. q. 9.
r. q. 1. p. 3 21. l. 14. Constantine. r. Justinian. p. 326. l. 3. r. having. l.
eadem dele totam. p. 348. l. 29. r. to untruths. p. 349* l. 28. ports r.
parts. p. 25^. l. 22. Card. r. Corol.

Part. 1. in Margin.
Page 1. line 2. eap. 2. read 22. p. 4. Trid. 87. r. Trid. 187. p. 6. l. 7. c
2^. 4 r 23. p. 28. Pan. 3. r. Paneg. 7. p. 81. l. penul. lib. 5. de Synod. p^
2^0. r. lib. de Synod. p. 252. p. 83. post lin. vlt. addatur haec quotatio
Cornel. Epist. ad. Fabium. p. 100. lin. penult. p. 250. r. p. 252. p. 103. l.
2. nu. 63^. nu. 43. p. 107. lin. vlt. diuis. 1. r. diuis. 3. p. 112. l. 9. lib.
1. r. lib. 2. p. 132. lin. penul. p. 91. r. pa. 86. p. 146. lin. penul. an.
430. r. 730 p. 190. 1. ^5. Inlij 20. r. Maij 22. p. 198. lin. vlt. add hanc
citationem Steuch. p. 144. p. 201. l. 10. die 21. Iunij. r. die 22. Maij. p.
210 l. 42. Psalm. r. Fol. p, 216. l. 31. nu. 16. r. nu. 15. p. 217. l. 12. an.
1053. r. an. 1043. p. ead. l. vlt. paneg. 9. c. 3. r. paneg. 5. c. 4. p. 220.
l. vlt. pane. 5. c. 4 r. paneg. 9. c. 3. p. 2 36. l. 18. an. 447. r. an. 347.
p. 269. l. 7. c. 39. r. c. 44. p. 271. l. 10. c. 7. r. c. 70: p. 275. l. 22.
Apol. 2. r. Appen. 1. p. 293. l. 4. part 3. r. part. 4. p. 297. l. 1 Barth. r.
Bald. p. 318. l. 9. Edict. r. Edit. p. 324. l. ^9. an. 780. r. an. 800. p. 331.
l. vlt. Tit. 27. r. Tit. 37 p. 341. l. pen. laic. c. r. laica. p. 351. l. 1.
an. 818. r. 817. p. 359. l. 4. nu. 25. r. nu. 26. p. ead. lin. 13. nu. 25. r.
nu. 24 p. 380. l. penul. lib. 11.. lex. r. lib. 11. c. 6.. lex.

CHAP. I.
The first reason proving the second Roman Synod under Siluester, to be a
forgery taken from the persons supposed to have been assembled therein.
ALL the calumnies objected to Constantine have such dependence on the second
Roman Synod held in Syluesters time, that the due examining of this one Synod
will be a full clearing of all the chief calumnies which they have most
maliciously devised against him.

Now this Roman Synod might justly and with much ease be rejected, and that
by the warrant of that true and memorable testimony of Hincmarus Hinc. Epist.
7. Ca 2.
Bishop of Rhemes, who speaking of some of the Decrees thereof, says,
Catholic^ Ecclesia inter Synodalia decreta non computat. The Catholic Church
does not esteem the Decrees made in this Roman Council to be Synodall. But
because it is cited both by Pope Nicholas Nic. 1. Epist. 8.. Consonat. and.
Hinc etiam.
the first, and by Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 17. and lib 2. de To.
pontif. cap. 26.
as a worthy Synod strengthening the Popes supremacy, magnified by Baronius Cum
haec Romans Synodus vt legitima in compluribus antiquis codicibus scripta
habeatur, non est quod quis ^uspicari possit hum^num esse commentum. Ba^. an.
324. nu. 29.
for an ancient monument of the Church, and for a sacred Quam and sacri Romani
Concilij actis intelligimus confirmari. an cod. nu. 30.
Council, published for such an one, by Binnius Bin. tom. 1. Conc. pa. 299.
and seq.
and commended in their Roman Breuiarie Breu. Rom: in fest. S. Siluest. December.
31.
, to the public use of the Church, let us more at large, and seriously
consider the worth and dignity thereof: examining first, the persons therein
assembled. Secondly, the Acts and Canons thereof. Thirdly, the time and some
circumstances which concern the time, when it is supposed to have been held:
by every one of which I doubt not but the baseness and forgery of this Synod
will be made manifest.

For the first, had there been any such true Council, the Church should not
have accounted that at Nice, but this at Rome for the first general Council:
for this could not be thought a provincial Synod, seeing unto it were called,
and present in it, as the Acts do show, of the Western Bishops 139. of the
Greek Bishops 132. out of Rinocorura (which Ptolomee Ptol. Tabul. 3. Africae.
places in the very utmost part of Egypt, far beyond Alexandria) 57.
Bishops. When out of so many several Provinces, subject to several
Patriarchs, so many Bishops as 328. were called and present: what reason can
be imagined why this should not be a general Council as well as that at
Nice, wherein were present not so many Bishops, nor in likelihood out of so
many distinct Provinces? And because it was held before the Nicene Council, it
must needs (had there been such an one) have been reckoned the first of all
general Synods. Seeing then the Church never so accounted it, but ever held
that at Nice (which was celebrated after this) for the first, it is manifest by
the Churches judgment that they knew not of any such Roman Council as this
under Siluester.

Baronius to heal this sore, tells Bar. an. 32^. number. 124*
us, that in the edition of Cresconius the Greek Bishops are omitted, and he
gives a reason why they could not be present at this Council, because there
was not time enough to call Bishops out of so remote countries: adding further,
that Syluester called only the Italian Bishops to the Synod. Baronius might as
well in plain terms have professed the Acts of this Council, wherein all
these are said to have bin assembled, to be false and forged, (which is the
point we endeavor to prove:) but the Cardinal was loath to speak so plainly,
and after the Macedonian fashion, to call a Spade a Spade. Let us pass by this
his modesty: See but how uncertain and incoherent these conjectures of
Baronius are. It is very uncertain how long or short the time was after the
Synod was first summoned till the Session thereof: and why out of Greece they
might not as easily come to Rome upon a short summons, as out of Egypt and the
utmost part thereof (where Rinocorura is) I think it would trouble Baronius to
declare. Again, whereas Baronius would out of the Cresconian edition have the
number of Bishops in that Synod to be 230. he might have observed that his
fellow Bellarmine Bell. lib. 2. de pont. ca. 26
, yea and their own Breuiarie Breu. loc. citat.
directly checketh that number, and tells him, that there were 280. or 284.
Bishops present: and yet neither of those numbers do accord with the Acts Nam
rece^sentur ex vrbe Roma and non long ab ea (puta ex Italia) 139. ex Graecia
132. ex Rinocorura, 57. Act. conc. Romans
of that Council: for if the Greek Bishops and they of Rinocorura be both
omitted, there are but 139. which wants 90. of Baronius number, and of
Bellarmines 140. If they of Greece only be left out, and the other of
Rinocorura admitted, then were present 196. which wants of Baronius number 34.
and of Bellarmines 84. So incoherent and confused is their account in seeking
to defend the truth of this Synod. Further, whom can Baronius persuade that in
Italy Tantum Italiae Episcopos a Syluestro conuocatos fuisse Romam credimus.
Bar. an. 324. nu. 124.
alone there were at that time 230. Bishops, as by this account Nam ex
Cresconiana editione quam sequitur and probat, nu merat Episcopos, 230. ibid.
there must, which only number of Italians (far more Itali praelati.
Tridenti 87. in Appen post sinem Conc. Trid.
then was at Trent) might have ouerswayed in any ancient Council whatsoever
the Pope had pleased.

But leaving them thus entangled in their defense of this Synod, I wish any
indifferent man to think with himself, what credit is to be given to that
Council, wherein the forgerer was not ashamed to set down the names and
Chyrographos Act. Conc. Romans cap. 1.
the hand-writings of 132. Bishops as consenting to that Synod: not one of
which (as the Cardinal assures you) were so much as present in the Synod: or
whether he might not as easily forge a few Canons out of his own brain, as
counterfeit the names and hand-writings of so many Bishops wherein his fraud
might more easily be perceived and controuled. This briefly for the persons.

CHAP. II.
The second reason, proving this Roman Synod to be a forgerie, taken from the
Acts and Canons thereof.
THE second consideration is of the Acts and Decrees supposed to be made in
this Roman Council, wherein there are diverse evident demonstrations of
forgerie. In it was condemned Photinus as their Breuiarie Breu. loc. citat vbi
iterum Arius. Photinus Sabellius damnati sunt.
testifies, and the like is affirmed by the Epilogue, Epil. breuis seque^tis
Romans concilij qui Actis praefigitur.
or rather Preface to that Council. An untruth void of all probability,
seeing the heresy of Photinus sprung up as Socrates truly shows, diverse
years after the death both of Constantine and Syluester: for after the
Council at Antioch in Encaenijs, he Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14.
says; that at Sirmium noua haeresis exoritur, a new heresy did arise, and
that was the heresy of Photinus. And again, Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 24.
when Photinus Bishop of Sirmium endeavored to diuulge that doctrine which he
had devised, and tumult began to arise about it, the Emperor Constantius
commanded a Synod to be called to Syrmium, wherein they deposed him from his
Bishopric. Thus Socrates, and the like does Sozomen Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 5.
affirm. Had Photinus been condemned in the great Nicene, and again in this
Roman Synod by Siluester, (as their Breuiarie says he was) how did he
continue Bishop of Syrmium more then thirty years Sirmiense concilium habitum
est, an. 357. Bin. in Not. ad id. conc. hoc autem Romans habi^um 324.
after that sentence? or what needed the Council at Syrmium to examine, or
condemn either him or his heresy, which both by Pope Siluester had so long
before been condemned, and also by the great Nicene Council? or how could
either Siluester in the Roman Synod, or the Nicene Council condemn that
heresy in Photinus, who began first to broach his heresy near hand twenty
years after the end of these two Synods? Binius saw and confessed this, and
therefore says; Bin. notis in hoc Council. 3. Epilogus.
That which is spoken of the Photinians to be condemned in this Roman Synod,
Plane falsum est, It is utterly false.

In the third Chapter of that Council is decreed, That a Presbyter may not
accuse a Bishop, nor a Deacon a Presbyter, nor a Subdeacon, a Deacon.
Concerning which Canon, let the judgment of Hincmarus be observed. He Hinc.
Epist. 7. cap. 21. and seq.
at large proves both by Scripture and ancient Canons, the contrary to this:
he calls this vanam opinionem, a vain opinion, and whereas some do produce,
says he, Saint Siluester to have decreed these things: he tells us, that the
Catholic Church does not account them as Synodall decrees. And after he has
recited the words of this Roman Synod, and of this third Chapter thereof, he
says Ibid. ^ap. 24.
of it; Quae dicta quam aduersa sibi, and quam diuersa a Sanctis Canonibus and
sacris legibus sint nemo est qui dubitet: Which sayings, how contrary they are
in themselves, how repugnant to the holy Canons and sacred Laws, there is none
that doubt. And after he has professedly refuted that Decree by sundry
reasons, he in the end concludes, Ibid.
Quapropter credendum non est, wherefore it is not to be believed, that Saint
Syluester did make such Decrees. Thus their famous Archbishop of Rhemes.

In the third Chapter is set down, That a Bishop shall not be condemned under
seventy two witnesses against him, nor a Presbyter under forty four, nor a
Deacon under thirty six, nor a Subdeacon, A coluth, ex^rcist or Reader,
under seven: and th^se witnesses Testes autem and Accusatores sine aliqua sint
in^amia, vxores ac filios habentes. Italegit and citat v^rba Canonis huius
tertij Hinem. Epist. 7. ca. 22. In edit. Biniana textus multo obscure tior est.
must be such as have wife and children. So the Synodall Canon. It were worthy
the learning, (seeing the Canon presupposes, that a Bishop and Presbyter may
be accused and condemned) who they are that can possibly bear any witness
against them, not one Bishop or Presbyter against another, for they are not
such witnesses as may have wives and children, if you will believe their Roman
doctrines Caelibatus iure Apostolico annexus est sacris ordinibus. Bell. lib. 1.
de Cler. ca. 19.
and decrees. Not any inferior unto them, for that the same Canon Can. 3. conc.
Romans
forbids; not any lay person, for a Canon of a more ancient Pope, Marcel. 1.
epist. 2. and ^^atur cause. 2. q. 7. ca. Laico.
and of as great authority as this of Siluester decrees, Laico non licet
quenquam Clericum accusare. A lay man may not accuse any Clergy man. It was
not without good cause that Hincmarus said; The Canon was repugnant to it
self. And of the last clause touching married witnesses, Hincmarus censure is
most just, quam Hinc. Epist. 7. cap. 23.
absurdum sit ratio aperta demonstrat. Manifest reason does demonstrate that to
be very absurd, that the testimonies of such as have wives and children,
should be more esteemed then such as are continent, or married and have no
children.

In this Synod Can. 6. and alibi.
is mention diverse times of the Cardinal Deacons of Rome, which Title of
Cardinals not to have been given to Deacons in Siluesters days, is more then
probable. For the name Cardinal being added to Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon,
betokens a difference betwixt such and others, the one Hoc discrimen ponit Bell.
Apol pro Torto ca. 4.. At inquit, and. Quod addit.
having the dignity and right to elect the Pope, and be of his Council in
governing the Church: the other wanting both these. So to say that in
Siluesters time there were some Cardinal Deacons, or Presbyters of Rome,
implies that some others of the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome were not
Cardinals, or else it were frivolous and idle to use that addition. Now in
Siluesters time, and long after all the Presbyters, and all the Deacons of Rome
joined in the election of the Pope, and assisted him in government. Of the
later (which is assisting the Pope) those frequent Roman Synods used in the
times of ancient Popes, are witnesses, which since the erection of the
College of Cardinals in grown out of use, as Bellarmine Concilia Romana
particula^ia exoleuerunt and in eoru^ loca Consistoria Cardinaliu^ successisse
videntur. Bell. cap. eod.. Quod addit.
says, and in their stead the Consistories of the Cardinals have succeeded. Of
the former, which is the election of the Pope, besides innumerable examples,
the fourth Canon of their first Council under Symmachus is a witness, where
the election of the Pope is signified Con. Romans 1. sub Sim.
to be made by the consent, totius Ecclesiastici ordinis, of the whole order of
the Roman Clergy, or of the mayor part of them: And this was above 170.
years Conc. illud Romans sub Simmacho habitum est an. 499. Bin. in Nor. ad ^d
con. hoc sub. Siluestro an. 324. Bin. Not. in hoc conc.
after this Roman Synod. Bellarmine who has labored this point,
acknowledges this truth with us. This, says he, Hoc solum interest inter
antiqua tempora and recentia, etc. Bell. Apol. pro Tort ca. 4.. At inquit.
is the only difference betwixt the ancient and the latter times, because of
old, by reason of the paucitie of persons, omnes in communi hoc officio
fungebantur, All the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome did in common perform that
duty (of electing and assisting the Pope) and so Non distinguebantur
Presbyteri and Diaconi Romani Cardinales a non Cardinalibus. ibid.
the Roman Presbyters and Deacons that were Cardinals, were not distinguished
from those that were not Cardinals, but afterward when the number of
Presbyters and Deacons did increase, it was needful to select some few that
should perform this office, and those were called Cardinal Presbyters, and
Cardinal Deacons of the holy Church of Rome. Thus Bellarmine, who tells us
withal, that this reducing the Popes election to a few selected Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons, is not late or new, seeing it is five or six hundredth
years old. Which antiquity we envy not to Cardinal Deacons, seeing the
Cardinal confesses that for the first times (until 1000. years after Christ)
all the Roman Presbyters and Deacons were Cardinals alike, no difference being
among them, for which some were to be called Cardinals, and not others.
Wherefore seeing this Roman Synod gives the Title of Cardinals to Roman
Deacons, of which name at that time there neither was nor could be any use, it
may thence be perceived that the deviser of these Synodal Acts, bewrayed both
his malice in forging, and ignorance in doing if so very unskillfully, it being
as ridiculous to call those old Roman Deacons, Diaconi Cardinales, (so the
Synod says) as to say Diaconi homines, or Diaconi Clerici.

Yea, but in Siluesters time all the Roman Deacons were not Cardinals, (says
Bellarmine Bell. ibid.. Non (...).
) but seven only who were chief among the rest. Bellarmine herein
contradicts his own saying. For in his Controversies he teaches, That there
were but seven Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. cap. 16.. H^^c.
Deacons in Rome in Siluesters time: And that he proves by the Council of
Neocesarea, Conc. Neoce^a. c^n. 14.
Which decreed, that in one city, though it be great and ample, septem
tantum debere esse Diaconos, there ought to be only seven Deacons: Which
Council was then very fresh in memory, (as held Habitum est, an. 315. vt
colligit Bin. Not. in id Council.
in the time of Pope Siluester) and was withal approved Distinc. 20. ca. de
libellis.
by the Roman Church: Now all those seven to have been Cardinals, both this
Roman Diaconi Cardinales vrbis Romae septem. Can. 6 Conc. Romans
Synod avouches, and Bellarmine Tempore Siluestri 7. tantum erant Romae
Diaconi (Cardinales abundare videtur) and illi omnes 7. erant Cardinales, Bell.
lib. 1. de Cler. ca. 16.
expressly confesses. By what other Arithmeticke then he can find any Roman
Deacons in Siluesters time, that were not Cardinals, but by the rule of
falsehood, it is not easy to conjecture. And although among seven, it were no
incongruitie to call two or three of them Cardinal Deacons, as chief among
the rest, yet to call them all Cardinals, as the Council does, it is as absurd
as to call all the thirty two points, Cardinal winds; which none but such as
the unskillful forgerer of this Roman Synod will affirm. For if all be
Cardinals, then are none Collateral; if all chief, then none inferior.

In another Canon, Can. 5.
Siluester is said to have appointed with a loud voice, that no Presbyter
should make Chrisme, and the reason thereof the Pope there gives, because
Christ has his, Name of Chrisme. By which reason it is as forceably
consequent, that no Bishop, nor the Pope himself may make Chrisme. The
deriuation of Christ's name will enforce the one both as Logically and
Theologically as the other. And why may not a Presbyter make Chrisme, as well
as make Christ himself? Or why shall not this reason exclude a Presbyter from
consecrating or transubstantiating the Bread, as well as from consecrating Oil
or Chrisme? Sure this and the former reason concerning married Witnesses, were
both framed in one forge of simplicity and folly.

There are other like worthy reasons set down in another Canon, Can. 16.
Which forbids any Clergy man to enter into the Court, quoniam omnis curia a
cruore dicitur, Because every Court has his name of cruelty. Siluester, it
seems, was desirous to show his Papal authority in decreeing Laws for
Grammarians as well as for Divines, and making a new Etymologicum. Pomp. Festus
knew not this Papal Etymon, when Fest. in voc^ Curia.
he said; Curia est locus vbi publicas Curas gerunt, It is called the Court of
those public cares, and vigilancie of the chief Magistrate and his
Ministers, for the Public good and happiness of the Commonwealth, who like
Epaminundas, watch and wake for the City, while the rest by means of their
care, sleep securely. Cicero knew not of this Etymon, when he described Cic.
orat: pro Milon.
the Court to be, templum sanctitatis, the Temple of sanctity, of honor, of
wisdom, of public Counsel, and the like. If every Court has his name of
cruelty, what shall be thought of the Romana Curia, of which it is said; Non
vult ouem sine vellere? Nay it were well if they would only fleece, but
alas, they flay and worrie the sheep of Christ. It is that Court of which
Espenceus Claud. Espenc. Com. in Epist ad Tit. ca. 1. digress. 2.
their learned Bishop speaks, wishing Pius the fifth would hear what an
Italian Poet and Divine says of it, There remains in the sheepefold the
Boar, the Tiger, the Lion, the Liberd, the Griffin, the Panther and Bear. And
unto Leo the tenth he feared not in plain terms to say; Romana graui
maculata veneno Curia, The Roman Court is defiled with poison, the contagion
whereof has infected all Countries. Thus and much more Espen^eus, explaining
how truly Siluesters Etymon agrees to the Court of Rome.

The Canon it self whereof that's a reason, is not unworthy observing; the Pope
and Synod most straightly forbid either Deacon or Priest, or any Clergy man
for their own, or for any cause at all, to come, or so much as enter Nemo
clericus propter causam suam quamlibet intret in Curiam. Can. 16. Conc. Romans 2.
into any (secular Ita explicatur in vita Siluestri. Hic constituit, vt nullus
clericus propter quamlibet causam in curiam introiret, nec ante iudicem ciuilem
(id est saecularem) causam diceret, nisi in Ecclesia.
) Court, for that is Idolatry; and if any do it, Anathema suscipiat, nunquam
rediens ad matrem Ecclesiam: Let him be accursed, and never restored to the
Church again. Thus decrees the Synod. Was S. Paul the^ an Idolater and
Anathema for appealing Act. 25. 10. 21.
to Caesar's Court? Or is Constantines tribunal more accursed then Neroes? Was
Athanasius an Idolater, an Anathema, when fleeing from the Council at Tire, he
went to Constantinople Nos adito principe, Eusebianorum scelera patefecimus,
Athanas. Apol. 2. page 219.
, made complaint to Constantine of his wrong: entreated and obtained audience
at his Court? Were all those holy ancient Bishops Idolaters and accursed, who
as subordinate officers to the Emperor, and by commission from him, not only
came into the Courts, but sat as Judges therein, hearing and determining not
only Ecclesiastical but civil Causes, and that with such a privilege, that
if any man would reject the civil Judge, and appeal to the Bishops
judgments, the Bishops sentence should stand firm, without any appeal:
tanquam ab ipso Imperatore prolata: as if it had been given by the Emperor in
his own person. This Sozomen Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 9.
witnesses, but more effectually the Emperors own Edicts, that of Arcadius De
Episc. audientia. l. 8. Cod. Justin*
Honorius, and Theodosius; wherein that which I cited is expressed, and another
more ancient the^ theirs, made even by Constantine himself, who L. 1. de.
Episcopali iudic^o Cod. Theod.
thus writ to Albanius. Omnes causae quae vel praetori^ iure, vel civilly
tractantur: All causes which are handled by the Praetorian or civil law, if
they be ended by the sentence of Bishops, are ratified for perpetual
stabilitie, neither shall it be lawful to examine that cause which the
sentence of Bishops has decided. Thus we did once decree by an wholesome edict,
and this perpetua lege firmamus, we ratify by a law to abide for ever. Thus
decreed Constantine. Let now any of judgment consider, whether it be credible
that so wise and religious an Emperor as Constantine, could so cross his own
Acts and Decrees, as in this Roman Synod, to subscribe (as the Synodall Acts of
this Council say Subscripserunt Episcopi 284 and Augustus Constantinus. Act.
Synodi Romans 2. ca. 20. and ca. 10.
he did) to that Canon which accurseth all Clergy men that come into any
Court, and yet establish the Episcopal courts and judgment in all causes, and
that with such ample privileges as he did in his edict now remembered: or
whether this edict of Constantine allowing with many honors and immunities the
presence of Clergy men in civil and imperial Courts, do not convince this
Roman Synod of forgery, which makes Constantine subscribe to the condemning
and anathematizing of all Clergy men that enter into any such Court.

Another Canon Can. 14 Testimonium (...) aduersu^^ ^aicum (...) recipiat.
of this Synod is, that none ought to receive the testimony of a clergy man
against a lay man. What? were Clergy men in Pope Siluesters time of so little
credit, that their testimony might not be accepted? But of this Hincmarus Hinc.
loco (...). ca. 23.
judgment is very good, who affirms and proves this canon to be repugnant
both to the sacred rule, to the determinations of the Apostolic Sea, and to
the laws of Christian Emperors. And because the Synod says that Constantine
subscribed to this Canon, and so ratified it, it will suffice both against the
Canon is self, and the forgerers untruth touching Constantine, to oppose
Constantines own express words in that Edict to Ablauius before mentioned:
who thus says, L. 1. de Episc. Iudicio: Cod. Theod.
Testimonium etiam ab vno licet Episcopo perhibitum, omnes iudices indubitanter
accipiant: The witness though it be but of one Bishop, let al Judges embrace as
undoubted, neither let any other be heard when the testimony of a Bishop in
any part is delivered. So Constantine.

Now these so many and evident proofs of untruth in the Decrees and forgerie
in the Synod, may justly persuade that there is no account to be made, or
credit to be given to that Canon which Bellarmine and others allege out of it
for the Popes authority, which is the last Canon of all, that None (...).
ought to judge the first Sea. And though this also to be a counterfeit and
false Canon, not only the judgment and deposing of Pope Liberius (of which I
have elsewhere entreated) but the testimony of Pope Hadrian, and a Roman Synod
with him declare; for therein Adrian. cum Synodo Romans cuius acta extant. Act.
7. conc. 8.
was decreed, that In case of heresy the Pope may be judged: whereas by this
Synod they would absolutely exempt him from all judgment; yet at this time I
will only observe that this Canon (admitting the truth thereof) is not so
helpful to their cause as they suppose and vainly boast. Had the Synod said,
prima seeds Romana, the first Sea of Rome, is to be judged of none, their
pretense had been more colorable. But when it said no more then prima seeds,
why should this be restrained to Rome more then to Alexandria, or to Antioch?
Is not the name of prima seeds common to all Patriarchs and such Primates as
had though not the name, yet the authority of Patriarchs? Their own Anacletus
and Stephanus will testify this, In those cities, says Anacletus, Anac. Epi.
2
which were the chief of the Provinces, and where the heathens had secular
Primates for judgment, both divine and Ecclesiastical laws commanded that
there should be placed Patriarchs or Primates, (which Qui vnam form (...) licet
diuersa s^^t no^^^a.
have one form though they have diverse names) and these and no other should be
called Primates: And Pope Stephen Step. Epist. 2
adds of these, Let no Metropolitans or other Bishops be called Primates,
nisi hi qui primas seeds tenent: but those that have the first Seas. Seeing
then in the Eastern Empire there were seven Diocesses, and every Diocese had
a Patriarch or Primate, as Berterius (...).
at large proves; seeing also six Patriarchall Primates were in the Western
Empire, for it contained (...).
six Diocesses every one of which had several Provinces, as by the Notitia
Prouinciarum and Berterius is manifest: and every primate by Pope Stephens
testimony had a first Sea; this Canon of the Roman Council, as rightly
belongs to any of those thirteen Primates and first Seas, as to the Roman Sea
or Pope. The same appears by the third Council at Carthage, wherein Saint
Austen was present, and to which he subscribed: they decree Con. Carth 3.
tempore Si^^^* ca ^6.
, that the Bishop of the first Sea should not be called either the Prince of
Bishops, or the supreme Bishop, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus, that is
Primate or Bishop of the first Sea: wherein they did certainly intend such Vt
liqunet (...) ciusdem Conc* vb: dic^^^^. ad quod (...) ^^^lium omnes Pro^^nciae
quae prim^s seeds habent, ternos (...)
as were Patriarchs, or Patriarchall Primates, of which kind in the Diocese
of Afric was the Bishop of Carthage, in the Diocese of Italy the Bishop of
Rome, in the Diocese of Gallia the Bishops of Arts, in the Diocese of
Britain (as anciently it seems) the Bishop of York (that being Non tamen
(...) (Londini*) fuit antiqua huius Diocae^^ Metropolis sed potius E^oracum,
illic si quidem fuit Imperatoris Palatium, and Britanniarum Praetorium. Bert.
Diatr. 1. ca. 3. p. 36.
before and in Constantines time the Imperial city;) but since the coming
of Augustine, the Bishop of Canterbury, which in the Heptarchy of the Saxons
was the chief city, for which cause the Bishop of this Sea is expressly
called by William Malsbury Guil. Malm. in Prolog. ad libr. de Gestis pontif.
Anglo^^^.
Totius Angliae Primas and Patriarcha, the Primate and Patriarch of all
England: and the Gloss Glos^a in ^a^ Cleros Distm. 21.
on the Canon Law, says that the name of Primates comprehends other
Patriarchs, as by name he mentions the Bishop of Canterbury: yea and Pope
Vrbane the second in the Synod at Bar, called Anselme Bishop of this Sea,
Alterius orbis Patriarcham, (so Berterius Bert. Diatr. 2 ca. 4. pa. 199 ^ Malm
(...). 1 de gest. pontif: Angl. pa. 127.
cites it, and not Papam, as William Malmsbury does) but the sense was one and
the same, for he did not intend him to have a supreme and universal
authority, that neither would Anselme accept, nor would the Pope ever give
unto him; but he so called him in regard of the like Patriarchall authority
which Anselme had in England as the Pope had in Italy or in his Roman
Diocese. The like might be showed also in the other nine Patriarchall
Diocesses, whereinto the Empire was divided. But I will not enter into that
argument. Seeing it is evident by that third Council of Carthage Conc. Carth.
3. tempore Siricij cap. 2.
that there were other Bishoprics called by the name of first Seas as well as
the Roman, why should they restrain this privilege which Siluester and the
Roman Synod gives to the first Sea, only to the Pope? or why shall not every
Patriarch or patriarchall Primate challenge the like exemption from al humane
judgment, because the first Sea is to be judged of none? Nay it is evident by
another Canon of this very Roman Synod, that it intended this as a common
privilege unto all Patriarchs and Patriarchall Primates, to all which the
name of summus Praesul (in special signification) is common. A Presbyter shall
not be condemned, says the third Canon, under 44. witnesses, a Bishop not
under 72. Neque praesul summus a quoquam indicabitur, nor shall the highest
Bishop be judged of any. Now seeing in the same Canon is meant the Subdeacons,
Deacons, Presbyters and Bishops of every Diocese, it is evident that by summus
Praesul the Patriarch or highest Bishop in any Patriarchall Diocese ought to
be meant as well as the Italian or Roman Patriarch. And then it is easy to
perceive both how untruly this forged Synod says, that the first Sea can be
judged of none, seeing Paulus Somosatenus Paulus Samosatenus condemnatus est in
Conc. Antioch. ^t liquet ^x Et s^b lib 7 ca. 23. and 24. id Conc. habitum est
an. 272. Bin. Not. in id con.
Bishop of the first Sea at Antioch, not long before Siluesters time, had been
judged, condemned, and deposed: as also how little they gain by this Canon,
seeing as the Pope by it is exempted from the judgment of other Patriarchs;
so also is every Patriarch, and Patriarchall Primate exempted from his and
other humane Tribunals, which will be no small prejudice to the Popes
supremacy. But this out of the Synodall Decrees themselves, is sufficient to
demonstrate the falsehood and forgerie of this Synod.

CHAP. III.
The third Reason, proouing the second Roman Synod under Siluester to be a
forgerie, taken from the time when this Council is said to have been held.
THE third consideration concerns the time of this Roman Council. It was
held as the Acts do witness, on the thirtieth of May, when Constantine the
Emperor was the third time Consul, and with him Priscus: wherein the forgerer
many ways bewraies himself, and his own audacious ignorance, in
counterfeiting these Acts. Let us wink at his eloquence and rare Dialect, who
calls the Emperor Domnus Augustus, and not after the vulgar fashion in those
times, Dominus. In the Fasti neither Greek nor Latin is any Priscus a
colleague with Constantine. It is Crispus who was Consul, whom the unskillful
fellow calls Priscus, that is one error, and the least of all. A second is,
that he makes Crispus Consul with Constantine the Emperor the third time. For
when Constantine the Emperor was the third time Consul, his colleague was
neither Priscus nor Crispus, but Licinius, as the Greek Pa. 283.
Fasti and Latin Pa. 281.
also do witness, and besides them Eusebius Ann. Christ. 313. pa. 211.
in his Greek Chronicle, Cassiodore In suo chro. pa. 47.
, Onuphrius, In Fastis. pa. 281.
, Cuspinian In Notis su ^s ad Fast pa. 401.
, and which is of mroe authenticke truth then all these, the Imperial Edicts
dated that year, as namely; that Cod. Just. lib. 10. ut. 31. l. 14.
to Euagrius, which bears date in March, Constantino Aug. 3. and Licinio 3.
Coss. and another to Cod. eod. lib. 10. (...). 10. l. 2.
Aemilius dated also in March, Constantine the Emperor being the third time,
and with him Licinius, Coss. beside diverse the like. Wherefore seeing the Acts
do witness, that this Synod was held when Constantine the Emperor was third
time Coss. and with him Crispus; and this was never: even by the Acts and date
thereof it is clear, there was never any such Council, or if it was, it was
held in no year.

It is true indeed, that the Colleague of Crispus Crispus 3. and Constantinus
Caesar 3. vt in Fastis tam Graecis quam Latinis, sed in graeco B. mendose
scribitur pro ^.
was Constantine the third time Consul, but that was not the Emperor
Constantine, as the forgerer expressly Constantino Augusto 3. and Pris^. in
Conc. Romans
affirms, but his eldest Son Constantinus Caesar, as the Fasti declare: and
because it may be, the forgerer intended that year when they were Consuls, let
us further see, if yet the time and circumstances will accord upon that
supposall.

This Consulship of theirs was the next Vt ex Fastis liqu^^, ^a^ Grae^^s quam
Latin^^^
year before Paulinus and Iulianus, in whose time the Council of Nice was
held; yea, and began also, as Binnius Bin. Not. in conc. Nic. Paulino.
and Baronius Bar. an. 325. nu. 3.
very truly do teach, whereupon they both Bin. not. in conc. Romans 2. ^^b Sil.
Ba^. an. 324, nu 127.
do of a certainty collect that this Roman Council was held a whole year
before the Nicen began, or was either appointed or summoned. Now I would here
entreat Cardinal Bellarmine to reconcile his contradiction unto this: for he
clearly affirms that the Nicen Council was begun the year before
Constantinus Caesar, and Crispus were Consuls. It continued, says he Lib. 1 de
conc c. 5.
, three years and it ended when Paulinus and Iulianus were Consuls. Certainly
either Bellarmine must confess this Synod to be forged, or else acknowledge
his own gross error in making the Nicen Council to begin a year before
this: to say nothing that it seems some incongruitie also for Constantine or
Siluester to call first a general Synod to Nice, and during that Council, to
call another as general also to Rome, wherein shall be more Bishops then at
Nice; which yet upon Bellarmines assertion is evidently consequent. But it is
certain that Bellarmine in his Chronology both in this and many other places
is exceedingly defective, and in making two Councels to be held at one time,
the one at Nice of 318. the other at Rome of 328. (or 280. Bishops, as he
accounts) he was not so well advised as he might and should have been. So for
Bellarmine, this Council and note of time in it, is a clear conviction of his
error.

For the thing it self, The occasion of this second Roman Synod
that this Council was not held in that year of their Consulship, as Baronius
and Binnius for a certainty affirm, there is one thing specially to be
observed, which contains the whole discovery of this fiction and the falsely
supposed occasions of this Council, together with a clearing of the most
religious Emperor Constantine from those slanderous calumnies and untruths
which Zosimus and other heathen writers, and after them some deceived by their
narrations did follow, but Baronius and Binnius wittingly (that I say not
maliciously) against the evidence of truth, do not only embrace but earnestly
defend.

The narration out of their own writings is this: The end of this Synod was,
that Constantine might celebrate Fuerunt haec celebrata, vt public ^quaedam pro
accepto munere gratia rum actio. Bar. an. 324 nu. 124.
a solemn thanksgiving unto God for the benefit lately received in his
Baptism: that benefit was the clensing of his leprosy, as the very Synod
Synod. Rom 2. ^ub Sil. ca. 1.
it self expresses. And how he fell into this leprosy Baronius out of
Zosimus and some other, as also out of the Acts of Siluester does at large
declare. The first original and cause thereof, as the Cardinal Bar an. 324.
nu. 10 and 17.
shows, was the tyranny and unnatural cruelty which Constantine had lately
(to wit in the Initio anni huius 324. Crispus ^ patre occis^s fuit. Bin. Not.
in hoc conc.. Constantino.
beginning of this very year) showed, in murdering his own son Crispus. the
Consul this year, a most noble Crispum nobilissimum. Caesa^e^, Christiana
religione imbutum, etc Bar. an. eod. nu. 16.
and religious Prince, of whom Baronius says, that he was killed, furore
tyrannicae patriae potestatis, by the madness and tyranny of his father. To
this was added the like murders of his own wife Fausta Constantinus malum,
maiori malo sanau^ nam cum Faustam b^lneo inclusistet mortuam inde extraxit.
Bar. ex Zo^i no vt c^rtum narrat. an. eod. nu. 10. and approbat ibid. nu. 8.
, his nephew Licinius junior crudelissime inter^^citur, ex Eus. Che. citat.
Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. and ipse probat hoc. nu. 8. and 9. and nu. (...).
propinqu^s adeo (...) non peper^ it.
Licinius, and very many Bar. an. eod. nu. 17.
other of his friends. After these, tot Ibid.
tamque immania scelera perpetrata, so many and so immane cruelties committed,
Baronius shows Ibid.
out of that Constantine being sore perplexed in his conscience, went to his
heathenish Priests (for as yet, says Sozimus, Sozim. lib. 2. pa. 31.
patritis sacris vtebatur, he used the heathen rites, sacrifices, and religion)
to be expiated from these crimes by them. But the Heathen Priests denying, that
they had any means to lustrate or purge so great and foul offenses, He
understood by a certain Spaniard, whose name was Aegiptius (Baronius Egiptius,
magum notat. ideo in eam plane sententiam i^imus, vt hunc magum Hispanum nullum
alium existimemus qua^ Hosium Corduben^em. Bar. an. cit. nu. 27.
thinks him to have been the renowned Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain)
Sententiam doctrinae Christianorum, That by the doctrine of Christians, any
sins might be abolished and pardoned; whereupon Constantine forsook his
ancient Religion, and followed the Egyptians advice. Thus Sozimus, touching the
murder of Crispus and the rest, to whom Baronius Anno eod. 324. nu. 27.
in this manner applaudes, Vides haec omnia, You see all these things set down
by Sozimus and other Heathens, Esse in omnibus consentanea veritati, to be in
all points consonant to truth, and worthy to be entirely received of all such
as exactly follow the truth. This was the first supposed cause of the leprosy
of Constantine.

The other was a crime far greater then this, and that was his Persecution of
the Church of God, of which the Acts of Siluester make express mention. When
Act. Siluestri apud Bar. an. 324. nu. 33.
Constantine persecuted the Christians, Silueuester with his clergy fled into
the Mountain Soracte. Pope Adrian mentions the same in his Epistle sent to
Constantine, and Irene, which was read and approved in the second Nicene
Council, where he says Had^i. 1. Epist. 1.
; That when Constantine ad fidem conuerteretur was converted to Christianity,
the Apostles Peter and Paul appearing to him in a vision, said unto him;
Syluester Bishop of Rome with his clergy, Persecutiones tuas fugiens, fleeing
thy persecution, is hid in the Mountain Soracte, among the cliffes and dens of
the Rocks. And again, When Constantine had sent a troop of Soldiers to
bring Siluester unto him, the Pope credidit se ad Martyrij coronam eu^cari,
Thought that they had been come to put them to death, and to martyr them. Of
the same persecution Baronius entreating out of the Acts of Siluester, affirms
Bar. an 324 nu. 33.
Constantinum adhuc patrita sectantem, persecutionem aduersus Ecclesiam Dei
concitasse; That Constantine as yet following his heathen superstition, raised
persecution against the Church of God, Which Syluester to avoid, fled into the
Mountain Soracte. The very same does Binius Bin. Not. in vitam Silu.. Hic in.
Constantinus adhuc avita ^^ctatus, persequutionem concitauit. etc.
affirm, and then they both Bar. loc. cit. and Bin. Not. in vitam Silu.. Quem
curauit.
add, Constantinum ob admissa flagitia fuisse a Deo lepra percussum. That
Constantine was smitten with a leprosy by the hand of God for these crimes, to
wit, for those vnnaturals murders, and persecution of Christians.

Thus we have the disease and leprosy of Constantine, and the two causes
thereof: Now the cure of it, as they Bar. an. 324. nu. 33. Legend in S.
Siluest, and Edict. Constable. de Donat. 10. 1 Conc. pa. 296. and Hadr. Epist, 1.
quae etiam citatur in conc. Nic. 2. Act. 2. and ^re^^iar. Romans in Festo S. Silu,
declare, was in this manner. Constantine to get help of his leprosy, first
consulted with the Priests, who told him that he must make a pond with the
blood of Infants, and therein wash himself, and so he should be cleansed: but
the* Emperor moved with the outcryes and lamentations of the mothers, refused
such a cure; and then in the night in a vision, did Peter and Paul appear unto
him, and willed him to send for Siluester, who would show him another pond,
wherein after thrice washing he should be cleansed and cured: withal
admonishing T^^ autem relicta omni idolorum superstitio^e deum vnu^ adores,
etc. Hadr. Epist. 1.
him, to leave his superstitious worship of Idols, and to serve the only true
God. Constantine being thus admonished from heaven, sent for Syluester, and
among other conferences, percunctabatur Hadr. loc. cit.
qui essent dij Petrus and Paulus: what Gods Peter and Paul were? and when
Siluester had told him that they were two of the Apostles of Christ, and showed
their Images unto him, he was baptized by Siluester, and presently Confestim
^^nitati restitutus est. Had. Epist. in conc. Nic. 2 Baptismo sanatur. B^e^. in
Festo Siluest^^.
restored to his health.

Here is the benefit which Constantine received of Siluester by baptism; the
consequents whereof were diverse. One, his erecting De his vid. Bar. an. 324.
nu. 63. and seq. Bin. Notis in Donat. Constable. and ^rcu loco cit.
of many Churches, adorning them with Images and great gifts, particularly with
That Donation so famously Bar. an. 324. nu. 117.
mentioned, wherein the city of Rome, all the Provinces in Italy, and other
parts of the West were conferred unto the Pope, and his successors for ever. A
second, his Edicts Anno citato nu. 82.
for embracing Christianity every where: and specially a liberty granted to
Christians to build Churches, Quod ante negatum erat, which before this time,
or until then, was not permitted unto them, as their Breuiarie Loco citato.
says. And to omit others, the holding of this Roman Imperator ^am re^ens
baptizatus, hoc Concilium (Romans 2.) promouit eo fine, vt public^m quandam
gratiarum actionem pro accepto beneficio deo ageret. Bin. Not. in hoc Conc. and
Bar. an. 324. nu. 124.
Synod, which was to be a public testimony of his thanksgiving for such great
benefits. This is the sum of that Narration, by which Baronius and others, do
maintain the truth of this Synod, whereof we now entreat.

It were even an Herculean labor to purge out the untruths of this their
narration, which is as foul, as ever was Angias stable. Leaving the rest, I
will principally ob^erue such points therein, as tend most of all to declare
the falsehood and forgery of this Roman Synod: and those are four, all of them
depending on this circumstance of the time when this Council was held.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth reason proving this second Roman Synod to be a forgery, taken from
the supposed murder of Crispus by his father Constantine.
THE first circumstance discovering the forgerie of this Roman Synod, is the
murder of Crispus. This Synod did follow that murder, as Baronius Ex his
explorata prorsus habentur admissa dira ac parricidalia Constantini delicta, ab
eodemque ad ea abluenda queasita remedia. Bar. an. 324. nu. 28.
expressly teaches, and proves also out of Zosimus, seeing that murder and the
guiltiness thereof was one occasion why Constantine sought for remedy both of
this sin, and of his leprosy: the cure of both which he obtained by baptism
at Siluesters hands. Seeing then this Synod followed his baptism, as the
Synodall Acts Cap. 1. con. Romans 2.
do expressly witness: and Baronius Bar a^. 324. nu. 123.
with Binius Postquam Imperator ia^. recens baptizatus, etc. (...). Notis in
hoc Conc.
confesses, it must of necessity follow that murder of Crispus also.

Now that Crispus was neither murdered nor dead, at or before the time of this
Synod, will be clear, if we carefully observe the time of both these. The
Synod ended on the 30. of May. in the year when Crispus and Constantine the
younger were the third time Consuls. For so the corrected Acts do testify,
Actum in Traianas thermas 3. Calen. Iunij. These things were done on the 30. of
May, in that year. That 30. of May, in the third Consulship of Crispus, falls
out to be in the end of the 18. year of Constantines Empire, wanting only two
months of the end thereof. For Constantine began 8. K^lend. August. succ^ssit
Constantio Constantinus. Bar. an 306. nu 3. and Socr. lib. 1. cap. 1.
his Empire at York in Britain on the 25. of July, when Constantius Clorus,
and Galerius, were the sixth time Consuls, which was an. 306. From that
Consulship exclusive, unto the third Consulship of Crispus, (which was an. Chapter
324.) there being 18. Consulships, and so 18. years, it is certain, that from
the 25. day of July, in the sixth Consulship of Constantius Clorus, to the 25.
of July, in the third Consulship of Crispus, there are exactly 18. complete
years, and no more: whence it certainly follows, that if Crispus was
murdered before the 30. of May, in the 3. Consulship of Crispus, then must he
be dead in the end of the 18. year of Constantine the Emperor, seeing his 19.
year began not till the 25. day of July next following in that same third
Consulship of Crispus.

Let us now examine the time of the death of Crispus, and you shall see that he
neither died in the 18. nor yet in the 19. year of Constantines Empire, but in
the 20. Of it Sozomen thus writes Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 5.
; Crispus for whose murder Constantine is said to have sought expiation,
vigesimo anno imperij paterni mortuus est, died in the 20. year of his fathers
Empire. Baronius strives here against the stream, and sets this Gloss upon
the words of Sozomen, that he meant Crispus to have lived Bar. an. 324. nu. 7.
ad vigesimum vsque Imperij patris annum, unto the twentieth year of
Constantine: now s^ith he, Crispus peruenit ad 20. Constantini annum, sed
exclusive, attained or lived unto the 20. year of Constantine exclusiuely,
that is, he lived not in it, but died in the next year before it; namely, in
the nineteenth of Constantine. Truly the Cardinals Gloss is directly
contrary, both to the words and meaning of Sozomen. For Sozomen says not, as
the Cardinal with great fraud and falsehood alleges him, That Crispus came
unto the twentieth year of Constantine, (which words may admit the Cardinals
Interpretation) but Crispus (...), died and ended his life in the 20. year of
Constantine, and so lived in some part thereof. Unto Sozomen herein accord the
greek Fasti, where in the 20. year of Constantine, in the Consulship of
Paulinus and Iulianus, and after the Nicen Council was begun, the time of
Crispus death is expressly set down to have been (...), on the eighteenth day
of September, in that twentieth year; that is more then fifteen months,
after that thirtieth of May, on which the Roman Synod was ended, in the third
Consulship of Crispus-Cassiodore in his Tripertite History, affirms Crispus
vigesimo anno Imperij paterni defunctus est. Hist. Trip. lib. 1. cap. 6.
the same with Sozomen, and so does Nicephorus Crispus vigesimo Imperij eius
(Constantini) anno decessit. Nic. lib. 7. ca. 35.
and others; yea, Onuphrius Onuph. Com. in Fast.
affirms, he died not until the 7. Consulship of Constantine, which was the
year after the Nicene Council was ended.

That which misled Baronius, or rather whereby he labors to mislead others in
this cause, is a sentence in the Latin Chronicle Eusebius. chro* Lat.
of Eusebius, where it is said, That Crispus was most cruelly murdered by his
father Constantine, anno imperij sui nono, in the ninth year of Crispus being
Caesar. Now that ninth year of Crispus being Caesar, is the nineteenth year
of Constantines Empire, as Baronius Bar. ann. 315. nu. 1. and seq.
had proved. So the murder of Crispus will fall out in the nineteenth Hic plane
annus perspicue demonstratur esse eorundem Caesarum nonus quo dicuntur esse
necati. Bar. an 324 nu. 1. and 7.
year of Constantine.

Doubtless, the Cardinal was in some exstasie or passion, when he could not,
or would not see how directly this testimony does overthrow his whole purpose
touching this Roman Council, which he strives to defend. For it is certain,
that the 9. year of Crispus being Caesar, is the 19. year of Constant. seeing
Nazarius in his Panigyricke made in honor of the Caesar's, says Quintum
decimum annum Imperij princeps degit. Quinquenna^^a beaussimorum Caesarum
occupatos in gaudijs habe^t. Nazar. Rhet. in paneg. 3.
, That the 15. year of Constantine, was the 5. year of the Caesar's; which is
also evident by Eusebius: for in one place he expressly says Eus. in chro. an.
8. Constan. tini, iuxta vna^ editionem: an. (...). iuxta aliam
, That Crispus and Constantine the younger, were made Caesar's at once, and in
one year. And in another Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constable. cap. 40.
he expressly affirms, Constantine the younger to have been made Caesar decimo
paterni Imperij anno, in the tenth year of his Fathers Empire. So the 9. year
of Crispus being Caesar, falling out in the 19. year of Constantines Empire,
could not begin till the 25. of July, in that year when Crispus was third time
Consul; seeing on that day, in that year, began the 19. year of his fathers
Empire. Wherefore seeing both that Latin Chronicle of Eusebius testifies, and
Baronius confesses that Crispus was murdered in that ninth year, it
ineuitably ensues, that he was alive two months after the Roman Synod was
ended, which was on the 30. of May in that same year. So inconsiderate was the
Cardinal in producing this testimony as his chiefest proof, that by it he
has demonstrated the murder of Crispus, neither to have been any occasion of
Constantines baptism, or of his holding this Roman Synod; neither so much as
to have happened before, but two months after the Synod was ended.

Besides, that Latin Chronicle of Eusebius is many ways untrue, and such as
the Cardinal even in these times of Crispus rejects. In that Eusebius, it is
said that Crispus was made Caesar in the eighth year of Constantine: Erroris
arguitur Bar. an. 315. nu. 3.
, says the Cardinal, Eusebius is in this point erroneous: why may not another
give the like censure of the last year of Crispus, and say, Erroris arguitur,
Eusebius erred, in saying Crispus died in the 9. year of his being Caesar?
Again, the ninth year of Crispus being Caesar, and his murder, are both set
down in Eusebius to be in the twentieth year of Constantine: of this the
Cardinal says, Bar. 324. nu. 1.
Perperam positus est, This year is placed amiss in Eusebius. May not another
say as justly, the ninth year of Crispus is perperam positus, set down amiss
in Eusebius, to be the year when he was murdered? Has Baronius a privilege
above others to play the Critic with Eusebius?

Last of al, there is more then a vehement and strong suspicion, that all this
that Baronius cites out of the Latin Chronicle of Eusebius (that Crispus was
murdered in his ninth year) is but some addition that has crept into the
text, for (as after you shall see) neither did Euagrius nor Sozomen know of any
such thing in Eusebius: and to this day, in the Greek Eusebius there is
nothing at all, either touching the murder of Crispus, or touching the time of
his death. And the like corruption of Eusebius his chronicle in other places,
may easily be observed; as to go no further, in the very next year before
this, that is, in the 18. or, as Scaligers edition accounts it, the
seventeenth year of Constantine, in the Latin Eusebius there is this set
down, that Constantine against right and contrary to his oath put Licinius to
death at Thessalonica. This is out of doubt an addition thrust in by some, who
finding that calumny against Constantine, set down in Zosimus (as it is Zosim.
lib. 2. pa. 31. neque multo post violata iurisiurandi religione laqueo vitam
^iad^^^^.
most maliciously) thought good to insert it also into the Latin Chronicle of
Eusebius; whereas neither it is in the Greek, neither is it true that
Constantine brake his oath or promise therein with Licinius, for his promise of
life was conditional, as Socrates Licinius amicitiam simulate cum eo iungere,
se astringere iu^a^^ento, nunqua^ quicquam se moli^u^um in quo aliqua
tyrannidis significatio existe^^t. Atque certe non iurauit solum sed etiam
peieraui^. etc. Constantinus vb^id intellexit eum occidi iussit. Socrat. l^b.
1. ca. 2.
expressly shows, and Licinius quickly violated the condition by attempting a
new rebellion. And Eusebius in his other books is so far from imputing any
blame or blemish to Constantine touching that action, that he expressly says
Eus lib. 2. de vita Con. c. 18.
of Licinius, That he suffered, meritas iustasque poenas, just and deserved
punishment, which had it been effected by the perjury of Constantine had
certainly been unjust.

But enough of this testimony out of Eusebius Latin Chronicle, which besides
this suspicion, so many ways does contradict the Cardinals own assertion. So
that still it remains sure, that supposing Crispus to have been murdered,
yet his murder must fall out after the nineteenth year of Constantine begun,
as we have proved, and then the Roman Council which was ended before that
time, is certainly convicted to be a counterfeit.

But what shall be said (to add this in the last place touching Crispus) if
Crispus was not at all murdered by Constantine? what then will become of the
seeking for expiation, or of baptism to wash away that sin: of this Roman
Council, of the donation of Constantine? all the other must needs be accounted
fables if that which is the supposed occasion and foundation of them all be
fabulous. For the trial of this doubt, hear first what Sozomen says, I am
not ignorant, says he Sozom. lib. 1 ca. 5.
, that Constantine is reported by heathen writers to have murdered diverse
near of blood unto him, and by name his own son Crispus: for which fact
afterward being sorry, he sought expiation of the heathens; but not obtaining
it, he began to be in love with christian religion, and so became a christian.
Truly this seems to me to be fained by those who slander christian religion:
So Sozomen. And the very same does Cassiodore Trip. hist. Cassiod. lib. 1. ca.
6.
in his tripartite history set down.

Hear again what Euagrius says professedly against Zosimus the narrator of
this murder and cruelty. Zosimus, says he Euag. lib. 3. ca. 40.
, is one of those who are addicted to the nefarious and execrable religion of
the heathen, and therefore he is inflamed with spite against Constantine
because he was the first Emperor who forsaking that detestable superstition,
embraced Christianity. Again, Infinitis maledictis pium and magnificum
Constantinum lacerat; he does with infinite calumnies disgrace the holy Emperor
Constantine. For he reports that he murdered his own son Crispus, and his
wife Fausta; and when he could not by his own heathen priests be expiated from
these crimes, then forsaking his ancient religion he turned Christian. Quod
autem ista omnino falsa sunt, mox ostendam: But that these things are utterly
false I shall straight declare. And a little Ca. 41.
after he refutes that slander of Zosimus concerning Crispus, not only by other
authors and reasons, but even by Eusebius who lived and was co^uersant both
with Constable. and Crispus Which I therefore mention not only to reprove that
calumny of Zosimus, but to declare how justly the Latin Chronicle of Eusebius
is to be suspected in this matter, seeing in it this cruel murder is expressly
imputed to Constantine: whereas Euagrius by the undoubted testimonies of
Eusebius, proves the falsehood of that narration. Again, seeing both Euagrius
and Sozomen reprove this as a calumny devised by the heathen, and set out by
Zosimus; who can think that they would not much rather have reproved it in
Eusebius, had he expressed the same, as in that Latin Chronicle it is? Or why
should Euagrius reprove Zosimus because he reported that which he heard, living
long after, in the time of Honorius: if Eusebius who lived and conuersed with
Crispus had so expressly delivered the same?

Hear Nicephorus: I know, says he Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 35.
, what crimes the Grecians do impute to Constantine, per sycophantiam and
calumnias, by slanders and calumnies; and then reciting this heathenish
narration of the murder of Crispus, and after it embracing the Christian
religion, he adds: Haec manifesta figmenta, these are manifest fictions, by
which they do traduce the faith and piety of Christians, veluti per
comaediam, making as it were a play or poetical comedy thereof: Crispus enim
vigesimo imperii eius anno decessit, for Crispus (for the murdering of whom
they say Constantine fought expiation in his nineteenth year) died in the
twentieth year of Constantine. So Nicephorus. Hear lastly their own
Augustinus Steuchus Steuch. lib. 2. de donat. Constan. cont. La^. Val p. 156
, who with great scorn reiects the authority of Jerome, and says, he speaks
untruly of Constantine, and he gives this as one reason, because he writes
that Crispus was cruelly murdered by him.

It is true indeed that many writers do mention this murder as committed by
Constantine; but the first and most ancient in whom I find it set down, is
Zosimus, who lived about the year 400. after Christ, who extremely hating the
christian religion* in all places where he can pick any occasion, is desirous
to publish any calumny against the professors thereof, especially against
Constantine, as Euagrius truly observed: from him it is like that Orosius,
Sidonius and others living in that age or near hand, first took it, and from
them afterward many received it, clausis oculis, not examining the truth or
circumstances of the narration. But seeing both Euagrius and Sozomen diligently
sifted and examined the truth of that matter, and found it to be but an
heathnish calumny (which the circumstance also of time does manifest) to
disgrace the honor of that most famous Emperor: there is more credit and
trust herein to be given to them, then to many other, who without trial
relate the same as they found it repeated out of Zosimus, of such as took it
from Zosimus. And thus much of this circumstance of time when this Council was
held, to wit after Constantines murdering of Crispus in the year when Crispus
was third time Consul, and with him Constantinus Augustus, and this was in
truh never.

CHAP. V.
The fifth reason proving that the second Roman Synod is a forgerie, taken
from the leprosy of Constantine.
ANother circumstance discovering this counterfeit Council, is, that it was
held for a congratulation after Constantine was purged from his leprosy, as
the Acts Eodem tempore cum multi nobiles gauderent, quod Constantinus
baptizatus a Siluestro, and mundatus ^uisset a lepra, pro beneficio quod
accepit, etc. Conc. To. 2. ca. 1. and Bin. Notis in illud Conc.
do express. And this also was never. For that whole narration touching the
leprosy of Constantine, though it be approved not only by Baronius Bar. an.
324. nu. 33. 36. 42. and alibi.
, by Binius Bin. notis in Constant. donat.. Ipse enim.
, by their Angelical Aquin. p. 3. q. 69. art. 8.
Doctor, by the Acts Act. Siluest. apud Baron. loco citato. nu 33.
of Siluester, and by the Charter Donat. Constat. apud Bin. pa. 296.
of Constantines donation, but even by Pope Adrian Hadrian. 1. Epistola prima
qu^e citatur in Conc. Nic. 2. Act secunda, ibique probatur. pa. 313.
, by the second Nicene Council, and appointed in their reformed Breuiarie
Breu. Romans in fest. Siluest.
for a parcel of a public lesson to be read in the Church, yet is it a very
Legendary fable and even an incredible untruth.

Of it their own Canus says Leprae Constantinianae testis grauis and probatus
ex ^eteribus nemo est. Canu. Loc Theol. lib. 11. cap. 5.. Quod deinde: and,
scriptores omnes veteres (de hac lepra Constantini) tacuerunt, non o^^fluri
s^iciuissent, sci^a^ omnino rem si fuisset. ibidem.
, There is no ancient writer who is a grave and allowed witness that
mentions this leprosy of Constantine. And again, that Constantine was sick
of a leprosy, apud idoneos authors nusquam legi, I no where read it in any
author who is a grave, worthy or fit witness thereof. So Canus. And yet he
read it in the Roman Council, in Pope Hadrian, among the Acts of the second
Nicen Council, in the Acts of Siluester, in the Roman Breuiarie, in the
donation of Constantine, in Saint Thomas, in all these it is read, and most of
them Canus mentions. So by Canus own confession none of all these is either
a grave, and allowed, or a fit witness of this matter; that is to say, none of
them all, neither they all together are such as may be credited: Which is a
very hard censure, specially of this Roman Synod, of Pope Adrian, of the
second Nicen Council, and of the Breuiarie.

Of the same writes Platina Plat. in vit ^ Marci. 1.
in this manner: That Constantine fell into a leprosy, as is vulgarly
reported, that he was cleansed thereof by Baptism; that he should have been
washed in infants blood as the fable is, Nullo modo credo, I believe none of
these in any sort; and he gives this reason, for that, hac de re a nullo
scriptorum fit mentio, there is no mention hereof in any (faithful) writers,
neither heathen nor Christian. Orosius would not have passed over this, nor
Eutropius, nor those who most diligently have written the Acts of Constantine.
Thus Platina: and the very same says Nauclerus Nau in annum Chr. 314.
. Now if in no ancient or faithful writer there be mention thereof, then out
of question this Roman Synod is neither ancient nor faithful: the donation of
Constable. is neither ancient nor faithful: the second Nicene Synod neither
ancient nor faithful: the acts of Siluester are neither ancient nor faithful:
the Epistle of Pope Hadrian neither ancient nor faithful: for in all these
this fable is expressly set down and related. To the very like effect says
Caietan Caiet. Annot in p. 3. Aqu. q. 69. art. 8.
, Nuliius authoritate constat: it appears by the authority of none (to wit,
who are worthy of credit) that Constantine fell into a leprosy and was purged
thereof by baptism. And he adds three reasons of his saying; First, because
the Acts of Siluester, (those are they which Baronius magnifieth) are
uncertain. Secondly, because no good writer either heathen or christian reports
this. Thirdly, because it is repugnant to the authority of Saint Ambrose. Thus
Caietane.

This might be sufficient for such as are not addicted to their wilful errors:
but because Baronius and Binius, and their applauders are men of another
temper, let us now consider whether there be either likelihood or possibility
in this narration. There are two causes alleged why God thus smit Constantine
with a leprosy: the one his cruelty Habent Acta Siluestri (quae ipse approbat
and sequitur illo an. nu. 31.) Constantinum (...) admissa flagitia, lepr^
percussum, etc. Bar. an 324. nu. 33. Inter ^a flagitia censet Crispi alioruque
occisionem an. eod. nu. 28. and saepe alibi.
and unnatural tyranny in murdering Crispus, Fausta, Licinius, and others.
But that this possibly could be no cause thereof (especially in that nineteenth
year of Constantine wherein he is supposed to have been a leaper) is evident
by that which before was declared; seeing Crispus was living in the twentieth
year of Constantine, and seeing this was but a malicious calumny and
sycophancy of Zosimus and other heathens: so for that cause he could not be a
leaper.

The other supposed cause (which now we are to examine) was Constantines
persecuting of the Church, and his following of Heathenish Idolatries, and
superstition, until this time of his leprosy, and murder of Crispus, from
which by baptism he was cured. Of this Baronius thus writes Bar. an. 324. nu.
33.
, The Acts of Syluester (for the truth and credit whereof he earnestly An.
eod. nu. 31. and seq:
labors) declare Constantinum adhuc patrita sectantem, persecutionem aduersus
Ecclesiam excitasse, That Constantine until this time following the Heathenish
Religion of his fathers, did raise persecution against the Church; for which
crimes he was smitten with a leprosy. Thus Baronius; affirming Constantine
even adhuc* till that time of his leprosy, and till he had killed Crispus, to
have been an Idolater and embracer of Heathen superstition. Of it their Roman
Breuiarie thus Breu. Rom* in Festo S. Siluest.
says; Constantine being cured of his leprosy by baptism, was inflamed, ad
tuendam and propagand^m, both to maintain and propagate the Christian
Religion, giving license and power to Christians to build public Churches,
Quod ante negatum est, which till then, was not permitted unto them. The
Heathen Writers do relate this at large. Sozomen Zo^om. (...). 1. cap. ^.
reports how they write, That Constantine when he could not obtain of his
Heathenish Southsayers purgation from his crimes, by chance happened to meet
with some Bishops, and they promising to him expiation for his sins, caepisse
illum, illorum religionem in admiratione habere and fiera Christianum: That he
then began to be in love with Christian religion, and to be a Christian
himself, and draw his subjects to Christianity. Zosimus Zo^^m. (...) 2. pa.
^1.
most clearly relates this, saying; That Constantine until he fell into
those crimes of murder of Crispus, Fausta, and others, Patritis adhuc sacris
vtebatur, embraced and followed his heathenish religion. And that When the
Egyptian (Hosius) being first admitted to his conference, persuaded him to be a
Christian, Tum patrita missa facere. Then he forsook or left his Heathenish
Religion, Ad e^que abolenda se conuertit; And turned himself to abolish it. So
Zosimus. Baronius having related Bar. an. 324. nu. 17. and 27.
this and some other like passages out of Zosimus, approves them for true, and
says Ibid. nu. 28.
; These things being confirmed, specially by the testimony of Heathen Writers,
atque exacta insuper adhibita examinatione probata, certa veraque cognita, etc.
Are known to be approved, certain and true by exact examination. So he;
teaching it with Zosimus, and other Heathens, to be not only true, but
certain, that Constantine till he fell into these crimes, and into this
leprosy caused by them, had been not only an embracer of Paganism and
Heathenish Idolatries, but a persecuter also of the Church: and that Interea
Bar. an. eod. nu. 33.
fuisse ob admissa flagitia lepra percussum, That while he was in this state,
for those crimes of murder and persecution, he was smitten with leprosy.

Truly, they could not have devised a more false and palpable slander to
dishonor the religious Emperor: and though the heathen writers may be winked
at, yet Baronius approving their malicious untruths for known and certain
truths, is unpardonable. Neither was Constantine a persecuter, neither did he
at that time follow heathenish Idolatries and superstitions; neither was he
then, but many years before converted and become, and so continued a zealous
professor and defender also of the true Christian faith. Of all which there are
every where so many and so evident demonstrations, that I may truly say, Inopem
me copia fecit.

Among many millions of testimonies, let us consider a few about that time,
when he made wars and overcame Licinius. Those wars began about his 11. year,
and there was a full conquest of Licinius, and end of the wars against him, in
the 12. year of Constantine, as appears evidently by Constantines Edict
Cuius est mentio, l. 1. De veteranis, Cod. Theod.
, (mentioning both his victory Ex die 5. Nonar. Iuliarum cum p^^ma per Thraciam
victoria vniuerso orbi illuxit. Ibid.
at Thrace, obtained the year before, and his dismission of his soldiers
after the end of those wars at Nicomedia) bearing date the 10. of April, when
Licinius was fifth time Consul, and Crispus his Colleague; which was for the
first part of their Consulship in the 12. and after the 24. of July, in the 13.
year of Constantine.

That Constantine at this time had utterly forsaken Paganism, and was now an
earnest protector of the Church of Christ, against the cruel persecution of
Licinius: besides other, that one memorable speech of Licinius is a most
evident witness, which he made to his soldiers in a grove, where they had
many Images of their Gods erected, to which they set up burning tapers, and wax
candles, and offered sacrifice. Thus said Eusebius lib. 2. de vit^ Constable. ca. 5.
Licinius, Dij isti sunt^pasrij, These are the Gods of our Fathers, which from
antiquity we have received of our ancestors to be worshipped, and which we do
religiously honor. But this Constantine who is to fight against us, patrijs
institutis violatis, having violated the ordinances of his fathers, and being
blinded with error, worshippeth a strange God, et turpi istius insigni, and
with that shameful ensign of his God (he meant the Cross) he greatly
disgraceth his army: and in confidence of this God he comes into the field, not
only against us, but much more, contra ipsos Deos, quorum cultum vt proditor
deseruit, against the Gods themselves, whose worship he as a Traitor has
forsaken. Thus and much more to this purpose said Licinius. Was Constantine
think you a persecutor of Christians at this time* who fought against Licinius
for Licinius persecutionem contra Christianos iam pridem ex^^ctam de integro
exuscitauit. Eusebius. lib. 2. de vit. Constable. cap. 1.
persecuting them? Was he an Idolater or worshipper of heathen Gods, of whom
Licinius complains, that he came to fight against those their ancient Gods?

See again how Constantine prepared himself to the battle, He then
especially ( says Eusebius Precibus si vn^^^am alias, ian^^sibi opus
intelligens, dei sollicitare sacerdotes, etc. Eus. lib. eod. ca. 4.
) gave himself unto prayers, he called the Bishops, and solicited them not to
depart from him, but to be ever at hand: whom he kept about him, tanquam
animae custodes, as the Watchmen and guardians of his soul; he consecrated
all Ibid cap. 12. 13. 14.
the vacant time he had to pour out his prayers to Christ his Savior: he made
more account of God, then of his life, Illius consilijs omnia transigere, he
did nothing but with the direction of Gods counsel: are these tokens of one
as yet not converted? of a persecutor of Christians?

After the victory, as soon as he had now obtained the so^e government of the
Empire, with what care, piety, and zeal, he advanced the Christian faith, all
Histories are records, his imperial Edicts, the whole Empire, the whole world
is a witness. In his foureteenth year, the Greek Fasti say Epit. Chro. (...)
an. 14. Constantini.
, The heavenly light of our Savior Christ shined through the whole world unto
the Churches, Tyrants every where being dead, and their houses rooted out. The
very like does Eusebius Eus lib ^. ca. 19. and 23.
witness. The wickedmen (to wit, persecutors) being now destroyed and rooted
out, the world was illustrated as with clear beams of the Sun, and the
Emperor, Deum omnibus praedicare coepit, began to publish the true God to all
in his Empire. In his 14. year, says Cedrenus Ced. in hist.
, When the whole Empire was now come to Constantine alone, Omnes suas
cogitationes ad sacras res conuertit, He converted all his thoughts to holy
matters, he builded Churches, and magnificently enriched the same: he made
diverse laws also, one that such Temples as had been consecrated to Idols,
should be dedicated to Christ and his service. Another, that only Christians
should go to the wars, that they only should bear rule both in time of peace
and war. A third, that he who continued in the worship of the false Gods,
capite plectatur, should be put to death. So Cedrenus. The like says Sozomen
Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 8.
, When Constantine had now got the sole Id vero obtinuit devicto Licinio, quod
ante 14 annu^ factum fuisse ex l. 1. De veteranis ante ^^tata, liquet.
Empire, by a public Edict he commanded his subjects, vti religionem
Christianam colerent* That they should embrace the Christian religion. And when
he had by his Edict commanded this and much more, whereby he was persuaded
that his Subjects, ad veram religionem impelli, might be compelled to the true
Religion, he abrogated all the Acts and Decrees of persecutors made against
Christians; he appointed throughout his Empire such Governors as were
Christians, interdicerentque omnibus, and they forbad all, either to erect
Statues, to offer to Idols, or Festa gentilitia celebrare, To observe* their
Heathenish celebrities; he commanded that on the Lords day they should abstain
from judgment or doing any work but should consecrate that day to call upon
God. So Sozomen.

The very Imperial Edicts are verbatim recorded in Eusebius Eus. in vita Constable.
lib 2. ca. 24. ad 44. and a ca. 47. ad 60.
, wherein the several branches of those Laws are set down; two or three of
them were these. One, whereby Lib. eod. ca. 44. 45.
he forbad those detestable and heathenish Idolatries, which were anciently
used in every city or country; the other, Qu^ iussit templa exaedificari,
whereby he commanded that Churches should be builded, and that they should
spare for no cost therein, but that they should receive moneys out of the
Emperors treasury. A third, was touching restitution Ibid. ca. 35. and 39.
to be made to the Church, of whatsoever in time of persecution had been taken
from it. If the public ^reasury possess any such goods, it shall not be
free to retain them, yea, let no man dare to speak ought, Contra sanctas Dei
Ecclesias, against the holy Churches; and what he has by injury for a time
possessed, ea Ecclesiis suis iure restituat, Let him restore that to the
Church, as in right he ought. The like Edict (besides many other) for Immunity
L. ^^de Episcopis, Ecclesijs and Clericis ^od. Theod. Qui diuino cultui
ministeria impendunt, ab omnibus omnino muneribus excusentur, ne sacrilego
^^ore quorund^m a (...) obsequijs anocentur.
of the Clergy, and that no burdens should be imposed upon them, is extant
in the Code, and was published in November, in his fifth Consulship, and that
was in the beginning of his foureteenth year.

Nor do I mention these decrees about his 13. or 14. year, as if Constantine
had then first of all forsaken and rejected the heathenish superstitions, and
embraced the profession of the Christian faith, for he had done that long
before. His law Ibid. l. 1.
is yet extant, wherein he mentions, Priuilegia indulta, his privileges which
he had before granted to the Cleargic; contrary to which, some heretics did
molest them. but the Emperor commands that his officers should see such
injuries redressed and hindered. This Edict was set forth in October, when
himself was the 3. time, and with him Licinius Consul, which was in the
beginning of his eight year: and yet before that, he had granted privileges
unto them. So clear it is, that long before his 13. much more before his 19.
year, he was a Defender of the Catholic faith. Even from his Helena
Constantinum filiu ad pi^tatem a puero instituit, ait Bar. an. 315. nu. 12.
p^er Christianismum co^plexus est. Niceph lib 7. ca. 18.
infancy he ever bare a loving affection to Christian religion, which both
Constantius Clorus his father, and Helena his mother, had before professed: but
after he had once been confirmed in the same, by those two visions, which in
the sixth or seventh year Max^ntius a Constantino superatus, occiditur anno
Constantini sexto. Eusebius. in Chron. ad an. 7 Constant. and in alijs eiusde^
editionibus Latinis ad annum 6. Constable. quomodo and in Graeca Eusebian. Chron.
edit. ponitur.
of his Empire, (when he made war against Maxentius, and overcame him) was
manifested unto him, the one of Christ's name De quo mentio est Crucis nomine in
Fast. Graecis ad an. 6 Constable. and in Eusebius lib. 1. de vita Constable. ca. 22. and
25. Vbi signum illud, non Crucem fuisse, sed duo prima nominis Christi eleme^.
^aliquido demonstrat. (...) and (...) appearing in the air, in the day time,
somewhat like a Cross (for which cause it is usually so called:) the other of
Christ
Ibid. ca. 23.
himself in the night, manifesting himself unto him; after that (as Eusebius
Ibid. ca. 26
shows) he set down with himself, That he would worship no God, but the God
of Christians: he called the Bishops unto him, and was instructed by them;
cultu Ibid. ca. 35.
et obserua^tia honorifice amplecti, he entertained them with all love,
reverence and honor, and set Illos suae mensae participes effecit.
them at his own table, whither soever he went, he had them with him, he
decreed Ibid. ca. 26.
, to bend his whole mind to the reading of the Scriptures: in token of his
public profession of Christ, he carried the first letters Ibid ca. 25. in
corona salutaris appellationis seruatoris nota ins^r^pta, duobus solum expressa
elementis, (...) and (...), quae totum Christi nomen perspicue significarunt.
of Christ's name (usually, but not fitly nor rightly called the Cross) in his
helmet, in his ensigns, in his Diadem, and at his Ad pectus vsque continue
descriptum continuit.
breast; he erected Ibid. an 33.
a monument thereof in the city. After his victory over Maxentius, in the
beginning of his seventh year, he writ letters to Cecilianus Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 10. ca. 6.
then Bishop of Carthage* signifying his Bountiful gifts to the Ministers
legitimae et sanctissimae catholicae religionis, of the true and most holy
Catholic religion: to Anulinus Ibid. ca. 5.
about The liberties and immunities which he granted to the Clergy: after
that to Pope Meltiades Ibid.
, and Crescus B. of Siracuse, wherein he calls the Christian Profession, the
most holy religion: he calls Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 5.
them to a Council, himself was present among them at Arles, yea, (as
Eusebius Eus lib. 1. devit. Constable. ca. 37.
says) he was, tanquam communis Episcopus a Deo constitutus: as a common or
general Bishop to the Church; and time would fail to recount the thousand
part of those evidences, whereby is demonstrated, that long before his 19.
year he had both in his own practice, and by public laws quite abandoned
the Heathen worship of the Gods, and had showed himself not only a professor
of Christianity, but a protector of Christians, and a nursing father unto the
Church.

By these do most clearly appear the manifold untruths of that legendarie
tale touching the leprosy of Constantine, and what trust is to be given to the
approuers and abetters thereof. First, that Constantine til that 19. year of
his reign, wherein he is said to have murdered Crispus; did follow the
heathenish worship of the gods, and their superstition, is a most manifest
untruth. This does Zosimus Patritis adhuc sacris vtebatur, and hoc consilio
(Hosij) impulsus ad eiusmodi abolenda se conuertit. Zosim. lib. 2. pa. (...).
teach, Pope Adrian ^u autem in hac part ^u^^fica te vt relicta omni
superstitione idolorum etc. Had. 1. Epist. 1.
the 1. the 2. Nicen Act. 2. vbi Hadriani Epistola recitatur and approbatur, p.
309. and 313.
Synod, the Author Donat. Con. vbi idem recitatur quod ab Hadriano.
of the donation of Constantine approve, and Binius Bin. Notis in Donat.
Constant.. Ipse enim. and in Nota marginali ad Epist. Had. in Conc. Nicen 2.
Act. 2. p. 309
seals up this and the rest that follow, with this note, Hanc totam historiam
Hadrianus, the Pope recites this whole story, and by the authority of this
edict does confirm it.

2 That till then, when Siluester came unto Constantine to baptize him, he knew
not whether Peter and Paul were Gods or Apostles of Christ, is a most palpable
untruth: yet this does Pope Adrian Quae siuit Imperator, qua lesnam
arbitraretur Deos esse Petium and Paulum. Hadr. and Conc. Nic. and Donat. Con
and Bin. locis citatis.
, the second Nicene Council, the Author of Constantines donation approve, and
Binius seals it with his former note: This story is confirmed by the authority
of Pope Hadrian.

3 That Constantine was not converted to Christianity till this time, and this
occasion of his murder and leprosy, and in that nineteenth year, is an
vnexscusable untruth. This does the narration of Zosimus Locis citatis.
and all the former imply; and Pope Adrian more plainly expresses it, saying
Had. Epist* cit.
: that this fell out touching the leprosy of Constantine, and cure thereof, Cum
ad fide^ conuerteretur pius Imperator, when the conversion of the holy Emperor
Constantine was wrought: and the like does their Breuiarie Breu in festo S
Siluest.
, where Peter and Paul commanded him, that if he would be delivered from his
leprosy, after that he was baptized by Siluester, he should command
throughout his Empire, temples to be built after the Christian manner, which
till then had not been permitted; and taking away the images of vain gods, he
should worship the only true God. And Baronius Haec exacta, adhibita
examinatione probata, certa veraque cognita. Bar. an. 324; nu. 28.
approues the narration of Zosimus for true and certain.

4 That Constantine was at that time a persecutor of Christians, is a most
malicious untruth, yet this does the writer Siluester persequutiones tuas
fugiens. Donat. Con.
of Constantines donation affirm: Hadrian the Pope approues Had. and Con: Nic.
locis citatis.
and confirms the same: the second Nicen fathers applaude it, Anastasius Cuius
persequutionem sugiens. Anast. in vita Siluest.
records it, Baronius Plane animo exhorrescit, qui audit ipsum Constantinum
esse persequutu^ Ecclesiam. Bar. an. 324. nu. 34. and, tempora plane^ Neroniana
erant. ibid. nu. 35.
strives to maintain it, and Binius seals it up with his former saying Bin.
loco cit. and, Siluestri and Constantini historia confirmata etiam literis and
authoritate Adriani Papae. Bin. No. marg. ad Epist. 1. Hadr. loco citato.
, This whole history is recited and confirmed by Pope Adrians authority.

5 That Pope Siluester fled from the city, and hid himself with his Clergy in
dens and caves, or mountains, by reason of Constantines persecuting of
Christians, is another untruth. How could they flee that which was not? yet is
this recorded by Anastasius Anast. in vita Siluest. ^
, approved by the author of the Donation Locis citatis apud omnes.
, by Pope Hadrian, by the second Nicen fathers, by Baronius, and sealed up by
Binius as a truth confirmed by the Popes authority.

6 That Constantine by occasion of this persecution was smitten of God with a
leprosy, is a mere fiction, subl^ta causa tollitur effectus. Seeing the
causes of this leprosy are fained, the effect flowing from them, can have no
better realitie: yet is this leprosy recorded by Anastasius Quem curauit
dominus a ^^pra Anast. in ^ita Siluest.
, approved Locis ^itatis, ab omnibus illis approbatur.
as a truth by the author of the Donation; by Pope Hadrian, the 2. Nicen
fathers, by their Breui^rie, defended by Baronius, who says Ne quid de hoc
reliquum sit quod fidem lectoris retardare possit. Bar. an. 324. nu. 36.
, He would have nothing remain which should stay the Reader from believing
it, and it is sealed up as a confirmed truth by Binius Locis citatis.
.

7 Constantines seeking to the heathenish Priests, his preparation of a bath of
infants blood, the information of the Spanish Egyptian (that is, of Hosius)
instructing him then first of all touching the efficacy of Christian religion,
his vision of Peter and Paul, his sending for Siluerster to be baptized by him,
his enquiring for the Images of Peter and Paul, and Siluesters showing them
unto him; his baptizme upon this occasion his deliverance from his leprosy
immediately upon that baptizme, his Donation after that deliverance: these are
so many appendices and latchets hanging upon the maine lie of his leprosy: one
great or mother untruth, begets an 100. Yet are these by the former authors
Locis citatis
approved, applauded, and as Binius tells us, sealed with the Popes confirmation.

8 By this may be perceived what regard of truth the second Nicen Council had,
and what worthy and authentical reasons they alleged for their adoration of
Images. This letter of Pope Adrian was read and applauded Dicat nobis beatiss.
patriarcha Tharasius, consentitne literis sanctiss Papae veteris Romae, an
minus. Tharasius respo^dit, vim literarum lectarum confirm amus, etc. Sancta
Synodus dixit, vniuersa sancta Synodus sic credu, sic docet and iterum, sancta
Synodus dixit, sequimur recipimus and probamus literas sanctis. papae. Cone.
Nic. 2. Act. 2. p. 313
therein as a special testimony, seeing the Images of Peter and Paul had been
so carefully kept Had. Epist. 1. to. 3. pa. 255. b
, and were then so evidently demonstrated to Constantine when he was in his
leprosy: and Baronius Bar. an. 324. nu. 40.
tells us, that the very same table or picture which was showed then to
Constantine, is yet in Saint Peter's Church in the Vaticane at Rome to be
seen. Now seeing this is a very Chymerical fiction; when the Pope himself
was glad to urge such base forged and indeed incredible legendarytales, for
the worshipping of images, the rest of the Synod you may be sure, would take
heart to tread in his steps, and so they did very mannerly; for that whole
Council is fraught with such rales, and out of the credit of them, was decreed
an Anethema to all that deny adoration of images. Of the like writings alleged
in that Council, I shall perhaps have occasion elsewhere to entreat: by the
way let me here observe touching this of Constantine and Siluester, that
whereas that Nicen assembly esteemed it a principal reason for the honoring
of Images, it is, if it be truly weighed, a most manifest demonstration, that
in the primitive ages, Images were neither adored, nor yet set up in Christian
Churches. Constantine as before I showed, had been not only a professor of the
Christian faith, but a public defender and protector of it, and of
Catholics against Heretics, for more then ten whole years before he fell
into his supposed leprosie^, as his law before mentioned dated in his eight
year is an irrefragable witness. About his thirteenth, at most fourteenth
year, he set out those other laws for reedifying and repairing of Churches
and Oratories, for the speedy effecting whereof he was so religiously careful,
that he writ to Eusebius Eus. de vita Constable. l. 2. c. 45
(and the same in effect to other Bishops.) Quibuscunque Ecclesiis, what
churches soever either you are set over, or other Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, vbicunque terrarum any where, you are all to see that those buildings
be diligently looked unto, so that either those churches which remain may be
repaired and enlarged, or where need is new may be builded: and what is
needful for that work call for of the Governors of Provinces, to whom I have
given in charge, vt omni studio and propensione animi subministrent, that they
give those things to you with all readiness and alacrity: and that this was
accordingly performed Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 10 hist. c. 2. 3. 4.
witnesses. Now when there were so many magnificent Churches and Oratories
builded and beautified, specially in the chief cities; either those Images of
Peter and Paul and the like, were not set up; or if they were, Constantine in
all that time either came into none of those Churches and Oratories, or at
least adored not, no nor saw those Images. And truly I shall never be induced
to think that Constantine for six or ten years together was a Recusant, and
came not at the Church of Christians, of whose zeal in praying, love to the
word of God, and to the preachers thereof, there are so many undoubted
testimonies. Again, that he should come to those Churches (as most certainly
he did) had the Apostles Images bin then set up and adored by Christians, his
irreligion and negligence had been without excuse, who in all those years gave
no adoration to the two chief Apostles, neither at Rome where he was often,
nor at Sirmium, nor at Millaine, nor in any other place of his Empire; nay that
he did not so much as see and know the Images of those two Apostles, till
Siluester at this time of his leprosy, in his ninetenth year, showed them
unto him, it is hereby evident, that Images were in those days neither adored
nor set up in their Churches and Oratories: But this by the way touching the
worth and worthy proofs of that second Nicen Sinod.

9 By this may further be perceived what true, holy and religious lessons the
Roman Church commends, and practices in their public Liturgy, one of which
in their Breuiarie contains the sum of this poetical fable touching the
leprosy of Constantine and the cure of it, by Siluesters baptizing, yea the
Breuiary adds one untruth, which neither in Hadrian, nor in the Donation of
Constantine, nor Baronius, nor Binius is observed; and that is, That
Constantine being thus cured, gave liberty unto Christians publicly to build
Churches, quod ante negatum erat, which before this time was not permitted^ an
untruth easy to be refuted, by many other testimonies, but those which I even
now cited out of the Emperors letters, commanding the Bishops every where to
have care diligently to build Sic ergo cum Maximinus e medio sublatus esset,
ecclesiae per gratiam omnipotentis dei ex^^sis fundamentis renouabantur and
erigebantur. Eusebius. l. 9. hist. c. 11. and. l. 10. ca. 3. la^ Maximinus (post
cuius obitu^ haec facta su^t) obijt an. co^stantini 6. vt ait Eusebius. in chron.
sed anno 9. vt ait Bar. an. 314. nu. 8.
and repair their Churches, and furnishing them with all needful things for
that work: the many Panegyrickes which the Bishops used at the dedication of
their Churches and Oratories (some of which Eusebius Eus lib. 10, hist* ca. 4.
recites) is so abundant to refute the lying Breuiary, that I shall not need
to add more thereunto, This only, I say, that they had need (and good reason)
to have their Liturgy in an unknown tongue, least the people understanding
what legendary fables and untruths they read instead of Gods word; should
abhor, as justly they ought, that service of God, which is stuffed with so
many untruths.

Lastly, we see by this, that the Roman Synod under Siluester, whereof we
do entreat, is nothing else but a base, even a sottish forgery, the author
whereof could devise no other occasion, then a thanksgiving after Constantine
was delivered from his leprosy, who never was touched or affected with that
leprosy. I say no more, but seeing the Council it self is witness (and
Baronius and Binius defend it therein) that it was held after Constantine was
purged of that leprosy: and seeing he never was purged, nor needed any
purging or clensing thereof, it ineuitably follows by the testimony of the
Council it self, that there never was any such Roman Council, as this is
described to have been. So much of the second circumstance, whereby this
Council is discovered, namely the leprosy of Constantine.

CHAP. VI.
The sixth reason proouing the second Roman Synod, to be a forgerie, taken
from the Baptism of Constantine by Pope Siluester.
A Third circumstance to discover the same, is, that it was held after
Constantine was baptized by Siluester, as the acts Eodem tempore cu^ multi
nobiles gauderent quod Co^stantinus baptizatus a Siluestro esset, etc. Conc.
Romans 2, ca 1*
do expressly affirm; and this was also never. For the occasion of that
baptizing by Syluester, was the leprosy of Constantine, which seeing we have
before declared to be a mere fiction, the baptism of leprous Constantine must
needs be like it, a legendary fable also. And even this alone were sufficient
to be spoken of that Baptism, specially seeing Baronius tells us, that
Constantines baptism was to expiate Per baptismu^ patratis facinoribus ablus
and expiari iussus est. Bar. an. 324. nu. 41. dira and parricidalia delicta.
an. eod. nu. 28.
those former crimes, and as he calls them, immane murders, and purge Omnis
te mala leprae valetudo deseret. Bar. ex. Hadriani Epi. 1. citat. an. 324. nu.
37
away, as Pope Hadrian says, his leprosy. But seeing this baptism by
Syuester, is a matter so certainly reported Siluester ab exilio rediens
baptizauit co^stantinum. Anast. in vita. Siluestri, and Sander in sua visib.
Monar. ad an. 314. Genebr. in Chron, in Siluestro, Bin: Notis in vitam Silu..
baptizauit.
by them, set down in their Breuiary Breu. To. in fest. Silu.
, approved by Pope Hadrian Had. 1. epist. 1.
, by the 2. Nicene Council In quo Epistola Adriani proba^a est Act. 2, p. 313.
b.
, for defending whereof Baronius Baro. an. 324. nu. 41. ad nu. 72.
has taken such pains, that he peremptorily tells us, how Constantine
prepared Bar. an. 324. nu. 41. corona^ d^posuit and veste^ imperialem septem
diebus.
himself unto it, laying aside his crown and Imperial robes, how many days
of Catechizing he had, to wit seven: who was his Catechizer, to wit, Hisce
catechismi diebus cum ipsum ad fidem instrueretsummus Pontifex and catechista
Siluester. ibid.
Siluester: where he was baptized, to wit, at Rome Voluit fieri intra palatium
Late^ane^se, in. eodem. nu. 42.
near the Lateran palace* what manner of Font he had, to wit, such an one
Ibid. nu. 57.
as was decked with a Lamb of most pure gold; on the right hand of which Lamb
was our Savior of pure silver (note by the way the dignity of the Lamb above
Christ:) and on the left hand John Baptist holding this title, Ecce agnus Dei.
What number was present: it was not Ibid. nu. 42.
done publickely by reason Constantine was so deformed with his leprosy: but
paucis duntaxat arbitris, a very few being witnesses thereof: though of all
these, and the rest which are of this stamp, there can be no fitter sentence
pronounced, then Vanitas vanitatum and omnia vanitas: yet I will add somewhat
to show how these men take pains to make and maintain untruths, even such
also as being admitted, they gain nothing at all to their cause thereby,
unless it be that this Roman Synod might get, which it is never like to do,
some small credit by such fictions.

That Constantine was not baptized, either in his 19. year, or at Rome, or by
Siluester, as these Legendars affirm, but in his one and thirtieth year at
Nicomedia, and that after the death of Siluester, is by the ancient
Ecclesiastical writers with one consent testified. Eusebius who lived at that
time, expressly witnesses it. When Constantine, says he Eusebius. li. 4. de vit.
Constable. ^61. 62,
, being very sick* came to the suburbs of Nicomedia, he called the Bishops
together, and then signified his desire of Baptizme, saying, It is time now,
that at last we should receive that sign of immortality; telling them that
he had so long deferred it because he purposed to have been baptized in
Jordan, after the example of our Savior: And then, says Eusebius, his
baptism being consummated, Incredibiliter animo gestiebat, By the abundance of
his faith he did incredibly rejoice, and a little after Ibid. ca. 64
that dyed. The like witnesses Socrates, Socr. lib. 1. ca. 26.
When Constantine being sixty and five years old, was greatly afflicted with
sickness, he came to Nicomedia, Et illic in suburbie, lauacro baptismatis
tingitur, He was there baptized; wherewith being exceedingly comforted, he
made his testament, and after a few days dyed. Theodoret Theod. lib. 1. ca. 31.
in like manner says, that a year and some months after that Athanasius was
sent to Triers (which was in the thirtieth year of Constantine) when he was
sick at Nicomedia, ibi donum suscepit sacri baptismatis, he there received
the sacrament of Baptism, for unto that time he had deferred it, Quia in
Iordane se consecuturum sperauerat, because he haped to have been baptized in
Iordane. Sozomen Sozom. lib. 2 ca. 32.
accordes hereunto, When Constantine was sick and languishing, he was carried
to Nicomedia, Ibi sacrosancto baptismatis mysterio initiatus est, there did he
receive the holy sacrament of baptism, wherein exceedingly rejoicing and
giving thanks to God, after that he had made his testament, within a few
days he dyed, being sixty five years old. The same does Saint Ambrose Ambr.
orat. in obitum Theodosij.
witness, who says of Constantine, Baptismatis gratia in vltimis constituto
omnia peccata dimisit, The grace of baptism did free him from all sins,
being then ready to dye. The same affirms Saint Hierome Hier in contin. chron
Eusebiani. ad annum 340.
, who in the 31. year of Constantine says, He was baptized by Eusebius,
Bishop of Nicomedia, In extremo vitae suae tempore, even in the very last time
of his life. The same does the Greek Fasti Epitome chron. ab Adom etc. an. 1.
Olimp. 279.
witness, Constantine gloriously and religiously changed his life, having
been Emperor 31. years, being first made partaker of saving baptism, by
Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople, who had been formerly Na^ Eusebius a Nicome
media constantinopolin translatus est, vt docet Socr. lib. 2. ca. 5.
of Nicomedia. The same does Pomponius Laetus affirm, It is a marvel, says
Pom. Laet. in compend. Romans historiae. in co^stantino.
he, that Constantine being deditissimus, most addicted to the Christian faith,
did defer his baptism, in extremum vitae tempus, to the last part of his
age; and then answering this doubt, he did it, says he, as I think, volens id
in Iordane efficere, desirous to be baptized in Iordane, and he was baptized
of the Bishop of Nicomedia. Such an harmony and consent there is in ancient
Writers, all testifying that to be untrue which their Breuiary, Pope Hadrian,
and this counterfeit Synod do affirm; and which Baronius, Binius, Sanders,
Genebrard, and others do maintain, that Constantine was baptized at Rome in
the 19. year of his Empire: of which Binius Bin. Notis in Epist. de
munificentia constable. 10. 1. p. 295.
adds one most vast and inexcusable untruth, that the Nicene Council,
consensu omnium, by the consent of all Writers, was held after that Constantine
was baptized: whereas all those ancient writers before named, do with one
consenting voice proclaim the contrary.

The same also shows another foolish error of those who suppose,
constantinus a Syluestro baptizatus est. Rursus etiam, sicut in multis ac
diuersis chronicis legimus, ab Eusebio Nicomediensi episcopo rebaptizatus
fuisse natratur. Got of. Viterb. in suo chron. part 16. p. 383 fed falso hoc
ascribit historiae Tripartitae Hist. Trip. lib. 3. cap. ^2.
that Constantine being first baptized by Syluester at Rome, was rebaptized by
Eusebius at Nicomedia; for they evidently witness, that Constantine until
this last time had deferred his baptism, and upon what occasion he did so
defer it.

Now against this consent of ancient Writers, to all which Baronius Necessario
affirmandum est, Eusebium esse mentitum. Bar. an. 324. nu. 48. and 54. and,
figmentum vocat Binius, quod ab Eusebio alijsque ei co^sentientibus hic
asseritur. Bin. Not. in vitam Silu.. Baptizauit.
gives the lie, if you consider what Baronius and Binius do oppose, that will
much more confirm one in this truth touching the baptism of Constantine. They
could not name one ancient Writer, who affirms Constantine to have been
baptized by Syluester; their chief witnesses are the Acts Bar. an. 324. nu.
42.
of Syluester, the Acts of Liberius, a book published by Anastasius, out of
the Vaticane, touching the munificence of Constantine. But who are the authors
of those Tracts, and what authority they are of, Baronius and Binius were loath
to speak. They are all such, as to which belongs that censure noted out of
Gelasius by their own Canus. Gelasius and a Council, says he Canus. lib. 11.
loc. Theol. c. 6.. Quod. si.
, commands, vt eas historias nullo modo amplectamur, quae sine authoris nomine
proferuntur, that we should in no sort allow of such histories, as are set out
without the certain name of the author, for such books do smell either of
imposture or heresy. So Canus. Or if you rather desire to hear Gelasius, and
the Roman Synod Council. Romans (...) sub Gelasio.
it self, they profess indeed that they knew some Catholics in Rome, and so
in other Churches, to read the Acts of Syluester, though it wanted the
authors* name; but their censure of namelesse writings is this: Therefore by
ancient custom and singular care, such writings of the Saints are not read in
the holy Roman Church* because the names of the writers are utterly unknown,
and ab infidelibus aut i^i^tis superfula aut minus apta scripta esse puta^tur,
and relating things superfluous or less fit, they are thought to be written
either of infidels or idiots. So Gelasius with the Council: which censure
alone is sufficient for rejecting those namelesse and worthless acts, which
are the very best authors that Baronius and Binius had in this cause.

There is another testimony cited by Baronius, Bar. an. 324. nu. 49. and an.
325. nu. 61.
which carries great show of antiquity, and that is of Dalmatianus Bishop of
Cyzicum, who collecting some Acts of the Nicene Council, sets down the
Oration of Constantine used there before the Bishops, wherein he often
confesses himself, Sacr^ baptismate initiatum, to have been baptized at that
time. Thus writes Baronius, and hence would collect, that Constantine was the
year before the Nicene Synod baptized by Siluester.

I answer, that the Cardinal both deludes his Reader, and cites a witness
who is directly opposite unto his own position. The author whom he intends is
not Dalmatianus, nor yet Dalmatius (as the true name of that Bishop
Dalmatiumque Cyziceni episcopu^ Cyzici ordinant. Socr. l. 7: c. 28. quem
Dalmatium scriptore^ fuisse illorum actorum putat Alph. Pisanus praefat. sua in
Act. Come. Nic. apud Bin. pa. 321.
of Cyzicum was) but an impostor, whom some would have to be thought that
Gelasius Cyzicenus cu^ Acta Synodi Niceni ex antiquissimo libro (qui quide^
fuit Dalmatij Cyzicenorum Archiepiscopi) descripsisset, redegit ex illo multa,
etc. Posseu. in Appar. verbo, Nicaeum Council. Photius, Gelasiu^ hunc, authorem
horum Actorum ait, and cundem vocat caesareae Palestinae episcopu^, and,
cyzicu^ fuisse ipsi patriam ait in s^a Bibloth. c 88.
Gelasius, mentioned by Photius, and is supposed to have written about the
year vt conijcit. Baro. an. 476. nu. 67
476. Neither does Constantine affirm in his Oration set down in that book,
that he was baptized before the Nicene assembly. The Impostor indeed relates,
or rather forgeth out of his own brain, what Constantine spoke to the Bishops
at the beginning of the Council; and he has devised such a tedious and
witless speech Oration ea extat. li. 2. Act. Conc. Nic. in initio apud Bin. pa.
328.
, as neither is true, nor yet befitting the Emperor. In that Oration the
Emperor says; Quid ergo in meae mediocritatis iustificatione dicere
oportebat, What was to be said in the justification of my mediocritie, but that
which the divine truth does demonstrate? And again, I truly in this small
furniture of my Oration, dare say no more then animam meam iustificatam, that
my soul being justified ought to converse in sincerity: and lastly, I will
briefly assay to declare this, quatenus fides and animi iustificatio facultatem
dicendi dederit; so far as faith, and justification of mind shall grant
ability of speech. Thus does the Cardinals forged Dalmatianus, make the
Emperor to speak, and out of these three sayings Imperator saepius prefitetur
se plane Christianum esse, sacroque baptismate initiatu^. Bar. an. 324. nu. 49.
Nota (inquit Bin. in illa Dalmatij verba) iustificationem iam tertio repetitam,
contra Eusebium, qui Constantinu^ in fine vitae baptizatum scribit. and vox
iustificationis baptizatum ^am fuisse, constantinum significat. Bin in marg.
pa. 329. a. b.
, wherein the Emperor is made to name his justification, they collect that
sure the Emperor was baptized.

I will not here stay to show how witless and impertinent these sayings are,
which the forgerer has made Constantine to utter, I will only now demand of
Baronius and Binius: if justification does infer baptism, was not
Valentinian the Emperor justified, though he died without baptism? Saint
Amhrose Amb. Orat. de obitu Vale^^niani.
says of him, that seeing he purposed when he should come into Italy to be
baptized, certe quia poposcit, accepit, surely in that he had a purpose and
desire of baptism, he received the fruit of baptism, that is, grace and
justification. So may it be said of Constantine, even before he was baptized,
seeing he had a resolution and earnest desire to be baptized where Christ
was, in Jordan, Certe quta poposcit accepit, undoubtedly he had by this desire
the fruit of baptism, though it was but then in voto, not in actu. Or if one
who believes, but is not baptized, has not grace or justification, then that
Scripture shall not be true, With the Romans 10. v. 10.
heart we believe unto justification: and he that believes in me, has
everlasting life: And, credidit Romans 4. 3.
Abraham Deo, Abraham believed God, and that was imputed to him for
righteousness, even before he was circumcised. It is an excellent saying of
Ambrose Amb. loc. (...).
to this purpose: Qui habuit spiritum tuum qu^modo non accepit gratiam tuam; He
that had thy Spirit, O God, how shall not he have also thy grace, thy
Justification? Or, If because baptism is not solemnly administered, this does
move you (says Saint Ambrose) then let not Martyrs be crowned if they be
but Catechumens: for (by your saying) they are not crowned (nay, not justified)
if they be not baptized: but if they be baptized in their own blood, et hunc
sua pietas ab^uit and voluntas: Truly this believer, though a Catechumen is
baptized by his own piety and desire of baptism. So Ambrose. This may suffice
to show how very frivolous a collection they make from justification or faith
to prove baptism, of which I have in another place showed my opinion, without
prejudice* to others, that baptism is not given to any, (but without all
doubt, not to adulti) that they may have grace or justification, but because
they are supposed by the Church to have the first grace and to be justified,
therefore are they baptized, and receive the seal of their former, and an holy
instrument of a second grace, and further assurance of their justification; But
of this elsewhere.

And this I have answered, supposing Constantine to have spoken as the Imposter
makes him, and so often to make boast of his justification. But that the
Emperor said in truth no such thing at all, it is witnessed by Eusebius, who
was present in the Council, and heard the Emperors Oration, and has wholly
set down Eusebius. lib. ^. de vita Constable. ca. 12.
the same. In which both wise, eloquent, and religious speech of Constantine,
there is no such thing either said or signified: the same is in like manner
related by Sozomen Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 18.
, of that which the Cardinal cites out of his forged Dalmatianus not one
syllable. And this by the way may be one strong presumption, that the Author
of those Acts meant not truth and good dealing, in the rest of the disputations
and Narrations he sets down, when at the entrance he was so bold as to devise
a false and witless Oration for the Emperor. But if it please God that I may
ever finish my other Treatise concerning the eight general Councels, I
purpose, and nothing doubt, to demonstrate by undeniable evidences, that there
is no truth nor credit at all to be given to that forged Author, whom
Baronius here calls Dalmatianus Cizicus, and some other call Gelasius.

Lastly, what will you say if this Dalmatianus do evidently contradict the
Cardinals own position, and teach that Constantine was baptized before his 19.
year? In this Dalmatianus it is expressly affirmed, Deci^^o quidem tex^o ann.
and sex mensibus regni sui, sanctam Concilium congregauit anno 20. conuentum
d^^^luit. Dalm vel Gelas. lib. 4 and apud Bin. pa 365. quod ex Graeco Vaticano
etiam citaturiterum lib. 1 in fine. page 328.
, That the Nicene Council began in the sixteenth year of Constantine, and
in the sixth month thereof. Now by Baronis and Binius collection and
interpretation of Constantines saying, that he was justified, it unavoidably
follows, not only that Constantine was converted, and was no persecutour in
his nineteeth year, but that he was baptized also two whole years N^m anno
19. Constantini, Consul erat Crispus 3. vt Graeci Fasti testantur and agnoscit
Bar. an. 324. nu. 1.
before the beginning of Crispus his third Consulship, before he fell into his
leprosy, or sent for Siluester. And then by Dalmatianus the Cardinals own
witness, the whole narration of his murdering of Crispus, Fausta, and others;
of his leprosy, of his cure, of his baptism by Siluester, of his holding the
Roman Synod for thanksgiving of his cure after his baptism, are all clearly
proved to be (as in truth they are) mere fables; all which they teach to
follow the third Consulship and murder of Crispus: whereas by Dalmatianus,
Constantine was baptized and held the Nicene Council two whole years before
that Consulship of Crispus began. So very improvident was the Cardinal in
alleging Dalmatianus in this cause. But enough of him, and so of the witnesses
which Baronius could find to speak for this baptism of Constantine: which as
you see, are both few, and withal uncertain and worthless writings, unfit to
be opposed to that consent of ancient Historians, which for the contrary we
produced.

Melchior Canus Canus lib. 11. cap. 5.. De baptismo.
, and Nich. Sanders Sand. Visib. mo^a^ch. ad tempus Siluestri, pa. 282.
, add the testimony of Nicephorus to the same purpose, who resolutely indeed,
and too confidently, affirms Nicep. Callist. lib. ^ cap. 35. and lib. 8. ca.
^4.
, Constantine to have been baptized at Rome: but Baronius was unwilling to use
this testimony, which he knew many ways to overthrow the maine point at which
he aymeth. For Nicephorus says, That with Constantine Vna cum ipso autem
Crispus etiam filius eius dininum partucipauit lauacrum. Nic. lib. 7. ca. 33.
was Crispus his son also at the same time baptized; and then the fable of
Constantines murdering of Crispus, and falling into a leprosy after that
murder, all before his baptism, is quite spoiled. Again, Nicephorus Lib. 7.
ca. 44. and seq.
places the baprisme of Constantine before his victory over Licinius, which
as we have showed, fell out in his twelfth year; and then how the Roman
Council which puts his baptism in the Consulship of Crispus the third time,
that is, in Constantimes nineteen year: how this can be salued, is not easy
to declare. Baronius had reason to omit and neglect this testimony of
Nicephorus. It is not the Baptizme of Constantine, but the credit of the Roman
Synod for which the Cardinal strives: and seeing that is so contradicted and
proved by Nicephorus to be a counterfeite, Baronius thought it more fit to
ouerpasse this witness, then cite him, who in the maine point is so repugnant,
both to the truth, and to the Cardinals maine position.

Binius Bin. Notis in vitam Siluestri.. Baptizauit, Authoritate e^us (Romani)
Conc^lij Anastasius recenset Constantini baptismum Romae habitum. anno Imperij
ill^us 18. etc.
unto these adioynes a testimony of Anastasius, who in his brief Chronicle, by
authority of this Roman Synod under Siluester, teaches, that Constantine was
baptized in his eighteenth year, and the same by Zosimus and other writters
is, as he says, confirmed. Suppose it were true. Binius could not have
alleged any thing more effectual against him self. For we have before proved
that Crispus died not till the twentieth year of Constantine, and Baronius
Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. and 7.
confidently affirms and proves out of Eusebius, that he was not slain till
the nineteenth year current of Constantine. Wherefore if he was baptized as
Anastasius witnesses, in the eighteenth year, then was he baptized before the
murder of Crispus, before he fell into his leprosy, and so not only Baronius
and Binius himself; but Pope Hadrian, their Breuiarie, and this very Roman
Synod under Siluester, are clearly proved to be fablers, who all teach his
baptizme to follow the murder of Crispus, and the leprosy of Constantine.

Some may perhaps wonder that Baronius did not allege the Pontifical of
Damasus in this cause, for therein it is expressly said, That Siluester coming
from exile in the mountain Soracte, whither he had fled for the persecution of
Constantine, baptized Constantine, and cured him of his leprosy. Now Damasus
is an ancient father and Pope, living near to that time also. His name might
have gained great countenance and credit to this baptizme by Siluester. But
the reason of the Cardinals silence of Damasus name, is evident. The
Pontifical is vulgarly called in deed and inscribed by the name of Damasus:
but Baronius Bar. an. 384. nu. 15.
himself confesses that Damasus is not the author of it: and Binius expressly
says Bin. in Notis ante vitam B. Petri. pa. 19.
, Huius libri Pontificalis Damasus author non est, Damasus is not the author
of this Pontifical. Again, whosoever was author of it, in that very life of
Siluester, he directly contradicts Baronius and Binius and demonstrates this
Roman Synod to be a counterfeite: for he places this Synod Huius temporibus
factu^ est Concilium in (...). etc. Et in v^be Roma con^regatu^ Episcopos 277.
and damnauit iterum A^^^^, and Photinum. Vita Siluest. apud Bin.
after the Nicen Council, and so the whole fable of Crispus murder, of
Constantines leprosy, cure, and baptizme, before that Nicen Council, is quite
spoiled. To say nothing how the Pontifical places the death Fuit temporibus
Constantini and Volusiani ex die Kalend. Feb. vsque in diem ^anuarij
Constantine and Volusiano Consulibus. Damas^vt vocatur. in vita Siluest.
of Siluester in the Consulship of Volusianus, which ^^lles Bar. an. 314. nu. 1.
in the ninth year of Constantine (for Volusianus was Consul in no other year
during the reign of Constantine) and so by the Pontifical, Siluester dying in
the ninth year of Constantine, some ten years after that should rise out of
his grave to baptize and cure Constantine, and hold this Roman Synod after the
cure thereof: or else because the same Pontifical says that Siluester lived
until the year when Constantine and Volusianus were Consuls, which never was
yet, by the authority of that Pontifical, Siluester is yet alive, and Pope
also. For these and such like reasons I think Baronius did wisely not to
produce the Pontifical of Damasus.

Besides these testimonies wherein you see is little help for their cause,
Baronius and others allege diverse reasons and collections, to persuade that
Constantine was baptized at Rome by Siluester. One is the monument of
Constantines Font, that wherein he was baptized, which (as they say) is yet to
be seen at Rome. This does Melchior Canus Canu. leco cit. in testimonium
certistimum Romae ass^ nature. ^
think a very pregnant and certain proof. Baronius Bar. an. 324. nu. 42.
does also mention the same, and tells us, that hactenus visitur h^c
baptisterium, the Font wherein he was baptized is as yet to be seen in the
Laterane, but withal ne ^els us that which exceedingly does discredit this
ancient monument of their Font. There remains s^^^e pritas (says he Bar. an.
324. nu. 55. 56.
) of that noble antiquity, quam vix in chartis, modo nobis antiquitas
representa^, wh^en in writing or in Books Antiquity does represent unto us,
but yet those Printes remain by the industry of Anastasius, Qui^tam memorabile
monumentum ab iniuria temporis vindicatum, memoriae prodidit: who has left
unto posterity this memorable monument, freed from the injury of time, and
these they are, quae nimia vetustate obsita, prout licuit ex mendo so codice,
which we have set down as well as we could out of a faulty, torn and too old
a book, very rude, and not set out with Anastasius style. Thus Baronius
touching this monument of Constantines Font. When the memory of it must be
gathered out of a torn, rude, and faulty book; when the first whom the
Cardinal could produce for it, was Anastasius the keeper of their Vaticane,
one who lived more then 500. years Claruit Anastasius, an. 860. Tritem, lib.
de Eccles. script. and Bellar. lib. de Eccles. script.
after Constantines death, and who was (as I have elsewhere declared) an
arch-corrupter of true monuments, and one principal mint-master of their
fabulous narrations; when the credit of this monument must rely on him, it may
justly be thought that there are neither ancient, true, nor certain proofs
for this Font of Constantine.

Binius Baptisterium adhuc extat, and a Marcellino eius aetatis scriptore. lib.
27. appellatur Constantinianu^ Lauacrum. Bin. Not in Donat. Constable. ^. 298.
cites a far more ancient author then Anastasius, to wit, Ammianus
Marcellinus the heathen writer, who, as Binius says, calls this Font
Lauacrum Constantinianum, and this he says is a testimony not to be contemned.
Truly had Marcellinus mentioned the font of Constantine, or called it by that
name it had been a very clear testimony: Binius should not have needed so to
have qualified or impaired the same by saying it is non contemnendum
testimonium. But I fear Binius was conscious to himself that the Lauacrum
Constantinianum in Marcellinus, is not any Font wherein Constantine or any other
was baptized, but the Thermae or Balneum, the bath which Constantine made, as
many other Emperors had done the like before: as the bath which Maximianus
surnamed Herculeus, had a little before made at Millane, is called by Ausonius
Et regio Hercule^ celebris sub honor lavacri, Auson. De nobil. vib. Ep. 4, de
Mediol.
Herculeum Lauacrum: of which Sigonius says Sig. de occid Imper. lib. 1. an.
301.
, that it was called Herculeae Thermae sieve Lauacrum Herculeum: And in
Olympiodorus Olymp. citatur a Lips. lib. 3. de magnit. Romans c. 8.
are mentioned, Lauacra publica ingenti magnitudine, very spacious and large
bathes, of which sort of Lauacra, Ammianus himself speaking, says Am Marc.
li. 16.. Proinde.
, Lauacra in morem prouinciarum extructa, there were bathes at Rome as great as
a Province: One of which, namely, Antonianae Thermae, had six hundred seats
in it for such as would be bathed there, as Olympiodorus Olymp apud Lyps. loc.
cit.
testifies. Such a bath was that Lauacrum Constantinianum, which Ammianus
mentions: which Binius might easily have known, partly by the description of
Rome prefixed to the Notitia Prouinciarum, and set forth also by Onuphrius
Onuph. lib. de deser. vrb. Romans
(where besides the general sum of bathes in Rome which exceeded the number
of 900. there is express mention of eleven principal, one of which Vt liquet
ex desc. Romans tam ante Not. prove. quam apud Onuph.
was Thermae Constantinianae; the same no doubt with that which Ammianns Am.
Marc: lib. 27. prop^ initium.
, and after him Sigonius Sig. lib. 7. de occid. Imp.
calls Lauacrum Constantinianum,) and specially by the very Text and words of
Ammianus; for there it is said, that the people would have set on fire the
house of Lampadius, prope Constantini Lauacrum, near the bath of Constantine:
not near his Font, of which Ammianus knew nothing. And if the Font had been
meant by that Lauacrum, he would rather have said, near the Church or Temple
of Constantine, and not near the Font, which was in the Temple. So childish
was this collection out of Ammianus, that it may most justly be esteemed,
testimonium contemnendum.

Suppose some Font in the Laterane were called Constantines: what if it was
that Constantine which was the son of Irene, and in whose time the second
Nicen Council was held? Those gay and glorious Images of the Agnus Dei, of
Christ, of John Baptist, of the Angel, and such other Pictures, wherewith the
Font is bedecked; do persuade that it was rather his Font, then Constantines
the Great. Or say it was the great Constantines font, what if it was so called
because he bestowed it, and erected it, not because he was baptized in it? as
the very Laterane Church (wherein that Font as they say yet remains) is called
by the same Anastasius Anast. libell. de munificentia Constantini, apud Bin.
pa. 259.
, Constantiniana Basilica, the Church of Constantine, not because Constantine
was baptized in it, (for it was builded after his baptizme, as themselves also
confess) but because he builded it. Howsoever, till there appear more
certain proof then is this of Anastasius; there are few I think that will
give credit to such a late and fabulous writer, and so uncertain a monument,
against so many ancient records and testimonies, some of those who lived at the
same time with Constantine, who with one consent do testify, that he was
baptized not at Rome, but at Nicomedia.

A second reason they take, and urge it very earnestly from Constantines
presence in the Nicen council: whereupon they infer, that certainly
therefore he was baptized before that Council. Who can believe (says Canus
Can. loco citat. lib. 11. c. 5
) that the Nicen Bishops would suffer Constantine to be present in that Synod
and at their disputations, unless he had been first baptized? Eumne sanctos
patres passures (says Steuchus Steuch. lib. de Donat. pa. 156.
) would the holy Nicene fathers have suffered him to sit among the^ in the
Council if he had bin unbaptized? How could he (says Baronius Baron. an. 324.
nu. 49.
) have bin present and sit among the Bishops in the holy Synod, if he had been
but a Catechume? Laturine essent beatiss. illi Antitistes, would those most
holy Bishops have suffered or endured this? This is forbidden (says Binius
Bin. Not. in vitam Siluest.. Baptizauit.
) to all Catechumes and sinners: and will you think that it was granted to
Constantine, guilty of such crimes, and as yet a Catechume? Thus reason they.

For answer whereunto, I omit what insolency they show in their speech, as if
Constantine who was the chief and commander of all in the Synod, might not sit
there, but by the leave, courtesy, permission and sufferance of the Bishops? I
entreat them first to know what Bellarmine or the Cardinals Dalmatianus would
say to this Objection. For both Dur^auit tribus annis, and finitum est anno 20.
Constantini, Bell lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5.. Sed and. lie^. Dalmar sieve Gelaf.
Cyz^cenus. lib. 4. Act. Nic. p. 365.
they make the Nicen Council to begin before the eighteenth year of
Constantine. And seeing Constantine was not baptized before the murder of
Crispus, before he fell into his leprosy, which was, as they account, in his
nineteenth year: what a foul ouer-sight was it in Dalmatianus and Cardinal
Bellarmine, to think that Constantine being then but a Catechume and not
baptized, did sit in the Nicen Synod, did hear their quarrels, take their bills
of complaints, and was present at their disputations and determinations?
Certainly this new found learning was not known in the days of Dalmatius.

Next, I wish them to consider of the Council at Arles, unto which Constantine
called very many Bishops, no fewer then two hundred, ex locis diuersis ac prope
infinitis, almost out of infinite places (as the Emperors own letters Apud
Eus, lib. ^o. hist. c. 5.
do witness) among which were presidents also in the Council, four Legates
for Siluester, as Baronius Bar. an. 314. nu. 51.
observes, and after him Bin. Not in Conc, Arel.. Ad petitionem.
Binius. That Constantine was present in this great and holy Council, Eusebius
clearly testifies, saying, Eusebius l. 1. de vita Con. c. 37
, Constantine as a common Bishop appointed by God, called a Council (he means
this at Arles) and in media istorum frequentia ac congressu adesse, and he was
present in the midst of the Bishops, he did not disdain to sit among them,
(this is another manner of speech them to say, they Quod Constantinus ad huc
Catechumenus interfuerit. patresconcessisse videntur. Bin. Not. la Conc. Ar^l..
Ad.
permitted or suffered him) he was made partaker of their deliberations, etc.
Now this Council was held, when by all men's confession, Constantine was a
Catechume, for it was assembled Vt Acta Concilij illius declarant.
in August, when Volusianus and Anianus were Consuls, which was in the
beginning of Constantines 9. year. None of all those holy and worthy Bishops,
once vpbrayded the Emperor, that he was not baptized, or that they might not
suffer him being but a Catechume to sit in the Council. Seeing Baronius and
Binius both of the^ confess, that he was present in this holy council at
Arles, though he were but a Catechume, what per^^rse dealing is it in them to
say the Bishops at Nice would not have suffered him to sit in the Synod had he
been but a Catechume?

And it is but mere dallying, which they add of this Council at Arles, that
the Emperor was not to be excluded, (so Baronius Bar an. 314 nu. 53.
speaks) or that the Bishops granted or gave leave unto him to be present,
(so speaks Bin. loc. citato.
Binius) because in this Council was handled no matters of faith: For both was
there a question of faith, inuolued in that cause between Cecilianus and the
Donatists, (as I have elsewhere made evident,) and where I pray you, do they
find, that a Catechume Emperor is to be excluded, more from hearing a cause
of faith debated in a Council, then a cause of the facts and scandalous actions
of Bishops? For it is a manifest untruth which Binius Bin. Notis in vitam
Siluest.. Baptizauit. Constantio adhuc Catechumeno Mediolanensi Concilio
interesse non fuisse permissum testatur Sulp. Seuerus: and similia fere habet
Bar. ann. 355. nu 10. 11
affirms, to be witnessed by Sulp. Seuerus, lib. 2. That Constantius the
Emperor was not suffered to be present in the Council at Millane, because he
was a Catechume. That he was a Catechume at that time, Seuerus indeed affirms:
but that he was either for that cause, or at al excluded, or not permitted to
come to the Synod, Seuerus has not one syllable. Nay, to see the vanity of
these men, Bintus Cum huic Conuentui praesideret haereticus Imperator, quis
legitimum Concilium vocet? Bin. Not. in Council. Mediol Reprobatum.
plainly professes, that the Heretical Emperor Constantius, was president
in that Council at Millane: and so either by himself or by his Deputies, was
present therein. Besides, of the two, it is less to be regarded, that the
errors, then the crimes and scandals of Bishops be known to Catechumes, or to
any others, as Constantine wisely considered, when at the Nicene Council he
Burnt all the bills Ruff hist. lib 1. ca. 2. and Soc. lib. 1. ca. 5.
of their particular quarrels and accusations, giving this as a reason, Ne vllt
hominum innotesceret simultas sacerdotum, adding (as Theodoret Theod. lib. 1.
ca. 11.
says) That if himself should see a scandalous fault in one of them,
paludamento suo se obtecturum sceleratum facinus, He would hide such a fault
with his own Imperial robe. Wherefore seeing the Emperor being as yet
unbaptized, sat in so great and holy a Synod, as was that at Arles: it is a
very frivolous objection of Baronius and Binius, that he might not be present
at Nice, unless he had been baptized.

A third reason they make, Because Constantine was present at the sacred
mysteries Bar. an. 324 nu 49. and Bin. Not. in vitam Siluest. Baptizauit.
at Easter, (they mean the Vsque ad sacratissimae oblationis finem
perseuerasse, Bar. loc. cit.
Eucharist) and was not commanded by the Deacon to depart, as Catechumes were
wont to be: And this they would seem to collect out of Eusebius, who says
Eusebius. lib. 4. ca. 22. and 57.
, That he with all his strength both of mind and body, did perform the divine
rites of that holy feast of Easter. But neither does Eusebius, nor any ancient
writer mention his presence at receiving of that Sacrament. Those Sacra, and
Divine rites, which Eusebius intends, himself explaines to be, The joyful and
religious Vigil Nocturnam in hoc festo peruigilationem tam clara^ reddidit,
quam diurnam luce^ accensis tota vrbe quam celsissimis cereis candelis, and
lampadibus, igneis, etc. lib. 4. ca. 22.
, which the Emperor observed, in honor of Christ's Resurrection, and in token of
his assured belief thereof; His magnificence Setuatoris benignitatem imitatus
omnib^s benefica^ and prolixam manum porrigebat, collaus in omnes maximis
beneficijs, ibid.
, used as a token of his joy at that time, his zeal and feruency in praying
Imperator cum caeteris pernoctans vota precesque Deo suo persoluebat, lib. eod.
ca. 57.
, and praising God; of which Eusebius faith in the very same Chapter Lib. eod.
ca. 22.
, Ille deo suo quasi sacerdos quidam sacra faciebat, he offered sacrifices, or
prayers and praises to God at that time, as one of the Priests. From which
words, they may as well, nay much better conclude, that he consecrated the
Host, then that he was present at the consecrating or receiving thereof. So idle
is this their conjecture touching his presence at the Eucharist.

Steuchus Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 160
, out of Theophanes adds a fourth, which he calls validissimum argumentum, a
most strong argument, to prove that Constantine was baptized before the Nicen
Council; and that is, Because if he had not then been baptized, he might not,
orationes cum diuinis patribus habere, not so much as have prayed with those
holy Fathers, or been present at prayers with them, at which Constantine to
have been present, he affirms (and that rightly) to be so certain, That to
think the contrary, is, as he says, absurdissimum, a thing most absurd.
Steuchus herein bewrayes a far worse fault then ignorance. For who can imagine
Steuchus to have been ignorant, that Catechumes (they were such Vt patet ex
Cyrill. Alex. lib. 12. in Ioh. ca. 50. and August. tract. 4. in Johan.
as being instructed in the faith, were not as yet baptized) were in ancient
times permitted to be present, at all other parts of divine service, (prayers,
reading and preaching of Gods word) save only at the receiving of the
Eucharist. When that was to be celebrated, the Catechumes were dismissed: even
as at the end of all, there was Missa fidelium, a dismission of all the rest,
who till the end remained. And from this very custom of dismissio^, the word
Missa Missae nomen significare etiam Mercatu^ seu^ nundinas in constable. Carol.
Mag. tit. de Malla, ca. 2. and alibi obseruat Busaeus. Not. ad illud ca. Idem
notat Ioh. Lidius in glo^^ sua La^inobarb. An vero inde dictae voces illae
Michaelmas. Martinmas, and similes, alij viderint: nos pro officio diuino hic
accipi mus.
, (which is corruptly now called Mass) took his name, Missa, being anciently
used for Missio, as remissa Diximus de remissa peccatorum. Tertul. lib. 4.
cont. Marc. cap. 18. Aug. lib. 3 De bapt. ca. 18.
, for remissio, and collecta Fecit Solomon collecta^, etc. ^. Chron. 7. 9. and
1. Cor. 16. 2.
for collectio. Its called Missa, says Isiodore Isiod lib. 6. Etym. cap. 19.
, because the Catechumes were sent away, the Deacons crying, If any who is a
Catechume remain, let him depart. The like says Rabanus Rab. lib. 1. Inst.
cler. cap. 32.
, and Remigius Remig. lib. de officio Missae.
: Missa, says Alcuinus Alcuin. lib de divine. offic. cap. de celebr. Missae.
, is so called, because it is a dismission, and the Missa of Catechumes was,
before the administration of the Sacrament, the Missa fidelium, (that is, such
as were baptized) was after the celebration and receiving of the same. That
Canon of the fourth Council at Carthage, (which was held about Conc. Cart. 4.
habitum Honorio 4. and ^^tichiano Cons. Act. Conc. apud Bin. pa. 553. is est
an. 398. (...) Bar. ob^jt autem Constantinus an. 337.
60. years after Constantine) does clearly witness this: for there Conc.
Carth. 4. ca. 84.
it is decreed, That no Bishop should hinder any to come into the Church, or to
hear the word of God, neither Gentile nor Jew, nor Heretic, vsque admissam
Catechumenorum, until the dismission of the Catechumes. And the like was
decreed, concerning notorious offenders, in the Council at Ilerda in Spain,
Where Conc. Ilerdense can 4. habitum vero est ann. 524.
they are permitted to stay in the Church no longer, then vsque ad missam
Catechumenorum, till the dismission of Catechumes. Steuchus could not be
ignorant of this custom, continued in all ages of the Church. It was mere
hate of the truth, which moved him to avouch, that Constantine a most religious
Emperor, might not be permitted to be present at prayers, with the Nicene
Fathers, unless he had been baptized; when the use and custom of the Church
even in that very age, allowed not only Catechumes, but notorious offenders,
and heretics, yea Pagans and Jews, to be present at the same.

Bishop Canus considering, that the baptism of Constantine could not
effectually be concluded, either from his presence at prayers, nor yet at the
Eucharist, goes one step further then either Baronius or Steuchus durst
adventure: and out of Nicephorus Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 35.
, tells Canus loc. Theol lib. 11. ca. 5.. de baptismo.
us, (which is their fifth reason) That Constantine was particeps mysteriorum
cum eis, partaker of the holy mysteries, (that is, of the Eucharist) with the
Nicene Fathers; and they add, Historia tradit, that this is witnessed in the
History. Verily, could either Nicephorus or Canus, or any other of them all,
produce any one authentical History to testify this, none would ever after
open their mouths against them in this matter, touching Constantines baptism.
But no History at all (as I think,) and certainly none of credit, either
does, or can mention this. For it is certain, not only by Eusebius Eusebius.
Amb. and alij locis citatis.
, Ambrose, Jerome, Theodoret, and many other, but even by Constantines Apud.
Eus. lib. 4 de vit. Constable. ca. 62.
own words, That he deferred his baptism until a little before his death,
nine years at least after the Nicene Council was ended; and he gives a
reason, Why he had so long deferred it. Seeing then none unbaptized, might
partake of the Eucharist, it is evident and certain, even by Constantines own
testimony, that he being unbaptized at the time of the Nicene Council,
neither might, nor did communicate with those Fathers, as Nicephorus Diuina
mysteria participasse: and eiusdem mensae participem s^isse ait Nicep. loc.
cit. and ex eo Canus.
says he did, at that holy table, nor partake of the Eucharist with them.
That which misled Nicephorus herein, was the mistaking of certain words in
Eusebius, which is (in all likelihood) the Story that Nicephorus means.
Eusebius declaring the devotion, piety and zeal of Constantine, in observing
the celebritie of Easter, says Eus. lib. 4: ca. 22.
, That he performed (...) (...) est sacroru^ anti^tes and d^ctor.
the divine and sacred rites, or duties prescribed by the Bishops: and again,
(...). He sacrificed, or was as a Priest to offer the sacrifices of prayers and
praises unto God. Nicephorus misconceiuing these words, affirms, The
Historieto speak of the Eucharist, whereas not one word is meant thereof: and
to speak, Of his receiving those sacred mysteries, whereas the History
speaks only, of his offering spiritual and holy sacrifices unto God: and to
speak Of the time of the Nicene Council, whereas the History speaks only
of Easter, at which time there was no assembly of the Nicene Nam Con^. Nic
coepit 14. die Iunij, and terminatum est 25. die Augusti. eodem anno, Bin. Not.
in id Conc.. Paulino.
Fathers. Nicephorus is as foully mistaken in both these sayings, (that
Constantine was partaker of the Eucharist, and that the History witnesses the
same,) as he was, saying, That Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 14.
the Nicene Council was held in the time of Pope Julius, or, that there was a
Bishop Ibid.
of Constantinople at that time, or, that Constantine Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 33.
was baptized with Crispus. All of them (and many more) are so untrue, that no
fitter judgment can be given of them, then Posseuine gives in another matter:
Mendacissime Posseu. Appar. in Nicephorus.
asserit, Nicephorus is a most lying Author in them all; And for Canus, who
herein applauds Quae duae rations efficient, vt non temere ijs accedam, etc.
Can. loc. cit.
Nicephorus, none can say otherwise, but that he wittingly followed the lying
reports of him whom their own Posseuine calls a most lying Author.

Besides these actions of peace, from which as you see, the baptism of
Constantine by Syluester, cannot be concluded, Baronius urges a sixth reason,
drawn from his actions of war; Were it true, says he Bar. ann. 324. nu. 45.
, that Constantine was not baptized, till a little before his death, then he
must be held for piety and religion far inferior to Constantius: for as
that time when Constantine dyed, he was preparing a warlike expedition against
the Persians, and before that he had made many battles against his enemies;
all which time, and in all which wars, he remained unbaptized: whereas
Constantius being to fight against Magnentius, Ne lixam quidem voluit nisi ante
baptizatum, in hostem proficisci, would not suffer so much as a Skull to go
into the battle, unless he were first baptized. So Baronius.

You may clearly perceive, that by the Cardinals divinity, Constantine must
be proclaimed, and that for a certainetie, to have been far worse then
Constantius. For that Constantine was not till near his death baptized, is
clearly and undeniably proved, by all those ancient and undoubted Witnesses,
whom before we produced. The Cardinal was not a little glad so far to
dishonor and disgrace Constantine, as to make him worse then one of the most
heretical and persecuting Tyrants, that ever the Church endured: then one whom
the Orthodoxall Fathers accounted and called Quid igitur hic (Constantius) quod
Antichristi est omisit? aut quid ille vbi venerit, plus committere poterit?
Atha^* Epist. ad sol^t. vitam agent. pa. 238.
Antichrist, and the Type Quod vere imaginem referat Antichristi, ibid.
of the great Antichrist. But the Cardinal in speaking thus to disgrace
Constantine, has most foully disgraced himself, and bewrayed his own want
both of true divinity, and reason. For though Constantius with his whole
Army, had been baptized, and had received all the Sacraments in the World,
yet seeing he was even then an Heretic, and an impious oppugner, and
persecutour of the true and Catholic faith; none of all his outward actions,
though they be never so holy in themselves, could make him, I say not equal,
but not comparable in any degree to Constantine, a most pious, religious, and
sincerely Orthodoxall Emperor. It is neither circumcision Gal. 6. 15. Romans 2.
28.
, nor baptism, but a new creature, and an heart purified and washed by Faith,
and the love of God, which auailes with the Lord: and it is a very true saying
which is collected out of Saint Austen Aug. s^rm. super gestis (...) Emerito,
lit. ^.
, Habere omnia Sacramenta and malus esse potest; habere autem charitatem, and
malus esse non potest: A man may receive all the Sacraments, as Judas did, and
yet be a wicked man, yea a very Devil, as Judas was; but have the love of
God, the love of Gods true Church and Children, and be a wicked man, he cannot.
This love of God, and Gods Church, which Constantine inwardly and sincerely
embraced, made him (though for the outward act unbaptized) by many degrees
more acceptable unto God, and more honorable in the Church of God, then the
outward receiving of baptism, or any other Sacrament could make Constantius,
in whom there was no sincere love to God, but an extreme hatred of Gods truth,
and of his holy servants who professed the same.

And yet had the Cardinal sought by this his divinity, to have dishonored
Constantine alone, though his fault therein had been inexcusable, it might
more easily have obtained pardon. But by this position of his, he has made
both Valentinian, and Theodosius the Great, far worse then Constantius also.
Of the wars made by Valentinian, and his victories obtained against the
Almanes, the Illirians, the Quades, the Saxons, the Britains, the people of
Afric, and others: Beside many other historians, Ammianus Marcellinus An.
Marcel. lib 28. 29 30.
who lived in those times, is a witness. For Theodosius, that he by many and
most victorious conquests, subdued the Goths, who then oppressed the Roman
Empire: Theodoret Theod. lib. 5. ca. 5.
and others Theodosiu^ rempub. Gothicis armis pene oppressa^ restituit. Egnat
in Theod.
declare. Now though Valentinian Audio vos dolere, quod non acceperit
sacramenta baptizmatis. Ambr. orat. de obit. Valent.
was never baptized, nor Theodosius at the time of those happy conquests, yet
are they both so renowned for piety, that Saint Ambrose (to whom the whole
Church consents therein) calls Ambr ibid.
the one an inhabitant of Paradise, clothed with celestial light and glory:
and of the other, he says Ambr. orat. de obitu. Theodosij.
, he enjoys eternal rest and delight in the bosom of Abraham. But it is
meat and drink with Baronius by any color of divinity, to impair the
honor of Emperors, and endeavor to have the most religious of them all, to be
accounted more impious then any persecuting Tyrant.

Besides all this which concerns the divinity of Baronius, there are two
special points to be observed in his reason also. First, he says, that
Constantius would not suffer, ne lixam Bar. an 324^ nu. 45.
quidem, not so much as a skull unbaptized to go with him to battle. Now in
Theodoret, out of whom Baronius Bar. an. 351. nu. 15.
relates this; Constantius Vt apud Theod. liquet. lib 3. ca. 3.
named neither skul nor cook, but only socios belli. The Cardinal by this
base and contemptible addition, or comparison, was pleased to vilify the most
renowned and religious Emperor: and as elsewhere reproving Justinian, he
Illud vetus (^ust inian^) occmendum, Non vl^ra crepidam. Bar. an. 550. nu. 14.
compares him to a Cobbler, so here every skull, if he hap to be baptized, must
with the Cardinal be compared with, nay preferred before, and give a check to
the religious and most holy Constantine.

The other point which I observe, is, an eminent defect in the Cardinals
reason. Who would not persuade himself, reading in the Card. this high
comme^dation of Co^stantius, as being more pious then unbaptized Constantine;
who I say would not assure himself, that Co^stantius was baptized at the time
when he made the war with Magnentius? for otherwise, if Constantius also was
then unbaptized, you will certainly judge the Cardinal to have dalied in this
matter, who by the piety of Constantius condemns Constantine for going to
war being unbaptized. Now the truth is, that Constantius was not baptized
when he fought with Magnentius and overcame him in that battle in Pannonia,
where Vt liquet ex Zosimo lib. 2.
himself was present, nor in seven years after. For he overcame Magnentius in
his seventeenth year Bar. an. 353. nu. 6.
, and he was baptized but Bar. an. 361 nu. 20. Moriens voluit baptizari, ait
Athanas. lib. de Synod. pa. 250.
a little before his death* in the five and twentieth year of his reign. What
is now (think you) become of the Cardinals reason, or how is Constantine for
his going to war unbaptized, far more impious then Constantius, seeing that
Constantius in all the wars that he made was unbaptized also?

Neither will it help the Cardinal to say, that yet the soldiers of
Constantius were baptized, and Constantius commanded that they so should be:
but this much bewraies the malicious dealing of Baronius, who hereupon
preferres either the one or the other before Constantine. Constantius indeed
commanded Theod lib. 3. ca. 3.
that they should be baptized; adding further, that if they refused it, they
should be sent away; but he did that, not in piety, but in mere policy.
Magnentius against whom at that time he was to fight, though he pretended
himself to be a Christian, yet was in heart a Pagan and an Idolater; and when
he had once usurped the Empire, he gave free liberty and toleration to such
as would sacrifice and do worship to the heathen Idols, as the very law of
Constantius Aboleantur noct^ra sacrificia Magnentio authore permis^a: (...)
Constantius^ leg. 5. De paganis sacrif. Cod. The^d.
, dated after the death and overthrow of Magnentius does declare. Constantius
knowing how dangerous it were for him, to have Paganes, and such as were
addicted to Pagane Idolatries, to be in those wars against Magnentius,
commanded that all his soldiers should receive baptism, or else to depart
home; if they refused to be baptized. Had Constantius done this in piety,
himself would first of all have been baptized: seeing he was not, he showed
therein an act of policy, and sought his own safety and security; but there
was no token of true piety, nor of seeking their salvation: nothing at all for
which he is to be compared with, much less to be preferred to the most
religious Constantine. Again, had Constantine being required by superior and
lawful authority, refused to be baptized, his contempt of Gods ordinance had
proved him therein to have been much inferior to the soldiers of
Constantius, who at the Emperors command received that sign of their
Christian profession. But seeing he never refused to be baptized, but having
for many years votum baptismi, a sincere Quam (...). Eu. li. 4. c. 6^^
desire thereof, deferred only the act, and that for no other cause but in an
ardent desire to be more like unto Christ, in being washed with the self same
waters of Jordan that Christ was; his want of actual baptizme, joined with a
sincere desire thereof, and fervent zeal to imitate Christ, is every way
equal, if not more commendable, then the actual, but constrained receiving of
this Sacrament in those soldiers, who neither had like zeal unto God, nor
like cause to defer their baptizme as Constantine had. So the Cardinal is
every way most injurious unto Constantine: first, in preferring the soldiers,
religious in deed, but constrained act of baptism, before Constantines zealous
deferring of the act, joined with a most pious desire thereof: and again, in
preferring Constantius unto Constantine, for that which he not in piety but in
mere policy required, himself all the while, remaining without the act of
baptizme, as well as Constantine, and never having that pious affection and
zealous desire, either to God, or to any godly act or Christian duty as
Constantine had.

After this Baronius proposes by way of demand, a seventh reason, to prove
that Constantine did not defer his baptizme till his last age, and then by
consequent, that he was baptized by Siluester: and thus he disputes: Quonam
Bar. an. 324. nu. 45.
quaeso maiorum exemplo, By what example of those that went before, did
Constantine so long defer his baptizme, even unto his decrepit age, till he
was ready to die? I again demand of the Cardinal, seeing himself puts
Constantines baptizme but twelve years before, at which time he was full
fifty three years old, by what example of any before, did Constantine (who as
the Cardinal confesses Bar. an. 3^5. (...) 12.
, was trained up in piety even from his youth) defer his baptizme for more
then fifty years? I doubt not, but the Cardinals friends would be as much
perplexed to find an example of the one, as we need to be for the other. Had
all such particulars been expressed in Stories, there might no doubt abundant
examples be produced of either. It was an use, (I do not say how commendable)
but an use it was, in the primitive Church, even in Constantines age and long
after, to defer their baptism, oftentimes till they thought their last hour
imminent, but usually, for very many years. Theodosius the great, a most
renowned and religious Emperor, deferred his baptism till he was forty five
years Baptizatus est Gratiano 5. and Theodosio 1. Coss. Socrates lib. 5. c. 6.
is est an. Chapter 380. iuxt. Marcel. and Bar. Obijt Olibrio and Probino Coss.
Marc. in Chr. and Prosper. is est an iuxta Marc. and Bar. 395. vixit au^^ annos
60. vt ^estatur Socr. lib. 5. ca. 25.
old, and had deferred it longer, but that returning to Constantinople with
many victories, he fell into an extreme sickness at Thessalonica, by occasion
whereof he was there and then baptized: and this Theodosius lived even in
Constantines days. The father of this Emperor was named Theodosius also, and
almost contemporall with Constantine, a religious father of so religious a
child, he living very long, as Orosius signifies (calling Oros. lib. ^. ca.
33.
him a man, experientissima prouidentia, of great prudence, arising from most
long experience) yet was he not baptized till he came, as Baronius speaks of
Constantine, to his decrepit age; and then by the malice of his barbarous
enemies, being commanded to be slain, he first desired that he might be
baptized, which being done he willingly offered his neck to the executioner,
and gloriously died. Of Constantius the Emperor, and son of Constantine, we
showed before, that Athan lib 5. de Synod. pa. 280.
moriens baptizatus est, he was not baptized till he was at the very point of
death. Martine, Bishop of Turone, in whose praise they love to be
hyperbolicall, (one so holy, that Angels Facie ad faciem cum eo est Angelus
colioq^^tus. (...). Se^. lib. 3. ^^al.
came to confer with him while he lived, and who since his death is
canonized Mar^y. Romans Nov. 11.
for one of their greatest Saints) lived at the same time also, and at least
twenty years Nam natus est. 11. anno Constantini. Gre. Tur. hist. ^^an. li ^.
c. 36.
with Constantine: and yet so holy as he was, he deferred his baptizme
Baptizatus est anno 15. Constantij. cu^ esset annorum 35. Bar. an. 351. nu. 1^.
till he was five and thirty years old, nor in likelihood had then received
that Sacrament, but that being in wars under Constantius, when he fought
against Magnentius, the Emperors command enforced him so to do. Saint
Ambrose, who lived likewise in Constantines Nam obijt ineunte an. aetatis suae
64. anno Chr. 397 Bar. eo an. nu. 30. ergo natus est an. 334. triennio ante
obitum Constantini.
time, was chosen Bishop of Millane, being but then a Catechume Socr. lib. 4.
ca. 25.
and unbaptized, and no less then forty years Creatur enim Episcop^s an.
374. Bar. eo an. nu. 7.
of age. The like is observed of Nectarius, whom the whole second general
Council approved for Bishop of Constantinople, though he was unbaptized
Sozom. lib. 7. ca. 8.
when he was chosen to that high See. Yea this was so usual among Christians
in those times, that Binius says, Bin. Not. in Conc. Carth. 3.. In orient.
Inoleuerae consuetudo, This custom was so strong, vt plerique, that most men,
both in the East and West Church deferred their baptizme, vsque ad prouectiorem
aetatem, till they were well stricken in years. So that the Cardinal had
little reason to deman^d examples thereof, there being so many, even of those
who lived in Constantines days.

Nor did this custom begin in that age, as the Cardinal not only by his
demand implies, but expressly affirms, saying, that none before Constantine
Nullum ante hac d^ ca^re praecessisse repetitur simile exemplu^. Bar. an. 324.
nu. 45.
did thus defer their baptism. There are many evident proofs also, that it
was frequent and usual in the Church before Constantines reign, or days
either. That many in the primitive Church, even till their very death deferred
baptism, S. Ambrose shows, who mentions Cathechumenos Ambr. de obitu Valentin:
martyrs, martyrs that were but Catechumes and not at all baptized in water,
but in their own blood. The same clearly appears, by the 12. Canon of the
Council at Neocaesarea, held 8. years before that Constantine, by their own
account Conc. Neocaes habitu^ ante an. 316. proba^ Bin. not* in ^l^ud Conc. sub
^iluestro.
was baptized: for there it is decreed, that if any were baptized in the time
of his sickness, when they were clinici (that is, bedred, of (...) to their
bed, so that they could not walk, to whom therefore Cyprian merrily opposed
Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 7.
Peripatetici) such should not be ordained Presbyters, unless either their
subsequent zeal, or raritie of such as could be found willing to be
ordained, enforced it. The same Canon to have been of force long before, is
evident by that which Pope Cornelius, about 50. years Cornelius coepit an.
254. Bin. in notis ad vitam Corn. Constantinus coepit imperare an. 306.
before Constantine, writ, reproouing the ordination of Nouatianus, because be
was ordained Presbyter when he was Clinicus, whereas minime licebat quenquam
in lecto baptizitum in clerum assumi, it was nor lawful to assume any into the
Clergy who was baptized in his bed. Now this being mentioned by Cornelius as
an ancient law or cannon of the Church, demonstrates that long before
Constantines age, it was so frequent and usual among Christians to defer
their baptism not only to their old age, but even till they were at the point
of death, that sometimes there were no other but such as had been so baptized,
to be assumed into the Clergy. That one memorable Story concerning Genesius
Martyrologium Romans and Mart. Vs^ardi in August. 25. diem.
, witnesses the same custom, He being the chief of the Theatricall Mimi, at
the command of Dioclesian, acted a play of the Christian religion before the
Emperor, in derision of the Christian Faith and Mysteries. To express the
custom of Christians, he was laid as one Clinicus, on his couch upon the
Theater, then he called for baptism; the mimicall Presbiter being brought,
asked him if he did believe, who answering he did, he was mimically baptized:
and then apparelled in white, and then for making that profession, he was in
mimicall fashion led to be executed. But this play was then turned into sad
earnest, for at that time he being truly and sincerely converted to
Christianity, in stead of cursing and deriding, began to bless and adore
Christ, and seriously exhorted the Emperor, and all in the Theater, to embrace
the holy Christian Faith, as himself did: at which the Emperor being incensed
with rage, commanded him to be most cruelly tormented; and when by no
torments whatsoever, he could be driven from the constant profession of Christ,
he was at last beheaded, and is now enrouled among the blessed Saints and
Martyrs.

If these be not sufficient, there are yet some more ancient obseruances used
in the Church, which declare the same. For whereas Christians of all sorts,
both orthodoxall and heretical, deferred their baptism not only to decrepit
age, but to the very point of death, Epiphantus Epiph. (...). 28.
expounds (and that not improbably) the words of Saint Paul, Why 1. Cor. 15. 29
are they then baptized for dead? of such as being vicini mortis, near unto
death, are said by the Apostle to be baptized for dead: as we say of one that
is almost forsaken, Habetur pro derelicto. And whereas many of them died
unbaptized, not only the C^rinthians Epiph. ibid.
, and Marcionites Chrysostom. in cap. 15. Hom in Epist. 1. ad Cor.
, used to Baptize others that were living, for them that so dyed: but
Tertullian Tert. lib. 5. cont. Marc. ca. 10. and lib. de Resur. ca. 48. Ita
exponit (de ijs qui pro alijs mortuis baptizantur) verba Apostoli, Tertullianus
and alij, vt ait Bell. lib 1. de Purgat. ca. 4.. Prima est.
also, and Ambrose Ambr. Com. in ca. 15. epi. 1 ad Corinth.
, do approve of that Interpretation, and custom also, as being intended by
Saint Paul in those words. I will not here examine the sense of the Apostles
words, but by this which I have said, it is evident, that according to both
expositions, many Catechumes did defer their baptism longer then
Constantine, even until their death: and that not only in Tertullians time,
that is, an hundred years Tert. scripsit eos libros circa an. ^09. Bar. eod.
an. nu. 2.
before Constantine* but as Epiphanius thinks, even in the, Apostles days
also. So that the Cardinal needed not to demand, By what former example
(adding, that none could be given) Constantine did defer his baptism so
long, until he was sixty four years old, which the Cardinal spitefully,
and in disgrace of Constantine, calls decrepit age: whereas himself, when he
speaks not of an Emperor, but of a Bishop, to wit of Saint Ambrose, calls the
64. years of his age, But almost the Mol^stissime accidit, ipsum decess^^^e in
ipso pe^e li^^ine senect^tis, (...) nu. 397. (...) 30.
entrance into old age.

Lastly, lets admit that Constantine had no former example: what think you was
become of the Cardinals wit, learning, and judgment; when from this he would
prove, that therefore Constantine might not, nay, which is far more
inconsequent, that therefore he did not, de facto, so long defer his
baptism? May nothing, nay is nothing, de facto, done, whereof a precedent
example cannot be given? Let me then put a few demands to the Cardinal, what
example before Benedict Benedictus 9. puer f^rme decennis electus extitit,
Glab. lib. 4. ca. 5.
the ninth, can his Cardinalship give, that a Boy but ten years old, should
be Bishop of Rome? or before John Inter fideles vitam and mores eius
cognoscentes (Johannes 23.) vulgariter dicitur Diabolus incarnatus, Co^c
Constant. sess. 11. artic. 5.
23. that a Devil incarnate should be the Pope? or of any Pope before Sergius
Sunt qui dicunt eum ob turpitudmem cognomenti Sergij nomen sumpsisse, eamque
consuetudinem (mutandi pontificum nomina) hinc manasse, Plat. in vit. Sergij 2.
and Wern. in fasc. temporum, ann. 844.
the second, sur-named Swinesnout, as Platina says: or Octauianus Hic reuera
primus inuentus, qui mutauit sibi nomen. Bar. an. 955. nu. 4. and Bin. idem in
John 12.
, as the Cardinal and Binius suppose, that changed their names; or before John
the twelfth, that a Pope should drink healths to Diaboil in amorem vinum
bibisse omnes ram clerici quam laici acclamarunt. Conc. Romans sub Ioh 12. cums
acta extant apud L^p^and. lib. 6.
the Devil, and give holy lbidem.
orders in a stable? or before Formosus and Stephen, that a Pope dead Bin. in
^^ta Stephani 7. pro c^rto tradit eum sic tractasse Formosum. Idem testatur
Bar. an ^^7. 6. Plat. in vita Steph. 6. alijque*
and buried, should be pulled out of his grave brought in pontifical Robes
before a judicial Tribunal, arraigned, condemned, and then cast into Tyber?
What example before Syluesters time of assembling a general Council? What
example before the first Nicene, of a general Council, decreeing Arius and
all Arians to be heretics? What example before Constantine, of establishing
Christianity by Imperial Laws, and banishing Heretics? Sure the Cardinal
would be impatient, and judge one little less then bereft of wit and
understanding, who would conclude, that because there were no precedent
examples of these (and a thousand thousand such like matters) therefore
Benedict the ninth, or John the 23. were not Popes; or John 12. and Stephen 7.
did not those abominations; or that therefore there neither was, nor might be
any general Councels assembled; or that the Nicen Council did not, or might
not decree Arians to be Heretics; or that Constantine might not, and did not
establish Christianity by his Imperial Laws. Its so poor, so silly and
senseless a reason, to prove a thing was not done, or might not be done,
because there was no precedent example for doing the same, that I well hope
some of the Cardinals friends will cause this passage of his dispute to pass
one day under some Index expurgatorius, and be quite wiped out of his Annals:
that the world do not wonder to see so great and renowned a Cardinal, to make
so fond and feeble, so silly and senseless arguments.

An eight reason, which is proper to Binius Bin. Notis in vitam Silu..
Baptizauit.
, is taken out of Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 3 de vit. Constable. ca. 3.
, In whom Constantine is said many years before his death, to have showed
himself in a Picture, having above his head the sign of the Cross, and under
his feet the old enemy the Devil, represented in the shape of a winding
Dragon, Medio ventre transfixum, thrust through the midst with a Lance, and
cast into the deep sea. From this Picture, thus disputes Binius. How could
this be applied to Constantine, if he was not then baptized? For every
Catechume is energumenus, possessed of the Devil, and is so far from killing
the Serpent, that he is rather possessed by him, Nam aliter a Catechumeno non
expellitur quam per baptismum, For the Devil is not otherwise expelled from a
Catechume, then by baptism. Thus Binius.

Then by Binius divinity, Valentinian the Empeperor, of whom before I spoke,
was still possessed with the Devil, for he was not at all baptized: Then those
Martyrs who die Catechumes, are still possessed. And what a worthy piece of
Theology is this, to teach, such as are possessed with the Devil, to go
straight to heaven? For so did Valentinian, as Saint Ambrose Credamus, quia
ascendit ad illas florulentas delectationes, vbi ae^ernae vitae ^^uitur
voluntate, Ambros. Orat. de obitu Valent.
shows, and so do all Martyrs ad p^aemium statim peruenire, Ecclesia semper
credidit, Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 1.. Haec.
Martyrs. Again, if Constantine was till his nineteenth year possessed of the
Devil: how did he, not only by his private piety and zeal, but by his
public Laws and religious Edicts, abandon Idolatry and superstition, destroy
the tyrannical instruments and agents, yea the very power of the Devil, by
advancing the Gospel and profession of Christ throughout his whole Empire? as
besides others, Eusebius Deum omnibus qui (...) Imperij sui finibus
continebantur pala^ praedicare caepit Constantinus, Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 19. hoc
factum statim post de^^ctum Licinium, id est, anno suo 12. vt ante proba^imus.
whom Binius cites, is a most plentiful witness: was Satan then divided
against Satan? And what may Bellarmine think of Binius, and this divinity?
for by the Cardinals Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5.. Item. Et. Sed quia.
position, that the Nicene Council continued three years, and ended in the
twentieth of Constantine, it unavoidably ensues, that Constantine sat in the
Council of Nice among the Bishops, before he was baptized, while he was by
Binius assertion (...); possessed with the Devil. A wonder, that none of al
those two hundred holy Bishops at Arles, none of those three hundred and
eighteen Bishops at Nice, did use some exo^cisme, to expel the Devil out of
those holy assemblies, till Siluester did this, nine years after the one
Council, and a year and a half after the Nicene was, (by Bellarmines
assertion) begun: Or might one possessed, think you, sit in the Council at
Arles, as Binius himself confesses Constantine did, and not also at Nice?

Besides, there are two answers which specially concern this objection. The
former is touching Eusebius, and that which he conceived of that Picture. He
thought it indeed To be Vt liquet ex ipsis verbis Eusebij loco citato.
the Picture of Constantine, and that the Emperor meant to express himself
thereby. But what if Eusebius misconceiued Constantine? and whereas Constantine
in that table, intended to represent Christ like a valiant Warrior, conquering
and killing the old Dragon, treading him under his feet, and casting him into
the sea; Eusebius thought this was indeed to express Constantine himself.
Sure even that which Eusebius adds in that place, does much persuade, that
Constantine meant not himself, but Christ; for he says, That many admired
the wit and acuteness of the Emperor, that he, diuino afflatu pulsus, moved
by the holy Spirit, figured those same things, which by the words of the
Prophet Isa. 27. 1.
, were foretold of that dragon, that God should thrust a great terrible sword
into the dragon, and kill him in the sea. Thus Eusebius, whereupon it is
clearly consequent, that Constantine intending to represent that which the
Prophet Isay in those words expressly applied unto God, did not represent
himself, but Christ (of whom Isay prophesied) To be the killer and destroyer
of the old Serpent. But of this I have spoken more at large in another
Treatise, touching St. George killing the Dragon, and that which may be thought
to be signified thereby.

The other answer is touching Binius his collection, admitting Constantine to
have been indeed represented by that picture, as both he and all Christian
religious Emperors may well be, seeing they by their zealous defending and
propagating the Gospel, suppressing the violent and fraudulent oppugners
thereof, may truly be said by the power of Christ, to conquer and kill the old
Serpent, and tread him under their feet. Now I would demand of Binius, how he
knows that Constantine set forth this table or picture, after he was
baptized, rather then before? Certainly by Eusebius, who expressly avouches
Lib. 4. ca. 61. 62. 63.
his baptism to have been after his 30. year, when he was near his death,
and this picture to have been erected long before Nempe ante coactum conc.
Nicen. vt liquet ex lib. 3. ca. 3. and 4.
: it is undeniably consequent, that Constantine had killed and trodden under
foot the Dragon long before his baptism, and so the witness of Binius does
directly contradict that which he affirms, and would prove out of him. Again,
I would demand how he knows this picture was set up by Constantine, after his
19. year, rather then before it? for by Eusebius narration it clearly
appears, that the Emperor set it forth, upon his subduing of those persecuting
tyrants; and therefore the Dragon which Constantine, as Eusebius thought,
killed, is there Lib. 3. ca. 3.
said to have oppugned the Church impiorum tyrannide, by the tyranny of the
wicked. Now the last persecutor and tyrant, in whom the dragon oppugned the
Church in Constantines time, was Licinius, whom Constantine overcame in his 11.
or 12. year, as by his Edict L. 1. de vete^anis, Cod. Theod.
we before declared: upon which conquest, or shortly after, the Church enjoyed
Impijs hominibus e medio sublatis and po^estate tyrannica deleta, mundus de
reliquo, velut solis la^^ (...) collu^^^^^^ ^uit, Eu^. lib. 2. ca. 19. cum iam
Licini^^ occisus ^sset.
peace, together with the free promulgation of the Gospel of Christ.
Constantine then erected that picture, as a public monument, how by his
means, the tyranny of Satan was conquered by the power of Christ: and
Eusebius to signify that this picture had reference to those times, about his
12. year begins his next Chapter Lib. 3. ca. 4.
in this manner, Quibus rebus ad exitum perductis; These things being ended,
(to wit, touching the conquest of tyrants, and of the fury of the dragon) yet
the mind of Constantine was much troubled for that pestilent schism, which he
heard was in the churches of Thebes and Alexandria, about the cause of Arius:
and so he proceeds to that narration, (which he had a little interrupted)
touching the Emperors course which he took in the matter of Arius. So this
picture, by which Binius supposed, to prove the baptism of Constantine in his
19. year clearly proves, that he peruerts both the writings of Eusebius, and
the fact of Constantine, both which do show, that he had overcome the Dragon
before his nineteenth year, much more before his baptism.

The ninth reason, and that which carries indeed greatest color of truth, is
urged by Binius Quod Eusebius affirmat Constantinu^ in extremo vitae cursu ab
Eusebio Nicomediensi Artianorum antesignano baptizatum, impiu^ and a Catholica
Ecclesia alienum, ex hac vita nigrasse, figmentum est. etc. Bin. Ioco cita. in
Not. ad vitam Silu.
That if Constantine had been baptized at Nicomedia, and by Eusebius Bishop of
that place, seeing Eusebius was a known Arian, it would follow, that
Constantine should at the last turn to Arianisme, and so dye out of the
Church* out of the Catholic faith, as not only communicating with Arians,
but even receiving the holy Sacrament of an Arian Bishop, in token of his
communion with them. All which Binius says, (but most untruly Nam Eusebius
contrariu^ diserte asserit. Imperator (inquit, lib. 4. de vit. Constable. ca. 64.)
ad Deum suum assumptus est, and iterum, corpus humi relinquens animi partem
intellgentem ac diuinam Deo suo c^iunxit, and cap. 72. ter beatum voc^^.
) Eusebius to affirm.

For answer whereunto, it cannot be denied, nor can any be ignorant thereof, who
is conversant in the Ecclesiastical Histories, both that Constantine much
esteemed and favored Eusebius Nicomediensis, and that this Eusebius was a very
subtle and malicious Arian; and yet that Constantine even to his death,
extremely hated and detested Arianisme. Of the respect Constantine had of him,
there are besides other, two eminent tokens. The one, that when Athanasius
being most injuriously condemned in the Council at Tire, had complained Epist.
Syned^ Alexand apud Athana^. Apol. 2. page 195.
of their wrong to Constantine: when the matter came to be heard before the
Emperor, Eusebius craftily declining Aliud crimen commentitium detulerunt,
Apol. 2. page 219.
the former accusations, laid unto Athanasius charge a new crime, tending to a
kind of treason: that Athanasius had threatened to stay the Emperors ships
and corn which was to be sent out of Egypt, and so by that means (as might
be conceived) meant to weaken the Imperial State, or raise a sedition or
rebellion in the Empire: which when Athanasius with great grief denied,
saying; That he being but a private and poor man, was not able to do such a
matter, Eusebius periuring Eusebius de^erauit Athanasium perqua^ opulentum
esse, and satis virium and authoritatis ad ista patranda habere, ibid. pa. 195.
himself, swore that he had both wealth and authority enough to do it: to
whole oath the Emperor gave such credit, even as holy David 2. Sam. 16. 4.
did to Ziba, in the cause of innocent Mephibosheth, That without further
examination Emicuit ibi Caesaris ira, adeo vt inaudita causa, e vestigio
efferbuerit; and omisso iudicio, nos in Gallias relegarit, ibid. pa. 219.
of the truth, he banished Athanasius: but afterward repenting him of that
hasty act he purposed to cal^ Cum suis sed^bus hunc Episcopum pater
Consta^tinus restitue^e ^^^let, humana sort praeuentus eit ante^^am hoc
impleret, ait constantinus Epistala ad Eccl. Alexand. apud Athanas. Apol. 2.
pa. 219.
him home again, but was prevented by death. All which is to be seen in the
second Apology of Athanasius. The other token of his love and favor to this
Eusebius, was his receiving of the Sacrament of baptism at his hands, when he
was so extremely sick and near his death, whereof before we cited very many
witnesses.

It is true that some of the Ancients (as now Binius) considering no more then
those outward acts of Constantine, thought him in his latter time to decline to
Arianisme: so did Lucifer Lucif. lib. 1. pro Athan. pa. 57.
Bishop of Calaret a Confessor, who knowing the fact, but not the cause of
Athanasius banishment, said of Constantine, that he hated and banished
Athanasius, quia noluerit esse Arianus, because he would not be an Arian. So
did Saint Jerome in his Chronicle (if it be not falsely, Hier. in. Chron. an.
31. Constantini.
as may seem, inserted thereinto) who looking to the baptism of Constantine
by this Eusebius, collected thereupon, that he declined in Arianam Sectam, to
the Arian sect. They both did (and so does Binius) very injuriously from these
or the like facts, conclude any change in the faith of Constantine: for his
faith and profession was still the same, that is, Catholic; the change was not
in him, but in Eusebius: as if we observe three several times will easily
appear.

At the first, before and in the beginning of the Nicene Council, this
Eusebius showed himself in his natural colors an earnest Arrian: yea he was
so obstinate in defense thereof, that they were as usually if not more, called
from him Eusebians Eusebiani passim vocantur a Synodo Alexandrina, apud Athan.
Apol. 2.
, then from Arius, Arians. When Eusebius was such, the Emperor subscribed to
his condemnation which the Synod had decreed, Edictum Imperatoris Arium*
Eusebium, and Theognidem in exilium ire mandauit, says Socrates Socr. lib. 1.
ca. 5. p. 223.
, the Emperors Edict commanded that Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and
Theognis, should be banished: but very shortly after both Eusebius and diverse
others, though dissemblingly, recanted and subscribed Vobis significamus, nos
fidei confessioni consensisse, Epist. Eusebij Nico. and Theognidis. ad Patres
Concili^ Niceni. apud Socr. l. 1. c. 10.
to the Councels decree; whereupon they were received In Synodo Nicena octo
Episcopes Arianos susceptos scimus. Eusebius episcopus Nicomediensis. etc.
Hier. aduersus Lucifer^to. 2. p. 145
by the Nicene Council. Eusebius and the rest were permitted by the Emperor
Omnia quae voluerat obtinuit. sic de hoc Eusebio scribit Imp. in suis literis
apud Theod. 1. c. 19
to enjoy their Bishoprics: with their profession of change, the Emperors
displeasure was changed also.

Some few years after the end of the Council, Eusebius returned to his former
byasse, and began Eusebius Nicomediensis statim po^^. pro viribus laborauit vt
A^iu^ reduceret. Soc l. 1. c. 19. and Theod. l. 1. c. 19
again to labor for Arianisme. How Constantine was displeased with him
thereupon, his letters to the Church of Nicomedia, for the banishment of him
and Theognis, set down by Theodoret, are a most pregnant testimony: Thus he
writ: We Epist. Constantini apud Theod l. 1. c. 19.
have given commandment, concerning these ungrateful men (Eusebius and
Theognis,) that being carried from their Sees, they should be banished into
most remote places: adding withal, that if any man, eas Ecclesiae pestes, vel
memoria, vel laudibus celebrare aggrediatur, if any should mention or praise
those plagues of the Church, he should suffer condign punishment for so
doing. Thus did the Emperor show his detestatio^ of Eusebius when he showed
him self an Arian. And upon this charge from the Emperor was Eusebius Illi
(Eusebius and Theognis) (...) honoribus spoliati, Vrbibusque eiecti sunt.
Theod. ib.
deprived of his See and banished.

Shortly after this the Proteus changed his profession again, but with like
dissimulation and fraud as he had used before, as Theodoret Theod* l. 1. c. 19.
etc. 20.
shows, and as Nicephorus Nicep. lib. S. ca. 43.
truly notes of him and Theognis, ouium pellibus amicti, lupos agebant, they
put on the habit and show of Catholics, but inwardly in heart they were
wolves and cruel heretics. Constantine seeing but with man's eyes, upon his
return, received him not only into favor, but into familiarity Familiaris
Imperatori effectus. Theodo. loc. cit.
, he craftily giving sundry tokens of love to the Catholic faith. Yea
Baronius Bar. an. 33. nu. 5.
himself notes of him, that after his return from exile, Nicenam fidem coram
ipso ardenter pofitebatur, he before Constantine did earnestly profess the
Nicene faith, though in his heart he hated it. And from thencefoorth all the
time of Constantine, that Eusebius and Theognis and the rest did not nor durst
prosesse any other faith but the Nicene and Catholic, Sozomen declares, They
closely endeavored, says he Sozom. lib 2. ca. 30.
, to alter the Nicene faith, tamet si non auderent palam denegare, though
openly they durst not deny the same: and he gives this as a reason, pro certo
enim sciebant Imperatorem ita sentire, for they knew of a certainty, that the
Emperor did hold the Nicene faith, and they durst not gainesay the Emperor
therein: yea they were so forward in showing an outward profession of the
Catholic, and dislike of the Arian doctrine, that not only during
Constantines time, but five years also after that, while Constans lived, they
openly professed in the Synod at Antioch Quintus iam agebatur annus a morte
Constantini Soc. l. 2. c. 5.
in Encaenijs, nos certe Eusebianorume, ist^la apud Athan. lib. de Synod. pa^
^48. and apud Soc. lib. 2. ca 7. Eusebium aurem ipsum Nicomediensem interfuisse
concilio liquet ex Soc. l. ^. c. 9. and agnoscit Bar. an. 342. (...). 43.
Arij acoluthi, id est, fectatores no^ sumus, of a cer^aintie we are not
followers of Arius: and in the very first canon of that Synod, as followers and
defenders of the Nicene faith, they decree Canon. 1. C^c. Antioch. (...)
Encaen^js.
that all should be excommunicated, who durst dissolve or gainestand the
definition made for Easter by the Nicene Council, which was assembled in the
presence of the most religious Emperor Constantine. And yet notwithstanding
this outward and dissembling profession, both in Constantines time, and after,
they not only in heart embraced, but secretly and craftily labored (as
Athanasius shows) to bring in the heresy of Arius into the Church. Omitting
other, let Baronius own testimony be observed touching the outward profession
of Eusebius, and the chief Eusebians, during the time of Constantine. This
(says he Bar. an. 336. na. 37. 38.
) is to be understood, that the Eusebians so long as Constantine lived, did
forinsecus, outwardly make a show and profession of the Nicene faith, to which
they had once subscribed. And again, so long as Constantine lived, the
Eusebians durst not so much as mutire aduersus Nicenae fidei regulam, not once
whisper ought against the rule of the Nicene faith. So Baronius.

Had Constantine favored Eusebius, or any Arian Bishop, or received baptism
at their hands, while they had professed Arianisme and heresy, that blemish of
declining in his latter age from the faith, and of favoring the Arian heresy,
had been justly imputed to him. But seeing he communicated with Eusebius, and
received baptism at his hands, as of one, Ardenter profitebatur. an. 331. nu.
5.
who was a Catholic professor, and earnest (as Baronius faith) in that
profession, who was Constantine, that he should search into, or judge of the
heart? was he to be (...)? Was not he in charity to judge, that as Eusebius
professed with his tongue, so with his heart he believed the Nicene decree? The
Nicene Fathers themselves gave a clear instruction in this point: for when
this Eusebius, Theognis, and others; yea even Arius himself, made an outward,
but yet a fradulent and dissembling profession of the true faith, subscribed to
it with their hands, they received them into the communion of the Church, (as
S. Jerome Hier. loco citato.
expressly notes.) They judged them (and that justly) to be Catholics who made
a Catholic profession: yea the Apostles, and Christ himself taught the very
same, who held communion, and received Math. 26. 23. and seq. Christus prima^
Eucharistiam confectam manibus suis, Iudae sicut caeteris Apostolis tradidit
August in psalm 10. Adfuit Judas and illius sacrificij communicationem metuit.
Chrvs. ho. de Iudae prodit. sic ^^rill. lib. 9. in Ioh^n. ca. 15.
the sacrament with Judas, so long as he kept the outward and Catholic
profession, though in his heart he was an Apostata, yea a devil. By all which
this fact of Constantine in receiving baptism of Eusebius Nicomediensis, and
holding communion with him, is clearly justified: for even in so doing he
communicated with a Catholic Bishop in the eye of the Church, though he was a
detestable Arian, and a very Judas in the eye of God: he communicated with him
in that outward profession which was Orthodoxall, and all that man could see;
he did not communicate with his inward belief, which was heretical, and which
God did, but man could not see. So this objection touching Co^stantines
baptism, is but a mere cavil of those, who if this truth be admitted, would
collect a declination and Apostasy in Constantine, as if hereby he should
have been exeluded from faith, and all hope of salvation: whereas
notwithstanding this, yea even by this he gave a token of his constant
continuance in the Catholic faith, which until his last gasp he constantly
embraced and most honorably maintained and for this cause is honored as a
Saint in the Greek Menol. Graec^ie 21. Maij.
Church, and expressly called Saint Constantine, by Pope Epist. Steph. ^ad
Basilium extat post. Act. Conc. 8. apud Bin pa. 900.
Steven the sixth, though in their Roman Martyrologe, they would not vouchsafe
that honor unto him.

There are yet one or two doubts, which are in this cause eagerly, but most
maliciously urged by Augustine Steuchus. He not only calls it in plain
terms, Ad me^dacia multorum coarguenda de baptismo Co^stantini. Steuc. pa.
160.
a lie, that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, or by Eusebius Bishop of
that place, adding that the ancient Historians Grauifissimi scriptores
peccauerunt. ibid. pa. 158. and co^plures errauerunt. ib.
and Writers who say this, do err therein, but he will further also tell you,
how and by what occasion they erred and were deceived in this their report.
Constantine, says he Steuch. ibid. pa. 157. 158,
, the son of Constantine the Great, was a wicked Fuit improbus atque in
Arianorum dogma delapsus. ibid. ipse Arianus erat. ibid.
man, an Arian, and an embracer of Arianisme, he expelled E^ecit sanctu^
Foelicem. pa. 158.
out of the Roman See Pope Foelix, by whom Ob heresin Foelix cum anathema^c
percusserat. ibi.
he was anathematized for heresy: and in further token of his love to
Arianisme, whereas he had been formerly baptized, he was Ab Eusebio
Nicomed^ensi rebaptiza^us. ibid.
again baptized in the last part of his age by the Arians, even by that Arian
Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia; all which he Quod Dama sus testa^ur. ibi.
says, is affirmed by Damasus. Now hereupon, says he, those most grave
Historians and Writers attributed that to the Father, which indeed happened to
the son, both of them having one and the same name, and they supposed that
Constantine the father, was baptized in his last age by Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, whereas it was indeed his son Constantine. Thus Steuchus: who much
applaudes himself in this so wi^tie a conceit.

Truly I do not know whether I should here reprove his most gross and
supine ignorance, or his extreme malice to the truth. I shall not need to
show how injuriously and maliciously he accuses Constantine the younger, to
have been an Arian, and a favorer of Arianisme. The great love Intelligetis
quantae apud n^^reuerentiae fuerit. and Athanasiu^ vocat admirand^e legis
interprete^, and sacrum caput. Epist. Consta^tini ^unioris apud Athan. Apol. 2.
p 219.
and reverend respect which he showed to Athanasius while he was banished, and
the religious care Ego mihi conuenire puto, vt suis sedibus restituatur. ibid.
he had to see him with honor restored and put in quiet possession of his See
again, do undeniably convince Steuchus to be a slanderer.

That all the rest, which Steuchus has here heaped together against the same
Constantine, how he was rebaptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, how he
persecuted Pope Foelix, how he was anathematized by the same Foelix, and the
rest of the Narration is nothing else but a mere calumny and slander, every
one may perceive; and Steuchus himself (if either ignorance or malice had not
put out his eyes) might easily have discerned, seeing it is certain that this
Constantine was dead at least 15 years Constantinus junior obijt Acindino and
Proclo Coss. Soc. l. 2. c 3. is est annus Christi 340. Bar. Foelix autem
P^ntificatum init an. 357. nu. 67.
before Foelix ever came to the Popedom. So blinded was Steuchus with malice
that he regarded not, whether he had so much as any color of truth for his
lies and slanders. And whereas he pretends Pope Damasus, to be a witness of that
which he says (to omit his simplicity in thinking Damasus Liber iste est
Anastasij non* Damasi, vt notum est. Bell, (...). descrip. ^ccl. in Damaso.
to be the author of that book) Steuchus in this bewrayes himself to be void
of all truth, and most impudent in down-facing the same. For in that Damasus,
there is not one word of this, which Steuchus alleges. It is Constantius Hic
declarauit Cons^^tium haereti^^. ab evdem Co^stantio martyrio corona^^^ Foelix.
vita Foelic. 2. in Pontif. (vt vocatur) Damas^
and not Constantinus of whom Damasus writes, that he was a persecuter of
Foelix, that Foelix declared him an Heretic, that he was rebaptized by
Eusebius of Nicomedia; was this, think you, a small fault in Steuchus, first
to slander Constantine with all these heinous crimes, and then to belie Damasus
as affirming the same, whereas that Damasus speaks all, of the Arian Emperor
Constantius, and not one word of the most religious Constantine?

Now because Steuchus pretends also that the ancient Writers might another way
mistake Causa vna erroris quod Constantius filius scribitur supremo vitae
tempore baptizatus, Steuc. pa. 157. Potuit fieri vt scriptores tribuerent
patri, quod accidit filio Co^stantio. ibid,
this matter, and ascribe that to Constantine which happened to Constantius his
son: its further to be observed, that even this which the Anastasian Damasus
reports of Constantius his rebaptizing by Eusebius, is so palpably untrue, that
Binius Bin. not. in vitam Foelicis 2.. Hic.
says of it, falsis simum est, it is most false. And well might he so say: for
Constantius was not so much as once baptized while Pope Foelix lived, but as
Socrates Constantius baptismo ab Euzoio accepto, ad bellum recta proficisritur,
in eoque mortem oppetijt. Soc. lib. 2. ^a. 37.
witnesses, a very little before Constantius own death; which was three
Constantius obijt Coss, Tauro and Flore^tio. Soc. loc. cit. Is est an. Chr.
361. Bar. eo an. nu. 1. Foelix obijt an. 358* vt testatur Bar. an. 357. nu. 67
complete years after the death of Foelix. Again when he was baptized, it was
not as that lying Damasus Damas. in vita Foelic. 2.
says, by Eusebius, but by Euzoius Bishop of Nicomedia: and this not only
Athanasius Athan. lib. de Synod. pa. 350.
, but Socrates Soc. li. 2. c. 37.
also expresses. Whereby it is evident that the ancient Historians did not (as
Steuchus fancieth) mistake the baptism of Constantius the son, instead of
Constantine the father, seeing they mention them both Soc. li. 1. c. 26* agit
de baptismo Constantini and l. 2. c. 37. agit de baptismo Constantij.
, as two diverse baptismes, and express the diverse times at which, the diverse
persons by whom they were administered. So every way is Steuchus convinced both
of slandering Constantinus the younger, and of belying Damasus, and of imputing
a very foolish error to those ancient and grave Historians, as if they had
erroniously thought, that to agree to Constantine the Father, which, as
Steuchus fancieth, happened either to Constantine the younger, or to Constantius
his brother.

Like ignorance and malice does Steuchus show in another fancy, touching the
baptism of Constantine. He says Operae pretium est nosse baptismum magni
Constantini, quem scripsit Eusebius fuisse potius balneum calidarum aquarum, ad
quas aeger Constantinus sanit^ti consulens accessit. Steuch. lib, cit. pa. 158,
, That whereas Eusebius affirms Constantine to have been baptized at
Nicomedia, its worthy your labor, to observe and know, that the baptism
whereof Eusebius speaks, was not the Sacramental baptism, but balneum
calidarum aquarum, A bath of hot waters at Nicomedia, wherein Constantine when
he was sick was bathed for his bodily health. Is this that which is operae
pretium, to know? No, the recompense of your labor must be to know, that
Steuchus for this his fancy, does deserve for ever to wear a bell and a babble.
Do but read and consider the most pious and religious speech, and actions of
Constantine, used at that time, and recorded by Eusebius, (who, as it seems,
was then present with him) and you will not only remain assured, that
Constantine was not baptized either at Rome, or by Syluester, but further also
even admire the stupidity, and for ever detest the vile dealing of Steuchus,
and all such as follow him.

Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 4. de vit. Constable. ca. 6^ and 6^.
declares, how while Constantine being at Constantinople, grew sick and very
distempered in his body, for that cause went ad calida ciuitatis balnea, to
the hot bathes of that City; from thence, says Eusebius, he went to
Helenopolis (a City Helinopol^n Bythinia trasitvt tbi profluentibus sponte
sua aquis, and naturalibus lauacus vteretur, Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 54.
in Bythinia) to use the bath of that place also: and departing Inde
(Helinopoli) discedens ad suburbana Nicomediae peruenit. Eus. loc. cit.
hence, he came to the Suburbs of Nicomedia, and there calling the Bishops unto
him, he said thus; What I have these many years desired, brethren, this day
has brought unto me. Now its time that I should at last be partaker of that Vt
tandem insigni illo per quod immortalitatem ^dipiscimur, perfruamur, ibid. ca.
62.
sign, by which we obtain immortality, which I had purposed to have done in
Jordan, after the example of Christ, but God seeing what is most fit, does
vouchsafe these mysteries unto me in this place. And then, says Eusebius, the
prayers being ended, and the accustomed ceremonies of the divine Institution
being used, arc^norum mysteriorum eum participem faciunt, They do administer
the holy and sacred mysteries unto him: and he, renatus and sacris initiatus,
Being then regenerate and initiated by the holy Sacrament, did wonderfully
rejoice and admire the divine Majesty, and being attired with princely Robes,
more white then light, he laid away his Scarlet, nor would he touch it again.
Thus, and much more Eusebius. Can any now sufficiently deride Steuchus, for
perverting these words of Eusebius, and all the sacred actions performed both
by Constantine, and the Bishops, as meant of an hot bath? Did he defer this
so many years, that he might go to an hot bath at Jordan? Or will Steuchus
dare to say, that Christ's baptism, was but an hot bath? Is an hot bath, a
mystery that is a Sacrament, or sacred sign of immortality? Or who duly
pondering these words of Constantine, can ever doubt that he was now, and never
before, baptized, and that at Nicomedia? and therefore that Pope Hadrian,
Steuchus, Baronius, Binius, and all the rest, who affirm, that he was baptized
at Rome, and by Syluester, do most certainly against the evidence of undoubted
records, maintain a most evident untruth.

Now in the last place we are to consider how Baronius declameth and inueigheth
most eagerly against Eusebius, who is the relator of this truth. He calls him on
Arian Bar. an. 324 nu. 63.
, the ringleader Signifer Arianorum. ib.
of Arians, a liar Eusebius mentitus est, ibid. nu. 48.
, one subtle in devising Imbibit dolos ad concinnanda quotquot posset
mendacia, ib. nu. 43.
as many lies as he could; adding, that he lies Necesse est dicere Eusebium,
(in hoc de Constantini baptismo) esse mentitum. ib. nu. 48. de baptismo est
falsa narratio, ibid. nu 42.
in this touching Constantines baptism, that he was the Comment^ ab Ariano
homine ex ^ogitatum, ibid. n^ 49. and nu. 50. v^cat hoc, A^iani hominis
imposturam.
architect who first forged and devised this lie, from whom as the spring
Exs^^^^o (...).
, others derived this untruth and imposture, none ever before mentioning the
same, himself also contradicting Ibid ^n 46.
his own narration. Thus does Baronius (I say not) reason, but rave against
the reporter of this truth, thinking that by disgracing him, he may oppress
and overthrow the truth it self.

Its not my purpose wholly to excuse Eusebius, either for his life or doctrine:
Vitijs sine nemo nascitur, optimus ille qui minimis vrgetur; yet had Eusebius
been worthy of never so much blame, Baronius of all men, was most unworthy and
unfit to object the same unto him, Loripidem rectus derideat. The Cardinals
own Annals, being so fraught with fables, yea being a lump of lies, and a
very mass of misreported matters, he should have been more sparing, in
obiecting errors or untruths unto others; most of all to Eusebius, whose
History and Chronicle, were the very best ^orch, to direct Baronius in that
whole course of time which they handle. But he, most ungrateful person, having
had so much help* and received both light and warmth from the fire of Eusebius,
does like Aesops Viper, disgorge the venom of his mind and virulency of his
tongue upon him, whom he should, and that most deservedly, have honored.

Now though I cannot in all matters, nor intend in any one error, to patronize
Eusebius, yet can I not endure to hear this Roman Rabsheca, so indignely
misuse a reverend Bishop, and a most renowned Historian: and specially for
delivering a most clear, certain, and undoubted truth. Omitting many other,
there are four points in the Cardinals Inuectiue, which I will touch in this
place.

The first is the Cardinals acuteness, in spying a strange repugnancy in the
sayings of Eusebius, whereas he affirms Eusebius. lib. 4. de vit. Constable. ca. 62.
, Constantine to be the first Emperor that was baptized: Baronius to disgrace
Eusebius, as contradicting himself, and therefore as unworthy of credit, says
Bar. ann. 324. nu. 46.
; Plane immemor, Eusebius had quite forgot what himself had said in his own
History Eusebius. lib. 6. histor. eccle. ca. 33.
, that Philip who was Emperor long before Constantine, was a Christian. Do
you not admire the Cardinals subtlety, who can see a repugnancy in those two
assertions, which are both true, and fitly coherent the one to the other? Had
Eusebius said, that Philip the Emperor had been baptized, the Cardinal might
justly have insulted, and declaimed against him. But seeing Eusebius says
only, that he was a Christian, and says not that he was baptized; you may
sooner see here the Cardinals hatred to Eusebius, then any contradiction in his
writings. Its true that before Constantine, not only Philip, Philippus primus
Romanorum principum Christianus fuit. Vin^. Lirin* ca. 23^ and Oro^. lib. 7 ca.
20.
, but Constantius Vt liquet ex Eusebius. lib, 1. de vit. Constable. ca. 11.
Clorus also, the father of Constantine, were Christi^ns, and embraced
Christianity, Though neither of them were baptized, neither of them, by
Imperial authority established Christianity in the Empire. But of all
Emperors, Constantine was the first, who to his Christian profession added
baptism, and by his authority commanded all his subjects to embrace the
Christian faith. In which respect, he is usually called also the first
Christian Emperor; not simply, nor in regard of the profession only, but
first of all, who was Christian in a complete manner, who received the holy
ensign of that holy profession: first, who by Imperial laws allowed and
authorized the profession thereof. Some, I confess, following the namelesse
and worthless Acts of Pontius Imperatores crediderunt and a S. Fabiano Papa
baptizati sunt. Act* Pontij, apud Bar. an. 246. nu. 9 Idem ait Gilb. Geneb. in
Chron. an. 252.
, say of Philip the Emperor and his son, that they were baptized; but
Eusebius says no more as of his own opinion and judgment, but that Philip Cum
Christianus esset. Eus loc. cit.
was a Christian: what is further added in Eusebius, That Philip was excluded
by Pope Fabianus from the public prayers of Christians, and that he was set
to do penance among the vulgar sort of penitents, and after that received
into the Christian Communion: all this Eusebius relates, only as a fame and
report of others, (saying, (...), which Christopherson rightly translates, fama
est; others, de eo fertur) but Eusebius himself approues not this report, as
true; nor is it indeed any way likely: but that Philip was baptized, Eusebius
neither as of his own opinion, nor yet so much as by a fame or report of
others, does affirm. Nay Eusebius directly denies the same, and this one
testimony so confidently given by Eusebius, that (...). lib. 4. ca. 62.
Constantine was the first of all the Roman Emperors that were baptized, is of
more weight to persuade that Philip was not baptized, the^ any which can be
produced, that affirms he was baptized. Howsoever, seeing Eusebius says it
not, Baronius, you see, herein proves himself a Sophistical trifler, but no
way proves any repugnancie in Eusebius.

The second is, the simplicity of Baronius, who gives this as a reason, why
Haec demo^strat ^ sunt, vt haec impostura fidem apud lectorem non inueni^t, sia
quou^s id trad^ reperiat, cu^ nullus alius praecesserit, praeter Eusebrum a quo
id quisquam acceperit author Bar. an. 324. nu. 50.
none should believe that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, in whomsoever
this be found reported, seeing there is none before Eusebius who has reported
the same. Was not the Cardinal, think you, bereft of reason when he thought
any before Eusebius could report either when, or where Constantine was
baptized? Eusebius lived at that very time, he conuersed daily and familiarly
with Constantine; who could sooner or better know it, more certainly relate
it, then such a Bishop? The Cardinal might as well prove that none should
believe that Constantine was Emperor, in whomsoever this be found to be said,
because no Historian before Eusebius does mention or write the same. Nay, it
may much more firmly be concluded, that Eusebius his report hereof is most
true, seeing none in that age did control or contradict him therein: their
general silence being a seconding, and approving of his narration, all in that
age, knowing it to be so certain, that they rested satisfied in his report,
they thought it needless to say the same, and impossible with any color of
truth, to say the contrary. And though none before Eusebius his time did write
thereof (for that was impossible) yet even in that very age, did others most
worthy of credit, Saint Ambrose Amb. orat. de obitu The. od.
and Saint Jerome Hier. in Chron.
write, and testify that which Eusebius had written before: and both of these
were alive Ambrosius obijt an. 397. aetatis suae 64. Bar. on. 397. nu. 30. ergo
natus est an. 333. Hier. obijt an. 420. aetatis suae 91. Bar. an. 420. nu. 39.
ergo natus est an. 330. Baptismus aute^ Co^stantini suit vltimo ipsius anno. Id
est, 336. aut 337.
when Constantine was baptized, and one of them Bishop within 33. years after.
Against these so ancient and faithful witnesnesses, all living at this very
time, the Cardinal cannot produce any within 140. years of Constantine, who
writ the contrary, no nor after that time neither can he allege any, but the
fabulous Acts of Siluester, with the forged second Roman Synod (which both seem
to have bin devised about the 440. year Nam extabant Acta Siluestri ante Conc.
Romans sub Gelasio, quod habitum est an. 494.
of Christ), and such as being in their credulity abused by their forgeries,
do abuse others with false and fabulous reports taken out of them.

The third thing which I observe in the words of Baronius, is his most uncivil
usage of this reverend Bishop, in so often and insolently giving him the lie,
and calling him an Architect and deviser of lies. To this reuiling of Baronius,
let me oppose that testimony of Saint Jerome: Eusebius, says he Ecclesiast.
historiam pulchre Eusebius ^exuit. Hier. epist. ad Pammach. and Ocea^
, has excellently written the Ecclesiastical history: and again, I Hier.
Apol. 1 aduers. Russin.
have praised Eusebius for his Ecclesiastical history, and for his Chronicle.
That of Euagrius, Eusebius Caesariensis is a man most eloquent, so excellent in
writing, that by his persuasion he enforces his readers to love and embrace
Christian religion. That of their own learned disputer ^uag. lib. 1. ca. 1.
, He is the best and most ancient historian of all Hearts conference with D.
Rain^^. ca. 6. ^^uis. ^.
that ever have traveled in the Stories of the Church. That of their Bishop
Christopher ^on the translatour of Eusebius, For History, says he Prooem.
Christophers. in Eusebium, in fine.
, Eusebius has so set it down, that Saint Hierome greatly approues it, Et sic
veritati adhaesit, vt nihil in illa error^s omnino reperiatur; He so followed
the truth, that there is no error to be found in his Story. Or if this seem
(as indeed it is) too excessive commendation, let us hear their own Bishop
Canus, who supposing Can. loc. The^l. lib. 11. cap. 6.. Rei^cit.
, (as many other have done) the writings of Eusebius to be condemned by Pope
Gelasius, (the occasion of which error, I shall hereafter explain) could
find no reason, why Gelasius should so hardly censure the History of
Eusebius, but only, Because he sets down the Epistle of Christ to Abagarus,
(which yet Eusebius only reports, but approues not as true and undoubted:) and
certain Epistles of Clemens Alexandrinus, (wherein Eusebius deserves no blame
at all;) and the praises of Origin, (whose errors yet he does not there
approve:) and Canus then adds, Gelasius ^aetara sibi ac Concilio pla^uisse
mo^^t, ibid.. Praeterea*
did allow the rest in Eusebius; therefore if you except that Epistle to
Abagarus* and the praises of Origin, his History is such, cui fides omnino
haberetur, as may wholly be credited. And for the Chronicle of Eusebius, He was
(says Canus Ibid.
) a man of great diligence and labor, of exceeding variety of reading, and of
very grave judgment. Neither do I know whether any Author, either in the
Latin or Greek Church, though he strive never so much, can leave more
excellent Monuments of time. Thus Canus: who having so diligently examined and
weighed this whole matter, his only judgment ought not only to ouersway, but
utterly abolish and confound for ever the Cardinals railing against, and
reuiling of Eusebius: especially for his recording this of Constantines
baptism, wherein by the testimony of Bishop Canus, his history is worthy to
be wholly believed.

The fourth and last point which I here observe, is the Cardinals imputation
of Arianisme unto Eusebius: wherein he treads but in the steps of some of the
worthy Fathers of their second Nicene Council. Eusebius Con Nic. 2. Act. 5 pa.
351. Eusebij verba cit^ntur. Act. 6 pa. 374.
had taught that no image could fully express Christ, being both God and man:
the Nicene Fathers, no^ enduring that any should cross their doctrine of
Images, reject and anathematize Sancta Synodus dixit, libros illius re^^^imus
and anathematizamus. ibid. Act. 5 pa. 352.
his books, yea all that Sancta Synod as dixit, Anathema and illis libris
(Eusebi^) and qui^^los l^gunt. ibi.
read them; call him an heretic Originem and ipsum autho^^ (Eusebi^)
haereticos ostenda^^s. ibid.
an Arrian Apparet ill^. Ariancae esse opinionis. Act. 6. p. 375. a.
, yea and a Theopaskite O^mantur Chri^^u^ ca^^e^ sin^ (...) assu^^p^sse, etc.
^bid.
also, one who taught that Christ had no soul, but the Godhead supplied the
office of the soul, that so the Dei^ie might be said to suffer. Eusebius
being of this sect, says their Nicene proctor, Epiphanius Ibid.
, imaginem Christi Theopascitarum more reijcit, reiects the image of Christ, as
the Theopaskites do, adding, that Eusebius (...) area domi^ica. (cath^ lica^
dico ecclesiam) (...) sunt. ibid p. 374. b.
is rejected and cast out of the Catholic Church.

Had Eusebius writ inuectiues against Constantine, calling him, as Baronius
does, a parricide (...), 24, nu. 28. and 44.
, a persecutour Bar. ib. nu. 33.
of the Church far worse ann. e^de^, nu 45.
then Constantius (whom Catholics counted and called Antichrist,) had he told
fables and lies of Constantines leprosy, cure, and baptism at Rome: or had he
writ for Images and adoration thereof, Eusebius had been a renowned writer
with Baronius and the Nicene Fathers; because he does not this, he must be an
heretic, an Arian, and Theopaskite, one cast out of the Church.

First, for that calumny of the Theopaskites, objected by those Nicene
fathers, there is no truth at all in them, nor are they worthy of any credit:
for that Eusebius did truly and rightly teach two distinct natures to be, and
to abide in Christ, the divine and the humane, all his books do abundantly
testify. In his History he Eusebius. lib. 1. Eccles. hist. c. 1.
sets down this as the foundation of all that follows, That Christ being God,
induit hominem nobis similiter passionibus obnoxium, took upon him man, or
humane nature, being by it subject to passion as we are: and again, that the
Deity is impassible, he plainly teaches in that Epistle of his which is
recorded in Socrates and Theodoret, wherein he Epist. Eusebij Caesar. apud
Socr. li. 1. ca. 5. prope finem. and ^heod. l. c. 12.
professes the divine nature to be void and incapable of passion, affection,
or mutilation. To say nothing that the heresy of the Theopaskites, (which
those Nicene fathers impute to Eusebius) did but spring up, and was borne about
Exorti sunt Theopascitae temporibus Hormisdae Pontificis circa annu^ Do* 513.
Pratelol. de haeres. in Theopasc.
the year 513. more then 160. years after Eusebius was dead.

For that other imputation of Arianisme; its true, that Eusebius for a while
inclined to that heresy, and was an earnest propugner thereof: Saint Jerome
testifying of him, Arianum Hier. (...)
fuisse nemo est qui nesciat, there is none but know that Eusebius was an
Arian; and again Hier. (...)
, he was Arij apertissimus propugnator, an open defendour of Arius. But that
he reclaimed himself and forsook Arianisme at the time of the Nicene
Council, it is evident by many witnesses. Theodoret Theod. ^^b. 1. ca. 12.
and Socrates S^c. l. b. 1. ca. 5. pa. 223.
of purpose declare this, expressing that form of faith which Eusebius made
and offered to the Council, so orthodoxall, that Constantine exhorted all the
Bishops* to subscribe unto it, so that this only word of (...) were added
thereunto. To which Eusebius in that his own Epistle Epist. Eusebius. citata a
Theod* and Socr* locis cit.
says, that when he understood what they meant thereby, he assented
thereunto; adding, that diverse ancient and holy Bishops before the time of the
Nicene Council, used that very word (...). Sic tandem, says Socrates, vna cum
reliquis vniuersis came approbauit, and subscriptione ratam fecit: so at last
Eusebius with all the rest of the Council approved that of Homousios, and
subscribed unto it. Athanasius who was present in the Council witnesses the
same. Eusebius Caesariensis, says he Athan. co^^. Atian. haeres. decreta. pa.
180
, subscribed to that sentence of the Council, which a little before he had
denied, and he writ this to the Church of which he was Bishop, telling them,
eam esse ecclesiae fidem, that this was the true faith of the Church and the
tradition of the Fathers, confessing in his Epistle that Christ was (...), of
the same substance with the Father. So Athanasius: then whom a more authenticke
witness cannot be desired.

That Eusebius perseuered in this orthodoxie of faith, the most honorable and
memorable testimony of Constantine himself, with whom Eusebius was most inward
and familiar, is a most clear evidence. When the people of Antioch, being in a
great uproar about their election of a Bishop, requested to have Eusebius, and
Eusebius had refused the Bishopric of Antioch, the Emperor much commending
that his fact, writ unto him, expressing his own, nay the whole Catholic
Churches judgment of Eusebius in this manner, Sic Epist. Constant^^m ad
Eusebium l. 3. de vita. Constable. (...). 59.
putato, Think thus of your self, that you are herein blessed, in that by
the testimony almost of the whole world, you are judged worthy to be the
Bishop (...) of the whole Church, (or as others ^o^^nius (...). sed totius
orbis. Hist trip. l. 1. c. 27. and (...). l. 2. c. 18.
have it, of the whole world): and this also is an overplus of your happiness,
that every one is so desirous of you, that they would have you to be and abide
with them. Thus Constantine. Would himself, being a most religious Emperor,
nay would the whole Catholic Church, and almost the whole world, give so ample
and honorable a testimony of Eusebius, had he been an Arian?

Here I can not sufficiently both admire, and detest the most fraudulent
dealing of Baronius in this matter. He to persuade you, as do also the second
Nicene Fathers, that Eusebius after the Nicene Council, remained an Eusebius
postea in Conciliab^l* Tyr^o alijsque con^nenticulis pro A^^anis st^^^t,
omnibusque studijs Ario f^ui^. Ba^not. in Ma^tyr. Ro^. Iun. 21. and similia
habet. an. 355. nu. 8 9.
Arian, most craftily tells you, that this testimony was given by Constantine,
not after the Nicene Council (as the narration in Eusebius Eus lib. 3. de
vita. Constant. ca* 59. cum de Concilio Nic^no (...). 14.
does show that it was) but that Constantine (...).
writ this at that time, when Eustathius was chosen Bishop of Antioch, which
was certainly before the Nicene Council (Eustathius being one (...)
of the chief Bishops therein:) and that it was then, that the people of
Antioch being in a tumult, requested the Emperor that Eusebius might be
translated from Caesarea to Antioch. Yea the Cardinal not only reproues and
declaimes against the cra^t of Eusebius, for setting this, as following after
the Nicene Council, whereas it happened before; but also (with more then
Sinonian art) he tells you why Eusebius thus perverted the times. I epsy,
says he Bar. loc. cir.
, incredibilem vafri viri versutiam, the incredible craft of Eusebius herein,
and this it is; He was noted in the Nicene Council of Arianisme, and to cover
that blemish, he sets this letter of Constantine in his commendation, as
written after the time of the Council: which if he had set in his due place,
and before the Council, his praise would have been darkened, seeing all the
Council knew him to be an Arian: Thus Baronius. If any please to examine this
matter, he will certainly see, not as the Cardinal did, per transennam, but
as clear as the light, incredibilem vafri viri versutiam, the incredible craft
of Baronius. For all those troubles at Antioch about the election of their
Bishop, and desiring to have Eusebius, (which Baronius recites Bar. an. 324.
nu. 143.
, and sets down as falling out at the election of Eustathius) happened not at
his election, but 18. years after, when Eustathius was deposed and thrust from
that See: Then it was, that the city of Antioch was in an exceeding uproar for
a new Bishop: Then it was, that they writ and sent to Constantine, entreating
to have Eusebius; then it was, that Eusebius refused to take that patriarchall
See; then it was, that Constantine writ the letter, giving so high commendation
to Eusebius. All which is most evident, by the narration not only of Eusebius
himself, but of Theodoret Theod lib. 1. ca. 20 and 21.
, of Socrates Soc. l. 1. c. 18.
, of Sozomen Sozom. lib. 2. ca. 18.
, of Cassiodore Cast. tripe^t. hist. l 2. c. 25.
, and of Nicephorus Nic. lib. 8. ca. 45.
; who all expressly mention this offering of the Sea of Antioch to Eusebius, and
his refusal of it, to have been after Eustathius was deposed; yea Socrates,
Sozomen, Cassiodore, and Nicephorus, express this very commendation of
Eusebius, to have been at that very time given unto him by Constantine, that
he was worthy to be the Bishop of the whole world: whereas Baronius produces
not (nor, as I do verily believe, could not produce or find) so much as one
either historian or other of his opinion, though he to blemish Eusebius,
magisterially takes upon him, against the evidence of truth, and against so
many evident witnesses, to turn topsituruie, the historical narrations of
eighteen years. Say now in truth if you do not see, incredibilem vafri viri
versutiam.

Nay, its ^leere that Eusebius before, and till the time of the Nicene
Council, was a favorer, and as Saint Jerome says, a propugner of the Arians;
so that the Emperor, (and much less the whole Church) could not then think
Eusebius to be so worthy a Bishop, or worthy of so high commendation: But this
testimony, they having had long experience of his orthodoxie and faith, some
ten or eleven years after the Nicene Council, might well give unto him. For
the deposing of Eustathius, fell not out three years after Constantines death,
as Baronius Bar. an. 340. nu. 30.
foulie misconceiuing the Chronology of Nicephorus Baronius fraudulenter
asserit sex annos Vitalis poni a Nicephoro post imperium Constantini inceptum.
Sed non hoc ait Niceph in sua Chron sed Vitalem fuisse ex ijs vnum, qui
Antiochiae sederunt tempor^ Christiani Impera^oris: and sedisse in vniuersum
sex annos. sed tres aut quatuor ^orum elapsi erant, antequa^ ad Imperium
peruenit Constantinu^, vt ^x ijs quae ^aximus, liquido constat.
Bishop of Constantinople affirms; but it happened about the last year of
Constantine: and seeing Eusebius, as Socrates Socr. lib. 2. ca. 3.
witnesses, died shortly after the return of Athanasius to Alexandria (which
was the next year Constantinus obijt an. 337. Athanasius restituitur an. 338.
Bar ^o an. nu. ^. and seq.
after Constantines death) you see what an honorable testimony this is, which
the Emperor and the whole Catholic Church gives of the perseverance of
Eusebius in the profession of the Catholic faith; and how slanderously
Baronius Bar. loc. citatis.
, and the second Nicene Fathers say Con. Nic. ^. Act. 6. pa^ 375. ma^sit enim
vt Aethiops, non commutans cutem suam.
of him, that he continued in heresy like a Blackamoore, and that he did not
change his skin.

To these let us join Socrates, who in his Ecclesiastical history, has
professedly writ an Apology Socr. l. 2. c. 1^
for Eusebius, wherein he plainly calls them slanderers, and reproachful
detractors, and contumelious vexers of Eusebius, who accuse him (and so do the
second Nicene Fathers, and Baronius) to have been a favorer of Arians, after
the Nicene Council: and this he proves, not only because Eusebius consented
to the Nicene Council, but out of diverse writing of Eusebius, wherein he
directly teaches the contrary to the Arians. The same Orthodoxie of Eusebius,
and his constancy therein, is witnessed by that learned man Georgius Trap.
praefat, ad Nich. papa^ in lib. de praepar. Euang.
Trapezuntius, who says that Eusebius did willingly follow the authority of
the Nicene Father, and sanctissime atque pie in Orthodoxia vixisse, that he
lived most holily in the Orthodoxe faith. But omitting others, I choose rather
to allege Sixtus Senensis, who declares the very occasion, how many have been
deceived in imputing Arianisme to Eusebius Caesariensis. Non defuere, says he
Six. Sen* biblioth. in Eusebius,
, There have not wanted some, who have thought Eusebius to have been an Arian,
and an oppugner of the N^cene Council, being deceived by the like name of
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, who lived at the very same time, was in great
esteem with Constantine, and was Antesignanus Arianorum, the very ringleader
of Arians: the likeness of the name, made men to think that to be meant of
Eusebius Caesariensis, which was both spoken and meant of Eusebius
Nicomediensis. Or else, says he Ibid.
, they were deceived, because Eusebius Caesariensis did in the Nicene Council
a long time doubt, whether the word Homousios might be allowed or no: but when
it was explained by the Nicene Fathers what they meant thereby, decreto
Homousianorum subscripsit, Eusebius then subscribed to the Nicene Decree. So
Sixtus.

The very same is witnessed by Tritemius Trit. lib. de script. eccles. in,
Eusebius.
, saying, that whereas Eusebius was first an Arian, coming to the Nicene
Council, errorem deposuit, he abandoned his error, and embraced the Nicene
faith. Tritemius adds one point further most worthy remembering for clearing of
Eusebius. He at the appointment of the Nicene Council, composed that Creed,
which is called the Nicene Creed, and in token of his most sincere faith
offered it to be read and confirmed by them, In which Creed, he so crushed
the errors of the Arians, that they approved it, without either adding or
subtracting ought at all from that form of faith which Eusebius had made. Thus
Tritemius.

Whence it is clear, that Eusebius was at no time an heretic, no not even
then when he embraced the heresy of Arius. Before the time of the Council, he
erred indeed (as Cyprian had done in another matter) but then the cause was
not as yet fully decided, and he was not obstinate no^ pertinacious (which
only makes an heretic) in that error, but even then he was paratus corrigi:
And his own fact did demonstrate the same: for after full discussion of the
cause, he submitted his, to the Churches judgment: he forsook, and as
Tritemius says, deposuit, left his error, and subscribed to the Catholic
faith, which until that full discussion, he had erroniously, but not
pertinaciously, and therefore not heretically oppugned. After the Council he
cannot be thought an heretic, being so constant (as we have already proved)
in the Catholic faith, and that even to his dying day, as Tritemius Trit.
(...). citato.
witnesses, saying; Eusebius after the Nicen Council, in orthodoxa fide
perseuerans, sancti^sime consummatus est, perseuering in the Catholic faith
in a most holy manner was consummate or died. For which cause he is set in the
rank and Catalogue of the blessed Saints and Confessors. Vsuardus in his
Martyrologie says V^uardi Martyrologia quo Romana Ecclesia, ac permultae aliae
vtuntur, iussu Carol^ magni conserptu^* in (...)
, that on the twenty one day of June is observed in Palestine, the Celebritie
sancti Eusebij, Episcopi, and Confessoris, of S. Eusebius a Bishop, a
Confessor, an Historiographer of most excellent wit. Posseuine also (...)
witnesses, that he is reckoned among the Saints, both by Pe^rus de Natalibus
in his book de Catalogo Sanctorum, and by the Greek Men^logie. Likewise in
the Martyrologe of St. Notkerus, who was canonized by Pope Leo the tenth, it is
thus said Martyr. Notk^^^. (...)
; On the twenty one day of June, is the death Sancti Eusebij Episcopi, of
Saint Eusebius a Bishop, celebrated at Caesarea. This canonizing of Eusebius,
and enrolling him among the glorious and blessed Saints, not only by Vsuardus,
but, as Posseuine says, by Pet. de Natalibus, by the Greek Menologie, which
both Canisius and Baronius commend Hen. Can. in epist. ad left. post Finem
Menologij.
, as very ancient, and of best note; and specially by Saint Notkerus, who lived
about seven hundred years Notkerus obijt anno dom. 912. Metzler. in admonit.
ad ^^ct. ante Martyr. Notkeri.
since, and but a little Conc. Nic. 2. habitum, ann. 787. Bin. and Bar. Carolus
Magnus obijt an. 814. Bar. ^o an nu. 57. Notkerus valde dilectus Carolo Magno,
c^itis nepos fuit. Echerhard in vit. B. Notkeri, cap. 29.
after the second Nicene Council, is sufficient to wipe away that slander and
untruth of their second Nicene Synod, (which Notkerus, as it seems, purposely
intended to do) where they say, that Eusebius was shaken out like chafe, and
cast out of the Church. For though he be cast out of the Idolatrous and
Image-worshipping Church here upon earth, yet is he (as you see) reckoned
among the glorious Saints of God, and received into the tryumphant Church in
heaven. Thus Baronius by his disgracing of Eusebius, has now occasioned us,
not only to defend the honor of Eusebius, and vindicate it from his calumnies
and slanders; (wherein I confess, I was very willing to take some pains, for
the benefit which the whole Catholic Church has received by his writings:)
but further also to leave this baptism of Constantine, witnessed not only by
other ancient Fathers, Bishops, and Historians, but by the undoubted testimony
of that Eusebius, whom Constantine and all the world honored for a Catholic
Bishop, while he lived, and their own Martyrologies honor for a blessed Saint
and Confessor when he is dead. And thus much be spoken of the third
circumstance, whereby the forgerie of this second Roman Synod is demonstrated,
in that it was held after Constantine was baptized at Rome by Pope Syluester,
which as we have clearly proved, was never.

CHAP. VII.
The seventh reason, proving this second Roman Synod to be a forgerie, taken
from the Donation of Constantine: and first of the Charter or Edict thereof.
THE fourth and last circumstance which I will mention, whereby this Synod is
proved a counterfeit, is the Donation, or as Steuchus calls Aug. Steu^^ lib.
1. de Donat. Constable. pa. 43.
it, the Decree, or the Oracle of Constantine. For that was made a little after
his baptism, and before this Synod, as the Acts of Syluester do witness:
wherein Act. Silu. apud Bar. ann, 324. nu. 60.
the privileges of the Church, are said, to be given the fourth day after his
baptism. That the Edict of the Donation, says Baronius Bar. an. ^^d. nu. 12^.
, was made the fourth day after his baptism, the Latin copies do set down.
And Binius in his Marginall notes upon the Edict, expresses Bin. to. 1. pa.
297.
the same; Constantinus Imperator quarto die, Constantine gave this the fourth
day after his baptism. And at the beginning of the Donation, set down in
their Canon Law Did. 96. ca. Constantim ^.
, as also in Anselme Anselm and Deusdedit citantur ibid aglosiat. Greg
, and Deusdedit, it is said, Constantine the fourth day after his baptism,
gave this privilege to the Roman Church, that is, to the Pope. Yea Pope
Nicholas the third in his decretall Epistle expressly affirms Nic. 3. c.
Fundamenta de elect. and elect. pot. in Sexto
, the pragmaticall constitution whereby Constantine conferred this Donation of
the Monarchy of Rome to the Pope, to have bin made quarto die baptismatis, on
the fourth day after he was baptized. This Council then, following his
baptism, must follow also his Donation; and seeing the Donation bears date
Dat. Romae 3. Kal. April. in fine Donat.
, the 29. of March, the Council must be held a month or two after it, seeing
it ended Act. Conc. Romans 2. c. vlt.
the 30. of May in that year when this Donation was made. Now this was in
truth never. For that Donation of Constantine to be a base and witless
forgerie, is of old by Laurentius Valla, and since that, by diverse of our
learned writers, so fully demonstrated, that scarce ought can be added unto
their labors. Nor would I so much as once endeavor to entreat thereof, but
that many of the Popes late flaterers do most pertinaciously, and shamelessely
continue still the claim thereof: and it must not seem strange to any, nor be
thought unfit, that we should reiterate our just defense of the truth, so long
as they reiterate their cauills and vain objections against the truth.

Eugubinus Steuchus has writ two whole books in defense of the Edict of that
Donation, wherein steuchus lib. de Donat. Constable. pa. 189
he thinks and boasts, that he has proved most clearly, Constantinum sua manu
scripsisse illam Donationem, that Constantine writ this Donation with his own
hand. Adding Steuch. lib. (...) pa. 208.
, that they who say this Decree is false or fained, do maximam iniuriam
facere, exceedingly wrong, not only the ancient Popes, sed omnibus Graecis ac
Latinis Theologis, but all, both Greek and Latin Divines.

Cardinal Albanus has a large Treatise Hier. Alban, Card. lib. de Donat.
Constant. Is extat inter Tract. Doct. to. 15. part. 2.
, or book rather, to prove the truth and validity thereof: wherein he scorns
and derides all that account it a figment, telling us, that all Ibid. nu. 1.
the words of this Charter of Donation, ab originalibus excepta exemplaribus,
were taken out of the original Records, and so left unto us: That they Ibid.
nu. 3.
who deny it, are led more by wickedness, then by reason; and he concludes
Ibid. nu. 21. and 33.
, This Donation of Constantine to be not only true, but of force and
validity, and that, iure optimo, for most just reason; he approues also Alb.
ibid. nu. 19.
the saying of Panonormitane Panor. in Cons. 24. nl. 2. vol. 1.
, Eum non procul ab haeresi distare, That he is almost an heretic, who dares
speak ought against it. Yea, the same Cardinal adds Ibid. nu. 5.
one other clause worthy to be remembered, that the Popes, nullum alium suae
possessionis titulum, quam Constantini donationem attulisse, Have produced no
other title, for their possession of those territories, but only the donation
of Constantine.

Cardinal Iacobatius Card. Iaco. bat. lib. 10. de Conc. Art. 8. cap. vlt.
concurs wholly with Albanus; but he sets down his opinion, with more both pride
and ignorance. He after much insulting in his reasons and authorities alleged,
concludes Ibid. nu. 34 36.
, Quod hodie non sit dubitandum de validitate huius donationis, That none must
at this day doubt, either of the truth of it, that it was made by Constantine,
or of the validity thereof, that being made, it ought to be of force.

Johannes a Capistro, is so confident in this matter, that he says of Ioh.
Capist. lib. de. Author. Papae. part. 2. nu. ^20.
Constantine, Donationis paginam proprijs manibus roborauit, he confirmed this
Charter with his own hands; adding, that the same Charter is said to be kept in
Sacristia S. Petri bulla aurea roborata, in the Registry of S. Peter, sealed
with a golden Bull.

Boethius Epon, is another, and very eager disputer Boet. Epon. lib. Heroic.
quaest. q. 3.
for this Charter. He mentions nine several forms thereof, and sets down
verbatim four or five Ibid nu. 10. 11. 14. 16.
of them: one of Iuo Carnotensis: a second of Balsamon: a third of Albericus: a
fourth of Isiodore, which he likes Videtur esse ipsissi^a illa quam Constant
nus ip^e concepit, ibid.
best of all, as being that which Constantine conceived, and which wholly agrees
with that, which is set down in Bin. tom. 1. Conc.
Binius: a fifth out of Eugubinus Steuchus, to which he adds for a sixth En tibi
qui^as, and cum Gratianea senas Donationis huius formulas, ad amussim, sirem
spectes, inter se conuenientes. Boet. Epon loc. cit. nu. 28.
that in Gratian. And he is so confident for the verity of that Donation,
that having cited Ibid. nu. 1.
for a proof thereof, a Text of Melchiades Ca. Futuram cause. 12. q. 1.
, the next Pope before Siluester, he says Ibid. nu. 5.
; Certo certius est Donationem Constantini inde probari: It is more then
certain that Constantines Donation is proved thereby.

In their Canon Law lately corrected and illustrated with notes, by the command
and authority of Gregory the 13. the Gregorian Glossators Not. in cap.
Constantinus. did. 96.
labor to prove the truth of this Edict, as being set down in the Acts of
Siluester, and invetustissimis Pontificalibus, in their most ancient
Pontificals, in Pope Hadrian, and in many others.

To these let Binius be adjoined, who not only affirms, the same Edict and
grant Ea quae de dominio and temporali regno Romans sedi colla^o hic (in Edicto)
enarrantur, vera esse, etc. Bin. Not. in Donat. Constable.
of a temporal kingdom and dominion, made therein to the Pope, to be true:
but he adds, that the Emperors munificence and piety, sais aperte testantur,
do evidently witness the truth thereof. Again, whereas Constantine (says he
Bin. Not. in vit. Silu.. Siluester.
) judged it to be an unworthy thing, that the City, where the Monarch of the
whole Church was resident should be subject to the rule of a secular Prince, he
most magnificently gave unto Siluester, and to his lawful successors, the
dominion and temporal jurisdiction, not only of the City of Rome, but
almost of all Italy, and other Provinces. Thus Binius, who further adds Bin.
Not. in Edict. Constable.. Ipse.
, That Pope Hadrian confirms the History of Constantines leprosy, and
baptism by Siluester, veritate huius Edicti, by the truth of this Edict:
signifying, that Pope Hadrian judged this Edict to be true, and by the truth of
it, confirmed other matters which he delivered as true.

None of all these have writ more earnestly for this Edict and Charter, then
some few years since, the great Doctor of Naples, Marta; who is so confident
of the certainty and truth hereof, that he says Doc. Mart. lib. de Iurisdict.
part. 1. ca. 30. nu. 20. and 26.
; Non esse vlterius dubitandum, None may hereafter doubt, but that it was truly
made by Constantine. For proof whereof, he produces the testimonies of many
Fathers, of many Historians, of many Ciuilians and Canonists; yea, of Emperors
and of Popes: unto all which he adds some, as he supposes pregnant reasons,
to confirm the same. And lest that might breed some scruple, because that
chapter in Gratian Did. 96. ca. Constantinus.
, where this Edict is set down, it is called Palea, that is, Chafe; at which
Steuchus Ab indoctis Canonistis Palea vocatur. Steu. lib. cit. pa. 43.
was not a little chased; the Doctor tells us a Story, well worthy remembering,
how it came to be called Chafe. The narration Mart. loc. cit. nu. 35. and seq.
is this: When Gratian had composed his book of Decrees, he brought it to Rome,
to have it approved by the Pope: but in token of reverence, he gave it to a
learned Cardinal, that he should present it to his Holiness. The Cardinal
being very ambitious, perusing the book, and liking it well, added here and
there, many other testimonies and Texts of Fathers and Popes, and then
presented it to the Pope as his own work. Gratian disdaining thereat, and
remembering the verse, Sic vos non vobis mellificatis apes; in presence of the
Cardinal, avouched before his Holiness, that the Book was his, and not the
Cardinals; and for proof thereof, he repeated without book, the order and
sum of the Chapters, omitting such as the ambitious Cardinal had inserted.
Whereupon when the Cardinal pleaded, that sure he had not composed this book,
seeing he knew not of such Chapters, Gratian answered concerning every such
Chapter, as it was read unto him, Hoc Capitulum non est de tritico meo: Palea
est, Palea est, This Chapter is none of my Wheat, its Chafe, its Chafe.
Whereupon to every Chapter, which was not truly Gratians, in stead of that
ambitious Cardinals name, which was deservedly buried in oblivion, There was
set, Palea. But Eugenius the third then Pope, approved Totus liber ab Eugenio
3. approbatus est, etiam cum omnibus Paleis, and vsu receptus, Mart. ^a. cit.
nu. 37.
the book, withal the chafe therein. Wheat and Chafe, both were allowed by
his Holiness: they both tended to advance his See, they both were received, and
authorized to serve for the use of their Church. Thus pleads Marta for this
Chafe, and chaffie Charter: whose treatise might be thought nothing inferior
to that of Steuchus, but that the book of Marta is dedicated only to Paul the
fifth, whereas the other of Steuchus, was thought worthy to be dedicated to S.
Peter himself; Steuchus telling S. Peter, That he undertook that labor, vni
tibi Ecclesiaeque tuae, only for thee O S. Peter, and for Thy Church, as
himself says, in the Epistle Dedicatio libri ad Sanctu^ Petrum. and Accipe
quaeso, quos tibi sacro labores. etc. Steuc. Epist. ante lib. de Donat. Constable.
which he writes to S. Peter, and prefixeth it in his book: though I fear me
he found no messenger that would deliver either the book, or the Epistle to S.
Peter.

But that which gives greatest countenance to this Edict, is the Decretall
Epistle of Pope Leo Epist. 1. Leon. 9. c. 12. 13. 14.
the ninth, who verbatim repeates almost that whole Edict, so far as it
concerns the Donation: as namely, How Constantine writ in his Edict, that he
would exalt the most holy See of Peter, more then his own Empire or earthly
throne, giving unto that See, potestatem, dignitatem, and honorificentiam
Imperialem, Imperial power, dignity, vigor and honor. There the Pope of a
Bishop, is made an Emperor, and that above the secular Emperor himself. How
he decreed, that the Roman See, principatum teneat, should be chief of
other Churches, and have principality above the Sea of Alexandria, of Antioch,
of Jerusalem and Constantinople, and of all other Churches in the whole world.
There the spiritual Prince-hood, above other Patriarchs and Bishops is
conferred to the Pope. How he gave to Siluester and his successors for ever,
his Laterane Palace, which is preferred above all Palaces in the world, his
Diadem and Crown, his mandilion, his cloak, his coat, and omnia imperialia
indumenta, and all imperial robes which himself did wear; his imperial
guard, his imperial scepter, and omnem processionem imperialis culminis, and
gloriam potestatis nostrae, and all the residue of his imperial dignity,
honor and power: There is his estate, such and so pompous, that Constantine
himself (as the Charter says) held the Popes bridle, and performed, officio
stratoris, the office of a groom of the stable, or yeoman of the stirr^p, unto
the Pope. How to the end the Pontifical height should not seem vile, but be
adorned more then the dignity and power of the earthly Empire, he gave unto
Siluester and his successors for ever, both Ecce ta^ pala ium nostiu^, qua^
vrbe^ Roman, and omnes totius Italiae, and omniu^ Occidentaliu^ re^^gionu^
Prouinci^s, loca and civitates, concessimus, Edict. verba apud Isiod, Iucnem.
Balsam. Alber. and Bini^m. and, Scire ^nuenit, do^asse Consta^tinu^ vniuersu^
Occidentem. Steuch. loc. cit. pa. 17.
the city of Rome, and all the Provinces, places and cities of Italy, and the
Western countries, decreeing all these his grants, to be kept inviolable and
unchangeable, vsque in finem mundi, even unto the end of the world. Here is
the Popes revenues and rich Patrimony of S. Peter.

This and far more, does Pope Leo verbatim, recite out of the Edict or
Charter of Constantine, all which, he says, he sets down lest Ne forte de
terrena ipsius dominatione ^liquis vobis ^ubietatis su^rsit scrupu^us ib. ca.
13.
any scruple of doubt should remain touching the Popes terrene dominion, neue
leuiter suspicemini, ineptis and anilibus fabulis Sanctam Romanam sedem velle
sibi inconcessum honorem vendicare, and defensare aliquatenus: and lest any
should so much as but lightly suspect, that the Roman See would challenge, or
any way defend their honor by foolish and uncertain fables: yea, he adds of
this Edict, and that which he cites out of it, that he therefore relates it,
that hereby, veritas fundetur, and confundatur vanitas, that truth may be
confirmed, and vanity confounded; and that all Catholics may know, nos,
himself and other Popes, to be the disciples of that Peter, who says 2. Pet.
1. 16.
of himself, We have not followed unlearned, or sophisticated and falsely
devised fables. And yet more to commend this Edict he adioynes; Know ye, that
we do inculcate unto you these things, which we have not so much received,
relatu quolibet, by any relation or hearesay, quam quae ipso visu et tactu
comperta sunt, as which we have found out by our own sight and feeling. Thus
writes Pope Leo for the certainty, truth, and credit of this Charter of
Donation, so Pontifically and assuredly, as if he had seen Constantine set
his seal unto the same; or lay it with his own hand upon the body of S.
Peter, as the same Leo says he did.

I must needs confess, that when I considered, how besides Cardinal Albanus,
Cardinal Iacoba tius, the Gregorian Glossators, Steuchus, and Marta Pope
Eugenius also, Pope Nicholas, Pope Hadrian, and especially Pope Leo in his
decretall Epistle, had so confidently approved this Edict or Charter of
Donation, assuring all Catholics, that he follows the certain truth and no
fables therein; I was not a little desirous to sift and examine the same:
partly to see what worthy Charters and ancient writings they commend to the
world, as bearing evidence to their cause: and especially to try whether their
holy Popes, (of whom I had good hope, that of all men they would not
countenance and writ^ decretall Apologies for forgeries) might be cred^^ted in
this and like narrations, which concern the dignity and glory of their See,
and papal Crown. And first I will speak of the Edict or Charter of the
Donation, and then of the Donation it self, of both which, that they are base
and improbable fictions, there are many undeniable reasons: Some few of which I
will touch.

For the Charter: All that we have formerly said of the supposed leprosy,
Persecution, and Baptism of Constantine by Siluester, are undoubted
Demonstrations of the forgerie of this Edict of Donation: for in the Charter
are al these not only related, as certain truths: but they are made the very
ground and occasion why Constantine made this Charter. Seeing then there is
neither truth, nor realitie in the foundation, certainly there is no truth at
all in the Charter it self, which is builded upon such fictions and fables.
But leaving these, I will propose a few other considerations in this cause.

First, in this Edict is mentioned the Sea of Constantinople as one of the
Patriarchall Sees: whereas neither it had Patriarchal dignity before the second
general Council, (that is more then fifty Conc. Co^st. 1. habitum est, an.
381. ^uxta Baron. Edictu^ vero editu^ dicitur, an. 324.
years after the Donation is supposed to be made,) nor was there at that
time, so much as the name of Constantinople: for the City was then called
Byzantium: and diverse years after when Constantine had much enlarged it, and
made it, as Socrates says Soc. l. 1. c. 12.
, parem and aequalem Romae, equal to Rome; choosing it for the Imperial fear,
it was then first called from his name, Constantinople: and this was done, as
Baronius himself acknowledges Post hoc (Conc. Nic.) Patres Consta^tinopolin
perrexere. Bar. 325. nu. 196.
, a little after the Nicene Council, was ended: but as Sigonius Sig. l. 4 de
occid Imp. an. 330.
more truly teaches, five years after that Nicene Council, when Gallicanus
and Symachus were Consulls. So very stupid was the forgerer, that to gain to
the Pope, and See of Rome, principality over Constantinople, he makes
Constantine write of that city, which was not, no nor the name of it so much
as extant in the world at that time. I should think indeed, that there was
some fraud used in the inserting of this name, but that all the several forms
extant of this Charter, as that of Albericus, of Isidore, of the Gregorian and
corrected edition of the Decrees, have all the same name of Constantinople, and
Pope Leo the ninth, who assures us, that he felt and saw the very authentical
Charter, mentions the same name in his Decretall Epistle. Besides in the
Greek Edict, set down by Balsamon Theod. Bals. co^m. in Pho^^ Nomocan. Tit.
8. ca. 1. pa. 85.
, the same is extant, and the Gregorian glossators Not. in Cap. Constantinus,
did. 96.
testify that the Edict, as it is set down in the Decree, is in a very
ancient Manuscript in the Vaticane, and that also accordes to their most
ancient Pontificalls: and Marta last of all tells Mart. loc. cit
us, that the copy of the Edict, which he sets down (wherein also this name
of Constantinople is expressed) is in the registry of the Vaticane. Seeing then
there is such an uniform consent in all the forms and copies of the Charter,
both Greek and Latin; seeing the Charter is so safely kept in their Vaticane,
and ratified by the Decretall Epistle of Pope Leo, for true and authentical:
there can be no suspicion of corruption at all in those words of the Edict:
The error and corruption was in none at all, but in the author himself, who
forged such an unlikely, improbable, and incredible untruth.

2. Had Constantine given principality to the Roman See, above all Churches in
the world, as the Charter says he did: what folly was it in John Bishop of
Constantinople, Cyriacus and others, to strive Vt liquet ex Greg. lib. 4.
Epist. 36. 38. and al ^s multis.
for that pre-eminence? What meant Boniface the third, that he would never show
this Charter and grant of principality made by Constantine? Why did he use so
much entreaty (...) 3 and Anast. in vita eusdem (...).
and means to Phocas a murderer, that the Church of Rome might be called the
first of all Churches, when the same was long, almost 300. years before, given
by a fair Charter to the Roman See, by Constantin so worthy and renowned an
Emperor?

3. In this Edict Constantine is made solemnly to give unto Pope Siluester, the
Laterane palace: whereas not only Sigonius witnesses that this was given long
before to Pope Meltiades, Augustale palatium in Laterano impertijt Sig. lib 3
de occid. Imp. an. 312.
, Constantine gave to Meltiades, the Laterane palace: but Baronius Cum tam
euidenter demonstratu^ sit, Melchiade^ Papam a Consta^tino hoc an. in
augustiffia^s Lateranenses aede^ translatu^ etc. Bar. an. 312, ^u 85.
and Binius Domum Lateranensem Melchiadi ab Imperatore ^onatam esse, nemo
prudens ampliu^ dubi^are potest. B^n Not. in lib. de Munific. Constable.
avouch the same for a certainty, and say, that no wise body will doubt
thereof. Those Augustissimae Lateranenses aedes, say they Loc ci^.
, that most princely palace of the Laterane was given by the same Constantine
to Pope Meltiades the predecessor of Siluester, and to his successors, and that
in the seventh year of Constantine; which was twelve years before he was
either baptized, or made this Charter of Donation. Is not this now a piece of
great munificence in the Emperor, to give that, which is not his own to give,
or to give that to Siluester, which many years before that gift was Siluesters
own and his successors for ever?

4. In this Edict Constantine says, We will have all people in the world to
know, Construxisse nos intra palatium Lateranense, that we have builded unto
Christ, within our palace of the Laterane, a Church from the very foundation
thereof, together with a Font. Now seeing the Edict was made in the fourth day
after Constantine was baptized, (as you have seen themselves to profess)
whether it were possible, that such a princely Church, should be builded up in
four days, were a fit question for a ^urie of workmen to decide. And for the
possibility thereof, I leave it to their verdict. Only I will entreat them to
hear one special evidence out of the Acts of Siluester Act. Silu. apud Bar.
an. 324 nu. 60, 61. 62.
, wherein when the author had told what Constanstine did all the seven days
that he was, in Albis, after his baptism, on the eight day (says he) he
laid aside his white garments, his diadem and imperial robes; and accipiens
bidentem, and taking a spade he first of all dug and opened the ground, to
lay the foundation of that (Laterane) Church, and carried twelve baskets of
earth upon his own shoulders unto it, according to the number of the twelve
Apostles. Thus the evidence, even those very Acts of Siluester, which Binius
Bi^. Not. in vit. Silu. De su^e epto.
calls, Acta probatissima, most approved Acts. Whereby the Jurors may easily
be informed, whether the Church was builded on the fourth day, whose
foundation was but begun, and the earth first dug, on the eight day after
his baptism.

5. This Edict, as by the words thereof is evident, follows the leprosy Dum
valida squaloris lepra, tot^^ mei corporis invasisset carnem etc. Verba Edict.
of Constantine, and his baptism Bene^^t^^; so^^e illic a^e trina mers^^ne,
vnda salutaris put^ficauit. ibid.
; and so could not be made before the nineteenth year of Constantine, in
which both these, as you have seen by Baronius and Binius, are supposed to
have happened. Yet is it dated (...)
in the Consulship of Constantine the fourth time, with Gal^icanus. Now the
fourth Consuship of Constantine, (as by the Fastiboth Greek and Latin,
besides other evidences is clear) was before the eleventh year of his Empire:
by which account Constantine should have made this Edict and Donation 8. or 9.
year before the occasion and cause thereof was offered; and prophetically
should tell, how he was a leper, baptized, and thereby cleansed from his
leprosy, many years before he had any leprosy, for which he needed any
clensing. Again, see the stupiditie of the forgerer; not Gallicanus, but
Licinius was colleague with Constantine in that year, as appears both by the
Fasti, and by many Imperial Edicts, dated in this manner, L. 1. de Pignoribus.
C. Theod. and quam multae aliae leges.
Constantino A. 4. and Licinio 4. Coss. Nay I say further, seeing Gallicanus
was never Consul with Constantine, as by the Fasti is evident, it clearly
follows, that this Edict which was made in the Coss. of Constantine and
Gallicanus, was of a certainty never made; for that year of their Consulship
was never.

To these, let me add the testimony of their great Cardinal Baronius, to whom
accordes Gretzer, who has writ an Apology Great. Apol. pro Bar. ca. 21. and
Append. 1. (...) lib. de (...). principu^. (...) 86. etc.
for him in this very point. He by many reasons, and at large proves (...)
, this Edict to be, commentitium, prorsusque falsum, a mere figment and
forgerie, and as Gretzer says (...)
, commentis accensendum docuit, he has taught that it is a counterfeit. One
reason is; The ancient (...)
Popes since Constantines time, had many occasions to dispute against Princes,
touching the rights and prerogatives of the Church, yet none of them before the
thousanth year after Christ, is read to have defended the same, by authority
of this Edict: and yet they knew and mention the Acts of Syluester. Another is
this: It is certain Bar. an. eod. nu. 61.
the Emperors make no mention of that Edict of Constantines Donation; and yet
in the Charter of Henry the first there is a sure mention Ibid. nu. ^9.
, de Imperatoribus singu^lis, of all the former Emperors, who had made such
ample donations of Provinces unto the Roman See. A third is, That this Edict
Ibid. nu. 52.
was not in the ancient Acts of Siluester, but was by forgerie inserted into
them: the time when this was done he defines, to have been after Alia Acta
Siluestri non ante 1000. Christi annu^ cognita ab aliquo fuisse noscuntur.
Quibus actis superadditum est ipsum recitatum a Theodoro, Constantini edictu^.
Ibid and, Illud constat non ante Othonis tempora (coepit 996.) a quoquam
citatum. ibid nu. 60.
the 1000. year of Christ: the parties by whom this forged Edict was made and
published, he also declares: it was fained by some Grecian Ibid. nu. 52*
, under the name of Eusebius, and set forth by Theodorus Balsamon, whereas, a
nullo Graecorum hactenus in lucem editum, until then no Grecian had published
it; and from the Graecians it came to the Latins, and Western Church: Leo the
ninth being the first Pope, who makes mention thereof. Thus the Cardinal. By
whose acknowledgement, you may see what truth there is in their Popes,
specially in Pope Leo, who in his decretall Epistle, most solemnly commends
this Edict, for an ancient and undoubted evidence, such as he knew by sight
and sense to be the true deed of Constantine: which yet their great Cardinal
after long sifting of Monuments and Records, testifies to be a forgerie, and
that of the Graecians, first of all devised, as he says, about 700; and
published 800. years after the death of Constantine.

Yet about the time of devising and first publishing of this Edict, which the
Cardinal so precisely sets down, I can no way assent unto him. If this Edict
was not devised till after the 1000. year of Christ, how does Leo the ninth
(who was not Pope, till an. 1049.) mention it as an ancient Record and
Monuments? as besides that his own words ^^9* Epist. 1.
make plain, Gretzer Gretz. App^^d. 1. pa. 87.
also confesses. Is fifty years a not^ of antiquity, for that, which is
pretended to be made 700. years before? Why do the Gregorian Glossators say
Notae ad cap. Constan^^^^.
of this Edict; That it is mentioned, in antiquissimis Pontificalibus, in their
most ancient Pontificals? have they no Pontifical more ancient, then 1000.
years after Christ? How was it either devised after the 1000. or first
published by Balsamon after the 1180. Circa illa tempora Balsa^one^ scripsisse
^it Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 49. and Bell lib. de Eccles. scrip.
year, or first mentioned by Pope Leo the ninth in the Latin Church? seeing,
as Binius says Bin. Not. in Donat. Constant.. Ipse.
, Pope Hadrian the first, (more then three hundred years before Leo the ninth)
confirms the Story of Constantines leprosy, veritate huius Edicti, by the
truth of this Edict of Constantine: yea the same Hadrian mentions also this
Donation in another Epistle, which though it be not extant, yet the contents
thereof are recorded by Baronius, out of a Vaticane Manuscript, in which it is
said Bar. an. 795. nu. 7.
, Hadrian (in this thirty fifth Epistle) meminit Donationis, makes mention of
the Donation made in Constantines time to siluester, and of other Donations,
and he says; in Lateranensi scrinio eas Donationes haberi, that those
Donations are extant in their Laterane Registry. Nay, what will Baronius, or
what can he say, to all those who certainly testify, this Edict to be a parcel
of those very Acts of Siluester, which Pope Gelasius mentions? The Gregorian
Glossators speaking of that part of this Edict, which concerns the Donation of
Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces, say Not. in 62. Constantinus, (...).
96.
; It is set down in those Acts of Syluester, whereof Gelasius and the Roman
Synod with him entreat. Gelasius, says Cardinal Alba^^us Card. Alb. lib. de
Donat. Constable. nu. 1.
, one above exception, reckons the Acts of Siluester among those Books which
deserve to be approved in the Church: in cis autem tota huius concessionis
ratio continetur, and in those Acts (so approved by Gelasius) is the whole
form of this Donation contained. Gelasius, says Cardinal Iacobatius Gelasius
Donationem factam suisse ponit. Iacobat. lib. 10. de Conc. Art. 8. ca. vlt. nu.
30.
, sets down, that this Donation was made by Constantine. The very like says
Marta Mart. cap. cit nu. 25. and 38.
. Of Iuo Carnotensis, Steuchus thus testifies Steuch. lib. cit. pa. ^48.
, Iuo writes thus; In the ^etes of Siluester, of which Gelasius in a Council
of seauentie Bishops, speaks, it is thus read: Constantine the Emperor in the
fourth day after he was baptized, gave this privilege to the Pope; that all
Bishops in the Roman world, should have him for their head. Steuchus himself
was keeper of the Vaticane Library, as well as Baronius; hear, I pray you,
with what confidence he assures you of this matter. If you search, says he
Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 81.
, the old Literane books, you shall see, ex illis Siluestri Actis, out of
those very Acts of Siluester, of which Gelasius speaks, that this Donation is
described: And besides his own testimony hereof, he adds; That both
Anselme, and Iuo Carnotensis do witness the same: for they, says he,
proferunt Donationem, do set down the Donation, out of those very Acts of
Syluester, of which Gelasius speaks. And in another place Steuch lib. eod pa.
44. 45.
, having told us, that there are almost no other Acts of Syluester, but those
which happened betwixt him and Constantine, about his Baptism, and the Donation,
and his leaving of Rome unto Syluester upon that donatio^, he thus insults over
Valla, and his words are every way as effectual against Baronius: Mirabilis
hominis impudentia, Truly it is a marvelous impudency in him that denies (and
this does Baronius Bar. an. 1191 nu. 52.
expressly deny) That this Donation or Edict, is set down in those Acts of
Siluester, of which Gelasius speaks. Ego testes omnes bibliothecas proferam,
I can produce all Libraries for witness hereof, All which have together with
the History of Siluesters baptizing Constantine, this Donation, privilege or
Edict. Thus their own Champion, conuincing as an eyewitness, his fellow
Bibliothecarius, Baronius, both of impudency and untruth; first, for denying
this Donation to be mentioned in those Acts of Siluester, of which Gelasius
speaks; and next, for slandering the Graecians, as deuisers of it, after the
year 1000. which to have been in their Vaticane and other Libraries 500.
years Conc* illud Romans sub Gelasio habitum est an. 494. vt Bar. and Bin.
agnoscunt.
before that, in the time of Gelasius, he for a certainetie assures us. How may
we trust any Vaticane Bibliothecarij, if Steuchus an eyewitness be not to be
trusted in this cause? And if we credit him, who ever hereafter will trust his
fellow Baronius, that thus insigniously downe-faceth the truth?

Now if one might sit as an impartial Judge, betwixt Baronius and Steuchus, in
this cause, it may rightly be affirmed, that both of them do in part say
truth, and both also in part do err. That this Edict of Donation is a very
figment, Baronius rightly avouches, but Steuchus, and the rest, who hold the
same with him, do herein speak far amiss. Again, that this Edict was of
ancient time in the Popes Library, and in those Acts of Syluester, which
Gelasius mentions, in this Steuchus deserves to be credited; But Baronius in
saying that it was not extant till the 1000. year after Christ, nor published
before Balsamons time, in these the Cardinal says far amiss. So with
Steuchus we profess, and have proved also, that this Edict of Donation is
ancient, as being known not only in the time of Leo the ninth, but of
Hadrian, yea of Gelasius also: and with Baronius we profess, and have clearly
proved, the same Edict to be nothing else but a forgerie and figment. What
they say amiss, we reject in either: what they rightly affirm, we accept of
either: and upon the true confession of Steuchus, we conclude the Edict of
Donation to be ancient: again, upon the true confession of Baronius, we
conclude it to be a forgerie: And upon both these truths, which they severally
profess, we rightly and safely conclude it to be an ancient forgerie.

CHAP. VIII.
That Constantine made no such Donation, as they pretend: And the reasons of
Gretzer to prove that Donation, refuted.
THough the Edict, or instrument of the Donation be forged or falsified; yet
the Donation it self may be good, says Gretzer Great. Appe^d. 1. ad lib. de
(...) princ. pa 89. Haec co^ equ^tio viriu^ est expe^s, Instrum (...)
Do^ationis supposititium est, ergo and ip^^ Donatio.
, and for such he labors to defend it, telling us Nec pro prae cipuo fulchro
potentiae temporalis habent Romans Pontifices Constantinianum diploma, sed
alio^u^ Imperatorum Regum ac principum iudubitatas donationes. ibid. pa. 88.
, that the Popes have indeed other undoubted Charters for their temporal
dominions, (which Cardinal Albanus Car. Alb. li. de Donat. Constable. nu. 5.
flatly denies) qua^ uis ipsa per se donatione Constantini merito quoque
nitantur: though their rights justly or deservedly rely also upon the very
Donation of Constantine, seeing none did ever yet evidently prove it to be
fained. So Gretzer, who carpes and diverse times reprooues the learned
Protestant, whom he would seem to confute, because he did not (as he
fancieth,) distinguish, as he should have done, the Donation, from the
instrument or Charter of the Donation; the Diploma or Charter, he openly
professes commentitium esse, to be counterfeit, the Donatio^ to be such he
denies. And lest he should be thought to have devised this subtlety of
himself, he says, that Baronius is of the same mind. Baronius Neque ipsam
Donationem, sed Donationis Diploma falsitatis accu^ae^^ Ba^onius, ibid pa. 89.
did not accuse the Donation to be false, but the Charter or Edict of the
Donation. Nay the Donation Donatione^ certe probabilibus coniecturis, ni^i
demonstrat. ibid. pa. 90.
he probably defends. Thus Gretzer, whose childish and sophistical collusion,
let us a little examine in this place.

An accute Logitian (says Gretzer Ibid. pa. 89. Dialecticus paulo ocula^^or
oggeret, hoc non sequi. etc.
,) will say, fortassis donationem per solos testes absque vllo Instrumento
peractam, that perhaps the Donation was made by witnesses only, without either
scrip or scroule. But a judicious divine, an expert lawyer, or prudent
statesman, will never say so; no not with a perhaps: Neither when it is said,
can any of those witnesses be produced to testify that Donation, or any who
ever heard it of them. And why may not the Bishop of Constantinople plead the
very like Donation by word of mouth from Constantine: that Rome and Italy was
given by Constantine, to him and his successors for ever, and say it is
proved by witnesses, which now are dead, without any Charter or instrument to
testify the same? How can an acute Logician effectually overthrow the one, and
defend the other donatio^?

But to silence the Jesuits acute Logician, three several Vt supra
declarauimus.
Popes are witnesses, that the donation of Constantine was made, not by ear
witness only, but by a Charter and Instrument: and two of those Popes further
testify, that the Charter of that donation was extant, and to be seen in
their times, among their records or in their registry. The first is Pope
Hadrian, who in the thirty fifth Epistle before mentioned, faith of the
donation of Constantine, and others, In Lateranensi scrinio eas haberi, that
they were kept in the Laterane Registry: this was about the year of Christ,
790. The second is Pope Leo the ninth, Who saw (as he tells us) and handled the
very Charter of Constantines Donation: and this was about the year 1050. The
3. is Pope Nicholas the 3. who says, that Constantine left unto Siluester the
city of Rome, and declared per pragmaticum Constitutu^, by a pragmaticall
constitution, or writ of record, that he and his successors should have the
disposing or government thereof: and this was about the year 1280. To these may
be added Cardinal Albanus, who expressly thus says Hier. Alb. lib. cit. nu. 12.
; Donatio ipsa fuit scripto interueniente confecta, The Donation was made in
writing: Capistranus, Boethius Epon, Steuchus, Marta, and the Gregorian
Glossators, who all Vt ante de^^^atum est.
assure us, that the very Charter ( writ, as Steuchus says, with Constantines
own hand) is extant in the Vaticane, and that also, as Capistranus adds,
embossed or sealed with gold. Now whether three Popes, with Cardinal Albanus,
Capistranus, Steuchus, and the rest, some of them being as themselves profess,
oculatitestes, or the Jesuits acute Logitian, coming in, with a Portassis, be
more to be credited, let any be judge.

The acute Logitian, says Gretzer Posse^enim fier^, vt donationis factae
legitimum instrumentum diuturnitate temporis perierit, aut additione, and
detractione corruptum fuerit, Gretz. lib. cit. pa. 89.
, will further say; It may be that the instrument or Charter, is either
perished, or corrupted by long continuance: So may also another, and as good a
Logitian say, of the Donation of Rome and Italy, which Constantine made to the
Bishops of Constantinople. But who can suppose, that the Roman Bishops, who
are careful to keep evidences for many little quillets, would suffer the
charter of so fair a patrimony, as is the Empire of the West, either to be
lost, or to perish, or to be corrupted? Or if the original had by some rare
mishap been lost, would they lose al copies and extracts, all records, and
inroulments of so fair a Charter? Or could all these be lost and perish, and
none of the Popes lament, or bemoane the loss of them? For to say it was
falsified or corrupted, unless it were by the Popes themselves, or their
agents, (who had the custody of that Charter) is more then ridiculous.

But to silence again the Jesuits acute Logitian, Steuchus the keeper of the
Popes Library, assures Steuch. lib. cit pa. 44. 45.
us, that this Edict of Donation, such as is now extant, is set down in those
very Acts of Siluester, which Pope Gelasius approved, and that Gelasius by
approouing those Acts, approved also this very Donation: yea he further
adds, that all Libraries, together with those Acts, kept also this Donation,
quaeremansit omnibus testimonijs confirmata et roborata, which remained, (then
it was not lost) confirmed by the testimonies of all those witnesses. Pope Leo
the ninth Leo 9. Epist. 1. ante cit.
also auerres, and that in verbo sacerdotis, yea, summi Pontificis, that he
saw and handled the very true and authentical Charter which Constantine made,
and with his own hands laid upon the body of S. Peter. Whether, think you,
is Steuchus with all Libraries, yea with Pope Galasius, and Leo the ninth, so
assuredly testifying the Charter not to be lost or perished: or Gretzers
Logician, coming in with another Fortassis, more to be credited in this cause?

After these oppositions of the acute Logician, Gretzer adds his proofs for
the Donation: and because they are such, as he was conscious to himself,
could not necessarily enforce or infer his conclusion, he calls them
probabilities Probabilibus coniecturis niti. Gretz. lib. cit pa. 90. haec non
absque versi militudine pro Donatione disputare licet. ide^. p. 91 and non
improbalibiter hoc ^us ex Donatione der^uatur. p. 91
, and conjectures. Two of the best of them we will here examine. The former
is taken out of Baronius Magnu^ sane de collatis ill^s Romans Ecclesiae a
Constantino muneribus argumentu^, quod Francorum principes suis diplomatibus ea
a Longobardis ablata, se Romans ecclesiae ^^st^uere prof^ssi sunt. Bar. an 324.
nu. 117 and eadem habet Bin. not. in Donat. Constantini. Edictum.
, to whom Biniusi also consents. It is not for nothing (says he Gretz. loc.
cit. pa. 90.
) that Cardinal Baronius notes, that the French Kings in their writs of
Donation doeprofesse, that they restore to the Roman Church, the dominions
which they took from the Lombardes. So Gretzer; who from this Restitution,
inferres that the Roman Church had them formerly by the Donation of
Constantine.

Truly by the Cardinals leave, this inference is neither necessary, nor so
much as probable. Restitution will prove a former possession, or holding of
those Provinces, Cities, or Lordships, which were restored: but it will neither
prove, that the Popes possessed them by right, nor by any Donation; much less
by any Donation from Constantine. They might be restored, though the Pope had
got them by invasion, by wrongful intrusion, by fraud, by robbery, by
rebellion, or treason; and so the Popes got them in very deed.

After that Justinian had expelled the Goths out of Italy, who like Pirates
and robbers Goths Italiam praedonu^ more cepisse, atque muitis pristinis
possesso ribustenuisse, ai^ Belisarius, in su^ ad Vitice^ Ocat. apud Sigon.
lib. 13. de Occid. Imp pa. 307. quod fasius declarat contra Gothoru^ praetextus
lib. eod. pa. 312. and 313
, had invaded, and by violence intruded themselves, into a great part of that
country, from the time of Alaricus, to the overthrow of Totilas, which is
near hand 160. years Italia post annu^ ^ere 160. a Gothis liberata, Sigon.
li. 20. pa. 352.
; Italy from that time was governed by the Eastern Emperors, tanquam
Orientalis imperij prouincia, says Sigonius Sig. lib. eod. pa. 345.
, no longer in manner of a kingdom of Empire (for that being begun in
Augustus, ended for the Western part in Augustulus ^^sperium Romanae gentis
Imperium quod Augustus primus tenere coepit, cu^ Augustulo perijt. (...). in
Chron. ad an. 476. and Bar. an. 475. nu. 2.
, about the year four hundred and eighty:) but in manner of a province
subjected to the Eastern Emperor. That government in Justinians time, was
held by that noble and worthy Counsaillour Narses Sigon. l 20. (...)
, and after him by Longinus, who was the first Primu^ Rauennae non Ro^^^ sedem
praefect^uae posuit Longinu^, seque Exarchu^ Italiae. ae vocauit. Sig. lib. ^.
de reg. Ital pa. 5.
that took the name of Exarch upon him, and made Rauenna the chief city for
justice: under which rule by Exarches, sent Longinus succesio^ Narseti, a
sustino ^issus. ibid. pa. 5. and ab hoc tempore in ^aioribus Italiae vrbibus
Imperator praefectos praeposum ibid.
from the Emperor as his Depu^ies or Lieutenants into Italy, the Eastern
Emperors held the right and government of it about two hundred years Hic
finis eius praefecturae (Exarchatus) quae per a Cor: fere annos ltaliae
^^perauit. Sig lib. 3. de reg. Ital. pa. 75.
, until it was partly by the Pope, partly by the Lombardes taken from him; the
Popes in the end possessing the Lombardes share also. The Lombardes were as the
Goths, nothing else but pyraticall intruders Narses Imperatorem Italiae
possessione deside ran^ spoliare, ad Albomum Longobardorum in Pannonia Regem
(...), cumque ad inuadendum and occupandum Italia^ inuitauit. Sig l. 1. de reg.
Ital. pa. 5. and Longobardi an. 568. e Pannonia egressi, anno sequenti praedari
in Italia coeperunt; tertio anno dominatu^ institu^^. Sig. p. 8 eade^ omnino
habet Paul. Diac. l. 16. hist. misc. verbis (...)
, who invaded the country; injuriously withheld from the Emperor a good part
of it, and erected a kingdom of their own, from the time of Longinus the
first Exarch, when Alboinus invaded it, unto the death of Aystulphus, and
Desiderius, that is, about two hundred years. Whatsoever they either possessed
themselves, or gave away unto others, it was but held by tyranny and
usurpation, the right Omnes (...). perij famal: in Septentrionalibus vel
occiduis parti^us (...) ^cribit Synodus 125 Episco. in Sexta Synodo. Act. 4.
Hoe fuit an. 8^0 quo tempore Longobardiregnu^ Italiae ^uaserant, and
possessione tenebant.
still was in the Eastern Emperor. The Pope gained first one great part, and
after that almost all Italy in this manner.

When the question concerning adoration of Images, about the year 712. began
to be rise in the Church, Philippicus the Eastern Emperor, and after him Leo
Isaurus, and lastly Constantine (whom they with no small note of their
immodestie nickname Copronimus, but rightly is he called Iconomachus:) did
justly and constantly oppose themselves to that superstition, which was then
not creeping, but even rushing into the Church. The Popes of those days,
Constantine, Gregory 2. Gregory 3. Zachary, and Stephen the 3. opposed
themselves to the Emperors, and stood earnestly, nay factiously, for defense
of the adoration of Images: and this was the first eminent matter wherein the
Popes and the Roman Church made a public defection from the ancient and
Catholic doctrine, banding themselves and making a strong faction to maintain
the same. And of all men they were the greatest gainers by this Schism; for
under color of heresy, they did not only reprove the Eastern Emperors,
excommunicate them, withdraw their subjects from their faith, loyalty, and
obedience; but in the end quite deprived them also of their Imperial
dominions, and most rightful possessions. Pope Constantine began this work
with Philippicus, Pope Gregory, and Pope Stephen, finished it in the time of
Leo Isaurus, and Constantine Iconomachus. Gregory the second (says Zonaras
Zonar. Annal. to. 3. fol. 101.
,) Vectigalia quae ad id vsque tempus imperio inde pendebantur, inhibuit:
forbad the Romans and Italians to pay the tributes, which until then had
been paid unto the Emperors. When Pope Gregory the second heard, how Leo the
Emperor dealt against the venerable Images, Tributa Romanae vrbis prohibuit
and Italiae, he forbad the tributes to be paid unto the Emperors, out of
Rome and Italy. So Paulus Diaconus Paul. Diac. hist. misc. lib. 21. pa. 657.
And again, Pope Gregory Lib. eodem. pa. 663.
, remouit Romam and Italiam, nec non and omnia tam Reipub. quam Ecclesiastica
iura in Hesperijs ab obedientia Leonis, removed from the obedience of the
Emperor Leo Isaurus, Rome and Italy, and all his civil and Ecclesiastical
rights in Italy. And again Lib. eod. pa. 665.
, Romam cum tota Italia ab illius imperio recedere faciens, Gregory caused Rome
and all Italy, to depart from the government or obedience of Leo.

Gregory the 2. says Alb. Stadensis Alb. stad. an. 731.
, Italiam ab eius imperio cedere fecit: caused Italy to forsake the Emperor.
Gregory the 2. says Abbas Abb. Vsper. an. 718.
Vspergensis, omnia tributa Romanae vrbis and Italiae Leoni dari prohibuit,
forbad any tribute to be given to the Emperor either out of Rome or Italy. At
this time, says John Marius Ioh Mar l. de Schis. and Conc. part. 1. ca. 9.
, did the Popes begin to enlarge their fringes, and lift up their horns more
proudly against the Emperors. For Gregory 2. did anathematize Leo, and
vectigalium receptioni ei interdicere ausus est; and was bold to forbid tribute
to be paid unto him. Gregory 2. says Sigonius Sig. lib. 3. de Reg. Italiae.
pa. 63.
, understanding the proceedings of Leo, did excommunicate him, loose his people
or subjects of Italy, from the religion of their oath, and ne ei aut tributum
darent, aut alia ratione obedirent, indixit: and he commanded them that they
should pay no tribute unto him, nor any other way obey him. Gregory the 2.
says Bellarmine Bell. l. 5. de Pont. Romans ca. 8.. Quintu^.
, vectigalia solui probibuit, forbad the Italians to pay tribute to Leo the
Emperor, and so deprived him, part imperii, of one part of the Empire.

It is true that Gregory the 2. at the first, and before he excommunicated or
deprived Leo, withstood the Italians, and hindered them to make a new Emperor;
as not only Platina, but long before him, Anastasius witnesses, saying Plat.
and Anast. in vita Greg. 2.
, that when the Italians would have chosen another Emperor, Gregory the 2.
authoritate sua obstare, and, compescuit tale consilium, did hinder and
withstand that course and counsel: which gave occasion to some learned men, to
think that Leo was not at all deprived of his tribute by Gregory the 2. Yet
both Platina Gregorius 3. statim vbi. Pontificatum inijt, Leonem Imperio simul
and co^munione fidel^um priuauit. Plat. in vit. Greg. 3.
, Martinus Mart. Pol. an 731.
Polonus, Nauclerus Naucl. an. 733.
, Wernerus Were an. 714
, and others expressly affirm, that Gregory the 3. next successor to the former
Gregory, did this to Leo: which to the point in question is all one. But that
which Platina, and some others ascribe to Gregory the 3. was indeed performed
by his predecessor Gregory the 2. For when he, having used all fair and
favorable means, could not prevail with Leo, but still he continued to
break down Images, and inflict punishment upon those that maintained the
adoration thereof, then he proceeded to excommunicate, and deprive the
Emperor of his rightful possessions and tribute. Gregory the 2. says
Sigebert Sig. an. 7^8.
, quia Imperatorem incorrigibilem vidit, because the Emperor would not be
amended, caused Rome, Italy, and the West, to depart from his obedience; et
vectigalia interdicit, and he forbad them to pay any tribute unto him. When
the Emperor, says Binius Bin. Not. in vi^a^ Greg. 2^ ^. Post.
, would not obey the godly admonitions of the Pope; then at length was that
done, which Theophanes, Cedrenus, and Zonaras affirm, that the Pope (Gregory
2.) anathematized the Emperor, and exhorted all his subjects in Italy, ab eius
obedientia recedere, to forsake his obedience. When the Emperor, says
Baronius Bar. an. 430. nu. 4.
, remained impenitent, and would not obey the Popes advice, (about the cause of
Images) at last the Pope (Gregory the 2.) accursed him, tumque Romanos tum
Italos ab eius obedientia recedere penitus fecit, and he caused both the
Romans and Italians utterly to renounce all obedience unto him.

The Pope having thus deprived the Emperor of his dominion, in the next place
casts about and plots how he might inuest himself in the possession of the
same. And this he did by hindering the choice of others, that so himself might
be accepted for their Lord. When the Romans, who had thus revolted from Leo,
would have chosen another Emperor (says Sigonius Sig. lib. 3. de reg.
Italiae. pa. 63.
) the Pope refused that, as an unfit course: but afterward, they subjected
Leonis imperium respue^unt, ac solenni sacrame^to se Pontifici obtemperaturos
iurarunt. ibid. pa. 64.
themselves to the Pope, (who willingly, you may be sure, accepted their
service) binding themselves with an oath, that they would for ever defend his
life, and state, and in all things obey him. When the Pope had thundered out
his curse (says Baronius Bar. an. 73^. nu. 5.
) mox desciscunt penitus a Leonis imperio, Apostolico Pontifici inhaerentes,
they straight forsook the Emperor, and adhaered unto the Pope. Ita Roma,
Romanusque Ducatus, and by this means Rome and the Dukedom of Rome, came from
the Grecians to the Pope, says Sigonius Sig. loc. cit.
.

Is not this now a very handsome conueyance, wrought and finished by rebellion
and treason, and all under the color of religion? And by this rebellious
revolt, which himself had persuaded, the Pope gained the Dukedom of Rome,
wherein was contained Rome with her castles, towers, and villages in the parts
of Hetruria, Portus, Circumcellae, Sutrium, Anagnia, Capua, Tibur, with twenty
cities besides, as Sigonius Sig ibid.
shows. So by this means Italy, which in right wholly belonged to the
Emperors, was now held by three possessors: The Pope held Rome, and the
Dukedom thereof: The Lombardes, and their Kings, held Millane, Venice, Padu^,
and the far greatest part: The Emperor by his Exarch, held no more but the
Exarchate of Rauenna. The Emperor striued Leo indign^ ferens se Romana ditio^e
exutum, and co^munione piorum eiectum, Pontificem ac Romanos vindicare statuit,
etc. Sig. lib. 3. pa. 67.
to recover his own, either of the other to enlarge their usurped dominions.
The Lombard, against the Pope; the Pope, against the Lombard; and both of them
against the Emperor.

The Lombardes as they did long and earnestly thirst after the whole country
of Italy, so especially in the time of Luitprandus, and Aystulphus, they
assayed the same, and won diverse cities from the Pope, by name Sigon. ibid.
pa. 68.
Ameria, Orta, Palmarium and Bleda: Afterward they laid Vrbi obsidione^
admouit. Sig. ibid.
very hard siege to Rome it self. The Pope by many plausible and fair
persuasions, entreated the aid, first of Charles Ad Carolum Martellu^ propere
Legatos misit Gregorius, obtestans vt ecclesiae rebus succurreret. Sigon. ib.
Martell, and afterward of his son Pipine Pipinu^ vltro Pontifex appellauit
ac nouam Aistulphi etc. Sigon. lib. 3. de reg. Ital. pa. 77.
, who by the means and Decree, as Sigonius Cuius (Zachariae) decreto Pipinus
ad fastigium dignitatis euectus. Sigon. ibid. and iterum pa. 76:
says, of Pope Zachary, had obtained the kingdom of France, Childericke the
true and rightful king, being deposed from the same. At last when Aystulphus
Iam Longobardorum imperio omnia citra Romam tenebantur. Sigon lib. 3. pa. 75.
having utterly overcome the Exarch, and gotten the full possession of the
Exarchate of Rauenna, and all cities belonging thereto, greedily now gaped
Animum ad Pontificiam ditionem adiecit. ibid.
after Rome and the Popes share, which only was behind, Pope Stephen
entreated Stephanus confestim, ad regem Pipinum misit, orare se, etc. Sig. lib.
eod. pa. 76.
and obtained Facile perenti Pontifici est obsequutus Pipinus. ibid. and pa. 77.
of Pipine not only that he would defend the cause of the Church, and restore
unto it, such Cities as Aystulphus, and the Lombards had taken from it: but
further, that he would Non solum bellum pro ^ecuperando Exarchat^ Pentapoliqu^
suasit, sed etiam ne ea redderentur Imperatori contendit: sed vt vtramque
regionem B. Petro praecipui beneficij loco concederet. Sig. Ibid. pa. 78.
give unto it, and not to the Emperor, the Exarchate of Rauenna, if he should
conquer the Lombardes. Pipine willingly assented unto his Holiness; vowed Ego
(inquie Pipinus) polliceor, me, si victoriae compotem fecerit Deus, Exarchatum,
Pentopolinque B. Petro, eiusque succestoribus traditurum, in perpetuum
possidenda. Hocque fuo, filiorumque suorum iuramento muniuit. Sig. ibid.
, and swear to perform his request: yea, notwithstanding the Emperor Legati
ad Pipinum ab Imperatore missi, quod in mandato ab Imperatore habebant, impense
rogare Pipinum vt Exarchatum, et Pentapolim non Pontifici, sed Imperatori
concederet. Sig. Ibid. pa. 79. and Sabell. Ennead. 8. lib. 8
earnestly labored with him, that he would restore to Him, imperialia munera,
as Anastasius Anast. vit. Steph. 3.
speaks, those Imperial rights, or dominions; giving this as his special
reason, Quia Sabell. loco cit.
Imperij essent, non Pontificis, because in right they belonged to him, and not
to the Pope. But the Popes persuasion prevailed. Pipine overcame Aystulphus,
restored whatsoever of the Dukedom of Rome, the Lombards had taken from the
Pope; and further, by a writ Pipinus Exarchatum, Pentapolimque S. Petro and
successoribus eius in perpetuum possidenda concessit. Atque ita scribam,
refer ipsas in tabulas Donationis iussit. Sig. lib. 3. de Reg. Ital. pa. 80.
of Donation conferred upon him, (that which neither he had right to give, nor
the Pope to receive,) the Exarchate of Ranenna, and Pentapolis, containing
twenty nine Sig. Ibid.
Cities, or rather Regions of Italy.

Here is the first and truest title, which the Pope ever had to those
Provinces in Italy, the Dukedom of Rome, and Exarchate of Rauenna. By which it
may be easily discerned, that as he got them by fraud and Treason, so he held
them by open wrong and Injustice. For neither that which was given, nor that
which was restored by Pipin, did in right belong to the Pope, but to the
Emperor. From him, both that which Pipine restored, was treacherously
detained by the Pope: and that also which Pipine gave, was first unjustly taken
by the Lombards; and being taken from them, was unjustly given to the Pope: and
so from one unjust possessor, was conveyed to another, but still, most
injuriously withheld from the rightful owner thereof.

Are not Baronius and Gretzer now very politic disputers, who from the
Restitution Pipinus misit Aistulpho, Ecclesiae ac reipub. restituenda iura.
Anast, in vit. Steph. 3. pa. 221. and, Aistulphus professus est, se civitates
redditurum, ibid.
of some Cities, it seems of Ameria, Orta, Palmarium, and Bleda, belonging to
the Emperor, and usurped a while by the Pope, but afterward taken Ab eod em
rege (Litprando) ablatae sunt a Romano ducatu civitates quatuor, Ameria, Orta,
etc. Anast. in vit. Zach. 1. pa. 194.
from him, by the Lombards, and now restored by Pipine; can prove a just Title
to those Cities, in the Pope? yea, a title by Donation? even a Donation from
Constantine? Whereas Pipine restored no more, then a Robber had taken from a
Traitor, the Lombard from the Pope; and which both of them unjustly withheld
from the rightful owner, who was the Emperor. And truly I could not choose
but smile to see the subtlety of these men, who making this reason: Pipine
restored some Cities to the Pope, therefore Constantine gave the same, add
this Gretz. in Append. 1 pa. 90. and Bar. ann. 324. nu. 118.
for a confirmation thereof. For if the Church, say they, possessed the
dominion of them, before the privileges granted by the French Kings, vnde
illud sibi, nisi iure debitum potuit vendicasse? How could the Pope claim them
otherwise, then as in right due unto him; seeing it is certain Cum certu^ sit
nulla id factum armotu^ vi atque violenta grassatione. Gretz. and Bar. Ibid.
he got them not by Arms, or by violent grassation. Thus dispute Baronius and
Gretzer. As if he must needs hold them either by right, or else by violent and
forceable grassation. But they wittingly and craftily omit that tenure, by
which alone the Pope held those Cities, and the whole Dukedom of Rome, and
that was by a perfidious and traiterous revolt of the Emperors subjects,
persuaded, and caused by the Pope; and by his own traiterous and unjust
withholding them from his own Lord the Emperor, the only true owner of
them. Seeing thus they obtained them, neither any Donation nor any Restitution
by Pipine, could inuest in them a rightful possession. For though Pipine had a
fair pretense of restoring that, and giving more to Saint Peter, or the
Church, to wit, for this end, To Polliceor me pro remissione peccatorum
impetranda haec B. Petro traditurum. Dixit Pipinus. Sig. lib. 3. cit. pa. 78.
obtain pardon of his sins: yet was this but a pretense; to color his
iniust action. Nor could he by this or any like Act, ever expiate the
iniquity and wrong; first of his deposing Childerike, and inuading his Regal
Throne, and then of his taking by force, and without any just cause of war,
those Provinces from the Emperor, and giving them unto the Pope. God Mica. 6.
8.
has showed thee (O man) what he requires. Surely, to do justly, and to love
mercy: First of all, God requires Justice, and then Mercy: To be merciful and
charitable in giving that which one has unjustly got, or unjustly possesses,
is not an Act of Mercy, but of tyranny and injustice; like those sacrifices,
which God rejects, as an abomination unto him. Thou shall Deuteronomy. 23. 18 Deus
hic quicquid partum est illicito and turpi quaestu repudiat. Calu. in ea verba.
not bring the hire of a Whore, (that is, nothing got by unjust or dishonest
means) into the house of the Lord. To this purpose S. Augustine Aug. lib. de
bono Coniugal^. ca. 14.
truly says, If a man will give very large alms, out of those grounds which
he has unjustly invaded, non ideo rapinam iustificat, he does not thereby
justify or make amends for his wrong. And again Aug. lib. contra mend. ca. 7.
Quis ista dicat nisi qui res humanas omnes, legesque per^ertere conatur?
, They subvert all Law, who say, Let us rob the rich, that we may give to the
poor: To the like effect Chrysostom Foeneratus sum, aiunt, sed pauperi
obtuli. ^ona verba quaeso. Talia sacrificia Deus non accipit. Chrysostom. Hom. 57.
in Math.
speaks: I have got these goods, say thou, by usury, and impiety: but I
have offered them to the poor; O, says he, God, acceptes no such sacrifice.
Pipine should have restored as well the Exarchate of Rauenna, as the Dukedom
of Rome to the Emperor: that had been indeed an Act of justice; to take
either the one, or the other, from the Lombards, and give them to the Pope, was
another Act of iniquity, and an addition to his former sin: which both by
the testimony of the Prophet Ezec. 33. 15
, and rule of Saint Austen Iuxta verbu^ Augustini, Non remittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum. Alex. 3. lib. 5. Dec^etal. tit. de vsuris. ca. Cum tu.
, could not be pardoned, unless the goods, whether got, or kept by wrong, had
been justly restored: Justly, I say, to the true and rightful owner of them;
and that was the Emperor, not the Pope. For, Nulla Bern. epist. 77.
illi poenitentia remittitur peccatum, qui cum possit, non restituit ablatum;
by no repentance is the sin of injustice pardoned to any, who when he may,
will not restore the wrongfully gotten goods to the rightful owner. But enough
of the former reason of Baronius and Gretzer, to prove that Constantine gave
those Cities, because Pipine restored them to the Pope.

The other Conjecture which Gretzer alleges, concerns the Popes patrimony
in the Cottian Alps: long before the time (says Gretz. Append. 1. ad lib. de
Munifi. pa. 90.
he) of Pipine, that other Donation was made, which Paulus Diaconus Paul. Diac.
lib. 6. de Gest. Longob. ca. 28.
mentions: Aripert King of the Lombards restored the Donation of the
patrimony of the Cottian Alps, which formerly did belong to the Apostolic
Sea, but had been for a long time detained by the Lombards; and this Donation
written in golden letters, he sent to Rome: from these words of Paulus
Diaconus, Gretzer concludes Loc. cit page 91.
, Cum ergo certo certius constet, seeing it is most certain, that before
Pipines time, yea before Ariperts, (that is, before the year seven hundred
and four,) the Pope or See Apostolic, had diverse Provinces subject to their
Dominion, and there appears no evidence for any other title, whereby they
should have and hold those lands, it follows, that the right to have them, is
not improbably derived from the Donation of Constantine. So Gretzer.

I answer, that this reason is many ways defectuous, sophistical, and
improbable. First, the proof is only of the patrimony of the Cottian Alps,
but the conclusion is of many Varias Prouincias sus in ditione tenuisse. Ibid.
Provinces, whereas that patrimony was so far from containing many, or any
one Province, that it was but certain villages, or farm houses, in the
North-west part of the Alps; which Gretzer himself calls Gretz. loco citato,
pa. 91.
, and that significantly, Cortes and villas Alpium Cottiarum, Cottages or
places of provision of corn, cattle, or foul: for so Cortes to signify, both
Varro Cors exterior sit crebro operta stramentis ac paleis, conculcata pedibus
pecudum. Var. lib. 1. de re Rust. ca. 13:
, and Nonnius Cortes sunt Villarum intra macerian spacia. Non. in voce, Certes.
do declare. And by the same name of Cortes, does Ado Viennensis call that
patrimony of the Pope. Aripert restored Ado. in Chron. an. 699.
to the Apostolic See, Cortes and patrimonia Alpium Cottiarum, those farm
houses and patrimonies in the Cottian Alps, which had been taken from them by
the Lombards. What is this to the Donation pretended from Constantine? What are
a few Cottages, or Farm houses, to Rome; to all Italy, to all the Western
Provinces and kingdoms? Its true, I confess, that the Alps Cottiae, was one
of the seventeen Italia 17. Prouincias obtinebat. Liguria, Rhetia, Alps
Cottiae, etc. Sig. lib. 1. de Reg. Ital. pa. 2. and Paulus Diac. lib. 2 de
Gest. Longob. cap. 14. and seq.
Provinces which belonged to Italy, and into which it was divided. But that the
Popes patrimony was not the whole Province, but some Cortes, or villages
therein, Sigonius evidently does witness, who says Sig. lib. 2. pa. 38.
; There were at this times, when Rotharis was King of the Lombards, (which was
more then sixty years before Aripert) two Provinces in the hither part of
Italy, adhuc Imperatoriae ditioni subiectae, which were as yet subject to the
Emperors Dominion, and those were Alps Cottiae, et Opitergium. The Province
then of Alps Cottiae, was the Emperors, and subject to him, until that time
when Rotharis inuading it, Imperatori Ibid.
prouinciam eripuit, bereaved the Emperor of the Province, and deprived the
Pope, opulento patrimonio, of a fat patrimony which of old he had in the same
Province. So Sigonius, speaking of this very patrimony which Aripert restored
to the Pope. Gretzer might as well; nay much better conclude, that because some
Nobleman, has a Manor, and some Lordships, and Farms in the Wolds of York,
therefore Certo certius the dominion of al England in right does belong to him.

Secondly, what a sorry collection is this of Gretzer, because Histories and
Records make no mention of any other title, by which the Pope had that
patrimony in the Alps Cottiae; therefore he deriues it from the Donation of
Constantine? why? Is there no other means how the Pope might get that, but
only by Constantines Donation? what if the records of the conueiance thereof
made by some other, were lost or burnt, in some of those often irruptions,
sackings, and spoylings by the Goths, Vandals, or Lombards? What if those
lands came to the Church by no Donation at all, but by defect of Heirs, by
virtue of that Law Eus. lib. 2. de vit. Constable. cap. 36.
of Constantine, If none of the kindred of Martyrs, Confessors, and exiles be
alive, who may succeed as heirs unto them, vt Ecclesia semper cuiusque loci
haereditatem adeat, ratum esto; be it enacted, that every where, and for ever,
the Church shall have and enjoy their possessions. Or why might not the Pope
have it by some purchase, the oblations and treasures of the Church being
anciently so very great, that they might easily purchase much more then that
one patrimony, containing Cortes et villas? Or what if he had it by Donation of
some other either before, or after Constantines time? Certain it is, that many
private men, gave not only goods, but lands and fair possessions, both to
other Churches, and to that at Rome. Prosper Hilarious acceptis fidelium
numerosis haereditatibus Ecclesiam Arelatensem ampliauit. Pros. lib. 2 de vita
Contemp. ca. 9.
mentions this of the Church at Arles, that it was enriched with the
inheritances which many bestowed on it. So many and so ample Donations of
lands, were made unto the Church in Austens time, that both Aurelius August.
ser. 49. de diuer.
his predecessor, and himself Aliquas cum haereditates recusasse nouimus.
Possid. in vita Aug. ca. 24.
also, sometime refused lands that were offered to be given, sometimes restored
them, and that unasked, after they were given. The like donations might be
showed in other churches; especially in the Roman, to which they were so
usually made, that Christian Emperors, (as by name Valentinian and Gratian) by
their laws L. 20. De Epis. Eccle. and Cler. Cod. Theod.
, did some ways restrain the same. Neither was this used only in, and after
the time of Constantine, but even under the Heathen Emperors also, as the
Edict of Constantine set down in Eusebius, does manifest: wherein he
commands Restitution Eusebius. lib. 2. de vita Constant ca. 39. and lib. 10.
^cc. hist ca. 5.
to be made to the Church, of such houses, lands, orchards, and the like, as
by the tyranny of others had been taken away, and withheld from it. Yea,
Gretzer (who holds Gretz. Defens ca. 14. lib. 2. de Romans Pontif.
those Epistles which go under the names of the ancient Popes, to be truly
theirs, and no counterfeits) will not deny such Donations of Lands, patrimonies
and possessions, to have been made in the time of Vrbane the first, and of
Pius the first, that is, an hundred and sixty years before Constantine either
was baptized, or made this supposed Donation. For those Popes do expressly
mention, praedia Epist. 2. Pij. 1. and Epist. Vrbani 1.
diuinis vsibus dicata, the Church lands or Patrimony: and the one of them
further insinuates, this custom to have been long before his time. For
whereas many sold their lands, and brought the price of them, and bestowed that
on the Church; It was thought more convenient, says he Urban. 1. Epist. citat.
, both for the present, and future times, if they would give, haereditates et
agros, The lands and inheritances themselves unto the Church. Whereupon
Christians gave their lands and patrimonies to the mother Churches, and the
same in each Diocese was in the disposing of the Bishops, who with his whole
Clergy of Presbyters, Deacons, and other Church Officers in that Diocese,
were in common to be maintained therewith. Which same custom, Saint Cyprian
observes, who mentions Cypr. Epist. 34.
, Sportulas Presbyterorum et diuisiones mensurnas, the stipend and monthly
allowance which the Bishops allotted to the Presbyters. Seeing then by the
testimony of those two Popes, it appears, that 160. Pius papatu^ inijt an.
158. Bin. Nous in vit am Pij. 1. Constantinu^ volunt baptizari an. 324.
years before Constantine made this supposed donation, the Church of Rome had
farms, inheritances, lands, and patrimonies bestowed upon it; and one part of
their lands, as Sigonius Ecclesia Ro^. opimis agroru^ fundorumque
possessionibus erat instructa, quae per omnes fere Europae Africaeque
prouincias dispersae, Romans ecclesiae patrimonia diceba^tur. In Italia
Patrimonium Alpium Cottiarum, etc. Sig. lib. 1. de regno Occid pa. 3.
shows, was this very Patrimony in the Cottian Alps, how inconsequent is
this reason of Gretzer? The patrimony in the Alps, was given to the Roman
See, long before Aripert, and no record appears by whom: therefore it was
given by Constantine. Why may he not rather conclude, therefore it was given
in Valentinians time, or in Pope Pius, or in Vrbanes time? for they both
witness, that the Church had patrimonies and lands then given unto them.
Seeing the Records are not extant, to testify the gift of those Cortes and
Villae, what more probability is there, that they should be given by
Constantine, rather then by other Christians, either before or after him? The
Jesuits reason is much like, as if some noble man in the time of Edward the
first, (when they were called to show Quo warranto by what warrant or title
they held their lands, most of their evidences being in the Barons wars lost
or burnt) should have thus reasoned, My Ancestors held these Manors and
Lordships, in the time of King Richard the first, and long before, and because
there appears not by Records any other title whereby they had them, it is
most probable, that they were given by King Brutus unto them.

Thirdly the Jesuits reason and proof, taken from the fact of Aripert and
Litprandus, does directly overthrow that donation of Constantine, which he
would thence conclude. For by Sigonius it appears that Aripert was very
liberal Ad caeteras ecclesias liberalissime donauit; erga Roman^ praecipue
munificus erat. Sig. lib. 2. de reg. Ital. pa. 55.
, and munficent to the Church of Rome, and therefore gave some great gift unto
it. Now, in restoring that patrimony he was just, and not liberal. And
whereas both Sigonius, and Diaconus, call the writing which Aripert sent, a
Donation Eamque Donationem aureis litteris exaratam misit. Sig. ibid. and Paul.
Diac. lib. 6. ca. 28.
; they imply, that besides the restoring of that patrimony (which was no
Donation, but as they Patrimoniu^ Alpiu^ Cottiarum a Rothare ademptum,
restituit. Sig. loco citato. Donationem patrimonij Alpium Cottiaru^ quae a
Longobardis fuerunt ablatae, testituit. Paul. Diac. loc. cit.
expressly call it, a Restitution) Aripert gave some other lands to the Sea of
Rome. But this in king Litprandus is more manifest. He restored to the Pope
diverse cities, says Sigonius Sigon. lib. 3. pa. 70.
, atque insuper patrimonijs donauit, and further he gave unto the Pope a
patrimony at Naruium, another at Ancona; a third at Auximum, a fourth at
Humanate, with the valley of Sutrium called Magna. Thus Sigonius. Had all Italy
been given by Constantine to the Pope and his successors, neither Aripert, nor
Litprandus, could have given any lands, villages or patrimonies therein unto
him; they should but have restored them all; seeing then they restored some, as
by name that patrimony in the Alps Cottiae, and gave others; it is clear by
the very restitution of the one, and gift of the other, that the whole was not
judged to belong to the Pope, but some parcells only; and that those (even
that very patrimony in the Alps Cottiae) was given not by Constantine (for
his gift was of the whole country, yea of all the Western provinces:) but by
some other, who gave lesser gifts either before or after Constantine.

The fourth and last defect in the Jesuits reason is, that whereas he was to
prove such a right in the Pope, as Constantine is supposed to have given, to
wit an imperial Tribu^ntes ei diguitatem, and honorificentia^ Imperialem.
verba Edicti.
, monarchical Vtriuscue potestatis Monarchia^. Nich. 3. ca. Fundamenta. ante
cit.
, a s^preme and independent dominion in all Italy and the Western Omnes totius
Italiae, and Occidentaliu^ regionum prouincias, etc verba Edict.
provinces, he proves indeed that the Pope had before Ariperts time (which
was 370. years Aripertus 2. regnare coepit an. 70^. Sig. li. 2. cit. pa. 54.
after Constantine) certain villages, cottages, or farm houses in the Cottian
Alps (which is a very sorry proof for the right of the whole West, or of all
Italy:) but that he held even that small patrimony, or so much as those
villages or farms, as an absolute Lord of them, and not as a tenant under the
Emperor, and with a dependence from him, or with an acknowledgement of him, as
an higher Landlord: to prove this, the Jesuit speaks not one word, not his
witness Paulus Diaconus, nor his master Cardinal Baronius. Nay that the
patrimony of the Church paid tribute to the Emperors as an acknowledgement of
a sovereignty and dominion in them, both over the persons and lands of the
Clergy: that one saying of S. Ambrose does make evident, If the Emperor,
says he Amb. Orat. in Auxet. post. epist. 32.
, demand tribute, we deny it not: Agri Ecclesiae soluunt tributum: the
lands of the Church do pay tribute. And that the Roman Church was no more
exempt, then that of Millane, Sigonius does witness, who expressly mentions
Sig. lib. 2. cit. pa. 50.
the annual rent of 200. head of cattle, which the Roman See did yearly pay
to the Emperor (and that but a little before the days of Aripert) for
certain lands, or a patrimony which that See had in Brutium and Lucania. Yea
Gretzer himself confesses Great. Apol. pro Bar. ca. de Constable. Otho^: and lib.
2. cont. Replic. ca. 15.
of the dukedom of Tuscanie, and Spoletu^, that notwithstanding the donations
both of Constantine, Charles, and others, yet ius dominii apud Imperatorem
manebat, the sovereignty, or right of dominion remained in the Emperor. Nor
is it likely, that the Cortes and villae in the Cottian Alps, had a greater
privilege then those other lands in Lucania, or in the Dukedomes of Tuscane,
and Spoletum: specially seeing Bellarmine confesses Ante Iustiniani tempora,
clerici non erant liberi a tributis quae pendi solent ratione possessionum:
Bell. li. 1. de Cler. ca. 28.. Quatta.
, that till the time of Justinian, (that is, 200. years after Constantine) the
lands of the Church were tributarie to the Emperors.

I say further, that although by those after donations of Charles the Great, of
Lewis his son, of Otho the first, and Henry the first, (of the truth and
validity whereof I will not here dispute) although by these, the Pope may
have some title to the possessions, reuennues, and commodities of those
Dukedomes, cities, and territories so bestowed upon him; yet that which they
now claim, and which they would persuade Constantine and other Emperors to
have conferred, to wit, an imperial, an absolute Absolutam donationem
complectitur diploma Othonis. Gretz. Apol. pro Bar. ca. 20.
, and independent dominion in the same, not any of all those donations do
import; nay they manifestly witness the contrary. For in the Charters
pretended by Otho, and Henry (which are of all most ample) this is expressed,
That they Constit. Othon. magni. apud Bar. an. 962. nu. 7. Constable. Henr. I. apud
Bar. an. 1014. nu. 7.
give or confirm unto the Sea of Rome, those cities, provinces, and
territories, to use, enjoy, and dispose, saving in those Dukedomes, nostra in
omnibus dominatione, and illorum ad nostram partem, and filij nostri
subiectione, saving our dominion in them all, and their subjection to us and
our son: and, salua in omnibus potestate nostra, saving in all these
provinces and territories, that power which to us and our successors does
belong, according to the covenant, constitution and promise, which was made
with Pope Eugenius. What that covenant made with Eugenius was, is, as Gretzer
says Gretz Apol. pro Bar. ca. 20.
, explained in the Charter of Otho, wherein it is said, that none should be
consecrated for Pope, until he had solemnly made a promise to preserve all
Imperial rights, as Pope Leo is known of his own accord to have made. Lib.
eod. ca. 22.
This Leo, Gretzer tells us, is Leo the 4th. and he says, he is almost even
certain thereof. I will not strive with him about this point; though it will
breed no small doubt touching the truth and credit of the Vaticane Charters,
that in the covenants agreed unto by Eugenius the second, Pope Leo the fourth
should be named, Eugenius being dead full twenty years Eugen. 2. obijt an.
827. Bar. in illum an. nu. 26. Leo 4. coepit an. 847. Bar. eo an nu. 7.
before Leo the fourth entered into the Papacy. But let us suppose Leo the
fourth to be the man here named: what promise was that which this Leo made?
Gretzer Gretz. lib. cit. ca. 22.
out of Gratian, Iuo, Panormitane, and Baronius, tells us, that he made
promise to the Emperors, de vniuersis Imperii iurihus integre et
inuiolabiliter conseruandis (...) to keep entirely and inuiolably all the
rights of the Empire. So both by those Imperial Charters before mentioned, and
by Gretzers own confession, it is certain that none were to be consecrated or
held for Popes, till they had first made this promise to keep entirely and
inuiolably all the rights of the Empire. Now seeing Sovereignty, or supreme
dominion, is one, and even the chiefest of all imperial rights and royalties,
it being, as the Lawyer truly says Couaruv. Pract. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 1.
, forma et substantialis essentia maiestatis regiae, the very form, substance,
and essence of Imperial dignity, and regalitie; it is hereby clear, that
this was still reserved to the Emperor, in those Donations of Charles, Lewis,
Henry, Otho and others. Yea Charles the Great, to have expressly reserved this
royalty and sovereignty of dominion to himself, and his successors, is
evident by Sigonius, who shows Sig. lib. 4. cit. pa. 90.
, that when Charles, after the overthrow of Desiderius (the last king of the
Lombardes) and conquest of Italy, divided it as he thought good; to the Pope
(says he) Charles permitted or confirmed the Exarchate of Rauenna, of
Pentapolis, the dukedom of Perusium, of Rome, of Tuscanie, of Campiania, iure
principatus et ditione sibi retenta, reserving and retaining to himself the
right of Principality and sovereign dominion. And although it be clear by
the Charters themselves, that Lewis Salu^ super eosdem Ducatus nostra in
omnibus dominatione, and illorum ad nostram partem subiectione Constit. Ludou.
Pij apud Bar. an. 817. nu. 12.
, Otho, and Henry herein followed Charles, whose grant they Confirmo tibi
Romanu^ ducatum, etc. sicut a praedecessoribus vestris vsque nunc in vestra
potestate tenuist^s. ibi. and in Co^st. Othonis 1.
confirm; yet Sigonius further witnesses, that in the time of Otho, this
right and sovereignty of dominion was acknowledged to be in the Emperor, not
in the Pope. For speaking of those cities that were subject to the Pope, they
esteemed, says he Sig. lib. 7. pa. 177.
, the Pope as prince of the commonwealth, Regem vero, vt summum Dominum: but
Otho ^he Emperor, their Sovereign Lord, and unto him they paid their tributes
and performed obedience: Thus Sigonius.

Let us hear the judgments of those who are learned in the laws, who of all
men are most fit to direct us in this question, which is, de iure, and not
only de facto. Antonius Rosellus, a man noble Vir nobilis and eruditus. Poss.
in Anton. Rossel.
both for birth and learning, skillful both in the Civil and Canon law, one so
far from partiality on our side, that he earnestly Ant. Ross. Monarchiae
part. 1. ca. 69.
defends the donations made to the Popes, by Charles, Lewis, Otho, yea and even
this also of Constantine; has at large and diligently sifted this point. After
long debating the matter on either side, in the end he thus concludes.
Firmiter teneo Ant. Ross. li. cit. ca. 71. pa. 297. and seq.
I do firmly hold, for those lands and territories which the Pope has from
ancient time possessed (and in Ibid. ca* 70. pa. 296:
which prescription is sufficient without any title) that the Donation of
Constantine, and others is good, for the possession, propriety, and vtile
dominium, seeing thereby the imperial right Iura imperialia in his bonis
remanserunt, ibid. ca. 71. pa. 297.
is not taken away: Sed directum dominium est penes Caesarem, but the direct or
supreme dominion and jurisdiction, even in those places, is in the Emperor:
Neither is it Directu^ dominium est in ossibus Caesaris, irremouibile, vel
inabdicabile. ibid. pa. 297.
, nor can it be separated from the body and bones of the Emperors person.
Habet ergo Papa executionem potestatis, therefore the Pope has the execution
of the power, in those territories which are given unto him: but he has not
the dominion or sovereign power in them: that belongs to the Emperors, who in
all temporal goods, and possessions is the sovereign prince. Again Ibi. pa.
297.
, as we daily see that the Emperor gives Dukedomes, Earledomes, or Kingdoms,
and tamen retinet in directo dominio ipsam iurisdictionem; and ius imperij in
ipsis bonis, aliis commissis, and yet he retains the direct or sovereign
dominion and jurisdiction in himself, and his imperial rights, in the goods
which he so commits to others: even so in those goods given by the Emperors
to the Church or Pope, Ius imperij and iurisdictionem retinuit, and retinet:
The Emperor still held, and does still hold the imperial rights or supreme
Jurisdiction, quamuis vtile dominium eius, etiam exercitium, Pontifici
commisit, although the profit of the dominion, and the exercise of the
jurisdiction he committed to the Pope. Again Ibid. pa. 298.
, The donation to the Pope is good, quoad proprietatem and dominium
particulare, sed non quoad iurisdictionem totalem and ius imperii, good to
pass away the property and particular dominion in those lands, but not good
to pass away the whole or supreme Jurisdiction, or the Imperial right in
them.

The same Rosellus adds two or three other points very worthy observing to
this purpose. One, that the Pope is not capable of Sovereign dominion, no not
in those very territories which have been given unto him. Although, says he
Ibid. pa. 298.
, the Pope be capable of the Imperial right, quoad subsidium, in respect of
the profit, non tamen est capax principaliter, yet is he not capable thereof as
the principal owner of it; nay it is, says he, impossible that in the same
person should consist the Imperial authority, and the priesthood, et ideo
impossible est per viam praescriptionis, and therefore though the Pope
prescribe never so long time for his holding those territories, yet it is
impossible that by way of prescription, the Pope should either in whole, or in
part hold ius imperiale, Imperial or Sovereign right therein.

An other is, that Emperors being the supreme Lords, may upon just cause
recall any, or all the former donatio^s, and take into their own hands the
possession or property in those Territories, which the Popes hold by virtue of
those Donations. To which purpose he thus says; The Ibid. pa. 298.
Donations, for passing away the property in those goods, is firm, yea it is
not reuocable by succeeding Emperors, if they have no cause to revoke it; Cum
causa autem posset, but upon just cause it may be revoked, by the successors
of those Emperors who made the Donations. Now whether the Popes have given,
and that oftentimes, many and just causes, to revoke those Donations, I list
not here dispute. Their so often iustling with the Emperors, their usurping
that Imperial authority which belongs not to them, but to the Emperor; their
often misusing Emperors in most base and indigne manner, and making them of
the Popes Lords, the Popes vassals; these may seem to any who are not factious
on the Popes side, to be just causes to resume all those lands, which he
either by Donation or usurpation possesses. But I leave this to their
judgment, to whom in right it belongs; and those are the Emperors and secular
Princes themselves; as the same learned Lawyer there rightly sets down: If Ca.
eod. pa. 299.
there happen, says he, a controversy betwixt the Pope and the Prince,
concerning any mere temporal matter, (and such is this touching the temporal
possessions granted to the Pope) I think the Emperor himself ought to be
judge herein, seeing in temporal matters he is above all; even the Pope
himself, and Ipse est iudex suae causae, The Emperor is judge in his own
cause, as the Law teaches. So he.

The third is this, that whereas the Popes, to make sure that authority which
they use in the patrimony of S. Peter, cause the Emperor to swear, that he
Cum iuramento se astringat iu^ Imperij and iurisdictionem in illa territoria
non exercere. Idem ca. cir. pa. 297.
will not exercise that Imperial authority which he has in those lands, but
permit the Popes to enjoy the same as they have used, (tying the Emperors by
this oath, from the exercise of any Imperial jurisdiction in those
territories) the learned Lawyer teaches, That Emperors indeed, after Cum
iurisdictione^ non exercere iurauerit, si facit, extra suum dist^ictum se ex
tendit: imo periurus est. ibid. pa. 297.
they have once taken this oath, cannot intermeddle in those lands, but ought
by virtue of their oath, leave the jurisdiction therein to the Pope: but
withal he adds, which is worthy remembering, that seeing the Emperor
retains still the direct Dominion in those lands, which Dominion he cannot
possibly pass away to the Pope, his successors Quia hoc iuramentum est
personale, certe successor ad ipsum praestandum non est asttictus. Ibid. pa.
297.
need not to take that oath; and not taking it, says he, they may actually use
their own Imperial rights, and jurisdiction in the same, and it were better
they would do so.

They may do this. And what if they ought also, so to do? Math. Parisiensis
Math. Paris. in Johan. ano. 1210. pa. 306. Otho memor sacrame^ti quod fecerat
cum a Papa ad Imperium sublimatus fuerat, quod videlicet, dignitates Imperij
conseruaret, and iura dispersa pro possibilitate sua reuocaret Ibid.
sets down the oath which Otho the fourth took, and he mentions it as an oath
which other Emperors were wont to take, as by name Henry Iurauit (Henr. 5.)
quod obediret Pontifici, Saluo honor Imperij and Regni, sicuti Catholici
Imperatores Pontificibus (iurare) solent, Leo Ostiens. in Chro^. Cassin. lib.
4. ca. 42.
the fifth did, and that is, to maintain the dignities and rights belonging to
the Empire: yea Baldus their great Lawyer, testifies the same oath to be
usual. The Emperor, says he Bald. in Prooem. de Feud. nu. 32.
, when he is crowned, jurat nihil diminuere de bonis Imperij, does swear that
he will not impair the State of the Empire. And Lucas de Penna more fully, The
Emperor, says he Luc. de Pen. Cod. de omni agro desert. l. Quicunque
desertum. fol. 18^. col. 2.
, swears at his Coronation, iura regni sui, and honorem Coronae illibata
seruare, to keep inviolable the rights of his kingdom, and the honor of his
Imperial Crown. By virtue of which oath, the Emperors are strictly obliged,
in duty both to God and to the Empire, to take unto themselves, not only all
those large and fair territories, which the Pope has either by fraud or force
invaded, decking himself with the plumes of their Eagle, but specially they
ought to resume, that Dominion or Sovereignty of authority, in those very
lands, which the Pope now challenges as his own. For this Soueraignetie being
the most proper and an essential privilege belonging to any Imperial Crown,
by virtue of this their sacred oath, they ought utterly to refuse (as the
Lawyer says they may) that other coacted oath, whereby they are most
injuriously tied to permit that man of sin quietly to enjoy their Imperial
Possessions, Rights, and Royalties, and tread both themselves, and their
Crowns under his feet. It was no marvel if this whole passage in their
learned Lawyer, seemed very distasteful, and worthy of expunging, to their
Roman Censurers, who not enduring to see a testimony so pregnant, and
prejudicial to the Popes authority, and whence so dangerous consequents may
be collected, to be recorded in the writings of so learned a Lawyer, at one
blow do cut off, cashire, and expunge for ever, that whole passage in his
book, that it may never see the light, commanding Index Expurg* ^uxta Council
Trid. decretum. Philip. 2. Regis Cathol* (...) concinnatus. ann. 1571.
it wholly to be abolished, though it contain no less then 178. lines in a
large folio.

The like to that in Rossellus, is taught by another of their famous Lawyers,
Franc. Vargas Fr. Varg. lib. de Author. Pontif. Axiom. 1. nu. 2.
, who alleges Baldus, and diverse other Lawyers, as consenting with him. He
sets down two assertions; The one, that suprema Principis iurisdictio est
prorsus inabdicabilis, the supreme jurisdiction of the King cannot possibly be
given away from him: The other, that it is impossible, that the Emperor should
make any, vel parem sibi, vel superiorem, either equal or superior to
himself: for, as Baldus says, Lex regia contradicit, that is contrary to the
law or nature of a King. Then out of doubt, neither Charles, nor Lewis, nor
Otho, nor any other Emperor either did, or could by any of their Donations,
pass away their Sovereignty to the Pope.

The words of Baldus are very remarkable, he speaking of this Donation of
Constantine, and expressing with his own, the judgment of the Doctors of
Law, says Bald. in Prooem. de Feud. nu. 32. 33.
thus; They determine that this Donation, quoad expropriationem territorij,
dignitatis, et iurisdictionis, non valere nec possibilem esse; neither is, nor
possibly can be of force, to pass away either the propriety, or supreme
Dominion in those territories, or the Imperial dignity and jurisdiction over
them. The commodities, profits, et vtile dominium, may be granted, says he,
salua semper ab Imperio, recognitione et fide; always reserving and keeping
safe to the Emperor, recognition and feoltie, to hold them from him: for to
say, that the Emperor would by his Donation, mutilate, or cut away the members
of the Empire, est species fatuitatis, is a kind of folly. Thus Baldus; by
whose clear testimony, Gretzer, Marta, Steuchus, Albanus, Iacobatius, and all that plead either for the Charter, or for the Donation, or that an absolute
Dominion was given by Constantine to the Pope; they all by the judgment of
Baldus, are a consort of fools.

Aretine not only assents to Baldus, but much commends his judgment herein.
Eleganter tradit Baldus, says he Aret. in Rubric. ff. de verbor. ob^igat.
, Baldus does very well ^each; That the Emperor, non potest dare quotam
Imperij, cannot give away any quotient, neither a third, nor a fourth part, nor
half of his Empire; but he may give some goods belonging to the Empire.
Whereby Baldus, says he, means that the Empire being an entire and universal
power, the Emperor by giving ought, cease not to be universal Lord of all
belonging to the Empire. Then by Aretines judgment, neither Constantine, nor
any other Emperor, by any Donation of Lands and Territories, either does, or
can pass away his supreme and Imperial right in and over them.

Lucas de Penna, is very pregnant in this point; Imperij Regalia, says he Luc.
de Pen. Cod. de omni agro deserto. l. Quicunque desertum. fol. 184. and 185.
, sunt inalienabilia, the Royalties of the Empire cannot be given away, nor
alienated from the Empire. Whereupon he inferres, that though the Emperor
should swear that he would not revoke such royalties, as were alienated to the
prejudice of his Crown and Dignity; posset tamen^ea, non obstante iuramento,
reuocare; yet notwithstanding this his oath, he might recall such grants and
alienations. And he gives that reason, which before was touched, because the
Emperor swears at his Coronation, to keep safe the honors and rights of his
kingdom: but by alienating his demaines and Territories (much more his Regal
Sovereignty and Dominion) he does not preserve but impair the Imperial
rights. Thus he. By whose judgment, neither was by any of those Donations the
Sovereignty and Royalty past away from the Emperor; and if it were, yea, and
that also by an oath, yet seeing such an oath was unlawful, and contrary to
the Imperial oath taken at his Coronation, it can bind none, nor can it be
vinculum iniquitatis, a band to tie him to do wrong, or contrary to his
lawful oath: and therefore notwithstanding such an unlawful oath, Emperors
(as he thinks) may, and ought to revoke such grants, and take from the Pope
their Imperial rights and royalties, which he now claims and usurps.

Albericus de Rosate is abundant in this cause. Let us see, says he Alb^r. de
Ros. de Quadriennij praescript. l. Been a Zenone. nu. 4. fol. 111. co. 4.
, whether Constantines Donation could be of force to the prejudice of his
Successors, Accursius holds it could not: so does Ioh. de Pari^ijs; And he
gives this reason thereof: Because none being deputed to an Office, may do
ought against his own Office. But it is against the Office deputed to the
Emperor, to impair his Empire, or cut and take away any part from it. For by
the same reason, that he cuts away one part, he may cut away also another:
and so may his successors: and so the Empire should at last be brought to
nothing, and utterly destroyed; which is against the public good, and the end
why the Empire is ordained. Ex quo vere credo. Whereupon I do truly believe,
that the foresaid Donation, de iure, cannot be of force to prejudice the
Empire, or the successors.

But may not the Church, says he, prescribe in this matter? To this Albericus
answers by three diverse steps and degrees. First, says he, For corporal
matters, there is no doubt, but longissima praescriptione, by most long
prescription of time, the Church may defend it self, praestitis tamen tributis
and censibus, yet so that it yield tribute, and due pensions as an
acknowledgement of the supreme right and dominion in the Emperor. Secondly,
For Alber. de Iurisdict. omn. Iud. l. finali.. per iniquum nu. 4. fol. 146.
those things which are of mere or mixed Empire, Praescriptio dat tantum vtile
dominium, directum non tollit, Prescription does only give the useful or
profitable dominion (to the Pope) but it does not take away the direct or
supreme dominion from the Emperor. Again, Contra principem non nisi quoad
vtile dominium praescribitur, Prescription against the Emperor, is only of
force, for the profitable dominion, not for the direct or supreme, because the
Pope in using the dominion, does it as the Emperors minister, and in the
Emperors name, and so the Soueraignetie does rest in the Emperor. Thirdly, may
not by the Canon Law, prescription, or long possession be good for the Popes
right in this cause? To this Albericus Alber. de Quadriennij praescript. loco
ante cit.
answers, that it is least available by that law. For by the Canon Law there
is required to a forceable prescription, Titulus, et bona fides, both a good
Title, and also good dealing. Both which, says he, seem to be wanting in
this case; for there is a Title pretended, where there is no Title at all, quia
datus per ^um qui dare non potuit, because the Title was given to the Pope, by
him who could not give it: and because the alienation is made contrary to Law,
as we have showed. Bona fides also is here wanting, because the Pope and their
successors knew, res esse alienas, hoc est, Imperij, that the things given
unto them were not Constantines, but the Empires. Thus Albericus: showing
plainly both by reason, by the Civil, and by the Canon Law, that such
Donations of an absolute and Monarchall Dominion as they pretend to be made by
Constantine, Charles, Lewis, Henry, and Otho, are of no force at all, nor can
be of validity, neither by virtue of any Donation, nor of any Prescription.

Boethius Epon does professedly, and at large discuss this point, and thus
writes Boet. Epon. Heroic. quaest. q. 3. nu. 43.
. The Donation of Constantine did no way concern the alienating or giving up
of the Roman Empire, but only the alienating of all the places in Italy, and
in the whole West. Constantine Ibid. quaest. 5* nu. 19.
did not abdicate his Empire, or give it to the Pope, ne per Occidentem quidem,
no not in the West, nor in Italy, nor in the very City of Rome. He honored
the Pope as much as he could, citra Imperij vel abdicationem, vel alienationem
vllo modo, without either abdicating, or any way alienating the Empire. He
Ibid. nu. 27.
gave to the Pope a certain right of jurisdiction and rule in the Western
Regions, Impeperio Romano inserius atque minutius, but inferior and less then
Imperial authority. He Ibid. nu. 34.
gave to the Pope, Imperium honorarium duntaxat, and secundarium, sed minime
supremum, an honorable and secundarie government, but not the supreme, That
supreme authority, in solidum penes Constantinum remansit et^am in Occidente,
did remain entirely unto Constantine (and so to his successors) even in the
West. And in his commentary, which for the honor and credit of Constantines
Donation he has made upon it, he Boet. Epo. Glossem. in cap. Constantinus.
post. ^ quaest. 5. nu. 21.
sets this down with a memorandum, Notabis hinc, observe hence, that the
Empire or sovereignty in Italy, and in the West, was not transferred by
Constantine to the Pope, and very often does he repeat the like.

Didacus Couarruuias, speaking of the sovereignty or supreme jurisdiction which
belongs to a King or Emperor, says Couarr^^. Practic. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 1.
, nullo modo a rege alienari potest, it can no way be alienated or given away
by the King, though in giving lands, cities, or territories, the King use
never so ample and abundant words: and he gives an evident reason hereof,
because this Sovereignty is essential to regal majesty; and therefore
cannot be severed nor given or taken away from it.

Many others might be added, as by name Guilel. Benedictus, Carolus
Degrassatius, and Felinus; all which teach the same, as Vargas Varg. and Couar.
loc. c^t.
, and Couarruuias do witness. But I will here only adioyne the testimony of
their Hier. Balbus both a Lawyer and Bishop, who in his book dedicated to
Charles the fifth, in many places insists upon, and diligently discusseth this
point. He first shows Hier. Balb. lib. de. Co^onat. pa. 83.
, that this sovereignty of temporal authority, was not in the Pope, but in
the Emperor, until the time of Phocas: until then, that Emperors h^d the
(supreme) power in Rome: This is, says he, a most certain argument: Because
Pope Boniface 4. desiring to build a Church in honor of the blessed Virgin, in
that place where the Pantheon stood, necesse fuit ei facultatem obtinere a
Phoca, he was of necessity to obtain leave of Phocas so to do. The Pope,
says he, being then, not Dominus sed Inquilinus, not Lord, but tenant under
the Emperor, omni ditione carebat, wanted all temporal dominion in the city
of Rome, so that he could not so much as build a Chapel, sieve iussu
Imperatoris, without leave, allowance and license from the Emperor. Then he
shows Ibid. pa. 84.
the like for the next 800. years. The first of the Popes, says he, qui vrbis
dominatum sibi vendicare tentauit, who attempted to challenge the Sovereign
dominion of Rome, was Boniface the 9. in the year 1400. Yet Balbus is of
opinion that he challenged it only, and obtained it not. For of Charles the 5.
in the third place he expressly says Ibid. pa. 86.
, and says it to the Emperor himself, that he was primus ex Imperatoribus,
the first Emperor who gave to the Pope the city of Rome, and other adjoining
cities, and subjected them to his power and dominion. Fecisti hoc Carole
Auguste, thou O Charles (the fifth) have done this; who being, and being called
the King of the Romans, omnem Romanae vrbis iurisdictionem ^ te abdicasti,
have abdicated and past away from thy self to the Pope, all the Jurisdiction
of the Roman city. Thus Balbus. Upon whose testimony it follows that the
sovereignty of Rome was by no Emperor, de facto, past away or given to the
Pope till the time of Charles the fifth, that is, till about the year 1520. And
if de facto, it was then done by him, yet, by the former testimonies it is
clear and evident, that de iure, it could not be done, and that the grant is
not only of it self inualid, but such also as may be any of his successors
be, and that justly revoked. And let this suffice to have declared the manifold
defects and inconsequents in that poor reason of Baronius and ^retzer, that
because the Pope had a patrimony in the Cottian Alps before Ariperts time,
therefore Rome and Italy, and the Western Provinces were given by Constantine
unto him, and he was made the supreme, Imperial, and independent Lord, or
Monarch thereof.

CHAP. IX.
Three reasons to prove that Constantine never made any such Donation as they
pretend, either by word or writing.
THE reasons of Gretzer, and his acute Logician, being now clearly refuted, it
were not hard by many evident proofs to refute the position it self, which
he and Baronius maintain, that though the Charter be counterfeit, yet the
Donation of Constantine is true, and to be so esteemed: Among many, I will
rather point at, then handle two or three reasons, to manifest that Constantine
made no such Donation at all, either by word, or writing.

The first, is the testament of Constantine wherein he disposed the whole
Empire and divided it among his three sons. Constantine in his testament
(says Sozomen Sozom. lib. 2. ca. 32.
) divided the Empire to his sons, the Western part he assigned to
Constantine and Constans; the Eastern to Constantius. Constantine and Constans
(says Zosimus Zosim. lib. 2. pa. 35.
) held all beyond the Alps, with Italy, Illyricum and Afric: to Constantius^
was given whatsoever was in Asia, the East and Egypt. To Constantine and
Constans was attributed (says Zonaras Zonar. to. 3. pa. 85.
) Italy and Rome it self, Afrike, Sicily, the Cottian Alps, cum Gallijs, with
the countries of the Galls; to Constantius that which was in the East. And
though Zozimus affirm that the sons divided the Empire among themselves, yet
that they did it by the designement, and according to the testament of
Constantine, Eusebius Deinde quae videba^^ur, extrema quoque voluntate sua
disponebat. Liberis suis regni haereditatem tanqua^ patrimonium relin quebat.
Eus. li. 4 de vit. Co^st. ca. 63.
, Ruffinus Liberis de successione Romani orbis testanie^to haeredibus scriptis,
etc. Ruff. lib. 1. ca. 11.
, Socrates Constantinu^ partibus imperij ad occidentem f^tis praefecit.
Constantium, etc. Soc. lib 1. ca. 25.
, Cassiodore Facto testamento, tribus filijs constitu^is haeredibus, est
defunctus. Cass. tripert. hist. lib. 3. ca. 12.
, Nicephorus Imperio filijs iam diuiso, Constantino and Constanti occidentales
parts designauerat, Nic. lib. 8. ca. 54.
, and many more do expressly witness. To omit others, their own Sigonius does
declare, that to Constantius Constantius accepto testamento imperium Orientale
iniuit. Sigo. lib. 5. de occ. Imper. pa. 73.
the East was given by the testament of Constantine; to Constantine Constans in
Italia, Constantinus in Gallia imperium ex testamento patris inierunt, ibid.
and Constans Italy and the Galls, or Western Provinces: who further adds
Ibid.
, that when there was a difference between two of the brethren about the
bounds, Constantine the eldest, demanding of Constans, to have Italy and
Afric, Constans answered him, se testamento patris stare velle, that he
would stand to his fathers testament* and would defend that being his last
will. Unto all which add the acknowledgement of Baronius. As soon, says he
Bar. an. 337. nu. 51.
, as Constantine was dead, each of his sons, relictam sibi ex patris
testamento Imperii partem festinus accepit, took that part of the Empire,
which by their fathers testament was left unto them: and Constantine with
Constans to have taken Rome, Italy, and the West, himself does declare.

Is it credible, that if Constantine had formerly made either by word or
writing, an absolute Donation of Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces to the
Pope, and that so solemnly, that as Leo 9. says, he decreed that donation to
abide firm and inviolable, in finem mundi, unto the end of the world; is it
credible, I say, that so pious and prudent an Emperor would within twelve
years after do contrary to his own act? especially in his last will and
testament, wherein he would rather have testified his religious affection and
love to the Church, by an addition of some other gift, then leave so eternal a
blemish upon his name of inconstancy, of injustice, of impiety, of sacrilege,
and of making his own children inheritours of that which he knew was neither
his to give, nor which they without open injustice, impiety, and sacrilege
might accept, hold, or possess.

The second reason is the perpetual possession and dominion which the
Emperors had of Rome and Italy with the government thereof; which continued
still in them, not only after Constantines time, but even while he lived,
until it was unjustly taken from them, first by the Popes, and then confirmed
by Pipine, Charles the Great, and others. In the 20. year of Constantine, the
very next after this supposed Donation, was Seuerus Ad Seuerum Praef. Vr.
Iuliano and Paulino Coss. l. 2. de Iudicijs. Cod. Theod.
the praefectus vrbis, President of Rome, appointed by Constantine to gouernei.
with the cities belonging thereunto, by the Imperial authority as it formerly
had bin. The next year after, was Maximus Ad Maxim^ P. V. Constantino A. 7.
and Constantino Caes. Coss. l. 2. ad legem Corneli^* de falso. C. Theod.
; the 2. next years was Vt testatur Onuph. comment. in Fas^. lib. 2. ^pa* 283.
284.
Anicius Iulianus; next after that Optatianus, and throughout all Constantines
time, and every year he had his lieutenants and deputies to govern the city
of Rome under him, and in his right. It were easy to express almost in each
year the several praefectivrbis, under Constans, Constantius, Valentinian,
Theodosius, and other Emperors, for more then an 100. years after
Comstantine. After the time of Valentinian the younger, when the Western
Empire by reason of the irruptions of the Goths and Vandal^s began to decay,
that the supreme government of Rome and Italy still remained in the Emperor,
his appointing the Kings of Italy, and after them of the Dukes of Rome, and
Exarches of Rauenna, is an evident proof. Leo the Emperor (says Sigonius
Sigon. lib. 14. de Occid. Imp. pa. 234.
) sent Maiorianus into Italy to take the government and Empire thereof. (...)
about the year 457, and within a year or two after Rome had been sacked by
Gensericus: again Sigon. lib. cod. pa. 240. and 24^.
, the Senate entreated Leo the Emperor, that he would send in those
troublesome times, a Governor, or Emperor into the West, and he gave to
Anthemius the dignity of the Western Empire. Again, when Odoacer the Herule,
had invaded the kingdom in the West, Zeno the Emperor gave Sig. lib. 15. p^.
^60.
to Theodoricus the Goth, Italy and the government thereof, and he committed
unto him the people of Rome, the Senate, cum ipsa vrbe ac tota Italia, with the
city it self and all Italy: by virtue of which grant Theodoricus, and some
few of his successors, had right (but yet with a subordination to the
Emperor) to the Italian kingdom; and hereupon the Romans received Ibid. pa.
261.
Theodoricke for their King, and said they would obey him, vt iusto domino, as
their lawful Lord (to wit, under the Emperor) for they had already known the
Emperors pleasure to be such. Thus says Sigonius, and this was about the
year 500.

When after this, Justinian the great (for so is he, and that worthily called:)
had expelled the Goths and Vandalls out of Italy, how he made imperial laws
whereby he ruled it as the other parts of his Empire; how he substituted
Narses to be under him, and in his name the governor thereof; how after that,
the Exarches were sent from the Emperors, who as deputies held (so far as
they were able by reason of the Lombardes intrusion and violence) the rule and
possession of Rome and Italy, is not unknown. Longinus the Exarch, says
Sigonius Sig. li. 1. de regno Ital. p. 5
, nouam Italiae administrationem indixit, set down a new kind of government
for Italy, he set over every city their several Dukes and Judges to
adminster law unto them, and this he did specially at Rome and Rauenna. Again
Lib. cod. pa. 12.
, Mauritius the Emperor sent Smaragdus to be Exarchate of Rauenna, Gregory to
be the Duke of Rome, and Castorius the captain of the soldiers and garrisons
that there were kept, who with great joy were received into the city: Again
Sig. lib. 2. pa. 50.
, John the Exarch, iudices Romam ad ius dicendum miserat, sent Judges to Rome
for administration of right: and very often the like, yea that both Rome and
Italy in right belonged to the Emperor and was subject to his government,
until the time of Pope Gregory the 2. is evident by that which out of Paulus
Diaconus, Zonaras, Anastasius, Sigonius and Baroni^s was showed; they with one
consent teaching that by the means of that Gregory, Leo the Emperor was
deprived (under color of piety, but in truth, perfidiously and traitorously)
of the Western dominion: the Pope, as Diaconus Paul Dia. lust. lib. 21. pa.
665.
says, causing Rome and Italy to forsake the Emperors obedience: and again
Ibid. pa. 663
, He removed Rome and all Italy, and the right both of the common weal and of
the Church in the Western parts, ab obedientia Leonis and Imperij, from the
obedience of Leo and from the Empire. The Romans and others at that time
adhaered to the Pope, and so by this traitorous means he got the possession
of much of that, which afterward by Pipine and Charles the Great was confirmed
unto him. And that was done by Gregory about the 730. year after Christ,
until which time, Italy, and Rome remained in the Emperors possession and
subject to his dominion.

Can it be imagined that Constantine, if he had made such an absolute and
solemn Donation of Rome and Italy to the Pope, would immediately, even the
next year after that, and all his life time, have continued the possession,
rule, and government thereof by his lieutenants in such sort as he had done
before? or may we think that both himself, Constans, Theodosius, Valentinian,
and other most pious and religious Emperors, would have usurped that
government and intruded themselves into S. Peter's patrimony? Or if all those
Emperors would have been so unjust and impious, may we think Syluester,
Julius, Leo, Gelasius, Gregory, and other Popes, men of high courage to defend
their rights, that they would have put up so great indignity, without once so
much as checking the Emperors for so open wrong, sacrilege and usurpation? Or
may not the silence of so many Popes, and continued possession by so many
Emperors, be thought a just reason to condemn that pretended Donation?

The third proof that Constantine made no such Donation, is the testimony of
their own Writers, whereof though it were easy to produce a long Catalogue,
yet I will here cite but a few. The first, is Bishop Canus, who thus writes
Mel. Can. lib* 11. ca. 5.. Quod deinde.
; Eusebius, Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, Eutr^pius, Victor, and
other Authors of good credit, who have m^st diligently written all the Acts of
Constantine, not only do make no mention of this Donation; but further they
declare, that he so divided the Roman Empire among his three sons, vt Italia
vni eoru^ tota contigerit, that all Italy was allotted to one of them. So
Canus. And to him accords, one of their later and most earnest defenders of the
Popes Regalties, Alex. Carerius, who thus says Ca^. lib. 2. c^. 21.. Acced^t.
, Of this Donation of Constantine, Compertum est, it is certain, that nothing
is read in any approved Historian, specially in those, who writ in that or the
next Age. Eusebius does not mention it, nor Hierome, nor Augustine, nor
Ambross, nor Basil, nor Chrysostom, nor Ammianus, nor the tripertite History,
nor Damasus, nor Bid, nor Orosius. So Carerius.

The second is Cardinal Bellarmine, who among other reasons, why the Emperors
consent was required in calling the four first general Councels, gives Bell.
lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 13. Secunda and. Quarta.
this, That the Pope in those days was in his temporalties subject to the
Emperor, and Dominum suum temporalem eum agnoscebat, and acknowledged the
Emperor to be his temporal Lord; and because the Emperors at that time,
orbis terrae imperarent* did rule over the whole world, there could no Council
be called, nisi in vrbe aliqua Imperiali, but in some ^ittie of the Emperor.
So Bellarmine; who had he known that Constantine had made either by word or
writing, such a solemn Donation of Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces, to
Sylucster and his successors for ever, he needed not to have complained of
want of Cities, where to hold a general Council without the Emperors leave
or consent: he might have called the Bishops to Millaine, to Ra^e^^a, to Capua,
to Arles, to a thousand more, even to Rome it self; but the reason why he did
not this, says the Cardinal, was because Rome and all those Cities, were the
Emperors, and in the Emperors Cities, without his leave and consent, a Council
could not be called.

The third is Cardinal Cusanus Nic. Cusan. lib. 3. de Concor. Cath. ca. 2. and
seq.
, who at large has handled and examined this argument touching Constantines
Donation, and by many reasons refuted the same. Ex istis constat, by these it
is manifest, says he Idem cap. 2.
, that Constantine gave not to the Pope, Rauenna, Rome, and the West, seeing
the Emperors unto the time of A^stulphus, held a continued possession of them,
and that pleno iure, by full right. Again, we read, says he Ibidem.
, that the Popes do confess the Emperors, Dominos suos esse, to be their
Lords, and Pope Agatho writes to Constantine the Emperor, who called the sixth
Synod, that Rome is, ipsius Imperatoris seruilis vrbs, a servile city, and
subject to the Emperor. In like manner, Pope Boniface writes to Honorius the
Emperor, that Rome is the City of his clemency; and to be short, says he,
the contrary is no where read, but that unto the time of Pipin, the Emperor
remained in possession of those places before named; and then he concludes,
Haec credo vera esse, I believe these things to be true, notwithstanding the
famous opinion to the contrary, touching Constantines Donation. So Cusanus.

The fourth is Jacob. Almane, who entreating of the Canon Constantinus, where
this donatio^ is expressed, he not only reiects it as being of no In capite
il^^lorum canonum, ^aquam non habentiu^ authoritatem ponitur palea. Iac. Alm.
lib. de potest. ^ccl. and laica.. Doctor iam.
authority, but further adds; that Constantine could not, if he would, give
the Western Empire to the Pope, and if he had done it, yet his Donation could
not bind his successors; and for each of these he gives several reasons.

The fifth is one unworthy of naming, being the most impudent proctor that ever
the Pope had, who says Gas. Sciop* in Ecclesiast. cap. 51.
, Non semel risi eos, I have often laughed at those, who are so earnest for
this donation of Constantine, the Charter of which we believe to have been
made by the fraud of some Grecians, ad fac^endam Romanae Ecclesiae inuidiam, to
make the Roman Church to be envied, nor do we care much whether there were any
such Donation or no.

The sixth and last, is Aeneas Siluius, who afterward being Pope, was called
Pius 2. He in a Dialogue written when he was In Dialogo, quem adhuc Cardinalis
scripsit. Mart. ca. 30. ^it. nu. 34.
Cardinal, does professedly refute this fable of Constantines Donation,
calling the professors of the Law, stolidos, very fools for striving so much
about this Donation, whether it were of force or no, cum constet eam ne per
somnium quidem in mentem Constantino venisse, Whereas it is very certain,
that it never came into Constantines mind, no not so much as in a dream.

This to have been indeed written by Aeneas Si^uius, not only others Aeneas
Sil. inuehitur contra miseros Legistas qui tantum laborarunt an donatio facta
Siluestro valu^rit, cum nunquam facta fuerit. Card. Jacob. lib. 10. de Co^c.
Art. 8. ca. vlt. nu. 15. and idem ait Couar. lib. 4. Variar. Resol. ca. 16. pa.
69. and Hier. Balb. lib. de Coronat. pa: 80.
testify, but D. Marta himself professes Mart. loc. cit. nu. 42.
, who would gladly excuse this, in saying, that Aeneas Conscripsit ^uuen^s, in
minoribus, Ibid.
writ it when he was but a young man, and that being made Cardinal and Pope,
he forbad those his books to be read, adding; that this is to be seen in the
Index, to wit, librorum prohibitorum. Marta deludes herein, both himself and
others. For in the Index Index librorum prohibitorum authoritate Pij 4. primu^
editus, a Sixto 5. auctus, a Cleme^te 8. recognitus pa. 2.
, are only forbidden those things of Aeneas Siluius, Which himself recalled
in his Bull of Retractation, and in his Bull, he retracts indeed, whatsoever
Bu^la Retract. Pij 2. tom. 4. conc* pa. 512.
he had writ about the superiority of a Council above the Pope, and against
the supreme authority of the Pope: but that ever he retracted his condemning
of this counterfeit Donation, Marta will never be able to prove, unless it be
against the authority of the Pope, and dignity of their See; that falsehood
should not be counted truth, and a forged writing, should not be held for a
true and authenticke deed. And Marta might easily have perceived this. For
Aeneas Siluius was not a young man, when he writ that Dialogue; He writ it, as
Marta Mart. ca. cit. nu. 42.
confesses, an. 1454. which was but three years Nam Pontificatu^ inijt an.
1457. Bin, in vit. Pij. 2*
before he was Pope, at which time he was 54. years old; for he lived Ioh.
Stella in vita Pij. 2.
in all but 64. and having been Pope but seven years at most, he dyed Bin.
in vita. Pij. 2.
ann. 1464. So his writing of that Dialogue at that age, can no way come within
the compass of those books which he writ being a young man, and which only
are prohibited; and prohibited only so far also, as they speak against the
Popes supremacy.

So both by evident reason, and by the clear confession of their own Writers,
it does appear, that Constantine neither by word, nor writing, made any such
Donation to the Pope, as they now pretend and claim from him: yea those
forenamed, and many other of their Writers, though they knew right well what an
hard censure of heresy Vt supra ostensum est, cap. 7.
, not only Panormitane, but Cardinal Iacobatius also, had pronounced against
them, yet chose rather by yielding to the evidence of truth, to be esteemed for
little less then heretics, then with the title of Papal Catholics, to approve
such a false, fictitious, and forged Donation.

CHAP. X.
Seven witnesses alleged by Doctor Marta, for proof of Constantines Donation
examined: namely, the first Nicene Council, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hierom,
Pope Damasus, the Acts of Siluester, Pope Gelasius, and Isiodore.
I Would gladly here have dismissed both this Charter, and Donation of
Constantine, as unworthy of any further discourse or refutation, but that their
continual exclaiming, that none Eam donationem Constantini fictitiam esse,
nemo hactenus euidenter demonstrauit, Gretz. Append. 1. ad lib. de manific.
princ. pa. 89. hacte. nus nemo exstitit qui hanc donationem euertere potuerit.
Ibid. pa. 114. and saepe alibi.
have ever as yet evidently disproued the same; and the manifold reasons and
authorities alleged by Aug. Steuchus, by the Gregoririan Glossators, by
Boethius Epon, by Cardinal Albanus, by Cardinal Iacobatius, and specially by
their great Neapolitane, Doctor Marta, do enforce me to enter into a farther
examination of this cause. And seeing Marta is the latest, and withal most
accurate in handling this matter, who has raked together almost all, that any
of the other has pleaded for this Donation, and he so triumphs in his
proofs, that he fears not to say Mart. tract. de iurisd. part. 1. ca. 30. nu.
20
, that none may hereafter so much as doubt of the truth and validity of this
Charter, it may suffice to go pedetentim, with him, adding here and there, what
others do allege, where Marta ouerslippeth any proof which is by them
produced.

First of all, I wish you to observe the wisdom of Marta in this cause. He
undertaking, and proposing Verba donationis Consta^tini sunt ista; quam
intendimus comprobar^. Mart. loc. cit. nu. 1.
to prove this Charter to have bin truly made by Constantine, after he has
verbatim set down the same, (not changing or correcting so much as those
manifest and gross errors of the name of Constantinople, and date of the
Charter) immediately after Ibid. nu. 2.
says; Of this donation, the most wise Cardinal of our times, Baronius
writes in his Annals, an. 323. (he should have said 324. Bar. an. 324. nu.
117. and seq.
) but some malignant Non desunt inu^d^, etc. and. malignorum detrahentium
iuribus Eccle^iae. ibid. nu. 2. 3.
persons, envying the greatness of the holy Church, still affirm that it is a
vain figment. And then having set down one of those reasons whereby others
prove it to be a forgerie, he adds Ibid. nu. 3. 4
; To this argument of these slanderers, most grave men have answered, and among
others Cardinal Baronius in the place alleged. Thus Marta. Let any but peruse
Baronius, and he will even admire to see the most shameful dealing of Marta
herein.

1. Marta would persuade you, that Baronius does defend as himself does, the
truth of this Edict: whereas it is as clear as the sun, that Baronius in that
very place cited by Marta, calls it Ex depra^ato illo a Graecis mutuato edicto.
Bar an. 324. n^. 118.
a falsified Edict; and else where Bar. an. 1191. nu. 52.
in plain terms, says, The Donation which is set down in this Edict or
Charter, penitus esse commentitia, prorsusque falls a conuincitur, is convinced
to be utterly fictitious, and altogether false.

2. Marta says, that Baronius answers the reasons of malignant persons
brought to prove this Edict to be a forgerie. An untruth so manifest, that
there is not one syllable in that place of Baronius, tending to that p^rpose*
Nay, Baronius is so far from answering such ^e^^ons, that he himself brings
Bar. ibidem.
some evident proofe^, ex quibus by which, as he says, This Edict is convinced
to be utterly false, and a very figment. Marta to defend this lying Edict,
makes bold to belie and sl^nder their great Cardinal, but lies must ever be
supported by lies.

3. Marta commends Sapientissimus nostri te^poris Cardina lis, Baronius, Mart.
loco cit nu. 2.
Baronius for a most wise man in handling this matter. Now if Baronius
professing, proving and proclaiming this Edict to be utterly fictitious, and
altogether false, be most wise; what must be thought of Marta himself? who
contrary to the most wise Cardinal professes, and strives to prove the same
Edict to be most Donation^ fuisse verissimam. Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26. and nu. 39.
true.

4. Marta tells Mart. ca. cit. nu. 20.
you, that none may doubt but that the Edict was truly made by Constantine,
whereas his most wise Cardinal tells him, that it was not made by Constantine,
but forged A Graecis mutuato edicto. Bar. ann. 324. nu. 118. art Graecoru^
accessit. Bar. an. 1191. nu. 53. Hoc edictum a Graecis, perfida donatione
acceptum ait Bin. Not. in Edict. Edictum.
by some of the Grecians, near hand 700. Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 53.
years after Constantine was dead. Is not Marta now a very wise man, to
produce Baronius for a defender with him of this Edict of Donation?

Fifthly, Marta teaches Mart. loc* cit* n^. 2. and 3.
, that this Donation was made for the honor of the Roman Church, and that
therefore they who write against the Edict, doe^enuiously seek to impair the
dignity and amplitude of that See. Baronius tells him the quite contrary. The
Bar. an. 324 ^u. 118.
rightful possession of the Church, ambigua potius redditur, quam probatur, is
rather made doubtful then proved by this Edict; and this, he says, is
manifest to every one that diligently looks upon it. Again Bar. an. 1191 nu.
52.
, The Grecians are known to have made this Edict, non Latinorum amore sed odio;
inque odium Romanae Ecclesiae, not for any good will, but in hatred to the
Church of Rome, that what she possesses might be thought to be given by
Constantine. Absit Bar. an. 324. nu. 119.
vero, vt ab homine eiusmodi, but far be it from the Church to challenge her
dignity from such a man as Constantine. Now whereas Marta accounts and
calls those that judge this Edict a forgerie (one of the which is his most
wise Cardinal) envious and malignant detractors of the Church: I hope some
good friends of the Cardinal will admonish Marta of so foul a slander: or if
they will not, yet the Cardinal himself does in some sort cry quittance with
him; I have, says Bar. ann. 1119. nu. 61.
he, demonstrated this (touching this counterfeit Edict) against those who have
this Edict in such high esteem, vt stulte timeant, that they foolishly fear,
if the Edict be overthrown, that then the whole Church will fall with it. So
Marta for making such reckoning of this forgerie, has purchased at his most
wise Cardinals hands, the honor to be esteemed a fool.

In the next place Marta undertakes to answer that reason which is brought
Apud Martam. loc. cit. nu. 2. and 3.
against the donation, for that Eusebius, Theodoret, Socrates, and others make
no mention thereof. To this Marta, says Ibid. nu. 4.
, he will answer cumulatius, more fully then others before him have done; and
his answers are two. The first, that it is a ridiculous Argumentu^ est
deridendu^, etc. ibi. nu. 5.
argument, being drawn, ab authoritate negative. But Marta herein
demonstrates himself to be indeed ridiculous; for the argument is not barely
negative: They do not mention this, therefore it was not done; but the force
of it is affirmative, in this manner, Eusebius, Hierom, Ambrose, Socrates,
Theodoret, Sozomen, and others, are not only silent of this donation, but they
affirm that, whence it is clear that Constantine neither did nor could make
any such donation: for they testify and affirm, that Constantine was baptized
at Nicomedia, and by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and that but a little before
his death: and therefore from their testimony, it certainly follows, that
he did not make this Edict of donation after his baptism by Siluester, nor at
Rome, nor ten years before he died, as in the Edict it is said that he did.
If Marta knew not this to be the effect of the reason, he was too supine,
negligent, and careless; if knowing it, he thought it either negative, or
ineffectuall, he is too ridiculous.

In his other answ^re, Marta undertakes to give Cur in antiquis historiis, tam
rara monumenta extent de hac donatione. Mart: loc. cit. nu. 7.
a reason why in those ancient Historians there is scarce any mention at all
of this Edict; the reason, says he, Summa open ni^ebantur, ne vlla huius
concessionis mentio in reru^ gestarum monumentis haberetur; verum deleta eius
prorsus memoria, nullo vnquam tempore posteris innotesceret, Marta ibid.
is this: This Edict was made in vltimis temporibus Constantini, in the very
last time of Constantine; and Constantines successors did with all their might
endeuou^, that there should remain no mention of this Donation in any
monuments, but that the memory of it should utterly be blotted out, that at no
time it might come to the knowledge of posterity; and for this cause,
scriptores, ne Principibus odio essent, omiserunt: Historians and Writers
omitted it, least they should incur the hatred of Princes. Thus Marta: In
whose words there is neither truth, nor so much as any likelihood thereof.
First, it is a palpable untruth that Constantine (admitting he made this
Edict) made it in his last time: for by the consent of those who think the
Edict to be true, Constantine made it the fourth Vt ante ostensum est ca. 7.
day after he was baptized: which was as they Bar. and Bin. vt ante ostensu^.
est.
teach, An. 324. and therefore ten years full before he died. Again, by
Martas Mart. loc. ^it. nu. 13.
own confession it followed the leprosy of Constantine, and the cure thereof
by baptism received at Siluesters hands; was Constantine a leper till his
last time? was he not cleansed and baptized before the Nicene Council? which
was ten years before Constantines death. Or how could Siluester baptize him
in his last times, seeing before Constantines last times, both Siluester and
Marcus his successor were dead, Julius being Pope eight or nine Julius Papa
factus 26. October. an. 336. Bar. eo an. nu. 65. Constanti^us obijt 20. Iu^lij
an. 337. Bar. eo an. nu. 1.
months before Constantine died. Further what notorious injustice and fraud,
does Marta impute to the most religious Emperors, who succeeded Constantine?
who first would seek to wrong the Pope and the Church, in withholding from
them that which Constantine had given; and, which is worse, would seek for ever
to suppress and smother the right, quite abolishing all mention and memory of
that Donation? And of what base and abject minds does Marta make all the
Writers and Historians of those times to have bin, who for fear of the
Emperors, would not so much as mention the Popes right? Had the Pope no Writers,
nor Historians that durst speak for the truth? for his right? or what needed
they fear the Emperor, when they had the patronage of the Pope, who was now a
greater Emperor, as Steuchus Steuch. pa. 187.
calls him? Or would both the Emperors, the Nobles, and Commons, with all
Historians, and Writers seek to do so open injustice, when Constantine had so
straightly co^iured them all, saying, We Edict. constan. apud ^in^to. 1 pa.
298* a.
charge before the living God, and by his terrible judgment, all the Emperors
our successors, all our Nobles and Senators, and all the people in the whole
world, which are subject to our Empire, that it shall not be lawful for them
by any means to gainestand, infringe, or any way conuellere, to weaken this
our grant to the Roman Church and to all the Bishops thereof. Or if any
(which we believe not) shall be a violator or contemner hereof, let him be
subject to eternal condemnation, and let him feel the holy Apostles, Peter
and Paul to be enemies to him, both in this life, and in the life to come, and
being burnt in the lowest hell, let him fall with the devil and all the wicked
ones. Would they notwithsting all these coniurations, and direful imprecations
of Constantine, do so open wrong to the holy Church? would both Emperors and
Historians conspire in so great iniq^itie? Say they would, yet what wit or
judgment may we think had they, if (as Marta says they did,) they had
endeavored to suppress this Charter? Had it bin made in the presence or with
the knowledge of some few, they might have thought the concealing thereof
possible: but these things were not done in a corner, but as the Edict ^ib pa.
297. a.
testifies, it was made with the knowledge and consent of all Constantines
Lords and Nobles, of all the whole Senate of Rome, and of all people subject to
the glory of the Roman Empire? Was not this, think you, a wise and worthy
conceit in Marta, to imagine the Emperors would strive to suppress, and
Historians to conceal that Donation and all memory thereof, which was
publicly known (if the Edict say true) to all the Nobility and Commons, to
all both Clergy and Laity, even to all people in the Empire? and which being
sealed Huius imperiali^ decreti nostri pagina^ p^op^i^s manibus roborantes etc
ib. p. 298. a.
and ratified by Constantines own hand, was given to be kept in the Popes
Registry? Has not Marta, for this his wife conceit, well deserved the Cardinals
livery, which he has so dearly purchased?

Marta having now told you not only that ancient Historians and Writers did,
but why they did omit and durst make no mention of this Edict, in the next
place, like the Esopicall Satyr, he will tell you and prove also the quite
contradictory, that many ancient Writers, yea holy Fathers A patribus f^de
dignis tra^ita sunt. Marto. cit. nu. 6.
also, such as are worthy of credit, do mention the same: and therefore in a
vaunting manner he Mart. nu. 22.
says, Habemus plurimos sanctos Patres, We have very many holy Fathers,
Historians, Emperors, Lawyers, and sacred Canons for witness of this
Donation. Let us then hear and examine those witnesses, by which you shall see
the fair and honest dealing of Marta.

The most ancient, and withal most honorable witness which he produces, is
the first Nicene Co^ncell; of which Marta says Mart. cap. cit. nu. 21.
, The truth of this Donation does especially appear by the Nicene Council.
No, that appears not, but the extreme folly and falsehood of Marta does
evidently appear thereby. But first see the wit of Marta; He told Ibid. nu. 7.
you this Charter of Donation was made, in vltimis temporibus, in the last
times of Constantine, those were his 30. and 31. years; and here he tells
you that the Nicene Council is a witness thereof. Now it is certain, that
the Nicene Council was held in the twentieth year Eodem tempore (finito
Niceno concilio) vigesimus Constantini annus co^pletus est. Euseb^ lib. 3. de
vit. Constable. ca. 14.
of Constantine. So that by Martas account, the Nicene Council should testify
this Donation to have been extant nine or ten whole years before ever it was
made or thought upon.

See next the truth of Marta: where, I pray you, does the Nicene Council bear
witness of this Donation? Not in the Acts thereof: for of them there is no more
extant, but that which in Eusebius, Athanasius, Socrates, Theodoret, and other
ancient Writers is recorded. In none of which there is any mention at all of
this Donation. Not in the Decrees or Canons: They are extant and in every man's
hand, and in them there is not one word touching this Donation.

Hear now I pray you, the wise answer of Marta: because by the Mart. cap. cit.
nu. 21.
Acts of this Council, the Donation did specially appear, propterea toto
conatu insidi^ti sunt isti mali homines, therefore did those wicked men
endeavor with all their power to falsify and suppress the Nicene Decrees, vt
illius memoriam penitus abolerent, that they might utterly abolish the memory
of this Donation. By this Marta would persuade you that this Donation is
testified in some of the Nicene Canons which were suppressed and lost. But if
these Canons be lost, how knows Marta that this Donation was mentioned
therein? Or why may not another say that Constantine made the same Donation to
the Bishop of Bizantium, and prove it by those Nicene Canons which are lost?
How can Marta refute this, but he must withal condemn his own folly in
alleging for his proof the Canons which are perished? Again, who were those
wicked men that did abolish the Nicene Canons wherein this Donation was
mentioned? That Arrians and Heretics, to the end they might abandon the
faith, labored to falsify the Nicene Canons, has been often said and by
many: But that ever any man falsified or suppressed any of those Canons to this
end which Marta has devised, that so they might abolish the memory of
Constantines Donation, none, as I think, so much as ever dreamed thereof
before Marta, nor any I hope, will ever abette him in so foolish a conceit.

Now whereas Marta will needs undertake to prove some of the Nicene Canons to
be lost, though his labor therein be altogether vain, (seeing he cannot,
nor so much as once goes about to prove that this Donation was mentioned in
any of the lost Canons) yet is it worthy observing, what rare proofs he
brings of this untrue assertion, also. It is testified, says he T^statur
sanctus Athanasius, etc. Mart. ibid.
, by S. Athanasius in his Synodall Epistle to Pope Foelix, wherein he requests
the Pope to keep safely the Nicene Canons. And the same Foelix an holy martyr,
testifies that many of those Nicene Canons were abolished by heretics, as
may Vt in eius decretis videre licet ca. 2. in Epistola Concilij Sardicensis.
ibid.
be seen in the Decrees of Foelix in the Epistle of the Sardican Council.
Thus he. Marta sure was scarce his own man when he writ these things. First,
the authors whom he alleges are not St. Athanasius, nor St. Foelix; but Sr.
forgerer, and Sr. fool, the only fit witnesses for Marta in this cause. The
former Extat apud Bin. pa. 490.
was writ by Athanasius from a Synod at Alexandria, of which Baronius Nullus
plane* locus, vel tempus cogendae Synodi potuerit esse. Bar. an. 357. nu. 66
says truly, that there was no place where, no time when that Synod could be
held. Besides, in that Epistle the sottish forgerer makes Athanasius to say
Significamus paternitati vestrae, etc. Athan. Epist. loc. cit. pa. 49^
, that he received Episcopal consecration at Rome, and by the hands of Pope
Foelix, and in the fourth Indiction: whereof not one syllable is true; for
Athanasius was created Bishop not at Rome, but at Alexandria twenty years
before Foelix, as the holy Council Epist. Synodi Alexandrinae apud Athan. in
Apol. 2. pa. 193. and seq.
at Alexandria, wherein were diverse Bishops that were present when Athanasius
was consecrated, does testify: Besides, there is no year of Foelix Popedom,
which falls out in the fourth Indiction, as by the Fasti Indictio omniu^ prima
fui^ 7. anno Constantini. Onuphr. in Fast. anno vibis 1064. Bar. an. 312. nu.
110. it a annus ille quo Foelix fuit papa, nempe 357. (sedit ^o tan^^. Bar. eo
an^nu. 67.) est Indictioni^ 14.
is evident. But that which conuinceth Marta to have doted, in alleging these
forged writings, and whereby, (had he not been blinded with error) he might
easily have perceived both those Epistles to be undoubtedly forgeries, is that
which himself adds, that the Decrees of Foelix, are to be seen in the
Epistle of the Council at Sardica. For the Sardican Council was held in the
time of Pope Julius Concilium Sardicense habitum anno Iulij Papae 11. and
Christi 347. Bar. eo an. nu. ^. Foelix aute^ non fuit Papa ante an. 357. vt ex
Bar. patet.
, long before Liberius (to whom Foelix succeeded) entered into the Papacy. Is
not this now wittily done of Marta, to allege an Epistle of Pope Foelix
mentioned in the Sardican Council, when the Sardican Council by many years
did precede the Popedom of Foelix? Again, if both those forgeries were indeed
true authors, yet is Marta his untruth most euiden^, for in that Epistle of
Athanasius there is no request made to Foelix (as Marta says there is) for
preserving the Nicene Canons: neither in that Epistle of Foelix (which is an
answer to the former of Athanasius) is it said that any of the Nicene Canons
were perished. So not only the authors whom Marta produces are forgeries, but
that which he cites out of those forgeries, is also forged.

Marta further alleges Mart. lib. cit. c. 15. nu. 6. and 7
for the loss of some Nicene Canons, an Epistle of Pope Marcus Epistola Marci
extat apud B^niu^ ^o. 1. Conc. p. 346
writ to Athanasius, and the Epistle of Athanasius Extat ibid. pa. 345.
also to Marcus. In both which it is indeed affirmed, that very many of the
Nicene Canons are wanting. But the very same doom must be given of these, as
of the former. All feathers of one wing, all of them base and bastardly
writings. Athanasius was not at Alexandria, but in banishment at France Nam
Conc. Tyrium habitu^ est tempore Siluestri. B^r. an. 335. nu. 1. Ex isto
Con^eilio Athanasius recta profectus est Consta^tinopolim; inde a Constantino
missus in ex^lium in Gallia^, ibique moratus ad obitu^ Constantini, vt liquet
ex Apologia 2. Athanasij pa. 219. and seq.
all the time of Pope Marcus, where he lived both at ease and in great honor
with Constantine the son of Constantine the Great; and yet the forgerer makes
Athanasius to write Athan. apud B^n. pa. 345.
to him from Alexandria, and write of the heavy Quanta and qualia quotidie
patimur audistis. ibid.
persecution which he there daily suffered. And that Epistle of Marcus was
written Epist. Marci. in ^ine.
on the twenty third day of October, when Nepotianus was Consul; whereas
Marcus is acknowledged to have died on the seventh day Marcus sedit tantum 8.
menses. Hier. in Chron. an. 331. Obijsse autem 7. di^ October* testatur Martyrol:
Romans and Vsuard* in illum diem.
of October in the same Consulship. Or if it seem nothing to Marta, that such
an holy Pope as Marcus was, should rise out of his grave, to write news about
the loss of the Nicene Canons, yet he might have learned of Posseuine, of
Bellarmine, and diverse others, that these Epistles are undoubtedly forged; Sine
dubio non sunt Athanasij and Marci, says Posseuine Posse^. in Appar. verbo
Athanasius.
, These two Epistles without all doubt, were not written by Athanasius and Pope
Marcus. Constat eas esse supposititias, says Bellarmine Bell. lib. de Eccles.
scrip. in Athanasio.
, It is certain that these two Epistles are counterfeits. Then it is certain
also, that Marta strives by forgeries to maintain this forged Donation.

But to put Marta out of doubt, that none of the Nicene Canons are lost or
perished, the African Bishops and their whole Council, is a witness above all
exception. For when Pope Boniface and Zosimus alleged Conc. Carthag. 6. apud
Bin. ^o 1. pa. 616.
a counterfeit Nicene Canon, the African Bishops to convince (as they did Vt
liquet ex Epistola. Conc. Africani ad Celestinum. Conc Afric. ca. 105.
most clearly) the false dealing of those Popes, sought out with great labor
and charges, the ancient and authenticke copies of the Nicene Canons, and
having obtained Epistolae (...), and Cyri^^^. ibid. ca. 102. and 103.
them both from Alexandria, and from Constantinople, they found them for
number, and ^ence to be the very same Bin. Not. post cap. 104, Conc. Afric. pa.
645.
which themselves formerly had, and which are extant in the Tomes Tom. 1. Conc.
apud Bin. and alios sub titulo, Canones Co^cilij Niceni.
of the Councels, in the African Apud. Bin* to. 1. pa. 617.
Synod, in the Codex Page 1.
canonum Romanae Ecclesiae, in the Codex Page 3.
canonum Ius^elli, and in many other places. Seeing then those twenty Canons
are all which the Nicene Council set down; and seeing in none of them there
is any one syllable touching this Charter or Donation of Constantine, it is
clear that Marta in pretending the Nicene Council as a Witness of this
Donation, belies all those 318. holy Fathers, and was foolishly guld by
Steuchus, when he adventured to say that the Nicene Council does testify the
truth of this Donation.

Besides all which, there are extant Apud Bin. to 1. pa. 321. and seq.
eighty Canons, bearing the name of the Nicene Council, together with the
Acts of that Council, translated out of Arabicke, and commended both by Turrian
Fran. Turrian. praefat. in Canon. Conc. Nicen.
, by Alphonsus Pisanus Al. Pisan. in praefat. ad Nicen. Conc. apud Bin. page
3^1.
, and by Marta Mart. ca. 1^. nu. 8. 9.
himself, that he needed not to complain of the want of Nicene Canons. And
yet in no part of all those Acts, in none of all those eighty Canons, is there
any mention or memory of this Charter, or of this Donation. Seeing then
neither the 20. true, nor yet the So. pretended Nicene Canons, will help Marta
in his plea for this Donation, it is too apparent, that Marta and Steuch^^,
without any shame strive to uphold this forged Charter by belying that ancient
and most holy Council as being a witness thereof.

Nay the insolency, and impudency of Steuchus, (the blind guide Steuc. pa.
119. and 122.
of Marta) is most intolerable. He shames not to say, that if one be in his
wits, he must confess the voice Steu. ibidem. pa. 122. Illa quae Imperator
suo priuilegio edidit, redolere mente^ ips^^ Concilij, vocem illam Constantini
^sse vocem to^i^^ Concilij, qui^i^ percipia^, modo ^pud (...)
of Constantine in this Edict, to be the voice of the whole Nicene Council;
that this privilege, natum est a Co^cilio Nicen^, had his birth from the
Nicene Council; adding in a vaunting, or rather a frantic manner: Is there
any Parthian or Turk, or enemy to Christianity, so blind and impious, that
does not see the Nicene Council, complecti Donationem, to contain this
Donation, and totum illud edictum fluere ab illo Concilio, and that this whole
Edict does flow from the Nicene Council? and this he says, is irrefragabile
testimonium, an unanswerable testimony for the truth and antiquity of this
Charter. If Steuchus could have forborne rauing, he might have known that
other manner of men then Parthians, or Turks, and enemies to Christ, could not
see this Edict to flow from the Nicene Council. Nay to have seen, that it
could not possibly flow from thence. For the Author of the Acts of Siluester,
(one much esteemed and magnified by Steuchus) saw that this Charter was made
the fourth day Acta Siluest. apud Bar. an. 324. nu. 60.
after Constantine was baptized: Pope Nicholas the third saw the same, when he
said Tit. de elect. and electi potest. ca. Fundamenta. in Sexto.
, and that in a decretall Epistle, that Constantine on the fourth day after his
baptism, with all his Nobles, and all the Senate, and all the people did
grant, per pragmaticam sanctionem* by a pragmaticall sanction, the Monarchy of
Rome to Syluester, and his successors. So either the Pope was more blind and
impious then any Turk, or else Steuchus himself was besotted and blinded with
folly, who thought he saw this Edict springing out, and flowing from the
Nicene Council, which the holy Pope saw to be made and delivered into
Siluesters hands, an whole year Nam C^nstantinu^ baptizatum ponunt an. 324.
idqu^ ante 3^. diem Maij, nam tum finitum erat Conc. Romanum secundum.
Concilium Nicenu^ inchoatum est 14. die Iunij, anno 325. Bin. Not. in Conc:
Nic.. Pa^lino
before the Nicene Council, So this is indeed an irrefragable argument, but
not of the verity of Constantines Charter, but of the vanity of Steuchus, and
of his most childish folly.

The next ancient witness produced by Marta, is Eusebius Caesariensis; of him
Marta says Mart. cap. cit. nu. 15.
, That in his books called Enneades, Eusebius writ the life of Siluester,
relating all those things which at Rome are reported of Siluester and
Constantine, of his Leprosy, of his Baptism, of his Font, of his Donation.
The like says Steuchus, out of whom Marta borrowed it. This whole History,
says he S^euch. lib. cit pa. 94. and 95.
, is written by Eusebius, one who lived in Constantines time. The same Eusebius
is alleged also by the Gregorian Glossators Not. in cap. Constantinus.
, and by Anton. Augustinus Ant. August. li. 1. de Emendat. Gratian. dial* 6.
pa. 53.
, as proving the truth of this Edict.

Truly this Euscbius is a very fit witness for Marta, Steuchus, and the
Gregorian Glossators, a most base and vile Impostor, calling himself by the
name of Eusebius, not known to the world till 1000. years after Christ, as
their own most wise Cardinal does tell them, who thus writes Bar. ann. 1191.
nu. 52.
; After the 1000. year, some of the Grecians counterfeited those Acts, and
published them, sub Eusebij nomine, under the name of Eusebius. Of the same
Impostor Posseuine says Posseu. in Eusebius. Caesariensi.
, The Author of those Acts, is fals^ ascriptus Eusebio, falsely ascribed to
Eusebius Caesariensis. There are many tokens, says Couarruuias Couar. lib. 4
Variar. Resol. cap. 16. nu 8.
, by which I do easily believe and constantly affirm, that Eusebius
Caesariensis writ not those Acts of Syluester. Yea Marta himself was
conscious, that this author was not the true and ancient Eusebius. For had
Eusebius writ this, why does Marta say Mart. cap* cit. nu. 7.
* That Historians omitted the mention of this Edict, and durst not for fear of
the Emperors, mention the same in their books? Besides all this, the true
Eusebius does undeniably convince that Author to be a lying forgerer. For the
true Eusebius does exexpresly, and for a certainty affirm, that Constantine
was not baptized either at Rome, or by Siluester, but at Nicomedia ^useb. lib.
4. de vit^ Constant. ca. 62*
, by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and that but a little before his death,
which was when both Siluester, and his next successor Nam Marcus obijt 7.
October. ann. 336. Bar. eo, anno nu. 61. Constantinu^ obijt 21. die Iunij, ann.
sequenti. Bar. an. 337. nu. 4.
were dead. It was needful, but very shameful for Marta, Steuchus, and the
Gregorian Glossators, to support the forged Donation by a forged Eusebius,
known also by Marta himself to be such.

The next witness alleged by Marta, is Mar. cap. cit. nu. 23.
Saint Jerome in his Commentary, in Psalm. 138. and in his Epipistle to
Eustochium, which begins, Saepissimo r^gatu. I am of a strong opinion, that
Marta in writing this defense of Constantines Charter, had vowed to maintain
that one forgerie, by diverse other forgeries and lies. Saint Jerome upon that
Psalm, neither names Constantine nor Siluester, nor the Donation, nor the
Charter of Constantine. That citation must pass for an evident untruth of
Marta, and a belying of Saint Hierome. The Epistle to Eustochium is a mere
forgerie ascribed to Saint Hierome; whereof there are most evident proofs. In
it Saint Hierome is made to say Per Syluestium patrem baptizatus est
Constantinus. Hier. loc. cit.
, That Constantine was baptized by Syluester, whereas the true Saint Hierome so
plainly delivers the contrary, namely that Constantine Hier. in Chron. ad an.
31. Constantini
was baptized by Eusebius of Nicomedia, and that a very little before his
death; that Martas Master, Aug. Steuchus, for this very cause, with great
scorn and indignation reiects Saint Hierome, saying Nihil mo^rabor quid
Hieronimus scripserit. Steuch. l. b. cit* pa. 156.
, I care not what Saint Hierome writes. In that counterfeit Hierome Constantine
says of himself, that till ^e was baptized he worshipped the Heathen gods,
and observed their Heathenish festiuities. A most false and sl^nderous
imputation laid to Constantine, whereof the true Saint Hierome cleares him,
saying of the twenty sixth year of Constantine, (six years before he was
baptized, by Saint Hieromes testimony) Edicto Hier. in Chron.
Constantini Gentilium templa euersa sunt, the Temples of the Gentiles were
pulled down by the Edict of Constantine. In that forged Hierome, it is said,
that Augustus Caesar after the overthrow of Antonius at Actium, returned with
triumph to Rome on the first day of August; and then was reckoned among the
Gods, and the name of the month which before was Sex^ilis changed to August;
and that the solemnity of that first day of August, in memory of that
victory, was observed till Constantine was baptized, and then Constantine
changed it to the honor of Saint Peter ad Vincula. Not one word of all which
has any color of truth. For by the true and most exact account of Dio
Cassius, and others, Augustus obtained the victory at Actium, not on the first
of August, but on the second 4. Nona^ Septembris. Dio Cass. lib. 51.
day of September; no^ was Augustus referred into the number of the Gods till
he was dead, as both Dio ^um (mortuo Augusto) immortalitatem ei tribuerunt.
Dio. lib. 56. in fine.
and Suetonius Suet. in Aug. ca. 100.
declare. Nor did Constantine ordain the solemnity of the first of August, in
honor of those bands of Saint Peter, which is the maine point that the forged
Saint Hierom aims at. For those two fetters of Saint Peter, which gave
occasion to that festival celebritie, were not found till the time Temporibus
Ioh. Chrysostomi praedictae ca^^nae erant reper^ae. Bar. Notis in Martyr. Romans
August. 1.
of Chrysostom, nor brought to Constantinople or Rome, till the time of
Theodosius the younger, and Eudocia Harum (catenarum) altera Constantinopolim
est delata, ab Eudocia Augusta; altera ab eade^ Romam missa ad Eudoxiam eius
filiam. Bar. ibid. and ann. 439. nu. 4.
his Wife, more then Nam Constantinus obijt an. Chr. 337. Eudocia autem
Hierosolimis (vbi vincula ac^epit) redijt, anno Chr 439. Hieronimus autem
obijt. anno Chr. 4^2. vt ex Prosp. in Chron. liquet.
an hundred years after Constantines death, and more then eighteen after the
death of Hierome. At that time one of those two bands wherewith Peter was
chained by Herod, being stayed Bar. an. 439. nu. 4.
by Eudocia at Constantinople, the other was sent to Rome, to her daughter
Eudoxia, who in honor of those bands, erected a Church at Rome, called Saint
Peter's ad vincula, at the dedication of which, upon the first day Quarum
memoriae Kalendae Augusti ^uere a Romans Pontifice consecratae, in e^r^mque
nomen, dicta b^silica d^dicata. Bar. ibid. nu. 7.
of August, the chain of Peter, which came from Jerusalem, was laid in it,
and with that another chain also of Saint Peter, wherewith he was bound at
Rome by Nero: those two being (as they Ambas has catenas, simul colla^as, sibi
(...) d^uino ^^raculo copula^as, vt ex duabus vna efficeretur, tr^dunt. ibid.
report) miraculously and inseparably linked together, upon this occasion, so
long after the death of Constantine, there was instituted a yearly celebritie
to be observed on the first of August, in remembrance of those bands of Saint
Peter, as Sigebert Sigeb. an. 438.
, and after him Baronius does at large declare.

If these be not sufficient demonstrations of the forgerie of Martaes Hierome,
let him consider what Erasmus his censure is, of that very Epistle which Marta
alleges E^as. annot. ante Episto^am illam ad Eustochium. tom. 4* pa 202.
, Plane sapit impostorem, it plainly sauoureth of forgerie, and in his Preface
Praef. ante tom. 4. Hier.
, he calls those Epistles Pseudepigrapha, Books falsely ascribed unto Saint
Hierome, adding that some of them (and this is one of the worst) Nec vmbram
vllam Hieronimiani pectoris referunt: have not so much as any shadow of Ieromes
learning. Let him consider what Baronius writes of the same Epistle. There is,
says he Bar. not. in Mart. Romans Aug. 1.
, an Apocryphal writing going under the name of St. Jerome unto Eustochium,
concerning the bands of St. Peter, wherein the lying author says, that the
celebritie for those bands was instituted by Siluester and Constantine, quae
scriptio ob omnibus improbatur, which writing is rejected of all men: Or what
Card. Bellarmine says of the same Epistles, Of Be^l lib. de scrip eccles. in
Hieron.
a truth there is nothing in these Epistles (set in the fourth Tome by Erasmus,
among which this to Eustochium is one) which is worthy either of credit, or of
St. Ieromes learning. For which cause Posseuine Poss^u* Appar. in Hier. pa. ^52.
reckons this, with other treatises, among those which are falsely ascribed to
St. Jerome. So foolish was Marta in citing this Epistle, that he bewrayes to
all, his purpose to have been plainly this, by false, fabulous, and forged
writings, to uphold that false, fabulous, and forged Donation.

Their next witness is Pope Damasus: He, says Marta Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26.
, bears witness to this Donation, yea expresses the very form Eadem
donationis forma scripta est in libro Pontificali Damasi Papae. ibid. nu. 20.
of it in his Pontifical. The Gregorian Glossators intend the same, when they
say Not. in Cap. Constantinus. did. 96.
, that this Edict is found, in antiquissimis Pontificalibus, in their most
ancient Pontificalls, or writings of their Popes lives. Of which kind there is
none so ancient as Damasus: Steuchus speaks more plainly. Damasus, says he
Steuch. lib. cit. pa. ^49.
, writ the lives of the Popes, and when he comes to Siluester, he there
writes of the baptism of Constantine, Totumque edictum donationis explicuit,
and he there explaineth the whole Edict or Charter of Constantines Donation.
Truly these men as they began with untruths, so without all shame they proceed
therein. Does Pope Damasus bear witness to this Charter? Does he express
and explicate the whole Edict? Let any man but look upon that life of
Siluester, which falsely bears the title Vita Siluestri, ex lib^o Pontificali
Damasi Papae.
of Damasus, and he will admire the impudency of these men. There is not one
word spoken of this Edict, nor of this Donation. Further, there is another, and
that a large Tract adjoined to the life of Siluester, and which is also (though
falsely) fathered upon Damasus, entitled, of the Magnificence Ad finem libelli
de Munificentia Constantini, sic additur. Haec Damasus. Caeterum neque illius
libelli, neque vitarum Pontificum, Damasus ^uth^r est* ait Beliar. lib. de ecc.
Script.
of Constantine. Here, if any where, either in the true or counterfaite
Damasus, it was most likely that this Edict should have been explained, at
least mentioned. But to see the vile dealing of these men, and their
downe-facing the truth, there is not in this Tract neither, which is a large
enumeration of the Magnificent gifts of Constantine, any mention or
signification of this Edict, or Donation of the city of Rome, of Italy, and
the Western Provinces. If this be not enough let them hear their own
Carerius, who tells Alex. Carer. loc cit.
them in plain terms, that in Damasus there is no mention of this Edict. The
like does Card. Cusanus, This is not, says he Cusan. lib. 3. de Conc. Cath.
ca. 2.
, found in the lives of Popes written by Damasus. And again, it is not found
in the history of Siluester, which Damasus made. Let them hear their most
wise Cardinal, who speaking of the ancient Popes, such as Leo he first,
Foelix, and others before them, says Bar. an. 1191 nu. 53.
, caruerunt hoc Edicto, they had not this Edict. By all which it is certain
that Pope Damasus is not, as Marta and Steuchus boast, a witness of this
Donation, but he is an undoubted witness of their perfidious dealing and
falsification.

Next to Pope Damasus follow the Acts of Siluester, even those which are
mentioned by Gelasius, as Steuchus Mirabilis hominis impudentia, qui neget in
historia ^iue gestis Siluestri quorum me^i^^t G^lasius, haberi donationem, seu
priuilegium. Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 44.
and Marta In registris and Actis Siluestri quae sunt in Vaticano, Donatio fuit
annotata. Mar. ^oc. cit. nu. 8.
assure us, as also that this Donation is set down therein. Now because these
Acts are indeed the best, fairest, and most ancient evidence that is or can
be brought for this Donation; and because they are the maine foundation, not
only of this Edict, but of those other fables touching the persecution,
leprosy, and baptism of Constantine by Siluester; and because so many Writers
in all ages since Pope Hadrians time, being either too credulous in believing,
or else too crafty in seeming to give credit to those Acts, have been most
shamefully gulled, and miserably m^sled into many errors and untruths by
those Acts; I may not let this one witness of all other pass without a
strict and diligent examination in this place. And although that which I have
formerly said touching the persecution, leprosy and baptism of Constantine,
(of all which the Author of those Acts was the deviser) be so many
demonstrations that the author of them was a most impudent fabler; yet omitting
all those, there are other evidences by which at this time I will make mani^est
the same.

Among all, I will principally insist on that one passage therein, which
concerns the first Roman Synod under Siluester. This Synod, as those Acts
Acta Siluestri apud Bar. an. 315. nu. 11. and apud Hadrian. 1. Epist. 3. ca.
53. and apud Antoninu^ par. 2. hist. ca. 1.
declare, Constantine being converted to the faith, called of purpose, that his
mother Helena might also be converted. For the better effecting whereof, Pope
Siluester before Constantine and Helena, disputed in that Council with the
Jews, so stoutly defending the Christian faith, that the Jews Siluester cu^
Episcopis tam per sacram scripturam qu^ pe^ miracula victores effecti sunt
H^d^. loc. citat Idem ^abet Antonin.
were both by reasons confuted, and by miracles confounded at that time. This
part of the Acts I the rather make choice of to examine, because Pope Hadrian
Loc. cit.
having by his Pontifical authority confirmed that narration, even in his
Epistle to the Emperor Charles the Great, and Baronius Facta est Synodus in
v^be Roma, etc. Bar. an. 315. nu. 10. Concilium facere consens^runt ex Had^iano
ait Bar. ibid. nu. 17.
, and Binius Concilium* Romanum 1. sub Siluestro. and hoc Concilio Romae habita
est dispu^atio, etc. Bin* to. 1. Conc. pa. 279.
, having set it forth as an ancient, and holy Council; it will hereby
appear, not only how false and fabulous the author of these Acts is, but how
their Popes, and their Proctors take a pride in pestring the Church with such
chimericall Counsels, and fabulous writings, as have neither truth, nor any
realitie in them at all.

Let us first examine the time of this Council. That is set down in the Acts
Apud Bar. an 324. nu. 97.
of Siluester to have been, when Constantine was the fi^t time Consul, and
Crispus his Colleague: And that was in truth never. For there was no year,
wherein they two were Consulls, as by the Fasti, both Greek, and Latin is
evident. Baronius here takes upon him to play the Critic, and tells Er^ore
librariorum contingere potuit, vt loco Licinij, Constantini nomen sit positu^.
Bar. ibid*
us that Constantines name is inserted in stead of Licinius; and so this
Council, and the disputation therein, should happen in the Consulship of
Licinius the fifth time, and Crispus, which is the thirteenth year of
Constantine. But so unhappy is the Cardinal in this his Criticisme, that
himself expressly refutes the same. For speaking of the tenth year of
Constantine, wherein Constantinus Augustus, and with him Licinius were both of
them Consulls the fourth time, he says Bar. an. 315. nu. 10.
, Hoc ipso anno* in this very tenth year of Constantine, and in this
Consulship was held that famous disputation at Rome, betwixt Pope Siluester and
the Jews. And this he says, is testified by the Exordium of the Acts of
Siluester set down in the Vaticane Copies, and in two other ancient
Manuscripts, the one of St. Mary the greater, the other of his own Library.
Binius further adds Constantino and Licinio 4. Consulatum agentibus, qui est
Christi 315. and Siluestri ^. and Constantini 10. hunc conuentum celebratu^
fuisse Acta Siluestri, and lex 1. de Iudaeis, Cod. Theod. testa^tur. Bin. not.
in Conc. Romans 1.. Sub.
, that not only the Acts of Siluester, but (which is a most shameless
untruth) the very Imperial law made in that tenth year against the Jews does
testify the same. So infatuated was the Cardinal in this cause, that what he
writes in one year, not only Binius, but himself also confutes in another.

But let us see, if this his second correction, approved by Binius, and
confirmed by so many ancient copies, and by the Imperial law, will save the
credit of these Acts of Siluester. Truly this note of time does undeniably
demonstrate those Acts to be altogether false and fabulous. For it hence
clearly follows, that Constantine was not only converted to the Christian
faith, but sought also to convert others in the tenth year of his Empire. Now
the Acts of Siluester, and Pope Hadrian, confirming them as authentical Acta
Siluestri ab ^^^driano velut authentica c^^ata fuerunt. Bin. Not. in Conc. Romans
1.. Concilium.
, tells us, that Cu^ ad fidem conuerteretur pius lmp. Constantinus. Had. Epist.
1.
Constantine was not converted till he fell into his leprosy, and until
Peter and Paul appeared to him in a dream, at which time he was so wholly
ignorant of Christianity, that he knew not whether Peter and Paul were gods or
no. Constantine fell not into his leprosy as Binius assures Bin. Not. in vitam
Silu.. Siluester.
us, till he had murdered his son Crispus: and that was in the ninteenth Vt
liquet ex Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. vbi ait Hic plane a^nus demonstratur esse, quo
dicuntur esse necati. and Binius ait Crispu^ occisum, an 324. Not. in Conc.
Romans 2.. Co^stantino.
year of Constantine. Seeing then Constantine by the Acts of Siluester, was
converted to the faith, and become an earnest maintainer of Christianity, one
who assembled a Roman Council of purpose for maintaining the same, in his
tenth year, when he and Licinius were the fourth time Consulls, it certainly
follows, that all, which those Vaticane Acts of Siluester, approved by Pope
Had^ian, report of Constantines persecuting the Church, of his leprosy, of his
baptism by Siluester, that all these are false and fabulous lies, yea and that
the very self same Acts of Siluester (wherein they were first of all devised
and forged) do undeniably convince them to be such.

After the time, let us consider the occasion of this Roman Council, and that
famous disputation of Pope Siluester therein. Helena Acta Silu. apud Bar. an.
315. nu. 11*
being in the East with two of her nephwes or grandchildren, Constantine, and
Constantius, being then Emperors, she as yet being a Gentile Helen^ gentilis
adhuc, a Iudae^s pene Iudaea eff^cta. ibid.
, was almost turned to Iudaisme, and ^earing that her son Constantine was
converted to Christianity, and baptized, Haec vbi Helena in Bithinia cosistens
audiuit. Iac. Voragin Legen. Siluestri. and ide^ Nicepho^^s t^adit. lib. 7 ca.
36. and Antonin. part. 2. hist. c. 1.
sh^e was offended therewith, and thereupon Common in (...), infenso animo ad
e^m sc^ipsir. Act. Silu. apud Bar. loc. cit. du^e (...). Vorag* and Anton.
locis ci^*
writ very angerly unto him, uttering in her letter many blasphemies Multa
blasph^mans in ^^ristum. Act. Silu. loc. cit.
against Christ; persuading Ipsum ad Iudaeor^ religione^ amplect^ndum (...).
Act^ Silu. apud Baron. and Antoninu^ loc* cit*
Constantine to embrace the Jewish religion. Constantine thereupon writ back
to his mother, and told her that he would have a public Ibid.
disputation at Rome, Vt vtranam religio praestantior foret, disputatione
probaretur, To try whether the Christian or Jewish religion were truer, willing
Vorag. and Anton. loc. cit.
her to bring the best learned of the Jews to plead for their part. Whereupon
there Qui coram ipsorum p^trona Helena disserere^t. Act. Sil. apud Bar. loc.
cit.
came 120. Nicep. loc. cit.
learned Jews, sent from Isach the high Priest, with Helena their Patron, and
disputed against 24. Roman Bishops: In that disputation, Pope Siluester
overcame Hadr. Epist. 1. ca. 53.
the Jews, by the judgment of those two heathen men Crato Victores effecti
sunt a bi^rio Cratonis philosophi, and Zenophil^, quos ad id eleger^nt. Bin. ex
Act. Silu. in Not. ad Conc. Romans ^. De communi consensu duos Iudices gentiles
statuerunt. An^o^. loc. cit.
and Zenophilus, who were by the common consent of both sides made judges of
that disputation, whereupon Helena (with many others) prostrating Helena nondu^
instituta, ^rudiri se and baptizari flagitat. Zonar. to. ^. psalm. ^3. H^lena
patriae religionis cultu relicto, ad Siluestri procidit p^d^s, ab ^ode^qu^,
fid^i mysteria edoct^. Nicep. loc. cit. Tu^c regina, Iudaei, Iudices, and
caeteri omnes co^uersi (...) ad. fide^* ^ac Vor. and Antonm. locis. cit.
her self as Siluesters feet, was at that time converted and baptized. This is
the sum and effect of that Roman Council, as it is set down in the Acts
of Siluester, and of those who took it from those Acts, namely Pope Hadrian,
Zonaras, as Nicephorus, Cedrenus, Antoninus, the Archbishop of Genoa, Baronius
and Binius. In which legendarie fable, there are not so many words as lies.

1. That this Roman Council followed the baptism of Constantine, is palpably
untrue. For as Baronius Bar. an. ^15. nu. 10.
and Binius Bin. not* in hoc. C^nc.
have assured us, it was held in the tenth year of Constantine, whereas by
their own account Constantine was not baptized till the ninteenth, but by the
true account, not till the one and thirtieth, or last year of his Empire. Now
that those Acts of Siluester do put this Council after the baptism of
Constantine, Baronius does testify, who for this ver^e cause says Bar. an.
324. nu. 97.
, Praeter ordinem temporis ea hic inserta, These things touching the first
Roman Council, are here inserted in the Acts of Siluester, but against the
order of time. For that Council, says he Bar. an. 315. nu. 10.
, was held in the tenth year of Constantine, that is, nine years before he
was baptized.

2. Those Vaticane Acts affirm, the two sons of Constantine, namely
Constantinus and Constans to have been Augusti, that is, Emperors, before the
tenth year of Constantine, when this Council is supposed to have been held.
An untruth so notorious that Baronius Ibid. nu. 13.
calls it, deforme mendacium, an ugly lie.

3. That Helena heard of Constantines baptism as by those Acts she must,
seeing he was baptized shortly after his conversion) and as Nicephorus sup.
loc. cit.
, Antoninus, and the Archbishop of Genoa say she did, is an evident untruth.
Constantine, as we have formerly proved, was not baptized till his last year,
and a little before his death; and Helena died diverse years before that time,
as both Eusebius Eus. lib. 3. de vit. Conc. c 45
, and Socrates Soc. lib. 1. ca. 13. vbi morte Helenae declarata, subijcit. ca.
14. postea Imperator, etc.
show, and Baronius Bar. ponit Helenae obitu^ an. 326 (eo. a^. nu. ^9.) id est
5. ann^s ante obi^um Constantini.
confesses.

4. Those Vaticane Acts affirm, that Constantine was converted to
Christianity before his mother Helena, and that she was a Pagane, a Iudaizing
Pagane, not converted to the faith till the time of this Council, when her
son was a maintainer of the faith. Of which, hear the censure of their own
men. It is untrue, says Binius Bin. not. in Conc. Romans 1.. Concilium.
, that Constantine was a Christian before Helena. This is perspicuously
demonstrated, says Baronius Bar* an. 315. nu 12.
, to be contrary to the truth, that Helena was made a Christian after
Constantine, and he gives a reason out of Paulinus worthy observing* that
Helena did instruct and train up Constantine in piety, even a puero, from his
very childhood: whereby you may further see what truth there is in those Acts
of Siluester, in the Edict of the Donation, and in Pope Hadrian who approved
Bin. loc. nu. per cit.
those Acts as authentical, seeing those Acts Act. Silu. apud Hadrianu^
Epist. 1.
and the Edict Edict. Co^st. apud Bin. pa. 296. b.
make Constantine so ignorant of Christianity in the nineteenth year of his
Empire, when he was more then forty year Vixit annos 65. regnauit 31. Socr.
lib. 1. ca 26.
old, that he then knew not whether Peter and Paul were gods, and whether
Christians held them for gods or no.

Now because all the rest of the narration, as well the Roman Council, as the
disputation therein, and all the consequents thereof, do all depend on this
untruth, that Helena was at that time a Pagane, inclining to Iudaisme, and
unconverted, seeing this which is the foundation is a lie, (so Binius Mendacijs
scatent Acta. Nam, etc. Bin. not. in id Co^c.
calls it) all the rest must needs be acknowledged for fables and lies. I
will only point at some of them.

5. It is untrue that Helena was displeased with Constantine for embracing the
faith, as the Vaticane Acts of Syluester, say Act. Silu. supra cit.
she was, 6. That she writ unto him in angry manner for that cause, as the
Vaticane Acts, Antoninus, and the lying Legend say Supra.
she did. 7. That she uttered many blasphemies against Christ in her letter,
as the Vaticane Acts say she did. 8. That she persuaded Constantine to embrace
Iudaisme, as the sam^ Vaticane Acts affirm she did. 9. That Constantine for
this end, decreed Constantinus statuit co^uentum, etc. Act. Siluest. supra.
to hold a Council, and have a disputation at Rome, as those Acts, Zonaras
Zona. tom. 3. ^s d^creuit, etc.
and Antoninus Anton. loc. cit.
say he did. 10. That Issachar, or Isaac, was high Priest at this time, as the
same Acts Act. Silu sup.
say he was; It is exploratissimum, says Baronius Bar. an. 315 nu 13.
, most certain that there were no high Priests among the Jews at this time,
nor since the sacking of Jerusalem by Titus. 11. That Helena brought either
120. as Nicephorus Nic. supra.
, or 140. learned Jews, as Antoninus, and the Archbishop ^ac. Vorag. in Leg.
Silu.
say she did, to dispute at Rome. 12. That there was twenty four Roman
Bishops to dispute on Syluesters side, as Nicephorus Ibid.
says there was. 13. That there was a Council celebrated at Rome, or any
assembly of those disputers, as the Vaticane Acts Act. Sil. sup.
, Pope Hadrian In quo Concilio. Had. loc. cit.
, Nicephorus In conuentu and colloquio. Nic. loc. cit.
, and after them Binius Binius vocat Concilium Romanum 1* sub Siluestro.
affirm there was. 14. That there was had in that Council, celeberrima
disputatio, as Baronius Bar. an. 315. nu. 10. celebris disputatio.
and Binius Bin. loc. cit.
call it, a most famous disputation, is a most famous lie; though Pope Hadrian
Had. loc. cit.
approve it for an authenticke Hadrianus acta Siluestri velut authentica
citauit* Bin. loc. cit.
truth. 15. That Crato, and Zenophilus were Judges of that disputation, as out
of the Acts of Syluester Binius Bin. loc. cit.
observes; and Antoninus with the Legendarian Archbishop Antonin. and Iac.
Vor. loc. cit*
sets down the very words, arguments, and answers used i^ that disputation.
Fit Judges I wisle, heathen men to judge of Christianity; and judge, whether
it or Iudaisme were the true Religion; and judge also of the infallible judges
doctrine, whether it were truth or heresy. 16 That Siluester was president in
this Council, as Pope Hadrian says Had. loc. cit.
he was. 17. That Siluester overcame the Jews not only by reason, but by
miracles also, as the same Pope Hadrian Had. Zonar. Nic. and Iac. Vor. locis
ci^.
, Zonaras, Nicephorus, Antoninus, and the Archbishop of Genoa affirm. 18. That
Zambres the Jewish Magitian, wrought a miracle to confirm Iudaisme; and that
was, to kill a most fierce Bull drawn thither by an 100. men, only by
whispering a word in the Bulls ear, as Zonaras Zon. Anton. and Iac. Vor. l^c.
cit.
, Antoninus, and the Archbishop say he did. 19. That when Zambres could not
restore the dead Bull to life, Siluester did it by a word, saying, Surge ^aure,
rise up dead Bull, and stand on thy feet, as Zonaras, Nicephorus, Glicas,
Antoninus, and the Archbishop of Genoa affirm Loc. cit.
he did; adding, that the dead Bull presently rose up and went forth, cum omni
mansuetudine, very gently and mannerly. 20. That there was a Dragon ^adam Acta
Siluestri habent de Dracone in specu morante and homines enecante. Bar an: 324
nu. 97. Cedr. Glic. ann. part. 4. pa. 345.
then at Rome in a cave, which was 365. steps deep, which killed every day
300. Multos ^aedebat. Cedr. and Glic. loc. cit. Anton. and Iac. Vorag. loc.
cit. Quotidie (...) 6000. hominu^ flatu suo interficiebat. Mart. Polon. ad an.
314.
men and more, with his breath, as Glicas, Cedrenus, Antoninus, the Archbishop,
the Acts of Siluester, and Mart. Polonus do affirm. 21. That the vestall
virgins brought victuals to this Dragon the first day of every month, as the
Vaticane Acts Dici^ur (in actis Siluestri) Kalendis sing^lis eidem Draconi a
vestalibus virginibus suppeditari solita alimenta. Bar. ann. 324. nu. 98.
say they did; but Baronius adds, in nulla part consistit, this is in no sort
coherent. 22. That Siluester after the disputation, further to confirm the
truth of Christianity, and confound the Jews, went down into the cave, and
there bound the Dragons mouth with a thread, and sealing up the brazen gates
wherein the Dragon was, with the sign of the Cross, commanded the Dragon to
stay there till the coming of Christ, as Antoninus Antonin. and Iac. Vor. loc.
cit.
, the Archbishop of Genoa, Mart. Polonus Draconem aeneis po^tis conclusit and
vsque ad diem iudicij ser^s ob fi^mauit. Mar. P^l. ad an. 314
, and the Acts of Ex Actis Siluestri citat: ^oc Bar. ann. 324. ^u. 97.
Siluester affirm he did: which for this very cause are reproved by Baronius
in this manner: Nothing Nih^l fabulosius ^ffingi posse certum est, etc. Bar.
ib. nu. 98.
is more fabulous, then that which is affirmed in the Acts of Siluester, that
the Dragon should remain immortal till the coming of Christ. Thus Baronius,
who yet says Bar. ibid. nu. 97.
, rem gestam veram credimus, We believe (they had need of a very strong faith)
that this thing touching the Dragon was truly done; and the picture Ibid. nu.
102
of Siluester set up in Churches with a Dragon bound at his feet, is a Trophe
or Monument of that victory of Siluester; and veritatem Historiae repr^sentat,
represents the truth of the History: ^e might better have said, it represents
the fiction, and ^he notable lie of that fable. 23. That Helena Helenam tu^
pr^mum conuersa^ f^^sse a^^ Nice. loc. cit. and Zona. to. 3. ^o. 83. Mart. Pol.
loc. cit. Tunc Regina, Iudaei, Iudices and caeteri omnes ad ^idem conuersi
^unt, Anton* and Iac. Vor. loc. cit.
, the two I^dges, and caeteri omnes, and all the rest of the Iowes were then
(upon those miracles of the Bull, and the Dragon) converted to the faith of
Christ, as Niceph Zonaras, Mart. Polonus, Antoninus, and the Archb. of Genoa
say; and Christianity was by these miracles enlarged, as says Dil^tantes
Christianorum ^idem, tam per sc^^ptu^am, quam per miracula. Hadr. loc. cit.
Adrian^ 24. That the Empress Helena being not before instructed in Christian
Religion, was now first Zon. and Nic. loc. cit*
informed therein, and then baptized, as Zonaras, and Nicephorus say. By all
these, (besides a number more) which are so many latchets depending on that
grand lie, that Helena was not converted to the faith before Constantine, or
before the 10. year of his Empire, it does now clearly appear, that the
first Roman Council under Syluester, is a mere fiction, and Chymera, and that
those Acts of Syluester, which they so often Bar. an 315 nu. 10. and ann. 324.
nu. 31. 33 40. 41. and saepe alibi. Bin. Not. in vitam Siluestri.. Siluester.
and. De suscepto. and. Que^. and Not. in Conc. Romans 1. and No^. in Edict.
Constan. Ipse. Steuch. pa. 87. vbi ait historiam Siluestri, ab vniu^^so Niceno
Concilio 2. approbatam. and praecipue page 44. Marta. ca. 30. nu. 8.
, and with so great ostentation urge in many causes, are nothing else but a
very puddle and sink of lies. Besides these, there are other false and
fabulous narrations in those Acts of Syluester, as that Siluester Haec in Ac^i^
Siluestri haberi testatur Bin. Not. in Conc. Romans 1. and Baro. ann. 315. nu. 16.
abrogated the faest on Saturday, of which Binius says, it is a lie; that
Siluester was ordained by Melchiades, of which Binius again says, it is a
lie; that he instituted, that the first day in the week should be called the
Lords day: of which Baronius says Bar. loc. cit.
, it is portentosum mendacium, a monstrous lie, and many such like: for those
Acts of Siluester scatent Vt ait Bin. loco cit.
mendacijs, do flow and abound with lies: but I will only in the last place
touch one other point, which much concerns the honor both of Constantine and
his most religious parents.

The Acts of Siluester either following or devising a lying fable, say, that
Helena Referunt Acta Siluestri Helenam ex Bythinia ori^idam fuisse, (...) Bin.
Not. ^n Conc. 1. Romans sub Silu.
was borne in Bythinia. The fable touched by Zosimus Zosim. lib. 2. vbi ait
Constantinum natum ex muliere quae matter familias non esset, nec legit^me
Constantio conuenit. pa. 23.
, but at large set down by Nicephorus Nic* lib. 7. cap. 18.
, is this: When Constantius Clorus was sent in an Embassage to Persia, being at
Drepanum a town in Bythinia, incensed there with lust, he took Helena his
hosts daughter for his Concubine, and of her at that time begat Constantine,
and then returning home was made Caesar. A mere fiction; devised by the
maligners of Christianity of purpose to disgrace the honor of Constantine, as
if he had been base of birth; and the piety of Constantius his father, and his
mother Helena, whom further in scorn and contumely they called stabulariam, an
Inne-keeper. That this whole narration is untrue, there is an evident proof
taken from the time; seeing Constantius is said to have been made Caesar when
he returned either the same or the next year out of Persia. For it is certain
by Eusebius Constantius 16 imperij annodiem obijt. Eus. in Chron. an. 311.
, that Constantius reigned in all but sixteen years, the three last of which,
he was Augustus or Emperor, and all the former but Caesar. The same is clear
by the Fasti of Onuphrius, where Constantius imperauit Caesaris nomine annos
13. me^ses 5. Onuph. in Fast. an. vrb. 1053.
Constantius is said to have been made Caesar in the Consulship of Tiberianus
the second time and Dio; from whose Consulship, to the death of Constantius,
are directly sixteen years. Cuspinian Cuspinian. 14. annos tribuit in Fast.
ann. Christi 294. and seq.
gives one, Epiphanius, and the Greek Fasti two years less Epiph. lib. de
Pond. and mensur. pa. 417. tribuit Constantio tantum 13. annos. Fasti Graeci
solum 12. ei dant. pa. 283.
to the reign of Constantius; but I am content to allow the most. Now if this
fabulous narration of Nicephorus were true, Constantine being borne within a
year or two of his fathers being Caesar, and succeeding immediately in the
Empire unto his father, could not possibly be above seventeen, at the most not
above twenty years, when he began to be Emperor. Whereas it is most clear
and certain, by Eusebius Eus. lib. 4. de vit. Constable. cap. 53.
, Socrates Annu^ 65. ingressus, obijt Soc. lib. 1. ca. 26. and annos 31
regnauit. ibid.
, and others, that he was 31. years old at that time.

Besides, that Helena was not of Bythinia, nor Constantine borne there, it is
certain and undeniably proved by the Panegyrist, (Eumenus as it is thought)
who in his Panegyricke made at the very solemnity of Constantines marriage
with Fausta, in the presence of Constantine himself, and all the Nobles, said
thus unto him; Thy Paneg. Maximino and Constantino Paneg. 9. ca. 3.
father Constantius did deliver Brittanie from bondage, tueas nobiles illic
oriund^ fecisti, thou by being borne there, and descending of the British
blood, have made that country noble. The same is testified by Pomponius Laetus
Pom. Laet. in Constantio Clo^o and Galerio.
, Constantinus natus est in Britannijs, Constantine was borne in Britain, of
Constantius and Helena: by Henric. Huntingtoniensis Hen. H^nt. hist. lib 1.
, Constantine was a Britain, Genere, and Patria, both by his descent, and by
his Country: by Onuphrius Onuph. lib. de Romans princip. pa. 73.
, Constantine, natus est in Brittannia, was borne in Britain. A truth so
clear, that Cardinal Baronius; no well-willer to the honor of this Island,
could not but with strong asseueration acknowledge the same; apertissime Bar.
an. 306. nu. 16.
constat Constantinum in Britannia ortum, it is most clear and manifest, that
Constantine was borne in Brittanie; again Ibid.
, certum est, it is certain, that Helena did bring forth Constantine in
Brittanie: and again Bar. Notis in Martyrol. Romans August. 18.
, I have proved elsewhere, quod Helena Brittanna fuerit; that Helena was a
British woman. The very same does Posseuine Posseu. Appar. in Niceph.
acknowledge, confessing Helenam, Britannam fuisse, and Constantinum in
Britannia peperisse, that both Helena was a British woman, and that she
brought forth Constantine in Brittanie. Yea he reprooues Nicephorus for saying
the contrary; which reproof of P^sseuine is sufficient also to refute that
very idle, and untrue opinion of Iul. Firmicus Iul. Firmicus vixit tempore
Constantini, vt ex ipsius scriptis liquet.
the Astrologian, followed by Ioh. Leuinius, that Constantinus apud That sum
genitus. Iul. Firm. Mathematicus. lib. 1. (Leuin. falso citat. lib. 2)
Mathes^s. ca. 4.
Constantine was borne at Tharsus. Certainly his Horoscope did much deceive
him; placing Constantine not only in another House, but in another Region and
Climate alalso. Whose error Leuinius might easily have discerned, seeing
Firmicus affirms Ibid.
further, That Constantine, a primo aetatis gradu Imperij gubernacula retinuit,
held the government of the Empire, even from his first age. For Socrates Vixit
65. regnauit 31. annis. Socrat. lib. 1. c^. 26.
, and others do truly and certainly teach, Constantine not to have been
Emperor, till after the thirty one year of his age. Nay the error of
Leuinius is utterly inexcusable, who Ioh. Leuin Not. ad Pan^gyric. 5. ca. 4.
together with that opinion of Firmicus, maintains also the quite contrary
assertion of Nicephorus, that Constantine was borne at Drepanum, a Town in
Bythinia: which two assertions are each of them contrary to the other, and
both contrary unto the truth; the clear and undoubted testimony of the
Panegyrist, uttered before Constantine himself, in that nuptial celebritie,
giving assurance, that he was borne neither at Tharsus nor Drepanum, but in
Brittanie, and of Helena, a British woman.

As for that other calumny of Zosimus Zosim li. 2*
, and many Oros* lib. 7. cap. 25. ex concubina Helena. Idem ait Niceph. loc*
cit. Mar. Scot. an. 305. Her. Contr. ann. 305. Rheg. an. 244. Got. Viterb. an.
290 alijque.
others, That Helena was not the Wife, but the concubine of Constantius: it is
clearly refuted by Eutropius, who says Eutr. lib. 9* in Dioclesiano
, that when Constantius and Galerius were made Caesar's, and married, the later
to Valeria, and Constantius to Theodora, the daughter in law to Maximianus the
Emperor, ambo vxores quas habuerant repudiare compulsi, they were both
compelled to put away their former Wives. The like says Aurelius Victor Au.
Vict. in Diocles. page 152.
, Constantius and Galerius were joined in affinity to Dioclesian, diremptis
prioribus Coniugijs, their former marriages being dissolved. So also Pomponius
Laetus Pom. Laet. in Diocles.
, they married new, being compelled, priores vxores repudiare, to forsake their
first Wives. The Arrians and Paganes, says Theophanes Theophanis integer
textus citatur Graece apud Aug. Steuch. lib. de Constable. donat. pa. 159.
, do slander Constantine to have bin a Bastard, but they lie: for he was borne
of royal parentage, his father Constantius, being the Nephew of Claudius the
Emperor, and of his first wife Helena he begat Constantine the Great.
Constantine, says Zouius Zou. eccle. hist. ^d ann. 306. nu. 5.
, was borne of Constantius Clorus, and Helena, non quidem concubina, vt somniat
Nicephorus, sed iusta vxore, who was the lawful wife, and not the Concubine of
Constantius, as Nicephorus dreameth. Helena the Empress, says Onuphrius
Onuph. lib. de Romans princip. pa. 70.
, was prima vxor Constantij, the first Wife of Constantius Clorus. Helena,
faith Christ. Masseus Chr. Mass. an. 337.
, was the daughter of Coel, quae nupta Constantio, who being married to
Constantius, bare him three sons. Constantius, says Volaterranus Volat. lib.
3. Geograph.
, duxit in matrimonium Helenam, took to Wife Helena. The Emperors Dioclesian
and Maximianus, says Vitus Basinstochiensis Vit. Basinst. lib. 5. Hist. pa.
432.
, adopted Constantius Clorus, and Galerius, qui priores vxores repudiare coacti
sunt, who were thereupon compelled to put away their former Wives. And that the
former Wife of Constantius was Helena, he Ibid:
also affirms; adding, That Constantine Ibid. pa. 427
being borne (of her) in Brittanie, attained to that honor which the Druides
had foretold unto him. Constantius Clorus, faith Zonaras Zonar. tom. 2. Annal.
in Dioclesiano.
, declared that Constantine being his eldest son, ex priore coniuge
susceptus, borne of his former Wife, should succeed to him in the Empire.

The testimonies of the Panegyrist, and Eusebius, both of them living in that
age, is of more weight and authority then all the former, yea then any else
who write of this matter. The former in the nuptial celebritie of Constantine,
said Eumen. Pa^eg. 5. ca. 4.
, Imperium nascendo meruisti, Thou, O Constantine, even by thy birth had
right unto the Empire, and wast the Neque ^rat dubium quin ei competeret
Haereditas. ibid ca 4.
undoubted heir thereof: whereas had he been base of birth, he could have
had no right at all thereby, nor been heir unto it. Eusebius also speaking of
the second marriages, of Galerius and Constantius Clorus, says Eusebius. in
Chro^. an. 292.
, they both were compelled, vxores (...). Ens. Chron. Graec.
quas habuerant repudiare, to put away their former wives; and the former wife
of Constantius was no other but Helena, as is by all confessed. Whence it is
certain, not only that Helena was truly the wife, and not the concubine of
Constantius, (as Arians and Paganes did maliciously slander) but that in
another place of Eusebius Latin Chronicle Eus. Chron. lat. an. 309. in
antiquis edit. sed an. 307. in edit. Lugd. cu^. notis Iosep. Scalig.
, those words are corruptly, and both against the mind of Eusebius and the
truth, inserted, that Constantine invaded the Empire, ex concubina Helena
procreatus, being borne of Helena the concubine of Constantius. For neither did
he invade, but most lawfully entered into the Empire, and that by a threefold
title; First, by his birth Nascendo meruisti. Eumen. paneger. 9. ca. 3. and
neque erat dubium quin ei competeret haereditas, ibi. ca. 4.
, being borne heir of the Empire: Secondly by the joint consent Vniuersus in
te consensit exerci-tus. ibidem cap. 8. and, Iam tunc coelestibus suffragijs
vocabaris. ib. ca. 7.
, and joyful, yea, celestial suffrages and acclamation of the people:
Thirdly, by the special designement manifest sententia patris electus est
Imperator. ibid. and apud Zon^ loc. ante cit.
of his pious father, appointing him to be his successor: all which the
Panegyrist in plain terms expresses; yea, Zonaras Zonar. tom. 2. in Diocles.
adds a further, and a fourth title, and that is, the designement of God
himself, who by an holy Angel commanded Constantius to leave the Empire to
his son Constantine: neither was he borne of a concubine, but as Eusebius
Loc. nuper. cit.
himself professes, of the lawful wife of Constantius; Neither are those
words extant in the Greek Chronicle of Eusebius, and therefore, no doubt,
both maliciously, and quite contrary to the mind and saying of Eusebius,
inserted into the Latin. Unto all which may be added that most honorable
testimony of Justinian the Emperor: who speaking of the city Helenopontus,
says Authent. Tit. 7. Nou. Constable. 28. ca. 1.
, that it was (o called by the most pious Emperor Constantine, in honor,
honestissimae suae matris Helenae, and pientissimae mulieris, of his most
honest mother Helena, a most holy woman; which Epithetes it seems Justinian of
purpose gives, that even by his Imperial law, he might wipe away that
slanderous imputation which even then was laid upon her. For certainly, those
titles of honestissimae, and pientissimae, had been most unfit, had either
Helena been dishonest of body, or Constantine base of birth.

Now for that last scoff of Stabularia, some learned men indeed, not so fully
pondering this matter, have affirmed it, to be certain, and that, ex
sanctissimis Ecclesiae Patribus, by the testimonies of most holy Fathers. But
St. Ambrose (who is for ought I can find, the only Father that mentions this)
is not a little mistaken by them. He thus writes Ambr. orat* de obitu
Theodosij.
: They say, she was at first stabularia. They say it, They indeed, who were
Paganes or Heretics, they who envied Constantine, and scoffed at Christian
religion, they said it. Julian the Apostate, an enemy of Christ and
Christianity, was the first that said it, calling Constantinus imperitus ac
stolidus. Iuliani verba in Act. (...) j. citatis apud Ste^ch. p. 151
Constantine a fool, and Helena (...). Iuliani verba. ibid. pa. 154.
base and ignoble: they who were the disciples and followers of Julian, they
said it. But Ambrose himself says it not; he only shows, in what a good
and pious sense she may be so called. A good Inkeeper, who sought the manger
of Christ so diligently; a good Inkeeper, who was not ignorant of that Host
who healed the wounds of him that fell among thieves; a good In keeper, who
esteemed her self but as dung, that she might gain Christ, and therefore
Christ lifted her from the dung (according to their saying) to a kingdom. So
Ambrose, not approouing what others said, but turning that which others said of
her in derision, to such a sense as did best express her piety. And whereas
Eutropius Eutrop. lib. 10. in Constantio.
calls the marriage of Constantius Clorus with Helena, obscurius matrimonium,
a more obscure marriage, his meaning is plain. For he neither meant, nor
said, that it was simply ignoble, but speaking comparatively, and comparing it
to his second marriage with Theodora the daughter in law to the Emperor; by
which he obtained first to be Caesar, and then Emperor; in respect of the
splendour of this second marriage, and the Imperial dignity obtained thereby,
he did and might well say, that the former was more obscure, or not so
illustrious; though in it self it was both very honorable, and in no sort any
disparagement to Constantius. For Helena was the daughter of Coel King of
Brittany, as besides the uniform consent of Writers Accepit filia^ Regis (cui
nomen erat Coel) Helena^. Henr. Hunting. hist. lib. 1. and, tradu^t Annals
Britannoru^ Helena^ filia^ fuisse Coel regis. ^ Cusp. lib. de Caesar. in
Co^stantino.
of the British story, is declared by Nauclerus, an Historian both for
diligence in searching the truth, and fidelity in delivering it, highly
commended by Reucline Nostra historia (i. Naucleri) proba est ac fida. etc.
Ioh. Reucl. in sua praefat. ad Naucl.
; and his testimony is well worthy observing. He purposely checking that
saying touching Helenas mean parentage, which he supposed Ambrose to utter
out of his own, and not (as in truth ^ee did) out of the opinion of other men,
says Naucl. genesis 11. an. 310.
, Helena the wife of Constantius was the daughter, regis Coeli, of Coel King of
Britain, quamuis Ambrosius, though Ambrose call her stabulariam. And again
Ide^. sub an. Chr. 177. ge^. 6
, Asclepiodotus King of Britain being slain, Coel (who builded Colchester)
succeeded unto him; then Constantius who was (afterward) Emperor, being sent
into Britain, did quiet the whole Island unto the Romans, and ducta Coelis
filia Helena vxore, having married Helena the daughter of Coel, he alone ruled
in the Island after the death of Coel. After him ruled his son Constantine the
Great, by whose favor, (for that both himself and his mother were Britains)
the Kings of Britain, imperiali diademate vsi sunt, did use an Imperial
Crown. The like is affirmed by Genebrard; Constantine, says he Gilb. Geneb.
Chron. ad an. 315.
, Helenam Coeli, qui Britanniam occupauit, filiam vxorem habuit, took to wife
Helena the daughter of Coel, who held the kingdom of Britain. This whole
matter is at large related by Vitus Basinstochiensis: Carausius, says he Vit.
Basinst. lib. 5. Hist. pa. 433.
, persuaded the Britains to make him King, that so they might free the Island
from the subjection of the Romans. The Romans hearing thereof, sent C.
Alectus to destroy that usurper, and to reduce the Kingdom of Britain to the
Roman dominion. Alectus having slain Carausius, held the kingdom for three
years; who being overcome and slain by Asclepiodotus, the Britains with one
consent chose Asclepiodotus for their King. When he had governed a while,
there fell out great enmity betwixt him and Coel, then Duke of Colchester; who
having killed Asclepiodotus, he was made the King of Britain, by the name of
Coel the 3. Then the Romans to recover the Island, sent Constantius Clorus, a
valiant and wise man, who had a little before subdued Spain. Coel
understanding both of his fame, and coming, entreated peace, and promised
subjection, upon condition that he might have the Kingdom, paying the yearly
accustomed tribute to the Romans. Constantius consented to him Constantio
petenti nuptias Helenae, dat eam Coel in matrimonium ibid pa 435.
* and desired Helena his daughter, whom Coel gave in marriage to him; and
because she was his only child and heir, with her he left the kingdom of
Britain to Constantius. The beauty Ibi. pa. 46^.
of this Helena was such that she excelled all the women in the Province, nor
was there any where, any comparable to her for skill in music and knowledge
of the liberal Arts. So Constantius first, and after him Constantine the
Great, held the Kingdom of Britain, together with the Roman Empire. So he*

Let them now cease by malicious slanders to disgrace her whom both the Latin
and Greek Church highly honored while she lived, and has enroulled her
among the most blessed Saints Sanctae Helenae (celebratio) Aug. 18. Martyr.
Romans Graeci, in Menologio, habent commemorationem Constantini and Helenae, Maij
21.
, ever since she departed. Let them also cease to disgrace Constantius, the
father of Constantine, whose most worthy and deserved praises, are to all
eternity set forth both by the Panegyrist Eumen. paregyr. 5. ca. 3. and 4.
, and by Eusebius Eus. lib. 1* de vit. Constant. ca. 9. 10. and 11.
; he being so beautified with piety, (besides other virtues) that Eusebius
says Ibid. ca. 11.
, Omnem suam familiam vni Deo consecrauit, he consecrated his whole family to
the true God, putting away all Idolaters out of his royal house, adding that
most memorable reason, They Quomodo enim fidem erga Imperatore^ seruare
poterunt, qui aduersus Deum perfidi esse co^uincuntur. ibi.
will never be faithful to the Emperor, who are perfidious unto God: who
also after his death, as the Panegyrist Eum. Paneg. 5. and 9. passi^^.
, and Eutropius Eutr. lib. 10. in Constantio,
say, was inter diuos relatus. And for a conclusion of this whole point, let us
hear that exclamation in the Panegyricke Eumen. Panegyr. 9. c. 9
, O fortunata and omnibus beatior terris Britannia, O happy Brittainy, more
blessed then any country, which first saw and saluted Constantine Emperor. I
say more; which bred, and brought forth both Constantine himself, and his
most blessed mother, and had the first Christian Emperor, the renowned
Constantine the Great, to be the ruler, and Imperial King of it. And thus
much be spoken of those Acts of Siluester. Concerning which I do now entreat
but a very reasonable request, which I hope will easily be granted; that
considering those Acts are clearly demonstrated to be nothing else but a very
sink of lies; none would hereafter give credit either to them, or to any who
allege them as witnesses worthy of credit, in which number, first Pope
Hadrian, then Albanus, Iacobatius, Steuchus, Marta, the Gregorian Glossators,
Baronius and Binius are all to be accounted.

Their next witness is Pope Gelasius with a Council of 70. Bishops, Pope
Gelasius, says Marta Mar. loc. cit. nu. 26.
, bears witness to this Donation. Gelasius, say Annot in cap. Constantinus.
did. 96.
the Gregorian Glossators, as also Anton. Ant. August. loc. cit.
Augustinus, so speaks of the Acts of Siluester (wherein this Donation is
expressed) vt videatur approbare, that he seems to approve them. Card.
Albanus Alb. lib. cit. nu. 1.
, and after him Busaeus the Jesuit, puts out videtur, and says Busaeus No^^s
in Epist. 3. H^nc mari.. Papae Siluestro.
, The Acts of Siluester, a Gelasio Papa approbati in Synodo, which are approved
by Pope Gelasius in a Council of 70 bishops, have this Edict; and Steuchus
Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 81. and pa. 44 Gelasius qui fatetur gesta Siluestri a
plerisque legi and approbari, idem suo testimonio quae de donatione in ea
historia scribuntur, comprobat.
no less confidently writes, Gelasius approoues those things which are written
in the Acts of Siluester, concerning Constantines Donation.

Truly, if Pope Gelasius do (as these men avouch) approve those Acts of
Siluester, he has for ever blemished and disgraced the Pontifical Chair, by
approving such false and fabulous narrations, as those Acts contain. But I
trust, I shall free and fully acquit Gelasius, and that ancient Synod, from
this their vile calumny and slander.

That Gelasius, with his Roman Council did not approve those Acts, their
own Bishop Canus does clearly testify, when he Apud idoneos scriptores
nusquam legi. Can. lib. 11. loc. Theolog. ca. 5.. Quod deinde.
says that no grave or allowed witness among the ancient Writers, mention the
leprosy of Constantine. Then certainly the author of those Acts of
Siluester, in which that leprosy is set down, is not an approved author:
Likewise their own Carerius witnesses Alex. Carer. lib. ^. de potest. Romans
Pont. ca. 21.. Accedit.
the same, Compertum est, It is certain, that nothing touching this Donation,
is read in any approved Historian: Then certainly, the author of those Acts,
(seeing in him this Donation is read) is not approved, much less by so
honorable approbation of Gelasius, with an whole Council. Card. Cusanus at
large declares the same: This Donation of Constantine, says he, Cusan. lib. 3
Concord. ca. 2. pa. ^81.
, in libris authenticis and in historijs approbatis non inuenitur, is not found
in approved histories, nor any authentical Books. Now seeing the Cardinal
knew that it was in the Textus ille, Constantinus, est ex Lege^da S. Siluestri
extractus ibid. pa. 781.
Acts of Siluester, it is plain, that he judged them not to be approved by
by Gelasius. Again Ibid pa. 782
, neither does the Council, under Pope Martin, wherein those writings which
were approved, are repeated, nec quisquam approbatus Author, nor any approved
Author, which I have seen, make mention of th^se Acts of Siluester. Then
doubtless the Author of those Acts was not approved by Gelasius. For certainly
Cardinal Cusanus, and Bishop Canus Gelasius author gra^issimus Can. lib. ci^.
cap. 6.. Quod si.
also held him with this Council for an approved Author. The Cardinal yet
adds; Let any, says he Cus. loc. cit. pa. 781.
, look upon the 15. did. Cap. Sancta Romana, and what approbation Gelasius
there gives to these Acts, and inueniet pauci roboris, and he shall find it to
be a very cold approbation. For Gelasius says, that though the Author of
those Acts be unknown, yet those Acts are read by Catholics, and therefore
they may be read. In which words, what manner of approbation there is, every
one, says Cusanus, may consider. For if from hence any will conclude, that
Gelasius approues those Acts, he might as well conclude, because a provincial
Synod at London did say, that many Catholics in the Church of England, do read
the Aurealegenda, that therefore the whole Synod and Church of England, do
approve the Aurealegenda for a faithful History. Textus non dicit Historiam
veram, sed legiposse, says Cus. ibid. pa. 781.
Cusanus, the Text of Gelasius, does not say, that the History of those Acts
is true, but that it may be read; and so also any fable may be read. Bishop
Canus goes yet further: for though he say Canus. lib. cit. cap. 5.. Quod deinde.
, that Gelasius did not reject those Acts, (to wit, not in express manner, as
he does the Acts of George, of Iulitta, and many others) yet that in their
general censure of namelesse writings, the whole Synod rejected them, Canus
clearly avouches, saying, Can. lib. 11. ca. 6. Quod si.
, Gelasius with a Council commands, that we Vt eas histori^s nullo modo
amplectamur, etc. Ibid.
should by no means, accept or credit those writings, which are published
without the certain name of the author; for such writings do smell either of
imposture, or heresy* Gelasius then, is so far from approving (as they boast
he did) those shameless Acts of Siluester, that by the confession of Bishop
Canus, he did indeed prohibit and condemn the same.

And all this I have said, supposing those Acts of Gelasius, which are now
extant, and which are set down in the 15. Did. to be true and incorrupt. But
there are sundry, and effectual reasons to induce any man, that this, touching
the Acts of Siluester, and much more in those Synodall Acts, is falsely
ascribed to Gelasius and his Roman Council. For in some ancient editions of
that Roman Council, This touching the Acts of Syluester is not set down: as
Baronius Bar. an. 324 nu. 31. vbi ^atetur ea de Actis Siluestri, desiderari
apud Gelasium in aliquo ^odice.
himself acknowledges. Yea but, says he Bar. ibid.
, they are in the collection of Cresconius, which is more ancient then others.
If Baronius mean that which is called, Breuiarium Canonum Cresconij, or
Concordia canonum, as it seems he does, (there being nothing else of
Cresconius, which concerns Councels, mentioned in Posseuine Posseu. in Appar.
in verbo Cresconius.
) the Card* deludes his reader. For in all that Collection or Breuiarie, this
touching the Acts of Siluester is no where mentioned. But say it were; is that
Collectio^ of Cresconius, think you, most ancient? No, there were many copies
of the Acts of that Council, long before Cresconius, who living after
Ferrandus (the Scholar Ferrandus, qui Fulgentiu^ vti magistrum magno in honor
habuit, claruit ann. 529. Posseu. in Ferrand.
of Fulgentius) made not his collection, till about the year 540. some fifty
years Nam Conc. Rom* sub Gelasiuo habitu^ est an. 494.
after that Roman Council was held. Baronius should have said and proved,
(which he never offers to do) that in some authenticke Copies, this had been
extant. The Copies of any Council, in less then fifty years may easily be
corrupted; especially if the corruption of them, may advantage the Pope and the
Roman See. Yea and this very Council to have been so corrupted, Binius
acknowledges, saying Bin. Not. in. Conc. Romans 1. sub Gelasio.
, It cannot be certain-knowen, Quae sit vera and pura lectio Gelasij, which is
the true Text or reading of Gelasius. Again, that in the best and most
authenticke copies of that Roman Synod, this, touching the Acts of Siluester,
was not extant, may be perceived by Gratian: for Card. Cusanus Non inuenitur
in antiquis libris iste versus de historia Siluestri. Cusan. lib. and ca. cit.
pa. 581. 582.
witnesses, That in the ancient Text of Gratian, there is set down no more
out of Gelasius, then unto these words, (Item gesta Sanctorum Martyrum,) after
which, is that concerning the Acts of Siluester. All that follows unto the end
of the decree, is added to the old Text of Gratian. And this not only
Cardinal Cusanus, but Guido surnamed Archidiaconus: yea the Gregorian
Glossators do testify the same, who at these words, ( Item gesta) thus write
Annot. Gregor. in cap. Sancta Romana. distinct. 15.
, From hence unto the end of the Chapter, omnia absunt a plerisque vetustis
Gratiani codicibus, all is wanting in most of the ancient copies of Gratian,
and this does Archidiaconus also observe. So they. Certainly, had Gratian found
that which is now added, touching the censure of all those Apocryphal Books,
in the true Acts of the Roman Synod under Gelasius, he would not have omitted
it; for he had not only fit, but necessary occasion to express the same, as
well as the former. Besides this, let any of judgment compare the appobation
given in that Synod to St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Basil, St. Athanasius,
yea even to the four first general Counsels; with that which is given to
Orosius, Sedulius, Iuuencus, and some others of far meaner note: and he will
see it can no way beseem the wisdom and gravity of that ancient Council.
Of the former they Conc. Romans 1. sub. Gelas.
say only, the Roman Church, non prohibet suscipi, forbids not the reading of
them: of the latter they say, We Ibidem.
praise Orosius, we prefer Ibidem.
with great commendation Sedulius, we admire Ibidem.
Iuuencus: a proof too too evident, that this unequal censure proceeded not
from so equal judges. And as for Eusebius Caesariensis, their censure of him,
is quite contradictory to it self: for in one place, they say, that for his
singular knowledge of matters, they do not Vsquequaque non dicimus renuendes.
ibid.
reject the history and Chronicle of Eusebius: and a little after, they
condemn the history of Eusebius Historia E^sebij Apocrypha ibid.
as apocryphal: adding, that the author Haec and omnia his similia, etc. cu^
suis authoribus, authorumque sequacibus, sub anathematis indissolubili vinculo,
confitemur esse da^nata. ibid.
, and approouers of him, or any other of those apocryphal books, are for ever
accursed by the Roman Church with an indissoluble band of an Anathema. Shall
we think Gelasius and the holy Council with him, to have played the Satyrs,
and blow both heat and cold, commendation and condemnation of the self same
writings, with one breath? Or may we not much more rightly conclude, that they
(which I verily think to be true) never gave this censure of Eusebius? Which
many not observing, think the History of Eusebius, the works of Lactantius,
of Clemens Alexandrinus, of Arnobius, of Victorinus, and diverse others there
named, to have been condemned in that Council. They only set down their
Synodall judgment, and approbation of those books mentioned in the former
part of the Synodall Acts, which in the ancient copies of Gratian were only
expressed; and some other with a false hand, patched to the same Acts, the
later part of them, which in the ancient copies both of Gratian, and (as
Baronius confesses) of some of the Synodall Acts themselves, were omitted.
Howsoever, certain it is, that if the Synodall Acts be corrupted (in such
manner as I have showed and proved) then Gelasius with that Roman Synod,
approues not the Acts of Siluester: if they be not corrupted, though in their
particular mention of those Acts, they say, They A multis in vrbe Roma
Catholicis legi cognouimus. Ibid. vbi nota, legi non public in Ecclesijs
Romae, sed priuatim, in vrbe.
are read of many in the city of Rome, and may be read, (as is, and may be
read the lying Legend also) yet in their general censure of namelesse
writings, they certainly condemn the same Acts, as being either forged, or
heretical; and whethersoeuer, of no worth or credit at all.

The next witness and last in this rank, is Isiodorus Hispalensis. He, says
Marta Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26.
, bears witness to this Donation. Isiodorus praesul Hispalensis, says Card.
Iacobatius Jacob. loc. cit. nu. 30.
, Isiodore the Bishop of Hispalis, affirms Constantine to have made this
Donation. Card. Albanus adds Alb. lib. cit. nu. ^.
, that Isiodore has set down the very form of this Donation, inter gesta
Concilij Niceni, among the Acts of the Nicene Council. In this testimony,
besides other, they show three special frauds. First, they belie Isiodore
Hispalensis. For he is so far from bearing witness to this Donation, that he
expressly teaches, Constantine not to have made the same. Constantine, says he
Isiod. Hispal. in Chron. an. mundi. 5535.
, In extremo vitae suae tempore, ab Eusebio Nicomediensi baptizatus est, was
baptized of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia in the last part of his age, or a
little before his death: whence it undeniably follows, that he did not make
this Donation, which as the Edict it self Edict. Constable. loc. cit.
, the Acts of Siluester Act. Siluest. apud Bar. loc. cit.
and Binius Bin. Not. in Edict. and in vit. Siluestri.
assure us, was made after Constantine was baptized by Siluester, and that was
at least ten years before his death. Secondly, they pretend that Author, who
calls himself Isiodore, and who made the collection of the Councels and Canons,
to be Isodorus Hispalensis. An untruth so evident, that this Author, in the
Praeface Isiod. praef. in tom. 1. Council.
which he praefixeth in suam Canonu^ collectionem, to his own collection of
those Canons and Decrees, makes mention of Pope Agatho and the sixth general
Council: and therefore certainly lived after the time of that Council, which
was held Bin. in tit. illius Conc. and Bar. an. 681
an. 681. whereas Isiodore Hispalensis died 40. years before; to wit an* 636.
as Baronius Bar. an. 636 nu. 7.
and Bellarmine Bell. lib. de Eccles. scrip. in Isiodorus Hispal.
do witness. Their last fraud is in belying, and that most shamefully, even
this Collector also (whom they name Isiodore Hispalensis) as setting down this
Edict among the Acts of that Nicen Council. A palpable untruth, as any may
perceive who looks but into the collection of the Councels by Isiodore. This
Edict is entirely there set down before he comes to the Canons, or any Acts of
that Nicen Council: So also in Binius Bin. tom. 1. Conc.
and others. Yea in the ancient collections of Isiodore, the Edict, and the
book de Primi^iua Ecclesia, was set (as the note Not, ante lib. de primit.
eccles. and Edictum Consta^tini, tom. 1. Conc.
in the Councels of Nicholinus his edition does testify, and Binius Bin. Not.
in Epist. de primit. Eccl.: Melchiadi.
confesses the same:) continenter post decreta Melchiadis: immediately after
the decrees of Pope Melchiades, and therefore before the life of Siluester, much
more before the Nicen Council which was held in Siluesters time, and is set
after the life and epistles of Siluester. Thus in every one of these 7. (which
are their prime, principal and most ancient witnesses in this cause) you do
now clearly see the vile and detestable dealing of Marta, and the rest, who
plead for this Edict and Donation. Either they belie their witnesses, as they
do the 318. Nicen Fathers, and Isiodore Hispalensis; or else in stead of
Fathers they obtrude most base, counterfeit and forged writings, as in
Eusebius, Hierom, Damasus the Acts of Siluester and Gelasius, we have evidently
demonstrated.

CHAP. XI.
The credit of four Popes and two Councels, alleged for proof of the
Donation, examined: namely, Hadrian 1, Leo 9. Eugentus 3. the 2. Nicen, and the
Council at Constance.
THE next witnesses alleged for this Donation, are four of their Popes, whom
all to bear witness to this Donation, they Mart. cap. 30. nu. 36. and 37.
Steuch. pa. 89 Annot. Gregor. in ca. Constantinus. Ant. August. lib. 1. Dial.
6. pa* 53.
boast, and we do willingly acknowledge. Before we particularly entreat of
them, there are one, or two general answers to them all. First, how could any
of these, know the truth and certainty of this Donation, seeing Hadrian was not
Pope, till more then 440. Leo more then 720. Eugenius more then 800. and
Nicholas more then 950. years, after Donatio facta dicitur an. 324. nam co
anno Constan. baptizatum asterunt. Bar. an. cod. nu. 41 and seq. Hadr. 1 coepit
an* 772. Leo 9. ann. 1049. Eug. 3. an. 1145. Nichol 3. ann. 1277 Bin. in eorum
vitis.
Constantine is supposed to have made this Donation? Can any man think such to
be fit witnesses of a matter of fact, done so many hundred years before their
times, unless they have some certain evidence of former ages? And evidence
they have none, better nor more ancient, then the false, fabulous, and
legendarie Acts of Syluester: to which if any will give credit, he
demonstrates himself to be altogether unworthy of credit.

Again, of all men in the world the Popes are most unfit to be witnesses in
this cause. Did Marta never hear of that in the Digests, Nullus Dig. li. 22.
tit. 5. l. 9.
idoncus testis in resua intelligitur, none is thought a fit witness in his
own cause? that is, as they Cuius commodum and vtilitas ad se directo spectat.
Venat. lib. ^. tit. 20.
do rightly expound it, when the profit redounds directly to him who is the
witness. So it does in this Donation, to the Popes: None do gain so much
thereby as they; nor is it a pedling matter, or a fly that such Eagles get
thereby; the gain of Rome, of Italy, of all the Western Provinces, will have
a strong operation in such witnesses, as have too well learned their lesson of
Julius Caesar, Si ius violandum, regni causa violandum est. The world is
witness, that far better Popes, of a better faith, and of more fidelity
then Hadrian, Leo, Eugenius, and Nicholas, have for ever blemished the Roman
See, for defending forgeries, even then, when they looked but for motes and
minnims, in comparison of Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces. Of many
examples I will instance but in one.

Pope Zozimus and Boniface 1. that they might by Appeals draw the gain of
some contentious businesses, to the Roman Court, pretended and pleaded Conc.
Carth* 6. ca. 3.
a Nicene Canon to have decreed the same. That Canon, an whole Conc. Afr. ca.
101. and ^05 in Epist. ad Celestinum.
Council of African Bishops, by the authenticke copies of the Nicen Canons,
convinced to be a forgerie. And yet this is not the worst fault in those Popes.
For (as Bellarmine Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pontif. ca. 25. Respo^demus and seq.
, Baronius Zozimus and Bonifacius citarunt canones Concilij Sardicensis nomine
Nicenae Synodi. Bar. an. 4^7. nu. 99.
, and others tell us) Pope Zozimus, and Boniface, when they named the Nicen,
meant the Sardican Council: in the 7. Canon of which, is verbatim set down
that very Canon, which Zozimus alleged, and the fourth Canon is also in effect
the same. In both it is decreed, That it shall be lawful, out of other
Provinces, to appeal to the Bishop of Rome, and that he shall have power, to
send if he will, Legates a latere, to end causes in Afric or other Countries.

Now this is a further demonstration, that the Popes for their own gain,
fear not to urge and uphold forgeries. For that these two Canons are forged,
and were not extant among the true Sardicane Decrees, the same African Bishops
(one of which was Saint Augustine) and their whole Council does evidently
declare, saying Conc. Afric. ca. 105.
in their Synodall Epistle to Pope Celestine; That any should be sent from the
side of your Holiness, (to hear, and end causes in other Provinces) in nulla
inuenimus patrum Synodo constitutum, we find it decreed in no Synod. If in
none, then for a certainty it was not decreed either in the Nicene, or in the
Sardicane, or in the first Constantinopolitane Council; in which only (until
that time) were made such Decrees and Canons, as did bind the whole Church, of
which kind of Decrees the Africane Bishops speak in that place.

Bellarmine Augustinus non agnoscit aliud Sardicense conciliu^, qua^
haereticu^. Bell: lib. 2 de Romans Pont. ca. 25.. Add.
, Baronius Admirari no^ desino quonam pacto accidisse po^uerit, vt verum
Sardicense Co^cilium, Catholicos Africanae Ecclesiae praeteri^rit. Bar. an.
347: nu. 96. and 98.
, and Binius Bin notis in Sard. Conc.. Approbatum. lidem Africani patres
viden^ur* illud Sardicense Concilium plane ignorasse. Bin not. in Conc.
Carthag. 6.. Hoc^idem.
, would gladly persuade, that neither Augustine, nor those other Africane
Bishops knew ought of that holy Sardicane Council. A thing so incredible, that
with reason none can imagine it. How could they be ignorant of a holy general
Council? For that this Sardicane was such, though some learned men (from whose
judgment I crave leave to dissent) have thought the contrary, not only
Athanasius Athanas. Apol. 2. vocat Magnum Co^cilium. pa. 191. sic autem
oecumeni cu^ vocat. vt eade^ Apol. pa. 194. vocat Nicaenu^ Conciliu^ magna^
Synodu^, and alibi.
, Socrates Edicitur Conciliu^ generale. Soc. lib. 2. ca. 16.
, Sulpitius Seuerus Imperator iubet ex toto orb apud Sardica^ Episcopos
congregari. Sul. Se^. lib. 2. sac. hist.. His per.
, and Justinian Universal Concilium, express vocat Justin. in Edicto contra
tria Capitula. quod incipit, Scientes.
, but the Council of Chalcedon Conc. Chalc. Act. 16. in Alloqu^t. ad Martianu^.
does witness, wherein is mention of this Sardicane, as of a general
Council, such as was that at Nice, at Constantinople, and Ephesus, among which
this is reckoned. Yea the Acts of the Council it self do explain the same.
First, it is clear, that there were assembled 344. Bishops In vniuersum
subscripserunt 344. ait Athan. Apol. 2 pa. 208.
, (far more then were at Nice) and that out of 36. diverse Recensentur 36
Prouinciae ab Athan. Apol. 2. in principio and iteru^ in 2. Epistolis Concilij
Sardicensis apud eundem Athan. Apol. 2*
Provinces, to wit, Egypt, Libia, Palestine, Arabia, Pannonia, Thessalia,
Dacia, Misia, Thrace, Macedonia, Achaia, Crete, Spain, France, Italy, Sicily,
Sardinia, Afric, Brittania, and many more: yea there were present in it, and
subscribed to the Decrees thereof 36. Recensentur apud Athan. loco citato, pa.
207.
, Africane Bishops, one of which was Gratus Primate of Carthage; Again, the
Council binds the whole Sint vobis igitur Georgius etc. Anathema. sic omn^bus
Episcopis totius Ecclesiae scribit Conc. Sard. in sine 2. Epist. apud Athan.
loc. cit.
Catholic Church to observe their Decrees, which no other but a general could
do. How could they possibly be ignorant, I say not of this Synod, to which so
many of their own Bishops had subscribed, but of the Decrees also made
therein? specially seeing they used to bring home a copy of the Decrees
consented upon in general Counsels, as themselves say Co^c. Carth. 6. ca. 9.
, that Cecilianus brought with him the Decrees made at Nice, at which he was
present.

Their first Council at Carthage, is a certain and undeniable proof that
they knew right well this holy Sardican Council; for therein Gratus, in the
hearing of the whole Synod said Co^c. Carth. 1. habitu^ tempore Iulij. c. 5.
thus, I remember that this was decreed, in sanctissimo Sardicensi Concilio, In
the most holy Council at Sardica: which first Council at Carthage, to have
been known unto Augustine (to say nothing of the rest) none may doubt: nay it
is Nefas, says Baronius Bar. an. 347. nu. 97.
, to suspect Augustine to have been ignorant of the Ecclesiastical Canons,
considering he by reason of his continual conflicts with Heretics, Omnia
Concilia scripta euoluit and archiua reserauit, Tossed the Acts and Decrees of
every Council, and searched all Registries: yea it seems the Acts of this
first Council at Carthage, were (among diverse others) read in that their sixth
Council, wherein this cause of Appeals was moved by Faustinus the Popes
Legate, seeing they say Co^c. Carth. 6. ca. 9.
, Let the copies of the Nicene Decrees, Et quae Patres hic constituerunt, and
those things which our fathers or predecessors have here (in Afric) set
down to confirm the same, be inserted into these Acts.

Besides, none can doubt, but those learned Africane Bishops, especially St.
Augustine, read and perused diligently the books of Athanasius. Now seeing in
those Apud Atha^. Apol. 2.
, this holy Sardican Council is described, and their very Synodall Epistle
expressed, there is no doubt but St. Augustine both certainly knew, and
willingly embraced the same, which he saw was approved by so many Bishops,
and of so diverse Provinces. Further, St. Augustine himself witnesses Aug.
lib. 3. contra Cresc* ca. 34.
, that he read the Synodall Epis^le of the heretical Council at Sardica
which was held by Arians: How could he then possibly, but know of the holy
Sardican Council held at the same time, by Hosius, Athanasius, and other
Orthodoxall Bishops? of which the very Epistle of that heretical Sardican
Council, makes often In suo conuenticulo habu^runt Osiu^ and Protogen^. and
saepe similia Epist. Synodalis Conciliabuli Sardicensis* apud Hilar. lib. 2 in
fragn^enti^. pa. 6. and seq and Bin. to 1. con. pa. 448.
and expressem^ntion Or what think you, was become of the wit and judgment of
Binius, when he said Posteri in African^ Ecclesia tempore Zosimi and Bonifacij
vtru^que conciliu^, Sardice^se, and Carthaginense 1. ignorauerunt. Bin. not. in
conc. Sardic.. canones. videntur plane ignoraste, Bin. not. in conc. carthag.
6. * Hoc idem.
Augustine was ignorant of this holy Sardican Council? whereas himself
confesses Bin* Not. in conc: Sard. O^cumen^cu^.
, that Augustine in his 162. Epistle calls it, Plenarium vniuersae Ecclesiae
concilium, A plenary Council of the whole Church: and Baronius speaking of the
Africane Bishops says Bar an. 347. nu. 97.
, it is satis compertum, clear enough and certain by the very public
monuments of the Africane Church, that the holy and lawful Council of Sardica,
was known to the Catholic Africane Bishops.

Seeing then it is clear and certain, that St. Augustine and the Africane
Bishops, who writ that Synodall Epistle to Pope Celestine, knew both of that
holy Sardican Council, and of the true Decrees thereof, the memory whereof
Eodem form saeculo celebratum Bar. an. eod. nu. 96.
was but then fresh, that Council being held not above eighty years Co^c.
Sardic. habitum an. 347. Bar. eo. an. nu. 1. Celestinus coepit an. 424. Bar. eo
an
before they writ this to Celestine: seeing, I say, they certainly knew all
the Decrees thereof, and yet for a certainty profess to Celestine, after so
long and diligent search of that cause touching appealing to Rome, that no
Synod had decreed, that the Pope upon appeal might send his Legates to judge
and determine causes in other Provinces; it remains as undoubtedly true, that
(if no more) yet the Canon which Zozimus alleged (which is now the seventh)
as also the fourth; wherein the authori^ie of receiving appeals, and sending
such Legates, is granted to the Pope, are not the true Canons of the holy
Sardican Council, nor were among the true Canons of that Council, in the time
of St. Augustine, and of those Africane Bishops. For had they truly been
there, they had as much furthered the Popes claim of receiving Appeals, and
sending his Legates; and they had as effectually procured the assent of the
Africane Bishops thereunto, as if they had been decreed by the great Nicene
Council it self: The Sardican being as general as the Nice^e, and the
authority of them both being equal, and the whole Church by the very Sardican
Decree, being bound to observe all the constitutions made by it. But Zozimus,
Boniface, and Celestine, were concious to themselves, that those Canons (the
fourth and seventh) were no true Sardicane Canons, but mere impostures and
forgeries, fathered on the Sardican Council, to lift up the authority of the
Roman See; and knowing further that if they had but once alleged these, as
Canons of the holy Sardican Council, the Africane Bishops could, and would
much more easily have convinced them of fraud and forgerie, then they did in
alleging the Nicene Canons; those Popes, I say, knowing this, durst not in all
those five years (so long Quinquennalem illa^ co^trouersiam Africanoru^, vocat
Bin. not. in Conc. Afric. pa. 646.
the contention about this matter continued) so much as once whisper, or
intimate to any, that the Canon falsely alleged by Zozimus to be a Nicene,
was indeed a Sardican Canon.

And if any demand, whence this corruption of the Sardican Canons should
proceed, the answer is very easy, by the old Cassian rule, Cui bono? Seeing
the gainers by those forged Canons were the Popes, the forgerers of them must
needs be either Popes, or their favorers. And hereof that which Pope Hadrian
the first affirms, gives a strong presumption, seeing the Sardican Canons (in
such manner as they were in his time) were, as himself says Hadr. 1. in
Epitome Canonum in Co^c. Sard.
, among the Romans, but not among the Grecians; who yet no doubt, had all the
true Decrees made at the Sardican Council. Photius also Patriarch of
Constantinople professes Vt testatur Nich. 1. Epist. 6.. post haec*
of the Greek Church, Non habere vel recipere, that they had not, or received
not the Sardican Canons. Not meaning, as Baroniu^ Non reperiri apud se canones
conc. Sardic. turpiter mentitus est Photius. Bar. an. 347. nu. 53. 54.
(^ailing against Photius) misconceiueth him, That they had not any copies at
all of those Canons among them, for Photius himself in his Nomocanon De ijs
qui siu^t episcopi ex L^icis, Syn. Sard. can. 10. Phot. in Nom. (...). 1 ca.
11. sed. in ^anonibus Sa^d conc ab al^o^ibus vocatur 13. vt apud (...) pa. 437.
expr^s^ mentions that very Canon, which Baronius urges against him, and
says (...)
, that Photius denies that they had it or the rest among them:) but he meant
they had them not in such esteem, as the Romans had: which to be Photius
meaning, his own words do explain, cited by Pope Nicholas Supra.
, non habere, vel recipere, they had them not in such manner, as to receive
them for Synodall authority, or for the true Canons of that Sardican Council;
In this sort, by reason of the fraud of the Latins, inserting false and fained
Canons, they justly received them not, nor approved them; which Gratian well
observing, and putting a difference betwixt the Greek and the Latin Church,
in their having of these Canons, says Distinc. 16. ea. Quod dicitis. in
rubrica, and cap. Ipso.
, The Sardican Council (in regard of the Canons thereof) Authoritate apostolica
recipitur, Is received or approved by the Popes authority; but it is not
received among the Grecians. The Popes, or their favorites, having for their
own gain, forged (if not all) yet certainly diverse of those Canons, could do
no less then approve them; the Grecians knowing the forgery (if not of all)
yet certainly of some of those Canons, and by name of that seventh, (which
Zozimus pretended for a Nicene Canon) could do no less then reject and
condemn them.

It were easy by many other examples, to declare that the Popes have made this
a very trade and custom (as if it were a piece of Pope-craft) either
themselves to forge, or else (which is every way as bad) to abett, countenance,
and maintain by their authority, such writings as were forged by others; and
by them to build up their own pomp and pontifical glory. But leaving all the
rest, I will now come to the examination of the credit of those four Pope, who
are produced as witnesses for this Donation.

The first of them is Hadrian Mart. ca. 30. nu. 26. Steuch. pa 87.
the first; who of all Popes that went before, is most shameless in uttering
untruths, and maintaining false and forged writings. I will give but a touch of
either. For his untruth, take that in his Epistle Hadr. 1. Epist. 1*
to the Emperors Constantine and Irene, which was read Nic. 2. C^c. Act. 2. pa.
309.
and appoued Ibid. pa. 313. b.
in their second Nicene Council: where he shames not to say, That Churches were
beautified with venerable Images, even from the Apostles time until then, and
he further adds, that the Church, Sanctas eorum figuras veneratur, Did from
that time worship the holy Images of the Apostles. A palpable untruth, easy to
be refuted by Origin, who living within a hundred years of some of the
Apostles, writ thus against Celsus: It is impossible Orig. lib. 7. cont. Cells.
pa. 97.
that one should know God, and make supplication to Images: and as for
Christians he adds, Nec simulachra quidem nos veneramur, We do not adore
Images: Of Lactantius, who living in Constantines time, says, Non Lact lib. 2.
ca. 19.
est dubium quin religio nulla sit, vbi est Simulachru^, It is no doubt, but
that there is no true religion, where Images are set up and adored: Of
Epiphanius, who living also in that age, rent Epiph. Epist. ad Joan* Hieros.
in pieces the image which he found set up in a Church, saying, It was against
the Scripture to hang up Images in Churches. Of which fact of his, whereas some
Bell. de Imag. Sanctor. ca. 9.. ad quintum.
make doubt, Cassander says, Constat Cass Consult. ca. de Imag. pa. 167.
, It is certainly known that Epiphanius did so; and for this cause not only
Waldensis reproues him, and says, As one Mr. Robert had done before; that
Epiphanius Th. Wald. de Sacram. tit. 17. ca. 157. pa. 325.
did that perhaps of zeal, but not according to knowledge: but Alphonsus Alp.
a cast. lib 8. aduer. haeres. voce Imago.
a Castro adds, that Epiphaniu^ though for this cause he be not an heriticke,
yet he did err herein, and did contrary to the Scripture. Of Pope Gregory the
Great, who 600. years after Christ, writing to Serenus Bishop of Massilia, who
had broken down Images (which the people began then to adore,) reproues him in
this manner Greg. Epist. 9. lib. 9 Ind 4.
, Truly I commend you, Quod ea adorari ve^uisses, That you forbade them to
adore Images, but I reprove you for breaking them down: That should not have
been broken down, Quod non ad adorandum in Ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas
solummodo mentes fuit collocatum, which was there set up only for instruction,
but not for adoration; then which no cleerer testimony can possibly be
desired. But omitting all the rest, I will here only propose the words of
their own Cassander, which fully demonstrate the falsehood of Pope Hadrian:
Certum est, It is certain says he Cass. loc. cit. pa. 163.
, that in the beginning of the Gospel preached, there was no use of Images;
especially in the Churches, as by Clemens, and Arnobius is evident. And as for
veneration, or adoration of them, he further declares, Quantum Ibid. pa. 6^.
veteres initio Eccl^siae, ab omni veneratione imaginum abhorruerunt, How the
ancient Church did even abhor the worshipping of Images; adding one thing of
special note, Non tunc valeba^ illa ratio, That excuse would not then serve
the turn, which now is pretended; that they gave not that worship to the
Images themselves, but to those, who were represented by those Images: for this
color of excuse, says he, did the Paganes also use; as Arnobius and
Lactantius declare: adding further, that such worship as is given to God by
Images, Non satis castum and conueni^ntem Deo esse, Is neither chaste, nor
fi^^ing for God, but devised by them that are superstitious. Thus and much more
Cassander. By whose testimony, the untruth of Pope Hadrian does most clearly
appear, who affi^mes Images not only to have been set up in Churches, but
adored also by the Church, even from the Apostles time.

For his approving false and forged writings, we need to go no further, then
to the lying and legendarian Acts of Siluester, which he Hadr. 1. Epist. 1.
c^tes as Bin. not* in Conc. Romans 1. sub Siluestro.
authentical; or to the first Roman C^tatur^d concilium ab Hadriano Epist, 3.
ca. 53.
Synod under Siluester, and that famous disputation betwixt the Pope and the
Jews, which we have before demonstrated to be a famous lie. Yet let me add
one instance more, and that is his alleging Hadr. 1. Epist. 3. ca. 34.
for adoration of Images the book of Athanasius questions to Antiochus:
wherein the worshipping of Images is as clearly taught, as in the second
Nicene Synod it self. For there Athan. Archepis. Alexand. quast. ad An^ochum.
q. 39.
it is said, That Christians do adore Images; that they who refuse them, are,
dementes, mad people: and further to show what rare and admirable effects the
adoration of Images has wrought, it is there declared: How when a certain
Monk at Jerusalem, had been long vexed with a, devil, (it was demon
scortationis, as Sophronius Sophronius citatur a Concilio Nic 2. Act 4 pa. 3^6.
Vbi haec eade^ historia r^citatur ex Soph. and approbatu^ a Concilio.
expresses,) The devil at one time appeared unto him, and said, If thou would
not have me to vex thee any more, do not worship this Image of the blessed
Virgin, and then I will forsake thee. Quid ad haec respondebunt, what can they,
who forbid adoration of Images, answer unto these things? says Pope Hadrians
Athanasius?

What else can they, or should they answer, but that Pope Hadrian strives to
maintain superstition and Idolatry, by lying and forged writings? That this
author, cited by Pope Hadrian, as the writing of St. Na^ cu^ Concilium
Francofordense de beati Athanasij Alexandriae Episcopi, verba f^cisset,
Hadrianus co^ refellens ait, Eiusde^ Athanasij sententias fideliter proferimus.
Hadr loc. citat.
Athanasius of Alexandria is such, Posseuine will tell them, Constat Posseu. in
verbo Athanasius. pa. 127.
, it is manifest that this is not the book of Athanasius, seeing Epiphanius
and Greg. Nissene are cited therein as ancient authors; who both followed
Athanasius. Bellarmine will tell them the same: The questions Athanasij esse
no^ possunt Bell. li. de scrip. eccl. in Athanasio.
to Antiochus cannot be the book of Athanasius. And whereas Bellarmine
himself had sometimes alleged Bell. lib. de Notis eccl. ca. 9.. Xenaias. and
lib. 1. de Purg. ca. 6.. Primus.
this, as the book of the ancient and holy Father Athanasius, he afterward
retracts this his error, and says, I do not think Bellar. Recog. in lib. 4.
de Council and eccl. ca. 9.
that Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria is the author thereof.

Besides this, the sottishness and gross ignorance, which the forgerer in
every page of that book bewrayes, does certainly demonstrate that St.
Athanasius was not the author thereof. Qu. 52. it is determined for an undoubted
Haud dubie lux praecedit te^ebras.
truth, that at the creation light was before darkness: quite contrary to the
Scripture Genesis 1. 2. 3.
, and the Jewish account ever since the creation. Qu. 64. it is said, that
Jonas died three several times, once when Elias raised up the widows son of
Sarepta; again, when he was in the Whales belly; and thirdly, by his natural
death after he was delivered out of the Whale: A fable, grounded on the
Synopsis Dor. Syn. in voce Jonas.
Dorothei, of which Bellarmine says Illa Synopsis plena est fabulis. Bell.
lib. de scrip. eccl. in Dorotheo.
, (and says truly) that it is full of lies. And yet this which he says of
Jonas, is as true, as that the Eunuch Vt ibidem Doroth. Pont.
whom Philip baptized, and Caesar, were two of the seventy Disciples of
Christ: or that Priscilla and Iunia (two women) were Priscilla Colophouiae
Episcopus fuit, Iunia Apamiae. ibid.
Bishops. Quae. 47. He sets down for a certainty that Paradise is the East
of the whole earth, and further East then India: adding, that the spices which
come from the East Indies, and other easterly countries, are more fragrant,
because they are near to Paradise; by the fragrancy of which, and the trees
therein, the Indian fruits are made more sweet and odoriferous. A sottish
conceit, not only because there is no absolute East of the whole world; but
because it is certain, that Paradise was near or about Mesopotamia and
Babylonia, as besides the consent of the best Vid. Iuniu^ notis in cap. 2. Genesis
Hopkins. in Synopsi Paradis^. Bened. Perer. Com. in Genesis lib. 3. q. 2. and 3.
Writers, the rivers Tigris and Euphrates, which compass Mesopotamia, and
which watered the garden, do infallibly demonstrate Quae. 54. he says, That
Christ was conceived on the 25. of March, because on the very same day, God at
the beginning created Adam: where besides the reason, void of reason, it is
utterly untrue, that God created the world in March, or at the vernum
aequinoctium, but (as in another Treatise I have fully proved) about the
aequinoctium hibernum. Qu. 65. he says that Tharshis, to which Jonas fled,
was a city of India; a very fable. Witness Josephus, who says Iosep. lib. 9
Antiq. ca. 11. and Iosephu^ ita sensisse ait Hieron, in ca. 66. and ca. 2.
Isaiae.
, Jonas taking ship at Ioppe, went to Tharshis of Cili^ia. Witness St. Jerome:
whose opinion Sensit per Tharsu^, mare significa^i. Hier. in ca. 10. Daniel.
, though it be not true therein, yet he expressly reiects Ibidem.
that of his going to India; adding, that most Vt Ple^ique (...).
Writers do take Tharshis of Cilicia to be there meant. The text it self
puts this matter out of doubt: where it is said Iona. 1. 3.
* that Jonas went to Iapho, and there found a ship going to Tharshis: And that
Iapho is the same with Ioppe, not only Adricomius Ad^ic. in Theat. terrae
Sanctae. in Tribu Dan. nu. 29.
, Ortelius Ortet. Synon. in Ioppe.
, and other Geographers witness; but the very Italian name of Ioppe, which to
this day is called Iapho Ortet ibid.
, does demonstrate. Now Ioppe is a Maritime town, on the West side of Jury,
situated on the mare Mediterraneum, or as some call it, Syriacum; whence there
is a straight passage through the Mediterranea^ Sea to Tharsus of Cilicia, but
not Neque en^m Jonas de Ioppe nauigans, ad India^ poterat peruenire, ad quam
illo mari non potest nauigari Hier. com. in ca. 2, Isai.
to the Indies. If Jonas had purposed then to fly to India, his passage should
have been on the East side of Jury, by the red Sea, and the Bay of Arabia;
the same that Solomon's ships took from Ezion-geber 1. Kin. 9. 26.
to Ophir, or Tharshis. For that these are two Synonimal names of the same
place, (though Tharshis withal signifies the Ocean) the text it self
imports: Seeing Iehosaphat purposing to send whither Solomon had done, is said
in one place 1* King. 22. 48.
, to send to Ophir, and in another 2. Chron. 20. 36.
, to make ships to go to Tharshis; but God disappointed his voyage, and brake
his ships at Ezion-geber* in the red Sea, so that they were not able to go to
Tharshis. Besides, the vulgar Latin translator, though he knew Tharshis in
Hebrew to signify the Sea, and so sometimes translates (...) in mari; vbi
H^br, est (...). 1. King. 22. 49.
it, yet speaking of Salomons sending to Ophir, he takes Tharshis for the
proper name of the Region, even the same with Ophir; saying 1. King. 10. 22.
, That the Kings navy, per mare ibat in Tharshis, went by Sea unto Tharshis,
bringing gold from thence: and again 1. Kin. 9. 28.
, when they came to Ophir, sumptum inde aurum detulerunt, They brought from
thence gold unto Solomon. So he clearly shows Tharshis and Ophir to be the
self same place whither Solomon sent for gold, and from whence his Navy
brought gold unto him. Gasp. Varrerius, after diligent examination of this
point concludes Gasp. Varre^. Comment. de Ophyra region. pa. 55.
, that the sacred Scripture, candem regionem modo Ophir, modo Tharshis
nuncupat, does call the same region, sometimes Ophir, sometimes Tharshis.

Now omitting some unlikely conceits where Ophir was, (as that of Volaterranus
and Ludou. Venetus: who suppose Vt testatur Varer. lib. cit. pa* 24.
it to be the Island Sofala in the Ethiopian sea, as the Chalde paraphrast
Chal. Paraphan. 1. Reg. 10. 22.
takes Tharshis for Afric, the Septuagint Septuag. ibid.
for Carthage:) there are two opinions which are of all most probable. The
former, that Ophir is some region of East India: either Iapan, as Maginus Mag.
in sua Geogr. pa 261 vbi Auream Chersonesum ait esse Iapanica^ insulam, sicque
M^r^atotorem sentire addit.
and Mercator thought: or, as Rab. Maurus, Lyranus, and Varrerius Varr. lib.
cit. pa. 22. 23. and per totum lib.
(who both cites the other, and earnestly contends for this opinion) as also
Acosta Acost. li. 1. hist. Ind. c. 13.
, and Mounsieur de Plessis Vt testatur Sr. Wat. Ragh. lib. 1. hist. ca. 8.. 15.
affirm, Ophir is the same with that which Ptolomie calls Aurea Chersonesus,
and now is known by the names of Pegu, Siam, Malaca, and Sumatra; all situate
beyond the gulf of Bengala. To them may be added both Josephus and St.
Jerome: who Hier. Epist. ad Princip. quae est 140.
call Ophir, Regionem Indiae, A Region of India, (they mean without all doubt
East India.) And again Hier. Epist* ad Marcel.
, Tharshis is a Region of India, as also Josephus teaches. Of which Regions of
Pegu, Malaca, and Sumatra (though many travelers in our times do report the
quite contrary) yet Varrerius Var. lib. cit. pa. 34.
and Acosta Acosta loc. cit.
confidently avouch, that in them, there is, ingens copia, very great
abundance of gold, silver, precious stones, Iuory, Apes, Peacockes, and rare
woods, fit to make musical instruments; which were the chief commodities 1.
King. 10. v. 11. 12. 22.
that Solomon had from Ophir.

The other opinion is embraced Ophir Postello Peru videtur; and idem affirmat
Ar. Montanus. Abr. Orte^in Synon. Geograph. voce Ophir.
by Postellus, and Arias Montanus, That Ophir is a part of the West India, or
America, as they teach, Peru; as Franc. Vatablus thinks, Hispaniola. Now
besides that affinity Vtrisque Cheseph, argentum: Chet^n, aurum puru^. Puah,
igne (...) aut su^tlere (vt tra^sfert Iun. Psalm. 12. 6. and Ezec. 21. 36.)
notat.
, which some have observed betwixt that Indian speech, and the Phenician or
Hebrew language: besides that conjecture which is taken from the Insulae
Salomonis, which are situate in the Mare del Zur, near to the coast of Noua
Guinea: there is one persuading inducement for this opinion; In that the holy
Scriptures speaking of that gold which Solomon used in the Temple, and which in
all likelihood was the same which was brought from Ophir, expressly calls 2.
Chro. 3. 6.
it Zahab Peruaijm, the gold of Peruaijm, or the two Perues: Peruaijm and by
contraction Paruaijm: being as Arias Montanus Ar. Mont* tract* de Phaleg, and
Gentiu^ regionibus.
notes, the Duall number of Peru: whereof, as he Ar. Mont. loc. cit.
says, there were two great Regions divided by a great Isthmus (that is where
Mexico is sited) both which being peopled by Ophir (the grandchild of Phaleg
Genesis 10. 29.
:) who planting his posterity there, and first inhabiting those countries,
left his own name (of Ophir) unto them both, and till the time of Solomon, and
after, they were so called. But since then, by a little inuersion of the
letters (the Radicalls of Ophir, and Peru being the same) they were called each
of them by it self Peru, (which comes of Parah to multiply or increase: this
country being a very great increase or addition to the former world: and both
of them together in the Duall number Peruaijm: The name of Peru still continuing
to the one, called also thence by Geographers in Latin Paruana, or Peruana,
that is, the Region of Peru: the other is now by a new name, and new
inhabitants called Hispaniola. The like is declared by Shindler Shindl. in suo
Lexic. Hebraeo.
a learned Hebritian, who says that by Paruaijm are noted the two Regions, of
Peru, and Hispaniola.

I confess the journey from Iudaea to Peru, was very long, specially in those
days when Nauigators, as is confessed Acost lib. and cap. eit. Varr. lib. cit.
pa. 45. and, Sr. Wall. Ragh. loc. cit.
, not knowing that admirable use, and therefore not having the help of the
loadstone, Card, and Compass, were forced for many occasions, but especially
for their own safety and direction, littus legere, to sail near the shore.
But seeing three years (so long was Salomons 1. Kin. 10. 22
Navy in going and coming) is a long time also, there is no doubt but a
Navy, though sailing along by the shoares of Arabia, India, and the Moiuccae,
and from thence passing to Noua Guinea, (which is near unto them) and so
holding the coast of Noua Guinea on their right hand, and in like sort the
Terra Australis, the streights of Magellane, and the South side of America,
might with ease both go to Peru (whither Solomon by his great and inspired
wisdom might direct them) and return also in that space of three years.

To them who embrace this second opinion I might adioyne Goropius Becanus a
Dutchman of Traiectum in Brabant; for he also resolutely holds Gorop. Beca.
lib. 7. Hispanic. pa. 112.
, Ophir, whither Solomon sent his Navy, to be Peru, or America, which he
calls Orbis Atlanticus, because Atlas, as he fancieth, the grandchild of
Iaphet, first sailed thither passing from Afric through the vaste Ocean,
called Oceanus Atlanticus. But Goropius does so ouerflow with uncouth,
improbable, and extrauagant conceits, that I thought his name would rather
disgrace then gain credit to this assertion. For who can with patience hear
that which he most confidently avouches. That not the Hebrew Eorum assertio
defendi non potest, qui linguam Hebraeam omniu^ primam esse contendunt Gorop.
lib. 2. Hermathenae. pa. 25. and saepe alibi.
, but the low Dutch, or German Linguam Cymbrica^ primam esse contendimus
ib^d. Cymbricam vero su^m vocat. lib. 1. Gallic* pa* 6. (...) nullam lingua^,
nostr* esse priore^. Lib^o 9. Her^^at. pa 2^4. Gall^ and Te^ o^es nec (...).
nec lingua differu^t. Gor. lib. 2. Gallic. pa. 34. Cernimus cla^issime
Gallica^n linguam non cum Alemanica conuenire, sed prors^s cum ea quam h^ctenus
Antwertpiani, caeterique Cymbri vtuntur. lib. 1* Gallic. pa. 11. and 6. Et;
G^lli olim e^ndem cum Germanis linguam habuerunt lib. eod. 1. pa. 4.
language (being the very same with the Cymbrian, and also with the old
Gallican tongue, as he teaches, and which has great affinity with our
Saxon;) was the first and primitive language of the world: the very same which
Adam spoke, and was author Primus no^^rae linguae Architectus fuit Orpheus Gor.
lib. 5. Hermat. pa. 103. Is vero (...) ante Diluuium Orpheus dictus est, fuit
Adam. lib ^od. pa. 104.
of it also: and which was used by all men till the confusion of languages at
Babel? Again, that when the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin words are either the
same, or have affinity with the Cymbrian, that is, the old Gailike, or the
German tongue, then they are, and must be derived E Cymbrica reliqua
deriuantur. Gor. Hermat. lib. 9. pa. 204
from the German, as being the first language of all. Upon which ground he
deriues Lib. 4. Hermat. pa. 94
the Greek Ate, from the Germane Hate; and the Hebrew Adam Ibid. pa. 95.
, from the Greek Ate, and the Germane, Dam, which signifies a bank: because
Adam was like a bank continually assaulted with the waves of Satan's ^^ate, and
temptations: and the L^tine Anima, from the German Asem, which signifies
Breath. To omit the rest (there are in him infinite of this kind) the very name
of Ophir he deriueth from Gor. lib. 7. Hispan. pa. 112
the German Over, because it is beyond the Atlantike Sea: and Peru, from Ibidem.
the German Pher, which signifies a custody; and Peruaijm which is mentioned,
1. Chron. 3, he deriues Ibid^m.
from the ^ame German Pher and Heim, an house; as if it betokened some house
made by Atlas for the safety of merchandise to be exported from America. Such
unapt and inept assertions (which abound in him) persuaded me to think him
unworthy of citing for that opinion.

Two exceptions are against this second opinion taken by some Sr. Wall. Ragh.
loc. ^it.
who think themselves expert in these matters of Navigations. The one, that the
name of Peru was given to that American region since the discovery thereof made
by Americus and Columbus: The other, that there is no possible passage thither,
but by crossing the maine Seas, and leaving the shores in a far distance:
which reasons would easily persuade, and more then persuade if they could be
proved. But his former proof is very sle^ght and of no weight. Fr. Pisarro,
says he, having discovered those lands on the South of Panama, some of them
by signs enquired of the Indian inhabitants, the name of that country: and
pointing with their hands over the river that ran by, the Indians answered,
Peru: thereby noting, as he says, the name of the river, and from this their
answer the region was ever since called Peru. But herein his conjecture is many
ways fallible: for why may not one think that the Indians truly expressed
the ancient name of the Region? or, say they meant the river, why may not that
river take his name of the Region, or the first planter in it, Ophir, which by
inuersion of letters is Peru? Or why might not the Spaniards as well
misconceiue the answer of the Indians, as the Indians mistake their demand? And
for his second reason, it may seem even a wonder, that one professing so exact
skill in these matters, could be ignorant that there is a straight course, and
that almost fast by the shores, from the Moluccaes to the coast of Noua Guinea,
and so by Terra Australis to the streights of Magellane and thence to Peru, as
both the Mappes of Ortelius, Maginus, Pet. Bertius, and others, and much more
the terrestrial globes of Hondi^s, of John Kereus, of William Johnson, and for
ought I can perceive, of all later Geographers, do make evident to the eye.
Had he well considered either his Mappes or Globes, he might have said that
journey to Peru had been long or tedious, but he never could have truly
said, it had been impossible. But leaving the judgment of this matter to the
learned; it does suffice for our present purpose, that whether soever of the
Indies, either East or West be meant by Tharshis, the forged Athanasius does
show himself a very witless man: it being as ridiculous to say that Jonas
took shipping at Ioppa to go to either of the Indies; as if one purposing to
go from Hull to Barwicke, should sail first to Dover, and thence to
Plimmouth, and so having compassed the whole Island of Britain, should strike
in at some Haven nere unto Barwicke.

Lastly, in the 115. Quest. there is mention of the heresy Haec est haeresis
little (...) a^unt incorruptibile ^ort us assump (...) dominum (...) Virgin^.
Orta (...).
of the Aphthardokites; which springing up in the time of Justinian from one
Iulianus Bishop of Halicarnassus, as both Liberatus Liberat ca 19.
, and Leo^tius Leont. lib. de sect. Act. 5.
testify, the forgerer as in every part of that book he bewrayes his gross
ignorance and folly; so in this, he demonstrates himself to have lived at
least two hundred years after Athanasius. And yet this sottish forgerie stu^t
with such untruths, does Pope Hadrian allege for the writing of that most
learned and renowned Bishop of Alexandria Saint Athanasius.

The next Pope cited by them as an approouer of the Edict, is Leo the ninth,
who though he be most confident in this matter, alleging this Charter as a
record of undoubted credit, and whereof no scruple may be made: yet is he as
insolent and shameless as Hadrtan, in maintaining untruths and forged
writings, if their Roman See may gain ought thereby. What an insolent and
untrue saying is that of Leo, in this very Leo 9. Epist 1. ca. 32.
Epistle, The faith of the Church of Rome, nec hactenus defecit, nec deficiet
in saecula, neither has yet, nor ever shall hereafter ^aile; whereas the faith
of Pope Vigilius, and the Roman Church to have failed, Vigilius definitiuely
and iudicially Consti^utu^ Vigil^, apud Bat. an. 553. nu. 50. Et seq.
defending the three chapters, and so all the heresies of Nestorius, the whole
fi^t general Council is an undoubted witness; as in another treatise touching
that whole Council I have at large demonstrated. Of Pope Honorius, that he
dogmatized, and doctrinally taught, defined and defended the heresy of the
Monothelites, the ^ixth Conc genesis 6. Act. 12. 13. and 14.
, seventh Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 7. an Epistola Synod. ad omnes fideles.
, and eight Conc. 8. Act. 7.
general Councels are all witnesses, (...), that if Leo and others had not
(...) Adamants, they would bl^sh to deny*

What credit can be given to this Leo in his alleging of ancient records, when
in the very same Epistle also he says, that Pope Leo 9. Epist 1. ca. 10.
Siluester did decree, and Constantine the Emperor, vniuersa Nicena Synodo
apprebante and subscribente: the whole first Nicen Synod approving and
subscribing to the same, that the highest See should be judged of none? An
untruth without all color fathered on the Nicen Council. For neither was that
Canon which Leo speaks of, made in the Nicen, but in the second Roman Conc.
Rom 2. sub Silvestto ca. 20.
Synod: neither was there ever any such second Roman Council, which decreed
that, as before Sup^a ca. 1. and 2. etc.
we have proved: neither did the Nicen Fathers ever approve or subscribe to
that Canon. Such shameless belying of most holy, and defending of forged
Councels and Canons, does demonstrate to every man how he may trust this Pope
Leo in citing of ancient records.

In another Epistle Leo 9. Epist 4.
, the same Leo to prove the authority of Metropolitans, and specially of the Sea of Rome, cites the Epistles of Pope Clement the first, Anacletus, and
Anicetus, most base and sottish forgeries. The Epistle of Clements which he
intends, is the first which bears Clements name: of which Posseuine the
Jesuit truly says, Non Posseu. in A^par. verbo Clemens. pa. 366.
potest esse Clementis, it can be none of Clement. Nor can it indeed possibly
be his: for Clement is there said to have writ this by the direction of Saint
Peter unto James the brother of our Lord seven years Epistola Clementis
scripta est post annu^ 13. Neronis Bin. Not. in eam Epist. Iacobus autem mortu^
est* ann. 7. Neronis, vt testatur Eusebius in Chro. and Hier. lib. de scrip.
eccles. in Iacobo
after James was dead: and in this Epistle Clement advises James being dead,
to keep inuiolably Vt seruari o^nia immaculata praecipias Clem. Ep. 1. in fine.
all the precepts of Saint Peter. In the Epistle of Anacletus, Anacl. Epist 3.
Haec est quam Leo (...).
the name of Cephas is ridiculously (as their own Ferus Fer. com in ca. 1.
Johan.
professes) interpreted to signify caput. And of all those three Epistles of
Anacletus, their own Cardinal Cusanus says, Credo Cus. lib. 2. de Concord.
ca. 34.
, I believe them all to be Apocriphall: and Contius Cont. in Cau. 6. q. 1. ca.
B^atus.
more plainly, there are many things which demonstrate these Epistles of
Anacletus to be counterfeite. The Epistle of Anicetus which Leo mentions, is
misdoubted by Bellarmine Forte falsum titulum prae se fert. Bell. lib. 2. de
Monach. ca. 40.
himself to be falsely entitled, but by the date thereof it is demonstrated
to be a counterfeite, for in the time of Anicetus Popedom, Gallicanus and
Ruffinus were not Consuls, nor in ten years either before or after; as by the
Fasti both Greek and Latin is evident.

In the same Epistle Epist. 4. Leonis 9.
is alleged a Canon out of the Epistle of Eleutherius Epist. Eleuth ad Galliae
prouincias. ca. 2. and citatur Cau. 3. q. 6. ca. Quam^^s.
, that Primates and Metropolitanes in other Provinces may discuss and examine
the causes of Bishops, Diffinitiuam tamen sententiam, yet they may not
pronounce a difinitiue sentence till they have consulted with the Pope; to give
such sentence, belongs only to the Pope. A forgerie also as the former: for
besides other proofs, certain sentences in this Epistle, taken verbatim Illa
verba Eleuther. Nec litigantibus, etc. desumpta sunt ex l. 1. de Iudicijs. cod.
Theod Ba^an 187 nu. 2.
out of the Imperial law of Constantine and the interpretation thereof, are a
clear evidence: for the forgerer thereby bewrayes himself to have lived 100.
years Eleutherius obijt, an. 194 Bar. eo an. nu* 1.
at least after Eleutherius was dead.

To omit the rest, (for Leo the 9* is full of them) observe but that one, which
he produces as an holy Canon, and by it would defend the dignity of their
See. You must know, says he Leo 9. Epist. 4.
, that without the Popes consent a general Council cannot be called, nor any
Bishop deposed, as in the sacred Canons you shall find.

This Canon is no where found, but in an Epistle Epist. Iulij ad (...) to. 1
Conc. apud Bin p^. 399.
written to the Eastern Bishops in the behalf of Athanasius, bearing the name
of Pope Julius, and out of that Epistle it is alleged by Gratian Cause. 3* q.
6. ca. Dadum.
. Now this to be undoubtedly a forgerie, many evident circumstances do
declare. It is dated when Felicianus and Maximianus were Consuls; and that was
never: for the colleague of Felicianus was Tatianus, as both the Fasti Greek
and Latin, and the Imperial Edicts L. ^ de Co^trah. empt. and l. 2. de excus.
a^tif. Cod. Theod.
dated in that Consulship do witness. Let us omit this, and think it a fault
of the writer: suppose (as Binius Bin. notis in eam Epistola^ quam esse Iul^j
contendit. pa. 400. b.
does stoutly affirm) that it was written in the Consulship of Felicianus and
Tatianus; yet that does more certainly convince the forgerie: for therein
Epist. Iul. loc cit. ca. 2.
Julius reprooues the Eastern Bishops for holding of Councels, and condemning
Bishops without his consent; whereas, says he, the sacred Canons do forbid
both these to be done. Whence it is evident that this Epistle must follow the
Council at Antioch. For after the exile of Athanasius, till then, the
Eusebians neither did nor durst hold any Council against him: the Emperor
Constantine the younger, professing Intelligetis ^uantae apud nos reuere^tiae
fuerit. Epist. Constantini iunioris, ad Pop. Alex^nd. apud Athan. Apol. 2 pa.
219.
such love and patronage to Athanasius. Yea it is clear by Athanasius and
Julius Vestri Legati Concilium a nobis indici postularunt. Iulij Epist. apud
Athan. Apol. 2. pa. 199
himself, that the Arians and other maligners of him, sent Legates Quin and
Eus^biani literas misere, Synodu^^ ^^sserunt (...), and ipsi Iulio si velle^,
arb tri^^m causae detulerunt Atha^. Apol. ^. pa. 198.
to entreat of Pope Julius that a Synod might be held at Rome for examining
all the whole cause of Athanasius; promising to come thither, and offering to
refer the whole cause unto his hearing and judgment. But afterward
Constantine being dead, contrary to their own promise, they found a fitter
opportunity by means of Constantius, to hold a Synod Socr. lib. 2. ca. 5.
at Antioch in Encaenijs, where they condemned Athanasius; and this their
Decree they would have to be of force to bind both Pope Julius and all others,
as if it were the Decree of a general Council. Till this time, Julius had no
occasion, nor reason to urge that Canon of holding general Councels. And that
upon this occasion he urged a Canon to that purpose, both Socrates Docet
Julius eos contra Ecclesiae canones egi^^e. Soc. lib. 2. ca. 13.
and the undoubted Epistle Oportuit secund^m Canonem, and non isto modo fieri.
Epist. Iul. apud Athan. Apol. 2. pa. 202
of Pope Julius, recorded by Athanasius, do testify. Whence it is clear,
that this Epistle which the forgerer dateth, and Binius assures us to have
been written in the beginning of Julius Popedom anno 337. cannot be esteemed
the true Epistle of Julius, seeing the Council of Antioch was not held till
four years Vt liquet ex Socr. lib. 2. ca. 5.
after that time.

But the true and undoubted Epistle Ea extat apud Athanas. Apol. 2. pa. 198
of Julius written to the Eastern Bishops, quite different from this, does
clearly demonstrate the forgerie hereof; And the Canon also which here is
alleged for sacred, makes evident the same. The Canon which the forgerer
intended, is out of all question, that which Socrates mentions Julius to have
alleged against their Council at Antioch. Julius, says he Soc. lib. 2. ca.
13.
, writ to the Eastern Bishops, that they did against the Canons of the Church,
(...), because they called not him, nor the Western Bishops to the council,
whereas the Canon of the Church forbids any decrees (which should bind the
whole would have that at Antioch to do) to be made without the consent of the
Bishop of Rome: to wit, without his consent sought for. This to have been
truly and indeed the exception of Julius, his undoubted Epistle Iulij Epist.
apud Athan. loc. citat. 202.
written from a Roman Synod, does evidently witness. Oportuit scribere
omnibus nobis, vt ita ab omnibus quod iustum est decerneretur, you should have
written to us all, and called us to the Council, that so what is just might
have been decreed by all. The Canons most justly forbid any decree (which
should have force to bind all) to be made without the knowledge of all, and
unless their consent were sought for at least; unless all who had right to
come to make the decree, were called to the Synod, and to the making of that
decree. Equity and reason teach, Quod Sexti Dec. lib. 5 de Regu Iuris, Regul,
^9.
omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari debet, that which binds all must be
approved or decreed by all. This being the true and indubitate Canon, the
forgerer whom Leo followed, makes Julius to say, that no Council can be held,
nor no Bishops be condemned without the Popes consent: but howsoever others
may examine the cause, yet the last and final sentence must belong to the
Pope: which to be a forgerie, and quite repugnant to the sacred Canons, the
Epistle of the Africane Bishops to Pope Celestine does demonstrate: for therein
they testify Cone. Afric cap. 105.
the Nicen Council to have decreed, that the causes as well of Bishops, as
other inferior Clearlees should be referred suis Metropolitanis, to the
Metropolitans of each Province, and that the causes finiendae essent, should be
there ended where they did arise, leaving no appeal from their sentence to
any, no not to the Pope, but only to a Provincial first, and then to a
general Council.

By this now it does clearly appear how shameless Pope Leo 9. was in seeking
to maintain the dignity of their See by forged authors, and counterfeit
Decrees, which he magnifies for sacred writings, and holy Canons. Now, if Leo
would dare to deal thus shamefully for the honor and gain of holding
Counsels, and of being a judge of Bishops; would he not much more adventure,
to set forth like forged Records, for gain of Rome, of Italy, and of all the
Western Provinces; to bring all Emperors in subjection under his feet, and to
hold his stirrup, as Constantine in this Donation is said Stratoris officiu^
illi (Siluestro) exh. buimus, ait Constantinus in Edicto donationis.
to have done before?

The third Pope alleged, as a witness of this Charter, is Eugenius the 3. He,
says Marta Mart. loc. cit. nu. 37.
, approved the Decrees compiled by Gratian, both the Triticum and Palea
therein; and one of Palea is the chapter Constantinus, wherein this Edict is
expressed. Be it so: yet he approved it no otherwise then as Palea. And it
had been a point worthy of Martaes labor, to prove that the Popes
approbation can transubstantiate chafe into wheat, or make of a forged, a true
and authentical Charter. Again, because Martae does so delight himself in
this Palea, which the ambitious Cardinal foisted into Gratians Decrees, I
would gladly know, of what truth and credit that Cardinal was. Certainly,
seeing he was so shameless in lying and forging, as that in Gratians own
presence Vt liquet ex Marta. ibid. nu. 35. 36.
, and before his face, he blushed not to challenge the book of Decrees for
his own work, wherein he was sure that Gratian would convince him of untruth,
how can any think, but that he would be most audacious and impudent, in
belying Constantine, and fathering that Decree on him, wherein he knew that no
such living witness as Gratian was, could be produced against him? Besides,
what credit can any man possibly give to Pope Eugenius (if he approved, as
Marta says he did) the whole book of the Decrees of Gratian, which is stuffed
with forgeries and false writings? Did. 16. ca. Septuaginta, is cited, The
Epistle of Athanasius unto Pope Marcus, concerning the burning of the Nicene
Canons. Whereas that burning happened diverse years after Marcus his death: and
Marcus was dead also at that time, when he writ (as they say) his answer to
that Epistle, as Bellarmine Bell. lib. de scrip. eccl. in Gratiano.
witnesses. Causa 24. qu. 1. ca. Haec est fides, he alleges a Canon under
the name of St. Jerome, which was certainly taken out of the book of Pelagius
the Arch-heretike, as the same Bellarmine Bell. ibid.
again witnesses. Causa 10. qu 9. ca. Quia sacerdotes, he cites another
Canon, as out of a book of St. Jerome, of which Bellarmine confesses Bell
ibid.
, that it is a counterfeite going under the name of St. Jerome. Causa 22. qu.
2. ca. Nec artificioso. He cites as the book of St. Augustine, that Treatise,
de conflictu virtutum and vitiorum, which to be a forgery, Bellarmine Ibid.
rightly proves, seeing St. Benedict is named therein, who lived more then an
hundred years after Augustine was dead. No marvel if Pope Eugenius approving
these, and an hundred such like passages in Gratian, approved also that Chafe
of Canstantines Donation, which is of the same stamp with the former. Chafe it
was, and for all the approbation of Eugenius, or any other Pope, Chafe it will
be ever, and ought for ever to be so accounted.

As for Pope Nicholas 3. (to whom may be added, Clement Clementin. lib. 2. tit.
9. ca. Romani.
5.) It was but a point of good manners in the^, to approve that Charter, which
they saw Hadrian 1. Leo 9. and Eugenius 3. to have before them, commended for
authentical. Who were they, that they should give the lie to 3. of their
predecessors? But that which disgraceth both the^ and the former Popes is,
that Nicholas, and Clement, followed herein Eugenius, Leo, and Adrian; and
they followed the Acts of Siluester. Now those Acts being, as we have before
demonstrated, nothing but a very sink of lies, and sottish fables, the Popes
by their approbation can no way give or gain any credit to such untruths, but
they impair their own credit, and extremely disgrace themselves, in seeking
by such fabulous and forged writings to uphold the dignity of their pontifical
See.

After the four Popes, let us examine two of their general Councels, which are
alleged as witnesses of this Donation. The former is their second Nicene, of
which Marta says Mart. ca. cit. nu. 10.
, that it bears witness to the Donation. Steuchus more plainly and
confidently affirms, that this Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 87.
takes away all doubt concerning the truth of this Donation, seeing the
definitions of general Counsels are of greatest authority.

The answer is easy: first, in that second Nicene Council, there is no
mention at all of this Donation, nor ought whence it can be collected. For
though they approve that part of the Acts of Siluester, wherein the
persecution, leprosy, and baptism of Constantine by Siluester, is set down,
yet of the other part of those Acts, wherein this Donation is expressed, they
make no mention at all. And that the one may be approved, and the other
rejected, Card. Baronius is an undeniable witness, who admits Bar. an. 324 nu.
31, 32. 33.
the former, and yet the later he utterly condemns Bar. an. 1191 nu. 52.
as a forgery. Again, the second Nicene Council is of no truth or credit in
the world. They are so impudent in alleging lies, fables, and forged writings,
that three quarters of those Acts, though they be very large (I speak it
confidently,) are nothing else, but either untruths or forgeries. The Council
of Frankford gave a true and just censure of that their Nicene Synod, when it
said Car. Magni. lib. 3. ca. 30.
, that those Fathers being destitute of proofs out of the sacred Scriptures,
turned themselves, Ad apocryphas and risu dignas naenias, To apocryphal and
ridiculous toys. Of a thousand, take but two or three examples.

First, the Acts of Siluester, touching Constantines persecution, leprosy,
and baptism, are approved Conc. illud probat prima^ Epistola^. Had. 1. Act.
2, pa. 313. In ea recitantur Acta Siluestri vt authentica. Act. 2. pa. 309.
therein; which Acts to be not only untrue, but a very puddle of lies, we
have before Sup. ca. 10.
demonstrated.

Secondly, that miraculous narration set down by Euagrius, of the Image of
Christ made without hands, and sent to Abgarus King of Edessa, by which that
city was made unconquerable, is approved Conc. Nic. 2. Act 5. pa. 354.
in that second Nicene Council. A very fiction and fable, as by the event, and
diverse other reasons is clearly proved in the defense of Justinian against
Baronius.

Thirdly, in that Council is related out of St. Athanasius Sermo B. Patris
nostri Athanasij, de Imagine, etc. Conc. Nic, 2. Act. 4. pa. 329. Totus hic
liber legitur and recipitur sub nomine S. Athanasij in Conc. Niceno 2. Bell.
lib. de script. eccl. in Athanasio. pa. 116.
, the whole book, De passione Imaginis domini: How that Image of Christ, taken
by Nicodemus his own hands, was brought to Berithus; how the Jews by chance
getting it, used all the indignities to it, which their fathers had done to
Christ himself: they scoffed at it, they crowned it with thorns, they gave it
gall and vinegar to drink, they crucified it, and they pierced it with a
lance; how a great deal of blood issued out of it, which cured the lame, the
blind, and all diseases: upon which miracle the Jews were converted, the
blood put into glasses, was sent by the Bishop of Berithus throughout Asia,
Europe, and Afric, and a solemn festival observed for that miracle. This
being read in the Council, all the Bishops were so moved therewith, that they
Totam ha^c congregationem, Athanasius, ad compunctionem and lachrimas co^pulit.
ibid. pa. 331.
fell to sighing and weeping. And for the truth and certainty of this story,
it is added, Haec Ib. pa. 330. b.
certa est and manifesta, This is the certain and manifest narration, touching
the Image at Berithus: and again, Haec est vera Ib. pa. 331. a.
and vehementer credita ratio, This is the true and most credible story,
touching the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which came out of the Image that
was crucified at Berithus.

Now this Treatise, De Passione Imaginis, not to be the book of St.
Athanasius, that famous Bishop of Alexandria, but a lying and fabulous writing,
going under his name, and inserted among his works, is by their own writers
confessed. This miracle, says Bellarmine Bell. lib. de script. eccl. in
Athanasio.
, happened an. 766. (and that is more then 390. years Athanasius obijt an.
372. Bar. eo an. nu. 63.
after the death of Athanasius:) They err, says Baronius Bar. an. 787. nu. 29.
, who think St. Athanasius, the famous Bishop of Alexandria, to be the
author of this book; it was, res recens gesta, a matter which happened but a
little before the 2. Nicene Council: and again, Plane Bar. notis in Martyr.
Romans Nou. 9.
constat, It is certain that the author of this history touching the passion
of Christ's Image, is not Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria: for this thing
happened in the reign of Constantine and Irene: And they entered into the
Empire, but an. 780 Bar. an. 780. nu. 5.
. that is, but seven years Nam Council. Nic. 2 habitum est an. 787. Bar. eo an.
nu. 10.
before the 2. Nicene Council.

Then it is certain their Colen censure of Monhemius is of no truth or credit;
wherein it is confidently auerred Cens. erroru^ Catech. Monhem. Dial. 3. pa. 59.
, That this was the writing of St. Athanasius, the most famous Greek Writer;
and most earnest propugner of the faith. Certain that their Fewar dentius is
of no credit, who by the warrant of this 2. Nicene Council says Feward. co^.
in Iren. lib. 1. ca. 24... Nicodemus.
, that Athanasius writ this 1260. years before his time, and he said this, an.
1596. Nay it is certain also, that this their 2. Nicene Council is of no
credit; for though Baronius labor to wipe away this blemish, by saying Bar.
an. 787. nu. 29. and 30. and Not. in Mart. Romans Nou. 9.
, that those Nicene Fathers meant not Athanasius of Alexandria, but some other
Bishop of that name, who lived after the year 780. (in which Constantine Hoc
miraculum tempore horum Augustorum contigisse asserit. Not. in Martyr. loc cit.
and Irene began to reign:) yet he does but therein wash the Blackamoore. For
that they meant St. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, not only Fewardentius (of
whom I spoke of late) witnesses, but Posseuine and Card. Bellarmine also, who
both say Citatur tanqua^ antiquissima historia in 7. Synodo. Bell. lib. de Imag.
sanct. ca. 10. Tertia. Posseuin. in Athanas. pa. 127.
, that this is cited by those Nicene Fathers, vt antiquissima historia, as a
most ancient story; and it were too ridiculous for the^ to call this story most
ancient, had it happened but some 7. as Baronius, or some 20. years, as
Bellarmine accounts before the Nicene Council.

Peter, Bishop of Nicomedia, who brought Adfero diui Athanasij librum. ait Pet.
Nico. in Conc. Niceno 2. Act. 4 pa. 329.
the book of Athanasius into the Nicene Synod to be there read, puts this out
of all doubt. For he Relatio miraculoru^ quae per Imaginem Christi facta sunt
Berithi. ea extat inter. opera S. Athan. ante librum de passione Imag.
, in a Council held at Caesarea, wherein were present all the Bishops of Asia,
testified this to be the book, Athanasij Alexandrinae vrbis Episcopi, of
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria. And that Tharasius, and the whole Nicene
Council thought no otherwise, it is clear by the very speech of Tharasius,
who, after this was read out of Athanasius, demands Conc. Nie. 2. Act, 4. p. 331
Why miracles were not wrought by our Images. Whereupon the marginall
Annotation, as well in the ancient editions, as in Binius, is this, Cur hodie
imagines non edant miracula, signifying plainly that Tharasius demands why the
Images in his time, did not work miracles, as they did in the times of
Athanasius: thereby evidently showing, that both he, and the Council thought
the Image at Berithus, to have wrought that miracle, not in his time, hut long
before, even in the days of the great Athanasius. Such palpable forgeries as
this, being approved by those Nicene Fathers, the Council of Frankford did
upon good and certain proof say Carol. magni. lib. 3. ca. 26. contra Nice.
na^ Synodu^ 2.
of this Nicene Synod, Pene omnia, almost all, in that vain writing, which
they call the 7. Synod, are like unto dreaming imaginations and fantastical
obumbrations; and there is almost nothing therein, quod non aut somnij
vanitatem, aut alterius deliramenti hebetudinem redoleat, which does not savor
either of a vain dream, or of a dull dotage.

The other Council produced by Marta, is that at Constance, where John
Wickliffe was Artic. Ioh. Wickl. conde^nati in Conci. Constant. fes^. 8. Art.
33.
condemned, (beside other matters) for saying that Siluester and Constantine
did err, dotando Ecclesia^, by endowing or enriching the Church: Whence, says
Marta Mart. ea. 30 cit. nu. 20.
, it is gathered, Non esse vlterius dubitandum de veritate and validitate huius
donationis, That none must doubt of the truth and validity of this Donation. A
very slight reason I perceive, will remove great doubts with Marta; whereas
the silliness of this collection of Marta, with men of reason, will make this
Donation, for which he pleads, to be far more doubtful. For what a
consequence call you this, Constantine endowed the Church with riches and
possessions, therefore he gave all Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces to
the Pope? Is there no dotation of the Church, but such an ample Donation of the
Western Monarchy? Thomas Waldensis professedly against Wicklife proves in a
whole chapter Th. Wald. Doctr. to. 1. li. 4. art. 3. ca. 38.
, That long before Constantines reign, the Church was endowed with lands,
goods, and possessions, in the time of Pope Pius the first in the time of
Calixtus the first, and specially in the time of Philip the first Christian
Emperor, 60. years before Constantine; of whom Waldensis says, He embracing
the faith, multis praedijs and facultatibus dotauit Ecclesiam, endowed and
enriched the Church with lands and great wealth: Of whom Gotof. Viterb. Got.
Viter. Chron. an. Chr. 248.
thus versifieth, Et dedit Ecclesijs praedia multa suis. The like does
Waldensis show of diverse others. Now if Philips endowing the Church with many
and great possessions, will not prove, that he made a Donation of Rome and
Italy to the Pope, it was a very witless conceit in Marta, to think that
because Constantine endowed the Church, therefore without all doubt he made
this Charter of Donation. Been referunt de quarundam Ecclesiarum Romae
dotatione, sed de Imperio nihil, says Jacob. Almane Iac. Alm. lib. de domin.
ciu. li and eccles. Concl. 2.. Primum est.
, histories and writers do well mention the endowing or enriching the Church
by Constantine, but of the Donation of the Empire made by him, they speak
nothing at all.

That Constantine endowed the Church, and that in a most princely manner, is
not to be doubted. His bounty herein, is at large set forth by Eusebius. At
Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constant. ca. 39.
Christ's sepulcher he builded a most sumptuous Church, adorning it with so many
gifts of gold, silver, and precious stones, as were numero fere infinita,
almost infinite for number. He beautified Ibidem cap. 40. and 41.
, regalibus ornamentis, with princely ornaments, a Church at Mount Oliuet, and
another at Bethlem: both which his mother Helena had builded; the one in honor
of Christ's nativity, the other of his ascension. He builded most munificent
Churches at Mambre Ibid. ca. 50.
, where Christ appeared to Abraham; at Heliopolis Ibid. ca. 56.
, and at Nicomedia Ibid. ca. 49.
, commanding the like to be done Eus. lib. 4. ca. 39. and lib. 2^ ca. 39. and
in omnibus Prouincijs Ecclesias exstruxit. lib. 3. ca. 47.
in other Provinces, giving charge, vt Ibid lib. a. ca. 39.
pecunijs non parceretur, that they should spare for no cost, but receive it
out of his treasury. At Constantinople he builded Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 47.
many temples, among them, that Eus. lib. 4. ca 58. 59. 60.
in memory of the Apostles (where he appointed himself to be buried) was
most sumptuous, covered with Gold, without with Brass stripped with Gold, he
enriched it with houses, bathes, walks, and all other things either necessary
or convenient. At Rome (if that book, De Munificencia Constantini, may be
trusted) he builded the Constantinian Libellus de Munif. Constable. (quem
fidelissimum vocat Baron an. 324 nu. 67.) extat post vitam Sal. tom. 1. Conc.
Church, another of Saint Peter, another of Saint Paul, others of S. Agnes, S.
Lawrence, S. Marcellinus, diverse others at Ostia, at Alba, at Capua, at Naples,
all of them so magnificent and costly, that besides the Lands, and revenues
given unto them, the very Gold of one Ea est Basilica Constantincana.
only Church came to 1900. and the Silver to 154000. of our pounds. Besides
all these, Ecclesijs Eusebius. lib. 1 de vit. Constable. ca. 35.
copiosa suppeditauit subsidia, he gave abundance to maintain them, yea as
Eusebius says Eus. lib. 4. ca. 28.
, Incredibile est and supra omnem opinionem, he so enriched them with lands,
with corn, with ornaments, as is incredible, and above any man's opinion.
Seeing Constantine thus munificently endowed the Church, (which is all that the
Council of Constance says he did) it was a very silly collection of Marta, to
conclude, That because the Council approved Constantines endowment of the
Church, therefore without all doubt, they teach that Constantine made this
Charter of Donation, and gave to the Pope, Rome, Italy, and all the Western
Provinces.

But to see the vanity of Marta; there is evident proof that neither
Wickliffe in his reproving, nor the Council of Constance in their approving
this fact of Constantines endowing the Church, did, or could mean thereby this
pretended Donation. Had Wickliffe thought Constantine to have given (as by this
Charter he is said) all the Western Provinces to the Pope, and the Church of
Rome, he would have reproved in the West none, but Constantine for endowing the
Church, nor could he have reproved other Western succeeding Kings and Princes
for endowing the same, with their lands and possessions. Those lands had not
been theirs to give unto the Church, and endow it therewith, being formerly
all given by Constantine. Now its evident by the Council of Constance, that
Wickliffe Artie. Wiclef. 3^. and 39.
reproved later Emperors and Kings in the West for enriching the church: yea
he reproved them more justly, and far more sharply then Constantine.
Constantine gave much indeed unto the church, but they added Cu^^ulantur
temporalia vsque ad putredinem, etc. verba Wiclesi apud Wald. 10. 1. lib. 4.
ca. 41.
much more. They were taught that lesson which was never heard of in
Constantines time, In Ant. Ros^el. part. 1. Monar. ca. 7. pa. 297.
ecclesia omnis immensitas est mensura, In giving to the Church, there is no
measure, but to give without measure. Whatsoever Constantine gave, was to
maintain the true faith and doctrine of Christ: succeeding Emperors about the
year 1200. after Christ, and 900. after Constantine, gave that superfluity
and excess of Lands and Possessions to the Church, for impious and
superstitious uses, to sing Requiems for their souls departed, to uphold the
Idolatrous worship of their Mass, of their Images, of their Saints, and to
lift up the man of sin to the Zenith of his Antichristian pride. What
Constantine and other Emperors for 1000. years, or thereabout after Christ,
gave to the Pope and Church of Rome, they passed only vsum fruc^um, the profit
and benefit thereof unto the Church; the supreme Vt liquet ex donationibus
Caroli, Othonis and aliorum, ante citatis.
Right, Dominion, and Jurisdiction they still kept in themselves. Succeeding
Emperors and Princes gave Lands in such sort to the Pope, as that they
acknowledged him to have Sovereign dominion In Imperatores, reges and
principes saeculares iurisdictionem super talia (temporalia) a Deo mediante
Papa accipiunt Carer. li. 2. de potest. Romans Pont. ca. 14.
both over themselves, and in those Lands which they gave. It was not so much
the bare dotation of the Church, against which Wickliffe inueighed, for he
expressly taught Praelati Ecclesiae debent viuere, sicut vixerunt sacerdotes
veteris testamenti, Wiclesi verba, citata a Tho^. Wald. lib. cit. ca. 33.
, that Prelates of the Church should live as did the Priests in the old Law,
who had iure diuino, not only Tithes and oblations, but ample possessions of
lands and houses, even 48. Numb. 35. 3. and Josh 21. 41.
whole cities, with their Suburbs, containing 2000. cubits round about on
every side: but the excessive pomp and superfluity Quod intellexit Wicle. fus
cum dixit, Cumulantur temporalia. supra. hoc ca.
of riches which they enjoyed, their abusing all that wealth to superstition,
idolatry, and Antichristianisme Vnde legem Antichristi vocat Wiclefus
donatione^ istam, apud Wall lib. cit. ca. 37.
, and principally the Sovereignty Hinc reprehendit, quod Imperator Romanus
fecit sacerdotes suos dominos, Wic. verba apud Wald. lib. cit. ca. 39.
of Dominion in them, which was then challenged by the Pope. These things
kindled the zeal of Wickliffe, and made him bend the tree as it were, to a
quite contrary side, that so at length it might come to some mediocritie of
straightness. These were the true causes which moved Wickliffe to reprove
succeeding Emperors, and other endowers of the Church, far more bitterly then
he does Constantine. Of Constantine and Siluester, he only says, that they
erred Errauerunt dotando Ecclesiam, Artic. Wicl. 33.
by endowing the Church: of the other he says, that they were Artic. Wiclefi.
39.
seducti a diabolo, seduced by the devil, in giving so excessiuely, after such
a manner, and to such ends as they did. Wickliffe in this his very blaming the
succeeding Kings and secular Lords, for giving so much to the Church,
demonstrates plainly that he thought not Constantine to have made this
supposed Donation, nor to have formerly given all the Western Provinces to the
Church. For then none at all of the Western Kings after Constantine, could
have given ought to the Church.

The very same also shows the judgment of the Council of Constance: for
seeing they condemn Conc. Constanc. sess. 8.
Wickliffe, for that he reproved other succceding Emperors and secular Lords
for endowing the Church, they do hereby demonstrate their judgment to have
been this, that other Princes and secular Lords in the West, might endow and
give their Lands to the Church; and therefore that Constantine had not by any
such Donation (as is this which Marta and others pretend) formerly given all
the Western Provinces to the Church. So the Council of Constance does
certainly reject this Donation as a forgerie, of which Marta boasts, that by
that Council it is proved to be a true and undoubted Charter.

CHAP. XII.
Sixteen other witnesses alleged for proof of Constantines Donation,
examined: namely, Anselme, Iuo, Deusdedit, Adalhardus, Mart Polonus, Antoninus,
Vincentius Belu, Sigebert, Ado, Gotofride, Otho Frising. Photius, Balsamon,
Damianus, Bernard, and Luitprandus Cremonensis.
AFter Councels and Popes, let us come to that confused heap of Authors,
Divines, Historians, and Lawyers, which they hudled together as witnesses of
this Donation. Before Gratians time (say Notae Greg* in ca. Consta^tinus. Anto.
Aug. Dial. 6. lib. 1. pa. 53.
the Gregorian Glossators, as also Anto. Augustinus) Anselme, Iuo, and Deus
dedit recite this Donation of Constantine. They do so indeed: but they recite
it out of the Acts of Siluester: for Anselme Ausel. lib. 4. ca. 32.
and D^u^dedit, in the very beginning of that Chapter say; In the Acts of
Siluester it is thus read, and then they set down the Edict: Anselme and Iuo
Carnotensis proferunt Donationem ex gestis Siluestri, says Steuchus Steuc.
lib. citat. pa. 81.
, they recite the Donation out of the Acts of Siluester. Their citing it, or
reciting of it, does not prove that they thought it true, but their citing it
out of those most false and fabulous Acts of Siluester (as the best and most
ancient Author that they could find) shows plainly that it is like the rest
of those Acts, false, fabulous, and counterfeit.

Adalhardus, who lived in the time of Charles the Great, is cited by Gretzer
for a witness of this Edict. For he, says Gretzer Gretz. Append. 2, ad lib.
de Munif. Princ. pa. 118.
, mentions this Edict, wherein Constantine gave Rome to Pope Siluester. But
the same Adalhardus mentions withal, that Constantine Adalhar. apud Hincmar.
epist. 3. ca. 13.
made the Edict after he had been baptized by Syluester, and had been
instructed by the ministry of Peter and Paul appearing to him. Seeing then it
is certain, as we have before Sup. cap. 5. and 6.
demonstrated, that Constantine was never baptized by Syluester, nor ever had
any such vision of Peter and Paul appearing unto him, and instructing him in
the time of his leprosy; it certainly follows, even upon Adalhardus own
testimony, that Constantine never made this Edict. Adalhardus was familiarly
Adalhardus a Leone tanto familiaritatis officio susceptus est, vt nemo ante.
Ratbertus apud Bar. an 807. nu. 7.
acquainted with Pope Leo the third, the next successor to Hadrian the first:
Hadrian having mentioned out of the Acts of Syluester, and confirmed for
authentical, that Edict, the one part of it in the second Nicene Ep^st Hadr. 1
lecta and approbata in Conc. (...). 2. Act. 2.
Council, the other in an Epistle H^^d^ 1 epist. 35. in (...) donatio^^s
Constantins, apud Bar. an. 795. nu. 7.
which then was extant; Adalhardus seeing the Acts of Syluester recording, and
Pope Hadrian confirming that Edict, might easily think it to be such as the
Popes Holiness did commend it for. He was not suspicious of that deep fraud,
which lurketh in the Popes breasts. As Hierom not suspecting any bad dealing in
a Christian, in a Monk, was deceived Hier. Apol. 2. adu. Ruff. pa. 2^6. posui
hunc librum a Pamphile editum, ita putans esse vt a re fue. rat divulgatu^.
by Ruffinus, and thought that defense of Origin, to be the book of Pamphilus
the Martyr, as Ruffinus said it was: Credidi Hier* Apol. 3. cont. Ruff. pa. 238.
Christiano, Credidi Monacho: Non putaui tantum sceleris a te posse confingi,
says Hierom. So Adalhardus, not suspecting that the Popes Holiness would
commit such horrible offenses, as to commend and approve forgeries and
counterfeit writings, deemed the Edict to be such as the Pope said it was,
Credidit Christiano, Credidit Pontifici. Had Adalhardus known the Popes
policies, had he examined the matter, or had the truth of that Edict been
scanned in his age, he would as certainly have found the Edict to have been a
counterfeit, falsely ascribed unto Constantine, as Hierom found the other
heretical book to be counterfeited, and falsely to bear the name of
Pamphilus. But what meant Gretzer to seek witnesses for this Edict? Of all
men, it least beseemes Gretzer to plead for the truth of it. For seeing
himself Concessio commentitia esse conuincitur. Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 52.
Diploma quod hodie superest com. mentitium esse concedimus. Gretz. Apol. 2
citat. pa. 91. and pa. 115.
following Baronius, proclaims to all the world the Edict to be a forgerie, he
thereby assures all, that Adalhardus in mentioning that Edict, gives testimony
to an undoubted and known forgerie.

Martinus Cysentinus, (so Marta ignorantly calls him in stead of Consentinus) is
a witness of this Edict, says Marta Mart. lib. cit. cap. 30. nu. 26.
. A worthy witness indeed, the Popes own Martini Poloni Archiep. Consentini
summi Pontificis poenitentiarij. Chron. sic habet titulus libri.
Penitentiarie, a domestical witness, against whom Testimonium domesticorum
and familiarium iur^ civilly imp. obatur. Venator. Anal. iu^^^ Pont. lib. 2.
tit. 20.
the Law it self takes exception. Besides, a most simple fellow, as Posseuine
Poss. Appar. in Mart. Pol.
calls him, one who obtruded fables for most approved truths. This which he
tells Mart. Pol. an. Chr. 319.
of Constantines giving all Imperial dignity to the Pope, is even as true as
that which in the same place he tells also, that Helena was not converted to
the faith till Siluester disputed with the Jews in the first Roman Synod:
which Baronius and Binius have assured you to be a lie. Or as true, as that
which he adds Mart. Pol. loc. cit.
, that Syluester after that disputation, shut up the Dragon, to live in the
cave, vsque ad diem iudicij, till the last day of Judgment: or as true, as
that which elsewhere the same Martinus tells Idem. lib. 2. ca. 4. pa. 72. 73
you, That diverse trees spoke and made Orations to Alexander the Great: and
that a Vine of Gold, which stood before a Temple of Gold, brought forth instead
of Grapes clusters of pearls and precious stones. All which, this worthy
witness of Marta, sets down as Historical truths; and ought as certainly to
be believed, as this Donation of Constantine.

St. Antoninus is a witness of it, says Marta Mart. ca. 30 cit. nu. 26.
. And so he is Anto. Su^m. par. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 16. and part. 2. Histor.
ca. 1.
of a thousand other lies, fictions and fables. This Florentine Archbishop,
does in that kind, deserve the next commendation to their Archbishop of Genoa,
and his Legendaur. Hear but what their own Bishop Canus says of him:
Vincentius Mel. Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 11. ca. 6.. ^^x vero.
and Antoninus did not so much endeavor to write true and certain matters, as
to omit nothing which they found in any Papers: nor did they use so much as
vulgar judgment to examine the same; and therefore with men of gravity and
judgment, authoritate carent, they are of no authority or credit. For this
time, let this suffice to be observed, that Antoninus not only approoues the
Acts of Siluester, but expressly tells us. Ant* 2. part. hist. ca. 1.
, that he took his whole narration touching Constantines persecution,
leprosy, cure by baptism at Siluesters hands, out of those very Acts of
Siluester; as also that, about Helenaes Iudaising, persuading Constantine to
Iudaisme: and of the Council wherein Siluester disputed with the Jews, and
overcame them, both by reason and miracles: which whole passage does verbatim,
almost agree with the words, and wholly in sense with the relation set down
in the Legendaur. Now the Acts of Siluester, being nothing else but a very
sink of lies, besides ten thousand other, in this only narration touching
Constantine, Antoninus is convicted at the least of an hundredth lies.

Vincentius Beluacensis is a witness of the Donation, say two Cardinals,
Albanus Alb. lib. de Donat. Constant. ante cit. nu. 1.
, and Iacobatius. Iacobat. lib. 10 de Conc. A^t 8. ca. vlt. nu. 18.
. He is Vinc (...). Hist. lib. 13. a. ca. 46 ad 57.
, I confess, but even just such another as Antoninus. Bishop Canus Can. loc
cit.
his censure is the self same of them both: that neither of them is of any
authority or credit. His narration is taken, as himself professes Vinc. loc.
cit.
, out of those Acts of Siluester. And so much as is in the Legend of Siluester
in Voraginensis, is wholly and almost verbatim, in Beluacensis; beside many
other heaps of fables and lies. Antoninus, Vincentius, and Iacobus
Voraginensis, are brave witnesses for Marta, Iacobatius, and Albanus. Yet was
it no small fault in Albanus to say Alb loc cit.
of Vincentius, that he is, fidelis and integer historiarum relator, A
faithful and upright relator of stories. Read him who list, and he will
clearly see that both Vincentius himself, and all who approve his relations
deserve no other reward at all but a Whetstone.

Sigebert is a witness of the same, says Marta Man. loc. cit.
. But Marta could not tell where. Sigeberts Chronology begins with the Empire
of Theodosius An. Chr. 381.
, forty years after the death of Constantine: and in all his book, (though I
have diligently sought the same) I can find neither volam nor vestigium of
this Donation. Besides, Sigebert testifies Sigeb. Chr. an. 607.
, that Pope Sabinianus, (others say Boniface the third) obtained of Phocas,
that the Roman Church should be the chief, and head of all Churches. A very
needless and foolish thing, either for Boniface to seek, or Phocas to grant,
or Sigebert to record, if any of them had known, or thought, that this had
been granted to the Pope by Constantine in so fair a Charter, almost 300.
years before.

Ado Viennensis is a witness hereof, says Marta Mart. loc. cit.
, and the Gregorian Glossators Notis in cap. Constantinus.
also. Ado is a witness of their vanity. He indeed says Ado Vien. Chron. an.
306
, (but says untruly) that Constantine was baptized at Rome: and that he
builded many Churches in Rome and other places, further he adds (which is
utterly untrue,) that Constantine gave Rome in his last testament to the Pope:
but of this Charter of Donation, Ado says not one word; unless Marta and the
Glossators think, that this Donation was the last testament of Constantine;
whereas the Donation to have been made ten years before his testament, by their
own confession is clear, and the same to be directly contrary to his
testament, both Socrates, Theodoret, and other ancient Historians do expressly
testify.

An other witness alleged Loci^ citatis.
by Marta, and the Glossators, is Got of Viterbiensis. A poor witness I
wisse. He declares, Got. Viterb. par. 16. in Constantino.
both what the favorers of the Church say for this Donation, and also what the
favorers of the Empire say against it: and then coming to tell his own
mind, He thinks that what the Church possesses, it holds that by right: but,
Caetera super his quaestionibus, for other things touching these questions (to
wit, about Constantines Donation) I leave, says he, to be resolved by
others. Thus Viterb. And that he did not indeed think the Donation to be
true, may easily appear, by his faint speech thereof, saying Ib. pa. 385.
, By this Donation, Rome and Italy, videtur collata Ecclesiae, seems to be
given to the Church: It seems, says he; whereas had he thought this to be a
true donation, he might and would without any videtur, have said, that they
were indeed conferred unto the Church.

Such another testimony is that which Gretzer alleges. The Priests, says he
Great. Append* 2. ad libru^ de muni^ sic. principum. pa. 117.
, did urge this Donation in the time of the Schism betwixt Alexander the 3.
and Frederick tho first, as by Otho Frisingensis does appear. True, Otho
says Otho. Fris. lib. 4. Chr. ca. 3.
, that some did so; and these were factious Hildebrandists, who strove to
advance the Pope above the Emperor: but Otho says withal, that the
Imperialists, or such as favored the Emperor, rejected and contemned this
donation. And he expresses their reasons, for that Constantine dividing the
Empire among his sons, gave to one the East, to another the Western
Kingdoms, which by this means descended to Theodosius and other religious
Emperors. Now they alled^e, says Otho, that so holy an Emperor as
Constantine, would never leave that to his children, which he had formerly
given to the Church, nor would so religious Emperors, as Theodosius and others
have usurped that which was not their own, but belonged to the Church. So
Otho. Who though he says Quae omnia de^inire praesentis negotij non est. Oath.
ibid.
, that he will not define this matter, yet by fortifying the saying of the
Imperialists, with so strong and unanswerable reasons, he plainly shows,
that the Popes faction made an unjust challenge, by that pretended Donation of
Constantine. But let Otho stand neuter, he being not willing to show his mind
in that place (which elsewhere In Epistola ad Fridericum Imp. quae praeponitur
Chronico.
he manifests to be for the Emperors right above the Pope.) What weight can
there be, in the saying of some few factious, and partial Hildebrandists,
approving the Donation: able to counterpoise not the saying only, but the most
clear and pregnant reasons of the Imperialists, rejecting the same Donation,
as a fiction and forgery.

To these which are of inferior note, they add four or five more eminent
witnesses, which are with more probability pretended: and therefore are more
seriously by us to be examined. The first of them is Photius, out of whose
Nomocanon Steuchus with great ostentation alleges, (and that in two several
Aug. Steuch. lib. de Don. Constant. pa. 16. and 110.
places) these words: The whole Church must be ruled by the Bishop of Rome, as
it is to be seen in the Edict of Constantine. This, says Steuchus, is
written in the Nomocanon, which he calls the book Iurium Ecclesiasticorum and
Imperialium; as if both the Ecclesiastical, and Imperial laws did confirm,
together with the Popes supremacy, the pretended Edict or Charter of
Constantines Donation. Suppose that Photius had writ this; what account, think
you, do they make of Photius, the Author of that Nomocanon? He was a falsifier
of Writings, says Posseuine Posseu. Appar. in ^hoti^.
; and out of Baronius he adds, sceleratissimus and immanissimus persequutor
Ecclesiae, A most wretched and cruel persecutor of the Church, worse then any
other Schismaticke, Heretic, or Heathen. This should Photius gain at their
hands, if he had been a witness for them, as Steuchus boasts he is. But in
very deed, Steuchus belyeth Photius herein: for in all his Nomocanon, this
testimony is not to be found. Marta to help the matter says Mart. ca. 30. nu.
19.
; The book Iurium Ecclesiasticorum, and Imperialium, was compiled by Theod.
Balsamon, (who was afterward Patriarch of Antioch,) by the appointment of
Manuel the Emperor, and Michael Patriarch of Constantinople: And cut of
Balsamon, Marta cites it. But Marta was fowly deceived herein; for as Balsamon
Bals. in Praefat. pa. 1. and 2.
himself testifies, that Nomacanon was made by Photius about 280. years Nam
Photius obijt circa an. 886. Bar. eo an. nu: 29. Michael fit Episcopus
Constant. an. 1166. Bar. eo an. nu. 41.
before Michael was Patriarch of Constantinople. Neither did Manuel or Michael
appoint him to collect the Canons, (that was done long before by Photius) but
to expound Bals. loc. cit.
the same, and show which Canons were obsolete and out of use, and how some
apparent repugnances might be reconciled therein. Now its true that Balsamon
does very often Theod: Bal. Schol. in Tit. 1 cap. 36. pa 38. 39.
mention this Edict, and calls it the Decree or Constitution of Saint
Constantine; yea, he expressly sets down The. Bals. Scho. in tit. 8. ca. 1. pa.
85. and seq.
the whole Edict of Donation; so that Marta and Steuchus had little wit, to
cite one poor and petite sentence out of Balsamon, where the Edict is, obiter,
mentioned; when they might have alleged the whole Charter it self out of him.
Neither does Balsamon approve the Edict; or say that Constantine did truly make
it, but when he saw it alleged, and set forth by the Romans, yea even by Pope
Leo ^. himself, more then 130. years, before he writ Leo obijt an. 1054 Bar.
eo an. nu. 46. Balsamo^ scripsit, an. 1191. Bar. eo an. nu. 49. 50.
, Balsamon upon their credit, without examining the matter, calls it as they did
before, The Edict of Constantine.

And who is Balsamon, that he should be thought a fit witness in a matter of
fact, done at least 800. years before his time? Or whence had Balsamon this
Edict? Hear but the judgment of Cardinal Baronius touching this point. He,
rejecting Bar. an. 1191 nu. 51. and seq.
this Charter as counterfeit: among other reasons, even for this, that Balsamon
(as he Bar. an. eode^. nu. 52. and 53.
slanders him) was the first publisher of the same, declaimes against him in
this manner: Balsamon Bar. ibid nu. 51.
being a most crafty Companion, has by fraud and Sinonian arts, mingled
apocriphal and forged, with true and authentical writings. So he did in the
Canons of the Apostles; So in the Canons of the sixth Council; And in like sort,
out of the Acts of Syluester, which are counterfeited under the name of
Eusebius Cesariensis, did he publish this Edict of Constantines Donation. So
Baronius: expressly testifying, both the Edict it self to be Bar. ibid. nu. 52.
forged: and Balsamon to have taken it out of the forged Acts of Syluester; who
also adds, That Balsamon Bar. an. eodem, nu. 51. 52 and 62.
published it not for any good will to the Church of Rome, but dolo malo, very
craftily, and in hatred of the Roman Church. Such a witness they have now got
of Balsamon for this Edict, who as the Cardinal declares, is a witness of the
forgerie thereof.

Lastly, to see not only the solly, but the vile dealing also, of Steuchus and
Marta in this cause, that one poor sentence which they allege, and Steuchus
sets forth, in Greek also out of the Nomocanon, is not at all to be found in
the best editions Non in ^odice Harlei, non in Edit. Paris. 1620. ex editione
Ioh. T^lij, cui access^t graecus textus ex Codicibus manuscriptis erutus, and
inumeris locis emendatus.
of Balsamon. In some, as in that of Agylaeus, it is not as they allege, Omnis
Ecclesia a Papa Romae ius accipit, but Vt notatur in Supplemento, in Edit.
Paris. and verba apud Balsa monem habere^tur paulo ante decretum Constantini.
Tit. 8. ca. 1. in Schol. pa. 85.
(...), let every City follow consuetudinem, the custom of Rome. It was a
pretty slight in Steuchus and Marta, to turn the City into the Church, and
in stead of following the custom of the City of Rome, to say that every
Church must depend on, and receive laws from the Pope of Rome.

But Steuchus and Marta were both of them willing not to see the truth in this
matter, and to deceive others by the name of Photius and Balsamon. For though
the books both of Photius and Balsamon be extant, and vulgar to be read and
seen; yet do you think they took this testimony, either out of the book of
Photius or of Balsamon? No, they did not, but either knowing that the text they
alleged was not there; or not caring, whether it were there or no: they took
it as Marta confesses Mart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 18. 19.
, upon the credit of one Nicholas Hidruntinus, Who going to Constantinople in
the time of Pope Innocent 3. about the year 1200. writ the Edict of
Constantine out of that book Iurium Ecclesiasticorum, and he, telling the^ Hoc
libro ostenditur, that in this book Iuriu^ Ecclesiasticoru^, it is showed, that
al other Churches must depend on the Roman, as by Consta^tines edict is to be
seen. Steuchus and Marta upon the word of Nicholas cite that as the saying of
Photius, or Balsamon: Whereas in truth, it is in neither of them; but falsely
affirmed to be there by Nicholas, and twice falsely avouched by Steuchus and
Marta, to be the saying of Photius or Balsamon, which was but the lie and lying
device of Nicholas of Hidruntum. To say nothing what a simple man and lying
companion this Nicholas was, who at the end of the Edict writ Vt Marta ait.
ibid.
thus; Finis testamenti ac Edicti magni Constantini. Here ends the Testament
and Edict of Constantine the Great. Whereas neither this Edict was the
Testament of Constantine; neither are those words extant in the book Iurium
Ecclesiasticorum: out of which, as Marta says, Nicholas exscribed his Notes or
Collections. But enough of Photius and Balsamon.

The next witness is Damianus, of whom the Gregorian Glossators, as also Ant.
Augustinus, say Not. in cap. Constantinus. Did. 96. Anto. Aug. lib. 1. dial.
6. pa. 53.
, That in his Synodall disputation betwixt the Kings Advocate, and a defender
of the Church of Rome, he makes mention of this Edict of Constantine, and his
giving of Rome and Italy to Pope Syluester. Who (as it is there said) accepted
some of the ornaments which Constantine gave him, to wit, such as were fit for
a Bishop, but the golden Crown and other Robes, which were rather ambitious
then mystical, Syluester refused. Me thinks, they should not much glory in
this Testimony of Damianus; for as it shows the modesty, humility, and
piety of Pope Syluester, in refusing the Crown, being offered unto him; so it
demonstrates the pride of their later Popes, who take upon them, not one, but a
Maxim Pontificum, triplicem qui fron^e Coronam, etc. Mantuan. ad Inno^. 8. de
vita D. Lud. Morbioli.
triple Crown, a miter Mitra auri phrygia^a. lib. 1. Sacr. Cerem. sect. 2. pa.
30.
of Gold, auro Ibid. sect. 1. pa. 17.
and gemmis ornatam, decked with Gold and precious stones; and that so
sumptuous, that Pope Clement the fifth, when at his coronation Pontifex ex equo
deturbatus, solum carbunculum ex tiara amisit, pretij aureorum sex millium.
Plat. in vita Clem. 5.
in Lions, by a mishap, either of a fall from his horse, or of a piece Cecidit
Corona de capite eius: in casu auulsus est carbunculus pretij sex millibus
Florenorum. Supplem. ad Ma^t Polo. an. 1305.
of rubbige falling from a wall, his Crown was smit from his head, he lost one
Carbuncle of the value of 6000. Crowns: of which their pride, an eyewitness
thus writes; I have A declaration of Francis Breton, a monk of the order of
Celestines, made publicly at Vendosm, on the 28. of Iun. 1601.
seen the Pope having upon his head a triple Crown, where was written upon
his forehead in precious stones, this word Mystery. The very same word which
Saint John in his Apocalips mentions, to be written in the forehead Apoc. 17.
5.
of the Queen of Babylon.

But to this testimony I answer, that the Author of that Book is not
Damianus, who was sometime Bishop of Ostia: but some forgerer calling himself
by the name of Damianus. Baronius In disputatione quae asseritur Petri Damiani.
Bar. an. 1191. nu. 61.
makes a doubt of that book: but diverse circumstances puts the matter almost
out of doubt. The Treatise is called a Synodall Disceptatio Synodatis, etc.
extat tum apud Bar. an. 1062. nu. 12. tum apud Bin. tom. 3. Conc pa. 1137.
disputation, whether Honorius who was called Cadolaus, or Alexander the
second, should be held for the rightful Pope. Now that disputation was not had
in any Synod; as by the book it self is manifest, but before Fiet hic
Osboriense Concilium. Discep. Synod. Dam. in initio.
the time of the Synod at Osbore (a place Osborium, locus nobis adhuc
incompertus. Bar. an. 1062 nu. 21. Nec apud Ptolomeum, nec Melam, nec Maginum,
nec Ortelium reperire potui.
, for ought is yet known in Vtopia.) Again, the Emperors advocate is there made
to plead so ignorantly, and withal, so partially, as if he were hired to
betray the Emperors cause. Damianus a man of great learning and discretion,
was neither so simple as to write so unlearned a dispute; neither so
presumptuous as to forestall the Synodal judgment, and before hand direct the
whole Council what they should Judge: neither so foolish as to call that a
Synodall disputation, no part of which was disputed in the Synod.

Again, the Author of that dispute, says; that all other both Episcopal and
Patriarchal Sees, were instituted by some Homo purus instituit. discep. Synod.
^. Cum beatitudo.
mere man, but Christ alone instituted the Roman Church. Who can think so
foolish and absurd a saying to have proceeded from Damianus? To say nothing of
other Sees, did not Saint Peter Petrus primo instituit and ere ^it sedem
patriarchalem Antio chenam. Bar. an. 39. nu. 16.
himself found the Church and Patriarchall See at Antioch, as well as at Rome?
was Peter more then a mere man, more then an Apostle, when he founded the
Roman? Or was he less then an Apostle, when he founded the Antiochian Church?
If the Roman was not founded (ministerially) as other Churches were, by an
Apostle, then is it not Apostolical: If other Churches be founded only by
men, and not (principally) by Christ, as the Roman was, then are they not
Christian: neither of which Damianus would ever have said.

Further, that Author says Disc. Synod. Damian.. Quoniam vbi.
; That the Empeperour non habet in Ecclesia Romana potestatem, has no
authority in the Roman Church. Who can think Damianus so ignoram, as thus to
say? He knew right well, that Pope Agatho writing to the Emperor, called
Italy seru^lem Epist. Agathonis in Co^c. genesis 6. Act. 4. page 12.
prouinciam, and Rome, seruilem vrbem, The Emperors servile Province, and
servile City: That Gregory the great professed, That the Emperor Greg.
Epist. 34. lib. 4. ^ud. 13.
was his serene Lord, and that he was ready to obey Vobis obedientiam praebere
de^idero. Greg lib. eodem 4 epist. 32
his Imperial commands: and that also in Ecclesiastical causes, concerning
one of which, the same Pope says, It well Greg. lib. eodem epist. 34.
beseemed our religious Lord the Emperor, vt ista praeciperet sacerdotibus, to
command these things unto Bishops.

Besides, that which the forgeter affirms, That Christ Disc. Synod. Dam.. Cum
beatitudo.
gave to Peter and his successors, terreni simul et coelestis imperij iura, The
rights both of the Terrene and Celestial Empire, is quite repugnant to the
mind and writings of the true Damianus, who puts that true and right difference
between the Regal and Episc^pall functions, That Kings Pet. Dam. epist. 9.
lib. 4.
are to use the secular, and Bishops the spiritual swo^d, and not meddle with
the Temporal. Was Damianus either so unconstant, or so forgetful, that what
he taught in one place, he would condemn and contradict in another?

Say the Author was indeed Damianus, He lived in the time of Pope Leo the
ninth: he was esteemed obnoxious in some matter to the Popes censure; and
therefore sought earnestly to regaine the Popes favor, as his own Epistle
Pet. Dam. Epist. 4. lib. 1. ad Leonem 9. vt ostendat se de quibusdam criminibus
falso accusatum.
to the Pope shows. What if he to please Leo the ninth; Who had published Leo
9. Epist, 1.
the Edict of Constantines Donation for an authenticke Charter, did sooth the
Popes Holiness in such a matter? What credit can it be to the Donation, that
it seemed pleasing to him, who durst not displease the Pope? Or if
notwithstanding all this, they so much esteem the authority of Damianus, then
must they for ever condemn Hildebrand, who was afterward called Gregory the
seventh, for a most impious person: For Damianus in his Epistle to Pope
Alexander the second, calls him, a Tyrant Blandus ille tyrannus. Pet. Dam.
epist. 10. lib. 1.
, a man of a Neroes Qui mihi Neroniana pietate semper condoluit. ibid.
piety, yea a very Devil Hoc ego sancto Satanae meo respondeo. ibid.
. If they upon the testimony of Damianus, will not a^count their St.
Hildebrand, to be Saint Devil, they have little reason to persuade us, upon
the like testimony of Damianus, to accept a forgerie for an authenticke
writing.

The next witness is St. Bernard, of whom Marta says Mart. ca. 30. cit. nu.
23.
; Aperte probat Papam Constantino successisse, he evidently proves, that the
Pope succeeded to Constantine. O the rare stupiditie of Marta! St. Bernard
proves no more, that the Pop^ succeeds to Constantine, then to Caligula, Nero,
or Dioclesian. In using imperial pomp, honor, and authority, (of that St.
Bernard speaks) the Pope succeeds, (yea goes beyond) them all; in having right
to use it, he succeeds to never a one of them all. St. Bernard tells the Pope,
that de facto he did succeed to Constantine, but that he succeeded therein de
Iure unto him, St. Bernard says not. Nay he plainly reproues the Pope for
such succeeding, and usurping the Imperial Dignity de facto, to which de iure
he had no right at all.

The words of Bernard makes this most evident. Suffer Bern. lib. 4. ad Eugen.
Quaeso sustine paulisper, supporta me, Imo da veniam, etc.
me, (says he to the Pope, carrying himself like an Emperor) bear with me,
yea pardon me, I speak this not rashly, but timorously, which I wish may be as
fruitful, as it is fervent. Hic, hic non pareo tibi, vt parcat Deus, herein I
will not spare you, that God may spare you. Having thus prepared the Popes
mind, to receive with patience his reproof, he then adds; Either deny that
you are the Pastor of this people, or show your self a Pastor unto them: you
will not deny that you are their Pastor, least you deny your self to be
Peter's heir, whose See you hold. Peter never went decked with precious stones,
and silks, never covered with Gold, nor carried on a white Palphrey, nor
guarded with Soldiers, and yet without these, he thought he could well enough
fulfill that commandment, If thou love me feed my sheep. In his successisti
non Petro, sed Constantino. In these things you succeed no^ Peter, but
Constantine. Thus Bernard, clearly reproving the Pope, first for omitting that
which belonged to his duty, in that he should have sed the flock as Saint
Peter did, to whom in that he did by right succeed; and then, for doing that,
which belonged not to his duty, in that he took Imperial dignity and honor
upon him, as did Constantine, to whom in that he did not by right succeed. For
Saint Bernard, to have thought that the Pope was not in right to succeed them
both, beside many, those his own words in another place, are a most evident
witness, Dominatio Bern. lib. (...) de Cons. ad Eugen.
interdicitur, indicitur ministratio, you are forbidden to use domination or
imperial authority in ruling, you are enjoined to use ministration, or
Apostolical sedulitie in feeding. Go I ergo tu, and tibi vsurpate aude aut
dominans Apostolatum, ^ut Apostolicus Domn^^um. ib^d.
to then, see if you either having Imperial domination, dare usurp the office
of an Apostle, or having the office of an Apostle, dare usurp imperial
domination. Certainly Pl^^e ab (...) prohibe^s, si vtrumque simi^^ter habere
voles, pe^des vtrumque. ibid.
you are forbidden the one of these; if you will have them both, you shall
loose them both. So Bernard; By whom it is now evident, that if the Pope
rightly succeed Saint Peter in his pastoral vocation, he cannot rightly
succeed to Constantine, in his Imperial domination; and therefore by S.
Bernards testimony, can have no right at all to this pretended Donation.

The next witness urged earnestly by Gretzer Gretz Append 2. ad lib de Munif.
princ^pa. 117.
, to prove the truth of this Charter, is Litprandus Cremonensis, who in the
Narration of his Legacy to Nicephorus Phocas the Emperor, mentions the
pri^iledges granted by Constantine to the Roman Church, saying Litpr. Crem. in
(...). ad N^ceph quae t^ta ^xtat ap^d ^ar an 968. nu 11. and seq.
; That Constantine bestowed Litpr loc. cit. nu. 27.
many gui^ts upon it, not only in Italy, but in Greece, Judea, Persia,
Mesopotamia, Babylon, Egypt, and Lybia, and in all the Western kingdoms, as
his privileges Quae apud nos sunt, which we have do testify: and further he
protests, That Otho who sent him in that Legacy, withheld from the Church,
neither any Town, City, nor Village which Constantine gave, or if he did,
deum negaui, I have denied God, says Litprandus. Here, says Gretzer, it is
manifest that Litprandus had respect to the very words of Constantines Charter,
wherein those particulars are expressed. See the perverse dealing of Gretzer,
he would by this Litprandus persuade you, that the Edict or Charter of Donation
is true, which himself professes Gretz lib. cit. pa. 115.
and proclaims to be a forgerie; and therefore assures you, that Litprandus is
a false witness in giving testimony to a forgerie.

Again, that testimony of Litprandus, demonstrates the forgery of this
Charter: for Litprandus says, That Constantine gave In omnibus pene
occidentalibus regnis, Litp. loc, cit.
almost in all the Western Kingdoms, many Cities, Towns, and Territories to
the Pope or Roman Church. Whence it is clear, that the Charter is forged,
wherein Constantine is said, To have given all Vrbem Romam and omnes totius
Italiae and occidentalium regionum prouincias loca and civitates. Edict Constable.
apud Bin. pa. 298.
the Western Kingdoms to the Pope and his Successors for ever.

Besides this, there is another answer to this testimony. Either Litprandus who
was Bishop of Cremona, is not the Author of that Treatise, or if he be, then is
he of no truth nor credit in the whole world. Do but take a taste of his
truth, wit, and judgment. This Litprandus discribing how base and sordid the
Bishops of the Greek Church in those days were, says; I speak Litpr. Crem.
loc. cit. nu. 87.
the truth, and lie not, throughout Greece, Bishops are not hospital, they sit
alone at a table not covered, themselves do both sell and buy their
commodities, themselves shut their doors, themselves carry their own meat
to table, ipsi agasones, themselves play the Carters and Muliters, themselves
are Capones, I would say Caupones, hu^sters, and keepers of victualing-houses,
and Tauernes. So their Litprandus. Can any but laugh at the folly of this
fabler, specially considering, that Curopaletes in that very age witnesses,
the pomp and excess of the Greek Bishops to have been such, that Michael
Curopal. apud Bar. ann. 1057. nu. 38.
the Emperor restrained their Sybariticas epulas and delicias, The
Sybariticall delicacies used at their tables; yea, and this very Emperor
Nicephorus complained of them, That they wasted the Asserens ab Episcopis
pauperum pecuniam consumi. ait Curop. apud Bar. ann. 964 nu. 34.
treasury of the Church: which by such sordid baseness could never have bin
done.

And yet his vilifying of the Bishops, is but a toy, to his misusing the
Emperor and his Nobles. He calls the Emperor a monster Reptans monstrum. Litp.
apud Bar. an. 968. nu. 21 Homo monstruosus. ibid. nu. 14.
, a pigmee Pigmaeum, capite pingue^, oculorum prauitate talp^num, ceruice
digitali ventre extensum, ibid. nu. 14.
, his head as fat as brawne, eyed like a Mole; a neck no bigger then a finger,
a gorbell^, swelling like Bufonis in modum tumefactus, ibid nu. 47.
a Toad, a spindle shanke Coxis longissimum, crutibus pa^uum. ibid. nu. 14.
, footed like Capripes. nu. 21.
a Goat, for color Color Aethiopem, nu. 14. Siluanus vultu. anus incessu.
agrestis, barbarus, setiger, villosus, nu. 21.
a Blackamore, for countenance a Satyr, for his gate a Beldam, a rude,
rusticke, and bristled clown, wearing old Nimis veternoso, and diuturnitate
ipsa faetido ornamento indutum, ibid. nu. 14.
and stinking apparel: and if all this be not enough, he calls him an Ass
Onager iste, nu. 52.
, a wild Ass, a very puppet Puppam ipsam meus sibi depinxit mea, ibid. nu. 33.
, or a Jack a thrums-riding on horseback, adding; That his attendants went
barefooted Vulgi ipsius potior pars nudis processerat pedibus. Sed and
optimates nimia vetustate rimatis tunicis erant induti; nullus est cui^s a^^uus
hanc nouam haberet, ibid. nu. 20.
, his Nobles did wear torn and ragged coats, so old, that none of their
great Grandfathers knew them to be new; his soldiers vere inquam non
homines, sed hominum similes, quibus lingua pro cax, sed frigid a bello dextra
ibid. nu. 5^.
not men, but shadows of men, pear^ of tongue; but faint of their hearts and
hands, such that Ibid. nu. 39.
400. of Othoes men, would drive all Nicephorus Armies out of the field.

Is it credible that a Bish. would use such base and immodest terms, and
withal untrue, of the Emperor? or was not some Tharsites the penman of that
Legacy? specially seeing of the valor of this Nicephorus, Baronius says Bar.
an. 969. nu. 5.
; It is scarce credible how many, how great, and how memorable victories he
obtained in few days. Glicas says Glic. Annal. par. 3. pa. 430.
more, There did shine in this Nicephorus plurima multo preclarissima, many and
excellent ornaments: and Constant. Manasses writing of him says Constable. Manass.
Annal. page 150.
; He subdued all the barbarous Nations; the Arabians feared him the Syrians and
Cilicians subjected themselves to him: adding further, he was endowed with an
absolute perfection of virtue, and beautified with all gifts, with strength of
body, with fortitude of mind, with courtesy, prudence, caeterisque tam animi,
quam corporis dotibus insigniter lucebat, and he was illustrious and eminent in
other gifts, both of body and mind. What think you now of Gretzers Litprandus,
and of his truth and credit? O* if for all this, they will yet still account this
Litpr. Cremonensis to be an Author of worth and credit, as Brouerius the
Jesuit, Canisius, Card. Baronius, and Gretzer esteem Magno Dei beneficio
factum puto vt ea Litprandi Relatio conseruata sit, quam a Chr. Brouerio missam
ad Vel. serum Hen. Canisius excudendum curauit, quibus omnibus de antiquitate
ecclesiastica been merentibus, been precamur. Bar. an. 968. nu. 6.
him: Let them consider what an honorable testimony he gives to the Roman
Emperors, and to all the Romans, and their Roman Nation: When Litp. Crem.
apud Bar an. 968. nu. 23.
Nicephorus the Emperor said unto him, you are not Romans but Lumbirds,
Litprandus answered in this manner, Romulus, of whom the Romans have their
name, was a fratricide, a bastard, one who erecting a sanctuary for a company
of fugitives, slaves, homicides, and such like, called themselves Romans, and
of such progenitors did descend the Roman Emperors, which Romans, we, to wit,
Lumbards, Saxons, Frenchmen, Loraners, Germans, Sueuians, and Burgundians,
do so much disdain, that we term our enemies by no other name of contumeli^,
but call them Romans: In this only name of Romans, comprehending all
baseness, all dastardlinesse, all covetousness, all luxury, all lying, and
quicquid vitiorum est, and whatsoever vice can be named; this name of Roman is
equivalent to all these. Let the Romanists now glory in this their Litprandus,
and produce him as often as they please, for a witness of this Charter of
Constantines Donation.

CHAP. XIII.
Thirty Lawyers, Ciuilians and Canonists, alleged by Marta, to prove the
Donation of Constantine: and an answer unto them.
AFter Divines and Historians, they allege an whole troop of Lawyers,
Ciuilians and Canonists, to the number of thirty, or thereabouts, All
witnessing, as Marta says Mart ca. 30. nu. 28. 29.
, Constantines Donation, Pro veris^ima haberi, to be held for most true and
certain. For the Canonists, it skils not much what they say in this matter:
The cause is the Popes, and they being the Popes Parasites, must in duty,
Gnatonise unto him with Ait, aio. How insolent, nay impious and blasphemous
they are in flattering the Pope, that one saying of theirs, Our Lord God the
Pope, (which occasioned others among them to think the Pope to Ne sequatur
scandalum pusillorum qui aestimant Papa^ esse vnum ^eum, qui habet potestate^
omnem in caelo and terra. Gers, in R^s^l, cuca materiam Excom. consid. 11.
be that one God who has all power both in heaven and in earth) may stand for
a thousand. This above all, I here mention, because the ringleader of their
Jesuits father Parsons, not only persuades Pars. in his Warnword to Sir
Francis Hastings wastword. Encou^t. 1. ca. 2. nu. 10. fol. 30.
, That no such saying is to be ^ound in the writings of the Canonists, and
hard it is, says he, to believe that any such text may be found; but turning
that whole matter to a very jest, he scoffs at Protestants, as if they had
foolishly devised the same; Whereas some, says he, found this written D.
noster D. Papa, that is, Dominus noster, Dominus Papa, some cauelling horeticke
judging it inconvenient to repeat Dominus twice, thought the later D. to stand
for Deus, and so read it Dominus, Deus Papa; eu^n as a simple fellow, says he,
having a letter, sent from some mariners, and indorsed, to the Right honorable
our good L. the L. Admiral, thought the letter was to be delivered to the
Lady Admiral, saying* that seeing the former L. stood for Lord, the second L.
must needs stand for Lady. Thus the grand (...) scoffs at Protestants as
fainers of this bla^phemous saying; which if he had not vowed to shut his eyes
against the truth, he might, and all others may see, to be extant in the
Gloss, Cap. Cum inter. Extra. John. 22. de verborum signifi. in fine: Where
the Pope is called Dominus Deus noster, not only in the old Gloss, but in the
new edition of it also, corrected Bulla Gr^g. 13. praefixa nouae editioni
Decreti.
, and expurged from sundry errors, by the authority of Gregory the 13: even
there (as if this were no error, nor a matter needing any correction or
qualificaon) is it recorded, for an eternal conviction both of their
blasphemy in uttering this, and of their impudency in denying it. The words
both in the old and corrected Gloss are these, Credere autem Dominum Deum
nostrum Papam, conditorem dicti decretalis and istius, non potuisse statuere
prou^ statuit, haereticum censetur. Let father Parsons and his friends consider
now, whether this be a Protestants fiction to say, that some of their Canonists
call the Pope, the Lord their God. It is little to be regarded then, what such
blaspheming parasites and patrones, of the Popes Omnipotency Vetustissima ac
fere omnipotens ecclesiae. Romans potestas. Aug. Steuchus, lib. de Don. Constant.
pa. 195.
, say in this cause. It is the custom of Canonists, said Sic sibi dixisse Pium
5. ait ipse Nau. Coment. in cap. Non liceat. cans. 12. q. 2.
Pius quintus, to give too much to the Popes power: Fran. Victoria rightly said
Vict. Relect. ^. de potest. eccle. sect. 6. nu. 3.
of them; They gave this dominion to the Pope, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus
and doctrina, when they were beggarly both for learning and living. Cynus Cynus
l. quoties Cod. de Iudicijs.
rightly said of them, Canonistae fecerunt sibi iura pro libito voluntatis,
the Canonists make what they list to be Law.

For Ciuilians I much honor them, so far as they keep themselves within the
bounds of the Imperial laws, which they profess: but those whom Marta
alleges, lived in those times, when there was such a mixture and confusion of
the Canon and Civil Law, as that in all matters, which concerned the Pope, the
Canon law ever had the predominance: As Popes had then got the masterie of
Emperors, so was the Imperial Law ouer-ruled by the Pontifical: nor were any
then suffered to profess that Law, unless he had, I say not a tincture, but a
deep die of the Papacy, and unless they received his mark both in their
hands and foreheads. From hence proceeded those exorbitant speeches of Baldus
Barth. l. sin. Cod. sentent. res^^di non posse.
; That the Pope is Deus in terris, a God upon earth. And again Bald. in cap.
^nter corporalia. Extrau. nu. 1.
, What things the Pope does in cases reserved, he does those non tanqua^ homo,
sed tanqua^ Deus, not as Man, but as God: and many the like both in him and
others. Now both sorts of Martaes Lawyers being thus seruilly addicted to the
Pope, (he being the sole master of the Canon, and ouer-mastering the civil Law)
were so partial in the Popes cause, that what Aeneas Siluius said Papam Pium
2. sic scripsisse Decano and capitulo Moguntino testatur auth. Paralip. Abb.
Vsperg. pa. 418.
of their Bishops, the same fitly agrees to these. Etiam vera dicere contra
Papam, est contra iuramentum Episcoporum, To speak even the truth when it is
against the Pope, was against the profession of those Lawyers.

Besides this general exception, if it were worth the labor to examine all
the particulars cited by Marta, it were an easy matter to show how few of them
do effectually prove that which he intends and undertakes. But sparing that
labor, which would be but irksome to my self, and to the Reader tedious, I
will give you in some of them, a taste of Martaes false and fraudulent dealing,
in alleging the writings of men even of his own profession.

The first and most ancient whom he cites Mart. loc cit. nu. 28. Est Accursius
de antiquissimis scriptoribus, qui scripsit circa, an. 1240.
, is Accursius: who thus writes of the Donation of Constantine. We answer
Accur. l. Si plures. ff. de Pactis.
, quod de Iure non valuit, that in Law this Donation was of no force. And he
gives a reason; Because had Constantine given away his Imperial Jurisdiction
of the West, (as by the Edict he does) sic potuit perire totum Imperium, the
whole Empire might so be ruinated and perish. This to be the true and final
judgment of Accursius, is witnessed by Bartholus Bart. in (...) ff nu. 13.
, Accursius finaliter tenet quod non valuit Donatio, Accursius resolves and
determines that Constantines Donation is of no force: By the Gloss Gloss in
cap. Romani* Tit. (...)
, Accursius holds that the Donation is not of force. By Couarruuias Cou^^ lib.
4. Va^^ar resol* ca. 16. pa. 70.
, Accursius in the Authentickes, holds and proves that the Donation is not of
force: By Lupoldus Lup ld. lib. de iu^^b. Imper. ca. 13.
, Accursius holds that the Donation is not good: By Card. Turrecremata Turr. in
Did. 96. art. 1*
, The Gloss upon the Authentickes holds, Quod Donatio illa non valuit, That
this Donation is not of force. And to omit many others, by Alu. Pelagius Alu
Pel. lib. 2. de place. (...). ca 29.
, Accursius affirms, that the Donation made to the Church by Constantine, is
not of force, and that his successors may revoke the same: And he also adds a
clause worthy Martaes observing, Hoc communiter tenent legistae, The Lawyers
do generally hold this with Accursius. What think you, does Marta now deserve
for producing Accursius as his first, most ancient, and most noble Lawyer, to
prove the verity and validity of this Donation? A Laurel, or the reward of a
lie?

Another of Martaes (...)
Lawyers, is Luc. Paulus Rose^lus, whose testimony I thought fit to set next to
Accursius, because it will serve as a very fair Torch, to see the fair
dealing of Marta, both with him and others. He in the very same place which
Luc. Paul. Rosell. in Repertorio ad Francis Aretinum in verbo Donatio
quantumcunque magna.
Marta cites for proof of the Donation, and to which he directs us, writes
in this manner, and his words deserve to be writ in golden letters. Whether
that great Donation which Constantine is said to have made to Syluester, be of
force or no, diverse men think diversely, and all are entangled in this
question; and why so? For it is not lawful to dispute openly against that
Donation; because the Popes and Cardinals, statim diris suis execrationibus eos
inuolutos reddunt, will presently enwrap them in their direful curses: Nay,
they will have them to be interdicted and forbidden the use both of fire and
water. What then, have you your self nothing to say in this matter? Yes, says
he; I will not omit or forbear to say this, Etsi millies indies
mortemulctarer, though I should every day dye a thousand deaths: That this
Donation, (if it was ever made) was not so profitable either to the Church, or
topietie. Does not our Savior say, that his house should be called an house of
prayer? But by this Donation of Constantine, it is made Latronum spelunca, and
omnium vi^iorum receptaculum: a den of Thieves, and a sanctuary for all vices:
And then a little after he concludes thus, Quare mihi videtur, Wherefore I
think, that that Syluester, (who ere he was) that wittingly took this
Donation of the Emperor, Diabolus statim effectus est, was presently upon that
acceptance made a Devil, and changed from an Angel of light, to an Angel of
darkness: And citing the words of Christ, Give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, he says; By this it appears, that neither the Emperor ought to
forsake, nor the Pope ought to accept those things which belong to Caesar, quae
etiamsi millies obtulerit, which though the Emperor should offer a thousand
times, Yet a good and holy Pope would never think it fitting to accept them:
Thus Paulus Rosellus. Say now in sadness if Marta for citing this Lawyer, this
Text, and these words, for a proof of the verity and dignity of Constantines
Donation, does not ex condigno merit to be crowned with a garland of folly?

A third Lawyer cited by Marta, Mart. ca. cit. nu. 28.
, is Bartholus, a man so wavering and unconstant in his opinions, yea even sibi
contrarius, as Ant. Rosel. says, Ant. Ross. tract. de Council. verbo Postquam.
nu. 8.
, that he changed cum coelo animum, his mind with the air, soil, and place of
his aboade; thinking it a point of wisdom, to speak omnia pro tempore and
l^co, what the present place and time persuaded, not what the truth. What his
true judgment was in this matter, appears certainly by these his own words,
in one of the places Bart. l. Hosts f^. de Captiuis. nu. 7.
cited by Marta. If any should say that the Emperor is not the Lord and
Monarch to^ius orbis, of the whole world, esset hereticus, such a man should be
judged an heretic, because he speaks both against the determination of the
Church, and against the text of the holy Gospel, where it is said; There went
out an Edict from Caesar, that the whole world should be taxed. And in another
place Bart. in Prooem. ff. nu. 14.
, Papa non habet aliquam iurisdictionem, The Pope has no (temporal)
jurisdiction at all. Thus Bartholus: who denying all temporal jurisdiction to
the Pope, and holding him for an heriticke, that denies the Emperor to be the
temporal Lord and Monarch of the whole world, does even thereby hold all for
heretics, who defend the Donation of Constantine; seeing by it the Pope is
said to be the temporal Lord, the Monarch as Pope Nicholas N^ch. 3. ca*
Fundam. de Elect. and elect. pot. in 6.
calls him, and greatest Emperor, as Steuchus Constantinus cessit maiori
Imperatori. Steuch lib. cit. pa. 187.
^earms him, of Rome, Italy, and all the Western Provinces, that is of a
great, and far the best part of the Empire. That this was the true judgment
and resolution of Bartholus, it is witnessed by Petr. de Anchona; Bartholus,
says he Pet. de Anchon. in Prooem. super. 6. Decr. Sacro sanctae. nu. 5.
, does effectually prove, and concludit, and concludes also, that Constantines
Donation is not of force. Whatsoever Bartholus any where says contrary to
this, (as indeed he does in diverse places) he speaks that, not ex animi
sententia, but as Lucius Paulus Rosellus says, Adulando Pontifici, in
flattery of the Pope, and for fear of his direful execrations and
Interdicts; yea, Bartholus his own words import no less. For when he comes to
speak of Constantines Donation, vide^e, says he Barth. in Prooem; ff. nu. 14.
, mark this well, nos sumus in territorijs Ecclesiae, and ideo dico Donationem
illam valere, We are now in the Popes territories, and therefore I say that
this Donation is of force, Bartholus for law, was of the like mould and mettle,
as were those Romish Deuines, of whom it is recorded Paralip. ad Abbat.
Vrsperg. an. 1518 pa. 448.
, that privately they used to say to their friends concerning
Transubstantiation, and such other questions, Sic dicerem in scholis, sed tamen
(maneat inter nos) diuersum sentio. Thus I say openly, and in the Schools, but
(keep my Council I pray you,) I think the contrary. Bartholus saying, is
altogether like. Thus I say in the Popes Territories, or to please the Pope,
The Donation is good, but (keep it to your self) I think he con^rarie: for
the Pope has no (temporal) jurisdiction, but the Emperor is Lord of all, and
he who says otherwise, is indeed an heretic.

Martaes next Lawyer is Baldus Mart. loc. cit. nu. 28.
, the Scholar of Bartholus; who had perfectly learned of his master, to
Gnathonize to the Pope, and to whom of all other, most fitly agrees that
censure of Lucius Paulus Rossellus, he durst not speak against the Pope, but
by flattery soothed him. Touching his opinion, it is first to be remembered,
that Baldus in all his speeches concerning this matter, presupposes the
Donation to have been truly made by Constantine: the Popes both then, and
before, had taught him and others, not to call that into question; and the
Palea Constantinus being long before Eugen. 3. obijt an. 1153 Bar. co an. nu.
10. Bartolus objit an. 1355 Galter. saec. 14. Baldus vixit, an. 1390. Bell.
lib. scrip. eccle. in Bald.
either Bartholus, or Baldus days, allowed Mart loc. cit, nu. 37.
by Pope Eugenius 3. multum grani attulit Ecclesiae, as one of their Lawyers
Nich. Euerard. loc. Argum. legal. in loco 11. a Verisimili. nu. 16.
says, had brought by that time, much corn and moulter to the Popes mill.
This being then presupposed to be true, (which is vt^erly false) that
Constantine made that Donation, Baldus and other Lawyers disputed only whether
this Donation supposing it to be made, were in law good, and of force, or not;
or how, and in what manner it might be said to be good in law. Much like as
School Divines about the same time disputed, whether Christ's body were really
present in the Sacrament by way of Transmutation, or of Transubstautiation;
both the one and the other supposing (but not believing and granting) that
which is utterly untrue, that Christ is really and corporally there present. Or
as at this day, the Romanists contend among themselves, whether the Pope has
directly or indirectly, power and authority to depose Kings, and take away
their Kingdoms; whereas the Pope in truth, has no such authority any way at
all: as those disputers suppose on both sides. The very like did the Lawyers.
They would not, nor was it safe for them to question whether Constantine made
that Donation: but supposing that, (which is untrue) they only disputed
whether being made, such a Donation was good and forceable in law or not: or
how and by what right he could give away so great a part of the Empire.

Baldus to please the Popes Holiness, holds that the Donation is firm, and
that after the surest manner that can be wished, but withal after such a
manner, as is most unlikely, and can never be proved. First, by any Imperial,
any humane authority, or law, Baldus professes plainly, that according to the
determination of the ancient Lawyers, Constantine could not make that Donation,
nor could it be of force, to pass away his Imperial right. Constantine or
other Emperors may pass away, says he Bald. in Prooem. de Feudis. nu. 32. 33.
, the use, profit, or commodity of their Territories, reserving always feoltie
and recognition to the Emperors* but neither Constantine nor any other
Emperor, can Non valere, nee possibilem esse. ibid.
pass them away, quoad Expropriationem territorij dignitatis aut
iurisdictionis, in respect of the supreme right, or of Imperial dignity and
Jurisdiction. Nay, to think that any Emperor would thus mutilate the Empire
is, as Baldus there adds, species fatuitatis, a point of folly. Seeing then as
Baldus professes, neither the Imperial right and royalty can possibly be
passed away, nor the use, profit, and commodity of so great a part of the
Empire, can by any humane law be given or granted* how, or by what means shall
this Donation be thought de iure, to be of force, even for the vsus fructus?
Here Bald. ibid.
Baldus goes a note far beyond Ela, and tells us, That this Donation
(supposing it was made by Constantine) potius fuit diuinitatis, quam
humanitatis, was an Act of God, rather then of Man: and that it proceeded a
fide catholica, from the Catholic faith, not from any Imperial Law. Let
either Marta, or Baldus, or any other prove, that God either by himself, or by
any Divine revelation, or any other way known to the Church, commanded
Constantine to make this Edict, and we will most willingly assent unto it, even
fide catholica. Till they prove this, (which they are never able to do) both
Baldus must be held for a base flattering parasite of the Pope in this matter,
and Marta for a trifling disputer, who from an untrue supposall of Baldus, and
his untrue collection upon that supposall, strives to prove an absolute
assertion of the verity and validity of Constantines Donation, and that not
only for the vsus fructus, which Baldus graunts in law to be good, but even
for the Imperial rights and roialtie which Baldus says, to be granted away is
impossible. The censure of Paulus de Castro, falls rightly upon Baldus in this
matter: Baldus, says he Paul. de Castro. in l. 1* Cod. Quando non pe^^ntium
parts, and in l. Edita. Cod. de edendo.
flies through the air and clouds: that is, has lofty, but unstaid
opinions, founded on the wind and clouds, All that he speaks tends to pomp;
and plerumque tantum subtilizat, vt scipsum frangat, for the most part,
(specially in this matter) he so follows subtilities, that he confounds
himself.

A fifth Lawyer alleged, both by Card. Albanus Hier. Alban lib. de Donat.
Constable. nu. 1.
and Marta Mart loc. cit. nu 28.
, is Albericus de Rosate: one so directly opposite to the validity of this
Donation, that Couarru^ias says Couar. lib. 4. Variar. Resol. cap. 16 pa. 70.
of him, Albericus holds the Donation to be of no force; and Boethius Epo not
only affirms the same, saying, Omnium audacissime; Albericus more boldly then
any other, affirm^s Boct. ^po. Heroic. q^aest. q. 3. nu. 7^.
the Donation not to be of force: adding also, that this is the common opinion
of the Doctors of the Civil law: but for this very cause of rejecting the
Donation as inualid, Epo himself calls Quaest. eadem. nu. 138.
Albericus, hostem Ecclesiae, a very enemy to the Church. Albericus own
words alleged before, do convince Albanus and Marta, both of untruth and
folly; for he Alber. de Rosat. l. Been a Zenone. de Quadri^n. (...). fol. 111.
col. 4. and l. final. de Iurisdict. omnium ludic.. per iniquum. nu. 4. fol. 146.
directly affirms, and proves, that this Edict of Constantine, neither is, nor
can be of force, either by virtue of any Donation, nor of any prescription,
neither by the Imperial, nor by the Pontifical law; And further, That the
successors in the Empire may revoke and recall the same. And though, upon the
like false supposall as Baldus took, that Constantine did make such a
Donation, Albericus thought Alber. in l. Been a Zenon. supra. cit.
it to have been made not by any humane Law or authority, but by some divine
instinct, and command from God; (which is a fancy without all color of
truth:) yet withal he adds two or three remarkable sayings, touching this
Donation. The first, that it was only personal, and tied Constantine alone,
and not his successors: to which purpose he says, vere credo, I do verily
believe, that this Donation is not of force to prejudice the Empire, or the
Emperors successor. The second is a Memorandum, touching that fancy which he
borrowed of Baldus, that this Donation proceeded from God. Albericus tells us,
that himself heard some great men say, and that it is recorded also in
authenticis scripturis, in very credible writings, that when this Donation was
given, and accepted (which certainly was never in Constantines time, nor many
hundred years after) there was then a voice heard from heaven, saying; Hodie
seminatum est venenum aspidum in Ecclesia Dei, This day is the poison of Aspes
powered into the Church. A pregnant evidence that God commanded not
Constantine, nor any else, to make any such Donation: for God does power grace,
and not poison into his Church. The third is a caveat for their Church, not to
be too insolent upon this Donation. I have heard, says he, of men worthy to
be credited, that in the time of Pope Bo^iface the eight, a certain Cardinal
of the order of Cistertians, a man of exceeding great reputation and knowledge,
openly in a festival Sermon said, or foretold, per eosdem passus and gradus,
that the Church or Pope by the same pases and degrees, whereby it had ascended
in temporalities, should descend also again, till it come to the extreme
poverty of Siluester. Sure that prophetical Card. spoke not far amiss. For
the spirit of God foretells the like concerning Babylon, (which they Ribera
Jesuit. com in cap* 14. Apoc nu. 38. and seq Babylon matter fornicationum quae
casura praedicitur, Roma quidem est, etc.
profess and prove to be Rome,) In as Revel. 18. 7.
much as she has glorified her self, and lived in pleasure; so much give ye
her torments and sorrow. Albericus by this Cardinals prophecy, gives Marta and
them all a fair warning, not to be too proud in that or any like Donation, for
though they sit like the Queen of Babel, and say they shall see no mourning;
yet when their sins are once ripe, their pl^gues shall come upon them, death,
sorrow, and famine; and those ten horns by which they have been lifted up,
shall hate that whore of Babylon (that is Rome) and make her desolate and
naked, and shall eat up her flesh, and burn her with fire, But enough of this
witness of Albanus and Marta.

Aretine is brought for another witness by Marta Mar. loc. cit. nu. 28.
: but he speaks directly both against Marta, and that Donation, and that also
even in the place alleged by Marta. Baldus, says he Aret. in Rubr. ff. de
verbor. obligat.
, does well teach, that the Emperor cannot give away any quotient of the
Empire, neither a third part, nor a fourth, nor one half. Then doubtless by
Aretines judgment, Constantine neither did, nor could give Rome, Italy, and
all the Western Provinces, (which is the better half of the Empire) to the
Pope.

Cardinal Zabarella is another (a seventh) witness of Marta Mart loc* cit.
nu. 29.
. But he affirms not the Donation to have been truly made, but only
supposes as others did, that it was made. Sufficiat Card. Zabarel. in Clem.
Pastor^lis.. Illud. in 2. oppos.
praesupponere, let it suffice us to presuppose, that the D^nation was made,
and was of force. Marta should have known that there is great odds betwixt a
pos^^ion and a supposition.

Lucas de Penna is another, (the eight) Lawyer, cited by Marta Ma^t. loc. cit
nu. 28.
, who though he say he will not deny the Donation, yet he sets down that
which does disprove and overthrow the Donation. He plainly affirms Luc de Pen.
C^d. de omni agro desert. l. quicunque desertum. fol. 185
That the territories or d^maines of the Empire, cannot be alienated or given
away. Again, The Prince is the husband of the Commonwealth. And therefore as
the husband cannot alienate bona dotalia, the dowry of the Wi^e, so neither
can the Prince the Lands of the Empire: and then he concludes, Interdicta
itaque sit talis alienatio, therefore such alienation is fo^bidden, least the
commonwealth by many, though but small alienations, ad nihilum redigatur, be at
length brought to nothing. Yea he further shows, That though such Donations
and alienations be already made, and that also with an oath, yet may they, and
ought they to be revoked, non obstante interposito Iuramento, notwithstanding,
an oath (he thinks such an oath to be unlawful, and therefore not of force to
bind) be taken to the contrary.

A ninth Lawyer, cited by Marta Mart. loc* cit. nu. 28.
, is Antonius Corsettus, who in that place alleged Ant. Cors. tract depotest.
reg. q. 4.
by Marta, demands, Whether a King may give away the goods of the Kingdom:
his answer relying on the judgment of Pope Innocentius, is, That a King or
Emperor may do it moderately, so that the Regal Dignity be not hurt
thereby, non item immoderate, but he may not do it above measure, not in such
sort, vt laedatur dignitas Regalis, That the Regal or Imperial dignity be
hurt or impared by such a gift or alienation. Now seeing this supposed
Donation, by which is given away Rome, It^ly, and all the Western Provinces,
that is half of the Empire: and that also in such sort as Al^arus Pelagius Al.
Pelag. lib. 1. de plane eccles. ca. 41.
vaunteth. That by virtue of this Donation, in verita^e Imperator nihil habet
facere Romae, necin toto Imperio occidentali, The Emperor has in truth
nothing at all to do with Rome, or with the whole Western Empire: seeing, I
say, this Donation is such, that none can doubt but that it is very immoderate
and excessive; yea as Baldus says, a very maiming of the Empire: it follows
by the judgment of Martaes own witness, that Constantine neither might make
such a Donation, or if he did, that the Donation is wholly void, inualid, and of
no force or effect. The same Ant. Corset Ibid.
adds diverse testimonies to this purpose: the first of Baldus, cited by Paul
de Castro, Who says that Baldus does determine, that if a King or Emperor
give away the goods of the Empire totaliter, and expropriando, totally, and in
such manner that he pass away his Imperial right and property therein, such a
Donation is of no force. The second of Durandus their Speculator, wh^ says,
that quando regnum enormiter laeditur, when the Kingdom or Empire sustaines an
enormous loss by such Donations, then they are void. The third of Oldrade, who
teaches, yea pulcre decidit, defi^es excellently, as says Corset, That a King
cannot give away immoderatly that which belongs to the Empire. The fourth, of
Bartholus, Who says, that if the Donations made by Princes, tend to a great or
excessive alienation of the rights of the Empire, non v^lent etiam iuratae,
such Donations, though they be confirmed by oath, are inualid, and of no force.
Thus Corset: proving clearly not only by reason, but by the consent of
Bartholus, Baldus, Durand, and Oldrade, four of Martaes own witnesses, that
this vast Donation of Constantine, is of no worth or force at all.

A tenth Lawyer cited by Marta Mart. loc. cit. nu. 29.
, is Felinus, whose words are so far from helping Marta, or supporting this
Donation, that they indeed overthrow the same. He in the place Felin. in ca.
Solitae, de Mayor. and obed.
which Marta alleges, referres his Reader for this Donation to Pius secundus,
saying, Concerning this Donation, vide la^e in dicto Dialogo Pij, vbi per multa
tenet quod Palea sit falsa. See the forenamed Dialogue of Pius the second,
where by many reasons he proves, that the Palea (Constantinus) is false and
forged, And ^e inueyeth against the miserable Lawyers* who ^oyled themselves in
disputing about the validity of that Donation which was never made. Does not
Felinus now strongly prove the Donation? And that Felinus his own judgment in
this ma^ter, concurred with this sentence of Aeneas Syluius, to which he refers
us, Couarruuias expressly witnesses, saying Couar. lib. 4 Var. (...) ca. 16
(...).
, Aeneas Siluius denies that Constantine made this Donation, and so does
Hieron. Balbus, and Felinus Cap. Solitae de Maiorit. and obedi. which is the
very place that Marta cites: yea Hier. de Ceuallos not only affirms Hier.
de Ceual. in Spec. aureo opin. Com^^un.
Felinus to have held the Donation to be of no force; but further adds, that
Felinus teaches this to be the common opinion of the Lawyers.

I list not, neither is it worth the labor to examine the rest of Martaes
Lawyers; you may by these conjecture, what fair dealing he uses in the rest.
Specially if you consider that four more of them must stand for mere Ciphers,
or else for witnesses of Martaes fraud. For in the places which he alleges
out of Oldrade Oldr. in Cons. 158.
, Jason Ias. in l. C^ qui ita. qui ita ff. de verb. obligat. Nulla la^s lex est
in eo Tit.
, Praepositus Praep. in ca. Cum ad veru^ did. 86.
, and Johan. Andreas Ioh. And. in addit. ad Spec. in tit. de prescript.
ratione, and. Item quod.
, there is nothing spoken touching Constantines Donation.

Now least Marta should vainly imagine that all his Masters of the Law are
wholly of his side, as he fancied these to be: to those later four which are
but ciphers, and the other ten which we have already examined and proved to
be more effectual for us then for him, I will adioyne so many, as may in
number equal, and in weight preponderate the whole Catalogue of Marta his
Lawyers.

Of eight other more, Hier. de Caeuallos Hier. de Ceuall. loco cit.
is witness. The other opinion, says he, that this Donation was not of force
de Iure, is held by Cagnolus, in repet. rubr. ff. de Dolo. nu. 79. by Genadius
sect. 3. fol. 220. by Paulus Fuscus de visitat. lib. 2. cap. 21. by Hier. Monte
de finibus reg. ca. 1. by Hottoman de Feudis. ca. 8. nu. final. by Vulcurnus de
reg. mundi 2. part. q. 4. by Sebastian de medicis. de l^g. and statut. part 1.
q. 3. nu. 1. 4. by Magdalenus de numer. test. in testamen part. 1. cap. 12. nu.
20. The same opinion is held, says Couarruuias Cou^r. loc. cit.
by Hier. Balbus. lib. de coronat. pa. 81. by Carol. Molineus, (he calls it a
fable) in Alex. Consil. 24. lib. 5. Col. vlt. by Hie^on. in Practica.
Cance^lar. fol. 9. and seq. as witnesses Iacobatius (...) Jacob. lib. 10 de
Co^^. Art. 8. ca. vl^. nu. 15. 1^.
, and by Iac. Beluisus in Prooem. ff. as witnesses Epo B^et, Epo. Her. ^u. q
3. nu. 78.
.

To these twelve may be added Cynus Pistoriensis, who thus says. Cynus ad l.
Comperit. Cod. de Praescrip. 30. vel 40. ann. nu. 1
This text is against them who think that the Roman Church may prescribe for
the Donation of Constantine, because for that which belongs to subjection it
cannot prescribe; (for contra Vt ait Lupold. lib. de ^ure reg. ca. 11. and
probat ^x C^p. cum non lic^at. Extr. de l ^^scrip.
obedientiam non currit praescriptio) No man can prescribe for not yielding
obedience, and then not for the Jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, cui
subiectus est totus orbis, to which the whole world (then certainly the Pope
and Western Empire) is subject. Ioh. Igneus Ioh Ign. R^^pet in l. Donationes
nu 2^.
who thus writes, Communis sententia, It is the common judgment of Historians,
that those Donations of Rome, and other cities in Italy, were not made by
Constantine: and in his Summarie Sum. in idem cap. nu. 21.
, That Donation made to the Church, falso attribuitur Constantino, is falsely
ascribed to Constantine. Pet. Ferrariensis, who says Pet. Ferr. in forma
repons. rei con^en^ae in verbo. Praescriptionis. nu. 33.
, Italy will never be at quiet till the Donation made (as is pretended) by
Constantine, be revoked by some godly and potent Emperor: seeing there is no
good concord betwixt Psalterium and Cythara, the Psalm and the Cytheren,
neither is it granted either by Christ, or by Saint Feter, that they should
possess such things, but they are commanded to give to Caesar that which
belongs to Caesar.

Alciat, who sets down Alc. lib. ^. Pareg ca. 19. pa. 475.
six effectual reasons, to prove that Constantine made not this Donation, and
then concluding, he declares, that not only the Donation it self, but the
occasion also of it is false and fabulous. Truly, says he, that Constantine
was not baptized at Rome, nor by Syluester, (both these the Edict expressly
avouches) but at Nicomedia, and by Eusebius Bishop of that place, Hierom and
other Writers do testify. Again, that he was affected with a leprosy (this
the Edict at large sets down) apud idoneos scriptores nusquam legitur, is no
where read in any good Writer, or such as may be credited: But of Constantine
the fifth, sur-named Copro^ius, it is said, that he was a Leaper, vnde fortassis
aequiuocatione nominis error inductus, whence perhaps by the equivocation of
the name, that leprosy is erroniously ascribed to Constantine the first, which
besell to Constantine the fifth. So Alciat: showing this Donation to be a false,
lying, and fabulous writing, and coniecturing also the same to have been
forged after the time of Constantinus Iconomachus, that is more then 380.
years Constant. magnus obijt an. 337. Constantinus Iconomachus natus est and
baptizatus an. 719 Bar. eo an. nu. 20.
after Constantine the Great was dead.

In the last place, to make up the number of thirty two, Couarruuias Did.
Couar. lib. 4 Var. Resol. ca. 16. pa. 69. and 70.
may be reckoned. Who besides sundry authorities, by many effectual reasons,
shows that Constantine made no such Donation. One is, For that by the consent
of Eusebius and all Historians, Constantine in his last will and Testament
divided the Empire to his own sons, and gave Italy and other places, (which
are said to be given to the Pope) to one of them; quod profecto non fecisset,
which truly he would never have done, had he formerly given the same to
Syluester. Another reason is this, Because neither Damasus, nor Historians,
either Greek or Latin, who have writ the Acts of Constantine, vllam de hac
refecere mentionem: none of them have made any mention of this Donation; Procul
dubio non omissuri, who without all doubt, would not have omitted it, if either
it had been made, or if they had known that it had been made, whereof, says
he, they could not have been ignorant, seeing they so diligently writ all the
Acts which concerned the Church in Constantines time. A third reason he adds,
Because it is certain by the consent of all Writers, that the Popes for four
hundred years after Syluester and Constantine, did not use that Donation, nor
had the temporal jurisdiction of Rome. Thus he.

By this now it appears, how vainly Marta mustred that troop of his thirty
Lawyers, as bearing witness to this Donation of Constantine. Those who among
them are most favorable on his side, presupposing the truth thereof (which
neither he nor they can ever prove) upon that false supposall, strive to
maintain it to be de iure, of force: but diverse, and some the very best of
them, denying it to be of any worth, validity, or force at all: and upon
supposall that it was made by any Emperor, teaching it, not to have been made
(as Baldus flatteringly fancied by Divine instinct, but by the Devils
suggestion, and the accepting of it, to have made that Pope who first accepted
it, (and them the rest who after him approved it) a very Devil and Angel of
the dark and infernal pit.

CHAP. XIIII.
The testimonies of eight Emperors: Zeno, Justinian, Charles the first, Lewis,
Henry the second, Otho the fourth, Frederick the second, and Charles the
fourth, alleged by Marta, as witnesses of Constantines Donation, examined.
AFter Councels, Divines, Historians, and Lawyers, Marta alleges the
Emperors themselves as witnesses of this Donation. Among them all he has
found eight, who being of all his witnesses most worthy to be heard in this
cause, I shall desire the Reader seriously to consider their testimonies.

The first is the Emperor Zeno, whose words as Marta cites Mart. ca. 30. cit.
nu. 27.
them, are these; We renew the Constitution of Constantine, qui veneranda
Christianorum fide Romanorum minuit imperium: who by the venerable faith of
Christians, impared the Roman Empire. Whence Marta concludes that Constantine
sure made this Donation, and so impared the Empire.

I am much ashamed, that Doctor Marta, even in his own profession Iura.
ciuilia, quae ad nos pertinent. ibid.
, should bewray so notorious ignorance: was there no way to impare the Empire,
but by making this Charter? What if by his dividing the Empire into three parts
among his three children, he be thought to weaken it? Seeing in such causes
those sayings seem especially to take place, Vis vn^ta fortior, and Imperium
impatiens consortis, and, (...); and many the like. What if Constantine gave
away some Cities, Forts or Castles, standing upon the frontire of the Empire?
What if in building Churches, he bestowed so much of the revenues, as that
the want thereof seemed to some to impare the Empire? It was a rare fatui^ie in
Marta, to think that the Empire could no way be impared, but only by giving
away Rome, Italy, and all the Western Provinces, that is the better half of
the Empire.

Again, see what a godly and religious mind Marta bears to the Christian
Faith. He will prove by the Civil Law, that Christian Religion, and the true
Faith, is the imparing of an Empire, or State, and that Constantine impared the
Empire, by the venerable Religion of the Christian Faith. Impious and
blasphemous Marta! worse then Matchiuell: Religion and piety was, and ever
will be the only fortress and bulwark of all Christian States and Kingdoms.
If he would not learn this of God, who warned Joshua, and in him all Princes,
To do that Josh. 1. 8.
which God commands, for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then
shall thou have good success: if not of this our most religious Constantine,
who by experience found it true and professed Eusebius. lib. 10. histor. ca. 7.
, That when Religion is neglected, the Commonweal comes to wrack, but when
it is maintained, the state flourishes: if not of Lactantius Lactan. lib. 5.
ca. 8.
, Ideo omnia mala, the cause why all calamities daily invade the State, is the
forsaking of God; if not of Saint Cyrill, who says Cyril lib. de recta fide ad
Theod. in initio.. Caeteru^.
, That piety is inconcussum Regiae dignitatis fundamentum, the sure prop and
foundation of any Kingdom: yet he might and should have learned this lesson,
in those very books of the Law, which he professes; either of Justinian, who
says, It becomes Justin. Cod. lib. 1. Tit. de summa Trinit, l. 3. Decere.
us to warn all our subjects, to be religious, for so we shall obtain more
abundant favor from the Lord; Or of Pope Nicholas the third, who says Nich.
3. ca. Fundamenta de Elect. and electi potest. in 6.
, Fundamenta militantis Ecclesiae in montibus sanctis, The foundation of the
Church Militant is set in the holy Mountains; (that is on true piety and
Religion) Upon this holy Mountain, tota Ecclesiae fabrica confidenter
inni^itur, the whole frame of the Church does firmly and surely rely; At
least he should have bin ashamed that the very Heathens should reach him this
lesson. All Liuius lib. 5. in orat. Camilli.
things fall out prosperously to the worshippers of God, all infelicitie to
those that despise him; yea even the Heathenish Poets also, Iniqua Senec. in
Medea. Act. 2.
nunquam Regna perpetuo manent: And again Senec. in Thieste. Act. 2.
, Vbi non est pudor, nec cura iuris, sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum
est. One might be eloquent in refuting this matchiuilian Doctor, it being very
easy to demonstrate, that piety, and prosperity in Princes, that the Church
and Commonweal, like the two twins of Hippocrates, do stand and fall,
flourish and fade together. I will only oppose this one sovereign Antidote,
to his poisonfull doctrine, Arx est religio, murus aheneus,
O Rex, est pietas, principibus bonis.


And all this I have spoken, supposing Marta to have cited the true words and
text of the law of Zeno. But now I must further answer, that Marta finding the
text corrupted (rather by error, as I think, then otherwise) wittingly and
maliciously embraces (as did before him Cardinal Albanus Hier. Alb. lib. de
Donat. Constable. nu. 9.
) that corruption, which is directly contrary both to the true reading, and
true sense of Zeno: for the true words are these; We Zeno smper. Cod. Just.
lib. 5. Tit. 27. l. 5. Ditu Constantini.
renew the Constitution of Saint Constantine, who by the venerable faith of
Christians, Romanum muniuit imperium, did strengthen and establish the Roman
Empire. So it is read in diverse Edict. Paris. ann. 1559.
other, and specially in that edition Quarta editio auctior and emendatior.
Lugd. an. 1607
of the Civil Law, which is called emendatior, more corrected; and their
learned Ciuilian Dionis. Gothofr. observes Gotof. not. in dictam legem Z^nonis.
, That the other reading of minuit, is rejected by Castrinsis as false, and ita
est, and it is false indeed, says he. Besides other reasons, the very words
themselves do show this, seeing it had been very absurd for Zeno to say,
That Constantine by the Christian faith had impared, but he might most truly
and justly say, That by the Christian faith, Constantine had fortified and
strengthened the Kingdom. Again, it had been most absurd in the Emperor
Zeno, to call him Diuum Constantinum, St. Constantine, and so commend him (as
he does in that very place) for embracing of the Christian faith, if he had
meant, that by the Christian faith the Empire had been impared. But that which
puts this matter out of all doubt, is another Edict of the same Zeno; called
Henoticum, which thus begins, Henot. Zenon. extat apud Euag. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Quoniam procerto scimus Imperium nostrum a sincera solum and vera fide tum
initiam habuisse, tum stabilitu^ esse, tum robur, ac praesidium, quod expugnari
nequit ex ea sumpsisse, Because we know assuredly, that our Empire by the true
faith, has both received the beginning, and been established and strengthened
in such sort, that it cannot be expugned. How could Zeno say here, that the
true faith did impare his Empire, who certainly knew it to be the most
inexpugnable prop and stay to uphold his Empire. It was fit that Marta for
defending of a false, counterfeit, and corrupted Donation, should be so far
infatuated, as that even in his own profession he should allege a false and
foolishly corrupted Text of the Law.

Next to Zeno, the Emperor Justinian is alleged, from whom Marta Mart. ca. 30
nu. 28.
reasons in this manner, Justinian says, that Leo the Emperor post
Constantinum fidei principatum auxit, did after Constantine enlarge the
Dignity or Majesty of the Faith; From which words, says Marta, it is
gathered that Justinian also knew of the foresaid Donation. Do you not think
that Marta had sent his wit to Rome, when he writ this at Naples? Justinians
words are plainly spoken of the faith; Marta expounds them, as meant of the
Empire. Justinian says, Constantine planted and propagated, and that Leo
enlarged the faith; Marta thence collects that Constantine diminished, and Leo
increased the Empire, whereof there is not any sound at all in the words of
Justinian. To conclude, from Leo his increasing the faith after Constantine,
that Constantine therefore impared it, is as if one should collect, that Romulus
impared the City of Rome, because Seruius Tullus after Romulus enlarged it.
And if it were granted, (which neither is true, nor any part of the meaning of
Justinian) that Constantine had impared the Empire, yet does it no way follow
which Marta collects, that therefore Constantine gave away Rome, Italy, and all
the Western Provinces to the Pope; or that Justinian knew that Constantine
made this Edict of Donation. He might impare the Empire an hundred ways, and
not give so much away, or not give it to the Pope. Besides all this, Marta to
make his false Gloss more colorable, clips away those words of the Text in
Justinian, which evidently manifest both the fraud of Marta, and the true
meaning of Justinian; these are Justinians words, Leo Justin. in Authent. Coll.
2. Tit. 1. cap. v^am.
of blessed memory, after Constantine fidei inter Imperatores principatum
auxit, among those that were Emperors, enlarged the Dignity or Majesty of the
Faith, and ordained the honor and discipline of holy Churches. Whence it is
clear that Justinian commends both Constantine for planting and propagating,
and Leo for enlarging the faith, by making laws for advancing the honor, and
establishing the holy discipline of the church, which at the first planting of
the faith, was not so fully done by Constantine. In which words seeing there is
neither mention, nor intention of imparing or enlarging the Empire; every man
may conceive, how well Marta deals with writers of other professions, when he
so maliciously corrupts the words, and peruerts the sense of those very
Imperial laws of Constantine, in the knowledge of which he professes
Percurramus iuta ciuilia, quae ad nos pertinent. part. 1* ca. 30. nu. 27
himself a Doctor.

The third Emperor who^ they allege, is Charles the Great, whom to be a
witness of this Donation, they prove by diverse collections. First comes in
Steuchus, and tells Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 111. and 115.
us, That Charles the great confirmed, id quod magnus Constantinus edicto
statuerat, that which Constantine had decreed in his Edict. To this purpose
Steuchus reci^es Page 112. 113. 114. 115.
an whole Chapter out of the libri Carolini: And though in all that large
Chapter, there be no mention either of Constantine, or of his Donation, or of
his Edict, yet Steuchus will from thence prove this Edict. And how I pray you?
Because there are some like sentences in that chapter of Charles, to those that
are in Consta^tines Edict. Constantine Steuch. ibid. pa. 116.
says the Pope must be the highest, and rule over al Bishops in the world:
Charles says, The Roman Church primatum habet a Deo, has Primacie, and is
preferred to other Churches by God. Constantine says, we decree that the Pope
shall govern all which pertaines to Religion, and stabilitie of Faith. Charles
in like sort says, That learned and holy men, as by name Saint Hierom, have
implored help from the Roman Church in doctrines of Faith. From this
similitude (there is, as you plainly see no Identitie) of Charles his speeches
to Constantines, Steuchus collects, That Charles both knew Hoc sciens,
perceptumque habens. Steuc. pa. 111.
of Constantines Edict, and confirmed Confirmat quod Constant^nus statuerat.
Ib* d pa. 115.
the same.

Steuchus has in many passages before, bewrayed his leaden heart and brazen
forehead: In this he will yet once again demonstrate the same unto you. What Is
Primacie, to Supremacy? What Is Primacie above Bishops, to a Temporal
Supremacy and Monarchy above the Emperor? Or how can a Primacie given by God,
infer the Donation of a Temporal Monarchy over Rome, and all the Western
Provinces, given by Constantine? But the eminency of Steuchus his folly
appears in that from one or two somewhat like, but yet different sayings,
found the one in Charles his words; the other in Constantines supposed Edict,
Steuchus inferres, that Charles knew, and confirmed this Edict. Are those
speeches of Primacie over Bishops, and expecting the Popes judgment in causes
of Faith, no where to be found before the time of Charles, but in this base
Edict of Donation? Read the third Epistle Apud. Bin. ^om. 1. Conc. pa. 104.
of Anacietus, there it is said, This Apostolic See of Rome, Card^ and caput
omnium Ecclesiarum a Domino constituta, was appointed by the Lord, to be the
head and hinge of all Churches, and all Churches to be ruled by it. Again, it
is there also said, The Sea of Rome, Primatum obtinuit, obtained from God
Primacie over all Churches. It is a witless reason, and a Topicall place fit
only for Steuchus, from similitude of speeches to conclude, that the one
writer knew or confirmed the writing of the other. The speech of the Lyrick
Horat. lib. 3. Carm. Ode 16
, Been est cut Deus obtulit parca quod satis est manu, is like to the saying of
Solomon Prou. 30. 8.
? Give me not poverty, nor riches; but feed me with food convenient. One
might justly deride him, who from the similitude of these sayings, would
conclude; that therefore the Epicurian hog knew what Solomon said, or meant to
confirm his Proverbs. But the most witless reasons are most fit for Steuchus.

Next comes Boethius Epo, and among those seven reasons, which are brought by
some witty disputers, to prove that Constantine by his Donation transferred
the Western Empire to the Pope, sets this down for the fifth, which carries
indeed the fairest color, and is of all the seven most probable. The Pope,
say they Apud Boet. Epon. lib. Heroic. quaest. q. 3. nu. 60.
, gave the Western Empire to Charles the great, for so Pope Innocentius the
third witnesses, saying Cap. venerabilem. lib. 1. Decretal. tit. 6. de Elect.
and elect. potest.
, the Apostolic See transferred the Empire from the Graecians, in persona^
magnifici Caroli, to the person of Charles the Great, and so to the Germans;
Now, say they, the Pope would not give the Western Empire to Charles, unless
it were his own, either by Constantines Donation, or by his proper right from
Christ. His proper right or title from Christ, these men could not find, nor
did think so good; and therefore they infer from this gift, That the Pope
Constanti^ nu. ipsum quoque (...) videtur. ibid. nu. 55.
had the Western Empire by the Donation of Constantine.

For answer to this reason, first it may be said, that Leo the third was not
so free hearted, as to give away his own, yea, all his successors right:
specially to an Empire. Such large Donations are not usual in their Popes.
But, howsoever not only these disputers for the Donation, but Bellarmine Bell.
lib. de Transl. Imp. vb. ait Imperiu^^ translatum P^ntificis autho^ta ^. pa. 3.
, Baronius Ex in^ita Romano pontifici authoritate, fuisse impl^^um affirma^us.
Bar. an. 780. nu. 14. and seq.
, Carerius Car. lib. 2. de Rom Pont. ca. 19* nu. 7.
, and many others do vainly boast of the contrary: the truth is, neither had
Leo the third the Western Empire to give, neither did he give it unto Charles.
All that he conferred was but the Imperial Coronation and unction, which were
but accidental ^ites and ceremonies, the substance it self he did not, he
could not confer. All the right that Charles ever had to the Western
Provinces, was first by Conquest, or Iure belli, and then by the unanimous
consent of the Roman State, which is equal to Ius electionis; they all
accepting him for their King and Emperor: which consent Pope Leo the third, as
a chief member of that State, in their name, and as the mouth of the whole
politic body, signified unto Charles, and expressed it, by setting the
Imperial Crown upon his head.

Of his former title by conquest, none can doubt, who considers that Charles
overcame Desiderius and the Lombards, and so made himself Lord of all Italy,
all the Cities thereof being either by force compelled to yield, or else
willingly without force yielding themselves unto him. Charles, says Rhegino
Rhegin an. 774.
, returned from Rome to Papia, and took it by force, and then all the Lumbards
coming, de cunctis ciuitatibus Italiae out of all the Cities of Italy, eius se
subdiderunt dominationi, sub^ected themselves to the rule and government of
Charles; and he, Italia subiugata and ordinata, Italy being now subdued and set
in order by him, with great triumph returned into France: and in the year 781.
coming again to Rome, his two sons were anointed Kings, Pipin King (or
Viceroy) of Italy, and Lewis of Aquitane. Charles says Hermanus Herm. Cont.
Cronic. breui an. 774. and in Chron. maiori. an. e^d.
overcame Desiderius, he subdued Long^bardos cum Italia, the Lumbards with
Italy, and in triumph came to Rome. Charles, says Otho Frising Oath. Fris.
l^b. 5. ca. 26. and 28.
subacta Italia, having subdued Italy, returned into France, and some years
after coming to Rome, his son Pipin was anointed King of Italy. Charles
coming into Italy, says Athelmus Annal. re^u^ gest. ^ Carolo, an. 774.
Illius, lib authorem Adelmum aut Athelmum vocat* Pap^r Masson in Leon. 3. and
Goldast. ante libros Carolinos pa. 83.
, overcame Desiderius, and took him captive, compelled the city of Ticinum
to yield; which other cities in Italy following, omnes se potesta^^ Regis
subdiderunt, they all subjected themselves to the power of Charles, who then
returned into France, subacta and ordinata Italia, having conquered Italy, and
set it in order. Charles, says Eginhertus Eginh. de vit. Carol pa 4
, did not desist nor give over war, till he had overcome Desiderius, put to
flight Adalguisus his son, totamque Italiam suae ditioni subiugaret, and had
brought all Italy under the yoke of his Dominion. Charles, says Marian.
Scotus Mar. Scot an. 774.
, went into Italy, and overcame Desiderius and the Lumbards, atque Italiam
totam subegit, and subdued all Italy. Charles, says Sigebert Sigeb* (...) 774.
, having Italiam sub iure Regni Francorum redegit, brought all Italy into
subjection to the French. Charles uing destroyed the Kingdom of the Lombards,
totam says Aimonius Aimon. lib. 4. de gest. Fran. ca. 70.
, forced the city of Ticinum to yield; which other cities in Italy
following, omnes se Regis and Francorum potestati subdiderunt, they all
subjected themselves to the power of Charles, and the King having subdued
Italy, returned into France, carrying Desiderius captive with him. Charles,
says Lupoldus Lupold. lib. de Iure Reg. and Imp. ca. 1.
, came into Italy, forced the city of Papia, being the chief seat of the
King of the Lumbards, to yield; other cities in Italy following it, dicti
Caroli potestati se tradiderunt, gave and subjected themselves to the power of
Charles, and he, Italiae subiugatae, set his son Pipine as Viceroy over
Italy, being thus conquered. Again Ibid. ca. 7.
, Charles bello licito subiugauit, subdued and conque^ed by just war, Italy,
Saxony, Frisia, and many other Provinces. And again Ibid. ca. 5. and it erum.
ca. 9.
, Charles licite per bellum acquisiuit, conquered, and that lawfully, Italy and
many other Provinces, and got them to him and his successors, because the
Kings and possessours of them dealt tyrannously against the Church.

It is true that many Cities yielded without war; but yet their voluntary
yielding to a Conqueror, hinders not his Conquest, but furthers the same, and
makes it more easy and and speedy. And therefore it is a very frivolous cavil
of Bellarmine Cum Rom^nis nunquam pugnauit, etc. qua ration^ igitur iure belli
Romanos subiectos habuit. Bell. lib. 1. de Transl. Imp. ca. 7. pa. 127.
, That because Charles fought not with the Romans, nor forceably entered the
city of Rome, as an enemy; therefore he obtained it not by conquest: for
neither did he fight with any City that yielded it self sine sudore and
sanguine, and yet he was a Conqueror of them, as well as of the other* and of
them all, none was so ready and willing to yield as Rome it self and their
State. Yea, they were so forward in this submission of themselves unto him,
That before Siffrid. Epit: lib. 1. an. 781.
hand, pactio interuenerat, there was an agreement, a covenant and compact
made, betwixt the Princes of Germany, and the Pope with the Romans, that when
the Lumbards were conquered, the Roman Empire should be transferred unto him.
What needed force, when they freely, and of their own accord, offered
subjection to the Conqueror?

To omit many other, their own Sigonius speaks most effectually to this
purpose, saying Sigon. lib. 4. de reg. Ital. in initio.
; Desiderius and all the Lumbards being overcome, Carolus Regnum Italiae sibi,
iure victorae vendicauit, Charles challenged the Kingdom of Italy as due unto
him by Conquest: yea, he further shows, that the Italian States upon this
Conquest, willingly accepted him as their Lord. After that says he Ibid.
, the people being demanded, if they would subject themselves to this King
Charles, and with constancy and fidelity obey him and his commands, had
answered, that they would; he was according to ancient custom crowned, and
then anointed King, and set in the Throne at Modoetia, by the Bishop of
Millane. Which things being done, Charles thought it his duty being now made
the Lord of Italy, non solum armis sed etiam legibus, not only by Conquest but
by Law, to set in order the Commonwealth: and then having told what Cities or
Dukedomes he gave to others, and what to the Pope, for a testimony of his
Sovereignty in both, Sigonius declares, That in all the Lands and Territories
which he gave or confirmed to the Pope, he did still retain ius principatus
and ditionem, Imperial or suprcame Dominion: and for the rest, all the Dukes
were to receive an oath of fidelity, every one swearing to be faithful to him
and his successors, vt vassallus Domino, as a vassal to his Lord. Thus and
much more Sigonius. The like consent was expressed at Rome, and that in a
Synod, held shortly after his conquest and crowning at Modoetia, For Charles
says Sigonius, after this His rebus Papiae atque Modoeciae actis, Carolus ad
consilia cu^ Hadriano co^municanda Roman iter intendit. Sig. ibid.
returned to Rome Iterum Romam redijt, Synodum constituit. Sigeb. an. 773. sed
non ait factam eo anno* Nam and reditus Romam and Synodus habita, post
expugnatam Papiam ann. 774 and idem declaratur Distinc. 63. Ca. Hadrianus and
Theod. de Niem. lib. de de Iur. Imp. in initio. Herm. Cont. an. 774.
: he appointed a solemn Council to be held; that Synod was Sigeb. Theod. de
Niem. and Gratian. locis citat. Naucl. an. 772. Mart. Pol. an. 772. Lupol. lib.
de Iur. regni. ca. 1 Rod. de Colum. lib de trans. Imp.. Hoc. Mars. Patau. de
trans. Imp: ca. 10. alijque.
most solemnly celebrated in the church of our Savior, at which were present
not only Bishops, Abbots, and other religious persons to the number of an
hundred and fifty, but judges Theod. de Ni^: loc. cit.
also, Lawyers, and others, ex vniuersis ordinibus almae vrbis, of all the
orders of the city, who sought out the customs and laws of the church and
Empire, Populus itaque Romanus legem condebat, the Roman people then made a
law after their usual manner, and Ius and potestatem Imperij concesserunt,
granted to Charles the right and power of the Empire, and in ^um transtulit
omne suum ius and potestatem, and the people transferred to him all their power
and right. The Testament of Charles set down by Eginhertus Eginh. de vita
Carol. pa. 13.
, yields an undeniable demonstration, that Charles from the time of this
Conquest, accounted himself the supreme Lord and King of Italy, seeing it
bears date Anno Christi 811. of his Kingdom in France, the forty three, of
his Kingdom in Italy the 36. The first of which thirty six falls out directly
in the year 774. By this now it appears, and that also by the consent and
judgment of the best Historians, and others, that both Charles esteemed
himself to have a right by conquest unto Italy, and that the Italians and
Romans acknowledged the same right in him; and that both the Pope, and the
other Italians, held their Territories from him as their supreme Lord: In
token whereof the Pope Rheg. an. 796. Si^^^ eod. an. Aim^. lib. 4. ca. 86.
Naucl. an. 796 Sigon. lib. 4. de reg. Ital. anno 796.
and Romans at the Election of Pope Leo, sent to Charles the keys of St.
Peter, and the standard of the city of Rome, and the rest swore fidelity to
him, and therein professed him to be their Lord, and themselves his vassals,
and the whole State of Italy first at Modoetia accepted, and crowned him for
their King, and then at Rome, in a Synod decreed the power and right of the
Empire to belong unto him.

Now seeing both this Conquest of Italy was made by Charles, and this uniform
consent was declared by the Romans, Anno. 774. as Rhegino, Hermanus, and
others affirm Rheg. Herm. alij que locis cit.
, even from that time Charles had the Sovereign, and truly Imperial
authority over Rome, Italy, and other conquered Provinces belonging unto the
Empire, though he neither desired, nor they gave unto him the Title and Name of
Roman Emperor, till more then twenty four Anno. 800. quando Imp^rator Romans
dictus and Corenatus est.
years after. For his power being then truly Regal, was also truly Imperial;
seeing it is certain that Rex and Imperator, Regal and Imperial authority
differ only in name and title, not in realitie and substance. How usually in
all writers are the Kingdoms of Assiria, Persia, and Grecia, called three of
those four Sl^id. de 4. fummis Imperijs libru^ scripsit. Medorum Imperium
vocat Perer. lib. 2. in Dan. pa. 104. and Imperium Persarum ac Graecorum idem
lib. 15. p. 907. Imperiu^ A flyrior^^^. Aeneas Syl. lib. de ortu Imp. ca. 4.
summa Imperia, which have ruled the world. Aeneas Syluius calls Aen. Silu. lib.
cit. ca. 1.
, the sacred Empire of Rome, Romanam regiam potestatem, the Regal power of the
Romans. Sigonius has writ twenty books of the Western Roman Emperors,
from Charles the Great to Rodulphus. All his books he entitles, Sig. a lib 4.
ad 20. de Reg. Ital.
De Regno Italiae, of the Kingdom of Italy. The name of the Emperor, says
Mars. Patauinus Mars. Defen. pac. part. 2. ca. 15.
is used to signify Regalis Monarchiae speciem, a kind of Regal Monarch: to
wit, such as is truly Regal and Sovereign. Hostiensis says Host Extr. de
verb. signif. ca. Super quibusdam, and cit. a Lupol. lib. de Iure reg. ca. 11.
, That Imperial unction (at which ti^e the title of Emperor is usually given)
non dat nisi nomen Imperatoris, gives nothing but the name of Emperor: The
substance then is the same with the Regal power, which before he has. Pope
Gelasius writing to an Emperor, and of his Imperial authority also, calls it
in express tea^mes, Regal power: The world Gelas. Epist. 8. quae est ad
Ana^tasium Imp.
is governed by two things, by pontifical authority, and regali pote^tate,
and by Regal power. Pope Leo who crowned Charles, calls Leo 3. apud Krantz.
Saxon lib. 2. ca 18.
that Regal power, which he had before his Coronation, Imperiale culmen, the
Imperial height. Lupoldus handling this point at large, says Lupold. de Iur.
reg. and Imp ca. 7.
of the Roman King, that eo ipso quod est Rex, est Imperator, even for this
cause that he is King, he is also Emperor* and that Ibid. habet Rex. Romans
^andem potestate^ exercendi actus reseruatos Imperatori, quam habet post
Coronationem.
in those Territories which belong unto him, he may exercise all Imperial
Acts: and particularly of Charles, he says Ibid. ca. 9.
; That before his Coronation to be Emperor, he had plenariam and omnimodam
potestatem, plenarie and al Sovereign power in Italy. He further adds Ibid.
cap. 7. Consuetudo generalis est omniu^ regnorum occidentalium, etc.
, That it is the general custom of all the Western Kingdoms, from time
beyond all memory, that their Kings do, and may exercise all Imperial acts
in their kingdoms, and that by reason of this custom, quae valet et licita
est, which is both lawful, and of force, the Roman King may before he be
crowned Emperor, exercise in his Kingdom all Imperial rights, acts, and
offices; upon which ground he particularly affirms Ibid. ca 7.
, that Rex Galliae the French King, as now he is called, has the same power
in his Kingdom, that the Emperor has in the Empire: and the like is to be
said of England, whose Crown is expressly called 25. H. 8. ca. 21. 22. and 1.
Mar Pa^l. 2. ca. 1. and 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
Imperial. To the like purpose Hier. Baldus says Hier. Balb. lib. de Coron.
pa. 68.
, that the King of the Romans, and the Emperor, idem omnino valent, et sunt
Synonima, are all one in substance, and are Synonimal titles: which he proves,
both because the years of ones Empire, incipiunt fluere, begin to be accounted
from the time that one is elected King of the Romans, and specially by the law
Cod. de Quadr. praescrip. lib. 7. tit. 27.
, Been a Zenone, wherein, that which is in one line called Imperialis maiestas,
in the very next, is called Regale culmen: whence it is evident, and that by
the Imperial law, that the Regal and Imperial majesty and height is the
very same; yea, Charles himself to have judged no otherwise is evident by his
own Act, for he Eginhart. de vita and gest. Carol pa. 11.
professed that if he had known that* Leo would have crowned him Emperor,
he would not have come to Church that day, though it was one of the chiefest
festival days in the year; even the day of C^rists Nativity. Now none may
doubt, but that if Charles had thought he had got by Imperial Coronation,
either a better right, title or interest, or more authority and power then
before he had, to Rome, Italy, and the Provinces which he had subdued, he
would most willingly have accepted, yea twenty years before that, have sought
for Imperial Coronation, and the Imperial Name. But knowing that though he
got a more glorious and pompous title, yet he obtained no power or authority
to, and over Rome, Italy, or the Provinces which he had conquered, then before
he had; he in modesty declining the name of Emperor, which he knew would
breed envy, (as afterward indeed it did Inuidia^ suscepti nominis,
Constantinopolitanis Imperatoribus super hoc indignantibus, magna tulit patien.
tia. Eginhart. Ibid.
) contented himself with the authority and power of an Emperor, which before
that solemn Imperial inauguration, he both had and exercised in Rome, Italy,
and other Western Provinces, which he had got iure belli, by Conquest and law
of Arms.

His other title was the willing consent of the Italian States and people to
have him for their Lord. And this was indeed sufficiently performed: first,
when after his Conquest, he was crowned at Modoetia King of Italy; and then
at Rome, when the Council of all the Italian States decreed him to be their
Lord and King; yet the same was again, and that with far more pomp and
solemnity then ever before performed at Rome Anast. in vita Leon. 3 alijque.
, in the Church of Saint Peter, on the day of Christ's Nativity, in the year
800 Nam obijt an. Imperij 11. an. Chri. 811. vt ex Testamento eiu^ ce^tum est a
pud Eginba^^. pa. 13. Qu^d ve^o Ath^l^^ Otho Fris. Rhegin. Herm. Sig^b. and
alij Coronatum dicunt an. 801 hoc eo fit, quia olim annum inchoabant a die*
N^^^uitatis Christ, non vt nunc a die Circumcis onis, and Kalend. ^anua. Quod
obseruat etiam Bell. lib. de Trans. Imp. ca. 4 pa. 105.
. When Pope Leo the third, in the name of the Senate and whole people of Rome,
and so of all the Italian States, Crowned him for the Western Roman Emperor,
and with many most joyful acclamations expressed their full consent thereunto,
and so transferred the Empire unto him. For though Bellarmine, and other
flatterers of the Roman See, challenge this wholly and solely to the Pope, that
he only Vt ipse qui solus id facere posse^, Imperium transfe^^e^ Bell lib. de
Trans. cap. 4. pa. 103.
, and none else could transfer the Empire; that he Bell. lib. ^od. in tit.
ca. 12.
suo iure, by his own Papal right, did transfer the Empire to Charles, and
that Charles Ibid. ca. 12. pa. 207.
obtained the Empire, nullo alio titulo nisi pontificis maximi authoritate, by
no other Title at all, but only by the Popes authority: yet is this but mere
ventositie, and puffing up the Popes pride. For neither has he right to give
or transfer any Kingdom: neither at this time was there ought (either for
Title or Power) conferred upon Charles, but what was given by the consenting
Decree of the whole body of the Roman State. And this, by the uniform
consent of the best Historians and writers is so clear, that none but such as
are peruicatious, and wilfully wedded to their own errors, can doubt thereof.

Athelmus, a most Author Annalium Francorum, omnium co^ sensu fidelissimus, and
qui tempore Caroli vixit. Bell. lib. de trans. Imp. ca. 4. pa. 93. Is fuit
Athelmus vt ante ostendi.
faithful author, and contemporall with Charles, says Athel. Annal. de reb.
gest. Carol. an. 801 videntur aute^ Annals Francotum editae per Pythaeum,
huius libri Epitome.
, Leo put the crown on the head of Charles, cuncto Romanorum populo
acclamante, all the people of Rome crying, To Charles the Emperor be life and
victory, which being done, a Pontifice more antiquorum principum adoratus est,
Pope Leo adored the Emperor, as the ancient custom was to do. the very like
words, both for the Coronation of Charles, acclamation of all the people, and
adoration given to Charles by the Pope, are set down both in Almonius Aimon.
lib. 4 ca. 90.
, in Ado Vi^nensis Ado Vien. an. 799.
, in Abbas Vspergensis Ab. Vsp. an. 801.
, in Tritemius Trite. de Orig. Franc. an. 801.
, and for the most part in Regino Rheg. in Chron. an. 801
. All the faithful people of Rome, says Anastasius Anast. in vit. Leon 3..
Post haec.
, seeing how Charles had defended the Church, did with one voice proclaim
Charles the Roman Emperor, et ab omnibus constitutus est Imperator, and he
was made Roman Emperor by them all. Leo the third, says Litprandus Litp de
vit. Pontif. in Leon. 3.
, purged himself by oath before Charles the King, and all the Clergy and
people; after which, ab omnibus praedictus Rex Romanorum Imperator est
constitutus, the same King Charles was made Roman Emperor by all, (by the
Clergy and people) and was crowned by Pope Leo. The Roman people, says Pope
Greg. 7. oration habetur apud Auent. lib. 5. p. 453.
Gregory the seventh; being the head of the world, and Lords of all, may
transfer the Empire, in quos libuerit, unto whom it list; as 275. years
since it transferred the Empire from the Grecians to the Germans. The Roman
people did it, not the Pope. Pope Leo, says Helmoldus Helm. Chr. siau. ca. 3.
, called a solemn Council; omnium ergo votis, omnium laudatione, so by the
votes or suffrages of all, by the collaudation of all, was Charles honored
with the Imperial crown; and the Empire translated from the Grecians to the
Frankes.

The Romans, says Sigebert Sigeb an. 801
, with one consent gave to Cha^les the imperial praises, ^umque per manum
Leonis Papae coronant, and they crowned him by the hands of Leo, and called him
Emperor. They crowned him, but by the hands of Leo. The Romans with one
consent, says Waltramus Naumbergensis Walt. tract. de Inuestit. in initio.
* praised Charles, eumque per manus Leonis coronauerant, and they crowned him
by the hands of Leo. Gotofride Viterb. speaking of the Imperial title given to
Charles, says Got. Vit. Chron. in Carolo mag.
, Tollere sic nomen curia tota monet, the whole Court (the Clergy, Senate and
people of Rome) willed Charles to take the title of Emperor unto him. Leo 3.
says Platina Plat. in ^eon. 3.
, populi Romans Scito ac precibus, Carolum magna voce Imperatorem decernit, by
the D^cr^e, and upon the entreatie of the people of R^me, with a loud voice
decreed (that is declared) Charles to be the Roman Emperor, and set the
Imperial Crown upon him. Charles, says Beneu. de Rambaldis Ben* de Ramb.
libr. Augustali, an. 801. inter opera Pe^^arc.
, electus est Imperator a senatu populoque Com. confirmatus a summo Pontifice,
was chosen Emperor by the Senate and people of Rome, and was confirmed by the
Pope. Leo says Egnatius Egn. Bap. in Carcl. mag.
, Scito populi Romani, clerique rogatu, by the Decree of the people of Rome,
and by the request of the Clergy, called and consecrated Charles for the
Roman Emperor. Pope Leo, says Sabellicus Sabel. Ennead. 8. lib. 8* in fine.
, Scito rogatuque populi, by the Decree and entreatie of the people of Rome,
consecrated and anointed Charles for the Roman Emperor. Leo, says Blondus
Blon. dec. 2. lib. 1.
, Crowned Charles with the old Diadem of Emperors, populi Romani Scito,
precibusque Imperatorem Romanorum declaratum, being declared to be the Roman
Emperor by the Decree and entreatie of the people of Rome. What Pope Leo did,
was done by the Decree of the whole Roman State Pope Leo, says Iac.
Wimphel^ngius W^mphel. in ^ pit. rer. German ca. 9.
, Populi Romani scito ac precibus, by the Decree and at the request of the
People of Rome, declared with a loud voice Charles to be the Roman Emperor,
and set the Imperial Crown upon him. Leo crowned Charles, says Aeneas
Syluius Aen. Sil. lib. 1. Epit. in Dec. Blond.
, After he was declared to be Emperor, populi Romani scito, by the decree and
entreatie of the people of Rome. And again Aene. Silu. lib. de ort. and auth.
Imper. ca 9.
, The Roman people, which with their blood (that is bloody wars) had got
the Empire; and by their virtues and valor had founded the Monarchy of the
world saluted Charles first Patricius, and afterward Emperor, concurrente
summi Pontificis consensu, the consent of the Pope concurring with them. They
did it, the Pope in that Act consented to what they did. Pope Leo, says
Onuphrius Onuph praesat. in lib. 4. ^astor.
, Romani populi and procerum Italicorum Scito, by the Decree both of the people
of Rome, and of the Pears of Italy; as also by the entreatie of the Clergy,
called Charles the Roman Emperor of the West. Phil. Achillinus handling this
very point, by whom the Empire was translated to Charles, after that testimony
so often mentioned of the peoples acclamation at the crowning of Charles, These
words, says he Phil. Achil. in Somni. Viridar. ca. 183.
, seem to imply that Pope Leo crowned Charles, de voluntate, ac ordinatione
populi Romani, by the will, ordination, or appointment of the people of Rome,
to whom it did belong to dispose of the Empire. Wherefore that translation of
the Empire, was made a populo Romano, by the people of Rome, the Pope being
included as one of them. And to this purpose he brings this reason. To them
principally does belong the translation of the Empire (if it ought to be
transferred) by whom it was instituted: but the Roman Empire was instituted by
the people, not by the Pope; and therefore by the people, and not by the Pope
must it be transferred also. And again Lib. cod. ca. 185.
, I answer, says he, that this translation of the Empire was made not by the
Pope, but by the people, who did at the beginning institute it, and from whom
at first, the Emperor look it.

Pope Leo, says Guiccardine Fr. Guicc. i^ Paralip. loc. 2. pa. 43.
, together with the people of Rome, named Charles the Roman Emperor, Verum
Pontifex haud alia authoritate, quam vt eius populi caput, but the Pope did
this by no other authority, but as the chief of that people. The Romans,
says John de Parisijs Ioh. de Paris. tract. de potest. Reg. and Pap. ca. 16*
, commended and magnified Charles the Great, and Imporatoris ei nomen dederunt,
and they gave the name of Emperor unto him. And this was done, says he, non
per solum Papam, not by the Pope only, but by the people, in whose power it is
to subject themselves to whom they will without prejudice to another: and they
did it upon a necessary cause to defend themselves against Infidels and Pagans:
nam populus facit regem, ^or the people by their consent make an (Elective)
King, and the Army an Emperor. The Romans and other Italians, says Michael
Coccinius Mich. Coccin. lib. de tra^sl. Imperij.
, seeing on the one side the avarice and sluggishnesse of the Grecians; and on
the other, the fortitude and justice of the Germans, transferred the Empire
from the Grecians to the Germans, in the person of Charles, and this
translation of the Empire was made, Romanorum caeterorumque Italiae populorum
consensu, and authoritate, by the consent and authority of the Romans, and
other people of Italy. The Pope, Senate, and people of Rome, says Auentinus
Auent. lib. 4. pa. 259.
, decreed, tacito plebiscito (their consent being in effect as if it had been
a written Decree of the Senate and people) to transfer the Roman Empire from
the Grecians to the Germans, and to Charles, and then was Charles crowned by
Pope Leo, all the people applauding it, which done, Charles was adored by the
same Pope, and other Romans.

Pope Leo, says Sigonius Sigon. lib. 4. Reg. Ital. ann. 801.
, put the Imperial cloak and Crown upon Charles, all the people applauding it
with their cries, and Imperatorius illi titulus a populo confirmatus est, and
the people confirmed unto him the title of Emperor. When the Roman Noblemen,
says Kranizius Krantz. in Saxon. lib. 3.
, came to a Council, the Western Empire was translated to the Germans. Again
Krantz. lib. 1. Metrop. cap. 14.
, Charles was proclaimed Emperor by all the people: Pope Leo performed that
sacred ministry, the people (cui ius ac fas esse videbatur de Imperatore
creando, who thought they had right to make an Emperor,) willing Leo so to do.
The Roman Church, says Canzo Canzo Turiens in gest. Carol^ mag. ca. 7.
citatur a Goldast. in suo Ration. part. ^.
, cum Proceribus, together with the Nobles or Senators transferred the Empire
from the Grecians, to the person of Charles and the Germans. The Romans,
says Alb. Argentinensis Alb. Argent. in Fragm Historic. inter Hist. Germ.
editas a Chri: Vrstitio.
, praescripserunt, appointed unto Charles the Roman Empire, and he being moved
by the request of Leo, of the Princes of the Kingdom, and all the chief men
consented to the will both of God and men, and was consecrated Emperor. Pope
Leo, says Bergomensis Phil. Bergo^. lib. 11. Supplement. in princ.
, being entreated by the Roman people, crowned Charles, being declared to be
the Roman Emperor. The translation of the Empire, says Lupoldus Lupold. lib.
de Iur. Reg. and Imper. in praef.
, from the Grecians to the Frankes, per eccle fiam Romanam facta, was made by
the Roman Church. The very same, says Radulph. de Columna Rad de Colum, lib.
de Trans. Imp.. Quantum.
. Now by this name of the Church is meant, not the Pope alone, or Clergy; but
the whole body of the Christian State of the Romans, as Lupoldus himself
declares; for both he Lupold. lib: cit. cap. 6.
holds, that the election of the Emperor is still made by the seven Electors,
vice and authoritate vniuersitatis principum ac populi, by the authority of
all the Princes and people of the Empire; and particularly for Charles, he
says Ibid. cap. ^.
, That those lands and power which he held, he had not from the Church, (that
is from the Pope) either in Fee, vel alio quocunque titulo, or by any other
title whatsoever, but he held them either by succession (as the Kingdom of
France) vel per bellum licitum, or else by just conquest, as Italy and other
Provinces which he subdued. Card. Cusanus Cusan. Concor ^athol, lib. 3. ca. 3.
, though he knew and alleges the Chapter venerabtlem, wherein the Pope is
said, to have transferred the Empire unto Charles, yet directly, denies any
such translation to have been made; yea he goes further, and shows, that to
make an (Elective) Emperor, the Popes authority is not sufficient,
Imperatorem Ibid. ca. 4.
facit consensus eligentium, non Papa, the consent of the Electors, not the
Pope makes an Emperor, and he Ibid.
sets this down, for a Maxim, Esse and posse Imperatoris ab vno^homine non
dependet, the Essence and power of an Emperor does not depend on one man,
(that is the Pope) and therefore even at this day, as he teaches Ibid. ca. 4.
, the Electors of the Empire, radicalem vim habent ab ipso communi omnium
consensu, have power to elect, from the common consent of all that are subject
to the Empire, that being as the root and foundation whence their election
has force: And again, The Election made by the Electors has force, non Ibid.
pa. 785
ab ipso Romana Pontifice, not from the Pope, but per Ibid pa. 786.
concordem omniu^ qui subsunt Imperio transf^sionem in ^os, but from this that
all the subjects of the Empire, ( one In qua quidem concord a Romans Pontif^x
Gregor. 5. includ^batur. ibid.
of which is the Pope also himself) have transfused, or transferred their
power of electing into those seven Electors: and so in their consent upon any,
is virtually included the consent of all the subjects of the Empire, even of
the Pope himself: The very same touching the Electors, does Lupoldus teach.
They, says he Lupol. lib. ^it. ca. 6.
, are esteemed to elect the Emperor in the s^ead, and by the authority of all
the Princes and people of the Empire. Now upon this true discourse of Cusanus,
it clearly follows; that if Charles was by any Election made Election^
principis ecclesiastici, as^e^imus Carolum and alios Germanos Impera^o^es ^^s
Imoperij adeptos esse Bell. lib. 1. de Transl. Im. ca 7. pa. 126.
Emperor, it was not, neither could it be made by the Pope, but by the whole
body of the Roman State consenting upon him; which consent was only uttered
and expressed by the voice and act of Pope Leo, when he nominated and crowned
Charles. Many more authorities (beside reasons) might be alleged to this
purpose, but these being so clear, are sufficient every way to encounter
Bellarmines fi^^^ie Aduers^s nostros circiter quinquaginta. ib^d. ca. 13. pa.
229.
wrested testimonies, whereof he boasts.

It is, and not without cause, disputed what effect this Imperial Coronation
had in Charles, and what ^e obtained by this making of him the Roman Emperor.
Some teach it to be only a (...) of Title, not of Realitie. So Hostiensis
Host. Extr de verb. signif. ca. Super quibusdam.
. Imperial Unction, gives nothing but the Name and Title of Emperor. Whence
John de Parisijs says Ioh. de Pa^. lib de potest. regia. ca. 16.
of this very Translation of the Empire, when Charles was crowned, Non
translulit veritatem, sed Nomen, it did not transfer Imperial power, but the
Imperial name unto him. And Cardinal Cusanus Cus. lib. 3. cit. ca. 4.
, It is evident that Unction and Coronation, nihil praestant Imperiali
patestati; add nothing to Imperial power. And to the same effect Jacob.
Almaine Iac. Alm. lib depotest. eccle. and laic. ca. q. (...) ca. 10.
, Coronation gives no power, sed est tantummodo solemnitas, but it is only a
solemnity.

And truly for Rome, Italy, and other Provinces which before that Coronation
and translation Charles had conquered, in respect of them, their sayings are
very true. For it is most certain, that in respect of these, Charles obtained
thereby neither more right unto them, nor more power and authority over them
then before he had: for he formerly held them both iure belli, and iure
consensus populi: and his power which before he had being royal and supreme,
was truly imperial: and so neither for right unto, nor authority over those
Countries did he receive any increase. In this respect the addition was only
Nominall, as giving him the highest style and name of Augustus, or Emperor, it
was not Real, as giving him either more right, or more authority in those
Provinces. Hier. Balbus teaches this, saying Hier. Balb. lib de Coron. pa. 68.
; All interpreters of the law, vno ore, parique consensu statuunt, do determine
with one consenting voice, that what belongs to the Coronation, is done honoris
and officij causa, rather for honor and office, then of necessity, or that
quicquam hac action Caesaribus accedat, that any thing should be added to the
kingly power. And he further says; That the election alone is of the
substance, the rest, to wit; Confirmation, Coronation and Unction, are only
matters of solemnity. Lupoldus Lupold. lib. cit. ca. 4. and cap. 11.
is earnest for the contrary. But if we rightly consider the point, the
realitie and power, which he thinks to have been added to Charles by crowning
him Emperor, is not so great as at the first it seems. He supposes, that by
this Virtute translationis huius Carolus eiusque successores receperunt
potestatem impericl^m in omnibus regnis, Prouincijs and terris occidentatibus
quae non erant ante translationem sub potestate Caroli. Lup. locis ci^atis.
making him Emperor of the West, the Roman State did therein give unto him
and his successors, a right unto all other Western Kingdoms and Provinces
which formerly belonged to the Empire, and which as yet he had not conquered,
which is the only matter of realitie superadded, that he could find. But
there must necessarily be added two restrictions, to make good this assertion.
The one, that he had to those unconquered Provinces such right only, and so
far, as the people of Rome and States of Italy could give unto him* Now
because there was in them no right at all at this time to do this, they having
long before transferred whatsoever power and right they had unto the Emperor
Vnde Roma seruilis vrbs, and Italia seruilis prouincia Co^stantini pogonati
vocatur, ab Agathone and occidentali Synodo. Act. 4 Conc. gen 6.
of Constantinople, it seems that in him the right and rightful power over
such Provinces still resided, till either by just conquest those Provinces were
taken from him, or else by voluntary cession, or other right, he passed them
away. By reason then of this former defect, that may be said of the peoples
giving or transferring to Charles the right unto those Provinces not as yet
conquered, which was often said Nich. 1. Epi, 10. Quonia^. and Hadr. 2. Epist.
4.
of the Ordinations made by Gregorius Syracusanus, and Phottus* Pater mous
nihil habuit mihi dare, nihil dedit; they had no power to give ought, they gave
nothing.

The other restriction is, that admitting they had rightly given such power
unto Charles, unto those as yet unconquered western Provinces which once
belonged to the Roman Empire, yet was this right given only over such
Provinces, as were iniuria ab alijs occupatae, to use Bellarmines Bell. lib. 1.
de Trans. Imp. ca. 13.. Decimo sexto.
own words, injuriously withheld from the Empire: for if any of those
Countries or Provinces had either iure belli, or by the consent Hi reges
dicipossunt constituti sea creati a Principe, propter Tacitu^ ipsius consensu^.
Nam qui patitur rem praescribi, vel consuetudine induci, praesumitur consensum
praestare. Lup. lib. cit. ca. 1
either Express or Tacit of the Emperor and his State, or by any other just
title freed themselves from the yoke of the Roman Empire, and so erected a
Sovereign or Monarchical kingdom of their own; as in Spain, England,
France, and other western Kingdoms, is not to be doubted Qui Imperatotem Romans
pto suo superio^^ in temporalious non (...). cu^^ sic^t app^^et deregibus
His^^^^^^ ^^^^ciae, and alijs omni^bus regibus Occidentis. Lupold. lib. c^. ca.
13.
but they had; for these, neither had the Roman State any power to give, nor
did Charles by their making him Emperor, receitie any right at all unto them.
I^ in respect of such unconquered Proui^ces only, as were iniu^iously
detained, the words of Lupoldus be admitted, that Charles by being made
western Emperor, received an addition of real power or right unto them, so
far as the Romans and Italians could give the same, it is not much material.
But for the maine point which concerns our present purpose, thus much is
evident and clearly demonstrated, that whatsoever it was that Charles received
by his Imperial Coronation, and by being made Emperor at that time, whether
only a Nominall Title, or some Real authority together with it, he both
received and held the same, not from Pope Leo, nor from any Papalauthoritie and
power, but from the joint consent and Decree of the whole Roman and Italian
State; whose consent and Decree for giving that Title of western Emperor unto
Charles, and either confirming what right he before had unto the conquered, or
giving a new right unto some unconquered Provinces injuriously detained, was
but signified and ministerially expressed by Pope Leo, as the mouth and hand of
that political body. The Act it self was the Act of the whole body, which
being the only principal agent, translated both the Imperial Title, and
whatsoever authority was with it conferred.

Neither is is to be doubted at all (or so much as questioned) but that Charles
and his successors had a most just aad rightful Title unto Rome, Italy, and
other parts of the western Empire, which he subdued: seeing he first obtained
them Iure belli, and then Iure consensus populi, declared upon his conquest,
first at Modoetia, then at Rome, in a very great assembly of all the States,
and after both these, An. 800. confirmed by the unanimous consent and Decree of
the Roman and Italian States at the time of his Imperial Coronation. Which
his right^ull Title is yet more clear, if those two points be rightly
considered, which both Baronius, and others of his stamp do often profess and
teach. The one, that the Cause of those wars by which Charles conquered
Italy, was just; seeing it was for defense Ecclesia liberatur a durissimo iugo,
and dirissimo sceptro regu^ Lon. gob. Bar. an. 774. nu. 1.
of Gods Church against inuading oppressors, undertaken also at the earnest
solicitation Deprecans Caroli excellentiam, vt succurreret occlesiae. Bar. an.
773 nu. 1.
, yea entreatie and supplication of the Popes Holiness; and furthered by the
special, yea, miraculous favor Fuga miraculosa Longobardorum. Bar. an. eod.
nu 8.
of God, who opened a way for Charles Deus Carolo viam semper aperuit, tanqua^
Cy^o. ibid. nu. 7.
to overcome the Lumbards, as he did unto Cyrus. The other, that Titulus Bar.
an. 800. nu. 12.
iuraque occidentalis Imperij iacebant absque possessor^, both the Title and
Rights of the western Empire remained then without any possessor, being taken,
and that justly, as they teach, from the Grecians by the Popes authority, for
that they pertinactiously adhered to heresy: All which are expressed, says
Baronius Sunt^^sta omnia expressa in fine Epistolae eiusdem Hadriani. Bar. ibid.
by Pope Hadrian in his Epistle to Charles. Now seeing a Conquest made upon a
just cause of war, does iure Gentium produce a just Title in the Conqueror,
it hence ensues that the Title of Charles to Italy, was just, seeing his
conquest thereof was grounded upon a just cause of war. Again, seeing the
western Empire was then vacant both for the Title and Right, it hence again
ensues, that Charles wronged none of their right or possession, by taking upon
him Imperial authority in Rome, Italy, and other subdued Provinces of the
western Empire; the right unto them being then tanquam ius in nubibus, did
descend upon him, who was the first Occupant. So upon these their own
assertions, both the Conquest of Charles was just, in respect of the Lumbards
oppression of the Church: and his taking of Sovereign, that is Regal or
Imperial dominion of the whole Country of Italy, was just also in respect of
the vacancie of the Empire, the right unto it, and those Provinces hanging yet
in the Clouds, and belonging to none but primo Occupanti, and that was Charles.

This is more then sufficient to answer that doubt of the disputers in Epo,
who infer, that Constantine gave the western Empire to the Pope, because
Pope Leo conferred it upon Charles. Yet to this which I have already said, let
me add the answer of Boethius himself, who contrary to those disputers,
holding that Boet. Epo. quaest. Heroic. 9. 5. nu. 31. and seq and Gloss. in
cap. Constantinus. nu. 21.
Constantine by his Donation, transferred not the Empire of the West unto
Syluester, or other Popes; to this their fifth reason, answers Ibid. Quaest.
5. nu. 48.
in this manner. That which is added touching the western Empire given by the
Pope unto Charles the Great, is not rightly said. For the Pope as being the
head or chief of the Church declared Charles to be Emperor, nomine totius
populi Romano Imperio subiecti, in the name of all the people subject to the
Empire, the people themselves, sic desiderante, desiring the same; the Emperor
of Constantinople being at that time justly deprived of the western Empire by
the Pope. Dedit ergo populus Christianus per Pontificem Imperium Carolo;
therefore the Christian people subject to the Roman Empire, gave the Empire
unto Charles by Leo, that is by his hands or ministry. Even as when the
succession of heirs happens to fail in any Kingdom, the people of that
kingdom, per ordinum eiusdem regni primores dat regnum nouo regi, gives that
kingdom to a new King, by the chief Peers and Orders of the same Kingdom.
Thus Epo; who clearly both reiects and refutes that vain boast of Bellarmine,
and others, that the Pope by his right, gave or transferred the Empire unto
Charles.

But what shall be said to Pope Innocent the third, who in the Chapter
venerabilem, does expressly affirm, that the Apostolic See (that is the Pope)
transferred the Empire from the Grecians to the person of Charles, and to the
Germans. Truly it might most justly, and by the rule of the law, be said, that
Popes are unfit Nullus idoneus testis in re sua intelligitur, ff. lib. 22. t.
t. 5. l. 10.
witnesses in their own causes. It might again be said with Albericus de
Rosate, That this Chapter Alber. in Diction. iu^^ in verbo. Elect. Imper.
venerabilem, is one of those Decretals, which are not iuri consonae, consonant
to the Law, but are set forth contraiura and libertatem Imperij, against the
right and liberty of the Empire. But I rather choose, to give that favorable
construction of the words of Pope Innocentius, which others have done before,
and which is consonant to the Historical narration. Innocentius Philoth Achil
in Somni. Viridar cap. 183.
said, that the Pope transferred the Empire to the person of Charles, either
because he did it authoritate Romanorum, by the authority of the Romans: or
because the Roman people, tribuit Papae potestatem transferendi, had then
given or committed to the Pope their power (so much as in them lay) to make
that translation, Vel quia Papa persuasit, seu consuluit fieri, or else because
the Pope did persuade and advise this translation to be made unto Charles. Any
one of which ways, if the words of Innocentius be taken, they are true, and
consonant to the Histories: if they be so expounded, as that the translation
was made either by the Pope alone, or else by his own, or any Papal
authority, they are untrue, and to be rejected, as utterly repugnant to the
uniform consent of the best Historians, as before we have already declared.

Marta in the third place, will yet after another fashion prove this Edict by
Charles the Great, Because he Mar. ca. 30. cit. nu. 31.
by his own Donation made to Pope Hadrian, confirms this Donation of
Constantine. Marta has so invred his tongue to truths, that one can scarce
expect ought vnelse from his pen. That Charles confirmed what Pipine had
given before, Anastasius Anast. in vit. Had. 1.. Alio.
at large declares. So does Baronius Bar. an. 774 nu. 5. and 6.
, and after them both Gretzer Gretz. lib. de Munif. princ. ca. 3.
; and in all these, as also in Leo Ostiensis Leo Ost. in Chror. Cassin. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
, is expressed the form of that Donation which Pipin Donatio Pipini extat apud
Anast. in vit. Steph. 3.. De quibus. Bar. an. 755. nu. 26. Gretz. citat. ca. 1.
made, and Charles confirmed. Let any one peruse that Donation, and he will
admire the vile and shameless dealing of Marta: For neither in that which is
mentioned of Charles, nor in that of Pipine, is this Donation of Constantine
either confirmed, or so much as named. I say more, those Donations of Pipin,
and Charles, do evidently, and undeniably convince this Donation of
Constantine to be a forgerie. For in those Donations, is particularly
expressed what Cities, Dukedomes, and Territories in Italy, Pipine gave, and
Charles confirmed to the Pope: what was not expressed in their Donations,
neither Pipin, nor Charles judged to belong to the Pope. Nay Charles disposed
otherwise of diverse Dukedomes, and ports in Italy, and gave them to others, as
Sigonius Sigon lib, 4. de Reg Italian 773. pa 90.
expresely witnesses. Apulia and Calabria he left unto the (Eastern)
Emperor, as after the victory of Justinian they were; and these afterward
became a new Kingdom, which was called the Kingdom of Naples. The Dukedom of
Beneuentum he gave to Aragisus, the son in law of Desiderius: the Dukedom of
Spoletum, to Hildebrand; the Dukedom of Foroiulium, to Rodgandus, what
remained in Italy besides, and these that which he gave to the Pope, of them
Sigonius says, Si^on. Ibid.
, Reliqua ipse sibi nomine Regni retinuit, he retained all the rest to
himself, as belonging to his own Kingdom or Empire. Had Charles confirmed
the Donation of Constantine, he neither would, nor in right could, have either
retained to himself, or given to any other, any of all these, but he should
have restored them all, and that only to the Pope, to whom by Constantines
Donation they belonged; yea he should in justice have resigned all the other
western Proninces also which himself held, to the Pope, not retaining any part
of them all. Besides, even in those very Territories which he gave, or
confirmed to the Pope; to wit, in the Exarchate of Rauenna, in Pentapolis, in
the Dukedomes of Rome, Tuscaine, and Campania, Charles when he gave, or
confirmed them to the Pope, he reserved Sigon. ibid.
in them all, Ius principatus and Ditionem, the Sovereign, and direct dominion
to himself. For Ius principatus, and ditio, import the direct and high
dominion, as Gretzer Quid quaeso est, esse in ^ure, principatu, atque ditione
a^icuius, quam habere Dominium directum ^^^us. Gretz. lib. ^. Cont. Replic. ca.
15. ^. Horribiliter.
also confesses. Now had Charles confirmed the Donation of Constantine, he
should have passed away, yielded up, or acknowledged the Soueraignetie in them
al, to be in none but in the Pope alone, and the Pope to be a superior Lord,
both in those Territories of Italy, and other western Provinces then himself.
Seeing Charles did none of these, his Donation or confirmation, howsoever you
call it, does undeniably demonstrate, that Charles either knew not of this
pretended Donation, or if he did, he contemned and condemned it (as justly he
might) for a base and counterfeit fiction.

The fourth Emperor alleged by Marta, is Lewis the son of Charles. He,
says Marta Mart. lib. ^t. ca. 31. nu. 1.
, proves or confirms this Donation. He confirms and demonstrates the vain
and vile dealing of Marta. His Donation is set forth by Baronius Bar. an. 818.
nu. 9. 10. and seq.
, out of their vaticane monuments (which are, you may be sure, made to speak
most favorably for the Popes cause.) Is either the Edict, or Donation of
Constantine, or Constantine himself so much as once named therein? No verily:
nor one syllable whence ought for the Donation can be so much as coniectured.
But as the Donation of Charles, so this of Jews, expressing what cities in
Italy he either gave or confirmed to the Pope, and how he reserved as Charles
had done before, the Sovereignty to himself, at least in the Dukedomes of
Tuscaine and Spoletum, by the acknowledgement of Gretzer Gretz. lib. 2 contra
Replic. ca. 15. ^. Porro vbi de Othone agit, sed par est ratio in Ludouici
donatione. and in Apol, pro Bar. ca. 20.
the most earnest Proctor for those Donations, expressing this very clause,
Salua super eosde^ ducatus in omnibus nostra dominatione, et ill^rum ad nostram
partem subiectione; Saving over those Dukedomes in all things our Sovereign
Dominion, and their subjection to us. Besides, as Card. Molineus Car. Molin.
contra paru. Datas in Epit. Gless. 15. sub^ st. nu. 157.
rightly observes, nec verum nec verisimile est, neither is it true, nor yet
probable, that Jews surnamed Pius, would make a deed of Gift of those things,
Quae donare non poterat, which were not his to give (as particularly Calabria
and the Dukedom of Naples) which Charles his Father, Graecorum Imperio
reliquerat, had left to the Greek Empire, as before out of Sigonius was
declared. These besides many the like do evidently demonstrate, that Jews
either knew not of this Constantinean Donation, or if he did, that he rejected
it as a forgerie. And the very like is to be answered to the Donation of Henry
the second, who is the fifth Emperor Mart. ca. 30. nu. 31.
alleged by Marta.

Otho the fourth confirms this Donation, says Marta. That Otho the fourth
confirmed to Innocent the third the patrimonte of St. Peter. Otho de S. Blasio
(...) de S. Blas. in append. ad Othon. (...). ca. 52.
, Sigonius Sig. lib. 16. de Reg. Ital. an. 1209.
, Nauclerus Nauc. in Othone 4. ann. 1209.
, Cronicon Belgicum Chron. magnum Belg. an. 1209.
, and many others do witness. But that he confirmed this Donation of
Constantine, there is not in any of them one word: and the patrimony of St.
Peter Baronius shows, was the same Henrici priuilegium, quo patrimonia Romans
Ecclesiae ab antecessoribus Imperatoribus collata confirmauit. Bar. an. 1014.
nu. 6.
which Pipine gave, and which Charles and Henry the second confirmed to the
Sea of Rome, in never one of all which, the Donation of Constantine is so much
as mentioned; but in the^ all, that is expressed, which clearly proves the
Donation of Constantine to be forged.

The very same must be said of Frederick the second, who is the next Emperor
alleged by Marta. He in his Aurea Bulla Friderici Aurea bella extat apud.
Baron. an. 1097. nu. 72. and apud Gold. part. ^. Imperial. constit. pa. 73.
, made Ann. 1113. confirms not only what his predecessors, Charles, Jews,
Otho and Henry had done before, but further he adds, that he will maintain
and defend the right of the Pope unto Sicilie, Corfica, and Sardinia. But of
this Edict of Constantine there is not so much as one word, from whence the
confirming of it can so much as probably be concluded. Nay, such
particularizing of the Popes Title in some parts of Italy, and some Provinces
or Islands in the West, manifestly proves, that he never meant to confirm all
the western Provinces to the Pope, which by confirming of this one Donation of
Constantine he should certainly have done, yea, had he confirmed but this one,
all the other Confirmations had been most idle, needless, and of no effect.

The last Emperor alleged by Marta is Charles the fourth. That he (as Otho and
Friderick had done) confirmed the patrimony of S. Peter unto the Pope, is
evident by Nauclerus, who says Naucl. in Carol. 4. an. 1355.
, he took the usual oath at the time of his coronation: yea, further also,
the Pope Paralip. ad Abbat Vsper. an. 1346. and H. Mutius in Chron. Germ. lib.
25. an. 1355.
refused to crown him, till he had sworn neither to stay at Rome, nor in
Italy. The Pope, as they observe, could not endure Pontifex co^sortis
impatiens. Mut. ibid.
any to be his peer in Italy. Besides this, In the presence, and with consent
of all the Electors of the sacred Empire, and other Princes, Barons, and
Nobles, An. 1356, the same Charles the fourth, made that large and most famous
Charter, called Aurea Bulla Aur. Bull. Caroli. 4. extat apud Goldast. part. 1.
Imper. Constitut. page 105.
, concerning the rights of the Empire, of the Electors thereof, and
particularly of the kingdom of Bohemia, decreeing Ibid. ca. 7.
, that the kingdom of Bohemia Saluis semper priuilegijs iuribus and
consuetudinibus Regni nostri Boemiae, super electione Regis, in casu
vacationis, per regnicolas (qui ius habent eligendi Regem Boemiae) facienda,
iuxta continentiam eorundem priuilegiorum, and obseruata^ consuetudine^
diuturnam a Diuis Romanorum Imperatoribus obtentorum, etc. Quae decernimus nunc
and perpetuis futuris temporibus in omni suo tenore et forma, indubiam tenere
roboris firmitatem. ibid.
should for ever enjoy their rights, customs, and privileges which formerly
other Emperors had granted unto them, that the Regnicolae, people of the same
kingdom should in the vacancie thereof make choice of their own King. He
made also another Imperial Constitution Constit. Car. 4. de liberate
Ecclesiastica. apud Gold. part. 3. Imper. Constit. pa. 415.
for the liberties and immunities of the Church, and exempting them from
judgment, imprisonment, and other punishment by secular men. But in none of
all these is there any, no not the least mention of confirming this Donation of
Constantine. Nay, it is expressed by Historians, How H. Mut. Chron. Germ. an.
1355.
diverse cities in Italy belonged to the Emperor, performed all honor and
obedience unto him, quod a subditis domino exhtberi potest, which subjects can
do to their (Sovereign) Lord, that they swear feoltie to him, that obruebant
officijs, and donis, they even oppressed him with multitude of gifts and
obsequies. An evident demonstration, that when himself held (as supreme Lord)
so many Cities in Italy, that he never confirmed this Charter of Constantine,
whereby, Rome, Italy, and all the Western Provinces, were for ever given to
the Pope.

Besides, that none of all those forenamed Emperors confirmed this Donation of
Constantine, Baronius whom Marta professes to be the wisest Cardinal, does
evidently witness. Let Marta hear, and seriously ponder his words, and he will
see his own folly in pretending them, as confirmers of this Donation. Sed Bar.
an. 1191. nu. 61.
nec Imperatores eiusdem edicti meminisse Certum est, It is certain, that the
Emperors have not mentioned this Edict of Constantine, Though Otho the first
and his son make mention of Pipines and Charles his Donation, and Henry
mentions both them, and that of Othoes also. If they mentioned it not, then
most certainly may Marta know, they did not confirm it: yea the Card. adds
Ibid.
, That the Popes to whom those Emperors made such grants, de praetermissa
Constantinianae Donationis mentione, non inueniuntur questi, never complained
that the Donation of Constantine was not mentioned in them: which doutlesse
they would have done, had they known Constantine to have made this Donation.

But all this will not serve the turn with Marta. He will yet further prove,
that those foresaid Emperors did confirm this Donation. And how I pray you?
That Charles the first, Henry the second, Otho the fourth, Friderick the
second, and Charles the fourth, confirmed this Donation of Constantine, it is
gathered, says he Mar. ca. 30. nu. 31.
, from the Chapter Romani, tit. de Iureiurando in Clem: by the Cap. Fundamenta,
tit. de Elect. lib. 6. Decretal. by the Chap. per venerabilem. tit. Qui filij
sint legitimi, and by the Chap. Ego Ludouicus distinct. 63. Thus Marta.

Against which proof of his I might first oppose the Imperial Charters
themselves, which directly show that none of those Emperors confirmed it. I
might again oppose the Certum est of his wisest Cardinal, It is certain,
that Emperors made no mention of it. I might further oppose another most just
exception, that the Popes and their laws are no fit witnesses in this, which
is their own cause; specially seeing the Imperial Charters of those Emperors
do testify the contrary. Yet, if in any one of these Chapters it be said, that
the foresaid Emperors confirmed it, I will confess, that Marta has some
color for his untruth. But if you examine those places, you shall find that
there is not one syllable in them whence this may be collected.

In the Chapter Fundamenta, Pope Nicholas the third says, (but says untruly)
That Constantine gave to Syluester and his successors, the Monarchy of Rome,
but that either Constantine gave Italy, and all the Western Provinces to
Syluester, (as the Charter of Constantines Donation says he did) or that any
of the forenamed Emperors, did confirm that Donation of Constantine, Pope
Nicholas says not. Gretzer himself confesses Caput. Fundamenta, in 6.
Donationem Constantineanam tam late non extendit, vt legenti planum fict Great.
Append. 2. ad lib. de munifi. princ. pa. 118.
, That this Chapter fundamenta, does not so far extend as the Donation of
Constantine. Besides, Nicholas does not once name in that Chapter, either,
Charles, Henry, or Otho: and of Fridericke, whom he names with great contumely
and scorn, (because he stoutly resisted the Popes tyranny) he speaks no
better, but that he was Frederici, colubri tortuosi, iusto ecclesiae iudicio
reprobati. cap. Fundamenta. loco. cit.
a Snake, justly reprobated and rejected by the Church, which is a very poor
testimony to prove he confirmed this Charter.

In the Chapter Romani, Pope Clement the fifth names indeed Constantine,
Charles, Henry, Otho, and Fridericke, and mentions them to have given
privileges Priuilegia omnia per praedecessores concessa, etc. cap Romani. loc.
cit.
to the Roman Church. And many privileges, and great guiftes, no doubt both
Constantine, and the rest did give; but that either Constantine made this
Charter, and gave so large privileges as are contained therein; to wit, Rome,
Italy, and all the Western Prouincences; or that either Charles, or any of
the forenamed Emperors, confirmed this Edict of Constantine. Clement has not
one word, nor ought whence this can be collected. Whereof if Marta will not be
persuaded by us, let him hear their own Gretzer Gretz. App. 2. ad. lib. de
munif. princ. pa. 114.
, In the Chapter Romani, nulla prorsus fit, mentio edicti Constantiniani, there
is no mention at all of Constantines Edict; and then citing the very words of
that Chapter, to which Marta has reference, he says, There is nothing here
specified concerning the Edict of Constantine, but there is only mention in
general of privileges and Lands given by Constantine to the Roman Church.
Thus Gretzer: which shows plainly the vanity of Marta, who from the grant of
some privileges or Lands given unto the Roman Church by Constantine, would
conclude that therefore Constantine gave Rome, Italy, and all the Western
Provinces unto the Popes for ever.

In the Chapter Ego Ludouicus, is set down a parcel of the Donation of Lewis,
of which before I showed, that in no part of that grant of Lewis, either
Constantine, or his Donation is so much as named; but Lewis his confirming of
some parts only in Italy to the Pope; being there expressed, and his
reserving of Soueraignety to himself, undeniably proves, that he thought not
all Italy to belong to the Pope, nor to him as supreme Lord; and therefore
this Donation of Constantine, by which Italy and all the Western Kingdoms
are given to Syluester and his successors, as to the chief Monarchs in them
to be a mere fiction and fable.

In citing the Chapter per venerabilem, Marta shows himself to be more then
foolish: for neither is Charles, nor Henry, nor Otho, nor Friderick, nor
Constantine, nor this Donation of Constantine, nor ought that can infer it,
so much as once mentioned in that place. Nay Pope Innocentius the third in that
Chapter, sets down that which directly overthrows this Edict. We, says the
Pope, have in the patrimony of the Church full power in temporal causes, but
in other regions (as particularly in France) we exercise temporal power but by
casualtie. Now seeing by Constantines Charter, the Pope is made a Monarch, as
Pope Nicholas Decernens Monarchiam Romans Pontificibus, Nich. 3. ca. Fundame^ta
says, A Prince and Emperor, as Steuchus calls Maiori principi cessit
Constantinus. Steuchus lib. de Donat. Constable. pa. 17. and maiori Imperato^i^rbem
reliquit. ibid. pa. 1^7.
him, to whom is given In Edicto Constantini.
the government of the whole West; it is evident, that by Innocentius his
decree, Constantine did not make this Charter, for then the Pope should have
had directly, and not casually, both in France, and all other Western
countries and kingdoms, a supreme, monarchical and temporal jurisdiction.
Thus you see, that for all which Marta has said in this cause, still that which
his most wise Cardinal avouches stands firm. Certum est. It is certain,
that the Emperors do not make mention, much less do confirm this Edict of
Constantine, for which Marta has mustered together, but with most unhappy
success, an whole army of all sort of witnesses.

We have now examined the chief of Martaes witnesses of all sorts, Councels,
Divines, Historians, Lawyers, and Emperors. Some few I confess are omitted;
Either for their unworthiness: of which sort is Ptolom^us Pogius, Eius memenit
Marta. lib. cit. ca. 30. nu. 25.
an Author so obscure and ignoble, that after long and diligent search, I can
no where so much as hear of his Book: or else because their testimonies are
too slight, and scarce worth refuting. Of this sort there are three cyted in
Marta. The first is Christ* Masseus Apud Mar. ca. cit. nu. 25.
, who says Chapter Massae. cron. an, 314*
only, that Constantine yielded to the pope his palace in Rome: but of giving
either all the Western provinces, or all Iraly, or but Rome it self to the
Pope, Masseus speaks not one word. Nay he Ibid. an. 336.
expressly declares that Constantine by his last will and Testament gave the
Western Kingdoms to Constantine his son, and the East to Constantius. So
that testimony of Masseus which Marta produces for proof of the Donation,
does indeed directly overthrow the Donation.

Not much unlike is Johannes Hugo Citatur a Mar. ca. cit. nu. 25.
, whom Marta should have ranked among his Lawyers: for though in one place he
say Ioh. Hugo lib. de offic. 4. praelat. seu quadriuio eccles.. sed sunt.
, that Constantine granted regal dignity to the Pope, and subjected Rome to
the Church, yet a little after he withal says (that which clearly
demonstrates the falsehood of this supposed Donation.) That lib. eod.. est
autem imperator.
the Emperor is princeps and Dominus totius Mundi, the Prince and Lord of the
whole world, (then sure Lord of Italy, Rome, and of the Pope himself.) That
all Provinces and all nations (then Italy and the west) are subject to him;
and that whosoever will not be subject to the Emperor nec haereditatem habere
potest, he can neither hold any inheritance, nor other things which are humane.
So by Hugoes testimony, the Pope must either ackowledge his subjection to the
Emperor, (and so this Donation to be false) or else renounce all his earthly
possessions, and so all the right which he pretendes to any part of his lands,
either by other title, or by this Donation.

The third is of no better note. Jacob. de valenti^ whose Cit. a Mar. loc. cit.
, words if Marta had duly considered, he might have seen directly to oppugn
this his pretended Donation. For he Iac. de vaualenti. in Cant. expos. 10.
says, that Constantine gave to the Church, Rome with the adjacent patrimony,
and 72 Cities in Italy, with many other Towns, adding that other Kings by his
example bestowed such like gifts on the Church. Had Valentia thought
Constantine to have made this Donation, he could not have said either that
other Western Kings had done the like, or that Constantine himself had given
some few Cities and towns in Italy, seeing by this Donation, not only all
Italy, but all the Western Kingdoms are given to the Pope.

Besides all those that Marta produces, there is one passage in Lud. Viues,
which I could wish to ouerpasse in silence. But his words are so injurious and
opprobrious to the most religious Constantine, more beseeming Julian, Zosimus,
or some malicious Pagane, then any Christian or child of the Church, that they
may not be omitted without that just censure which they deserve. Dies ille
Constantini, says he Lud. viues lib. de vita sub Tur. ca.
trist^ pietati fuit; It was a lamentable and an vnhapy day to the church,
wherein Constantine was made Emperor. He entered into the Church not as a true
Christian, but bringing With him, wealth, honor, and pride into the Church.
Venit in Christi Domum comitatus Doabolo, he entered into Christ's house
accompanied with the Devil. Martyrdom then ceased, zeal was cooled, piety
declined, and the faith began to totter. Viues might as justly commend Nero*
Dioclesian, Galerius, or other persecutors, because they made many Martyrs, and
sharpened the zeal and piety of Christians; as dispraise Constantine for
bringing peace, and with it all the blessings of peace to Gods Church, even
that free passage of the Gospel throughout the whole Empire, at which though
heathens repined, yet the holy Church, yea the holy Angels of God sung
Halleluiah, and sounded forth many Hymns of praise and thanksgiving unto
God. He might as justly declaime against Physicians, for freeing of those from
sickness and affliction, who in the time Hos. 5. 15.
of their adversity seek diligently unto God: or write inuectiues against
Moses and Joshua, and call their days unhappy, seeing they brought the
Israelites out of the furnace of Egypt, annd out of the wilderness, and
brought them to the land of their peace and prosperity, a land flowing with
milk and honey, where being fat with Gods blessings, they began to kick and
spurn against the Lord. Was it not sufficient for Viues to declaime against
Constantine alone, but to condemn also the piety, faith and zeal of the
whole Catholic Church in those happy days. Never was the faith more
constantly maintained, never did the zeal and piety of Bishops more abound
then in the days of Constantine, and diverse hundreths of years after. If in
some Christians that most happy peace and prosperity occasioned security, yet
is the fault thereof in no respect to be imputed to Constantine, but to the
corruption of their own nature, which waxes wanton with Gods blessings and
being luxuriant with prosperity, turns his best blessings into a curse unto
them. Viues should have remembered that good or bad actions are never to be
measured by Events, but by their own uprightness. But an inexcusable error
blinded and misled Viues in this matter. He supposed (not without a great
blemish to his judgment and learning,) Constantine to have made this excessive
and exorbitant Donation. He had heard it said that when this Donation was
accepted by the Pope, a voice from heaven had proclaimed: This day is poison
powered into the Church. Upon these erroneous supposals he inueyes against
Constantine as the giver, against the holy ancient Church, as the receiver of
this Donation: whereas had he but with any diligence examined the cause, he
might have easily discerned, that this Donation was neither given nor accepted
in Constantines days, and that the poison of Antichristian souereigntie, pomp
and pride maintained by this Donation, never insected, nor infested the Church,
till the days of Pope Hildebrand and his successors, to which times that
prophecy does fitly, and only agree.

There remains now but one more whom I will mention, Remundus Rufus, in whom
(seeing Boethius Epo Boet. Epo* Heroic quest. q. ^. nu. (...) que^ co^mode Rusus
refiraenauit.
commendes him for a worthy defendour of Constantines Donation) I expected some
more weighty persuasions then in others: the rather because he professedly
writes against Rem Rufi. responsio ad Molmeum de Donat. Constant.
Carol. Molineus, who has by many and very pregnant reasons convinced Car.
Moli^. lib contra paruas Datas in ^pit. G^. 15. substiactionis nu 157. et seq.
this Donation to be a counterfeit, a lie Me dacium mendacio cumulantes ibid.
nu 167.
and as he fur her calls Ibid nu. 159
it famosam fabulam, a famous fable. Now the truth is Remundus speaks so
faintly for the Donation, that under pretense of defending, he seems to be a
refuter thereof. Nihil mehercule habeo, verily, says he Rem. Rufus. lib.
citat. pa. 614.
, I have nothing at all whereby it can be firmly proved that Constantine made
this Donation: yet we will not call ^t a Fable, as Molineus does, and this he
strives to prove by a foolish definition of a Fable. Again Ibid.
Satis constat, It is very clear that before Pipins time (that is more then
400. years after Constantine) the Popes did not use that Donation, and this by
diverse reasons he declares. Again, Rem. Rufns lib cit pa. 644. et seq.
the Popes did not touch nor meddle with that Donation, quoad Imperij Romani
per occidentem gubernacula, for the rule and government of the Empire in the
West; nay they neglected that, and for this cause ius illius Donationis
praescriptione extinctum fuisse ante Carolum magnum, that the right of that
Donation was by prescription extinct before the time of Charles. Thus Rufus
professing what right was coserred by the Donation to have been extinct, and
so the Donation it self to be of no force, if it had been made, and yet so
faintly pleading for the verity of the making thereof, that his most miserable
defense of the same, against the manifold and solid reasons of Molineus, may
justly persuade any, that it both is a most base forgery, as we have already
demonstrated, and a famous fable, as Molineus fitly calls it. And so much for
the testimonies, alleged by Marta and others for this Donation.

CHAP. XV.
Four Reasons brought by Doctor Marta, and Card. Albanus for the Donation made
by Constantine in the pretended Edict, refuted.
AFter authorities, in the last place there are brought by Marta and Albanus,
some few reasons to confirm the truth of this Donation, which are well worthy
observing.

The first is drawn from the Justice of God, who Nec est verisimile Deum
omnipotente^ perferre potuisse, vt hoc figmentum in hanc vsque diem fidelium
mentes, sancta^ Ecclesiam Romanam obtenebrasset. Marta. ca. 30. cit nu. 32.
being omnipotent would never, or as Marta says, could not have suffered this
Edict of Donation, if it had been a figment, to have deceived and darkened the
minds of the faithful, and of the Roman Church even unto this day.

First Marta does well, to acknowledge their Roman Church, or as Carerius
Constantini donatione^ Orthodoxi and very Catholici, veramesse fatentur. Car.
lib. 2. de potest. Pont. Romans ca. 21. Veru^.
says, such as are true Catholics among them to hold this Charter to be true.
For seeing Leo the ninth in his Decretal Epistle has declared it to be the
authentical writing of Constantine, their Church, and all who are rightly
catechized among them, with Super hanc Petram, cannot choose but hold and
believe it, to be such as the Pope says it is: herein they build upon that
Rock, which will never fail them. But I trust by this time Marta sees, that
herein both their Pope and Church build upon sand, even on a fond, fabulous,
and forged Donation. Again, if true Catholics, yea and their Catholic
Roman Church, hold this for the true Charter of Constantine, what must be
thought of Card. Cusanus, of Card. Baronius, of Iac. Almane, of Gretzer, yea,
of Pope Aeneas Syluius, who all condemn and reject this Edict for a figment
and forgerie? None of these in Martaes judgment, are of the Roman Church, nor
with Carcrius true Catholics; They all must now be cashiered, and blotted out
of the book of life, rather then this one base and witless forgerie must be
forsaken.

Again, whereas Marta says, that God would not suffer their Church and her
Children to be blinded, deceived, or deluded with this figment, he should have
considered that to be most just with God, which the Apostle foretells,
Because 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.
they received not the love of the truth, therefore shall God send them strong
delusions, that they should believe lies. Neither would it seem strange to
Marta, (if he were not a mere stranger to the word of God) that the
omnipotent and just God, should suffer them and their Church to be so long
deluded with a figment. The justice and omnipotency of God winkes at and
suffers with long patience greater abominations in the Roman Church then
this. The abundance of their Idolatries and tyrannies, the Apostasy of the
Roman Antichrist, and his Antichristian Synagogue, God sees and suffers
long; But tarditatem supplicij grauitate pensabit, Know thou Romans 2. v. 3. 4.
not that the long suffering of God, leads thee to repentance? But thou,
after the hardness of thine heart, that cannot repent, heapest up wrath
against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.
He suffers them, as he did the Amorites Genesis 15. v. 16.
and Iebusites, till their wickedness be full; but as soon as their sins
are ripe, he will power down at once, all the Viols of his wrath Apoc. 18. 2.
upon that proud City, which says Ibid. v. 7.
, in her heart, I sit as a Queen; and he will cast Babylon (which they
Babylon, quae casura praedicitur, Babylon meretrix purpurata, matter
fornicationum, Roma quidem est. Riber* in Apoc. ca. 14. nu. 38. Roma non tantum
propter priora peccata, conflagratura est, sed propter illa quae extremis illis
temporib^^ commissura est. ibid. nu. 44.
know and profess to be Rome) like a millstone Apoc. 18. 21
into the bo^tome of the Sea, yea into a lake Apoc. 20. 10
of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet that seduceth the
world, shall be tormented both day and night for evermore.

A second reason brought by Card. Albanus, is drawn from the truth of God, who
by the mouth of his Prophets, foretold that Constantine should make this very
Charter of Donation. This grant of Constantine, says he Hier. Alban. lib. de
Donat. Constant. nu. 23.
, (and he speaks of that which was made Ibid. nu. 12
scripto interueniente, by writing and Charter) diuinis traditionibus vel
maxim innititur, does especially rely on the Divine Traditions, or
Scriptures. And, among Ibid. nu. 22.
them all, offert se vaticinium illud, that Prophecy of David 1. Chron. 29 14.
offers it self to us, Who am I, and what is my people? or what can we promise
to thee O God. All things are thine: but these things which we have received at
thy hands, we give unto thee. Quis neget hoc in loco concessionem illam
Constantint iam inde a primis temporibus a vate illo fuisse insinuatam? Who may
or can deny says Albanus Hier. Alb. loc. cit.
, but that this Donation of Constantine was from ancient time intimated and
fore-signified by the Prophet David? I answer, that whosoever has either wit
or judgment, or any learning, either in divinity or humanity, may justly,
and ought to deny it. Is there any one syllable there which can be proved to be
prophetical, or to foreshew what should come to pass? especially touching the
future gift of an Empire? of giving it by Constantine, rather then by Charles
or Otho? or giving it to Sylu^ster? What proof, either from the words of the
Text, or from the coherence, or from the ancient Fathers, or from the
Rabbinicall, yea, or from the very Cabalisticall Expositors, does Albanus
produce? Not any, nor so much as any conjecture for his prophetical prediction
of this Donation. But seeing Albanus is so delighted with voluntary
expositions of the Scriptures, he may find 1000. far more likely texts then
this of David, wherein this Do^ation is signified. That of the Prophet Jeremy
Ier. 23. 28.
, Quid Paleas, ad triticum? what is the Chafe to the Wheat, says the Lord? A
fair Prophetical allusion, or insinuation of their Palea Constantinus. Or
that which Michaia 1. King. 22. ver. 22.
foretold, I will go and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets:
Another fair allusion to those Prophets of Antichrist, who either devised, or
who applaud this lying Donation. Or that of the Psalmist Psalm. 118. v. 85. in
vet. vulgata lat. editione.
, Narrauerunt mihi iniqui fabulationes, wicked men have told fables unto me.
Where the Prophet both describes what this Donation is, a mere fable and lie;
and who they are that relate, embrace, and defend it, none but wicked and
ungodly men. To every one of which Texts, if one should add the words of Card.
Albanus, Quis neget hoc in loco, who can deny, but that the Donation of
Constantine, and all defenders of it, are prophetically insinuated by these and
like Scriptures; all these expositions may be justified and proved against
Albanus, in the same manner, as the Venetians proved their right for tribute in
the Adriaticke Sea, against the Pope. Let Respondent Veneti, Mirari se quod
iuberentur oftendere priuilegia quoru^ Archetypa Pontifex ipse suis Archiuis
custodiret: reperturus facile, si Donationis Co^sta^tini membranae partem
exteriorem, in qua maiusculis literis ea scripta essent accurate inspiceret.
Phil. Camer. meditat. historic. centur. 1. ca. 61.
the Pope, or Albanus, or any of them all look on the backside of the
Autographum of the Donation that which Constantine writ (as Steuchus Steuch.
lib. cit. pa. 189.
tells you) with his own hands, and maiusculis literis ea scripta esse accurate
inspiciet, he shall clearly see, that all these texts, and expositions of
them, are written there in great Characters, yea even in such Golden letters,
as Capistranus Ioh a Capist. part. 2 de author. Papae. nu. 120. pa. 46
tells you, the Donation it self is written in.

A third reason, and that is Martaes, is drawn from the Justice of their
Popes; Those holy Bishops, says he Nec est verisimile sanctiss. pontifices,
qui post Siluestrum bona haec tanqu^^ ad se spectanti^ vigore donationis
Constantini possederunt, voluisse occupare. Mart. loc. cit. nu. 32.
, after Syluester held the possession of those things by virtue of this
Donation; and seeing they would not, occupare, that is, unjustly invade them,
therefore it is very likely that Constantine gave them. Truly, this kind of
argument drawn from the Popes just and upright dealing, is the worst and
weakest Topicke place, that was ever devised: There is neither tyrrannie, nor
oppression, nor fraud, nor forgerie, which may not very easily by it be
justified. But for this particular, it is evident, that neither Syluester,
Julius, nor any of those ancient Ecclesia tempore Gregorij magni, (i. 600.
annis post Chr.) no^dum habuerat principatum politicum, sed possidebat bona
tempo^alia ad eum modu^ quo priuati ciues possident. Bellar. lib. 5. de Pont.
Romans ca. 10.. Quarto.
Popes, none till Gregory the second, Zachary, and Stephen, held or possessed
so much as those Dukedomes of Rome, Rauenna, and other large Territories in
Italy, which they now enjoy; much less did they possess the whole Country
of Italy, and all the western Provinces, which by this Charter of Constantine
is given unto them. Those ancient, more modest and honest Popes, were content
with a far less portion and patrimony. But when afterward Gregory the
second, and other succeeding Popes, had by treachery Vid. sup. ca. 8.
and rebellion withheld some fair possessions from the Emperor, and then to
cloak this their injustice, had procured some Charters from Pipine, Charles,
and other succeeding Emperors, to confirm (and that with an ouer-plus) the
same; when they saw that those also were not large enough, they Hadr. 1. and
praecipue, (...) 9.
sent abroad, ratified by their Pontifical authority this forged Charter, as
if it had bin the true and authentic deed of Constantine. So what they first
got by treachery and treason, that they after studied to hold and enlarge by
fraud and forgery. I must entreat Marta for this one Argument drawn from the
Popes just and upright dealing, that he will be pleased, not to call it a
Topicall, but as it is indeed a Sophistical, a Treacherous, a Tyrannical
place of arguing.

The fourth and last reason is Martaes Mart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 33.
also: and it is as he boasts, argumentum firmissimum, a most strong argument,
even another Achilles Zenonis: because the Emperors when they are crowned by
the Pope, do swear not to violate or infringe the Donation of Constantine. To
the like purpose is that of Alex. de Imola, The Emperor, says he Alex. de
Imol. in l. filio quem. ff. de liber. and posthumis.
, when he takes his crown, jurat de non contraueniendo dictae Donation^,
swears that he will not do ought against this Donation of Constantine. I
answer: first, that if it be indeed true which Marta and Alexander say, that
Emperors swear to maintain this pretended Charter of Constantines Donation,
(for of that Verba donationis, quam in ten simus co^probare in hoc capite, sunt
ista. Mart. loc. cit. nu. 1.
they speak) then are the Popes most vile and injurious persons, who do not
only persuade, but enforce Emperors to swear to maintain and defend a
false, forged, and Chimericall Charter, and to make God a witness of that as a
truth, which has no realitie nor truth at all in it. It may again be
answered, that if this oath be offered to Emperors at their coronation, they
might, and still may upon just warrant refuse to take the same: not only, for
that it is impious and blasphemous for any (much more for an Emperor) to
swear that they will maintain that as a true and real Charter of Constantine,
which was never made by him: but because it is most prejudicial also to their
own Imperial rights and royal dignities. And they may more safely refuse to
take it, seeing the Pope upon such their just refusal, may not rightly deny the
crown unto them. Mich. Coccinius says Mich. Cocci. lib. de Imper. translat.
prope finem.
very rightly in this case, Non potest Papa Regi coron^m Imperij denegare,
etiamsi Rex non iuret se Constantini donationem quam vocant ratam habiturum,
the Pope cannot in right deny to crown him, that is truly chosen Emperor,
although he do not, or will not swear, to hold as firm and of force, that
pretended Donation of Constantine.

But say the Pope do refuse and deny to Crown him (though in right he ought
not) what damage, hurt, or inconvenience does ensue to the elected Emperor
upon such refusal? Truly none at al, as the same Coccinius rightly declares.
For, ex ipsa electione, says he Ibid. fol. praeced.
, by virtue of his very election, he may notwithstanding exercise all
Imperial authority, and do whatsoever belongs to an Emperor after his
Coronation; neither need he seek either the Popes Coronation, or
Approbation: And hereof he gives a demonstratiue proof: Because he who is
surrogated, and succeedes in the place of another, has the right and power of
him unto whose place he succeedes. But by due Election made by the Princes
Electors, the elected succeedes in locum populi Romani, into the place, and
receives the authority of the whole Roman State; the consent of them all
being virtually included in those Electors, into whom they transferred their
power of electing an Emperor. And seeing before they transferred this power,
or while they retained it in themselves, presently upon their election, the
party elected, had full Imperial authority, without expecting either the
examination, or approbation of any other: the very same power also must
presently upon the election be in the party elected by those, unto whom they
have transferred their power of electing; and seeing neither Constantine,
Theodosius, nor Justinian, nor Charles the great, (which is to be remembered)
nor Lewis, nor the Othoes, Fridericks and Henry's sought for, or desired of the
Pope either nomination or approbation; surely others who have not or seek not
that Papal approbation, may yet without it be fully Emperors, and exercise
all Imperial authority, as the forenamed Emperors without it have done.

The same Coccinius gives yet another reason, why the Pope may not deny the
Imperial Crown, though the elected Emperor refuse any oath of feoltie, or
homage, (and such is that whereby they swear to defend this Donation of
Constantine) offered to him by the Pope. For the Pope says he Ibid.
, can do nothing in praeiudicium iurium alterius, to prejudice the right of
another: but by such an oath of feoltie or homage he should prejudice the
Emperor, who by means of this oath should become the Popes vassal, and hold
his Empire from him. But the Emperor holds his Empire from God, not from the
Pope. The imperial authority being conferred upon him immediately by God,
upon the consent of the Electors in which is virtually the consent of the whole
Roman state: even as Bellarmine Bell. lib. 2. de Rom pont. ea. 17..
obseruandum Tria sunt in Potifice, Pontific^tus ipse, vt forma, persona, vt
subiectum formae and Coniunctio vnius cu^ altero Ex his, pontificatus a solo
Christo est, persona qua electus est, ab electoribus. Ipsa vero coniunctio est
a Christo, mediante act ^ humano electorum.
says of the Pope and of papal or Episcopal authority, that it is conferred
immediately from God to the Pope upon the election of the Cardinals or any
other, to whom the right of electing belongs. Seeing then by virtue of the
election, the whole imperial power is given to the elected Emperor, and
seeing the Pope cannot prejudice the Emperors right, specially seeing the
consent In qua conco^dia Romans pon^ifex Greg. 5. includebatur Cusan. lib. 3.
concor. cathol ca 4.
of the Pope himself, is included in that of the Electors, it were injurious,
by reason of the refusal of any such impious oath, to deny the solemnity,
when the substance is fully conferred upon him, and that even by the Popes own
true, though implicit and virtuall consent, though in this particular he should
explicit expressly and actually happen to dissent.

The like is taught by Lupoldus, I conclude, says he Lu^old lib. de Iure
Regni. and Imp. ca. 7.
, that the Roman King after his election by the unanimous consent of the
Electors, or of the greater part of them, habet eandem potest atem has the
same power to exercise imperial acts in the provinces subject to the Kingdom
and Empire quam habet post vncionem and coronationem, which he has after
V^ction and Coronation. To this agree Hostiensis Hos. Extr. de verb. signif.
ca. Super qui busdam.
, and Card. Cusanus Cusan lib. 3. Co^cor ca. 4.
, who both hold, that Coronation adds nothing to Imperial authority, nor
gives ought but the name and title: and specially Hier. Balbus, who not only
affirms Hier. Balb. Coronat. pa. 68.
and proves it were admitted, that both Eugenius and Sigismund intended this
very Charter of Donation. But that neither in this promise, nor in those
forms of oaths set down by Hildebrand and Clement the fifth, that in none of
them the Charter pretended from Constantine is intended, there are three
evident reasons. First, which of all the Emperors that ever took this oath,
acknowledged Rome, Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and all the Western
Provinces to belong, and that also as to the supreme Lord, to the Pope? as by
this Charter it is said they do. For the Kingdom of France, to say nothing of
many other western Kingdoms, seeing Pope Innocentius the third professes
Innoc. 3. cap. per venerabilem, qui filij sint legitimi. lib. 4. Decretal. tit.
17.
, That the King thereof, superiorem in temporalibus minime recognoscat,
acknowledges none to be his superior in temporal matters, it is incredible
that either the Popes would require, or any Emperors, though required by the
Pope, would ever take a solemn oath and swear, that the Pope were a superior
temporal Lord in that kingdom to him. Nay, if Emperors swear to maintain
that the Pope was and ought to be the supreme Monarch in Rome, Italy, and all
other Western Provinces, how does their own Hier. Balbus say, and confidently
avouch unto Charles the fifth, the Emperor, Charles 5. primus Hier. Balb. lib.
de Coronat. pa. 86.
ex Christianis Imperatoribus, first of all Christian Emperors, gave the
City of Rome, with the adjacent Towns to the Apostolic See, abdicating from
himself, and renouncing all jurisdiction in the city. Let either Mar- or
Imola, or any other show, by fair and undoubted records, that all Emperors
since the time of Clement the fifth, or Hildebrand, acknowledged the Pope to be
the supreme Monarch in all the Western provinces; or else let them esteem it
no other then a slander of Imperial Majesty, and an imputation of perjury to
al Emperors since that time, to say, that they swear to maintain the Charter
of Constantines Donation. And yet I say nothing all this time of that which
Albericus rightly observes Alberi. in diction. verbo electio Imperatoris.
, that this Chapter Romani is another of those Decretals which are not iuri
consonae, and which were made against the dignity of the Empire.

A second reason is taken from the confession of Gretzer, who expressly
professes, that in the Chap. Romani, there is no mention of this Charter or
Edict at all, There is nothing says he Grets. Appen 2. ad lib. de munif.
princ. pa. 114.. In Epilogo.
, particularly spoken of thus Edict, but Privileges granted by Constantine are
there specified: and privileges Constantine might, and did no doubt grant many
to the Church, and yet not such ample Privileges as this Charter speaks of,
to wit, Rome, Italy and all the Western provinces. So they might both take and
observe that oath, and yet withal hold this Donation to be a forgerie.

The last reason is, that other oath which Otho the fourth Othonis iuramentum
extat apud Math, Pari^. in Johan. pa. 306.
and Henry the fifth Henr. 5. iuramentum extat apud Leon. Ostien. in Chron.
Cassin lib. 4. ca. 42.
, are recorded to have taken, and which to be usually taken by all Emperors,
out of Baldus Sup. cap. 8. pa. 166.
and Lucas de Penna we have before declared. Their oath Apud Lu^, de Pen. loc.
cit.
is, iura regni and honore^ coronae illibata seruare, to keep entirely, and
inuiolably the rights of their Kingdom, and the honor of their Crown. Can
they possibly swear that the Pope ought to have and enjoy, Rome, Italy, and
all the Western provinces, and yet keep inuiolate the rights of the Empire?
Is Rome and Italy no part of the Empire. Can they again swear, that the Pope
ought to be Supreme Monarch in all those, and yet preserve or keep inuiolate
the Honor of their Imperial Crown? Is not Sovereignty Vt Ostensum est ex
Couar sup ca, 8. pa. ^61.
of Dominion the honor, yea the very form and essence of Imperial
authority? Or may we think that the wisdom of Emperors can admit both
these, being directly repugnant, and contradicting oaths the one to the other?
Seeing it is certain that Constantine granted Privileges and Donations to the
Church, they may well with their former oath, swear to maintain those, so
far as they are or shall be made certainly known vnvnto them: but to swear
that they will maintain this pretended Charter of Constantines Donation, and
withal swear to preserve the rights and roialties of their Empire, without
open and evident perjury they cannot. Nay I say more, that seeing they are by
virtue of this Imperial oath bound to maintain both the Rights and Roialties
of their Empire, they are even thereby and by that sacred oath, bound not only
to abandon and abolish for ever this pretended Charter of Constantine, which is
most prejudicial both to their Rights and Royalties: but further also, to
labor and strive to recover both their Imperial Sovereignty in Rome and
Italy, and whatsoever Lands, Cities, or Territories the Pope usurps, and for
which evident and certain proof cannot be showed, that by just and legal
conueiance they have been either for the vsus fructus given, or otherwise
passed unto the Pope. But having spoken of this point before, I will not now
further insist upon it.

You have now seen, whatsoever of any worth or weight, either Marta, Steuchus,
Albanus, Epo, Rufus, or others of that rank, could find to gain any credit
or countenance to this Donation of Constantine. All which being now fully
refuted, you do see how desperate their cause is, which they so eagerly and
pertinaciously strive to support, by such false, forged, and legendary
writings. But that which now after the full refuting of this Donation, I would
specially observe, is this: That seeing by this Charter and Donation of
Constantine, the Popes neither have, nor can have any right or just title,
either to Rome, Italy, or any Cities which therein they possess; and seeing
again Card. Albanus tells Hier. Alb. lib. de Donat. Constable. nu. 5.
us, That the Popes nullum alium suae possessionis titulum attulerunt, have
brought or produced (they would no doubt if they could) any other Title, but
only this grant and Charter of Constantines Donation, it hereupon clearly
ensues, that the Popes neither now have, nor ever had any right or just title,
either to Rome and Italy, or to those Cities and large Territories which they
possess therein.

Lastly for Marta, who has of all most labored in pleading for defense of
this base and witless forgerie, though there can no more be said for excuse of
him, then was said for Faustus the Manichee, that the badnesse of his cause
enforced him to plead so badly, yet may it, and will it still justly be
answered, as S. Austen August. lib. 16. cont. Faustum. ca. 26.
did to Faustus; I grant indeed, that in a bad cause you could not possibly
plead better, Mala causa vana loqui coegit, Malam vero causam te habere nemo
coegit. A bad cause to use a vain defense enforced you; but to undertake a bad
cause, no man enforced you.

But for his alleging so many false, counterfeit and forged writings, and
giving credit to them, there is no excuse at all to be made for Marta, unless
one will say, that his credulity was such, as Melchior Canus Mel^. Canus loc.
Theod. lib. 11.. Lex vero secunda.
mentions to have been in one of their Priests in his time, Cui persuasissimum
esset nil omnino esse fallum quod semel typis excusum esset, who was verily
persuaded, that nothing was false which was published in print.

CHAP. I.
Of the Popes Temporal Monarchy, and what important Consequents do ensue
thereof.
Having in the former Treatise fully demonstrated the forgery of that pretended
Donation of Constantine, there remains yet one consideration touching the
Popes title both to those Kingdoms which are said to be given therein, and to
all other Kingdoms in the world. For though they magnify and make much (as
you have seen) of this and other Donations, yet do you think the Donation of
Constantine, Charles, Henry, Otho, or any other Emperors, by some Nempe per
Edictum Constant.
of which Rome, Italy, and all the Western Provinces and Kingdoms are said to
be given to the Pope, that this will satisfy the pride and insatiable avarice
of the man of sin? No, the whole world must be his Kingdom; and his title to
it, and every part of it, must not be from any mortal man; he in Christ's
right, and immediately from him, will be the direct supreme temporal Lord of
all: from him must hold all Kings, Princes, and all other persons whatsoever,
or else they can have no right unto either lands, goods, or possessions in this
world. But lest I may seem to impair their Popes right, let us hear their
claim and challenge in their own words.

Go to now, O ye most blessed Apostles (says Pope Grrgorius 7 in sua
ex^crationis Henrici Imperatoris, confirmatione, quae recitatur a Platina in
vita Greg. 7. ja. 178
Hildebrand unto Peter and Paul,) do you confirm what I have done, that all
men may know, if you being in heaven can bind and loose, that I also here on
earth can both give and take away Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, and
quicquid habere mortales possunt, and whatsoever any mortal man can have. This
ought, says Pope Leo Leo 9. Epist. 1. cap. 13.
the 9. to satisfy you de terreno, and caelesti Imperio, imo de regali
sac^rdotio, that both the temporal and heavenly Kingdom, yea a kingly
priesthood is given to the Apostolic See, and that diuinitus Nobis diuinitus,
and humanitus concessam gloriam ibid. ap. 39.
by God himself, and not only by men. Christ has committed to Pe^er says
Pope Nicholas the 2. terreni Nich. 2. in Epist. ad. Medi^lanens. did. 22 ca.
Omnes sed (...) fals^ascribitur Ni^holao 1. qui long ante P^t^um Dam^anum (is
huius Nicholai legatus lici tur) obierat.
s^mul and caelestis Imperii iura, the rights both of the earthly and heavenly
Empire. When the Pope gives or sends a consecrated sword, says their book L^b
1. Sacr. Cerem. sect 7. ^ol 84. and 85.
of sacred ceremonies, to the Emperor or other King, which is used to be done
on the night of Christ's nativity, he then by Sixtus cuartus, is appointed to
say, This Pontifical sword does figure or betoken summam temporalem potestatem
a Christo Pontifici collatam, That the supreme temporal power, is given by
Christ unto the Pope his vicar, according to that saying, Data est mihi omnis
potestas, All power is given to me, both in heaven and in earth; and according
to that also: He shall rule from Sea unto Sea, and from the flood unto the
worlds end. Pope Boniface Paral. Abb. Vsperg ad anni^ 129 ^. page 343 and seq.
8. boasting that he had the power of both swords, showed this by his actions
also, when in the year of that grand Iubile 1300. the first day, he rode as
Pope in his Pontificalibus, and the next day, imperiali habitu, infula Caesarea
insignis, he rode in his imperial robes with the imperial Crown, having a
naked sword carried before him, and one proclayming with a loud voice, Ecce hic
duo gladii, Behold here are two swords, the spiritual and temporal, both
given unto me.

The Papacy or papal authority is defined by Alu. Pelagius Alu. Pel^g. lib.
1. de plancti. Eccl cap 13.
in this manner, Papatus est Principatus tam in spiritualibus quam in
temporalibus, The Papacy is a Supremacy both in spiritual and temporal
matters. The Pope, says August. Triumphus Aug Triump. de potest. Eccle^. q.
36. ^^t. 3.
is greater then any King or Emperor, tam in temporalibus quam in
spiritualibus, as well in temporal as inspirituall matters: and as God is the
Lord of all by universal jurisdiction, so is the Pope his Vicar greater then
any King or Emperor, both in spiritual and temporal things. The supreme
power and dominion, says Thom. Bozius, Thom. Bozius lib. 1 de Iure statu^ etc.
ca. 1^ sect. Ob hae^.
which subordinates unto it all other domin^ons, datu^ est iure diuino
pon^ifici Romano, is given by the divine Law to the Pope: And by this, Pas^e
oues meas which was spoken only to Peter, significatur sacerdotalis ac regalis
potestas simul, is signified both pontifical and regal power. So that in the
Pope alone is Apex vtriusque potestatis, the top of both powers, spiritual and
temporal. The temporal Ibid. sect. Sic itaque.
power rests and resides in the Pope, tanquam capite sacerdotum mundique, as in
the head both of Priests and of the World. The Pope, says Rod. Sancius, Rod.
Sanc. li. de orig. ac differ. princ. part 1 and cit. a Carer. lib. 2. de
potest. Rom pontif. cap. 9. sect. Sequitur
in Christ's stead is chief in the whole world, both in spiritual and
temporal affairs. To the pope, says Rad. Cupers Rad. Cupers Com. ad Cap.
Oportebat. did. 79. pa. 253. nu. 23.
God has committed the rights both of the terrene and heavenly Kingdom:
again, Ibid. pa. 257 nu. 64.
The direct dominion of the Empire belongs unto God, and by consequent to the
Pope his vicar. The Pope, says Antoninus, Anton. in Summa, par. 3. (...). 22.
ca 5. sect 15.
for universal jurisdiction both in temporal and spiritual matters is
greater then any other King or Emperor. The Pope, says Lel Zeccus, Lel. Zecch.
in Tract. Theolog. pa. 81.
by the Law of God has power and temporal dominion over the whole world. The
supreme temporal jurisdiction throughout the whole world, says Franciscus
Bosius, ^^. Bos. lib. 1 de temp. Eccl Mona^c. cap. 3. page 52.
belongs to Peter's successor, so that he is both Hierarch and Monarch in all
things, Again Idem lib. 5. ca. 18. pa. 807.
The supreme Monarchy in all temporal affairs, belongs to Peter's successor,
and that iure diuino, by the divine Law expressed in the Scriptures. The scope
of his whole book is, as himself declares, to show, that Peter Th Boz. praef.
ad Clement. 8.
and the Pope succeed to Christ, as well in his Kingdom as in his priesthood,
and that Peter and the Pope is both King and priest according to the order of
Melchisedeck. It is certain, says Baronius Baron. an. 57. ^u. 28.
that judicial power (in secular causes) is given to Bishops (to wit, to
Christ's vicars) not only by Apostolical institution, but even by Christ, whose
priesthood is according to the order of Melchisedeck, both a King and a priest.
The secular power, says Aquinas Aquin. in 2. Senten. did. 4 4 q. 9. Art. 2.
and citatur a Tho. Boz. l. 1. de Iure status c. 13 sect. Primam.
is joined in the Pope, with the spiritual, the Pope has vtriusque potestatis
apicem, the top of both powers spiritual and temporal, by the disposing of
him, who is both a King and a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech.
That the Pope iure diuino has power over the whole world, as well in temporal
as Ecclesiastical matters, is taught, says Bellarmine Bell. l. 5. de Pont.
Romans c. 1. sect. Restat.
by August. Triumphus by Aluarus Pelagius, Hostiensis, Panormitan, Siluester,
and diverse others: yea Hostiensis teaches, that Christ by his coming,
translated all the dominion, even that of Infidel Princes, unto the Church;
and that this Dominion so resides now in Christ's Vicar, that he may give by
his own right the kingdoms of Infidels to whomsoever he will. The Pope,
says Marta Habere summam lai^am potestatem etc. Mart p. 1. c. 18 number. 1.
has supreme laicall power in temporal matters, and that not only in order
to spiritual causes, but naturally and temporally. And again Ibid. nu. 5.
As in the Church Triumphant, so also in the Church Militant, there is but one
supreme Governor, to whom all other as well Clerks, as laics, both Kings and
other, are to obey, and that both in temporal and in spiritual matters; and
this supreme Governor Ibid. ca. 18. per totum
is the Pope. Again, Ide^ c. 22. ^. 1.
The Pope has the same power that Christ had, and Peter exercised: but Christ
as man, had the fullness even of temporal power, and Peter exercised
temporally, that temporal power. Therefore the Pope has and may exercise the
same temporal jurisdiction temporally, and in his own nature. Both by the Law
Divine and natural, says Henr. Gandauensis Henr. Gand. quodl. 6. q. 23.
, does the priesthood excel the Empire, and penes ipsum residet de iure diuino
vtraque iurisdictio, and both iuridictions as well in temporal as spiritual
matters, as also the immediate execution of that jurisdiction does reside in
the Priest, by the Law both divine and natural. It is the common opinion of
School Divines, says Carerius Alex. Carer. l^b. 2. c. 9. number. 1. and lib.
eod. c. 13. number. 7.
, that the Pope has iure diuino plenissimam potestatem in vniuersum orbem
terrarum, the most full power over the whole world, both in Ecclesiastical and
temporal matters. Again Ibid, c. 16. n. 11.
, As the Pope cannot say that he holds not Christ's place here in earth, so
neither can he deny, that he has the temporal dominion of things; for as the
earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, even so are all subjected unto
Christ, and by him unto the Pope; to whom, being his vicar, Christ has
committed the right both of the heavenly and earthly Empire. Christ, says
Scioppius Gasp. Sciop. in Ecclesiast. c 36 p. 122.
, is the Lord of the whole world by a double title, of Creation, and
Redemption; and he Ipse vtrumque (postquam in coelum ascendit) per Episcopos
ex^rcet, imprimis autem per S Petrum cui soli dixit, pasce oues meas idem lib.
eod. c. 38 p. 126.
ascending into heaven, made the Pope his Vicegerent in them all, to whom he
gave not only directive, but coactiue power, that he might rule them with a
rod of iron, that is, by his secular power Esse autem virgam nihil aliud quam
saecularem sieve coactiua^ potestate^, ex Is. 14. discimus. ibib.
. Again, the Church, says he Ecclesia similis Vitulo, sieve ^oui trituranti
ibid. c. 38. p. ^ 29. in marg.
, is like unto a Calf, whose horn, that is, his secular power Aduertendum quod
Ecclesiae saecularis potestas tribuatur, per cornu significata, sed in capite
residet postquaem scilicet iam adoleuit, ibid. p. 129.
is set in the head, (that is, in the Pope) which power though in the younger
age of the Church, it was not grown, yet afterward (when Cornua cum ^tatis
maturit^te habiturus sit. Vt ea postquam Ecclesia adoleuisset vteretur. Ibid.
the Calfe was stronger) he did with his horn, push at Kings and Kingdoms,
and bring them in subjection unto him. And a 1000. such like sayings, he, and
others have to this purpose.

Nor do they hold this assertion of the Popes supreme temporal dominion, as
a doubtful opinion, but as a doctrine of faith. It is tenendum recta fide,
says Rod. Sancius Rod. Sant. l. de Orig. ac differ. princip. and cit. a Carer,
l. 2. c. 9. n. 13.
, to be by the right faith, that the Pope, iure diuino, has the true and
only immediate principality over the whole world, as well in temporal as in
spiritual matters. The Pope, says Rad. Cupers Iure diuino Papam vtram que
potestatem habere demonstratur. Rad. Cup. Comment. ad Cap. oporte bat.
distinct. 79 p 48. number. 1.
, has and that iure diuino, both powers, temporal and spiritual committed to
him, and they Ibid. p. 46. in Sumar. nu. 9.
who deny the Pope to have both these powers, Euangelium negant, do deny the
Gospel. Tho. Bosius Thom Boz. l. 5. de Iure status c. 10.. Johannes.
approues that saying of Hostiensis, That as it is Heretical to make two
beginnings, so it is heretical to make two Vicars of Christ here upon earth.
As it is heretical, says Marta Mart. par. 1. c. 18. nu. 25.
, to hold duo principia, two Authors of the world, so to hold that there are
two Vicars of God (the one in temporal and the other in spiritual matters)
est haereticum, it is heretical; and therefore the Pope himself says, It is
of necessity of salvation, that every creature should be subject to the Pope,
tam in temporalibus, both in temporll and spiritual matters: and Dantes Idem c.
19 (...) 5. and nu. 14.
the Florentine who held the contrary, was after his death condemned for an
heretic. Boniface the 8. says Carerius Alex. Carer. l. 2. c. 3. nu. 16.
and Martinus Polonus Mar. Pol. Chron. An. 1301.
writ letters to Philip the French King, wherein he told him, that the Pope is
Lord through the whole world, both in temporal and spiritual matters, and
contrarium sentire haereticum iud^cabat, and he judged it to be heretical for
any to hold the contrary. The same Carerius writing in defense of the Popes
direct, temporal, dominion over the whole world, intitles his book Aduersus
impios politicos, et huius temporis haereticos. tit. l.
Against impious politicians, and heretics of this time; accounting all for
heretics, who deny that temporal, direct dominion; one of which is Cardinal
Bellarmine, against whom Carerius Confutatur opinio Bellarm. Car. lib 3. c. 5,
6 7. and 8.
professedly writes.

Nor is this the Censure of Carerius alone, touching Bellarmine; Sixtus quintus
Bellarminus satisfacere non potuit ambitioni Sixti 5. Itaque parum ab fui^ quin
omnia illius Doctoris opera ab^leret. Guil. Barc. l. de potest. Papae c. 13.
and delere atque extinguere in animo habuit. ibid. ca. 40.
so condemned that doctrine of Bellarmine, (although he indirectly Bell l. 5. de
Po^t. To. c. 6. et seq.
yields as much as can be desired to the Pope) that because he did not hold
this direct temporal dominion of the Pope, he purposed to have abolished and
burnt as heretical all the books of Bellarmine.

Bartolus, as both Carerius Carer. lib. 2. c. 10. nu. 1.
and Covarruvias Couaer. part. 2. Relect sect. 9. nu. 6 p. 505.
observe, confidently affirmed that opinion which denies the Popes temporal
Monarchy, to be heretical. And Card. Baronius Bar an. 1053 number. 14.
doubted not to say, That the Catholic Doctrine, Haeresis errore notauit
omnes, has branded with the error of heresy all those who take from the
Church and chair of Peter, either of the two swords, and who grant unto it
only the spiritual sword.

From this supreme temporal Dominion which they thus give to the Pope, they
draw many pretty conclusions. First, that neither the Emperor nor any King
has any temporal authority, power, or Jurisdiction, but only such as they
derive from the Pope. The reason hereof is evident; for seeing all power, both
spiritual and temporal, is given first and immediately to him, none can have
any part of either, but from him. As all stars, says Carerius Carer. l. 2.
c. 12. nu. 3 4* 5.
, have their light from the Sun which is the fountain of light, so all power
and authority, quoad temporalium administrationem, even in the government of
temporal matters, depends on that supreme power which is given to the Pope.
Again Car. l. ^od. c. 14. nu. 14.
, The Pope has primo and per se, primarily and of himself, the Dominion over
all temporal things; Emperors Ibid. nu. 20.
Kings, and secular princes, receive their power from God, but mediante Papa,
by the mediation of the Pope, that is, Recipit Cap. e^d. n. 16
a Papa loco Dei, the Emperor receives it from the Pope in Gods stead. Again,
the Pope Ex quibus concluditur pontificem esse orbis virum Idem c. 15. n. 10.
is the husband of the world (a very fit wife sure for the Pope,) and all
others depend upon him as on the Architect. The Empire, says Marta Mart (...)
c. 19. nu. 9.
depends not on God, but on the Church and the Pope. The power of jurisdiction,
says Aug. Triumph. Aug. Trium. de potest. eccl. q. 1. art. 1.
in te^porall and in spiritual matters, est immediata in Papa solo, is
immediate in the Pope alone. Again Ibid.
, The power of Emperors and secular princes is such, that it is given to them
by another (that is, the Pope) and every one of the^, ab eo recognoscit esse
omne quod habet, must acknowledge whatsoever they have to be from the Pope. It
must be granted, says Alv. Pelagius Alv. Pelag. l. 1. de Pla^^ct. eccl. c. 13.
That no Emperors did rightly exercise the sword who received it not from the
Pope. All secular power, says Th. Bozius Th. Boz. l. 2. de iure stat c. 19. Ex
(...)
, in all things depends and is from the power Ecclesiastical, and that iure
ipso diuinissimo, by the most divine Law.

A second conclusion is this, that the Pope is an higher temporal Lord, and
Emperor, then any, yea then all the secular Kings and Emperors in the world.
The reason of this is clear: For seeing he is the fountain from which they
derive all their temporal authority, the same Kingly and Imperial authority,
must needs be more eminently in him, then in them all, even as light is more
eminently* in the Sun then in the Moon and Stars which borrow their light
from it. It is known, says Pope Cap. Solitae, Extrav. de Mayor and Obed.
Innocent 3. that there is as great difference betwixt the Pope and the
Emperor, as there is betwixt the Sun and Moon. Now the Sun being six
thousand five hundred thirty nine times greater then the Moon, as Astronomers
Ioh. Clav. com. in Ioh. de Sa^robos. pa. 189.
teach, (for the Canonists Glossan. Cap. Solitae, de Mayor and Obed.
ignorantly talk of 47 times) the Pope is by Innocentius Decree, 6539. times
greater then the Emperor. There is, says Carerius Car. lib. 2. c. 12. nu. 5.
that proportion betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, as is betwixt the Sun and
the Moon; as the Sun then is far more excellent and eminent then the
Moon, seeing she borrowes her splendour and light of the Sun, so is the Pope
then the Emperor, seeing his authority depends on the Pope, and is derived
from him. Bishops, and the Priesthood, says Waldensis Th. Wald. Doct fid to.
1. l. 2. ar. 3. c. 74.
, is as much preferred to the Kingly state, as gold is to lead, or the soul to
the body, or heaven to earth. So much, says Orichouius Stanist. Orich. in
Chimaera. p. 97.
, does the Priest excel the King, as a man does excel a beast, yea, as much
Quantum Deus praestat sacerdoti, tantum sacerdos praesat regi. ibid.
as God does excel a Priest, and that is by infinite degrees. Upon
consideration of these so great ods, Steuchus Aug. Steuch. l. de donat.
Constant p. 187.
says, That Constant. yielded the City of Rome to a greater Emperor then
himself, and that was, to the Pope. The Canons, says Marta Mart. par. 1. c.
19 nu. 7.
, put the Pope super verticem Imperatoris, above the very top and crown of the
Emperor; and the Pope, says Rad. Cupers, Rad. Cupers com. ad cap. Oportebat.
p. 43. nu. 39.
is deservedly accounted Rex regum and dominus dominantium, The King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. Aug. Triumphus yet more triumphingly says, Aug. Triump. in
princ. summae de potest. Eccles.
The Son of God has declared the altitude of Ecclesiastical power, to be
above all principalities and powers, that unto it should bow every knee, both
in heaven, in earth, and under the earth: and yet Stephanus Patracensis goes
one step further, which will reach even to God himself. In the Pope, says he
Orat. Steph. Patrac. in Conc. Later. sub Leone 10. Sess. 10. p. 624.
, who is the supreme Hierarch in the Church, there is omnis potestas supra
omnes potestates tam caeli, quam terrae, all power above all powers, both in
heaven and in earth: whom Rad. Cupers, following, says Rad. Cup l. citat. p.
3. nu. 7.
The Lord has so magnified the Church, (that is, by his own exposition Papa
totaem ecclesiam significat. id. p. 125. number. 43. in Summ^r.
the Pope) that he has preferred it not only to Kings and Keisars, sed
omnibus sub caelo, and supra caelum existentibus, but to all that are either
under, or above the heavens; and there is none, I think above the heavens, but
God only.

A third conclusion is this, That none can give any lands, goods, or
possessions to the Pope, but only restore those things unto him; The reason
whereof is evident, for all these are the Popes own before, and that iure
diuino, seeing as Marta says Mart. part. 1. ca. 15. nu. 14.
Vniuersus orbis est papae territorium, the whole world is the Popes
territory. If it be found sometimes, says Thom. Bozius Tho Boz. l. 3. de iure
Stat. c. 5. sect. Quin audet.
that certain Emperors gave some temporalties to the Pope, as Constantine to
Siluester, that is not to be understood, that they gave any thing which was
their own, they restored that which was unjustly and tyrannically taken from
the said Bishops. Constantine, says Carerius Car. si. 2* ca. 21. nu. 5. and
ca. 16 nu. 31.
, did restore that which before he had unjustly deteyned, he restored to the
Church and to the Pope those things, which he had deteyned from him, and had
long withheld and abused by his tyrannical power in serving the Infernal
prince and Idols; therefore that Donation of Constantine was in truth only a
restitution: for seeing the earth and all that is therein, is the Lords, and by
consequent the Popes, Constantine gave nothing at all of his own, but he
restored them, in recognition of the Lords, and the Popes Dominion. Again
Ibid. ca. 21. ^u. 7.
they are utterly deceived, who think that Charles, Pipine, or others, gave
Rome and other Cities in Italy to the Pope. The Pope has immediately from God
his temporal dominion, the same he has from Councels declaratiue, from
Constantine promulgatiue, that is, Councels only declared, and Constantine
proclaimed the Popes right and temporal dominion in them. We deny, says
Marta Mart lib. in. ca. 25. n. 20.
that the Pope founds his jurisdiction upon the Donation of Constantine; for we
have already proved that the Pope had, and still has the whole power which
Christ had, as well in temporal as in spiritual matters, neither did he
prejudice his own right in accepting those Donations, of Constantine and other
Emperors; they in those gifts did but recognize Idem cap. 29 nu. 13. 14.
therein, his supreme jurisdiction and so int^rrupted that praescription of an
absolute domin^on which they did pretend, acknowledging Ibid* nu. 15.
their Kingdoms, Dominions, and States, to be held of the Pope, as of the
Fountain of Jurisdiction, and Dominion. I have often, says Scioppius Gas.
Sciop in Eccles ca. 51. pa. 168. 169.
, laughed at those who altercate about the Donation of Constantine, neither do
we care whether there be any public record either of any such Donation, or
cession and yielding up of Rome; for constat, it is manifest that Rome could
not be given to the Church: and the reason is, not that which the Lawyers
suppose, for that Constantine could not alienate that, which belonged to the
Commonwealth, sed quia tantum, iure diuino tenet, but because the Pope holds
Rome neither by any Donation, nor by inheritance, nor by right of war, neque
vllo alio humano iure aut titulo, neither by any other human law or title
whatsoever, but only by right from God. It is God that gave Rome to the
Church, as meat to feed, as clothes to apparel the Church. Constantine Idem
ca. 52. pa. 17^.
and other Emperors did but perform the office of an hand to reach the meat to
the mouth, and put the apparel upon the head.

This right of the Pope, when diverse Kingdoms (as they teach) acknowledged,
they yielded the possession of those Kingdoms to the Pope, and so they became
his. Of the Kingdoms of Spain, Pope Gregory the seventh thus writes, to the
Kings and Princes thereof, (those were at that time and long after seven,
Munst. Cosm. li. 2. pa. 57.
Arragon, Castile, Portingall, Granado, Lions, Nauar, and Gallicia,) Notu^
Greg. 7. lib. 4. Epist. 28. Regibus caeterisqu^^ principibus Hispaniae.
vobis fieri volumus, we will have it known unto you that which we may not
conceal, and is needful for you to know; that the Kingdom of Spain in ius
and proprietatem traditum, was for right and propriety yielded to the Roman
Church. And again Greg. 7. li. 1. Epist. 8.
, writing to all Princes that go into Spain, We believe (says he) that you
are not ignorant, that the Kingdom of Spain from ancient time, proprii iuris
sancti Petri fuisse, and adhuc nulli mortalium, sed soli Apostolicae sedi ex
aequo pertinere, to have been the proper right of Saint Peter, and now also to
belong in right to no mortal man but only to the Apostolic See; for that
which once comes to the Church, can never be taken from the same. Particularly
of the Kingdom of Arragon, Steuchus Steuch. li. de don. Constable. page 193.
out of Innocentius the third says, esse Apostolicae sedis, that it is the
Popes. Of the Kingdom of Portingall, Steuchus also says, Steuch. ibid.
Ecclesie Romanae est, that belongs to the Church of Rome, and because
Hildefunsus knew it to belong to the Roman See from ancient time, he offered
it to the Pope, and subjected it to him. Of the Kingdom of France, Boniface
the eight said Bonif. 8. lit^rae apud Carer. li. 2 ca. 3. nu. 16.
, It is subject to the Pope both in temporal and in spiritual matters. Of the
Kingdom of England, Alexander the second Alexand. 2. epist. pars quae id
asseritur extat apud Baron. an. 1068. nu. 1.
affirms, that ever since it received Christianity, it has been in the
hands and power of Saint Peter. Of the Kingdom of Scotland, Pope Boniface
says, Bonif. verba citantur a Pol. Virg. hist. li. 17. et a Marta lib. cit.
ca. 26. nu. 60.
that it is in the Popes power, and that he may give and take away the same. Of
Italy, Steuchus says, Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 200.
Tota Italia est Ecclesiae, all Italy belongs to the Roman Church. Of the
Kingdom of Sicily, Marta says, Mart. lib. cit. ca. 26. nu. 6.
The laws do expressly teach that it is a part of the patrimony of the
Church; and Baronius has writ an whole book Bar. tract de Regno Siciliae to
n. 11. Annal. an. 1097. nu. 18 and deinceps.
to confirm the same. Of the Kingdom of Hungary, Gregory the seventh says,
Greg. 7 li. 2 epist. 13. ad Salomonem regem Hungariae.
Proprium ecclesiae est, It properly belongs to the Church of Rome. So do also
the Kingdoms of Croatia, and Dalmatia, as out of the same Pope Verba citantur
a Steuch. li. de do^. Constable. pa. 191.
Hildebrands Registrie, Steuchus avouches. Of the Kingdom of Russia, Steuchus
out of the same Hildebrand says, Steuch. li. cit. ^ag. 190. and Greg. 7. idem
declarat, lib. 2. Epist. 74.
Est iuris ac ditionis Romanae ecclesiae, the right and dominion of it belongs
to the Church of Rome. Of the Kingdom of Denmark, Steuchus out of Alexander
the second says, Steuc^. li. cit. pa. 189.
It is peculium and vectigal, the proper substance and tribute of the Roman
Church. And what should I add more, says Steuchus Steuch. ibid. pa. 195.
, The power of the Roman Church is most ancient, super omnibus regnis and
regibus, over all Kings and Kingdoms; all monuments of the Popes are full, in
showing this power, whereby Popes have ruled by their Empire, the whole World,
habenas omnium terrarum tenentes, holding the raines and regiment over all
Kingdoms in the Earth. Thus Steuchus.

A fourth conclusion is this, That as Emperors and secular princes derive all
their authority, so do they hold all their Kingdoms, Crowns, Territories
and possessions from the Pope, as tenants, as homagers and vassals unto him, or
else they are mere usurpers of the same. The reason of this also is manifest;
for seeing the whole world is the Popes Territory Vt Marta s^^*
, and he the Lord, yea the husband Vt Carer. (...)*
of the world, none may, nor yet in right can, enjoy any part of his
Territories, or company with his dear Wife, but by his allowance and
dispensation. Whence has he (Frederick the King) the Empire but from us? says
Pope Hadr. Hadr. 4. epist. cita^ur apud Auent. l. 6. p. 506.
the 4. by election of the Princes, he has the name of King, by our
consecration he has the name of Emperor; Imperator quod habet totu^ habet a
nobis, whatsoever the Emperor has, he has it of us. It is in our power, vt
demus illud (Imperium) cui volumus, to give the Empire to whomsoever we will.
We are placed of God above Nations and Kingdoms, to destroy and root out, to
build and to plant. The Emperor, says Lel. Zecchus Lael. Zech. tract. de Romans
Pontif p. 82.
takes the Empire de manu Pontificis, at the Popes hand, and to the Pope does
belong the direct dominion of the Empire. Again Ibid. p. 83.
, The Pope is absolutely the Lord of the whole Christian world; Kings and
Princes Imperia and regna ab illo recognoscere habent, must acknowledge their
Empires and Kingdoms to be held of him. The Emperor, says Marta Mart. lib.
cit. c. 18. nu. 11. and 12.
is Feudatarius ecclesiae, and ab ea omnia recipit. He is feudatary to the
Pope, and holds in fee all that he has from him. Again Idem c. 20. n. 4*
, We have declared the Emperor, vniuersa humana habere a Papa, to hold all his
worldly possessions and goods of the Pope. And for this cause he swears Idem*
c. 25. nu. 16. Papa Imperatorent confirmat iurantem sibi fidelitatem et
homagium.
feolty and homage to the Pope: the form of which oath, being expressed, both
in their book of the Decrees Distinct. 63. c. Tibi domino.
and of sacred ceremonies Lib. 1. Sacr. Cerem. sect. 5. fol 48.
, Clem. 5. has decreed Cap. Romani in Clement. tit. de Iureiura^^do.
Declaramus illa iur amenta fidelitatis existere, and censeri debere.
it to be an oath of feoltie; and when Lotharius the Emperor had taken that
oath Forma iuramenti Lotharii extat apud Bar. an. 1133. nu. 2.
, he was thereby made Post homo ^it Papae, etc. Versus extant apud Radevic.
lib. 1. de gest. Frideri ^^i 1. c. 10. and Sigon. lib. 11. de Regno Ita^. an.
1133.
Homo Papae, the Popes man; that is to say, the Popes servant or vassal; (for
the word vassus Episcopis, Abba^ibus, and vassis nostris dicimus, Capit. Carol.
magni li. 2. cap 9 and de vassis dominicis qui intra casa^ seruiunt, ibid. li.
3. ca. 73 and Anima vestra de corpore nuda ac desolata sine solatio, et
comitatu vassorum exibit. in capit. missis ab Episc. Rhem. ad Ludoui^^^. V^ss^
a Saxonibus La^^^ dicti. ait Glossari^m in capitu. Aliter, a vas vasis, vassal.
(...) deducit Mart. par. 4. ca. 188* nu. ^.
, whence comes vassallus, signifies a servant) and then as Marta Mart. li.
cit. part. 1. cap. 18. nu. 2^.
observes, Pope Innocent the second permitted him, but in truth, as Sigonius
Sig. lib. (...). an. 1133.
testifies, mandauit, the Pope commanded Lotharius to be painted on a wall in
the Popes palace, quasi vassallum ad pedes prostratum, as a vassal prostrate
at the Popes feet. The King of Arragon, says Steuchus Steu^. li. cit. page 193.
, accepit in feudum, praedictum regnum, took that Kingdom in fee of Pope
Innocentius the third: and recognoscitur a papa, says Marta Mart. li. cit. ca.
26. nu. 43. 44.
, and it holds of the Pope, by the annual payment of 250 duccates Maximas
(...) ait Marta, (...) Bar. an. 10^7. nu. 106. (...)
. The Kingdoms of Nauar, and Granado, says Marta Mart. ca. 26. nu. 53.
, were given by Julius the second to Ferdinand King of Spain, and his
successors, cum pacto vt recognoscerent Romana^ ecclesia^ in fidem and
homagium, upon this covenant, that they should hold those Kingdoms by feoltie
and homage from the Church of Rome. The Canary Islands Ibid nu. 54.
and Nigraria, fuerunt datae in feudum, were given in fee to the Emperor by
the Pope, and Jews King of Spain, did feoltie and homage to the Pope for
them, Anno 1343, binding himself to pay yearly for the same 400 florens of
gould. When Alexander the sixth gave the Indies to the Kings of Castile and
Portugal, says Marta, Ibid. nu. 55.
reseruauit sibi recognitionem feudalem ab ambobus, he reserved a pension to be
paid to the Pope by them both, as an acknowledgment, that they held both the
Indies in fee from him. Julius Ibid. nu. 25. 26. 27.
the second gave to Ferd^nand King of Spain, the Kingdom of Naples, in feudum
perpetuum* in a perpetual fee, but so that Ferdinand should swear feoltie and
perform homagium and vassallagium, homage and vassalage to him: And that also
for the Kingdoms Ibid. nu. 29.
of Sicily and Jerusalem he should pay yearly to the Pope 8000 ducats of gould,
and a white palphrey, in recognitionem very dominij regni Siciliae et
Jerusalem, in acknowledgement that the Pope has truly the dominion of Sicily
and Jerusalem. And both Philip the second, and after him his son Philip the
third, Anno 1599. did take, as Marta Ibid. nu. 31 and 34.
tells us, this oath of feoltie and homage. The Pope, says Marta Ibid. nu. 35.
gave in feudum, in fee the Kingdoms of Sardinia and Corsica, which in
propriety belongs to him, but so that the Feudatarie do swear feoltie, and
perform homage, et plenum vassallagium and full vassalage for the same, besides
the pension of 200 marks of silver, and finding of 100 furnished horse with
men for war; And James King of Arragon took this oath of homage, and after
him Ferdinand, and others. Of the Kingdom of France, that it is held of the
Pope, Boniface the eight boasts, who writ Verba Bonif. citantur a Steu. li.
cit. pa. 198.
to Philip the French King, Necesse esse pontificem vti dominum regni sui
venerari ac colere, that he must of necessity acknowledge and worship the Pope
as his Lord. And Marta says, Mart. lib. cit. ca. 28. nu. 1.
Recognoscitur a Romana Ecclesia, the Kingdom of France is held of the Church
of Rome. And at the time of the anointing their Kings, the Archbishop of
Rhemes says, that he gives the Kingdom, by the authority which Pope Hormisda
gave to Remigius: And then he Ibid. nu* 11 and 23*
ads diverse reasons, That the Pope has supremam potentiam, et iurisdictionem
in regno Franciae, the supreme power and jurisdiction in the Kingdom of
France. And Steuchus speaking both of France and Spain, says, Steuch. li.
ci^. pa. 189.
They honor, yea adore the Roman Church as a Queen, pensionibus persolutis,
paying their pensions and tribute unto her: and the pension in France was the
annual payment of a penie for every house therein, as Pope Dicendum est
^^mibus Gaellis and per veram obedientiam praecipiendum, vt vnaquaeque demus,
annu a^tim vnum saltim denarium seluat B. Petr^ Greg. 7. lib. 8* Epist. 23:
Gregory the seventh declares, who expressly demanded the same. Of the Kingdom
of England, they are vainly confident, that it was semper Stanis. Christan. in
Exam. Cathol. fol. 33
beneficiarium and tributarium Romano pontifici, ever held in fee of the Pope,
and paid tribute unto him. King Ina Christ. ibid.
paid yearly for it a penie for every house King Offa confirmed the same Anno
740. The like did Adelphus Anno 847. And the Pope had always in England his
gatherers of this tribute, of whom the last was Polydore Virgill. Of Henry the
second, they brag Bellar. Apol. pro Tort. cap. 3. sect Extat. Becan. Cont.
Angl. q. 9. nu. 1. 2. et seq. Bar. a. 1173 nu. 9. 10.
that he acknowledged the Pope to be his temporal Lord, himself to be the
Popes feudatarie, and his Kingdom the Popes patrimony. And of King John they
never cease to boast, that he resigned Christan. f 3^ and seq. and Bell. Apol.
pro Tort ^ c 4. sect. Extat. Mart. lib. cit. c. 26. nu. 39
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland to the Pope, and took Receptio ^orundem
regnorum in feuau^* ita vt rex tanquam secun^a^us dominus, ^ Rom eccl* illa se
habere agnoscat. et in signu^ subiectionis fidelitate^ et homag^^ praestare
debent. nec no^ in annos singulo^ 1000. marcas eide^ numerare. Bell* et Becan.
loc. cit.
them in fee of him again for the annual pension of 1000 marks, as appears
by his Charter sealed with Gould. Thus said Pope Regnu^ suu^ Angl. et Hibern.
Romans (...). co^cessit, recipiens illud a nobis in feudu^ sub am^^o censu 1000
marcaru^. Innoc. 3. in epist. (...) omnes fideles; quae extat apud Math. Paris.
pa. 356. regnu^ Angl. est suu^ propriu^ etc. (...) Innoc ibid. pa. 381.
Innocent the third, and the bull or authentical Charter hereof, is yet, as
they boast Cuius bulla authentica est in Vaticano. Mart ca. 26. nu. 4
, extant in the Vaticane. That by this means, the Pope has direct Directu^
domi^^u^ habet Eccl. in regnum Angl. et Hiberniae. Bell. loc. cit.
dominion in those Kingdoms, and that both King John and his successors are
made Se summo pontifici vasallos constitue^u^t et tributarios Mart. loc. cit.
feudataries and vassals to the Pope, as the Pope himself in a boasting manner,
said Innoc. 3 ve^ba apud Math. Paris. in Ioh. p. 379 and 381.
, vassallus noster est rex Angliae, the King of England is our vassal. Of the
Kingdom of Denmark, as being tributarie to the Roman Church, Pope Alexander
Alexandri verba citantur ^ Bar* an 1062 nu 109
the second, warned Sueuus their King to pay the accustomed rents or tribute
for the Kingdom. The Kingdoms of Croatia and Dalmatia, says Steuchus Steuch.
li. cit. pa. 191.
are the Popes, and the King is to pay yearly 200 Byzantines as a trybute for
the same, and to swear feoltie to the Pope. That the Kingdom of Bohemia, is
tributarie to the Pope, Gregory the seventh boasts, who says, Sub nomine
census misistis etc. Greg. 7. li. 2. Epist. 7.
It paid unto him a trybute of a 100 marks of silver. The Kingdoms of Suetia
and Norwey, says Steuchus Steuch. li. cit. pa. 194.
, pay trybute to the Church of Rome, and every house in Suetia paies yearly a
penie to the Pope. The King of Hungaria, says Marta Mart ca. 26. (...). 49. 50.
, declares that he takes and holds his Crown of the Pope, and Anno 1280. he
entered an obligation, to pay yearly 100 marks of silver, as a tribute for the
same. Now all these, besides some other Kingdoms, to the number of twenty and
seven, Marta Mart. ca. 26. nu. 3. vbi 27. regna esse descripta in registro
curiae Romanae ait.
particularly recites, and tells us, that they are recorded in the Registrie of
the Roman Court or Exchequer, as Kingdoms feudatarie and tributarie to the
Pope. Thus are all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, made to hold their Crowns,
Kingdoms, and possessions, of the Pope, as from the supreme, direct,
temporal Monarche of them all. To him they must be subjects, feudataries,
homagers, and very vassals. The Popes, says Steuchus, ^is vti subiectis
imperabant. Steuch. li. cit. pa. 183.
tanquam eorum domini, as their Lords, do command kings throughout the world
as their subjects. The Emperor, says Carerius, Carer. li. 2. c. 18. nu. ^.
is the Popes Minister, or Servant: and Marta Mart. li. cit. ca. 18. nu. 19.
adds, That it is the form of the Emperors Coronation, that he does swear se
seruiturum papae, that he will serve the Pope; yea both their doing of homage
unto him, and receiving unction from him, does witness this; seeing as Marta
Ide^ c. 27. n. 1
says, Homage is maximum subiectionis signum, the greatest token of subjection
and service; And again, Idem ca. 18. nu. 11. in Summar.
Reges qui vnguntur ab Ecclesia, sunt vassalli ipsius, those kings which are
anointed by the Church are made her vassals; that is in effect, the Pope
annoynts no kings, but he thereby sets a mark upon them that they are his
vassals.

Now seeing they are become the Popes servants, and tenants, it is worthy
remembering, first, in what tenure they hold their Kingdoms, and possessions
from him. Secondly, what service they are to perform to this their Lord. And
lastly, what account this Landlord makes of his tenants, and servants. Their
tenure is of all most base; for howsoever in words, the Pope gives them
fee-simple, or fee-tayle, or any kind of freehold, they are in very truth no
other, but mere Tenants at will, to the Pope, so that he at his pleasure may
take their Crowns, Kingdoms, and possessions from them, and give the same to
whomsoever he will. The Church, says Steuchus, Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 189.
suffers Kings to reign, modo dominam reginamque agnoscant, so that they
acknowledge the Pope to be their Landlord. If they once refuse this, they
forfeit all their estates, As by the examples De quibu^^ agi^ Carer. lib. 2.
ca. 19. per totu^.
of Henry the fourth, Otho the fourth, Friderike the second, and diverse others
is evident. The Pope, says Marta Mart. par. 1. ca. 29. nu. 12. et ^. 25. n^ 6.
et 22
, is Lord of the Empire (and so of other kingdoms) quia transfert illud ad
libitum, because he transfers it at his own pleasure and gives it unto whom he
will, as we have proved. Popes have given, says Carerius Car. li. 2. c. 19 nu.
26.
, and Thomas Bozius T. Bozius lib. 3. de iure stat. c. 4. sect. Sed and.
, great Empires and Kingdoms, to those who had formerly no right at all unto
them, taking them away from those to whom by right they did belong, though they
demerited nothing, but were wise, industrius, pious, and Catholic kings, such
as had done nothing, or given no cause at all, why they should have been
deprived; whereof there are diverse illustrious examples. Placuit Gregorio,
Carer. et Tho. Boz. locis citatis
It pleased Gregory the tenth to take the Eastern Empire from Baldwine the
second, who was the rightful Lord thereof, and give it to Michael Paleologus,
who had no right at all to the same. When Richard Carer. et Tho. Boz. loc. cit.
Duke of Cornwall, and Alphonsus King of Castile, were chosen to the Empire
though the Empire in right belonged to the one of those two, yet placuit
Gregorio, it was the Popes pleasure to admit neither of them both; and so
Rodulph of the House of Austria was then created Emperor, Alphonsus in vain
gainsaying the same. And by what Idem Car. c. 21. nu. 14. et T. Boz. loc cit.
sect. Neque id*
other authority or power did Alexander the sixth give to Ferdinand king of
Arragon, and to his heirs and successors, the Islands of the new found world?
(that is, the West Indies.) Truly by none at all, but for this, that Christ
gave unto the Pope his Vicar iura vtriusque Imperii, the rights both of the
celestial and terrestrial Empire, and so he might at his own will dispose
them to whom he pleased. To these Scioppius ads one more, Spain, says he Gas.
Sciop. in Eccles ca. 141. p. 512.
, does hold the kingdom of Nauar at this day, nullo alio titulo, nisi quia
pontifici sic visum fuerat, by no other title but because, it is the Popes
pleasure that he shall have it.

As their tenure, so their service which they must perform to this their
Landlord, is most base, most unsuitable to Imperial Majesty; Nor do I mean
that service which Marta says, Mart. lib. cit. cap. 8. nu. 19*
That the Emperor swears se seruituru^ Papae pro subdiacono, that the will
serve the Pope, for a subdeacon, that is, serve him when he says Mass with
the Challice, and other things; in regard of which service Durandus says
Durand Rational. lib. 2. c. 8. nu. 6.
That the Emperor being made a Canon of the Roman Church, debet ordinem
subdiaconatus habere, must enter into the order of Subdeacon; though this be by
others Gloss. in Cap. Valentinianus Did. 63 and Boe^. Epo. tract. de Regn. vel
Iure princ. nu. 48. and. 51.
denied. But the service which I mean, is, that the Emperor like a groom of
the stable must hold Stapham equi papalis tenere debet Imperator et deinde
ducere equum perfranum. Mart. lib. cit. ca. 18. nu. 19. et sacr. Cerem. lib. 1.
sect. 5. p. 61.
the Popes stirrup, and lead his horse; So Pipine Pipinus vice stratoris iuxta
pa^ae sellam properauit. Fredericus Hadriano 3. officium stratoris exhibui^
Steuch. lib. cit. pa 135.
did to Pope Stephen, Frederick to Pope Hadrian 3. If more Lib. 1. Sa^. Cer.
sect. 2. p. 3^
Kings be present; then the more worthy King must lead the Popes horse on the
right side, and the other on the left. If his Holiness be not pleased to ride,
then four Ibid.
of the greatest kings (even the Emperor for one, if he be there) must bear
the Popes chair, and the Pope sitting therein, on their shoulders. At his
feast, the Emperor Ibid. p. 43.
or greatest king must bring water to wash the Popes hands, they must carry
Ibid. p. 45.
the first dish of meat and set it on his table. At his coronation Ibid tit. 2.
pa. 28. and 29.
two Cardinal Deacons, must hold the two sides of his Pluuiale (or loose
vpper-garment) and the Emperor, or in his absence, two of the chiefest kings,
must hold up the tail thereof. If they happen to offend the Pope, they must
dance attendance barefooted at the Popes gates, as did Henry Henricus, soris
deposito cultu regio, nudis pedibus, leiunus a m^^e vsque ad vesperum persta.
^attriduo. Lamb Scaef^^ab. pa. 249.
the 4. the Emperor, and that for diverse days, and in a cold season; or they
must be whipped on their naked body with rods Caernem suam ^udam disciplinae
virga^um supponens a singulis viris religiosis quorum multitudo magna
conuenerat ictus ternos vel qu^ternos excepit. Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 2. pa. 174.
as was Henry 2. of Engl: or suffer the Pope to trample on their necks as
Alexander 3. did Papa Imperatoris ^ollum pede comprimens ait, Scriptum est,
super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis. Nauc. ad an. 1177.
on the neck of Frederick Barbarossa; not without blasphemy also abusing that
Scripture for justifying his proud insulting over the Emperor, Thou shall tread
upon the Adder and the Basiliske.

And yet that which in the third place I proposed, to wit, the account which
they make of kings, and all secular persons, far surmounteth all these
indignities, and to men of heroical spirits, cannot choose but be more grievous
and insupportable then all the rest. Omitting all their other opprobrious and
reuiling speeches (which are innumerable) hear but the words of two of their
late reuilers rather then writers. The former is Becanus, who calling Becanus
^ontrou. Aug. q. 3 nu. 14. 15. and 16.
the Pope a Shepherd, and Kings and Emperors dogs Per Canes intelliguntur
(...) reges and Imperatores. Ibid. nu. 15.
or Curres of this Shepherd, and sporting himself with these titles, says,
Igitur hi Canes, therefore if these Dogs be watchful and trusty they must be
ready at the Shepherds hand; but if they be lazy, mad or troublesome, the
Shepherd must presently remove them, and put them from their office. This does
reason teach, this does the Council of Lateran decree. Again, Christian kings
are sheep, are rams, are wolves, and are dogs. Whence it is that the Pope
carries himself in a diverse manner toward them. As they are sheep, if they
be scabby, he may put them out of the fold: as they are rams, if they be
troublesome, and push with their horns, he may may shut them up: As they are
Wolves, he may drive them away; Quatenus Canes, as they are dogs, he may put
them from their office, if they be defective therein: and some of these, he
does by excommunication, some by depositio^. So Becanus.

The other is Gasp. Scioppius, whose words are so contumelious, even in the
highest degree, that one may justly wonder that any of their Catholics, but
especially their Catholic Kings, can patiently digest them. The Church says
he Ecclesia est Mandra, sieve Grex* aut multitudo iumentorum* sieve Asinorum,
clitellariorum, aut Sagmario. rum Gasp. Sciop. in praef. ad Imper. in summae
Cap. 147.
, is mandra iumentorum, sieve a sinorum, a great fold of beasts or Asses; some
are pack Asses Cum nos Christiani simus dei ^^menta sieve pecora subiugalia,
equi, muli. sieve Asini Cl^tellari^, dossuarij, sarcinarij, Idem in Eccles. c.
147. p. 534.
, some dosse Asses, and others burden Asses. And then telling, cuiusmodi Ibid.
in Marg.
Asini sumus nos Catholici, what manner of Asses, himself, and other
Catholics are; We, says he Ibid.
, must be beasts which have understanding and reason to obey Bishops with all
humility and patience; for they Illi enim sunt Homines, sieve Agasones,
Muliones, Iuga^ij: Illinos ^ranat, illi loao aelligant, nos agunt, nos
s^imulant, n^bis iugum imponum ibid. page 534.
are the Men, they the Muliters, and Asse-driuers, they must yoke, bridle, and
saddle us, put halters about our necks, load and drive us; for others Ibid p.
535.
, they are like to beasts, but tame and obedient beasts, such as must do what
they are commanded: for a good Bonus and intelligens Asinus audit consilia et
praecepta sui Mulionis. ibid. p. 536.
and understanding Ass, is he, that hears and follows the direction and
command of the Muliter. Further yet he adds concerning Kings, that Reges
Ibid. in Marg.
Catholici sunt Asini cum tintinnabulis; Catholic Kings are Asses with belles
about their necks, as being the foreasses, which lead Tum caeteros Asinos,
qui sonitum tintinnabuli de collo vestro pendontis audiunt, viam ingredi
faciatis. Ibid.
the way to other inferior Asses. And particularly for Charles the great, whom
he much commends, he says Ibid. p. 536. 537.
, that Charles was a far greater and wiser Ass, then those Kings who cast
off the Popes yoke; for Charles being tantus Asinus, so great an Ass, cried
(or rather brayed) out with a loud voice, vniuersae Asinorum mandrae, to the
whole fold of Asses, that is, to the whole Church, in this manner; For the
memory of Saint Peter, let us honor the Roman Church, and though the yoke
which the Pope imposes be such as we can scarcely bear, yet let us with
devotion endure the same. Ex quibus verbis, says Scioppius, verum Issachar
agnoscas, de quo Genes. chap. 49. Issachar asinus fortis. By these words of
Charles, you may see that he was a very right Issachar, of whom it is said,
Issachar is a strong ass. Is not this now think you, a fine piece of Catholic
Divinity, to account and call the whole Catholic Church a fould of asses, all
Catholic Kings asses with bells, all other lay persons, asses without bells;
none but Bishops to be Men and Muliters, and the Pope the chief Muliter and
driuer of all the Asses. So shall the man be honored, whom the Pope will
honor. The more zealous and devout one is in obeying him, and embracing his
doctrine, the greater Ass they account and call him. Thus have they not only
stripped Emperors and Kings of their Royalties and Imperial rights, but of
their goods, lands, and possessions, yea of their honors also; and in the end,
for suffering all these indignities at the Popes hand, they account them to be
very Asses.

Now though by this, they do evidently demonstrate the Donation of
Constantine, of which we have hitherto entreated, to be of no force at all,
seeing neither he, nor Pipin, nor Charles, nor any other could give ought to
the Pope; and therefore all the claim which they pretend, to any kingdoms,
territories, or possessions, by such Donations are but a mere mockage of the
World; yet because they do hereby challenge an higher, a better, and far more
ample title, to all that is subposed by those Emperors to have been given,
even such, that in stead of praising their munificence, for that which they
gave, imputes open injustice, tyranny, and sacrilege to them, for that they
gave not all; let me entreat a little of this point also, and clear the honor
not only of Constantine, but of all other Kings and Princes, (for this
concerns them all) whom by this doctrine they make mere intruders and
usurpers of whatsoever they do not as tenants at will, hold of the Pope. A
large argument I confess, and which would require whole volumes, but purposing
summa sequi fastigia rerum, I will only speak at this time of these three
points. First, whether Christ as Mediator and Redeemer of mankind, had such a
sovereign and direct temporal Monarchy, as for his vicares they now claim
from him; which is indeed the first and the maine foundation of their papal
Monarchy. Secondly, Whether Christ left and committed any such temporal
Monarchy to Peter, which is their second foundation. Thirdly, Whether this
Monarchical Empire now claymed for the Pope, be not condemned by the judgment
of holy and learned men in all ages and successions of the Church.

CHAP. II.
That Christ had no such Temporal Monarchy, as is now claymed for the Pope.
FOr the first, whether Christ was such a Temporal King or no, we must
consider, that there is a threefold Kingdom of Christ mentioned and taught in
the holy Scripture. The first is his kingdom of Power or Excellency, whereby
he being God, is the supreme Lord of all things; for The earth Psalm. 24: 1.
is the Lords and all that is therein. Concerning which Kingdom, four things
are clear and certain. First, this Kingdom belongs to Christ neither by
virtue of his death, nor of his resurrection, but by reason of the inseparable
union of the manhood to the Godhead in Christ, by which he being that one
person, which is both God and man, from the very first instant of his
conception that man being very God, has the same power and Kingdom with God.
And as himself says John 10. 30
I and my Father are one, so is this Kingdom of God and Christ's, both one. Of
this Kingdom of Christ, are those words to be understood, All Math. 28. 28
power is given to me, both in heaven, and in earth: And that, He Heb. 1. 2.
has made him heir of all things; And that, The Father Ioh. 13. 3.
has given all things into his hands; And again, Omnia Ioh. 17. 10.
tua mea sunt, all that is thine, belongs also to me, and is mine.

Secondly, this Kingdom of Christ, is Incommunicable unto any mere creature
whatsoever, for it is grounded on the Infinity of Gods power, who as by his
infinite power, he made all things of nothing, so by the same infinite power,
he rules, orders, and disposes of all things. And because no creature is
capable of that Infinity of power, neither is any, capable of that universal
Kingdom of Excellency, whith arises from the Infinity of divine power. And
as Infinity of nature cannot be transferred unto any creature, so neither can
Infinity of power be given or transferred unto it, but this is, and resides
only in that Infinite Essence of God, nor can it agree to any, but to that
person, which is truly God.

Thirdly, this supereminent and universal Kingdom of Christ, does neither
abolish, nor hinder, but establish and ratify all other particular and secular
kingdoms. For as it was said, Daniel 2. 37
before Christ's incarnation, to Nebuchadnezer; The God of heaven has given
thee a kingdom, so Christ also after his incarnation, both approues and
confirms the kingdom of Caesar, saying, Mat* 22. 21.
Give unto Caesar, the things that are Cesars.

Fourthly, this kingdom of Christ is not temporal or secular, but far more
eminent then any, yea then all secular kingdoms in the whole world. Temporal
kingdoms are temporal, and mutable; this eternal, and immutable: they
administered by temporal persons, by temporal means, by temporal counsels:
by temporal laws, by temporal weapons, by temporal punishments: This
kingdom is administered by the only eternal God, by his eternal, omnipotent,
and immutable will, wisdom, counsel, and providence; either with means, or
without means, or contrary to means, as it seems best to him; administered
also, so irresistably, that nothing can resist the power of this kingdom, for
nothing can come to pass without the providence and will of God, either Non
fit aliquid, nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, vel ipse
faciendo. Aug. Enchyr. ca. 95. Nec vtique nolens sinit, sed volens. Ibid. ca.
100.
powerfully doing it himself, or willingly permitting it to be done.

The second kingdom of Christ is of Grace; and the third is of Glory: Or if
any like to call them both but one kingdom, it is not amiss; that kingdom of
Glory being inchoate by Grace in this life, which shall be perfected both in
grace and glory in the life to come. Of the former, Whereby Christ rules by
faith and grace in the hearts of all his elect, ever since the world began,
is that meant, Psalm. 2. Psalm. 2. 6.
I am appointed a king upon his holy mountain Sion; And that of Zachary, Zach.
9. 9.
Behold the king comes, and that in Jeremy, Ier. 23. 5.
I will raise up to David, a righteous Branch, and he shall be a king; And that
in Ezechiel Ezec. 37. 22
I will make them one people, and one king shall rule over them; And that of
our Savior, Matt. 6. 33.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof; The Luke 11.
20.
kingdom of God is come unto you, and is in Luc. 17. 21.
you: which is compared to seed Mat. 13. 24.
sown in good ground, to a grain Ibid. v. 31.
of mustard seed, to leaven Ibid. v. 33.
, and a number such like in the Gospel.

Of the other which is his kingdom of Glory, are clearly to be understood
those texts of Scripture, Lord Luke 23. 42.
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. It is Luk 12. 32.
your Fathers will, to give you the Kingdom. They Luc. 13. 29.
shall sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. The
unrighteous 1 Cor. 6. 9.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. By 2 Pet. 1. 11.
this means an entrance shall be ministered unto you, into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In all which, and many the like,
is meant that glorious kingdom of Christ, whereby himself now, and ever since
his ascension, is in perfect and endless felicity, both of body and soul,
subject to no infirmity of body, or grief of mind, as before he was; of
which most blessed kingdom, all the children of God are even now fellow-heires
Romans 8. 17.
with Christ, and shall* in their due time, be made 2 Timothy 4. 8.
actual partakers and possessors of that heavenly inheritance.

Of both these Kingdoms there may two things be observed. The former, that
they are in a special manner called the kingdoms of Christ. For though they
be the kingdoms also of the Father, and the blessed Spirit, because Faith Gal.
5. 22. and 1 Cor. 12. 11.
and Grace are wrought in the hearts of Gods children by his Spirit: and, God
gives both grace Psalm. 84. 11.
and glory; yet because the holy Spirit works that grace, and the Father
gives this Kingdom, for the mediation and merit 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
of Christ, therefore are they by a certain p^erogatiue, said to be Christ's,
for that he purchased and merited by the infinite and inestimable price of his
blood, and bloody death, (which was sufficient to have ransomed and freed all,)
that both Grace and Glory should be given to whomsoever himself would; and
that is to All and Only to the believers in him, to All and Only the elect
Ephesians. 1. 4.
in Christ.

The other is, that neither of these kingdoms is, or can, with any color of
reason, be accounted a temporal or terrene kingdom. Both of them in their
nature spiritual: The former is wrought by Gods Divine Spirit, and in the
Spirits of the Elect, and that by a spiritual manner of working; The later is
for place, not terrene but celestial; for time, not temporal, but eternal;
and for condition, not subject to any disturbance or change, as temporal
kingdoms are; but settled in an unchangeable state of most happy tranquillity.

Now seeing in the holy Scripture there is neither set down nor mentioned any
other kingdom of Christ, but one of these three, which we have now described;
and seeing it is clear and certain, that none of these three is a temporal
Kingdom, but the first, only divine, the second only spiritual, the third
only celestial; it remains clear and evident, that Christ Jesus neither
ever was a temporal King, such as are the secular Princes and Monarchs here
upon earth; neither ever, either had such a Kingdom, or executed and performed
the Offices of such a King. And it were easy to demonstrate (if it were worth
the labor) that those Romanists who pretend Christ to have had a temporal
Kingdom, do either ignorantly, ( as Franc. Bozius) or Atheistically (as that
Scurra Scioppus,) or impiously, (as the rest) pervert the holy Scriptures to
their own vain and fantastical conceits.

Let us hear our Savior himself witnessing this truth. When Pilate demanded
of him, if he were a King, he answered Ioh. 18. 36.
, My Kingdom is not of this world. He professes himself to be indeed a King,
and to have a kingdom; a Kingdom of Excellency and power, as he is God; a
Kingdom both of Grace and Glory, as he is the mediator between God and Man:
but for any temporal and terrene Kingdom, such as Pilate meant, he utterly
denies that he was such a king, or had such a kingdom. And he gives a plain
reason thereof, for otherwise, my servants would surely fight: As if he had
said; Had God sent me to be a temporal King, I would have come with temporal
pomp, with a temporal guard, and temporal weapons to defend my right, and
revenge my wrongs; and then neither my self nor my servants would put up all
these indignities: but because my kingdom is not terrene, because I come to
serve others and not to be served with such Princely service, by this my
carriage O Pilate, thou may know, that my Kingdom is not of this world, not
a temporal or terrene kingdom.

His facts declare the same, when the Jews Ioh. 6. 15.
had taken him to make him a temporal king, he fled away, refusing such a
Kingdom, even when it was offered unto him. When they came, desiring Luc. 12.
13.
him to divide the inheritance between two brethren, he refused to do it,
saying, Man who made me a Judge between you? As if he had said, the ordering
of such temporal affairs, belongs to temporal Kings and their subordinate
Judges or Officers, God has given that authority to them; Seeing I neither by
Gods appointment, nor by delegation from Caesar, have that temporal authority,
it belongs not to me to intermeddle with those temporal judgments. When the
Publicanes came and demanded, Math. 17. 24.
An non soluit, Does not your Master pay (that is, use to pay) tribute to
Caesar? Peter answered, yes, he uses so to do: by that his using to pay
tribute acknowledging himself, a subject to Caesar: even as at the time of his
birth, his name was, as one of the subjects of Caesar, and Citizens of Rome,
recorded Sub Caesare nobiscum describi voluit. Cyril. lib. 6. cont. Julian. p.
55. Romano censu statim ascriptus, vt natus est. Or^sius. lib. 6. ca: 22.
dicendus vtique ciuis Romanus, census professione Romani. ibid.
in their censuall books. And though Christ, as himself teaches Math. 17. 26
, being the Son of God, to whom all Kingdoms do belong, might by being the
natural Son of God, have pleaded a freedom and immunity from paying tribute
in any kingdom, yet seeing withal he was the Son of David, he willingly paid
tribute to Caesar, as being in respect of his manhood and humane birth, a
subject of the Empire and of Caesar: Yea, Card. Caietane Caiet. Com. in 17. Math.
, and after him Luc. Burgensis Luc. Burg. in eund. loc.
do teach that Christ paid tribute not only de facto, but de debito. For
seeing, say they, Christ said not, ne scandalizentur, but, ne scandalizemus,
lest we give an offense unto them; if Christ (who had taken upon him that state
of humility, and who was not yet known to the world to be God) had denied
tribute unto Caesar, Actiui scandali rationem habuisset, he had given offense
unto them, causing them to think that he had contemned the Law of God. To
which purpose Jerome says Hier. com. in 17. Math.
, Christ as being the Kings son, was not bound to pay tribute, but in that he
took upon him the humility of our nature, debuit adimplere omne^ iustitiam, he
was bound to fulfill all justice; one part of which, was subjection and paying
tribute to Caesar. So Christ both by his words, and actions, witnessed his
kingdom not to have been temporal, while he was here upon earth, neither did
he challe^ge, or ever use the authority of a temporal king, or hinder, much
less abolish and take away, as Scioppius Regnum Christi tollit omnia alia
Regna. Gas. Sciop. Eccles. c. 46. p. 151.
says he did, those kingdoms; but establishing that authority which God had
given to them, for all such temporal matters, he carried himself as a
subject to temporal Kings, submitting himself to death, even to a most
shameful death, upon the judgment of Pilate, the Emperors deputy in Jury,
whom he acknowledges Romani praesidis po^estatem Christus super se fatetur
fuisse caelitus ordinatam, Bern. epist. 42 in fine.
to have had power over him from God, to judge him.

To these may be adioined, the consenting testimonies of St. Austen Audite
regnae omnia, non impedio dominationem v stra^. Aug. tract. 115 in Ioh.
S. Cyrill Principatus Christi mundanus non est. Cyril. lib. 12. in Ioh. ca. 10.
, St. Ambrose Quod regnauit Christus non est contra Prophetiam (Ier. 22. 30.)
non enim saculari honoreregnauit. Amb. l. 3. in Luc. p. 44.
, St. Jerome Regnum Christi non erit terrenum et breue, sed coeleste and
perpetuu^ Hier. in c. 22. Ier. v. 30
, St. Chrysostom Regnum suum neque humanu^ neque caducu^ esse demonstrat. and,
non humanu^, sed long maius at praestantius imperiu^ Chrysostom. hem. 82. in Ioh.
, St. Hillarie Christus positus est rex non super illum terrenae ciuitatis
montem, sed eius quae est in coelis, Hilar. in Psalm 2. ya. 353
, St. Epiphanius Carnaliter non est impletum in saluatore, etc. Epiph. haer. 29.
, of Egesippus Egesip. apud. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17
, Eusebius Seeds David per diuinum saluatoris nostri regnum, erectum est.
Eusebius. lib. 7. de Demonst. Euang.
, Bid Regnabit in aeternum, non dixit in acquisitione gloriae, Gazarumque
terrenaru^, etc. Bed^n c. 1. Luc.
, Bernard Dabit ei deus sedem David, non temporalem sed aeterna^, non terrena^
sed coelestem. Bern. homil 4. super, Missus est. Lu. 1.
, and many others, who not only deny Christ's kingdom to have been terrene and
temporal, but explaining how that prophecy in Jeremy, That none of Ieconias
posterity, (of which they thought Christ to be) should sit upon the throne, or
be a King, how this I say is not repugnant to that saying of the Angel,
Gabriel, Luke 1. 32. God shall give unto him the throne of his father David;
they answer that these two are not contrary, seeing Jeremy speaks of a
temporal kingdom, and such Christ had not: and Gabriell of a spiritual and
eternal kingdom, and such Christ indeed had. But omitting all the rest, I
will add three or four testimonies of their own learned writers testifying
this.

The first is Card. Bellarm. who thus writes B^l. l. 5. de Pont. Romans c. i. 4.
sect. Superest.
, Christ as he was man, while he lived upon earth, neither had, nor would
accept any temporal dominion, neither Ibid. * Quod de nique.
did he ever exercise any such temporal power; and therefore it had been in
vain for him to have had it, seeing that power is in vain which is never
brought into act. And whereas some pretend, that when Christ whipped the buyers
and sellers out of the temple, he did therein use his kingly, temporal, and
secular power; the Card. rightly shows Ibid.. Respondent.
that Christ did that, not by any secular or kingly power, but as a Prophet,
and by prophetical authority, such as Phinies used when he killed Zimbri, and
Cosbi: and Elias when he killed the Priests of Baal. The same Card. ads, That
Ibid. sect. C^^firmatur.
such a temporal kingdom and secular power, was neither necessary nor
expedient for Christ, but altogether superfluous and unprofitable for him.
Again, That Christ, says he Recognit. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 4. p. 33.
, had an universal kingdom of power, as he was God, a spiritual kingdom of
grace, and a third which is an eternal kingdom of glory, I do read; but
that he had a fourth kingdom which is properly temporal, such as other Kings
here upon earth have, I find not either in the Scriptures, or in the Fathers:
Nay, I esteem such a kingdom to be contrary to the poverty of Christ,
mentioned in the Scriptures, and to savor of the error of the Jews, and
Heretics. Again Lib. eod. Recog. pa. 35
I have read the books of the Fathers, with what diligence I could, and I have
often read them to deny Christ to have had a temporal or terrene kingdom,
but I have no where read them to affirm that he had such a kingdom, Thus
Bellarmine.

The next is Cornelius Iansenius, one of their learnedest and best expositors
of the Gospel. The kingdom of Christ (says he) Cor. Ians. Concord. Euan. c.
3. sect. Dabit.
is called the throne or kingdom of David, not for that it is temporal,
sensible, or terrene, but because it was figured by the kingdom of David.

The third is Adam Sasbout, who upon those words which they Sededit super solum
David and super regnu^ eius, vt rex saecularis, ait Sciop. in suo eccles. ca.
36. p. 124.
so often wrest, God shall give unto him the seat and kingdom of David, thus
and very rightly writes Ad. Sasb. comment. in ca. 9. Isai.
, The Jews understand this text of a temporal kingdom of the Messiah, such
as other kings have here upon earth, whereas the Scriptures are most evident,
which witness that Christ's kingdom shall not be such: but Christ is said to
sit upon David's throne, because he rules for ever in the Church, and in the
faithful people, of which Church the kingdom of David was a type.

The fourth is Thomas Waldensis, who in a whole Chapter Tho. Wald. Post. fidei,
to. 1. l. 2. Art. 3. c. 77
at large and effectually by many Fathers, and reasons, proves that Christ's
kingdom is not temporal. Christ (says he) took away all suspicion from
Pilate, when he answered negatiuely touching a temporal kingdom, saying, My
kingdom is not of this world, that is, it is not humane, not temporal, but it
is far greater, and more excellent. Again, All with one accord write that
secular princes need not fear the kingdom of Christ, seeing it is not of this
world. And then he adds, finaliter definimus, we determine and conclude
finally, that Christ had no right to the kingdom of Israel, who as God had an
universal right to all kingdoms in the world.

To all which may be adjoined that which being taken out of Sedulius Ex Hymno
Sedulij, quem cot^ ecclesiae public canit Bell. lib. 5. de Rom pont. cap. 3
, the whole Roman Church approues and singes as an holy Antheme in their
public lyturgie: Non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat caelestia, Christ gives an
heavenly, he does not take away earthly kingdoms, that is, as Bellarmine Loco
cit.
rightly teaches, No secular king by beco^ming a Christian loses his right
to his earthly, but he getts a new right to an heavenly kingdom.

Now to this uniform consent of the ancient Fathers, and the best of their
latter Divines, if we should oppose that violent and indeed atheistical
wresting of the sacred Scriptures, for intitling Christ to a secular and
temporal kingdom, used by the Popes Proctors and Parasites, it would much
confirm any man in this truth. For who can with patience hear them teach,
Christi Gas. Sciop. in Eccl. c. 46. p. 151 in marg.
regnum tollit omnia alia regua, Christ's kingdom (and that is the Popes
Christus legatos constituit qui suo loco orbis haereditatem ^deant. Idem c. 36.
p. 125. and, Papa Romanus est velut Prorex. li. eod. c. 55 p. 179. and,
Christus ipse possessione^ non capit, sed paulatim per suos vicari et ibid.
cap. 36. pa. 125.
in Christ's right) takes away all other kingdoms in the world: For he is
properly no king that has any man superior unto him. Or that, Christ has
Titulo Rede^ptionis Christus omnia regna and imperia euacuat, and cessare
facit. idem li eodem. ca. 36. pa. 123.
euacuated and made void all principality and power, to wit, all besides the
Popes. Or that, I will Lib. eod. c. 46 pa. 151.
overthrow, says the Prophet, the strength of nations, that is to say, Delebo
imperium Romanum, I will abolish the Roman Empire. Consider but the ground of
this temporal kingdom which they give unto Christ. That is, because Christ
Christus vt homo titulo emptionis totius mundi dominus esse coepit. Sciop^ lib.
cit. ca. 41. pa. 139. Christus morte sua emit omnia, etiam infidelium regna,
et, ^mnia suo sanguine emit Christus. Sciop. lib. eod c. 36 pa 123. and,
Christus dominus omnium ratione Emptionis, ib. pa. 122. and, morte sua emit
omnia totius orbis regna ca. 141 pa. 509
by his death has redeemed and bought to himself (and by consequent to the
Pope Christus per suos vicarios possessionem capit terrae, sieve terrenorum and
externorum bonorum lib. eod ca. 36. pa. 125.
who is to take possession of all as Christ's Deputy) all temporal kingdoms
in the world. To which purpose, having wrested th^se words of the Apostle,
Coloss. 2. 14.
he has taken the handwriting that was against us and fastened it to the
Cross, he adds, Hic Sciop. li. cit. ca. 36. p. 122. 123.
perspicuum est, It is clear by this, that Christ by the title of Redemption
has obtained not only spiritual, but secular power, according as it is said,
Thou have put all things under his feet, not only the souls, but the goods
and estates of all men; all are subjected and brought unto the dominion of
Christ, and by him given to his viceroy Papa Prorex. ibid. c. 55. p. 179.
the Pope, who in his right must have the possession Loc. cit. ca. 36. p. 125.
of them all. And again, Christ Sui sanguinis effusione, totius mundi imperium
a diabolo, cui Adam illud per peccatum vendiderat, redemit. Idem. lib. eodem c.
41 p. 137.
by shedding his blood, redeemed or bought all the kingdoms of the world of
the devil, to whom Adam by his sin had sold them, And a thousand such like.

Truly, such divinity does beseem none but such as Scioppius, who
Atheistically peruerts every text of Scripture that he lights upon. That Adam,
and in him all mankind, by their voluntary transgression, forfeited unto God
their right both to the celestial kingdom, and to all the blessings of this
life, which God had promised unto them; and so made themselves by the just
judgment of God, servants both to sin and satan: That Christ to redeem
mankind out of this miserable servitude, paid unto God that inestimable price
of his own bloody death and passion; that by his most precious death on the
Cross, he purchased and merited at Gods hands, first, remission of sins, and
then both grace in this life, and an eternal Kingdom in the life to come for
all his elect; These, the Scriptures evidently teach, the Fathers profess, and
the whole Church of God ever believed. But that Adam sold either the kingdoms
of earth or of heaven to the devil, or that Christ paid any price to the devil,
to redeem either the one kingdom or the other at his hands (who was in truth
nothing else, but the Iaylour or executioner of Gods wrath,) or that Christ
bought at all any temporal kingdom, either of God or the devil, to bestow it
on the Pope, is such divinity as is fit to be preached only to a fold of
Asses, and preached only by him, who professes himself (and we envy not that
so just a title should be given unto him) to be an Ass, and one of no small
understanding in that fold of Asses. Now seeing this, which is the best and
fairest ground or title that he could find either for Christ's, or the Popes
temporal kingdom, is profane, blasphemous, and Atheistical, you may well
think, that the rest of their building which relies on this, must needs be
suitable unto it; that is, not only impious and blasphemous, but such as sets
open a wide gappe to Atheism, and most contemptuous profaning of the holy
Scriptures, and the most Sacred mysteries thereof.

CHAP. III.
That Christ gave no Temporal Monarchy to Peter, nor any of his Apostles, nor
any of their Successors.
THe second point which I proposed, is, Whether any such direct, temporal
Monarchy of the world, was granted by Christ to S. Peter, and in him to the
Pope, as his Successor. Now this is easily resolved by the former. For it is
certain, that not Peter, and then not the Pope (admitting him, which is
certainly untrue, to be Peter's heir ex ass) could have this by any right from
Christ, unless Papa non h^bet iurisdictionem coactiuam maiorem quam habuerit
Christus cuius est vicarius. Occam. li. 6. part. 1. cap. 3.
this had belonged first to Christ himself, as he was man and mediator
betwixt God and man; For Peter and his Successors, represent Bell. lib. 5. de
Rom Pont. c. 4. sect. superest.
Christ unto us no otherwise then as he was, dum hic inter homines viueret,
whilst he lived here upon earth. Christ himself saying, Ioh. 20. 21.
As my Father sent me, so send I you. Seeing then we have proved both by
Scriptures, Fathers, and by the clear confession of their best learned
writers, that Christ had no temporal kingdom, nor was ever a temporal, but
always an eternal King of power, of grace, and glory; it most certainly
follows, that he neither gave, nor left, or committed to Peter, or any of
Peter's Successors, any temporal Kingdom, or coactiue power, but gave unto
them only a power of direction, whereby they might guide others to faith and
sanctity in this life, and to everlasting glory in the life to come.

Our Savior teaches this fully, Math 20. and Luke 22. When James and John
dreaming of a temporal kingdom which Christ should have, desired Ipsi
dicuntur hoc petijsse Mar. 10. 35. sed illam petitionem ipsorum matter Christo
proposuit, ideo ipsa dicitur pro eis hoc petijsse Math. 20. 20.
and made the motion by means of their mother, to sit the one at the right,
the other at the left hand in his Kingdom, That is, to have temporal
authority, power, and dignity, next unto Christ himself; he correcting this
their erroneous, ambitious, and unfitting desire, said to them, and to all his
Apostles, and in them to all their Successors, The Kings of the Gentiles,
dominantur cis have secular and coactiue dominion over them, (that is, over the
Gentiles and people subject unto their authority) and they that are great
among them, exercise authority over them (compelling them to do what they
command:) vos autem non sic, But it shall not be so with you; but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your minister and servant; even as the
Son of man, came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. In which words,
as S. Bernard Bern. li. 2. de Cons. ad. Eug.
rightly observes, is set down, forma Apostolica, the very form of the
Apostolical authority given unto them and their successors by Christ, and
what from Christ they ought to challenge. And first, our Savior declares what
he would not give unto them; to wit, not any temporal, civil, or coactiue
authority, such as the Kings of the Gentiles exercised, and as they desired
him to give unto them; and then, what he would give unto them, to wit,
authority of Ecclesiastical ministration, and service, which himself
exercised.

That they desired secular, and coactiue authority, such as is used in
temporal kingdoms, and desired Christ to give this unto them, is evident by
their own words, Grant that we may sit (as secular Judges and Magistrates) the
one at thy right, the other at thy left hand (that is, in high dignity and
place, even next to thy self) in thy Kingdom, which they thought Regnu^
Christi huius vitae ac saeculare fore opinabantur, Chrysostom. in cap. 20 Math. Hom.
66
should be a temporal Kingdom. Christ not only checketh their ambition, and
denies to grant this unto them, but gives a manifest reason of his denial
thereof: The Kings of the Gentiles (those he names, because at that time there
were no other Kings in the world) have this temporal and coactiue dominion
which you desire of me, and they, partly by themselves, partly by their
deputies and subordinate officers, exercise the same. To give this, belongs to
them, and not to me. I have it not my self, and therefore I cannot give it to
you, nor depute you unto such rule. I came not to rule temporally, but to
serve; and that which I, as your Messiah, and ruler of my Church, do give unto
you, is, to serve as my self serve, not to rule in temporal sort, as I do
not so rule. If you would have this, you must seek it of the Kings of the
Gentiles; they only at this time, have this power under God, originally in
themselves, they only are to depute others to have it under them, and from
them. But if Kings should think it convenient to confer this subordinate
secular and coactiue authority upon them, whether then they should accept it
or no, of that our Savior speaks not one word. He only denies that himself
will grant that secular power, which they desired him to give unto them. But
seeing our Savior does not prohibit it, and the Church ever since Kings
embraced Christianity, has allowed it, most religious Constantinus magnus
sanxit vt cuiuis liberu^ esset in civilly causa a praetore aut quouis alio
saeculari iudice ad Episcopum appellare. Additque; Omnes itaque caus^ quae vel
praetorio iure vel ciuilitractantur, Episcoporum sententijs terminatae perpetuo
stabilitatis iure firmantur nec licebit vlterius retractare negotium quod
episcoporum sententia deciderit. Hoc perpetua lege firmamus. Lex illa tota
extat leg. 1. De Episcopali iudicio Cod. Theod.
Kings granting it, most religious Bishops Inter hos Augustinus, qui sic de se
ait. Homines quidem causas suas saeculares apud nos ^nire cupientes, sanctos
nos appellant. Agamus aliquando negotium salutis nostrae and ipsoru^ non de
auro, non de argento, non de fundis and pecoribus, pro quibus rebus quotidie
submisso capite salutamur, Aug. Epist. 147. and Non permittor ad quod volo,
vacare ante meridiem, post meridiem occupationibus hominum ten^or. Epist. 110.
and, Testor deum, multo malle^ per singulos dies aliquid manibus operari, quam
tumultuosissimas perplexitates causarum alienarum pati de negotiis
saecularibus, vel iudicando dirimendis, vel interueniendo praecidendis Aug.
lib. de oper. monach. ca. 29. Idemque ab aliis Episcopis factitatum, non est
dubiu^, cum lex illa Constantini omnibus episcopis idem ius iudicandi causas
saeculares contulisset.
accepting and using it, and the whole Catholic Church in all ages ever since,
approueing both the giving thereof by the one, and accepting of it by the
other; yea approueing it, by the very warrant of God himself, in the old
testament, where secular power was in diverse Vt in Mose, Eli, Samuele, alijsque.
joined unto spiritual: it is not to be doubted, but that it is consonant both
to the will of Christ, and the word of God; of both which there can neither be,
nor be wished for, a better or more certain declaration in this cause, not
determined by Christ, then is the uniform judgment of the whole Catholic
Church and that in all ages.

It is true I confess that learned men, both on our side, and theirs Bell. lib.
5. de Romans Pont. ca. 10. sect. Dico secundo. Cor. Iansen. in Concord. Euang.
ca. 104. alijque.
, expound the words of Christ in such such, as if Christ had denied not simply
dominion, but only tyrannical and cruel dominion: which they collect from
the compound verbes used by Christ, (...), and (...), which import (as they
suppose) unjust, cruel, and tyrannical governing. That Christ condemns such
cruelty and tyranny in all, and especially in his Apostles, there is no doubt;
but that he meant to forbid it in these words, there is no likelihood at all,
nor no circumstance to enforce, that reason, drawn from the compound verbes,
sauouring of gramaticall subtility, but neither of logical, nor theological
soliditie. First, though these compound verbes do signify sometimes
tyrannical dominion, yet neither do they so always, (for Josh. 15. v. 16.
(...), signifies simply prevailing by force without either injustice or
tyrany:) And that in this place, they ought not to be taken in that
signification, is evident, by all as I suppose that have translated the Text in
the Bible. In the Syriack, in Arius Montanus, in Isiod. Clarius, in Castalio,
in the French, in the Italian, in the Spanish, in the English, in S. Jerome,
the former word is constantly translated, by Dominari, which is to have
dominion and rule, and the latter, by exercising authority; not one translating
them, tyrannice dominari, or saeuam ac crudelem authoritatem exercere: and
which against those, with whom we deal, is of most force, their vulgar Latin
edition which they hold Conc. Trident. sess. 4 sect. Insuper.
to be authentical, and from which they may nullo praetextu, by no color
depart; This, I say, has simply dominantur eorum and potestatem exercent,
rightly delivering the sense of the words, though with some incongruity Nam,
eoru^, legitur pro, earum.
of Latin, and against Grammar.

Again our Savior in S. Luke Luke 22. 25.
, uses the simple verb (...), which out of question, signifies, dominantur.
Whereby it is certain, that the compound verb in S. Matthew, does signify
the same also: or if it do not, yet his words in Saint Luke simply deny
dominion to be given unto them. The Kings of the Gentiles (...) have dominion,
to wit, civil, coactiue, and temporal, and use it; but with you it shall not
be so: not by any grant from me.

Lastly, had our Savior denied only tyrannical and cruel dominion unto
them, he had not fitly reproved them at this time, nor answered their request,
made unto him. For they would easily have replied, why, we seek not any cruel
nor tyrannical kind of dominion; all that we desire, is to be emine^t in
secular and coactiue authority and power, in thy temporal and earthly
kingdom. Seeing then it is certain, that Christ denied to grant that which
they desired, and their desire was not of tyranny, but of temporal dominion,
it is not to be doubted, but our Savior denied that he would grant or give
unto them any secular, civil or coactiue authority at all, either mild or
tyrannical.

Now seeing Christ denied to give any secular power at all to any of his
Apostles, or to their successors, a fortiori he must needs deny to give that
which they now claim to the Pope, Regal, Monarchical, and supreme dominion,
and that over all kings in the world, either to Peter or James, or any of all
their successors. Our Saviors words, are far more emphaticall and forceable
against this. The Kings of the Gentiles have this dominion; If I should give
this unto you, I should contrary to mine own precept, take from Caesar what
belongs to Caesar. The Kings of the Gentiles have this dominion; should I give
this unto you, I should make all of you Kings, and not servants; now I appoint
you to be (as I my self am) servants unto your brethren, not kings over all
your brethren, and least of all over all the world. S. Bernard very rightly
applying this text to the Pope, who then carried himself like an Emperor,
tells him, that Apostolical ministration which is enjoined to Peter and all his
successiors, is incompatible which Monarchical dominion, which the Pope then
usurped, and which is now challenged. If, says he Bern. lib. 2. de consid. ad
Eugen.
, you succeed in the Apostolical vocation, you may not usurp (Monarchical)
dominion, Plane ab alterutro prohiberis, you are certainly forbid the one of
these two. If you will have them both, you shall lose them both. And to show
plainly that such independent temporal dominion used by the Pope, cannot
possibly be claimed from Christ, nor be iure diuino, he adds, Vt alia
quacunque ratione, haec tibi vendices, certe non Apostolico iure, by what means
soever you claim such dominion, it is certain, you cannot have it by
Apostolical right. And if it be not Apostolical, then is it certainly either
humane (which they scorn,) or (which is the truth indeed) diabolical. To the
same purpose does their learned Lawyer Ant. Rosselus Ant. Rossel. Monarch.
part. 1. c. 70. p. 298.
say Est impossible quod in eodem subiecto sit totale sacerdotium, and
Imperium saeculare. It is impossible, that the same man should be both a full
Bishop and withal a civil Emperor or supreme Monarch. And in another place,
he undertakes in an whole Chapter Lib. ^od. c. 38.
to prove, Imperium temporalium, non esse in Sacerdotio, nec esse posse, that a
supreme temporal Empire, or dominion neither is, nor can be in a Bishop. The
reason whereof is, that opposition which Christ has made between them; the
one, to be the Lord and ruler of all his brethren, and therefore subject or
servant to none, but only to God; the other to be a servant in performing
Ecclesiastical ministration to all his brethren, but specially to the Emperor;
and therefore to be subject to him, who is by God appointed to be the Lord of
all his brethren.

Our Savior again teaches this, by that commandment which he gives both to
his Apostles and all others, and which himself observed, Give Math. 22. 21
unto Caesar that which is Cesars. Now among other things due to Caesar, S. Paul
by the direction of Christ's own Spirit, reckons obedience, saying, Let Rom,
13. 1. 5
every soul to be subject to the higher powers, and that not for terror, or
fear of punishment, but even for conscience sake.

That, by the higher powers, the Apostle meant no other, but Caesar and secular
Kings, is evident by that very Text, seeing of them the Apostle says, That
they Ver. 4.
bear the sword, which certainly none then did, but secular Princes; and that
tribute Ver. 6.
is paid unto them, which was then paid unto none, but only to Caesar, and
secular kings: to whom even Christ Math. 17. 24.
himself not only used to pay it, but Peter in whose house Christ was at that
time, paid the same, it being exacted domatim, of every householder. S. Austen
Aug. epist. 54.
writes to Macedonius a temporal Governor, that the Apostle does terrify
wicked men not only by the future punishments, but even praesentibus vestris
saecularibus iudiciis, by your present secular judgments, when he says, Let
every soul he subject to the higher powers. S. Basil more plainly to our
purpose, The Apostle, says he Basil. Constit. exercit. ca. 22.
commands all to be subject to the higher powers, potestatibus mundi, non
spiritualibus, he commands this subjection to temporal and secular powers,
he speaks not here of spiritual powers; And this, says Basil, the Apostle
plainly declares, by that which follows, of paying tribute unto them. S.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. inca. 13. ad Romans hom* 23.
, is more then abundant in declaring this to be spoken of secular kings, whom
he often there calls Princes that do imperare, rule over their subjects,
Magistrates who are here by the Apostle described veluti milites armati, as
armed to take vengeance of evil doers, to whom honor, even Imperial honor
(as he calls Reddite timorem, Iemperialem honorem dicit. ibid.
it) is due, and due by all other. For all, says he, whether thou be a
Priest, or a Prophet, or an Apostle; sieve quicunque alius sis, or whosoever
else thou be, every one is commanded to obey these higher powers. The like
might be showed by Tertullian Quod attine^ ad honores Regum vel Imperatorum
satis praescriptum habemus in omni obsequio esse nos oportere, secundum
Apostoli praec^ptum. Tert. lib. de Idolat. ca. 15.
, Ambrose Principes hos Reges dicit. Ambr. com. in cap. 13. ad Romans
, and many others: but the confession of Pererius their Jesuit, may ease us of
this labor; who says Ben. Peter* com in ca. 13. ad Romans disput. 1.
All the ancient Writers almost (he might have left out almost) have understood
Paul de potestate tantu^ saeculari, to speak only of secular power, and the
Text of the Apostle does of it self declare the same. So Pererius. Seeing then
it is clear that all the Apostles, and more specially Peter, (for this Epistle
of Paul was written to the whole Church of Rome, at that very time Baron. an.
58. ^u 46. Quem ^it fuisse Petri exquo Episcopus Romanus esse coepit, amu^e 14.
and eodem tempore ait Paulum forte priuatas literas ad Petrum (Romae agentem)
mifisse. ibid. nu. 52*
, when Peter, as they teach, was Bishop thereof) and then much more all Peter's
successors, are commanded by the Spirit of God, to be obedient to secular Kings
and Princes; it is undeniably consequent, that Christ did not give a supreme
temporal dominion either to Peter, or to any other Apostle, or to any of all
their successors: for had he given that, then should not they have been
commanded to obey other Kings, but all other both Kings and people should have
been taught and commanded to obey even in all civil and temporal matters,
Peter and Peter's successors.

If notwithstanding all this evidence, any will yet exempt either Peter or the
Pope, or any other from this commandment of the Apostle, that may be justly
replied unto him, which S. Bernard says, Ber. Epist. 42.
Si omnis anima, and vestra, If every soul must be subject, to secular powers,
then must you also be, who has exempted you from this universality? Si quis
tentat excipere, conatur decipere, if any attempt to except you, he endeavors
to deceive you.

But besides this of Bernard, I will oppose two other evident reasons: The
former drawn from the scope and purpose of the Apostle in giving this precept.
Bellarmine, as also Pererius, do rightly observe, that whereas Christians Eo
tempore accusabantur Christiani seditionis and rebellionis. Bell. lib. 2 de
Pont. Romans ca. 29. sect. Quod. Quin etiam authore Chrysostomo, sparso rumore
percrebuerat, Apostol^^ and praedica^^res Euang^^u rerum esse Nouatores, atque
ad euertendas leges ciuiles omnia dicere and facere. P^rer. in cap. 13. ad Romans
disp. 1.
in the Apostles time were slandered to have been Nouatores, Innouaters of the
state, subuerters of civil government, seditious and rebellious persons; the
Apostles to clear the Christian doctrine of these Calummatores vocat Bell. eos
qui haec obijciebant. and Per. ait, Apostolos laborasse vt hoc scandalum
auserrent. loc. (...)
calumnies, both in their Sermons and writings, did earnestly persuade
obedience unto Emperors, Kings and secular Magistrates. Now had Peter
challenged, and the other Apostles and Christians abetted him in that claim,
the supreme temporal Monarchy of the world, then could Christianity never
have been cleared of that calumny: nay it had been no calumny at all, but a
certain truth; for seeing by the doctrine of Christians, Peter and his
successors were for ever to have the supreme temporal dominion over the whole
world, all other kingdoms and Monarchies had been quite subverted, all
Emperors and Kings should by this have become subjects, servants, homagers and
vassals to Peter and the Pope. He should have been their temporal Lord, whom
they ought to obey, their Landlord from whom they should have taken and held
all their possessions, and their supreme Monarch from whom they must derive
all their temporal authority. Thus had the Christian faith and doctrine,
subverted all other temporal Kingdoms, to establish a new temporal Monarchy
in the Pope alone. Seeing then the Apostles taught that accusation to be a most
odious calumny, because they, as Chrysostom says Chrysostom. in cap. 13. ad Romans
in ^^tio.
, taught that Christ by his Law non euertit politiam, sed melius instituit, did
not subvert any other civil state, common wealth or Empire, but bring them all
to better order, by embracing faith, and with it piety, and all godliness; it
is hence most clear, that Christ neither before, nor after his resurrection,
erected that newfound temporal, Pontifical Monarchy, which as Scioppius Gas.
Sciop. ca. 46. Regnum Christi ^ollit omnia alia regna. Quod de Papali regno
acceptum, verissime dicitur.
truly says, overthrows all other kingdoms and Empires in the whole world.

The other reason is this, that if Christ had meant to give such a temporal
Monarchy to Peter, he would no doubt have furnished him with secular means,
secular strength and power, first, to obtain, and then to uphold and maintain
that Monarchy. Now the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, as the
Apostle says 2 Cor. 10. 4.
, but spiritual, mighty to cast down all the strong holds of Satan. Certainly
they might if they had had Christ's allowance, have used their power to subvert
Kingdoms, and bring all to a temporal subjection under Peter. They could most
easily have subdued all the instruments of Satan, and all mortal men who had
opposed themselves to this Pontifical dominion. For who could have resisted
them, who with a word only could smite their oppugners with blindness, as
Paul did Act. 13. 11
Elimas, yea with present death, as Peter did Act. 5. 5. 10
Ananias and Saphira? But because this power was given them, only to confirm
the Faith, and enlarge Christ's Spiritual, but not their own temporal
kingdom; they only used it for the furtherance of Christ's glory, and never
either did, or might use it to set up their own secular dominion, and lift
themselves above all Kings, and Princes. Nay, seeing the Apostles were
faithful in the house of God, and preached every part of that doctrine which
Christ taught unto them; St. Paul testifying of himself, which is also true in
the rest, I have Act. 20. 27
kept nothing back, but have declared unto you the whole Counsel of God: and
none of them all, ever so much as once declared that Peter and Peter's
Successors, were to have a temporal Monarchy over the whole world, and that
all Kings must hold both their Crowns and Kingdoms from them; all to be
tenants, homagers, and vassals unto them: it may hence certainly be concluded,
that this temporal Monarchy which they claim to Peter and the Pope, is no
part of Gods counsel; and then without all doubt, it is no other but the very
counsel of the devil.

CHAP. IIII.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by the judgment of the
Primitive Church, and of general Councels; as also by the Fathers, and learned
writers, who lived till the 500. years after Christ.
THe third point which herein I proposed, was, to show that this direct
temporal Monarchy which they claim to the Pope, with those consequents and
conclusions which depend on it, has been condemned by the uniform consent of
holy Fathers, and learned writers in all ages of the Church. A work in truth
nothing so difficult to prove, as laborious to collect; and if I feared not to
be too prolixe, I would make it clear by the testimonies almost of all writers
of account, in all the ages of the Church. But studying brevity, I will select
some only out of that heap which I had not without great labor collected, by
which may be conceived what the judgment has been of the rest in this point.

First, there are two general considerations which may be here observed. The
one is the consenting judgment of Popes, Bishops, Martyrs, and all* Christians
of the Primitive Church, so long as Emperors persecuted the Faith; that is,
until the Empire of Constantine. Had Christians believed or known in those
days, that the Pope was an higher temporal King then secular Emperors, and
that none of those Emperors had any lawful authority to punish or put them
to death, seeing they had no authority at all from their supreme temporal
Monarch, the Pope, so to do; why did not those Popes command Christians, (as
they might lawfully have done) to make resistance by temporal force? why did
they not (as being superior Lords they lawfully might) wholly deprive those
Emperors of all their authority which they so tyrannously abused against
Christ? Specially considering that, as Bellarmine Bell. lib. 5. d^ Romans Pont.
ca. 7 sect. Probatur*
tells us, When Princes go about to turn their people from the faith, omnium
consensu possunt, and debent priuari suo dominio, by consent of all Romanists,
they may and ought to be deprived of their Dominion; yea Ibid. sect. Tertia.
non licet Christianis tolerare, Christians may not then so must as tolerate
them. At least, why did neither the Popes, nor any of all those Martyrs, use
that just Apology for themselves, that none of those Emperors had any lawful
authority over them, seeing they had none derived from the Pope? How were they
not perfidious in Gods cause, by concealing that truth, which if they had
taught, would have quenched all persecutions? How were they not injurious to
Gods Church in suffering those tyrants, who had no lawful authority from
their highest temporal Monarch, to murder and massacre the Saints of God? Nay,
how can they be excused from being accessorie to their own deaths, when they
used neither that temporal authority of the Pope, whereby they might justly
have resisted; nor that just defense of speech, whereby they might have
repressed all those tyrannies? For if any think, they had not at that time
temporal power, and strength sufficient to have made resistance, Tertullian
plainly witnesses the contrary. If (says he) Tertull. Apologet cap. 37.
we Christians would be open enemies, should we want either number or power?
Are not we more then the Mauri, Marcomans, or Parthians? more then any nation? we
have filled all places that you have, your Cities, your Islands, your Castles,
your municipall Towns, your Tents, your Tribes, your Palaces, your Senate,
your Markets, only we leave to you the Idol Temples. Cui bello non idonei
fuissemus? What war were we not able to undertake? But because both the Popes
and all other Christians then knew, that they had no such lawful authority to
make resistance to their Governors, they laid down their necks, and endured
all tortures, even death it self, using no other weapons, but tears and
prayers: Against Emperors being their Lords, they had scutum, but not gladium.
The Popes temporal sword and secular Monarchy which might easily have
resisted, and quenched all those persecutions, was not known or once dreamed
of among any Christians in those first three ages of the Primitive Church.

The other general consideration, is the consenting judgment of holy general
Councels. I have in an other Treatise A treatise of Councels which be general
and lawful
proved at large, that besides the Sardican, and that under Mennas, there were
held no more but eight, which are rightly to be counted and called Oecumenicall
and lawful Councels. All that followed that eight, which was held at
Constantinople about the cause of Photius, either in the year 869, in the time
of Hadrian the second; or in the year 879, in the time of John the eight, and
both of them in the time of Basilius, were in truth either not Oecumenicall, or
if such, yet not lawful general Councels. Now by all those eight, which were
only Oecumenicall Councels, the Popes temporal Mornarchy is clearly and
certainly condemned. For all those were both assembled, governed, and dissolved
by the authority of secular Emperors; all the Bishops in all those Councels,
by their coming at the Emperors call and command; by their willing submission
to Imperial government, when they were assembled; by their not departing, but
with the Emperors leave, and license, did acknowledge and proclaim Emperors
to be the only supreme Lords, Governors, and temporal Monarchs in the
Church. All which points, because I have fully in my other Treatise out of the
Synodall Acts of every one of those Councels made clear, I will not here
repeat the same. Let me only now mention one testimony out of that which they
call the eight general Council. In it Council C^^stant. 4. sub Hadr. 2. an.
869. Act. 1.
Basilius the Emperor writ thus to the whole Council, and all the Bishops of
the Council approved Recte imperatores nostri monuere, dicunt legati Act.
e^de^*
his writing, and saying: The government of the Ecclesiastical Ship (that is,
of the Church) is by the divine providence, nobis commissa given or committed
unto us. An evidence that the whole Church believed, and professed the
Emperor, and not the Pope to be the supreme Monarch, Pilot, and Governor of
the Church: an evidence also so certain, that whereas Binius following Raderus
the Jesuit, had in his former edition Edit. Biniana Colon. Agrip. ^n. 1606.
of the Councels, maliciously corrupted these words, and turned Nobis into
Vobis; quite contrary both to the Greek Text, to the ancient reading, and the
true sense of Basilius; Binius has now in his last editions of the Councels,
corrected that his error, and rightly reads the words, as they are also in
their Roman edition of the Councels, Nobis and not Vobis. So by the consenting
Judgment of all the Oecumenicall Councels, which as yet have been held, that
is, of the whole Catholic Church, whenever it spoke in one voice, this
temporal Monarchy of the Pope is most clearly condemned, and the sovereign
authority of secular Emperors above the Pope, is most clearly demonstrated.

Hear now the softer voice of the Church, speaking in those Fathers and
learned Writers, who lived in the several ages and successions thereof. For
though this question of the Popes temporal Monarchy was not moved in the
Church till more then a 1000 years after Christ, yet such is the force of
Truth, that even before this controversy arose, that Antichristian pride was
by the ancient Fathers both condemned and refelled, though not in express
manner (which, the question being not then moved, they could not do) yet by many
both certain, clear, and undeniable consequents.

In the first age, Ab anno 1. ad 100.
after our Savior, Christus Math. 22. 21
the head of the whole Church, had once given that precept of obedience, Give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; S. Peter Petrus Epist. 1. c. 2. 17.
seconds him therein, commanding to honor the King and submit themselves to
him, tanqua^ praecellenti, as being superior to the rest. And S. Paul Paulus
Romans 13. 1.
explaines both who they are that must obey, and those are Every soul; (I
think the Pope is one:) and to whom they must yield obedience, and those are,
the Higher (secular) powers, who bear the sword, and receive tribute. Ignatius
Ignatius Epist ad Smir^.
the next Bishop of Antioch after S. Peter, in one of those which their Baron.
An. 57 nu. 55. and Bell. li^de eccl. scrip. in Ignatio.
own writers commend for his true and genuine Epistles, says, It behooues all
to honor the King, Nec enim Rege quisquam praestantior, for there is none
(then certainly not the Pope) more eminent then the King, nor is any equal to
him, in all things created. Which words being so pregnant against the Popes
Soueraignety, are foully corrupted and falsified (by whose hands you may easily
conjecture) both in the Latin Edition of Ignatius at Paris Anno 1562 and in
the Greek also, of the same Edition. In both which, in steed of Rege, is read,
Deo. But in the Bibl. patrum the words are, and that rightly, set forth as we
have cited them, none above the king. Josephus Iosep. Antiq. (...) 17. ca. 3.
shows, that in his age there was an impious sect of the Pharisees, who were
oppugners of regal authority, and who alone refused to swear fidelity unto
the Emperor, cum tota gens Iudaeorum fidem suam iureiurando obligassent Regi
and Caesari, whereas the whole nation of the Jews did bind their fidelity to
Caesar by an oath. It is not to be doubted, but in the whole nation of the
Jews, there were many thousand Christians Christiani primis^culi.
; who neither justly could, nor would have taken that oath to the Emperor, as
their supreme Lord, had they known that Peter and his Successors had been the
supreme Monarchs of the world.

In the second age, Ab an. 100. ad 200.
Iustine Martyr Just. Mart. orat ad An^o^^num p. 128.
in the name of all the Christians of that age (one of which was the Pope)
professes to the Heathen Emperors, We adore only God, and vobis in rebus aliis
laeti inseruimus, and we willingly serve and obey you in other matters.
Irenaeus Ireneus. eius ve ba citantur a Ioh. L^^go in ^uis rotis ad Just Mart
orat ad Anton p. 117.
, Know ye O Emperors what is committed unto you; totus orbis sub manum vestram
subditus est, the whole world (then sure the Pope) is subject to your power and
diadem. Egesippus Egesippus apud Eusebius. li. 3. Hist. ca. 17.
declares that not Christ's kingdom (and then certainly neither Peter's nor the
Popes) is a terrene or secular kingdom: For when Domitian the Emperor,
fearing to lose his kingdom, would have killed all that were found of the
house of David, and inquired what manner of kingdom Christ's was, they answered
that it was no kingdom of this world. Tertullian is most full in this point,
Emperors know Tertullian in Apologet. ^ap. 30,
who gave to them the Empire, they know that they are only subject to the power
of God, to whom they are the second, and after whom the first, before all, and
above all other man, ^hen sure above the Pope. And again, in the name of all
Christians of that age, We honor, says he Idem lib. ad Scap ca. 2.
, the Emperor, vt hominem a Deo secundu^, and solo deo minorem, as one who is
next unto God, and less only then God, and who has all his power from God.
And lest any should think that this honor was given by Christians de facto,
but not de iure, Tertullian expressly adds, We give this honor to the Emperor,
quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, as being lawful for us to give, and
expedient for him to receive.

In the third age, Ab An. 200 ad 300.
Clemens Alexandrinus Clemens Alex lib. 3. Paedag pa. 30^
: Christ's precept of giving to Caesar the things that are Cesars, (in which is
commanded subjection of every soul, even the Pope, unto secular Kings) is a
law for administration of the Commonwealth. Origin Origin. com. in Epist. ad
Romans lib. 9. in haec verba, Vis non timere potestatem.
, Whatsoever crimes God will have to be temporally punished, non per Antistites
and Principes Ecclesiaru^, sed per mundi iudices voluit vindicari, he will have
them to be punished by secular Princes, not by Bishops or Ecclesiastical
Prelates. Then certainly not by Peter or any of Peter's successors. Cyprian
Cyprian. de simpli^. prael. sieve de vnitate eccles. ^a. 297.
, Christ gave parem potestatem, equal power, to all the Apostles; the rest
were the same that Peter was, endowed all of them pari consortio and honoris
and potestatis; With an equal fellowship both of honor and power. Then either
none, or (which is impossible) they all were supreme temporal Monarchs of the
whole world. Victorinus Victorinus Com. in Apocal.
calls the Caesarean Empire, Regnum Regnorum in regard of the supreme dominion
it had over all. Who as upon the greatness and power of that Empire he
supposed, that one of those Emperors to wit, Nero Existimat Victor. Neronem
nondum mortuum, ac futurum verum Antichristum Not. ad. Vict in 3 edit* B. B.
Pat. in margin.
did yet live and should personally come again and be that mighty Antichrist;
so had he lived to see the Pope to have Regnum Regnorum, and to be a King above
all Kings, even such, that if Nero were now alive, he must be his subject and
vassal, he would not have doubted upon that same greatness and absoluteness
of his Tyrannical power to have called the Pope, much rather then Nero,
Antichrist.

In the fourth age, Ab An. 300 ad 400.
Eusebius says Eusebius lib. 2. de vit. Constable ca. 19.
of Constantine, that he ruled the whole world, (then I hope, the Pope)
gubernaculis singularis potestatis, by his own Imperial power. Athanasius
Athanasius Apol. ad Cons^^ntium p. 156.
writes thus to Constantius the Emperor, If I were accused to others, I would
appeal to your Majesty, as Paul said, I appeal to Caesar. But seeing they
accuse me unto you, ad quem a te, quaeso appellare potero, nisi ad Deum? unto
whom can I appeal from you, but only to his Father, who says, I am the Truth?
Then certainly he knew not the Pope to be a superior Lord, for else unto him,
he might, and would have appealed. Hillary Hilarious. Can. 23 in Math. O plenam
miraculi responsionem.
with admiration commends that answer of Christ: Give to Caesar that which is
Cesars, and shows that Christ, would not have the right of Caesar to be
violated or hurt. Now the right of Caesar (as we have proved) is soueraignety
over all, and obedience from all unto him. Again, he plainly shows that the
Apostles (none of which had other power then S. Paul) had not civil and
temporal power. Nunquid Idem in Psalm. 2.
Paulo ius Praetorium, Had Paul civil and praetorian authority, that he
threatens to come with a rod? was he to use lictoris officio, the office of a
Sergeant? Non ita opinandum est, we may not think so. Gregory Nazianzene
Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 25. p. 81.
, speaking of Kings says, Mundus vniuersus vobis subditus, the whole world
(then sure the Pope) is subject to you, and to your Diadem. Those things which
are above are only Gods, those which are below, are both Gods and yours.
Gregory Nissene Greg. Nissen. lib. de Beatitud. inillud, Beati qui
persequ^tionem patiu^tur.
Regia dignitas supra se nullam habet tyrannidem, the kingly dignity has no
humane power (then not the Popes) above it: It is obnoxious to no other man's
will nor dominion. Cyrill Cyril Hi^ros. Catech. ^5.
Bishop of Jerusalem says, that Antichrist shall usurp potestatem Romani
imperii, the power of the Roman Empire, which, as he says, is greater then
was any of the former great Monarchies. A clear token that Cyrill judged the
Roman Emperor not to have been subject to any higher or greater temporal
Monarch. Epiphanius Epiphanius h^^r. 29.
demanding how that Prophecy is fulfilled in Christ, He shall sit upon the
throne of David, says, carnaliter non est impletum; This was not carnally nor
after a temporal manner fulfilled. And then he shows, that by this throne of
David, is meant Sacerdotium in sancta Ecclesia, Christ's Priesthood in the
Church, whereby he gives to the Church, power and Jurisdiction of binding and
loosing. Which though Epiphanius there calls a Kingly dignity, yet it is
certain, that he means not any secular or civil kingdom, for that he
plainly denies unto Christ; but he calls it kingly, because Christ from whom it
is derived, is both of the seed of King David, and also an eternal King
according to his deity. Ambrose Ambrosius. Orat. de obitu Theod.
says of Theodosius the Emperor, that he had potestatem super omnes, power
over all; (then certainly over the Pope:) and again, Idem. Apol. David, lib.
1. ca. 10. and ca. 4.
Kings are free from humane punishments for their offenses, tuti Imperii
potestate, being safe from all humane judgment by the power of their Empire,
subject only to the power of God. Ruffinus says Ruffinus in expos. Symb. pa.
176. and 206
of secular Kings, that their bounty and actions, discussioni non est obnoxia,
is not obnoxious to the discussion (much less to the punishment) of any man.
Jerome Hieronimus in Epita. Nepot. ad Heliod. tom. 1. pa. 26.
clearly denveth civil and coactiue authority to Bishops. The King rules over
men, though they will not; Bishops but over such as will: kings make others
subject to them by terror, Bishops are appointed to serve, not to terrify.
Kings keep and rule the bodies until death, the other keeps and rules the
souls unto eternal life. Prudentius Prudentius peristeph. hym^o 2.
says of the Roman Empire: Thou, O Christ, have placed Rome in vertice rerum,
as the highest top of all things, Thou have ordained that the world should be
subject to the successors of Romulus, and omne sub regn^m Remi mortale
concessit genus, and all mortal men, (then sure the Pope) are subject to the
Kingdom of Remus, that is, to the Roman Emperors.

In the fifth age, Ab An. 400. ad 500.
Chrysostom Chrysostom Homil. 2. ad pop. Ant.
says of the Emperor, parem non habet vllum super terram, there is none upon
earth (then not the Pope) equal to him; He is summit as and caput omnium super
terram hominum, The head and top of every one upon earth. Optatus Optatus lib.
3. Cont. Parmen pa. 85.
Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem, Above the
Emperor there is none but God who made the Emperor; then out of question the
Pope is not above him. Augustine Augustine lib. 5. de ciuit* Dei ca. 21.
, Let us not give or ascribe the power of giving kingdoms and Empires to any
nisi Deo vero, but only to the true God (then not to the Pope:) He gives the
Kingdom of heaven only to the godly, but earthly kingdoms he gives both to
the good and bad, as it is pleasing to him, to whom nothing but what is just is
pleasing. Prosper Prosper lib* Epigr^^u. 34.
teaches all Christians (is not the Pope one?) to be obedient to secular
Princes, Aequum seruire est regibus and dominis, and he plainly distinguishes
Idem lib. 2* de vocat. gentium. ca. 16.
the scepter of the Cross, from the weapons of the Empire, and arcem
religionis, from solium potestatis, the tower of religion from the throne of
power. Orosius Orosius lib. 2. ca. 1.
, That all power is of God both those who have not read have felt, and those
who have read do know; and if all powers be of God, how much more are
kingdoms, from which other powers are derived: and if kingdoms, how much more
is the greatest kingdom, cui reliquorum regnoru^ potest as vniuersa
subiicitur, to which the whole power of other lesser kingdoms is subject? of
which sort was the Babylonian, then the Grecian, then the Africane, at last the
Roman, quod vsque adhuc manet, which as yet remains. Then had not the Pope
any greater Monarchy at that time. Sulpitius Seuerus Sulpitius lib* 2. sacrae
histor.
says of the Council at Sardica, Imperator iubet ex toto orb terrarum, the
Emperor commanded the Bishops throughout the whole world (then he commanded
the Pope) to come to Sardica, to examine the cause of Anathasius. Cyrill
Cyrillus (...) lex. lib. (...) fide ad Theod. in princip^^.
the most famous Bishop of Alexandria writes thus unto the Emperors; There may
be seen in you the image of Gods Majesty, Vos enim omni terreno fastigio
superiores, for you are superior to all terrene highness, you are the
fountain of humane felicity, Quicquid vsquam est gentium hoc totum regni
vestri solio substratum est, Whatsoever is here upon earth, (then belike the
Pope) is subject to the throne of your Majesty. Theodoret Theodoret com. in
Daniel. ca. 2. Orat. 2.)
Bishop of Cyrus, The Roman Empire orbis terrarum clauos tenuit, ruled the
whole world, and it did not perish, but flourish at Christ's coming, and had
the world subject unto it, and the same kingdom of the Romans, vsque adhuc
permansit, has continued unto this time. Then all (even the Pope) were at that
time subject unto it. And that Popes ought de iure, so to be, he shows ^lem in
cap. 1^. ad Romans
by the words of S. Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
whether he be any Priest or any Bishop, (then I hope the Pope) or any Monk, he
must yield subjection to those to whom Magistracy is given. Theodulus Theodulus
com. in ca. 13. ad Romans
Bishop of Coelesyria, expounds those words, Omnis anima potestatibus subdatur,
to be spoken not of every superior, sed de ipso magistratu, but of the civil
Magistrate, and the Apostle shows, says he, that it is necessary that every
one (then the Pope) should obey the Magistrate, for the Gospel is not given to
be a subversion of public government and order. Vincentius Lyrinensis
Vincentius Lyrin. in Common. ca. 42. 43.
highly extols both Cyrill and the holy Ephesine Council, which was held but
three years before he writ. Now it is true that he there mentions caput
orbis, but he means not the Pope thereby, as Bellarmine Bell. lib. 2. de Rom,
Pont ca. 16 Octauus.
most fraudulently and falsely would persuade. The true and only Caput orbis,
which he means, was he, of whom both Cyrill Cyril. l^c. cit.
says, that all the whole world was subject to the Emperors throne, and whom
the whole Ephesine Council called Conc. Ephesians. in Epist Synodali, to. 4 Act,
Ephesians. conc. ca. 22.
Christianisimum fastigium, the most Christian top and highness. Other Caput
orbis, Vincentius knew none. Socrates Socrates lib. 7, ca. 11.
, there was envy at that time among them, seeing the Bishop of Rome, no
otherwise then the Bishop of Alexandria, going beyond the bounds of a Bishop,
ad seculare^ principatu^ erat ia^ ante delapsus, was now declined too much to
secular government: what would he have said, if they had then attempted a
secular Monarchy over the whole world? Leo Leo (...).
the great (a Pope that would not lose one jot of his pontifical right) so
far disclaimeth this temporal Monarchy, that he with great submission makes
earnest suite and supplication to the Emperors, I requested Idem Epist. 43. 49
vt iuberetis, that you would command the Synod to be deferred to a more fit
time. I Idem Epist. 9
request that your Piety supplicationi nostrae dignetur annuere, would
vouchsafe to yield to our supplication, that you would command that the
Council may be held in Italy; All Idem Epist. 24.
the Bishops (himself among the rest) cum gemitibus and lacrimis supplicant,
do with sighs and tears make supplication to your Mansuetude. And when the
Emperor would not yield unto his supplication, neither for the place, nor the
time, then he professes, Idem Epist. 17. and. 25.
I have endeavored as far as I can, vt Clementiae vestrae statutis pareatur,
that I may obey the statutes of your Clemency. Pope Gelasius Gelasius 1. Epist.
8.
, There are two things by which the world is principally ruled, the sacred
authority of Bishops, and the Regal power: of which regal power he adds,
that the Emperor praesidet humano generi, and imperat saeculo, is above all men
in dignity, and to rule in secular matters. And most clearly in his tome of
Anathematismes; Before Idem, in tom. Anathem. apud. Bin. to. 2. pa. 254.
Christ's time some were both Priests and Kings, as was Melchisedech; but after
Christ was once come, who is both King and Priest, vltra sibi nec Imperator
Pontificis nomen imposuit, nec Pontifex regale fastigium vendicauit; Neither
does the Emperor take unto him the name of Priest or Bishop, neither does the
Bishop challenge unto him the Imperial highness. So Pope Gelasius, at once
defines, that Popes neither then had, nor ever ought to have, Imperial
authority: much less a temporal Monarchy above all Emperors.

CHAP. V.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by the Fathers, and learned
writers, who lived from the 500. to the 1000. year after Christ.
IN the sixth age, Ab an. 500 ad 600.
the Council at Turone Council. Turonense 2. celeb. sub Ioh. 3 can. 25.
professes, that besides the power of excommunicating and anathematizing, arma
nobis non sunt alia, we have no other weapons. Then had not the Church, or Pope
in that age, power to inflict temporal, civil, and coactiue punishments. An
other Council Synodus Africana habita an. 23. Iustiniani apud Vict. Tununers.
an. 10. post. Cons. Basilij.
of Africane Bishops, Vigilium Romanum Episcopum synodaliter a catholica
communione recludunt, did exclude Pope Vigilius from the Catholic Communion.
Now those Bishops, being as Baronius Bar. an. 547 nu. 30.
professes, Catholics, it is a very ill sign, the Pope was not then known,
so much as for a spiritual, much less for a temporal Monarch in the Church.
Pope Symachus being accused of a most scandalous offense (to wit, of Adultery
Bar. an. 50* nu. 32.
Theodorick the King at that time, commanded the Bishops of Italy, to come to a
Synod Synodus Romana 3. tempore Symachi. Cum regia pracepisses authoritas. ibid
^. 2. conc. p. 284. (...)
for the hearing and examining of this matter. He commanded Iussus est
praeceptionibus regis Papa Symmachus. ibid.
also the Pope, not to take again the Patrimony of the Church, till he had
purged himself of the crimes objected. The Bishops came at the Kings command
Synodus ex praecepto regis congregat^^. ibid.
, the Pope Ibid. p. 285. a
also, vt causam diceret occurrebat, came to plead for himself; and before the
whole Council, he thanked Ibid. p. 284. b
the King for calling the Synod. The King gave Commisimus vobis causam, ^os
qualiter ^ultis sieve dis^ussa, sieve indiscussa, causa proferte sententia^ ibid.
page 287. b
such power to the Synod, that they might either examine particularly the whole
cause, or leave the particulars undiscussed, but yet give sentence therein. The
Bishops Ibid. p. 285. b.
, perpensis omnibus, having pondered the whole cause, judged that Symachus
should be received as Pope, and that his fact should be left to the judgment
of God. And all this they did, secundum Ibid. p. 285. b
principalia praecepta quae nostrae hoc tribuunt potestati, by command and
authority of the King, who had committed this to their power. And though the
Deacon Ennodius Concilio, authoritatem con^^a se indulsit. Ennod. Apol pro
Symmacho pa. 293. (...)
and some others of the Popes Parasites pretend, that Symachus in humility,
and of his own accord submitted himself to their judgment, yet Gerson Gers.
lib. de Auferibil. papa^ Consid. 12.
, a man of more sound and profound learning, says, both of Symachus, and some
other Popes, they did undergo the judgment of Councels, nequaquam ex humili
condescentione, not by any submission of humility, as some do feign, sed ex
debito and obligatione, but in duty, as being bound to stand to those
judgments. The same Pope Symachus Symachus Apol. a^duers. Anast. extat to. 3.
BB. patr.
, in his Apology to Anastasius, puts this, and rightly, as a difference
betwixt the Imperial and Pontifical Offices, Thou O Emperor gouerns humane
and secular affairs, Bishops do dispense the Divine Mysteries; and he
expressly calls the Emperor, Principem rerum humanarum, the Prince or chief in
humane matters. Pope Hormisda Hormisda Epist. 5.
to the Emperor Anastasius, says, Your Mansuetude has admonished us, God
commanding you so to do, to be present in the future Synod: Your Piety
observing these things, may long possess Apicts and sceptra sua, your top of
honor, and your Scepter. I return Idem Epist. 6.
unto you not only words of supplication, sed vestigijs vestris aduoluor, but
I prostrate my self at your footsteps. Pope Agapetus Agapetus papae. Anast. in
vitae Ag ap.
was sent in a legacy from Theodotus King of Italy, to the Emperor Justinian,
and he entreated Liber. in Breuiar. cap. 21.
him to recall his army out of Italy, but the Emperor supplicationes Papae
noluit audire, would not hearken to the Popes supplication. Pope Vigilius
Vigilius. euocatus ab Imperatore egreditur. Marcell. in Chron. an. 546.
was sent for by Justinian, to come to Constantinople, and he at the Emperors
command came, and stayed there about six years, till he had leave to return.
Pope Pelagius Pelagius ^ Epist. 16.
the first, writing to Childebert the King, says, We must endeavor to declare
the obedience of our profession unto Kings, quibus nos etiam subditos esse
sanctae scripturae praecipiunt, to whom the holy Scriptures command, even us
(that are Popes) to be subject.

Fulgentius Fulgentius lib 1. ad Thrasimundu^ prop^ initium.
, The King has received apicem terreni principatus, the top or height of
temporal or terrene power. And again Verba (...) Fulg. cit antur in Conc.
Paris* habito an. 829 cap. 3.
In saeculo, Christiano Imperatore nemo celsior inuenitur, none is found in
this world (then sure not the Pope) to be higher then the Emperor. Agapetus
Agapetus, paranesi ad Justin. Imper. nu. 61.
a famous learned man, and Deacon of the Church of Constantinople, says, to
the Emperor Justinian, Seeing you have received the Scepter from God, and
seeing, omnibus hominibus ab ^o sis praelatus, you are preferred above all men
(then sure above the Pope) by God, seek therefore to please him in all things.
And again Ibid. nu. 21
, The Emperor non-habet in terris se quenquam al^^orem, has none upon earth
(then not the Pope) above him. Which words being recited by Antonius Abbas in
his Melissae, sound so strongly against the Popes Sovereignty, that the Roman
Censurers, in their Index Expurgatorius, for desire of the spiritual, are
content to forgo and yield to Emperors the temporal supremacy, and qualify
the words in this manner, Index, Romans excus. an 1607 pa. 200.
write in the margent, Intellige inter saeculares et temporales dignitates;
Agapetus means, the Emperor is above all in secular and temporal dignities.
In like sort the Spanish Index Index li. prohib. et expurgat. de consil. Stae.
Inquis. Hispan. excus. Madriti. an. 1612. in Agapet. page 797.
, whereas it is said in Agapetus, The Emperor has none in earth above him,
write, say they, in the Margent, Intellige de potestate politica, and
saeculari, There is none above him in political and secular matters; and often
the like. Enough for us against the Popes secular Monarchy. Primasius
Primasius, Com. in Apoc. c. 17. sect. Habentem.
says of the Roman Empire, Orb^ monarchiae praefuit dominatu, it was the Lord
and Monarch of the world, And in the name of Rome, is figured totius terreni
regni potentiae the whole power of any terrene Kingdom. Liberatus Liberatus in
Breu. cap. 13.
says of Martianus, that he obtained culmen Imperij, the top of the Empire,
and that at the request of the Pope, he assembled a general council, he
thought not then the Pope to be above him, or his commander. Euagrius Euagrius,
li. 2. c. 18. sect. Est.
both reports and allows the saying of Eusebius Bishop of Dorileum, s^t down
in the Council at Chalcedon, That unto the Emperor, was given by the Divine
power of God, imperium mortalium and dominatus, the Empire and rule of mortal
men; one of which I suppose was the Pope. Cassiodore Cassiodor. variar li. 10.
pa. 626
sets down the Epistle of Theodohadus to Justinian the Emperor, wherein it is
said, That in toto orb simile nihil haberet, in the whole world, none (for
power and dignity) is equal to the Emperor. And in an other place Idem in
Psalm. 50
If any of the people offend, he sins both against God and the King, but when
the King offends, soli Deo reus est, he is guilty only to God, quia hominem
non habet qui facta eius dijudicet, because he has no man (then not the Pope)
that may examine his actions, God alone may discuss and judge his offenses
Venantius Fortunatus says Venantius Fort. li. 3. de vit S. Mart. pa. 313
, Valentinian was Emperor mundo famulante, the whole world (then belike the
Pope) serving or being subject to him. And in his poem Idem in supplew. p. 348
of Justinius the Emperor, he often calls him the head of the world, repeating
this verse unto God, Qui das Iustinu^, iustus, in orb caput, adding, that he
did Rite super reges dominari; Romanoque imperat orbi; An evidence that he knew
not an higher temporal Monarch in the Roman or western Empire. Gregorius
Bishop of Turone Gregorius Turon, lib. 5 Hist. ca. 18
speaking to Childerike the King of France, who had objected injustice unto
him, thus answered, If any of us O King, do transgress the bounds of Justice,
he may be corrected by you; but if you transgress them, who shall punish you^
we speak unto you; If you be willing, you obey, but if you be not willing, who
can condemn you, but he only who has pronounced, that he is Justice? The
Bishop sure knew not all Kings to be punishable by the Pope as a superior Lord.

In the seventh age, Ab an. 600. ad 700.
Pope Agatho Conc. Romanum sub Aga^hone, ^uius Epist. extat. in Conc. genesis 6.
Act 4. p. 12. et p. 21.
, with an whole Council of Italian, and other western Bishops, often
professes the Emperor Piissimis dominis. Omnes ^os vest^i impe^^ famuli.
ibid. pa 21.
to be their Lord, the City of Rome De hac seruili principatus vestri vrbe.
ibid. pa. 12. and 22.
, to be his servile City, Italy, his servile Seruilis pro^inciae. pa. 12
Province. Of himself he says, I was Ibid.
animated promptam obsequentiam exhibere effectually to perform ready
obedience in those things which in the Sacred Writ of your Highness, are
commanded. I endeavored, vt studiosa obedientia famulatus nostri impleret, that
the willing obedience of my service might fulfill this; We have sent these our
Legates, pro obedientia quam debuimus for that obedience which we owe unto you.
This your Ibid. p. 13.
Imperial Clemency did command, and our humility quod iussum est obsequentur
impleuit, has obediently fulfilled what you did command. Do these seem to be
the speeches of a Supreme Monarch? and that to his own vassal? Pope Gregory
Gregorius Magnus lib. 4. Epist Indic. 13. ep. 34.
the great says of the Emperor, Deus vniuerso mundo praeesse constituit, God
has ordained that he should rule the whole world. And again, Idem lib. 2.
Indi^. 11 ep. 62
Potest as dominorum meorum caelitus data est super omnes homines, The power
over all men (then sure over the Pope) is given from heaven to my Lord the
Emperor. Serenissimus dominus praecepit. id em lib. 4. Epist. 34* cit. and Ego
dominoru^ iussionibus obedientiam praebens. lib. eod. 4. ^p. ^2 et, Ego
missioni subiectus. l. 2 ep. 62.
My most excellent Lord has commanded me by his precept, ego praeceptioni
Pietatis eorum obediens, I am obedient to the Emperors command. And he speaks
not this of humility, as some do vainly pretend, but as acknowledging this to
be his duty, Ego Idem lib. 2. Epist. 62.
quae de bui exolui, qui imperatori obedientiam praebui, I have done what was
my duty to do, both in obeying the Emperor, and signifying also to you what
I think in this cause. Isiodorus Hispalensis Isiodor Hisp. lib. Senteni. ca.
52.
, Let secular Princes know, that they must give an account to God for the
Church, the tuition of which they have received of Christ. He will call for an
account of them, qui eorum potestati suam credidit ecclesiam, who committed his
Church to their power. Leontius Leontius li. de sect. Art. 4.
says of Theodosius, Coire iubet, he commanded the Bishops (even the Pope
among others) to come to the second Ephesian Council: Pope Leo (upon that
command) sent his Legate thither. Iustus Orgelitanus, Iustus Org. Com. in Cant.
in illa verba, Quia ^ caput meum plenu^ est
Those who are eminent by Princely honor in the Church, are noted quasi caput
in Christi corpore, as the head in the body of Christ (that is, the Church;)
those who administer Sacraments are as the locks of the head. Then are Kings
the head, and the Pope but as a fair lock in the head of the Church.

In the eight age, Ab An. 700 ad 800.
the Roman Council Conc. Romans sub Hadriano 1. extat decretu^ eius Did. 63. ^.
Haedrianus.
held An. 774. consisting of 153. Bishops and Abbots, in acknowledgment of the
Sovereignty of Charles then King of Italy, decreed the right of inuestitures
of Bishops (which is an Imperial prerogative or right of Sovereignty) and
particularly, the appointing of the Pope himself, and ordering the Roman See,
to belong unto Charles the great and his successors. Baronius not being able
dissuere nodum, to answer this evidence of truth, takes upon him like an other
Alexander, dissecare, to cut it quite asunder. He Bar. an. 774 nu. 10. and seq.
obstinately denies (as does also his Apologist, Gre^s. Apol. pro Baron. c. 1.
and li. 2. cont. Replic. ca. 1.
that either any such Synod was ever held, or any such Decree made. And
hereupon, both of them, with most reuiling terms declaime Sigebertus ipse
finxit. ador nauit imposturam. O scelus, O Impostura* Bar. loc. cit. Sigebertus
huius figmenti figulus. Great. Apol. ca. 1. sect. dices. huius co^menti author.
ibid. sect. In priore. Hoc ius architectatus ect Sigebertus. Apol. cap. 1.
sest. postea.
against Sigebert as the forgerer or first inuentor of this Synod and Decree,
or as they speak, of this figment. But they do herein bewray their most
malicious obstinacy in downfacing the truth and true records. For how could
Sigebert who writ his Cronicles, as Baronius and Gretser Sigebertus an. 1112.
sua scripsit. Bar. an. 774. nu. 10. Grets. Apol. c. 1. sect. Tertio.
assure us, an. 1112. be the deviser of this Decree, whereas Henry the fifth
before Dodoch. append. ad Mar. Scot. an. 1110. and Mat. Paris. ad (...). 1112.
that, challenged the right of inuestitures, as a Royal prerogative belonging
to the Empire, and continued in the Emperors hands, not only from the time of
Charles, and Pope Hadrian, that is, for more then 300 years, and during the
time of 63 Popes, but even eoru^dem authoritate et priuilegiorum firmitate, by
the very authority of those Popes, and by those privileges granted by them?
Was there any privilege for inuestitures, granted by any Pope to the Emperor,
from the time of Charles, but this of Hadrian and the Roman Synod? Undoubtedly
had this Synod and Synodall decree bin forged by any, the Emperor Henry 5.
would not; and had Sigebert devised it, an. 1112. (at which time he writ) the
Emperor could not have urged it as a known right, yea for such, as 300 years
together had been continued unto Emperors. How again could Sigebert be the
first architect and deviser of this Synod and decree, seeing Pope Gregory 6
(who was not pope within 64 years Gregorio 6 in pon^ificatu successit Clemens
(...) 46 Bar. ^o (...). 1.
before Sigebert writ and perhaps not when Sigebert was born) does not only
mention, but commend this decree of Hadrian^ Hadrian Verba Gregorij et integra
eius oration extat apud Guil. Malsb. lib. 2 Hist. Angl sect. Si vobis.
the first, our predecessor of worthy memory, is commended, for that he granted
Inuestitures of Churches, unto Charles; His very words are set down in
Malmesburiensis. An evidence so clear to demonstrate Baronius, and Gretzer to
be Calumniators of Sigebert, and downe-facers of the truth, that Gretzer Grets.
lib. 2 contra Replic. ca. 1. Alter. Oration illa a Malsburiensi appicta and
aff^cta.
is forced to slander Malsburiensis also as an impostor and deviser of this
speech of Gregory, as Sigebert was of the decreee of Hadrian. Further yet, how
could Sigebert first devise this Decree, seeing the Roman Council, held An.
964. wherein John the 12. was deposed, makes express mention Ad exempl^^ B.
Hadriani qui domino Carolo ordinationem Apostolica sedis and inuestitura^
episcoporum co^cessit. Conc. Rom sub Leon^ 8. cuius decretu^ extat Distinc. 96.
c. In Synod^
thereof, more then 140. years before Segebert writ? It is true, that here
again both the Cardinal Bar. an. 964 nu. 22 et seq.
, and his shameless Apologist Grets. Apol. pro Bar. cap 18
, are driven to their former shift; This also must be an Imposture and figment.
But it falls out unhappily, that Baronius forgetting the old rule, Mendacem
oportet esse memorem, does upon another occasion, where the Popes dignity is
not impeached, not only allow Leo 8. for the true Pope, (which elsewhere he
stoutly denies) but acknowledges this Roman Synod to have been truly held
by Pope Leo 8. and calls this very constitution of Leo made in that Synod,
Decretum Bar. an 99^ nu. 41
Leo^^ is Papae octaui, the Decree of Pope Leo the eight. So not only that
Synod under Leo 8. but Baronius his own self, is a witness, that he and
Gretzer slander Sigebert, and fight with all their power to oppress the truth.
Do you as yet require a more ancient witness? How could Sigebert be the
deviser of this Synod and Synodall Decree, seeing Anastasius the Keeper of
their Vaticane library, one who lived either in or very near the time Carolus
obijt an. 814. Bar. eo an. nu. 57. Anastasius floruit an. 858. B^llar. lib
descrip. eccle. in Anast.
of Charles, and who in all likelihood saw in their Vaticane, some authentical
copy of that Synod; seeing he, I say, made mention both of this Synod and
Synodall Decree, and that, some 200. years before Sigebert was borne. It is
true I confess, that this testimony is not now to be found in the Popes lives
written by Anastasius. But that there it was once extant, and is now to their
eternal infamy, and wrong of Anastasius, yea of the whole Church, expunged,
there are two evident witnesses. The one is Onuphrius Onuphr in vita Gregor. 7.
who telling how the custom of Inuestitures, of which Gregory 7. primus
omnium, first of all did attempt to deprive Emperors, had continued from the
time of Charles the Great, and was brought in by the authority of Pope Hadrian,
he thus concludes: Cuius rei meminit Anastasius Bibliothecarius in historia
Ecclesiastica; Quem locum Gratianus Canonum collector notauit. Anastasius the
library keeper, mentions this in his Ecclesiastical history, and Gratian in
his collection of the Canons, points at, or cites that place of Anastasius.
Gretzer could not deny Onuphrius to testify this, but because it is against
his and his Masters fancy, he says Gretz. lib. 2. cont. Replic. ca. 1.. Dixi.
, It is an error of Onuphrius; Onuphrius forgot himself herein. Peruicacy will
ever find one shift or other, but by this clear and true testimony of
Onuphrius, (besides that maine truth, of this Synod and Synodall Decree) two
things are clear; the one that Anastasius had set down this whole matter in
his book of the Popes lives; the other, that Gratian took it, not out of
Sigebert, as Baronius Gratianus Sigeberti imposturam toridem verbis exscripsit,
and veluti pontificum dec^etum vel Synodi canonem suo libro inseruit. Bar. an.
774. nu. 13
very childishly fancieth; but out of Anastasius: and that the very book, out
of which Gratian cites it, called by him historia Ecclesiastica, is the very
book of Anastasius, and by that same name, called by Onuphrius. The other
witness is Platina who says Plat. in vit. Pascalis 1.
, Jews granted to the Pope free power to choose Bishops, quam potestatem ab
Hadriano Pontifice Carolo concessam idem Bibliothecarius refert, which power to
have been granted by Pope Hadrian to Charles, the same Bibliothecarius, (to
wit, Anastasius Nam Anastasius vitas Pontificum (seu vt Possev vocat Historiam
Pontificum) continuauit ad Hadrianum 2. vt put at Onuph. Annot. ad Plat. post
vit. Nichol. 1. and Bell. lib. de script. Eccle. in Anast. Sed Baronius vsque ad
Step. 6 Bar. an. 885. nu. 7.
does relate. Now besides Hen^y 5. Pope Gregory 6. the Roman Council under
Leo, and Anastasius, the truth of the same Synod and Synodall Decree is
witnessed by Eutropius Longobardus Eurr. Long. lib. de. Iur. Imp.
, who lived before the Empire Vt ex fin^ libriliquet.
of Otho 1. that is, 100. years before Sigebert: by Iuo Carnotensis Iuo in suo
decret. tit. de elect. pontifi^is
, who writ also before Sigebertus scripsit post Iuouem. Boet. Epo. tract de
Regal^veliure princ. in Ben^ficijs eccl^ nu. 144.
Sigebert: by Waltram Naumbergensis Waltr. Naumb lib. de Inuestit.
another writer before Waltramus fit Episcopus Citzeus (is idem est qui
Naumburge^sis Munst. Cosmogr. lib. 3. in Magdeburgo) an. 10^9 and an. 21. post
obijt. Chron. Citizen Paul. Laugij an. 1089 si^ obijt biennio antequam scripsit
Sigebertus.
Sigebert: by Gratian Great Did. 6^. ca. Adrianus.
who lived in the same age with Sigebert, by the Glossators Gloss. ^n did. 63.
ca. In Synodo voce Affici.
upon Gratian, by Lupoldus Lupol lid. de Z^l-German. princ. ca. 8.
, Theodor. de Niem Theod. de Niem. lib de priv. and Iurib. imperij Post.
, Radulph. de Columna, Rad. de Colum. lib de Transt Imper. sect. Hoc itaque.
, Marsilius Patauinus Mars. Pat. lib. de transl. Imp. ca. 10.
, Occam Occam. part. 3. tract 2. lib. 3. ca. 3.
, Anton. de Rosellis Ant. Rossel. part. 2. Monarch. a. 8.
, Johan. Semeca 10. Semec. distinct. 63.
, Card. Zabarell Fran. Zobar. lib. de Schism. sect. Quis.
, Card. Turrecremata Turrecrem. in did. 63.
, Card. Cusanus Cusan. lib. 3. Concor. Catho. ca. 3.
, Card. Cameracensis Card. Camer. lib. de eccles. author. par. 1. c. 1. sect.
Ex eadem.
, Platina Plat. loc. cit*
, Nauclerus Naucl. ad an. 772.
, Mart. Polonus Mar. Pol. ad an. 780.
, Wernerus Wern. ad. an. 784.
, the Chronicon Richer spergense Chr. Reich. ad an 774.
, Rob. Gagninus Gagni. lib. 4. in Car. mag.
, Matthew. Parisiensis Mat. Pa^s. ad an. 1112.
, Matthew. Westmonasteriensis Math. West. in Floril. an. 773.
, Onuphrius Onuph. loc. cit.
, Boethius Epo Boet. Epo. de Regal. nu. 162 and seq.
, who earnestly strives for the truth of this Decree: and by many more. So that
unless Baronius and his applauders had shut their eyes, and hardened their
hearts against the truth, they would make no doubt, either that this Synod was
truly held, or that the Emperor was then acknowledged, even by the Popes
themselves, to be their Sovereign.

The Council at Frankford Conc. Francoford. in libell. Sacrasyllabo. in initio.
, professes that Charles was Dominus terrae, the Lord of the world; that the
Bishops Ibid.
assembled sacris obtemperando praeceptis, obeying the sacred command of
Charles, as Charles himself also witnesses Ibid. in Epist. Caroli ad
Elipandum.
, Iussimus Synodale Concilium congregari, we have commanded this Synod to be
assembled out of all the Churches ditionis nostrae, which are in our dominion.
Then certainly both he commanded the Roman Bishops, (for Rome was then in
his dominion) and the Pope obeyed his command, and sent Ado Vien. an. 792.
Theophilactus and Stephanus for his legates to the Synod.

Pope Stephen 3. Stephanus 3. Epistol. 3.
writes to Pipin and Charles, in a most earnest and suppliant manner,
entreating their aid against the Lombards. Nay he not only entreats this
himself, but he frames an Epistle in the name of S. Peter Petrus Apostolus
Pipino. Carolo etc. Ego Petrus Apostolus etc. Inter Epist. Steph 3. Epist. 4.
unto them, wherein he makes, both S. Peter, the Blessed Virgin, all the
Thrones, Dominations, Martyrs, Confessors and Saints in heaven, to sue for
this at the hands of Pipin and Charles, and even to conjure Protestor, ad
m^neo, et coniuro vos Christi anissimos reges etc. ibid.
them to help the Roman Church in this their great distress. What needed
such supplication, such poetical fictions, and coniurations, had Pope Stephen
known himself to be the Sovereign Lord, who might command Pipin, Charles,
and all the Kings in the world; and to whose command they ought all to be
obedient, unless they would be rebels against their supreme Monarch? Pope
Adrian Hadrian 1 Epi. 1. Domini^ pijssimis.
the first, acknowledged the Emperors for his Lords: We are Ibid. vt citatur
in* Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 1.
even drencht with joy for your command, in that ye command this cause of
Images to be handled. Again, Ibid. in fine.
I offer this my judgment with all humility to your Screnitie, that it may be
discussed: I entreat and beseech your Mansuetude with all feruor of mind: yea,
I beseech you, as if I were present genibus aduo lutus and coram vestigia pedum
volutando, upon my bended knees prostrate at the sole of your feet. Pope
Gregory Gregorius 2. Epist^ 3 sect. Attu.
the second, As the Bishop has no power or authority to look into the
Palace, (that is, to intermeddle in secular affairs) ac dignitates regales
deferendi, nor to give regal dignities, so neither has the Emperor power to
look into Churches, and intermeddle in those duties; Let every one abide in
that vocation, whereunto he is called of God. Germanus Germanus perstrinxit
Italos tanquam Imperatori su^ no^ ob^e^perantes Bar. an. 730. nu. 6.
Patriarch of Constantinople has a constitution (extant yet in the Vaticane)
wherein he repr^ues the Italians who disobeyed the Emperor. Now the chief
leader of those Italians, who made that defection, and denied tribute to him,
was Pope Gregory the 2, as before we showed. Venerable Bede Beda in Psalm. 50
, If the King offend, he offends only to God, quia nullus alius eum pro suis
peccatis puniet, because no mortal man (then not the Pope) may punish him for
his faults. Johannes Damascenus, Damascenus Orat. 2. de Imag. pa 736
Regum est ciuilis administratio, civil administration and government belongs
to Kings, We obey thee O King in those things which belong to civil and
secular matters, in them, quantum ad nos spectat, in respect of us that are of
the Clergy, the government is committed to you. But in ecclesiastical
affairs, Pastors, and Bishops, have delivered to us laws and constitutions,
we may not remove those eternal bounds which are set unto us. Bonifacius
Bonifacius Mogunt apud Othlon, li. 2. de vit. Bonif.
that famous Englishman, and first Archbishop of Ments, when he was sent Legate
into Germany, from Pope Gregory the second, with many ample privileges,
suppliciter obsecrauit, humbly entreated King Pipine, for the Monastery of
Fulda, and lands belonging to it; What needed that, had he known the Pope who
sent him, to be the supreme Lord of the world? Paulus Diaconus Paulus diac.
Hist* miscel l. 11
says of Constantine, that he was Monocrator totius Romani Imperij, the sole
Monarch of the whole Roman Empire. Then sure he knew not the Pope to be an
other, much less an higher Monarch. Alcuinus Alcuinus epist. 4. ad Dauidem
regem.
that learned Englishman, Scholar of Bid, and Schoolmaster of Charles the
great, says of Charles (who^ he usually calls Vt liquet ex Epist. 1 vbi se
pr^^^ptore^ huiu^ Dauidis fuisse not at et hoc idem obseruat Hen. (...) to. 6
(...) lect. p. 520
king David) that there are three most eminent dignities upon earth; one is
Papal, the second is Imperial, (such as the Greek Emperors had) the third
is Regal, in which says he, Christ has made you the ruler of his Christian
people, more excellent in power, more high in dignity, then either of the
former. Again, idem Alcuin. i^ li Carminum to. 6 Ant. lect. Henr. Canis.
Rex Carolus caputorbis; Europae venerandus apex, king Charles is the head of
the world, and the top of Europe. Then sure above the Pope.

In the ninth age, The Council at Paris Cone. Paris. sub Greg. 4. in praefat.
held, Ab an. 800 ad 900.
Anno 829. says, That Christ has committed his Church to be governed by his
servants Jews, and Lotharius, then Emperors: and they set down Eodem conc,
cap. 3.
this out of Fulgentius, for one of their decrees, There is none in the Church
(that is, in Church affairs) better then the Bishop, and none in secular
affairs above the Emperor. The Council at Triburia Conc. Triburiense in
praefat.
says of Arnulphus the Emperor, Celebratu^ est concilium sub Arnulpho
Imperatore a. 895 Bin exvetustiss, codice hoc cita^ ante d^cr^ta illius Conc.
The King of Kings, Arnulphum omnibus ecclesiasticae sublimitatis ordinibus
praeferre dignatus est, has vouchsafed to prefer Arnulphus our pacificall
king, above all orders, both of ecclesiastical sublimitie, and of secular
power. Pope Stephen Stephanus 7 in Ep. ad Basil* quae extat inter ep Synodales
Con^ 8. apud Bin. to. 3. p. 899
the seventh, writes thus to Basilius the Emperor, Your Majesty knows, that
the Priestly dignity, does not proceed from your Kingly power, quamuis enim
supremam Christi in terris personam formamque ger as, for although you be the
highest person representing Christ here upon earth, yet your care is only in
political and civil matters, which we wish to remain long unto you. And
again, In things belonging to this life, vobis Imperium a Deo est traditum,
the Empire and rule is given by God unto you. Pope Nicholas, Nicholaus papa*
^ius verba citantur Cause. 33. q. 2. ^. Inter (...).
Ecclesia gladium non habet nisi spiritualem, the Church has no other but
only the spiritual sword; then has it no temporal Monarchy. Photius Photius
episcopos euocat Synodum instituit, exauctorationem atque Anathema in Nicholaum
papam pronu^ciat. Nicet. David in vita Ignat. paetriar. Constant.
Patriarch of Constantinople, was so far from thinking the Pope to be a
supreme Monarch, That he in a Synod, iudicially, both deposed, and accursed
the Pope. Hincmarus Hincmarus Epist. 4. cap. 1.
Archbishop of Rhemes, There are two things, whereby the world is governed;
Pontifical authority, and Regal power: And then he shows, That neither may
thrust himself into the office of the other; to which purpose he in an other
place Idem epist. 5. ca. 38.
cyteth those words of Ambrose, Ad Imperatorem palatia pertinent, ad sacerdotem
ecclesia, Emperors are to deal in secular, Bishops in ecclesiastical
matters; yea, he sets Inter Epist. Hincmari ep. 9. ca. 6.
down also that Epistle of Charles the second, wherein is taught, that to
these two (to Bishops in Ecclesiastical, to Kings in Secular causes) one may
appeal, but from these none may appeal. Then is none in secular matters above
the King. Amalarius Amalarius praefat. ad li. de offic. eccles.
Fortunatus writs thus to Jews the Emperor, I have presumed to offer this
unto your Excellency, praesertim cum sciamus vos Rectorem esse totius
Christianae religionis quantum ad homines pertinet, that you are the Governor
of the whole christian religion, as much as pertaines to man. Haimo Haimo com.
in ca. 11. Hose. in ea verba, comedit capitae.
says, Princes are called in Scripture, Heads; for, that they iure capitis
caeteros regunt, govern others (and among them the Pope) in the right of an
head. Theodulphus Theodulp. in lib. carm. ^pud Ken. Canis. to. 6. p. 504
Bishop of Orleans, says of Jews the Emperor, Orbis te totus veneratur, the
whole world does worship you, and Primus in orb micas, Te scio (...) praeit,
you are the first or chief in the world: I know, there is none, (then not the
Pope) before or above you.

In the tenth age, Ab an. 900. ad 1000.
the Roman Council Conc, Romans sub Othon. 1. Eius acta exta^t apud Litpr li. 6
ca. 6. 7 et seq.
held An. 963, for many and enormious vices, deposed John the twelfth, and
placed Leo the eighth in his See; Which act approved by Otho the Emperor, with
the whole Synod, is a very ill sign they held not the Pope for their supreme
Lord, when they judged themselves to have, and that de Iure, authority above
him.

An other Roman Synod Synod ^om. sub Leone 8. cuius decretum extat Did. 63.
c. In Synodo* et recit atur verbatim vt Decretum Synodi a Bar. an. 996. nu. 41.
was held shortly after, by Pope Leo the eighth, wherein he with the whole
Clergy, and all the Popes and States of Rome, decreed and confirmed to Otho
the great, and his successors, for ever, power both to nominate his own
successors in the Empire, and also to order the pontifical See (that is, to
elect the Pope) and give other Bishoprics by inuestiture. The truth both of
this Synod and Synodall decree, is testified in their Canon Law Loco cit.
, in Theodorick de Niem The* de Niem li. de priuil. et Iur. Imp. sect. Conuenit.
, Waltram Naumbergensis Wall. Naumb. li. de Inuest. sect. Papa Leo.
, Martinus Polonus Mart. Pol. an. 964.
, Lupoldus Lupold lib. de Zelo Germ. princ. ca 8.
, Marsilius Patauinus Mars. Pat. li. de transl. Imp. ca. 10
, Radulp. de Columna Rad. de Colu^. li. de trans. Imper.. quantu^.
, Platina Plat. in ^^on. 8
, Nauclerus Nau^. an. 963
, Card. Cusanus Cusan. Conc. Cathol. l. 3. c. 3.
, Card. Cameracensis Pet. de Alliac. Card. Camer. l. de eccl. authorit. Part.
1. c. 1. Ex eadem.
, and many more. But against Baronius and Gretzer, who are as eager against this
Synod, as they were against the other, held under Hadrian, accounting Bar. an.
964. nu. 21. et seq. vbi imposturam et adscititiam Synodum vocat. Gretz. Apol
pro Bar. c. 18. Bulla, seu decretum est commentitium.
and calling this also an imposture and figment, and that among other reasons,
because this Leo the eighth, was not at all Pope, but a pseudo. Pope Bar et
Gretz. l^c. cit.
. I will only here oppose the clear confession of Baronius himself, who, when
his fit of fury was ouerpast, writes in this manner, and directly confutes a
great part of his own Annals; Whereas Bar. an. ^96 nu 41
Emperors had not this right to choose their successors, this is found to be
first granted to Otho the great by the Pope. Extat de his Leonis Papae octaui
decretum, there is extant concerning this the Decree of Pope Leo the eighth,
which even the Nouelists and Centuriators also do recite: wherein among other
things the Pope grants power to Otho to choose his successor. And having after
this repeated the very words of the Synodall Decree, as they are set down in
their Canon Law, and in Theodorick de Niem, he ads, That Oth^ authoritate huius
diplomatis, by authority of this Decree, and Papal Charter, chose his son
for his successor: and so we see this power to choose their successors, to come
ex praescripto Romanorum pontificum by the authority and charter of the Pope.
Thus, Baronius; acknowledging both Leo the eighth to have been the true Pope
(which he most peruersly Bar. an. 963 nu. 34. vbi vocat hunc Leonem, Monstru^.
eius surerogationem iure nullam, et pseudo-Leonem hunc e numero pontificum
explodendum ait. ibid. (...). 38
elsewhere denies:) and further this Synod under Leo the eight, to have been
a true and real Synod, which he and Gretzer strives, but all in vain, to prove
a forgerie; and lastly, that this Synod, and the true Pope with it,
acknowledged the right of choosing the Pope, and inuesting Bishops (which is an
Act of Imperial Sovereignty) to be in the Emperor, and therefore not the Pope,
but the Emperor to have been held for the supreme Monarch in those days.

Another Decree, either in this, or in an other Roman Synod, Decretum Syn Romans
sub Leon 8
was made by the same Leo, about that time also, whereby the Pope (in
acknowledgment of that Imperial Sovereignty above himself, and of that
supreme right which the Emperor had to all the territories in Italy, (even to
those which the Pope held) resigned them all unto Otho. The words of the Decree
are recorded by Albertus Krantzius Alb. Crantz. li. ^. Saxoniae. cap 10.
and Theodorick de Niem, Theo de Niem l. de priu et Iur. Imp. sect. Conuenit.
in this manner, We give unto Otho and his Successors for ever, whatsoever
either Charles, or Pipin, or Justinian, or Aripert, had given of the Regalities
of the Kingdom to S. Peter, or the Roman Church. And that you may have and
possess them for ever, by authority of this our Charter, we confirm them to
you for all generations; and if any shall infringe this our authority or
grant, or shall be found a violator thereof, let him know, that he shall fall
into the ind^gnation of S. Peter, of Us, and of our praedecessors; yea if he
do not repent, let his goods be confiscate, and he punished as one reus
Maiestatis, guilty of high treason. So let it be. This Decree was made as
Theodorick says, The. de Niem loco cit. in titulo cap.
in generali concilio, he means in a very great Roman Council, at which
were present Kr^nt. et Niem. loc. cit
and subscribed to it fifteen Archbishops and Bishops, seven Cardinals, and
fifteen chief Citizens of Rome. Did either the Pope himself, or others at
this time, esteem the Pope a supreme temporal Monarch of Rome, or Italy,
when he resigned these unto the Emperor, as to his Superior, yea Sovereign
Lord of them? Baronius and Gretzer, are exceedingly netled with this decree,
and exclaim Constitutio nomine Leonis con^icta. Bar. an. 964. nu. 24. a non
legitimo papa promulgata ibid. n. 22 Impos^or fuit. ineptus, stolidus, insulsus
ibid. n. 24. ficti tiam Bullam. commentitium diploma, vocat Gretz. Apol. pro
Bar. c. 19. et l. 2 cont. Repl. c. 14
both against it, and Leo, as being no true Pope. But the Cardinal himself
has refuted all that he, or any else can say against Leo, when he acknowledged
Bar. an. 996 nu. 41
him to be the true Pope, and his Decree to be Diploma, a Pontifical Charter
of sufficient authority to give the right of choosing ones successor in the
Empire. And for the truth of this Decree, besides Theodorick, and Krantzius,
who are indeed witnesses beyond just exception in this cause, the same is
testified by Barnard, who says, Barnardiverba citantur in Chron. magno Belgic.
an. 962 pa. 84
That Leo the eight, with the consent of the Cardinals and Bishops, yea of the
whole Clergy and people of Rome, restored to Otho and his Successors, the
Donations made by Justinian, Aripert, Pipin, and Charles. It is further
testified by their own Cardinal Cusanus, an eye witness of this Charter, who
thus writes, Cusan. li. 3. conc cath. ca. 2.
Vidi Decretum Leonis Papae, I have seen the Decree made by Pope Leo the
eight, in the Roman Synod subscribed by the Bishops, Clergy, and people of
Rome, whereby he restores to Otho the first, all the places which Charles,
Pipin, or Aripert (he is corruptly written Robert) gave to S. Seter, and the
places are particularly named in the Decree. And again, I much Ibid. ca. 3.
marvel that Gratian speaking of the inuestiture of Bishops granted by Leo,
which text proves Otho to be Emperor (to wit, superior to the Pope) did not
also mention that restitution of those Cities which were given to the Roman
Church. So Cusanus. The same Synodall Decree is yet further testified by those
four famous Schools of Learning, which were then honored with the name of
Universities or Academies; to wit, the university of Paris, of Oxford, of
Prage, and of Rome, who in a treatise Epistola vni versitatum Paris. Oxon.
Prag. et Romans de authoritate Imperatoris.
written by them all unto Pope Vrbane, and Wencelaus the Emperor, said thus:
Pope Leo the eight, by reason of the malice and turbulencie of the Romans,
decreed that none should be made Pope, but with the consent of the Emperor;
and further with the consent of the Cardinals, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons,
yea of the whole Clergy, and people of Rome, he remised, granted and gave to
Otho and his successors, those donations in Italy which were made to the
Roman Church, by Justinian, Pipin, Charles, and others. Thus witness those
four famous Universities, in whom is included the judgment of many other most
learned Divines.

Eutropius Longobardus Eutropius Longob. li. de Iurib. and priu. Imp.
professedly, and at large shows, that not only before and in the time of
Charles the Great, but long after, the Sovereign power and government of Rome
was still in the Emperor; and that Charles ordained that all the chief men of
Rome, as well Bishops as others, essent Imperiales homines, should be the
Emperors men or vassals, and that they, as all the rest, should make fidelity
to the Emperor; and that the Emperors deputy should at all times stay in
Rome, to determine litigious controversies; and this custom continued to the
time of Lewis the second, the son of Lotharius (that is, till the year 880.)
after which time the Emperors authority in Rome, by the fraud of the Romans,
began to decline. Luitprandus Luitprandus lib. 6. cap. 6. 7.
not only relates, but approoues the judgment of that Roman Synod which
deposed John 12. And he not only calls Ibid. cap. 11.
Otho, pium ac sanctum Imperatorem, a pious and holy Emperor; and Leo then
chosen, summum and vniuersalem papam a Deo electum, the highest and universal
Bishop, chosen by God; but he further sets it down as an act of impiety and
rebellion in John 12. and others of his faction, who resisted this Synodall and
Imperial judgment; John (says he Ibid.
) being deposed, sent messengers to Rome, promising to give them the money of
Saint Peter, and of all Churches (an holy offer for a Pope to make) if they
would rush upon the Emperor, and the new Pope Leo, eosque impiissime
trucidarent, and if they would kill them both, (which Litprandus says, was a
most impious enterprise:) and he adds, that the Emperor thereupon returned,
and slew a number of them, so that none had escaped, unless the Emperor being
inclined to mercy, (quae nulla debebatur, which in no sort was due unto them,)
had at the entreatie and supplication of Pope Leo spared them. Rhegino Rhegino
in Chron. ad. an. 963. and 964.
both records and approoues the same fact of the Synod, and Emperor, in
deposing John; adding, that the Romans sub iureiur ando fidelitatem
promiserunt, promised by an oath taken upon the body of Saint Peter, that they
would be faithful to the Emperor (as their Sovereign Lord,) and the new
chosen Pope Leo. Abbo Floriacensis Abbo Floriac. li. 1. de obsid. Lutetiae, in
initio.
says of Charles the Great, This city was committed to Charles our King,
Imperio cuius regitur totus prope cosmus post dominum, by whose Empire, next
and immediately under God, is governed almost the whole world. Whitichindus
Whitichind. lib. 2. Gest. Saxonic.
not only calls the Emperor Henry, regum optimum, maximum, the greatest and
best of Kings, but sets down the form of crowning the Roman King at
Aquisgrane, one part of which is this; Take this sword, omni potestate imperii
Francorum tibi authoritate diuina tradita, all the power of the Empire of the
French (they had then and long before been the Roman Emperors) being given
unto you by divine authority. Frodoardus Frodoardus in Chron. an. 948.
speaking of the Popes letters, sent to the Synod at Virdunum, in the behalf
of Hugo, who had been put from the Archbishopricke of Rhemes; Pope Agapetus
the second, commanding therein, the Bishops to restore Hugh to that
Archbishopric, yet says Frodoardus, nihil authoritatis canonicae continebant,
the Popes letters contained no canonical authority: and the whole Synod
notwithstanding the Popes command, did (and that he says, justly and by the
ancient canons) adiudge the Sea to Artaldus, and that Hugh should be
excommunicated, till he purged himself at the general Synod; and the
general Synod being shortly after assembled, they did, notwithstanding the
Popes command to the contrary, with one consent confirm Artaldus, and reject
Hugh. Did they esteem, think you, the Pope to be their supreme Lord either
in temporal or in Ecclesiastical matters?

CHAP. VI.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by the Bishops, and learned
writers, who lived from the 1000. to the 1100. year.
IN the eleventh age, Ab an. 1000* ad 1100.
this controversy, which till then none durst ever set on foot, began to
be rife in the Church; Leo the ninth, at the instigation of Hildebrand, first
claiming, and Pope Hildebrand shortly after, usurping the same in his deposing
of Henry the fourth, and giving his Empire to Rodulph, and after his death to
others. How this Hildebrandicall doctrine was embraced, and what applause it
then had, is worthy observing.

The Council at Worms Council. Worm. apud Abb. Vrsperg. an. 1076. and Lamb.
Scaff. an. eodem.
was held ann. 1076. wherein were present almost Ab. V^sp. loc. cit. and
Albert. Stad. an. 1076
all the Germane Bishops: In it Hildebrandum papam abdicarunt, they did reject
and forsake Pope Hildebrand, pronouncing Lamber. Scaff. loc. cit. sententiam
promulgarunt.
this judicial sentence, quod papa esse non possit, that he could not be, nor
indeed Decretum est vt bannum Hildebrandi nullus curaret, nec papa esset.
Marian. Scot. an. 1077.
was Pope, and that he had no power either to bind or loose by the privilege
of the Roman See, and that none should care for his curse; they writ Abb.
V^sp. an. 1076. and Lamb. Scaff. an. eodem.
unto him, that whatsoever he did from thence command or decree, irritum
haberi, they would esteem it void; and that as he did not account them for
Bishops, ita tu quoque nulli nostrum amodo eris Apostolicus, so neither shall
you from hence forward be accounted Pope by any of us.

In the Council of Papia, held the same year, 1076. Anathema Conc. P^p. to.
3. Conc. page 1283.
in se prolatum in Pontificem retorserunt, The Bishops returned the like curse
and Anathema to Pope Hildebrand as he had denounced against them. The decree of
the Council was this, Fit patrum consultum huiusmodi. Auent. lib. 5. Annal.
pa. 452.
Hildebrand who calls himself Gregory the seventh, has invaded the Sea. He
usurps both the Imperial and Pontifical office, as the old Heathen Emperors
were wont to do: he has committed treason, in seeking to take away from the
Emperor both his crown and his life, neither of which he can give: for these
causes, the most holy Emperor, the Bishops, the Senate and Christian people,
do decree him to be deposed. To this decree subscribed at Ticinum Auent. loc.
ci^
, (or Papia Binio hoc id^ est cu^ Papiensi Concilio.
) not only the Bishops Auent. loc. (...).
of Germany and France, but of Italy also, and they swore that they would
never receive him for Pope again.

In the Council at Gerstungan, Conuentus in Gerstunga^ apud Waltram lib. 2.
Apol. pr^ Henr. 4. cap. ^9
, it was proved by the sacred Canons, yea, out of the great Nicene Council,
that Henry the Emperor (whom Hildebrand had deposed) neither was, nor ought to
be excommunicated: And the Bishops who disputed for Pope Hildebrand to
justify his act, ita confusi sunt and deuicti, were so confounded and
vanquished, that they had not any thing to answer, because the mouths of them
that spoke wicked things were stopped.

In the Council at Mentz held Anno 1079. it was decreed Conc. Mogunt. apud
Sigeb. an. 1079.
that Hildebrand should de deposed.

In the Council held at Brixia Conc. Brix ^ense apud Albert. Stad. an. 1030.
et Mar. Scot. eod. an.
ann. 1080 wherein were 30. Bishops with the Nobles both of Italy and
Germany, diiudicabant Gregorium depellendum, they adjudged that Gregory the
seventh, was to be deposed and put out of the Roman See, and they elected
Guibert in his room. The decree of the Council Abb. V^sp. an 1080.
was this: Because it is manifest that Hildebrand was not chosen of God, but by
fraud and simonie put himself into the Sea; and seeing he both subuerts
Ecclesiastical order, troubles the Kingdom and Empire, defends a perjured
King (Rodulph), sowes discord and strife among those that are pacificall;
therefore we being now gathered together, God being the author, do judge, that
he being a manifest Necromancer, led with an evil spirit, and exorbitant from
the true faith, is canonically to be deposed, expelled, and if he will not
depart upon the hearing hereof, in perpetuum condemnandum, is for ever to be
condemned.

In a Council at Mentz Conc. Mogunt. apud Alb. Stad. an. 1085
held ann. 1085. at which Guibert called Pope Clement the third, was present,
all the Bishops who rebelled against the Emperor, deponendi iudicantur, were
judged to be deposed; and all other who took part with Gregory the seventh,
whom the Council calls a traitor to the Kingdom and Ecclesiastical peace,
are accursed and anathematized.

In an other Council at Mentz Conc. Mogunt. apud Ioh. Auentin. lib. 5. p. 464.
and seq.
(for it seems by many circumstances not to be the same with the former)
where were present the Emperor, Peter Bishop of Portua, the Legates of Clement
the third, Guibert (at the other himself was present:) many other Bishops both
of Italy, France, and Germany, communi omnium consensu Hildebrandi secta
pietati Christianae repugnans, explosa and exsibilata est, the Hildebrandical
sect, was exploded and hissed out, as being contrary to Christian religion.
Besides, Hermannus a king of Hildebrands making was proscribed, and 14. Bishops
of the Hildebrandicall sect were deposed and condemned for perjury, homicide,
yea for treason in resisting their Emperor Henry, though deposed by Hildebrand.

In the Roman Council Conc. Romans cuius Acta habentur inter Imper. Constit.
to. 3. pa. 3^5. et in Fasc. rer. expet. pa. 43.
held anno 1098. at S. Mary's, in the Church called Rotunda, wherein were
present three Cardinals, and diverse Italian Bishops, they thus write; We will
not have you ignorant that we are assembled to destroy the heresies, nouiter ab
Hildebrando inuentas, lately devised by Hildebrand, and to defend the Catholic
Faith; and a little after, We call heaven and earth to witness, that we give no
consent to their perverseness; and for testimony hereof, in the midst of the
Church, in the sight of men and Angels, incendio tradimus eorum decreta
haeretica, we burn in the fire the heretical decrees of Hildebrand and his
adherents.

To these Synodall judgments, let us add the consenting voice of others in
that age, equal to a Synodall sentence. Plerique Iudicium bonoru^. apud Ioh.
Auent. lib. 5. pa. 470.
omnes boni, Almost all good, ingenuous, and plain dealing men did write that
the Empire of Antichrist did then begin. Most Lib. cod. p. 455
men, both publicly, and privately, cried out against the wickedness of
Gregory, they cursed him, and prayed for all ill to happen to him; they cried
out, that he was carried headlong with the desire of domineering, they called
him Antichrist; they said he sat in Babylon as in the Church of God, exalting
himself above all that was called God, boasting that he like God could not
err. Further, that Hildebrand under the title of Christ, did orbis Imperium
ambire, seek to have the Monarchy of the world: that he esteems others who
would not consent to his sycophansies and frauds, beasts, fools, blocks and
asses: that he bent all his strength to oppress the leader of the flock, that
so the sheep being destitute of the Emperors help, he might at liberty use
his tyranny. That if all power be of God, most of all the Emperors, to whom
the government of the whole world is committed: that this nefarious and
inexpiable crime of Hildebrand is to be driven far from the Germane nation,
and Hildebrand is to be conquered not with words or disputations, but with
fetters and imprisonment.

The Church of Leodium, writ Ecclesia Leod. in Epistola aduers. Pascale^ 2.
circ. an. 1107
a large treatise against the Pope, in which they call the Roman Church as
then it was, Babylon; they prove, that they owe obedience to the Emperor,
notwithstanding he were excommunicated by the Pope; they say of the
Hildebrandists, that they did rent the church nouello schismate et nouellis
traditionibus, by a new schism, and new traditions, such as allow both
disobedience and perjury: And concluding that point; By this, say they, all
may perceive, that he is reus capitis, guilty of treason, and of death, who
does not obey Caesar (even that Caesar whom Pope Hildebrand had excommunicated
and deposed.) They further add, that Pope Hildebrand was author huius nouelli
schismatis, the author of this new schism, and the first that lifted up his
Pontifical lance, against the Crown of the King, and who indiscreetly
excommunicated those that favored Henry, for which cause he afterward
reproved his own rashness: and further, that all Popes from Gregory the
first unto Hildebrand, vtebantur solo gladio spirituali, used only the
spiritual sword, he was the first who ever girded himself with the sword of
battle against the Emperor.

The Deane and Church of Laurisham, Decanus and Eccl. Lauris. in suo libell.
supplici.
writ thus to the Emperor, Summo post Dominum Regi, to the highest King next
after God; They also complain of the Novelties Multae sunt aliae nouitates,
dogmata* sectae. Praefatas hereses sectasque. Conciaat haec heresis* ibid.
and Heresies which Hildebrand and Pascalis did maintain, and entreat him to
suppress those heresies.

Rodolph Rodulphus.
the first to whom ever any Pope gave the Kingdom of a deposed Emperor, at
his death condemned both the Popes doctrine in this point, and with it his own
fact also. For holding up the stumpe of his right hand (which he had lost in
battle) lo, says he Hell mold Chron. Slau. ca. 29. and Alb. Stad. an. 1080.
with this did I swear to my Lord (Henry,) not to hurt either him or his
honor, but iussio Apostolica, the command of Pope Hildebrand has brought me
to this, that I have broken my oath, and usurped unlawful honor; you see my
end, and how in that hand wherewith I swear, I have received a deadly wound.
Let those who instigated me to this, consider how they have guided me, and let
them look that we both (they and I) be not carried headlong to eternal
condemnation.

Pope Hildebrand Hildebrandus poenitens.
himself was at last displeased with this his own doctrine, and with his
doings also in this matter: for at the time of his death (and note that he died
in banishment at Salernum) he called, says Matheus Parisi. Math. Par. an.
1086* in Guiliel. conq.
some of the Cardinals unto him and confessed unto them, That he had greatly
offended in his pastoral charge, and suadente diabolo, and that at the
suggestion of the devil he had stirred up the anger and wrath of God against
mankind. Sigibert who lived in that age, relates Sigeb. a. 1085
the same, as also Florentius Wigorniensis, Flor. Wigor. in Chron. a. 1106
who cites for a witness hereof the Archbishop of Mentz. Cuspinian also says
Cusp. in Henr. 4. prope finem.
, It is testified in vetustissimis annalibus by the most ancient annals.
Sigibert Sig. and Floren. loc. cit.
, and Florentius also add, that Hildebrand sent his Confessor to the Emperor
to ask forgiveness of him, and of the whole Church; releasing Florent. loc.
cit.
all, both Emperor and others, from those bannes and curses which he had
denounced against them. And if one may believe visions of those times, one of
the Priests of Saxony Ioh. Auen. li. 5. pa. 470.
, lying like a dead man in a trance for three days, when he came to himself,
said, he then had a revelation, that Hildebrand, Rodulph, and Hermannus were
tormented in everlasting punishment.

Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, calls Lanf. epist. ad Hug. quae est apud
Bar. an. 1080. nu. 27
Henry the fourth, though deposed by Pope Hildebrand, gloriosum Imperatorem, a
glorious Emperor, and withal adds, that he could not obtain so great a
victory (against Rodulph) to whom the Pope had given the Empire) sine magno
dei auxilio, without the great assistance of God; whom yet the Bishop did not
think to give assistance to unjust causes.

Gerochus, one who in those days had writ most earnestly in defense of
Hildebrand, at last seeing his pertinacie, writ in this manner Geroch. eiu^
verba habe^tur apud Auen. li. 5: pa. 446.
: The Romans (to wit, Hildebrand with his faction) usurp Divine honor, they
will not give a reason of their actions, nor do they patiently endure that one
should say to them, Cur ita facis: They ingeminate that of the Satyricall Poet,
Sic volo, sic i^beo. This is my will; my will does stand for a reason.

Venerius Bishop of Vercels, writ an whole book against Hildebrand: In it he
thus says Venerius li. de vnitate ecel. citatur in Catal. test. verit. lib. 13.
. Christ taught his Apostles, not to dispose of Kingdoms, nor to order them,
nay himself did not affect such a Kingdom, but fled from it. We read
Hildebrand to teach, quod potestatem habuerit super reges, that he had power
over Kings and over Kingdoms, and that he might do that which the Psalmist
says belonges only to God, He puts down one, and sets up another. Hildebrand
has made a rent in the Church, whence are grown civil wars, slaughters,
periuries, perfidious dealings, injustice; these do now flow and super
abound, propter doctrinam Hildebrandi Papae, by reason of the doctrine of Pope
Hildebrand. Is it Apostolical, is it Catholic, is it spiritual to take part
with Hildebrand, to nourish and defend such crimes?

Conrad Bishop of Traiectum in an open assembly said, Conradi Oration extat apud
Avent. li. 5. pa. 463.
Hildebrand is carried headlong with ambition, seeing he usurps the power of
the immortal God.

Osbertus Bishop of Leodium speaking of Hildebrand says, Osbert Leod. li. de
vitae Hen. 4. sect. Igitur Saxones*
Quae dementia, what madness has armed you against the King and governor of
the world? your malignant coniuration will not profit you. Whom God has settled
in the Kingdom, your hand can not cast him out.

The Bishop of Triers, Epis. Treuir. cuius Epist. extat in li. Imper. Constable.
to. 1. p. 46
This Hildebrand, who inuadeth the Apostolic See, who is puffed up with such
pride as has not been heard off, who studies prophanes novelties, and is
delighted with an ample name, I know not how to call him a Christian, seeing he
has not that Character, namely peace and charity which Christ has imprinted
in his Disciples. There Is nothing so impious and nefarious, nothing so
detestable and execrable which he regards, so that he may arm others against
the King. I will not obey him hereafter, neither shall he by my judgment sit
in the seat of Peter, whom he does not follow.

The Bishop of Virdunum Epis. Virdunensis epist. extat ibidem.
, Hildebrand who is called the head, iam est cauda ecclesiae, is now the tail
of the Church; he who is called the foundation, is now the desolation of the
Church; he who is said to gather, does now scatter; he who is said to love,
does now hate the Church; he who is said to strengthen, does now weaken the
holy Church. O the Arrogancy of him, who glories that he is above the
Church, doing wickedly above all malice, renting the Church, and which is
unheard of, presuming to destroy the Catholic King (Henry the fourth, then
deposed) condemning most wickedly those who are godly, perverting the decrees
of the fathers, advancing an adulterous King (Rodulph) indeuouring to
extinguish the true and lawful King with all memory of the kingly name. He
calls perjury fidelity, faith he calls sacrilege, his father ( the devil)
was a lier from the beginning, and himself lies in all things and contradicts
the truth. Shall we call him our head, who is a wicked, an execrated man, who
subuerts the members of the Church?

Waltram Bishop of Medeburge, Let all Walt. Episc. Medeb. ep. extat apud
Dodech. in Append ad Mar. Scot. an. 1090.
be confounded who resist the Lord; Rodulph, Hildebrand, Egbert and diverse
others, Dei ordinationi in Henrico restiterunt, resisted Gods ordinance in
resisting the Emperor Henry, and behold they are perished, as if they had not
been; and truly their beginning must needs be evil, whom so bad an end did
follow.

Waltram Bishop of Naumberg has writ two books against the impieties of
Hildebrand. Certum est Walt. Nau^ber. lib. 1. de unit. ecc. and Imper. cap. 18.
its certain says he, that Pope Hildebrand has attempted to violate the
Sacred Scripture and the commandments of God: he has Walt. lib. 2. quae
vocatur Apologia cap. 2
mingled himself with the deaths of many Christians, kindling the fire of
war almost through the whole Empire, The Bishops Lib. eodem ca. eodem.
of Hildebrand, corporum simul and animarum sunt homicidae, are murderers both
of bodies and souls, they are such as may deservedly be called the Synagogue
of Satan. The Church Ibid. cap. 11.
has no sword given unto it, nisi gladium spiritus, but only the sword of the
Spirit: Hildebrand Ibid. ca. 4.
has usurped regal authority, against the ordination of God, and against the
use and discipline of the Church. He has usurped the offices of both powers,
temporal and Ecclesiastical, he has maruellously resisted the ordinance of
God: yea he plainly calls (...)
this doctrine of Hildebrand an Heresy, Magna est haeresis Dei ordinationi
resistere. Its a great heresy to resist Gods ordinance, which it is manifest
that these Bishops of Hildebrand have done, when they went about to destroy
Henry the King placed by God.

Pope Leo the ninth, Rome has brought up and nourished Constantine, Leo 9. Ep.
7
and super omnes mortales constituit, and set him above all mortal men; then
sure above the Pope.

Petrus Damianus Damianus lib. 4. ep. 9. ad Older. Firmanu^
; The offices belonging to Bishops and Kings are proper to each of them, the
King is to use secular weapons, Bishops the sword of the Spirit. Ozias was
smitten with leprosy for usurping the Priests office, what then does the
Priest deserve if he take secular weapons which are proper to lay men? Which
words are so pregnant against the Papal Monarchy, Bar. an. 1053 nu. 14.
that Baronius taxes Damianus as Heretical, for this saying.

Oecumenius Oecumenius in cap. 13. ad Romans
, The Apostle instructs every soul, though he be a Bishop or an Apostle
(then much more the Pope) to be subject to secular Princes.

Theophilact Theophil. in (...). 13. ad Romans
: Vniuersos erudit, the Apostle teaches all, yea though he be an Apostle (then
sure the Apostles successors) that they be subject to secular Princes.

Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury Anselmue (...) 26. ca. Math.
. There are two swords in the Church, the one material, the other spiritual;
and there are secular Ministers, to whom belongs the handling of temporal
matters: and spiritual to whom spiritual matters do belong: the temporal
sword is given to carnal (that is, secular) men, the spiritual to spiritual
persons: as the King may not intermeddle with the priestly stole, so neither
may a Bishop exercise that which belongs to the King.

Iuo Bishop of Carnotum Iu^ ep. 171
. The disposing of secular matters is given to the King, and they are
fundamentum and Caput populi, the foundation and head of the people, and where
they will not obey the admonitions of Bishops, diuino iudicio sunt reseruandi,
they are to be left to Gods judgment. Then is not the Pope as a superior Lord
to judge, punish, or depose them.

Glaber Rodulphus Glab. Rod. lib. 4. cap. 5.
. At this time the Roman See was miserably infected with a pestiferous
disease, for the space of 25. years; they ordained a Pope about 12. years
old, whom only silver and gold did commend more then either age or sanctity:
but as he had an unhappy beginning, so he had an unhappy end, for he was
deposed by the Emperor with the consent of the whole Roman Clergy, and a
most holy man put in his room. Glaber approouing this act of the Emperor,
shows plainly he thought the Pope tobe subject to Imperial authority, and
judgment.

Sigibert Sig. (...). 1088
: This Novelty, that I say not Heresy, was not before this time sprung up in
the world, that Priests should teach the people that they owght no obedience to
wicked Kings, and that though they swear fidelity unto them, yet they owe not
fidelity, and are not perjured, if they disobey their King. Hildebrand even in
this doctrine is by him accounted an author of Novelty and Heresy.

Thus was this Hildebrandicall doctrine no otherwise entertained at the very
first arising thereof, and ever since, then as a novelty, a schismatic, a
seditious, a pernicious and pestilent heresy. It is true, I confess, that the
Imperialists also who in this and the succeeding ages defended the right of
Emperors against the then challenged and usurped Papal Monarchy, were, and
that even eo nomine Vt liquet ex ijs quae hoc saeculo diximu^: et ex Decreto
Lud. Baua^ri cu^ concilio proceru^ in quo ita dicu^t Illos, quod a nobis and
Imperio deficere nollent, quod crimen laesae maiestatis, and scelus perfidiae
admittere recusarent, Haeresis nota in ^ssit papa. apud Auent. lib. 7. page 613.
because they were faithful loyal and obedient to Emperors, both accounted
and called Heretics by the Hildebrandists, or adherents to to the Pope. But
the name of Heretics being by either part given unto the other both then and
ever since, yet there is a maine difference in the verity of this Appellation.
The sentence and censure of the Pope in this and following ages, was for this
point but the partial and unjust sentence of some factious, seditious and
schismatic Hildebrandists, condemned by the Uniform and consenting
judgment of the whole Catholic Church in all the several ages thereof, till
the days of Hildebrand. The sentence and censure of the Imperialists was for
this point the Orthodoxall and consenting judgment of holy Councels and of the
Catholic fathers for more then a thousand years together after Christ. If
they object, that some of the witnesses whom in this or succeeding ages we
produce, were accounted Heretics, we justly reply, that those also whom they
produce against us, in this cause, were accounted Heretics. Either by the
judgment of the other, was counted and called Heretical, and so neither of
both since this rent in the Church made by Hildebrand, is an equal or fit
judge of the other. The impartial Judgment in this cause must proceed from
the former, ancient, and consenting voice of the Church before it was rent or
divided in this question. And seeing with the Imperialists in this point wholly
concurres, and from the Hildebrandists wholly dissents the consenting voice and
judgment of the Catholic Church in all the former ages thereof, that is, for
more then 1000. years together, it is an evident demonstration, that the
Imperialists, and those who are witnesses on our part, in this doctrine, both
in truth are, and are by all others to be accounted and called Orthodoxall; and
that the Hildebrandists and those who are witnesses on their part, in this
doctrine, both in truth are, and are by all others to be accounted and called
Heretical.

CHAP. VII.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy was condemned by Bishops, and learned
writers, who lived from the year 1100. to the year 1200.
IN the twelfth age, Ab an. 1100 ad 1200.
there was held about anno 1107. Concilium Tircense (perhaps it should be
Trecense.) In it Conc. Tirc. apud Bin in vita Pascal. 2. page 1304.
the Emperor Henry the fifth, complained that the Imperial rights were
impaired by the Pope. The matter-beeing deferred till the Emperor came to his
Coronation in Italy (which was about a year after) then, as Petr. Diaconus,
who then lived, declares, one of the Emperors part, seeing how Pope Pascalis
protracted the Coronation, and required a stricter oath, then seemed fit, said
Petr. Diac. in Chron. Cassine^. lib. 4. cap. 40.
Quid multis opus est, what needs all this doing? know that our Lord the
Emperor will so take the Crown as Charles, Lewis and Pipine took it; And
that was Naucl. gener. 38. in initio. et Sigeb. an. 1111
to have the inuestiture of Bishops, and all other Royalties and Imperial
rights which Charles and other Emperors had for 300. years and more; yea the
Emperor, says Alb. Stadensis Alb. Stadens. an. 1111.
would not swear, but said (and said most rightly) Imperatorem nemini debere
iurare, that the Emperor was not bound to swear unto any man, seeing to him
as supreme, all others are to exhibit the sacrament of their oaths. When the
Pope would not accept of that oath, they Petr. Diac. Chron. Cass. lib. 4.
(...). 41.
thrust him from his throne, took him prisoner with diverse Cardinals, and
others that took part with the Pope, and carried them to Sorecte: where the
Pope was kept in prison for the space of 61. days. In the end the Pope
yielded, and ( swore, Lib. ^od. c. 42
, that he would never either disturb the Emperor or his Empire, as violating
the Churches right, neither anathematize him for thus using the Pope: and
further that he would priuilegio sub anathemate confirmare, confirm by a
privilege and that under a curse (and so he did Papa tradidit ^i in oculis
omnium principu^ priuilegium de inu^stitura etc. Sigeb. an. 1111
in the sight of all) that the Emperor should enjoy the inuestitures of
Bishops and Abbots, and that whosoever were chosen for a Bishop, should be
consecrated of none unless he were invested by the Emperor. The Emperor on
the other side ( swore Petr. Diac. l. 4 ca. 42.
(in such form as he before had offered and the Pope had refused) that he
would obey the Pope, saluo honor Imperii and regni, always saving the honor
of the Empire and Kingdom, as other Sicuti Catholici Imperatores solent. ibid.
Emperors were used to swear. So both the Emperor knew and the Pope
acknowledged, and that upon his oath, the Sovereignty and Royalties to belong
unto the Emperor. You will say, the Pope did this in fear and by constraint.
It is true he was by just punishment induced unto it. And none must ever think
that Popes without such strong inducements, will ever do any right to Kings or
Emperors. But had the Pope thought those Royalties not to be in right
belonging to the Emperor, why did he at all consent unto it? why did he not
endure, I say not imprisonment, but death for a righteous cause? Si homines
timerentur, Martyrs non essent. All Princes may see by this, how to have right
at the Popes hand. If Popes once ouermaster them, they will be sure to do as
this same Pascalis did: as soon as the Emperor was gone, and the danger
ouerpast, the Pope in a Synod in the Laterane, recalled Abb. Vsperg. an. 1112.
Alb. Stad. an. eodem Naucl. an. eod. and Conc. Later. sub Pascal. 2. pa. 1309.
that his own former grant, made with an imprecation, uttered before the holy
Altar, in the sight of all the Princes, and said, it was Prauilegium not
Priuilegium: and contrary to his oath of not disturbing the Emperor nor his
Empire, (for assurance whereof he Sigeb. a. 1111
had given and received the holy Eucharist) the Council then decreed,
Imperatorem a liminibus ecclesiae sequestrandum censuerunt. Alb. Stad. an. 1112
that the Emperor was to be excommunicated and shut out of the Church, and the
Pope Papae legati Imperatoris excommunicationem publicant. Naucl. a. 1112 pa
739.
published and thundered out an excommunication against the Emperor, set all
the Empire in an uproar and combustion; nor was Pascalis and his successors
ever at quiet, till they had forced Naucl. a. 1112
Henry (as in the time of Calyxtus they did) to resign and deliver up the
Privilege granted by Pascalis, and compelled him to yield the Inuestitures of
Bishops into the Popes hands. But such coacted resignation, could not take away
either from that Henry, or from any of his successors, those Imperial rights,
which belong to their Crown and which they ought, even by the words of their
usual oath, Saluo honor Imperii, still to maintain.

There was held anno 1160. a Council at Papia, (it may, in regard of the
Bishops of so many provinces assembled therein, be called a general Council)
to determine whether Octauian called Victor, or Rowland called Alexander the
third, was the right Pope. The Emperor Fridericke the first called it, and
writ thus, Epist. Frid. 1. extat apud Radeu. lib. 2. de gest. Frid. 1. cap. 56.
Whereas Christ at his passion was contented with two swords, this is fulfilled
in the Roman Church (for the one) and in the Roman Empire (for the other.)
And, we by the counsel of all our Bishops and Princes have appointed a
Council at Papia, unto which vocabimus, we will call both those that term
themselves Popes, and all other Bishops in our Empire, as also of other
Kingdoms, France, England, Spain and Hungary. And to Rowland who was called
Alexander, he writ, Mandamus Rad. ibid. ^. 55
we command and charge you in the name of God to come to this Council. When
the Council was assembled the Emperor thus began: Although Orat. Frid. apud
Rad. li. 2. cap. 64.
I know that by the office and dignity of my Empire I have power to call
Councels, as Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Charles the Great, and O tho
have done before; yet the authority to define this great and weighty
business, committo potestati vestrae, I commit to your wisdom and power. The
whole Council adjudged Rad. ibid. c. 6^
the Sea to Octauianus, the Emperor ratified their judgment, placed him in
the Pontifical throne. And yet (so exorbitant are their Popes) notwithstanding
this so ample, so diligent, and exact examination and Synodall judgment,
Rowland (whom they truly called Idolum sibi Roula^du^ ^uexerunt. epist. Imp.
ibid. cap. 71.
an Idol) without any right at all, invaded and held the Sea, and ever after
bare so implacable hatred to Friderick, for doing nothing but justice, and that
in most equal manner, that he could never be at quiet, till at Venice, he had
trampled Naucl. a. 1177
him under his feet, telling him that he was subject, Et mihi and Petro.

When Pope Hadrian the fourth, in his quarrel against Fridericke the first,
had writ Epi. Hadrian. extat apud Radeuic. lib. 1. de gest. Frid. ca. 15
to the Bishops of Germany, to move the Emperor to yield to him, and had
inserted in his letters, those words at which the Emperor took great
indignation, Coronae beneficium tibi contulimus, we have given unto you the
Imperial Crown; as if the Empire and the Imperial Crown, were at the Popes
disposing, to give to whom he would; the Bishops writ Episcopi German. quorum
epist. extas lib. eod. cap. 16
back to the Pope in this manner: A verbis vestris commota est vniuersa resp.
Imperii nostri, all our common weal and Empire, were so moved by those your
words, that neither the ears of his imperial Majesty could patiently hear
them, nor the ears of the Princes endure them, therefore all stopped their
ears at those words, so that we consensu aliquo approbare nec audemus, nec
possumus, neither dare, nor can by any consent approve them, because they are
such as were never used nor heard of till these times; and we beseech your
Holiness, that like a good Pastor, you would send other letters, priora scripta
suauitate mellita dulcorantibus, which may soften and sweeten your former
writings.

There was about the same time, a very famous assembly at Roncalia, Conuentus
Roncal. apud Radeu. lib. 2. de gest. Frid. 1. cap. 1. and seq.
wherein were many Archbishops and Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons,
besides Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Judges of the Empire. Vna Ibid. cap. 4.
omnium sententia haec erat, this was the sentence and judgment of them all.
Thou O most excellent Prince art Orbis and vrbis Imperator, Emperor of the
City of Rome, and of the World. It pleased you to consult with us the loyal
people of your power, concerning the laws, justice and honor of the Empire;
therefore know, that the whole right of the people for making of laws is
granted unto you. Tua voluntas ius est, your will is law, according as it is
said, Quod principi placuit legis habet vigorem, that which pleases the
Emperor has force of a law. Could they give unto him an higher Sovereignty?

Pope Pascalis the second, anno 1110. thus decreed, Pascalis Decretum extat in
lib. Constit. Imper. tom. 1. page 54.
We command that those Royalties which belong to the Emperor, be resigned unto
King Henry (the fifth) which belonged unto the Empire in the time of Charles,
Lewis, Otho, and other their predecessors; and we forbid under the pain of an
Anathema, that any Bishop, or Abbot either now or hereafter, do invade those
Royalties, that is, those Cities, Dukedomes, Marquisates, Counties, moneys,
tolles, or tribute, Aduowsans, Towers, and Castles which belong to the Empire;
neither shall it be lawful for our successors in this See, to disquiet either
thee or thy Kingdom in this matter. Now the supreme Dominion and royalties in
Rome, and throughout all Italy, did certainly belong to Charles (as we have
formerly proved): then by the Popes decree, the Emperors are for ever to be
held for the Supreme Lords of the same.

Pope Innocentius the third, in one of his decretals defines, Innoc^n^. 3 Cap.
Per v^nerabil^m. lib. ^. Decretal. Greg. tit. Qui (...) sunt (...).
That though in his own Patrimony he be a direct Lord, yet in other countries
he does exercise that jurisdiction but casually, not preiudicating the right of
others; which words are so clear that though they wrest them never so much,
yet still they will demonstrate the Pope, even by the Popes decree, not to be a
direct temporal Monarch of the world.

Pope Celestine the third, Celestine 3. Extra. de Iudic. cae. cum non ab homine.
If a Clearke be incorrigible he must be excommunicated, and then smitten with
the sword of Anathema; if he contemn that, cum Ecclesia non habeat vltra quid
faciat, seeing the Church can go no further (but to the censure of Anathema,)
he must be punished by secular power.

The Senate and people of Rome write unto Conrade the Emperor, anno 1140. in
this manner, Senatus and populus Romans Eorum Epist. extat to. 1. Constit. Imp.
pa. 56
Vrbis and orbis Domino, to thee, Lord both of Rome and of the world: and they
tell him, that they desire to restore the Roman Empire which is given to him
by God, unto that state wherein it was in the time of Constantine and
Justinian, qui totum orbem tenuere manibus, who had the whole world subject
unto them; wishing that the Rebels and those who have taken away the honor of
the Empire, being trodden under feet, he may obtain all things which are due
to Caesar, and the Empire: praying him to remember, quot and quanta mala
Papalis Curia, how great and how many wrongs the Popes Court, and those which
sometimes were your citizens, have formerly done to the Emperors, and do now
attempt to do worse; but we, say they, have justly resisted them according to
our fidelity, and have expelled many of them out of the City as the worst
enemies to the Empire.

The Bishops of Germany writ Episc. Alemaniae. apud Rad. lib. 1. de ge^^.
Frid. ca. 16
thus unto the Pope claiming the Empire to be his gift, and at his disposing:
We willingly yield fatherly reverence unto you our father. The free crown of
our Empire diuino tantum beneficio ascribimus, we ascribe only to the gift of
God. The Bishop of Mentz has the first voice in the election, and so the rest
in order; the Bishop of Colen conferres regal, the Pope imperial unction,
whatsoever is more then this, ex abundanti est, a malo est, it is
superabundant, it is from evil. And that which they account to be more, is
the Popes pretense of giving the Empire with the crown and unction.

That the Greek Church Eccl. Graeca
in this age, held not the Pope for a supreme Monarch, may be perceived by
that which Humbertus Humber. lib. contra Graecoru^ calumnias, prope initium.
witnesses of them, that they not only detested the pope and accounted the
Roman Church to be heretical, but further urged them both, to receive their
opinions under the pain of an Anathema. Yea, long after this they would not
suffer Paul. ^emil. in Phil. 4. and Aeneas Silu. lib. 9 E^ist. in Blon^.
their Emperor Michael Paleologus to have Christian burial, because in a
Council at Lions, he had professed the Greek Church to be subject to the
Roman See.

Theodorus Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch, having alleged many Canons why
Clergy men should not undertake civil Magistracy and secular affairs, at
length expounds Theod. Bals. Comm. in Can. 16. Conc. Carthag.
them all to be so understood, that they may not do this sine iussu
Imperatoris without a command and commission from the Emperor, for if they do
it by the Emperors allowance, the Canons do not forbid them: seeing the
Emperor is neither subject to laws nor Canons. Again, Idem. Comm. in Can. 7.
Conc. 6. in Trullo. pa 369.
Note this seventh Canon, wherein it is said that spiritual dignities are more
excellent then secular. Sed ne hoc eo traxeris, but do not strain this, says
he, so far as some do, that Ecclesiastical dignities are above Imperial,
eis enim subiiciuntur, for Ecclesiastical dignities are subject to Imperial.

Athanasius Patriarch of Constantinople, speaking to the Emperor says, Ath^n.
Constant. li. de necess. episc. res. cap. 6.
Curam omnium suscepisti a Deo, you have the charge of all (and then of the
Pope) committed unto you by God.

Euthymius, Euthym. in Psalm. 50.
Seeing I am a King, I have offended only to thee O God, tibi soli iudici
subiicior, I am subjected to thee only as a Judge of me.

Saint Bernard is so clear in this point, that he Bernard. li. 2 de Consid.
ad Eug.
expressly denies that the Pope or any who is a successor to the Apostles, can
have that supreme and independent temporal dominion. Planum est, Apostolis
interdicitur dominatus, It is plain, Dominion (independent) is forbidden to
the Apostles. If you succeed the Apostles, you usurp that dominion: you are
clearly forbidden to have them both, if you will have them both you shall
loose them both.

Hugo de Sancto victore Huge de S. Victore, lib. 2 de Sacram. par. 2. cap. 4.
. The terrene power has the King for head, the spiritual power has the Pope.
Terrene or temporal matters belong to the power of the King, those which are
spiritual belong to the power of the Pope: and, Lupold. lib. de Iure regum.
and ^mp. cap. 9.
Hugo tenet, Hugo holds this conclusion, that the Emperor for temporal
matters has his power only from God, neither in those is subject to the Pope.
Again, Hugo says Aug. Triump. de po^est. eccl. q. 36. ar. 3.
that the Pope is greater then the Emperor in spiritual, but the Emperor
greater then the Pope in temporal matters: and he further says, that the
Emperor does not take the power of the sword and temporal dignity from the
Pope.

Petrus Cluniacensis, Pet. Cli^man li. 6. epist. 46
You will say, The Church has not a sword, seeing Christ commanded Peter to
put up his sword; It is true, It is true I say, Ecclesia non habet gladium
regis, sed habet virgam pastoris, the Church has not the sword of a King (not
the civil and temporal sword) but it has the rod or staff of a shepherd.

Petrus Gratianus Gratianus. Cause. 2 q. 7. ca. Nos si incompetenter.
the Master of their decrees; Note that there are two persons whereby the world
is governed, the Regal, and Sacerdotall. As Kings are the chief in secular
causes, so are Bishops in the causes of God. It is the office of Kings to
inflict corporal, the office of Bishops to use spiritual punishment.

Peter Lombard Pet. Lomb. lib. 2. sentent. did. 44. ca. 3. (...) comment. suo
in Epist. ad Romans cap. 13.
Bishop of Paris, and their Master of sentences, We must know that those words
of the Apostle, He that resists the power resists the ordination of God, are
meant of secular powers, to wit, of Kings and Princes, whom we may not resist
while those things which they command are such as God does not forbid. Now
seeing that precept concerns every soul, as the text expresses, (even the
Apostles themselves and their successors, as we have before proved,) the Pope
by this Bishops judgment, may not resist, but ought in all lawful commands,
obey secular Princes; for the conclusion of the Master, says Henry Goricon
Henr. Gor. com. in. cap. cit. lib. 2. sent. Pet. tomb.
upon that text is this, Quod semper obediendum est potestati, that men must
always obey secular power unless they command against God.

Petrus Blesensis, Pet. Blesensis Epist. 73.
Let the Church first exercise her jurisdiction, and if that will not suffice,
then let the secular sword supply that which wants. (u) To Princes is the
sword given, Animabus praelatus es non corporibus, you are set over men's
souls, not their bodies. A prelate and pilate have nothing common. Again
Epist. 42.
, to another Bishop, You being chosen for a Bishop, sanguinolenta potestate
exerces gladii potestatem, do with a bloody conscience use the power of the
secular sword; let him exercise the material sword who has received the power
of that sword. Secular powers are ordained of God that they should have that
sword. If you take Christ's ministry, abide in that vocation to which you are
called: dimittas laicis populi principatum, leave the rule or civil government
of the people to Laymen.

Johannes Sarisburiensis Ioh. Sarisb. Epist. 218.
Bishop of Carnotum, though he be violent in the Popes cause, yet says, Deus
solus arbitrio suo regna and Imperia transfert, God alone (then not the Pope)
does at his pleasure translate kingdoms, he sets up, he pulles down what
powers he will.

Geruasius Geruas. cuius epist extat inter Epist Al^xand. ^. (...) Ni^ol. ^.
(...) est nume^o 21.
Archbishop of Rhemes writes thus to Pope Alexander the second, It is reason
that we of France should honor the successor of Peter, seeing out of our
kingdom Rome did choose ( Charles the Great) quem sibi and mundo caput
ordinaret, whom it ordained the head both of Rome and the world (then head also
of the Pope, unless he were none of the world.)

Ioachim Abbas Ioak. Abbas com. in Ierem. ca. 22. pa. 310.
of whom Posseuine says, Posseu. Appar. in Ioa^^^m
that many believed him to have had the spirit and gift of prophecy, says,
Though secular Princes have taken somewhat by force from the Church, yet the
Popes on the other side have taken much from secular princes, which they
neither should have sought nor have received; and to this purpose Christ says,
Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, but because their covetous prelates will
not hearken to this word, they shall be burst like old bottles; and handling
those words, As an Ass so shall he be buried, those (Roman) Prelates, says
he Ibid. pa. 313.
, are truly Asses and fools, and therefore they shall lie open to their
enemies: And as from an ass is first pulled his skin, and then he is cast to
the dunghill to be meat for beasts and birds, so shall first be pulled from
those prelates the skins of their temporal possessions, and then shall they
be cast as a mocking stock, on the dunghill, and be as meat for the beasts of
the Roman Empire and birds, that is Evangelical men who shall reprove them.
Again, Ibid. in ca. 24 pa. 330
The Popes and prelates knew that those temporalities which they desired, iuris
esse Romani, did in right belong to the Roman Empire.

Eberhardus Eberhardus epist. extat apud Radeu. li. 2. de gest. Frid. ca. 71.
Bishop of Babenberge, The part which follows Alexander the third, does go
to the enemies of the Empire, which seems to be against wholesome doctrine,
and they both loose men from their oath of fidelity, and forbid them to obey
the Emperor, and so make way for schism which is the worst of all.

Otho Otho Fris. i^ epi. ad Frid. Imper. praefixa suo Chro^.
Frisingensis, a man noble both for birth, piety, and learning. Whereas there
is no other person in the world which is not subject to temporal laws, and by
being subject to them may be punished, soli reges, only Kings as being above
laws are reserved to the judgment of God, and are not restrained by secular
laws, Then are they not subject either to the Popes judgment or punishment.

Helmoldus, Helmoldus in Chron. Slau. cap. 33.
David siuning and repenting, remained still a King and a Prophet; Henry the
fourth, lying prostrate at the Popes feet entreating and repenting, was gratis
pessundatus, without cause depressed and crushed. Henry found not that in the
time of grace which David found in the hard time of the law, But let others who
dare, dispute hereof, this one thing may be known, that the Roman See, luit
factum illud, does to this day smart for that fact.

Gotofridus Viterbiensis, Gotof. Vit. in Henr. 4 part. 16. pa. 499.
Before this of Gregory, we do not read that any Emperor was excommunicated
by the Pope or deprived of his kingdom, such a novelty he notes that fact of
Hildebrands to have been. He also notes that the cause of all those broiles
betwixt Henry the fourth and Hildebrand, was Ibid. pa. 499
for that Hildebrand took the Popedom sine concessione Imperatoris without
the grant of the Emperor. Thereby giving to understand, that as Hildebrand
unjustly entered into the Sea, so he thought he could not hold it but by
depressing and oppressing him, by whose grant he should have held it, and
without whose grant he did not rightly hold: it and that the whole quarrel
arose neither for any fault of Henry, nor zeal of Hildebrand, either to God or
to the Church, but it began upon Hildebrands own undutifulness and unlawful
intrusion, and was continued for maintaining his unjust and usurped possession.
So holy a quarrel beseemed so holy a Saint.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by Bishops, and learned
writers, who lived from the year 1200. to the year 1300. after Christ.
IN the thirteenth age, Ab an. 1200 ad 1300.
when first Gregory the ninth Bin. in vita. Greg. 9. et. Alb. Stad. an. 1240.
and after him Innocentius the fourth, in the Council of Lions, had
excommunicated Conc. Lugdu. apud Mat Par. pa. 896. et. seq. an. 1245.
Frederick the second, and deposed him propria Alb. Stad. an. 1245.
authoritate, by their own Papal authority, and not by the judgment and
authority of the Council, diverse Princes Principes. Alb. Stad. lo^. citatis.
whom those Popes solicited, yea, under pain of excommunication commanded,
not to accept or account Frederick for Emperor, answered first Gregory and
then Innocentius in this manner; Ad papam non pertinere Imperatorem vel
instituere vel destituere, sed tantum electum a principibus coronare, that it
belonged not to the Pope either to make or unmake an Emperor, but only to
crown him whom the Electors had chosen.

When Pope Innocentius the third, had sent an excommunication Lit. Innocent*
recitantur a Math. Paeris. a. 1216. p. 370.
and interdict against the Prelates and Barons in England, who resisted King
John, or sought to put him (being then as Innocent calls Innoc ibid.
him the Popes vassal) from his kingdom; the Barons Barons and Praelati
Angliae. eorum verba habe^tur apud Mat. Par. an. eodem 1216 pa. 372.
and Prelates being assembled together, dicebant generaliter omnes, did all
with one general consent say, that those letters were of no force at all,
partly for that they were (as they pretended) gotten by surreption, and ex hoc
maxim, and specially for this reason, because the ordering of Laicall or
Temporal matters, belonged not to the Pope, seeing unto Peter, and his
successors non nisi Ecclesiasticarum rerum dispositio, the disposing only of
Ecclesiastical affairs was given by Christ; what have Popes say they, to do
with our wars? Behold they will be the successors of Constantine, and not of
Peter. They imitate not Peter in works, they are not to be likened to him in
power. Phy on it, that marcidi ribaldi, base ribalds, and ignoble Simoniackes
(so they term Popes) who know nothing of war, and weapons, iam toti mundo
propter excommunicationes suas volunt dominari, will needs dominere over the
whole world, by sending out their Excommunications and Interdicts. How unlike
are they to Peter who usurp the place of Peter!

Pope Innocentius the fourth Innocent. 4 in cap. Nouerit. de Sententia
excommunic. nu. 2.
, In temporal things solus Imperator qui vniuersis and Clericis and laicis in
temporalibus praeesse debet, priuilegium concedere potest, the Emperor only
who in temporal matters ought to be above all both Laicall and
Ecclesiastical persons, (then sure above the Pope himself) can grant a
privilege in temporal matters. Eberherdus Abusinus, Eberherdus apud Auent.
lib. 7. page 546. 547.
If we be not blind, we may perceive that under the title of the high priest
and under a sheep skin, the pope plays the woolfe. The Roman Bishops take
weapons against Christians, banish Unity and Concord, raise up wars and
sedition from hell, they do not provide for the good of the flock, sed potius
immanitate tyranni debacchantur, but rather they are enraged with tyrannous
cruelty. They violate holy things, abuse the covenant of God to deceive men,
they command men to deceive, to war, to be treacherous, to resist the sacred
Majesty ordained by God. Hildebrand about 170. years since, under the color
of religion, primus Antichristi imperii fundamenta iecit, first of all founded
the Empire of Antichrist. Alexander Halensis, That which Saint Peter says,
Alexa. Hal. part. 3. q. 40. memb. 5.
The King excelles, is true in suo ordine, scilicet ad corporalem vindictam,
true in his order, that is, for inflicting secular punishment: in doing whereof
if he offend, non habet qui eum puniat nisideum, he has none at all but God
(then not the Pope) to punish him. And again, Ibidem.
The terrene power has the King for head, the spiritual has the Pope.
Nichol. Lyranus Nich. Lyran. in Psalm. 50.
In that he was a King, non habuit superiorem, qui possit eum punire nisi Deum,
he had none, but only God to punish him for his faults. Aquinas, Th. Aquin. 1.
2. q. 96. art. 5. ad 3.
A Prince is said to be solutus legibus, free from the laws, quia nullus in
ipsum potest condemnationis sententiam far, because none, (then not the Pope)
may pronounce a sentence of condemnation against him.

Conrad Abbot of Vrsperge Conrad Ab. Vrsp. in An^ceph. post (...). 1124
speaking of the Popes deposing of Emperors, says; Though popes do glory
that they have done this, yet I observe that these things were rather done to
Emperors by the judgment of God for the sins of those Emperors, the
Princes and people joining their minds to make resistance unto them. And how
ineffectuall he esteems the Popes act of deposing, Emperors appears by that
which he adds, Ibidem.
that Fridericke was excommunicated by Pope Hadrian and Alexander, yet he never
lost his Empire; so Philip the son of Fridericke, though pope Celestine
excommunicated him, nunquam perdidit imperium, yet for all that he lost not his
Empire. Again, entreating of Pope Hadrians excommunicating Fridericke, he
calls it Conspiratio facta est. et, huic conspirationi. ^dem an. 1152. pa. 288.
a conspiracy of the Pope and Cardinals; addinge Idem pa. 289. 290.
that God was not pleased with that fact but brought that curse upon them,
which is foretold by David: They curse, but thou O Lord wilt bless; let them
that rise against me be confounded, but thy servant shall rejoice. This, says
he, was most evidently fulfilled in this business; for to the end that this
prophetical speech might be fulfilled, the foresaid Pope Hadrian a few days
after he had denounced excommunication against the Emperor, walked abroad at
Anagnia to refresh himself, and coming to a fountain, he drank a little of
the water; and presently a fly entered into his mouth, and stuck so in his
throat, that by no skill of Physicians, it could be taken away, and so he
died. The Cardinals also who were of that conspiracy, at their election of the
next Pope, made such a grievous schism in the Church, that Roma cum suis
conspiratoribus mansit in confusione, Rome with her conspirators (against the
Emperor) remained in confusion, and so in them we see it to be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet, Let those that rise against me be confounded: but in
the Emperor was fulfilled the other saying, Thy servant shall rejoice.
Guntherus Guntherus Ligur. lib. 6. page 369.
speaking of the Imperial power says: Nullum caput ista super (...) Aspicit
excepto Coelorum rege potestas, Imperial dignity has none above it, but
only the King of heaven: then certainly not the Pope. Upon which words
Spigelius the Scholiast observes, That if one should say so at this day, as
Gunther then did, haeretici nomen non effugeret, he would be counted an
heretic by the Popes flatterers: and whereas Guntherus adds, let Ecclesiam
ille diu inaque iurae temperet: Imperium nobis, fascesque relinquat. ibid.
the Pope govern the Church, and order divine not secular matters, the same
Scholiast observes, that this is indeed consonant to Saint Paul's precept, No
man going a warfare for God, intangles himself in secular affairs; but
withal he adds, that the Popes favorers have two answers to these words of
Saint Paul; the one is, that the Pope is not tied by the words or precept of
the Apostle, Quoniam inferior non habet imperium in superiorem, because the
Apostle being inferior has no power to command the Pope who is his superior.
The other, that secular affairs do most properly belong to the Pope, because
both swords are committed, and all power is given unto him. Durandus Durandus
lib. de modo celebrandi council. part. 1. tit. 2.
approoues the saying of Pope Gelasius: There are two things by which the world
is governed, papal authority, and regal power. Now Gelasius, as we have
before showed, so distinguishes these two, that as the Emperor may not take
upon him the name or office of a Bishop, so neither may the Pope Regale
fastigium vendicare, take upon him Regal or temporal sovereignty. Petrus de
Vineis, Pet. de Vin. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
It is no where read to be granted either by Divine or humane law to the pope,
to translate kingdoms at his pleasure, aut de puniendis temporaliter regibus
iudicare, or to judge of Kings, by inflicting temporal punishments upon them
in depriving them of their kingdoms. Petrus Cassiodorus Pet. Cassio. lib. de
Tyrann. papae.. Nonne.
Is it not a marvel, that whereas Christ paid tribute for himself and Peter,
and refused kingdoms, and secular judgments: that he who calls himself
Christ's Vicar should strive to make subject to his Dominion, Kings and
kingdoms, and that contra voluntatem illius, against the will of Christ?
Alexander named in scorn by the Popes favorers Cementarius Al. Cement. ^ius
verba habentur apud Math. Paris. in Ioh.. Ingessit.
, when Innocentius the third, had excommunicated King John, boldly and truly
taught at that time, (but he smarted for it after, as all martyrs have done,)
That it did not pertain to the Pope de Regum vel quorumlibet potentum laica
possessione, not to intermeddle with the temporal possessions of Kings, and
other Potentates, nor with the government of their subjects, seeing Christ gave
to Peter nothing but only the power of the Church, and Ecclesiastical
matters. Rainerius Pisanus, Rain. Pisan. Pantheol. part. ^. tit. de domin. ^ap.
2.
The secular power, non habet aliquod dominium supra se, quod cum puniat poena
vel vindicta corporali, has no dominion above it which may punish it with
civil, or corporal punishment. Vincentius Beluacensis Vinc. Be^ua^. Spec.
Hist. li. 26 ca. 84.
speaking of Hildebrands facts and doctrine, calls it a Novelty, and almost
an Heresy, which till then never sprang up in the world, that men should be
taught not to obey wicked Kings, and that they owe no fidelity unto them,
though they have taken the oath of fidelity. This was the very doctrine and
heresy of Hildebrand.

Johan. Semeca, Ioh. Semeca. apud Kran^^. l. 8. Saxon. c. ^f.
that excellent lawyer (who first made a gloss upon the Decrees,) not only
opposed himself to Pope Clement the fourth, in that exaction of tenths for
redemption of the Holy land, but when the Pope had for that cause
excommunicated him, appellationem opposuit, he appealed from the Pope, and had
many great men in Germany to take his part. The Lawyer belike knew some higher
Judge then the Pope.

Accursius Accursius in Authent. tit. Quomodo op^rtet Episc. (...) Conferens.
the famous Lawyer; It is plain that nec papa in temporalibus, neither may the
Pope intermeddle in temporal affairs, nor the Emperor with spiritual.
Johannes de Parisiis Ioh. de Parli lib. depotest. regia. and papali in (...).
has writ a large and learned book of the Regal and Papal power. There are,
says he, two contrary errors touching the pontifical power. The Waldenses
condemn all wealth and all secular dominion (though delegated) unto Bishops.
The other error is Herod's, who thought Christ's kingdom to be terrene and
secular; which opinion some in these days embrace, who so much decline the
error of the Waldenses, that they fall to the quite contrary error. Their
error is, that the Pope in Christ's steed has dominion and jurisdiction in
temporal matters, yea, dominion above secular Kings and Princes, because the
Pope has his power immediately from God, and Princes have theirs from the
Pope: whereupon they say, that solus papa est verus dominus temporalium, the
Pope is the only true Lord of all temporal goods, Princes and others they are
but dispensatores, stewards of them under the Pope. This opinion, says he,
sprung from the error of Herod, and savors of the error of Vigilantius: it
partakes also with that pernicious doctrine of the Pharisees, who to the end
the people might give greater oblations to them, taught, non teneri populum ad
censum reddendum Caesari, that the people were not bound to pay tribute and
duties to Caesar. But what is your own judgment in this matter? He following
a saying, which he cites out of Austen, Fides medium tenet inter duos errores
contrarios, says, Veritas medium ponit, Truth is in the middle between those
two errors; for Ecclesiastical persons may have temporal dominion, against
the Waldenses: and they have it not as being Vicars to Christ, but ex
concessione and permissione principum, by the grant, permission and delegation
of Princes. And entreating Ibid. cap. 5.
whether secular or Ecclesiastical power is more worthy, his resolution is,
That in spiritual matters the Ecclesiastical power is more excellent, but in
temporal matters the secular power mayor est potestate spirituali, is greater
then spiritual; neither is it quoad ista in aliquo subiecta, in respect of
secular matters in any sort subject to the spiritual: and he gives this which
is a true reason hereof, Because the temporal power is not derived from the
spiritual but they both immediate oriuntur a potestate diuina, do spring from
the supreme power of God and that immediately. And having Ibid. ca. 8. et 9*
proved that Christ as man had not this secular dominion, he adds, Ibid. cap.
10.
Dato quod Christus, Let us suppose that Christ had such secular power and
dominion, yet he gave it not to Peter, and ideo Papae ratione qua est Petri
successor non debetur, and therefore it is not due to the Pope as he is the
successor of Peter. And this at large he proves.

CHAP. IX.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by Bishops, and learned
writers, who lived from the year 1300. to the year 1400. after Christ.
IN the foureteenth age, Ab an. 1300 ad 1400.
Philip the Fair, called a Council Conc. Gall. apud Nau^l an. 1300. and
Gagnin. lib. 7. in Phil. pulchro.
of the Bishops and Peers of France, after Boniface the 8. had deprived him of
his Kingdom, and forbidden any of his Subjects to yield obedience unto him:
The whole Council, notwithstanding the Popes excommunication and deposition,
resolved, That the King, sine controuersia iure illa omnia tenere, did rightly
and without doubt possess his Kingdom and Dominions.

Pope John 22. anno 1323. had excommunicated and deposed (as much as in him
lay) the Emperor Lewis of Bauare, denouncing him, and his adherents to be
heretics; the Emperor thereupon called a Council: Conc. sub Ludouico Ba^aro.
Lud. rex consilio habito. Naucl. an. 1323.
the Popes proceedings were examined by men learned both in the Civil and Canon
law, iudicabant eos penitus non valere, their judgment was, that the Popes
doings were of no force at all, yea many and great Divines approved both for
their life and doctrine, dogmatizabant Iohannem Papam esse haereticum, did
dogmatically define Pope John to be an heretic. Thus writes Hermanus Vt
secibit Hermanus. Naucl. ibid.
who then lived.

An other Assembly Convent. Trident. apud Zouiu^ an. 1327 nu. 1. vbi Co^itu^s
vocat.
was held at Trent by the same Emperor Lewis, anno 1327. unto which were
assembled both many Aderant plurimi Episc. praelati, and regulares, Zouius
(...). eod. nu. ^.
Bishops and prelates, and many great personages of Millane, of Mantua, Verone,
and other Italian States. These princes Sacramenta fidelitatis praestiterunt,
took the oath of fidelity to obey Lewis. The Bishops Ibidem.
they taught these doctrines, that the pope and other Ecclesiastical persons
are subject to secular Emperors; that the pope and Bishops have no
jurisdiction (they meant civil, temporal or coactiue) from Christ, but from
the Emperor; That the pope has no power over the Emperor; That Imperial
dignity is immediate ab ipso solo deo immediately from God alone, and that the
pope has no power over it. That the excommunications and other censures of
pope John 22. against Lewis, were nullius momenti, of no force at all, nor to
be regarded; That Lewis of Bauare, was the true and lawful Emperor, quamuis a
sede Apostolica abdicatus fuisset, though he were excommunicated and deposed,
by the Pope; That Pope John was a notorious Heretic.

An other very great assembly was held at Frankford Conc. Francoford. apud
Krantz. lib. 9. Saxon. cap. 15.
, or as some say Auent. lib. 7. page 6 10.
, at Rheginoburgum, Anno 1342. at which were present the King of England, the
King of Bohemia, caeterique regni tam spirituales, quam saeculares, principes,
and the rest of the Empire, as well spiritual, as temporal Princes; They
decreed Krantz. loe^^* cit.
many things behoofull for the Empire, and among the rest, that he who is
chosen of the princes Electors, should have Imperial administration, though he
want the popes consent. For what was brought in more then election, proceeded
from flattery of some, and from the popes own suggestion, nec diuino iure,
nec vlla patrum ordinatione, and neither from Divine law, nor from the
ordinance of their ancestors. Further, it was decreed, that the Emperor being
chosen, shall make unto the Pope and the Church an oath of defense, devotion,
and humility, non fidelitatis, homagii, aut subiectionis iuramentum, but not
an oath of feoltie, homage, or subjection either to the Pope or Roman Church,
quia temporalis dominii Papa Imperatori nihil tribuit, imo Ecclesia sumpsit
omnia illa ab Imperio, for the Emperor receives no temporal dominion from the
Pope, but the Pope and Church, received all their temporalities from Emperors.
The decree made at Nouioburgum is verbatim set down in Auentinus Auent. loc.
(...).
wherein the Emperor and States, say, that John 22. commands men to break
their faith, to violate their promises and covenants, to deceive, to rebel,
and conspire against the Empire. He calls men Heretics, non aliam vllam ab
causam, for no other cause, but for that they are loyal to the Empire. And
showing how wickedly the Pope sought to usurp Imperial power, These two, say
they, are far different, a Crosiar, and a Crown, a Scepter and a sheephooke,
an Emperor and a Pastor, Corporal and Spiritual power, weapons and prayers,
Caesar and Servant, Prince and Prelate, Lord and Minister; adding this, that
the same man should be an Emperor and a Bishop, is monstrum biceps, a two
headed monster, a very Hell-hound. Nay, they call the Pope thus usurping
imperial dignity, not only a Cerberus, but Antichrist, and the very Devil
himself.

Lupoldus Lupoldus Babenb. lib. de Iur. regni and Imp. cap. 9.
: The Oath which the Roman King makes to the Pope, and Roman Church, (the
form whereof, is set down in their Canon Did. 63. cap. Tibi domino.
Law) is not an Oath of fidelity, that is, homagij quod praestat vassallus suo
domino ratione feudi, not of homage, as a vassal makes to his Lord, by reason
of some lands holden of him in fee; but it is an Oath of fidelity, that is,
fidelis defensionis papae et ecclesiae impendendae of faithful defense which
he ought to perform to the Pope and Church. And for proof of the former part
he alleges the saying of Hugo, that Imperator habet potestatem a solo Deo
quoad temporalia, the Emperor has his temporal power from God only, and in
them is not subject to the Pope; and again, Imperator temporalia immediate
tenet a Deo, the Emperor holds his temporalities immediately from God.
Whereupon he concludes, That for his Kingdom and Empire, and for the
Provinces and Lands belonging thereunto, non tenet a Papa and ab Ecclesia in
feudum, he does not hold them in fee of the Pope and Church; and therefore the
oath which he takes is not iuramentum homagii, an oath of homage, or
vassallage. For the other part, that it is an oath of defense, he alleges
Cap. eodem.
that the Emperor is Aduocatus Ecclesiae, as in their Canon law Cap.
venerabilem. extra de elect. and ^lict. potest. and Cap. Romani. in Clement. de
Iureiurando.
he is expressly called: as Charles Glossa. in cap. Adrianus, distinc. 63.
verb. patriciatus.
when he was made Patricius had thereby Aduocatiam Ecclesiae, the right of
Aduowson, or choosing Bishops in the Church. Now Aduocatio Lupold. ca cit.
Ecclesiae nihil aliud est nisi ius defendendi Ecclesiam, to be the Advocate or
have the Aduocation of the Church, is nothing else but to have a right to
Patronize and defend the Church. Whence the Patrons of Churches are called Cap.
Quia clerici Extra de iure Patronatus. vbi qui ius acquirit Patronatus dicitur
Aduocatiam ecclesiae acquirere.
Advocates of the same; and to this purpose he Lupol. lo^. ci^.
well applies that saying in the Canon law, Regimen Ecclesiae Romanae est
commissum Teutonicis, the Government of the Roman Church is committed to the
Germane Emperor. Seeing then the Emperor is the defender, the Patron, or
Advocate of the Roman Church, by right whereof he had (by the Synodall Decree
of Hadrian, and Leo the eight,) and indeed still has, power and right of
Aduocation, and nomination of him, which is to be Bishop of Rome; from this
Lupoldus concludes, That the oath which Emperors take, and make to the Pope, is
only an oath that he will defend the Pope and Church, but not to be an
homager and vassal either to the Pope or Church.

And if it be said, that some Emperors have taken the Empire in fee from the
Church, to this Lupoldus answers, Lib. eod. ca. 14
that the facts of some Emperors, can not preiudicate the rights of the
Empire, and he gives this, which is a true reason: because such Recognitions
and submissions (if any were made) were not made with the consent of the
Electors, of other princes, and of the people of the Empire; and therefore they
may rightly contradict the same; because equity and natural reason does
teach, that quando per aliquod factum praeiudicatur pluribus, id per omnes
illos comprobari debet, When any fact must be of force to praeiudicate the
right of others, that fact must be approved Quod omnes tangit abomnibus
approbari debet. Regul. Iur. 29.
by them all; and this, says he, seems to be that which both the law of
nations, as also the Civil and Canon law does teach.

Guiliel. Occam Guil. Occam. part. 1. lib. ^. cap. 9.
the scholar of Ioh. Scotus, and Theologus Auent. lib. 7. page 609
praestantissimus, a most excellent Divine, thus writes, The pope as he is
Christ's vicar has power to excommunicate, sed poenam maiorem nullatenus
inferendi, but he has no power to inflict any greater punishment. Again,
Occam. ca. cit.
papa ratione papatus non est solutus legibus imperialibus, the Pope by reason
of his Pontifical authority is not free from Imperial laws, but subject
unto them: and again, In temporalibus licet appellare a papa, ad Imperatorem,
a man may in temporal matters, appeal from the Pope, to the Emperor; yea he
proves by many reasons, that in temporal matters, and for coactiue
punishment, the Pope is and ought to be subject to the Emperor. One, because
Occam. lib. eod. cap. 4.
Christ himself as he was man, was subject to the jurisdiction of the
Emperor* seeing he professes that Pilate had power to judge him given from
God. An other, because Lib. eod. ca. 3
neither Peter nor any other of the Apostles had coactiue or temporal power
given them from Christ, as out of pope Gregory and Bernard he shows,
therefore neither has the pope who is their successor, any coactiue
jurisdiction ex ordinatione Christ; from Christ, or from his ordinance and
appointment. His books are full of the like.

Philotheus Achillinus Phil. Achill. in Somino V^idarij ca^. 146. and 147.
has writ a very learned Dialogue worthy every man's reading, to this purpose.
The Clerk, or Proctor for the Pope, to prove the Popes temporal Monarchy,
urges a text of Innocentius the third, who out of those words of Christ;
Whatsoever thou shall bind, or loose upon earth, shall be bound or loosed
likewise in heaven, concludes that Peter (and so the pope) has plenitudinem
potestatis, the fullness of power, and therefore has both Ecclesiastical and
Civil. To this the author, in the name of the Soldier answers, That if the
words of Innocentius be taken in the largest sense, (as the Clearke took them)
then they are flatly repugnant to an other text of Innocentius, where he says
Cap. Causam. Extra. Qui fils^ sint legit. sed caput illud a no^nullis tribuitur
Alexand. 3
We do observe that it pertaines to the King and not to the Church, to judge
of such possessions. Seeing then the pope who is the Church, or head of the
Church, may not judge of temporal possessions, then has he not the fullness
of power in respect of temporal matters. Wherefore, says he, the words of
Christ, whatsoever ye bind, etc. are thus to be expounded, that Christ excepted
nothing, de his quae sunt necessaria regimini fidelium, et non praeiudicant
iuribus et libertatibus aliorum, Nothing which was needful for their
spiritual government of the faithful, and which did not preiudicate the
rights and lawful liberties of other men. But if they used their power of
binding or loosing in any thing which was not necessary for the spiritual
government, or which took away the rights of others (of which kind he
reckons the deposing of Kings, the loosing subjects from their oaths of
fidelity, of taking a temporal Monarchy over al, to be:) in such needless
and injurious binding and loosing, wherein they abuse their power, Christus non
promisit potestatem Petro, Christ did not in such matters promise to bind or
loose, what the Pope did either bind or loose. Again, Lib. eodem cap. 163.
The Emperor and King has not his power from man, sed a Deo solo, but from
God only; as he at large and truly proves; and which is above all the rest to
be remembered for our purpose, The oath, says he, Ibidem.
which Emperors make to the Pope is not an oath of homage, as if they held
their Empire in fee of the Pope, but of defending the Church: even as other
Kings in their Kingdoms swear, that they will faithfully defend the Church,
and yet they do not for this cause hold their kingdoms in fee of the Church.
Nam Imperator non tenetur iurare summo pontifici tanquam vassallus, sed e
contra Papa, si vult retinere temporalia, quae sibi Imperatores dederunt,
tenetur iurare tanquam vassallus Imperatori: for the Emperor is not bound to
swear to the Pope as a vassal of the Pope, but quite contrary, the Pope if he
will hold those temporalities which Emperors have given unto him, is bound to
swear to the Emperor as one of the Emperors vassals. His whole book abounds
with the like Embleames to prove the Papal Monarchy.

Marsilius Patauinus, Mars. Patau. Defens. pacis. part. 2. cap. 4. sect. verum.
It is certain that Christ being God, could have given to the Apostles secular
and coactiue authority over all Princes in the world; but he neither gave it,
nor did decree to give it: Christ Ibid. sect. Prosequentes.
both by his words, and by his example taught all both Bishops, and others,
that they ought to be subject to the coactiue judgment of secular Princes.
This Ibid. Nec ase.
coactiue power he denied to his Apostles, as well toward others, as among
themselves: Unto no Bishops Lib. eod. ca. 5 sect. Amplius.
coactiue secular power is granted lege Diuina, by divine law, neither can any
Bishop, no not the Pope, have coactiue secular power or jurisdiction over any
Priests or other, unless the same be granted unto him, per humanum
legislatorem, by the secular Prince or maker of temporal laws. In whose power
it is always, to recall the same jurisdiction, upon reasonable cause, cuius
plena determinatio, and the full determining whether the cause be reasonable or
no, is known to belong to the same secular Lawgiver or Prince.

Michael Cesenas Mic. Cesen.
besides other things which he delivered against the pride and tyranny of the
Pope, as that the Pope Sic eum docuisse testatur Illir. in Catal. test. lib. 18.
was Antichrist, and the Roman Church the whore of Babylon, taught, Hac ex
Antonino. ^ 4. part. Sum. citantur. ibidem.
that the Pope non habet corrigere and punire, instituere vel destituere
Imperatorem, has no power to correct and punish, to make, or unmake the
Emperor; and that neither the Pope nor other Ecclesiastical persons could
punish any, punitione coactiua, by civil, temporal, or coactiue punishment,
unless they had power to do so from the Emperor.

Johan. de Ganduno. Ioh. de Ganduno. in Informat. de nullitate process. Ioh.
22. contr. Ludouic. Bau. Imp.
The Pope though never so Catholic and lawful, non habet potestatem, nec
authoritatem, aut iurisdictionem in temporalibus, has no power nor authority,
nor jurisdiction in temporal matters, specially not above the Empire, quod est
immediate a Deo, which is immediately from God.

A great number of learned men Pauperes de Lugdun. apud Christ. Massau^. li.
18. in princ.
in France (whom they contemptuously called Pauperes de Lugduno) taught, that
the Emperor is not subject to the Pope, but only in spiritual matters, and
neminem posse saluari qui aliter credit, and that none who believes otherwise
can be saved. Can any marvel if the Pope Ioh. 22. bulla qua damnauit Mars.
and Ioh. de Gand. extat apud Zouium an. 1327. nu. 7. Bulla alia qua idem Ioh.
22. condemnauit Occam. et Mich. Cesen. extat apud eundem an. 1328. nu. 7.
condemned Occam, Marsilius, Cesenas, the Lugdunenses, and such like for
Heretics? but that which was in them counted Heresy, in Austen, Jerome,
Gregory, and Agatho, was the true Catholic faith.

John Wickleif, Ioh. Wickl. apud Th. Waldens. doct. fidei tom. 1. lib. 4. art.
3. cap. 36.
that worthy servant of God, the Hammer of the Pope and his pride, besides many
other things which he reproved and condemned in the Roman Antichrist, this
was one, that whereas Christ took not upon him secular Dominion, his vicars
non debent supra Christum extolli in Dominio saeculari, ought not to exalt
themselves in secular Dominion above Christ: Which seeing they did, Wickleif
thence among other reasons concluded, that the Roman Vt liquet ex Artic.
Wicklief condemn. in C^n^^l. Constable. Sess. d. art. Wic. 37.
Church was Synagoga Satanae, the very Synagogue of Satan.

Nilus Thessalonicensis Nilus These. lib. 2. sect. Affirmant.
having recited the twentieth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, By this,
says he, we learn that to the Pope is given Primacie before other Churches,
non ab Apostolis sed a patribus, not by the Apostles, but by the Fathers, and
for that the City of Rome was the Imperial City. From S. Peter he receives
no more then other Bishops do. And whereas Lib. eod. sect. Quod vero.
it is said, the Pope judges all, but is judged of none, this is false, says
he, and contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles; contrary also to the
determination of Councels, for Pope Honorius was judged and anathematized by
the sixth Council. The Pope is subject to all laws, which other Bishops are
bound to obey. How can the Pope be exempt from judgment instar tyranni, as if
he were a King? Seeing Nilus both exempts Kings, and subjects the Pope to
humane judgment, professing the Popes power which he has from Peter, to be no
greater then other Bishops have, he clearly reiects and condemns the
Spiritual, and a fortiori, the Popes temporal Monarchy, as repugnant both to
Divine and Humane laws.

Barlaam Barlaam. de papa princ. ca. ^
follows Nilus in every step, teaching, all the other Apostles to have had
parem eundemque honorem, equal and the very same power which Peter had: and
that the Pope Ibid. cap. 4.
or Roman See had primacie among other Bishops, neither from Christ, nor from
Saint Peter, sed multis postea faeculis, but many ages after the Apostles, by
the gift and benefit of the holy Fathers, and Emperors, as out of the 28.
Canon of the Council at Chalcedon he declares. Again, If, says he, Ibid.
cap. 3.
the Pope be the chief among Bishops, because Peter to whom he succeedes, died
at Rome, and so left that See to the pope, then much more ought the Bishops of
Jerusalem to be accounted the chief among all Bishops, because Christ died at
Jerusalem, and to Christ the Great Bishop over all, succeeds the Bishop of
Jerusalem, even as the pope does to Peter. Seeing Barlaam reiects the
Spiritual, much more he does condemn the temporal Supremacy and Monarchy
in the Pope.

Nicephorus Callistus Niceph. Callistus. lib. 16. cap. 43
professedly, and with much indignation refutes that slander of Zosimus, that
the Roman Empire was decayed and perished since Christianity was embraced. O,
says he, if thou were not blinded with superstition, thou mighst see that the
Christian faith has brought much and great increase to the Empire. Sure
Zosimus calumny must needs be justified, and the Roman Empire not only
impaired, but quite extinct, if the Pope be admitted as a superior temporal
Monarch above the Emperor.

Matheus Westmonasteriensis, Math. Wemonast. lib. 2. in Guil. Conq.
speaking of Pope Hildebrand says, Just omnes Hildebrandum fuisse depositum
conclamant tanquam laesae Maiestatis reum, all did proclaim Hildebrand to be
justly deposed, as being guilty of high treason, seeing he set up another
against the Emperor Henry.

Franc. Petrarcha Petrarcha, Epigram. in Romam. Delli Sonett. part. 1. Son. 108.
calls Rome Babylon a shameless strumpet, and says also further, Idem li.
epist. sine titulo ep. 7.
Quicquid de Assiria, whatsoever we read of the tyranny of the Assyrians,
Babylonians, and Egypt, what of Auernus, of the Tartarian, and sulphurean
fennes, is but a fable and toy, if it be compared to this Tartarus of Rome.
Here is that terrible Nimrod, here is Semiramis, here is the inexorable Minos
and Radamanthus, here is Cerberus vniuersa consumens, the three headed helhound
devouring all: I have escaped out of that wicked Babylon, where all
shamefastness is banished, where nothing that is good is to be found, which is
the Inn of miseries and mother of errors, and he esteemed the Papal throne
to be so abominable, hat he was used to say, Idem. vt citatur in Catalog.
testium verit. lib. 18.
Nullum maius malum cuiquam optari posse, quam vt fiat Papa, that one could not
wish a greater mischief to any, then that he might be made a Pope.

Dantes Aligerius Dant. Alig. lib. 3. de Monarch.. Conclusit.
a learned Philosopher, and Divine, has writ an whole book to prove, that
the temporal kingdom immediate a Deo dependet, and non ab aliquo Dei vicario:
Depends immediately of God, and not on the Pope or any vicar of Christ as being
derived from him; and of the Canonists who hold the contrary, he says, that
they Theologiae ac Philosophiae inscii and expertes, being ignorant of
divinity and all philosophy, do detract from the imperial right. He fully
refutes their objections or cauils, who teach the contrary, and for a
certainty resolves thus, and most rightly, The temporal kingdom non recipit
esse, nec virtutem (quae est eius authoritas) nec operationem a spiritu^li,
neither receives his being, nor his virtue (that is, his authority) nor his
operation from the spiritual power; but this it receives from it, vt
virtuosius operetur per lumen gratiae, that it work more Christianly, being
illuminated with grace, and directed by spiritual guides.

Bartholus, Bartholus ff. leg. Hosts. it is. de Captiuis.
If any should say the Emperor is not the Lord and Monarch of the world, esset
Haereticus, he should be an Heretic, because he affirms that which is against
the determination of the Church, and the text of the holy Gospel. But he was
unconstant in this truth, for elsewhere, (belike when he was in the Popes
territories) he taught the contrary, and is for that cause reproved by
Couarruuias Couar. par. ^. Relect. sect. 9. nu. 6. page 505.
.

Baldus Baldus in Pro^m. sup. ff. ^etus. n^. 8. 9.
, It is a Maxim among Lawyers, quod Imperator Romanorum in temporalibus
superiorem non habet, that in Temporal matters, the Emperor has none above
him.

Cynus Cynus in L. Been a Zenone. Cod. de Quadrien. praescrip.
, As the Pope, so the Emperor has none above him, nam a Deo solo suum
recognoscit imperium, for he holds his Empire from none but from God.

Albericus de Rosate Alberic. de Rosat. in L. Been ^ Zenone. Cod. de Quad.
praesc. nu. 4. fol. 109. et 110.
. Hence it appears that the Papal and Imperial powers are altogether
distinct, and neutram ab alia pendere, and that neither of them depends on the
other, but there is one immediate spring of them both, and that is God. Again,
Idem Cod in lege^ Gloriosissimo de summa T^init. nu. 6.
Whatsoever they say, I believe these powers are distinct, so that the one is
chief in Temporal, to wit, the Emperor, the other, to wit, the Pope is chief
in spiritual matters.

Johan. de Rupescissa Ioh^nn. de Rup. citatur in Catal. test. ^er. bib. 18.
was famous for Prophesies and predictions in this age. He taught, the Roman
Church to be the whore of Babylon, and the Pope the Minister of Antichrist,
and the Cardinals to be his false Prophets. He prophesied Chron. maegnu^
Belgic. an. 1356
many things of Antichrist and the future Popes; and multa de suis prophetiis
visa sunt euenisse, many of his prophesies seemed to be accomplished. Pope
Innocent the sixth, was so ill pleased with his prophesies, that he imprisoned
Frossard. lib. 2 Chronicles. prope finem* cuius verba citantur in Catal. test. loc.
cit.
him at Auinion: and no marvel; for one of them which is mentioned in
Frossard, Ibidem
who saw him in prison, touches the Pope and his pomp very near. It was set
forth by a parable of the Bird, which being borne without feathers, all the
other birds decked her with their plumes, till the bird being grown gay and
gallant, not only contemned all the other birds in respect of her self, but
would needs be master, and tyrannize over them all. The Birds not well brooking
that pride, each of them plucked away their own feathers, and left her naked.
Even so, said Johannes, shall it fall out with the Roman Church, Pope, and
Cardinals; The Roman and Germane Emperors, and other Christian Kings and
Princes decked the Church with many gifts, ornaments, lands, and possessions.
Siluester is not read to have gone in state, guarded with 200. or 300. Knights,
but he lived soberly as other Bishops did. Constantine, and other Princes,
decked the Church so long, that the Pope grew insolent, and tyrannical, and
would be Lord of all: wherefore God is angry, and will yet be more incensed
against those who follow; so that Kings and Nobles, who have liberally given
lands, revenues and goods to the Church will not only wax cold in giving,
sed etiam prius donata auferant, but will vnplume the Romish Iay, and by taking
away their own feathers leave the whore naked and desolate, as S. John in his
Divine Revelation does for a certainty foretell. Was it not time for the pope
to imprison such a Prophet, propter haeresin Zouius cont. An. Bar. an. 1357.
nu. 4.
, for speaking such heresies against the Roman See? And yet why should they be
so stomachfull against this Ioha^nes? Did not Hildegardis some 200. years
before prophecy the like? whose Epistle or prophecy is set down by Albertus
Stadensis Hildegardis prophetia extat integra apud Alb. Stad. post. an. 1149.
p. 169 ad 178.
one living near that age; The Roman Empire Hild. ibid. pa. 174.
this of the West) shall decay, and those Princes who adhered unto it, shall
separate themselves from it, and be no longer subject to it; The imperial
Scepter decaying thus without hope of repairing, infula Apostolici honoris, the
miter of the Apostolic honor shall also perish: for because neither Princes,
nor other men, shall find vllam religionem, any religion in the Apostolic
order (that is, in Popes) dignitatem nominis illius imminuent, they shall take
away the honor of the Pope, that is, as John said, vnplume him: and the pope
at that time by the diminishing of his honor and pristine dignity, vix sub
sua infula obtinebit Romam, shall scarce have Rome and a few adjacent places
under his miter. Thus Hildegardis, and Albert. Stadensis not only much commend
her, and her prophesies, saying, Alb. Stad. pa. 169.
that she writ them Deo iubente, imo cogente, God commanding, yea enforcing
her so to do; but that Pope Eugenius the third, also scripta eius canonizauit,
has canonized her writings, and that in the Council at Treires. Why should
Hildegardis, prophesying that the Popes pomp and pompous Monarchical State
shall be ruinated, and that justly, because there is no true religion at all
found in them, be canonized for a Saint, if for the very like prophecy, Ioh.
de Rupescissa be condemned for an heretic?

Saint Brigit Brigit. lib. 1 Reuelat. ca. 41.
who lived and prophesied in the same 15. age, and within few years of John de
Rupescissa, in her book of Revelations sets down an heavier prophecy against
the Pope then he did. She makes the Creator of all things to speak thus to
the Pope and his adherents: Nunc conqueror superte, Now I complain against
thee, which art the head of my Church. Thou which should loose souls from
sin art a killer of them. I appointed Peter to be a feeder of my sheep, but
thou art a scatterer and destroyer of them: because thou art like to Lucifer,
more unjust then Pilate, more cruel then Judas, more abominable then the
Jews, therefore I do justly complain of thee. Having declared their sins,
then she foretells the judgment. The Lord thus answered: I swear by God the
Father, whose voice John Baptist heard in Iordane; I swear by that body, which
John baptized in Jordan; I swear by that Spirit, which appeared in the shape
of a Dove at Iordane; that I will execute justice upon these. Of the Head (that
is the Pope) God said, Seeds tua demergetur, thy seat shall be drowned as a
heavy stone which can not stay till it come at the lowest bottom; For thy
fingers, that is, thy assessors, they shall burn with sulphurous fire, which
can not be quenched. Thy arms, that is, thy Vicars, shall be adjudged to
that punishment which David speaks of, Psalm. 109. Let his children be Orphans,
etc. My simple people which are under them, shall be separated from them, and
they shall inherit everlasting confusion. Et sicut per honorem and superbiam
super alios ascenderunt, and as they have in dignity and pride ascended above
others, so shall they descend and be drowned in the lowest pit of hell. Thy
members (that is, all thy followers and favorers) shall be cut off, neither
shall there any mercy come upon them, but they with their heads, being severed
from all good, shall be tormented. Thus Brigit, one of their Prophets, and
canonized Saints, who has writ seven great books of such like Revelations;
for the credit and authority whereof, this is prefixed in the beginning, after
the proheme: Blessed be God, a quo hic liber inspiratus est immediate, and
diuinitus reuelatus, by whom this book is immediately inspired and revealed
from heaven. Has not the Pope now good cause to triumph in his Sovereignty
and Monarchical Highness?

CHAP. X.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by Bishops and Writers, who
lived from the year 1400. unto the year 1500.
IN the fifteenth age the Council of Pisa Council Pisanu^ apud Bin. tom. 3. pa.
1553.
, held Anno 1409. Ab An. 1400: ad 1500.
deposed not only Benedict the 12. who was a pseudo-Pope, and intruder, but
Gregory the 12. also, who was the true Qui verus and legitimus pontifex erat.
Bin. Not. in Council. Constant.. Concilium.
and lawful Pope, for an heretic and schismaticke. They knew not belike the
Pope to be the supreme Judge and Monarch, who neither is nor ought to be
subject to any humane judgment. And that the whole Church held their judgment
herein to be lawful, does clearly appear, for otherwise Bell. lib. 1. de.
Conc. ca 8.
Alexander the fifth could not have been esteemed, as he was of all, the true
and lawful Pope, nor could the next Alexander have called himself the sixth,
but the fifth* unless Alexander the fifth, who succeeded Gregory the 12. then
deposed, had been held for a lawful Pope, and no intruder.

The Council at Constance Council. Constant. apud Bin. tom. 3. pa. 1556.
, held An. 1414. did the like, it deposed not only two pseudo-Popes, but John
23. also, the true Communis ferme opinio fuit Alexandru^ and Iohannem fuisse
veros pontifices. Bell. loc. cit.
Pope, who for his most enormous vices (he being usually called Conc. Constant.
sess. 11, art. 5.
a Devil incarnate) merited that most just sentence. The same Council further
decreed Conc. Constant. sess. 4.
, that the Pope might and ought to be censured, punished and deposed, either in
case of heresy or of scandalous life, in both which cases, obedire tenetur, he
is bound, and ought to obey the sentence of the Council. Further yet, this
Council having excommunicated John Hus, says Ibid. Sess. 15 pa. 1600.
, They must leave him to the secular power, seeing Ecclesia Dei non habet quod
vltra gerere valeat, the Church has no more nor higher punishment then
excommunication, that it can inflict. Certainly that Council, and the Church in
that age, thought not the Pope a temporal Monarch, nor a supreme Judge, no
not in Ecclesiastical, much less in secular causes, when they decreed, that he
is and ought to be subject, both to the sentence, censure, and punishment of
an higher Judge. And it is idly said Bell. lib 1. de Conc. ca. 7.. Quintum.
, That this Council in this decree is not approved* for if the Council did
not rightly in deposing those Popes, then was not Martin the fifth true or
lawful Pope at all: and so the Decrees made therein against Wickliffe, Hus,
and the Bohemians, are of no force at all, as wanting the consent of a true
Pope to confirm them. If Martine was true Pope, (as with one consent they
profess,) then may the true Pope be either for heresy in doctrine, or
criminal offenses in life, censured, punished and deposed by a Superior
Judge. Much more idle is that which is further said Bell. loc. cit.
, that the former sessions of this Council wherein this is decreed, are
reprobated, because the Council of Florence has decreed contrary to this at
Constance, that a Council is not above the Pope; for by the very like reason,
it may as justly be said, that the Council at Florence, and the Decree made
therein, is reprobated by the other at Constance, which decreed contrary to
that at Florence, That a Council is above the Pope. The erroneous decree at
Florence, neither has nor can have so much force nor authority, to reprobate
or adnull the decree of Constance, as the true decree at Constance has, and
ought to have, to reprobate and adnull the decree at Florence: the consenting
judgment of the Church in all former ages, gives strength and authority to
the decree at Constance, none but the late vpstart Hildebrandicall faction,
does countenance or maintain the Decree at Florence.

The Council at Basil Council. Ba^^^ense sess. 33. pa. 79. and sess. 38. pa. 83.
begun An. 1431. decrees the very same with the former at Constance, yea they
decree that to be a doctrine of the Catholic Faith, such, as whosoever does
pertinaciously gainesay, is an heretic. So by the judgment of this whole
Council, all the Bishops in their Florentine Synod, who denied, and that
pertinaciously, the Pope to be subject to a general Council, were all
heretics; and their Decree both in it self heretical, and made also by
heretics. They further add Epist. Synod. Conc. Basil. sess. 45. in Decreto
quinque conclusionum. pa. 96.
one point of special consideration, that Nullus vnquam peritorum dubitauit,
None of skill and learning ever doubted, but resolutely held the Pope to be
subject to the judgment of general Councels in those things which belong unto
faith. So the Council declares, the Pope never to have had Spiritual, much
less Temporal Supremacy, as a Monarch over all, and this to be so evident,
known, and certain a truth, that none of learning and judgment ever thought
otherwise. Then by the Councels judgment, all maintainers of the Popes
supremacy, either spiritual or temporal, that is, all the Hildebrandian
faction, are unskillful persons, such as contradict the consenting voice of all
learned men. That this Council of Basil, as also the decree thereof for the
Councels superiority above the Pope, was ratified, approved, and confirmed,
both by Pope Eugenius, and Pope Nicholas the fifth, I have at large in another
Treatise touching the Council of Basil declared. For this time I will only in
a word observe, that whereas they pretend Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 7.
Sextum. and lib. ^. ca. 17.. Denique.
, That this Council at Basil, and this Decree thereof was repealed by their
Laterane Council under Leo 10: It is true that Leo did what in him and that
Synod lay to repeal it; But neither Decreta de fide^mmutabil^^ sunt, nec
pos^unt v^lo modo abrogari. Bell lib. 2. cit. ca. 17.. Denique.
are Decrees of faith, (such is Est veritas fidei Catholicae. Conc. Bas. ^ss.
33.
this) repealeable, they are all immutable and irreu^cable: neither was the
authority of Leo, of more force to repeal the decree confirmed by Eugenius,
the^ the decree of Eugenius, was to repeal and adnull the decree of Leo. Nay
that decree of Basil, fortified by the uniform consent of the Catholic
Church, and of all learned men, is able to annihilate the partial, nouitious,
Laterane decree of Leo, supported by none, but such as are illiterate or
unskillful men, by the judgment of the Council at Basil. Lastly, it is not
unknown, what the University of Paris writ of that Laterane Synod of Leo;
they account it no other but an heretical conuenticle. Leo the tenth say they
Appellatio Universe. Paris.. Sed Romani
, in quodam caetu nescimus qualiter, non tamen in spiritu Domini congregato, in
a certain assembly (they thought it unworthy the name of a Synod or Council)
gathered we know not how, but sure not in the name of Christ, censu^t contra
fidem Catholicam, decreed that which is contrary to the Catholic faith. Can an
heretical Conuenticle repeal or adnull the Decree of Basil, to which the
whole Catholic Church consents?

The Council at Bytures Council. Bituricense, apud Gaguin. lib. 10 in Carolo.
7. pa. 226.
, held An. 1438. by Charles the seventh, the French King, made a Pragmaticall
sanction, and therein confirmed the Decrees of the Council at Basil in this
manner. Perpetua esto, let the authority of the Council at Basil, and the
stability of the Decrees made there, be perpetual, and let no man, no not the
Pope himself presume at any time to take away or infringe the same.

Aeneas Siluius Aeneas Syluius lib de ortu and Author. Imperi^ ca. 23
, who was after Pope, says, Imperatorem super omnes mundi homines in
temporalibus Deus constituit, God has set the Emperor above all men in the
world (then sure above the Pope) for temporal matters: And again Lib. eodem.
ca. 16.
, There is none who may judge the faults of a King if he do amiss.
Tolerandumest patienter, It must with patience be endured, till either his
heavenly Judge, or his earthly successor do amend the same.

Petrus de Alliaco Card. of Cameracum Card Cameracens. de resumpt. Concl. 1.
, Although both Christ and his Vicar, as he is the head of the Church, has a
Spiritual Monarchy, non tamen Regiam temporalem, yet he has not a temporal
and Kingly Monarchy. Again Idem Pet. de Aliac. lib. de Eccles. authoritate in
Prooemio.
the error of the Waldenses was, that temporal dominion, is repugnant to the
Pope and Eclesiastical function. The error of the Herodians was that Christ
was a terrene King, whence the error of those in our times is derived, who
presume to teach that the Pope, as he is Christ's Vicar, has immediately
authority, dominion, and iurisaiction in Temporal matters, and over secular
Princes. The Catholic Church holds the mean betwixt these two contrary
errors, and teaches, that to the Pope as Christ's Vicar, temporal dominion is
not due; against the second error: and that the Pope may have temporal
dominion by the concession of secular Princes, or deriuation from them; against
the first error.

Cardinal Cusanus Card Cusa. nus lib. 3. de Conc. Cathol. ca. 3.
, speaking of Charles the great declares, what dignity by being Patricius
belonged unto him; The Patricius says he, being pater patriae, habebat curam
iudicij temporalis, and praefuit in temporalibus, had the care of temporal
judgment, and was the chief in temporal matters, the Pope not intermedling
in them; yea Patricius by the ancient gloss in Ca. Hadrianus did. 63. (that
gloss is now, for some good reason you may be sure, wiped away and expunged)
was Pater Papae in temporalibus, the father to the Pope in temporal, as the
Pope is his father in spiritual matters. Again Idem lib. eod. ca. 41.
the Pope has the highest ministerial care, sed non dominationis Imperiu^,
but he has not Imperial domination; the Pontifical and Imperial powers are
both of them from God, either distinct from the other, neither depending on the
other, and this was antiquorum omnium vera opinio, the true opinion of all the
ancient Fathers and writers, although now it be grown doubtful by reason of
the sinister desire which many have to speak pleasing things. Card.
Turrecremata Card. Turrecr. in Psalm. 50.
says of King David, Against thee only O God have I sinned, as against a
Judge, and one who have power to punish me. Quia tu solus es superior me,
because thou only art above me. Again Idem in did. 96. art. 1.
, if the Pope were the Lord of al things, nihil sibi posset dari, there could
nothing at all be given unto him, and so the Donations made by Emperors
should be false. Now of Constantines Donation he there adds, Donationem hanc
vere potuit facere, Constantine might truly make this Donation. Card. Albanus
Card. Albanus lib. de donat. Constantini nu. 5.
, The Popes have long time possessed those lands which Constantine gave, and
they have produced, nullum alium suae possession is titulum, no other title at
all, but only his Donation for their right. Then did they not, nor could they
find any title to an universal temporal Monarchy from Christ: for certainly in
so many hundredth years, they would have produced it. Card. Zabarell Card.
Zabarella lib de Schis.. quis.
, The Emperor is the Advocate, and defender of the Church, and it so much
belonges to him to defend it, that if the Pope Ibid.. quarto.
be suspected of heresy, potest ab eo exigere, he may exact of the Pope a
declaration of his faith. The same Card. not only holds and proves Lib. eod..
quintus.
, a Council to be above the Pope: but that the Pope may be an heriticke, and
may for Herisie be deposed, yea and for any other notorius fault, whereby he
scandalizeth the Church, if he be incorrigible, for such an one is esteemed an
heriticke.

Laurentius Valla Laur. Valla. lib. de Donat. Constantini. in princ.
, who was both the Prince of Grammarians in his age, (that was 1420.) and
Theologus praestantissimus as Tritemius Tritem. lib. de script Eccles. in Laur.
Valla.
calls him, a most excellent Divine, not only refutes, but derides that
temporal Monarchy which Popes then claimed in the West. Rome, say they, is
theirs, Sicile and Naples theirs, all Italy theirs, Spain Germany, Brittany,
all the West theirs; What, says he to the Pope, will you rob all western
Kings and Princes of their Crowns and kingdoms, and cause them to pay tribute
unto you? I rather think on the contrary, iustius licere principil us spoliare
te imperio omni quod obtines, that it is more just, that they should deprive
you of all the Dominions you have. Again Ibid. non long a fine.
let every Roman Emperor know, that (as I judge) he is truly neither Caesar
nor Emperor, unless he retain the Roman Empire; and that he is perjured,
unless he endeavor to recover Rome from the Pope, for Emperors in former
times were not forced to take such an oath, as now they do, but they did
swear that so far as in them lay, they would not impair the Empire, but
would labor to uphold, yea increase the same: This, and much more, elegantly
to this purpose, does Valla set down.

John Hus Johan. Hus. in Determinat. in Acad. Prag. an. 1410. de ablat Tempor.
a c^er. nu. 27.
, Reges and Principes sunt capitales domini bonorum temporalium, Kings and
Princes, are highest and chief Lords of temporal goods, yea, he was so
resolute against the Ecclesiastical (much more against the temporal) Monarchy
of the Pope, that he said Art. 27. Ioh. Hus recitatus in Conc-Const Sess. 15.
, Non est scnitilla apparentiae, there is not one spark of liklihood, that
there ought to be one head in Spiritual matters to govern the Church: further
he calls Art. 28 Ioh. Hus.
such universal and supreme Bishops, capita monstrosa, monstrous heads in the
Church; adding Art. q. eiusdem.
, that the Popes dignity and preeminence above other Bishops a Caesar is
potentia emanauit, proceeded from Emperors and from their appointment.

Gerson Ioh. Gerson. lib. de. Potest. Eccles. Consid. 12.
that famous Chancellor of Paris, The Papal power has not the dominion and
rights both of the heavenly, and earthly Empire, so that he may at his
pleasure dispose of the goods of the Clergy, and much less of lay men: but he
has a dominion in those goods, which is directive, regulatiue, and ordinatiue,
not coactiue. And declaring this, he sets down two contrary errors; the one
of Detraction, Which would deprive the Pope and Clergy of all dominion, and of
all temporal jurisdiction, though it be conferred by Princes. The other of
flattery, which says to the Popes (as he protests some to have written, and
some Popes have believed) O how great is the sublimitie of your power! how
incomparable to it, is secular authority! As to Christ is given all power in
heaven and in earth, so did Christ leave eam omnem all that power to Peter and
his successors; and as there is no power but of God, so is there neither any
Temporal, nor Ecclesiastical power, but from the Pope, in whose thigh Christ
has written, King of kings, and Lord of Lords, and of whose power it is
sacrilege to dispute. These does Gerson condemn, as stult as, falls as, and
insanas adulationes, as being foolish, false and frantic flatteries; And this
is the very sum of their doctrine, of the Popes temporal Monarchy. And then
rejecting both these errors, he says, Discretion does hold the mean between
them both, so that Clergy men are such, as may both have possessions of
temporal goods against detractours, and yet have only a directive and
regulatiue power in them, against flatterers.

Johan. Mayor Johan. Mayor in distinc. ^4. q. 3. Concl. ^.
sets this down for a conclusion, The Pope has not temporal dominion above
Kings, and he proves it by sundry reasons; first, if he had, then should Kings
be the Popes vassals, and he might at his pleasure thrust them from their
kingdoms; but this may not be granted. Secondly, the Popes themselves profess
non spectare ad se iurisdictonem temporalem, that temporal jurisdiction does
not belong unto them. Again, Kings receive not their power immediately from
the Pope, nec influentiam ab co vllam in temporalibus suscipiunt, neither do
they receive any influence at all from him in temporal matters. For the
temporal power does not depend on the Spiritual, but they are both distinct
powers, neither of them subordinate to the other, nor depending of the other,
for the King is not the Popes vassal. Again, the Pope has two swords
indeed, but the one, to wit the Spiritual he has in act, when he
excommunicates, or interdicts; the other, to wit the Secular, he has in habit,
id est potest rogare Princepes terrenos quatenus sint sibi subsidio, he may
desire secular Princes to help him with that sword. Again, Though Petrus
Paludamus, and Turrecremata hold the contrary, yet that which they hold,
facultas nostra censuit in fide haeresin, our faculty has censured it to be
an herisie against the faith.

Iacobus Almane Jacob. Almaine. lib. de potest. Eccles. and Laica.
has writ a whole Book touching the Ecclesiastical and Laicall power. He
having declared the Ibid quaest. 1 ca 6.. Quae. ritur.
the difference betwixt having Dominion or propriety in goods, and having
Jurisdiction in those temporal goods, adds two conclusions fit for our
purpose. The former Ibid.. Istis.
, that the Pope has not by Christ's institution, supremam potestatem Dominij in
singulis hominibus, and bonis ipsorum, not supreme dominion, either over all
persons, or over their goods, and to say the contrary, is as he out of Occam
teaches, multum Haereticale and perniciosum, very heriticall and pernicious.
His other conclusion is this Ibid.. Secunda.
, The Pope has not by Christ's institution, supremam potestatem Iurisdictionis
in rebus temporalibus, not the supreme power of Jurisdiction in temporal
matters, and that he proves out of St. Augustine. Idem. lib. eod. quaest. 3.
ca. 8.
And after, enquiring whence the secular power of Princes does depend, The
resolution says he y, of this question is thus. Potestas iurisdictionis
principium saecularum non dependet a Papa, The power of jurisdiction which
secular Princes have, neither dependes on the Pope, nor on the Roman Church:
Nay the Pope has no laicall Jurisdiction, nisi ex collatione Imperatorum and
principum, but by deputation or grant from Emperors and Princes, or by
prescription, (in which is a tacit grant, or consent of Princes.) His book is
full of the like assertions.

Nichol. de Clemangis Nich. de Clemang lib. de corrup. stat. eccle. ca. 5.
complains, That the Popes libidine dominandi, in their lust and desire of
dominering, exalted themselves above Emperors, Kings, and Princes, of all
Nations: that the Popes Dominion Lib. eod. ca. 13.
, nay their tyranny is omnibus nec iniuria supra modum inuisa, detested of all,
and that deservedly; To say nothing of that his Treatise Nic. de Clem. de
egressu ex Babylone.
, wherein he proves, that we must depart out of Babylon (that they know
Ribera. comm. in ca. 14. Apocal. nu. 44.
and profess to be Rome) not only in affection and heart, but corporally also.

Theodorick de Niem. Theod. de Nicon. lib. 3. de Schis. ca. 7.
Episc. Verdensis, The Imperial power, as also the Ecclesiastical depend
immediately of God; and therefore fatue and adulatorie loquuntur, qui dicunt
quod Papa habet duos gladios, they speak foolishly, and flatteringly, who say
that the Pope and Church has two swords, spiritual and temporal. These
parasites and flatterers have bronght a very great error into the Church, which
raises perpetual discord betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.

Thomas Waldensis Thom. Waldenf. Doctr. ^d. to. 1. lib. 2. Art. 3. ca. 78.
in a whole Chapter both by reasons and by authority of fathers proves, that
Regal power is immedtatly from God. In praesumptione delinquunt, they offend
presumptuously, says he, who affirm that the root of secular power depends
on the Pope, and that the execution of it is derived from the Popes grant unto
Princes. The temporal power of Kings is reduced to none above the King, but
only to Christ; the priest and the King have under Christ impermixt as
potestates, powers which are not conjoined in any one. By this it is evident
quod a sacerdote non habet Rex originem, that kingly authority is not derived
from the Pope. Regal power is given to the King by Christ. There are duae
primae potestates, two powers (pontificiall and regal) both which, are first
in their own order, and neutra ab altera secundum originem, and neither of
both takes his beginning from the other, but either of them in the exercise of
his own power is greater then the other: And very often the like.

Will. Wideford Will Wideford lib. aduer. Wiclef. art. 16.
writing against Wickliffe, brings in John and Paul, speaking thus to Julian
the Emperor, We do you no wrong, nor do set any man above you in Dominion,
but we set God above you who created heaven and earth.

Dionisius Carthusianus Dionis. Carth. in 4. Psalm. poenitent.
speaking of David, says, seeing he was a King, non habuit iudicem superiorem
in terra, he had no superior Judge upon earth that could punish him.

Platina Platina. in Bonif. 8.
liked not well of that Papal Monarnarchy, when reproving Boniface the eight,
usurping that authority, he says, he did rather terrify Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Nations, then put religion into them, quique dare Regna and
auferre. who sought at his pleasure to give and take away Kingdoms; And
inueying against the vices of his time, specially in the Popes, he says Idem.
in vita Marcellini.
, What shall become of our age wherein vices are grown to that height, vt vix
apud deum misericordiae locum nobis reliquerint, that they have scarce left any
place for God to be merciful: and among other sins he reckons the
Covetousness, ambition, pomp, and pride of their Clergy, especially little
qui rerum potiuntur, that is of the Popes: adding, that there was little regard
of Religion, that it was rather fained then true, and their manners so corrupt
and detestable, as if inde laudem quaererent, they sought for praise by the
vileness of their sins.

Wernerus Wernerus in fascic. temp. an. 1294.
says of Boniface the eight, He did vltra modum beyond measure, advance
himself to that arrogancy, vt Dominum totius mundi se diceret tam in
temporalibus quam inspiritualibus, that he called himself the Lord of the
world, as well in temporal as in spiritual matters; This is he of whom it is
said, He entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog.

Johannes Auentinus John. Auen. lib. 5. Annal. pa. 470.
speaking of Pope Hildebrand, says, falsi tum Prophetae, false Prophets, false
Apostles, false Priests did then arise, who deceived the people with a
counterfeit Religion, and who began to exalt themselves in the Temple of God,
above all that is honored, and whiles they endeavor to establish their own
power and Dominion, they quench Christian charity and simplicity. Sigebert, a
Writer of those times, omnis diuini humanique iuris consultissimus: a man most
skillful both in divine and humane Laws, writes thus, (and Auentinus approues
his writing therein.) A most pernicious sedition, and let me say it with the
leave of the godly, a most pestilent heresy, then assailed the Christian
people; They are bold to teach not only that men ought not to obey such
Governors as are placed by God over them, verum etiam fraud, vi, quouis modo
tollendos, but that such are to be murdered or taken away either by fraud or
violence, or by any means: Periuries, murders, civil wars, perfidiousnesse,
these they call piety. They absolve from obedience, those who are tied to the
Emperor by the sacred band and oath of religion, those who are faith-breakers,
truce breakers, violators of oaths, they persuade such not to be perjured.
Again Idem. lib. eod. pa. 447.
, The holy Fathers did what Christ taught, what the Apostles both taught and
performed, they honored Emperors, vt in terris a Deo secundos, and ante omnes
mortales primos, as the next unto God here upon earth, and as the cheifest
among all mortal men, calling them their Lords; they denied not tribute unto
them. But Hildebrand boasts, that both the Pontifical and Imperial
authority is given unto him by GOD, he takes both powers upon him, he
dispiseth Emperors and Kings, vt precario regnantes, as ruling only at his
pleasure and will. Thus and much more Auentinus.

Gagninus Rob. Gagnin. lib. ^. invita Philip. Pulch^i.
, of Boniface 8. writes; Thus dyed Boniface, the despiser of all men, Qui
Christi praeceptoru^ minime recordatus, who not remembering the precepts of
Christ, sought at his pleasure to give and take away Kingdoms, whereas he was
not ignorant, that he was his Vicare, cuius regnum non esset de hoc mundo,
whose kingdom was not terrene, nor of this world.

Petrus Ferrariensis Pet Ferrariens. in forma libell. in Action Confess.
pro^seru. tit, 30. gloss. ^.. Plenam.
, you see that the Pope (who should follow the foote-steps of Christ) does
endeavor to possess and hold by armed hand jurisdiction in lands, Cities,
villages, and places which naturally, and from the beginning of the world, and
by the ordinance of Christ, belong to the Empire, according to that, Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's: Nay the Pope endeavors to have superiority
above the Emperor, Quod ridiculum est dicere, and abominabile audire, which to
say is ridiculous, and to hear is abominable. For naturally, and from the
beginning of the world, not only Laikes, but Clerks, Erant sub potestate and
jurisdiction Imperij, were under the power and jurisdiction of the Empire:
Been ergo et sancte faceret ipse Papa, wherefore the Pope should do well and
religiously, if he did remit the whole Temporal jurisdiction into the hands of
the Emperor: neither without so doing will the Commonweal, and specially
Italy ever be at quiet, and by this means both Pope, Cardinals, and the whole
state of the Clergy, should live more devoutly, and be more grateful and
acceptable both to God and men. Thus Petrus.

George Hiemburge Georg. de Hiemburg. in admonit. de iniust. vsurpat, paparum.
at large refutes this usurped Papal Monarchy, (so he calls it) answering
their vain pretenses for the same, and having to this purpose alleged the
testimony of Christ, of S. Paul, of Hierom, Origin, Chrysostom, Basil, and
Bernard, by this, says he Ibid.. Ex quibus.
, it appears, fabulam and figmentum esse, that it is a mere fable and figment
which is written in the Popes Decretals, that the Pope has the fullness of
power given him by Christ, and such a Dominion that he is above Kings and
Princes in temporal matters. Again Ibid.. Quibus.
, by these now it does appear more clear then light, that Christ gave no
temporal power at all unto Priests, much less did he give the fullness
mundanae and temporalis potestatis, of terrene and secular power: nay it does
clearly appear that this (supreme and independent) power is both by Christ's
words and example, forbidden to the Apostles and their successors.

Antonius Rosellus Ant. Rossell. lib. de Monarch. part. 1. ca. 38.
proves, that the Pope is utterly incapable of Monarchical and Temporal
Sovereignty, whereof having given diverse reasons, from hence, says he, I do
conclude, haereticum and insanum esse, dicere quod vniuersalis administratio
temporalium sit vel esse possit apud pontificem, that to say the Pope either
has or can have the universal jurisdiction and administration of temporal
affairs, is Heretical, and a madness.

CHAP. XI.
That the Popes temporal Monarchy is condemned by Bishops and learned writers
living from the year 1500. unto 1620.
IN the sixteeneth age, Ab An. 1500. ad 1620.
when Julius the second, non tam Chron. Citiz. Paul. Lang. an. 1513.
clauiger quam armiger, one that used Paul's sword more then Peter's keys,
sought partly by force, partly by fraud to take Ferraria from the French, Lewis
the eleventh then King of France, calling certain Cardinals unto him, summoned
a Council Conc. Pisan. de quo. Nich. Basel in contin. Naucl. an. 1511 Generale
Concilium Pisis indixeru^t. Rex generalem conuentum indicendu^ curauit. Onuph.
in vit. Iul. 2.
to Pisa Anno 1511, cited Pope Julius ad causam Onuph. loc. cit.
dicendum, to answer and plead for himself in the Council. A demonstration
they held not him for their supreme Monarch. The Pope Nic. Basel. loc. cit.
exhorted the French King not to take part with the Cardinals, but he, nihil
horum aduertens not regarding a whit the Popes admonitions, continued his
resolution against the Pope; Julius excommunicated him, which caused him to
make war against the Pope, wherein the Pope was forced to flee to Ostia, and
was feign both to sue Papa omne^ operam dedit vt pacem cum Francorum rege
feceret. Onuph loc. cit.
for a reconcilement at the French Kings hand and to appoint a Council at Rome
in the Laterane of purpose Quo Pisanum Conciliabulum tolleret, Romae Concilium
in dixit. Onuph. Ibid.
to divert and avoid the danger of the Council at Pisa.

Anno 1561. was held an assembly at Paris Parisiens Conuentus. Thuan. hist tom.
2. lib. 28. pa. 41 and Bochel. lib. 5. tit. 3. ca. 6.
against John Tanquerell, who held that the Pope was both a spiritual and
temporal Monarch, and that Princes who rebel against the Popes precepts, are
to be deprived of their Kingdoms and Dignities. It was there decreed by the
whole assembly, that Tanquerell should be punished, and because he was absent,
that the Bedle in his name should openly declare that Tanquerell was sorry for
moving that question, which he acknowledged to have been handled both rashly
and inconsideratly; and that for this cause he did most humbly beseech the King
to pardon his offense. And further it was decreed, that no Divines should
handle (much less defend) such questions, and positions as was this of
Tanquerell; of which the King himself said, It tended to sedition, and to
weaken that loyalty of lawful obedience which is due to the King. This Decree
ten days after was put in execution, where before some fifty Divines, Petrus
Gustus in the name of Tanquerell retracted, errorem a Bonifacio 8. inuectum et
post eius mortem passim damnatum, that error brought in by Boniface the eight,
and every where after his death condemned.

Another assembly Paris. Convent. apud Bochel lib. 5. tit. 4 ca 8 pa. 134 and
755.
of the French State, was held at Paris, anno 1595. against one Florentinus
Iacobus, and Thomas Blancius, their positions were, that seeing Pope Clement
the eight was Christ's vicegerent in earth, there was no doubt, but both
Temporal and Spiritual power was from the Pope. And again, that the Pope had
the power of both swords, Spiritual and Temporal: It was declared by the
assembly, That these positions were false, Schismatic, contrary to the word
of GOD, to the holy Decrees, Constitutions, Canons and Laws of the Realm,
such as tended to rebellion, and troubling of the peace of the Kingdom.

In another assembly at Paris Paris. Convent. apud Bochel. lib. 5. tit. 20. ca.
45.
, anno 1595. Cardinal de Pelleue, and other Prelates rejected certain Decrees
of the Trent Council; for whereas the Pope and his Trent faction had said
Conc. Trid. sess. 25. de Reform. cap. 19.
, that if any Emperor, King, Duke, Marquess, or other temporal Lord, should
grant any place within his territories, for Duel, by so doing they are to be
ipso facto excommunicated, and deprived of their jurisdiction and dominion over
that City, town, castle, or place, wherein they permitted Duel, the
assembly of those Prelates thus censure that Trent Decree. This Trent Article
is contrary to the authority of the King, who cannot be deprived of his
temporal dominion, respectu cuius nullum omnino superiorem recognoscit, in
respect of which he acknowledges none at all (among mortal men) to be his
superior.

When Leo the tenth his Laterane assembly, had as much as in them lay, adnulled
the Pragmaticall Sanction made in the Council at Bytures, wherein the Decrees
made in the Council at Basil were confirmed, the University of Paris,
Universe Parisien in Appellat a Conc. later. sub Leone. 10.
, an. 1517. not only appealed from the Pope; thereby professing him not to be
the supreme Judge, no not in spiritual, (much less in temporal) causes, but
expressly said of that Laterane Synod, that it was an heretical assembly, and
had decreed that which was contrary to the Catholic faith, as before we
declared.

The French Church Gallicana Eules.
, (I mean those in that Kingdom who embrace their present Romish faith) were
so far from acknowledging the Popes Sovereignty in temporal, that they would
not admit it so much as in spiritual matters. This opinion, says that worthy
relatour Relation of State and Religion in the West parts. pa. 129.
; (that a general Council is above the Pope) is very current and strong even
among such Catholics in France, as favor the Papacy. Others hold their
Roman Church to be a true Church, but for the Pope, they hold resolutely that
he is Antichrist. This sort spreads far, and as themselves will say, is of
the learned sort. How did they account him their Sovereign, who not long since
in the days of Henry the fourth. When Ibid. pa. 1^^
the Pope made scruple to bless the King, they were ready to withdraw
themselves utterly from the obedience of that See, and to erect a new Patriarch
of their own; The Archbishop of Burges was ready to accept that dignity, and
it had been effected, but that the Pope, in fear thereof, did hasten his
Benediction. How again, did that Church acknowledge the Pope for a Monarch,
when they would not accept nor allow of his Laws made in the Conncell at
Trent. The King Innoc. Gentilet. in exam. Conc. Trid. Sess. 12. pa. 96, 97. and
Ioh. Sleid. Com. lib. 22. pa. 33^.
not only in contempt, calling it Conuentum, and not Concilium, at which the
Trent Assembly stormed not a little, but professing also, se suosque subditos,
that he and his subjects would by no means be bound to obey the same: others
of the same French Church were so auerse from those Trent decrees, even until
these days, that but of late Iac. Gaulter in sua Chron. Soec. 17. sub tit
Council. in fine.
, anno 1614. some of the Prelates and Peers, entreated this present King Lewis
the 13. that he would command, that Ecumenical Council per totum regnum
recipi, ac promulgari, to be received in his whole Kingdom: But the love which
that French Church Basiliensis concilij authoritas, and constantia decretorum
eius perpetua esto, etc. Sanct. pragm. in Conc. Bitur. de quo supra.
bears to the Council at Basil, and their own pragmaticall sanction made at
Bytures, may persuade that this Jesuitical motion, will hardly ever there take
effect, although Gualter Loc. cit.
boasts of the great success it found in that year.

Further yet how was the Popes Monarchy there acknowledged, when Decret.
Parliament. recitatur apud Gold in Replic. pro Imp. ca 9. pa. 81. 82
anno 1610. the doctrine and Book of Card. Bellarmine, written against
Barclay, (in which Bellarmine defends that the Pope may excommunicate and
depose Princes) was so detested by that State, that in their public assembly
they did prohibit and forbid any, and that under the pain of high treason,
either to keep or receive, or print or sell that book continentem falsum ac
detestabile dogma, containing that false and detestable doctrine, tending to
the subversion of the highest Magistrates, to rebellion against Princes, to the
withdrawing of due obedience in subjects: They command further, and under the
punishment also of high treason, Ne quis Doctor, Professor, that no Doctor,
Professor, or any other, should write or teach directly, or indirectly the
same doctrine of the Popes temporal power; to wit, that he has power to
excommunicate and depose Kings, to give or take away their Kingdoms. And
though it were true (which is all that Gretzer Gretz. lib. 1. cont. Replic. ca
11.. Etiam.
could hereunto oppose) that the present King Lewis, at the solicitation of
the Popes Nuncio, stayed the publishing of that Edict for a time, yet the very
Decree of their whole State and Senate, demonstrates that which we intend and
prove, that this pestilent doctrine of the Popes Supremacy, was abhorred and
detested by that whole State.

Besides these, how many Synods Synodi Eccles fiarum reformas tarum.
held by those of the reformed Churches in this age, might be produced? diverse
at Worms Vide Ioh. Funct. and Christ Heluic. in suis Chron. and Ioh. Sleid.
comm de statu Relig.
, at Augusta, at Spire, at Norimburg, at Ratisbone, at Franckford, at many
other places in all which the Popes supremacy not only Temporal, but
Ecclesiastical also, was condemned. Of them all I will mention but one Decree,
of that late National Synod at Gape Decretum a Nationali Synodo Eccle. Gallic.
celebrata Gapinci, an. 1603.
in France, which is this, Whereas the Bishop of Rome, having erected a
Monarchy in the Christian Church, does challenge and arrogate unto himself
principality over all Churches, and treads vnder^foote the lawful authority
of Magistrates, giving, taking away, and translating Kingdoms, we do
steadfastly believe, and constantly affirm him (the Bishop of Rome) esse
verumillum et Germanum Antichristum, to be that true and great Antichrist, and
son of perdition.

To these may be added the confessions of many reformed Churches Confessiones
Reform. Eccles. vid. Harmon. Confessionum
; of Auspurge presented to Charles the fifth, an. 1530. of Basil, an. 1532. of
Heluetia, an. 1536. of Saxony, an. 1551. written to be presented to the
Council at Trent, of Wittenberg, an. 1552. presented to their Council at
Trent, of France, an. 1559. presented to Charles the ninth; of England, an.
1562. of Belgia, anno 1566. of Bohemia, an. 1573. of Scotland, an 1581. and
others; in all which with one harmony is condemned their Papal Monarchy, and
that even in Ecclesiastical, much more in Temporal causes.

What an infinite number of Witnesses in this last age might be produced out of
the reformed Churches Pretestantiu^ scripta.
, Luther, Melancthon, Brentius, Bucer, Calvin, Musculus, B. Jewel, B. Horn,
B. Bilson, and those three Reverend and most learned Bishops now living, B.
Andrews, B. Buckridge, B. Moorton: Dr. Rainolds, Dr. Whitakers, and a million
of other learned and godly Bishops, Pastors, and Writers of the Church, who not
only reject, but have by unanswerable reasons refuted that Papal Monarchy,
which they now claim. And though to these most worthy servants of Christ, the
writers of their present Roman Church in this age, are neither for learning,
nor piety, in any sort to be compared, yet omitting all these, I will allege
cheefely the testimonies of some of their own and best learned writers in this
age, most of them such as are extremely partial on the Popes side, and
earnest in his cause, that themselves giving testimony to that truth which we
maintain, and like Midianites, sheathing their swords in the bowels one of
another, this Temporal Monarchy of the Pope like the head of Goliath, may be
cut off, though by the hands of David, yet with the Philistines own swords.

It was no good token, that either Pope Hadrian the sixth, or Marcellus 2.
Marcellus 2.
, liked well of their Monarchical Sovereignty, when the former Plat. in vit.
Hadriani 6.
caused this to be written on his tomb; That he esteemed nothing to have been
more unhappy unto him, then that he did Imperare; and the other Plat. in vit
Marcelli. 2.
sitting at dinner on a time, and there remembering that speech of Hadrian,
smiting his hand on the table, brake out into this saying: Non video quomodo
qui locum hunc altissimum tenent, saluari possunt, I see not how any Pope can
be saved. The well meaning Pope, it seems, was conscious of some exceeding
usurpation, transgression, or injustice, general to all later Popes; (and what
else should that be, but their usurped Sovereignty) when he grew to such a
general despair of the salvation of them all.

Card. Caietane Card. Caietan. In Opusc. to. 1. Tract. 3. ca. 7.
, under the power of Peter it is comprehended, that he rules over Kings and
Princes in order to the kingdom of heaven, nee enim huiusmodi Imperium aliud
est, quam aperire and claudere regnum coelorum, for this power which the Pope
has, is nothing else, but to open or shut the kingdom of heaven; then has
he no Temporal Monarchy; and this to be the judgment of Caietane, Bellarmine
Bell. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. ca. ^. vbi. citat Caietan. in Apol. ca. 13.
and Franc. de Victorra Franc. a Victor. Relect. 1. de potest ceel. sec. 6. nu.
8. vbi cit at Caiet. in Apol. ca. 6.
assure us. Caietane teaches, that in the Pope there is no mere temporal
power.

Ambrosius Catharinus Amb. Cathac. in cap. 13. ad Romans
, There are some, who either in flattery, or in too great simplicity, affirm
the Pope to have Dominatione^ e^iam temporalem totius orbis terrae, the
Temporal Dominion of the whole world. Verum ridicula haec profecto, But truly
thus to say is ridiculous. And he sets down diverse reasons to disprove that
ridiculous assertion. One, because if it were so, then there should none be
truly Kings in the world but only the Pope. Another, because Christ himself
refused to be a Temporal King, when the Jews would have made him one: and he
answered, to one of the brothers who requested him to divide the inheritance,
who made me a Judge, or a diuider between you? Of which words Catharinus thus
says; Hic locus videtur cogere vt fateamur, This place seems even to enforce
us to confess, that secular jurisdiction was not given unto him. Again, we
do not deny that the Pope has dominion of tempor all things, but this we say,
that such dominion is not given to him as Pope, nor immediately by Christ, sed
illud habet quasi vnus quilibet hominum, but he has it as any other man, unto
whom by humane right such power befalls. Again, In this, that the Pope is
Christ Vicare, there is no force to prove, that power is given to him, ad
regendum omnia regna mundi in temporalibus, to rule all kingdoms in temporal
affairs. Nay this does rather persuade, that such power is not given unto the
Pope, seeing Christ whose Vicare he is, refused that honor, and took it not
upon him, as he was man, but was himself subject to secular powers.

Domin. Soto Dom. Soto. (...) 4. Sentu. did. 25. q. 2. art. 1. concl. 3.
, The excellency of the Ecclesiastical powers above the Civil, is not of this
sort, that the Pope should be Lord over the whole world in temporal matters,
And he gives diverse reasons hereof; one, Christ left to his Vicar no other
power, but what himself as man had, nullum autem Regnum temporale accepit, but
Christ received no Temporal Kingdom. Another, Pope Innocentius, in the Chap.
per venerabilem, qui fill. sint legit. confesses ingenuously that he has not
power in temporal matters in the kingdom of France, and, quicquid alij
somniant, whatsoever others dream, he understands this, de omnibus regnis, of
all Kingdoms.

Ioh. Driedo Ioh. Driede, de libert. Christ. lib. 1. pa. 145. 146.
, This is to be known, that Christ when he set Peter over the whole Church,
giving him Jurisdiction over all the members thereof, non simul dedit ei
imperium temporale super vniuersam Ecclesiam, did not with all give him any
Temporal Dominion or Monarchy over the whole Church: For he did not take from
Kings and Emperors their Empires, neither was it his will or intent, that all
Regal power should be derived from the power of Peter, or from the Pope.
Neither do Christian Princes and Kings hold their Kingdoms and Empires in fee
from the Pope. Whence he concludes this to be manifest, That the Imperial
power of one man over the whole Church, non est diuini iuris, aut naturalis, is
neither from the law of God, nor nature, seeing neither natural reason, does
dictate, that one should be a Temporal Lord over all, neither does the Law of
God command it.

Andradius Andradius defens. Trid. fid. lib 2. pa. ^04.
commends very highly that saying of Aquinas, Prudentissime docuit, Thomas
taught most wisely, That secular Princes are not bound by laws in respect of
coaction, but of direction That is, paenis cogi non posse, they cannot be
compelled by punishments due to transgressors. And the same Andradius adds
Ibid. pa. ^^3
, That all learned men, yea even the Popes themselves, Innocentius and Hadrian
approve this saying of Thomas: Then by the judgment of Andradius, all learned
men, and Popes themselves teach, the Pope not not be a superior Lord, or
Temporal Monarch to Kings and Princes; for if they were, they might inflict
temporal punishments, and use coactiue authority over them.

Claud. Espenseus Clau. Espenseus. Com. in cap. 3. epist. ad Titum. Digress. 10.
, the Apostle following both the example and doctrine of Christ, commanded
believers to be subject to temporal powers; But some turbulent persons making
a controversy betwixt the Priesthood and kingdom, have raised great troubles;
Chrysostom long after the Apostles, and many hundredth of years, antehan^
camerinam, before this sink was set open, never suspecting that any such thing
would happen, taught, that every soul must be subject, whether he be an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or a Bishop; Theodoret, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, and all the Greeks follow Chrysostom. Gregory the Great
ingenuously acknowledged, that the Emperor ought, Dominari, to rule over
Priests. Bernard teaches the same: yea Popes themselves in their Decrees,
fatentur se imperatoribus subiectos esse, confess that they are subject to
Emperors. Gregory Idem co^m in epist. ad Ti^met^. D^gress lib. 2. cap. 6.
the seventh called Hildebrand by a new schism first of all, lifted up his
Pontifical lance against the Imperial diadem.

Krantzius Aib. Krantz. Saxo^. lib. 8. ca. 36.
speaking of Hildebrand, triumphing gloriously in his two swords, at the time
of the great Iubile, which he first instituted, with indignation thereat,
says, Behold O Peter, thy successor, and thou O Christ, behold thy Vicare,
Vide quo ascendit superbia serui seruorum tuorum, See whither the pride of the
servant of thy servants is ascended.

Job. Nauclerus Ioh. Naucl. ad an. 1085.
handling, but very timerously, this question about the Popes Temporal
Monarchy, in the end resolves as Gerson did, That both Detraction is to be
shunned, whereby all temporal power and possessions are denied to the Pope:
and also Adulation; whereby one ascribes so much to the Pope, as if all
kingdoms did depend on him, which he with Gerson calls, slultas and falls as
adulationis insantas; moderate discretion keeps the mean betwixt these two:
Again, Videntur per emnia culpandi, those Bishops seem altogether to be
worthy of blame, who would smite the Kings with that temporal sword, quem ipsi
ex regum habent gratia, which they have from the permission of Kings.

Georgius Cassander Georgy. (...). Consultat. Art. 7. Cap. Cap. (...). Pontif.
Romans pa. 58.
, this Controversy about the Popes supremacy in spiritual matters, had never,
as I think, risen among us, but that Popes hac authoritate ad dominationis
quandam speciem abusi, abusing this authority to a kind of domination, had
exceeded the bounds prescribed by Christ. This abuse of their Pontificial
power, which flatterers have beyond all measure increased, gave accasion of
reuolting from the Church, and of disliking that power, which they obtained by
the universal consent of the Church. Again Ibid. Artic. 16. de Magistratu.
, this ought to be held without all doubt, that the power and authority of
Christian Kings and Emperors, is no way less nor inferior to the authority
which the Kings of Israel had in their Commonwealth. Now Carerius, Alex. Car.
lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans ca. 18. nu. 14.
, and others, who are most violent for the Popes Temporal Monarchy, profess,
That in the time of the Law, the Kings of Israel were superior to Priests, and
had power and jurisdiction above them: might punish and deprive them of their
spiritual offices and dignities; yea, even kill them as any other lay persons,
if they were transgressors. The King Lib. eod. ca. 1. nu. 6.
was then the substantive, and the Priesthood the adjective. Then by Cassanders
judgment, it is also now and ought for ever so to be.

Sixtus Senensis Sixth. Senensis Bibl. sanct. lib. 6. Annot. 72.
, disputing this point, resolves it out of Turrecremata. lib. 2. Cap. 113. in
this manner. An universal temporal power is two-fould: the one is
Monarchical, the other Pastoral: The Monarchical power is that whereby one
is made a Monarch and supreme Lord of all persons and lands in the world, so
that he may advance whom he will to Kingdoms, Empires, and Dukedomes, and
depose whom and when he will: This Monarchical power the Pope has not, says
Turrecremata; and to him Sixtus subscribes, and he gives this reason, because
Christ has forbidden this to his Apostles; for when they did strive, says he,
de Monarchia temporalis regni, which of them should be a Temporal Monarch,
Christ answered, the Kings of the Gentiles reign, but with you it shall not be
so. Pastoral power in temporal matters in such, as the Occumenicall Pastor
may use for the better administration of the spiritual blessings in the
Church, This the Pope may have, says Sixtus, but he may not take upon him
Monarchical domination; that is forbidden by Christ.

Hosius Stan. Hosius contra Brent. proleg lib. 5.. Quartum.
calls Kings the heads of their kingdoms, adding, that Christ being the
principal head, governs by those who are ministerial heads under him, by
Princes and Emperors he gouernes kingdoms; by the Pope, the Church, and unto
Christ as the head of the Church, so the head of the kingdom is subject.

Francis. a Victoria Franc. a Victor. Relect. 1. de potest. eccle. sect. 2. nu.
7.
, The Apostles had power and authority in the Church, ea autem non fuit
ciuilis, but it was not any civil power, seeing neither their kingdom, nor
power was of this world. Again Ibid. sect. 6. nu. 5.
, Temporal power does not depend on the Pope, the Pope gives no power to Kings
and Princes, for no man gives that which he has not: Again Ibid. nu. 4.
, the Civil power is not subject to the Popes temporal power, or to the Pope,
tanquam Domino temporali, as to a Temporal Lord. Whence it follows Ibid. nu.
5.
manifestly, that the Pope has no ordinary power to judge of the causes of
Princes, of rights of dominion, or title of kingdoms, neither may one appeal
to him in temporal causes. Further yet, In Ibid nu 8. and Relect. 5. sect. 2.
nu. 3.
Papa nulla est potestas mere temporalis, there is no mere temporal power at
all in the Pope; neither Idem Rel. 1. sect. 2. nu. 9.
does the temporal power depend on the spiritual, as an inferior art depends
on his superior, as the art of making bridles depends on horsemanship, and the
art of making weapons, on the Military skill. All these and much more does
Victoria prove.

Albert^s Pighius (...). Pighi. Controu 16. Quod Christu^ pa. 254.
, That they say, Christum spiritualem tantum potestatem Apostolis dedisse,
etiam nobis placet, that Christ gave only Ecclesiastical power to his
Apostles, I like it well, and say the same. Pighius reaches, says Bellarmine
Bell. lib. 5. de Pontif. Romans c^* 1.. Tertia.
, that the Pope directly has no Temporal Dominion.

Duarenus Duarenus. lib. 1. de sacr. eccle. minist. ca. 4.
, Bishops have not ius gladij and imperium, the right of the sword, nor an
Empire: This belongs to civil Magistrates, as Christ clearly witnesses when
he said, My kingdom is not of this world: and entreating of the Decree of
Clement 5. that all Kings depend on the Roman church, This constitution, says
he Ibid.
, did so far displease Cynus Pistoriensis, that he feared not to say, this text
proceeded ex Pontificiorum errore, out of the error of those who took part
with the Pope: adding, that most Lawyers are of the same opinion; and that
Bartholus in saying otherwise, speaks rather dicis causa, then ex animo.

Michael Coccinius Mich. Coccin, lib. de transl. Imperij.
, Imperator Imperium tenet a Deo, the Emperor holds his Empire from God, and
not from the Pope, and speaking of the translating of the Empire; The Pope,
says he, does in no other sort transfer it from one to another, quam
Imperium transferentibus consentiendo, but by consenting to others who
transfer it, or by declaring that it ought to be transferred; but the
translation has his force and efficacy, not from him, but from the consent of
the people.

Hier. Balbus Hier. Balbus. lib. de Coro. not. pa. 18. and seq.
, Episcopus Gurcensis, sets down many and unanswerable reasons, ex quibus,
says he, plane conuincitur, by which it is clearly convinced, that neither
the Pope nor the Emperor do one depend on the other, sed vtrumque a solo Deo
manare, but that both of them spring from one and the same fountain, and that
is God; even as Ibid. pa. 21.
Moses and Aaron did either of them receive their power from God: and for this
opinion, pugnant Ibid pa. 18*
omnes fere Caesarei iur is interpretes, almost all the civil Lawyers do
fight, Bartholus, Albericus, and others; yea, diverse also of the Canonists,
especially Pope Innocentius in Cap. licet ex suscept. de foro compet, and Pope
John. Ca. Si Imperatori. did. 96, and Archidiac. did. 96. ca. Duo sunt. The
same also is taught, says he Ibid* pa. 2^ and 18.
, by Petrus de Ancona and Thomas Aquinas lib. de reg. princip. who says, that
there are two mystical bodies of Christ, the one spiritual, in which the Pope
is chief; the other temporal, in which the Emperor is chief: and Christ
being the head, influit primario, does immediately give the influence of power
and dignity to either: and then for the full resolution of the matter, and
least Ibid. pa. 64. and seq.
any should hereafter err in this, wherein the dignity and majesty of the
Empire consists, he sets down verbatim the Constitution of Lewis of Bauare,
which was made, as he says, omni ambiguitate mature discussa, every ambiguitie
being maturely and exactly discussed by Bishops: one part of which Decree is
this that the Imperial dignity and power, a solo Deo dependet, depends only
of God, and that it is a pestiferous doctrine by which the Devil has raised
strife and sedition, to say that the Imperial dignity or power is of the Pope.

Onuphrius Onuphrius in vita Greg. 7.
speaking of the ancient Popes, says, They were honored as heads of the
Christian Religion, and as Christ's Vicares, but their authority extended no
further, then to doctrines of faith, and they were subject to Emperors, and
did all things at their command: they were created by them, to Judge of
Emperors they durst not. Gregory the seventh first of all, and besides the
custom of his Ancestors, contemning the Imperial authority and power, was
bold to deprive the Emperor of his kingdom. A thing not heard of before that
age; for those things which are reported of Arcadius, Anastasius, and Leo
Iconomachus are but fables.

Papirius Massonus Papir. Masson. in vita Bonif. 8
, utterly dislikes the fact of Boniface the eight, in claiming the supremacy as
well in temporal as in spiritual matters, he cites and commends the words of
Petrarch, wherein he says, that Boniface like Jupiter Olimpius, fulminabat de
terris, thundered in the earth with threats and menacing Edicts: he calls
Boniface Tyrannum Sacerdotum, a tyrant of Bishops; and in the end admonishes
Popes, not to make Kings their enemies, for let not Popes think that God has
made them froenos regibus, to be as bridles to Kings, to curb them as they list
like unruly Horses, let them admonish, let them pray, to threaten to terrify,
to make wars, Episcopos non decent, do not beseem Bishops.

Sir Thomas Moore Sir Thomas Moore in exposit. passionis. de amputata Malchi
aurie.
, That which Christ commanded Peter, Put thy sword into thy scabbard, is as if
he had said, neither will I be defended with this sword, and I have chosen
thee into that place, vt non tali gladio te pugnare velim, sed gladio verbi
Dei, that I will not have thee to fight with such a a sword, but with the sword
of Gods word, Let the material sword be put up into his place, put it into the
hands of secular Princes, you that are my Apostles, have another sword to use.

Steph. Gardener Steph Guard. lib de vera obedien.
writ a book, de vera obedientia, wherein he fully and substantially refutes
the Popes supremacy, and that even in Ecclesiastical causes, proving that the
sword of the Church extends no further, but to teaching and excommunication,
and that the Soueraignety of government, as well in Ecclesiastical as in
Temporal causes, belongs to Princes. This also he confirmed by his sacred oath
Iuramenti forma extat in Acts and Monuments in Hen. 8. pa. 964
. I Steph. Gardener do promise and swear to you Henry my Lord, King of
England and France, atque in terris Ecclesiae Anglicanae immediate sub Christo
supremo Capiti, and the supreme head of the Church of England, next and
immediately under Christ, that I shall not give, or cause to be given to any
foreign Potentate, Prince, or Prelate, no not to the Bishop of Rome any oath or
feolti^, directly or indirectly* but shall perform faith, truth, and obedience
to your royal Majesty, as to my supreme Lord, neither shall I consent that
the Bishop of Rome shall have or exercise here any authority or jurisdiction.
Further, I do profess that the Papacy of Rome is not ordained of God, and
that the Pope is not to be called supreme, nor universal Bishop, and much
more to the like purpose. To all this he swore, subscribed, and set his hand
and Seal, an. 1534.

To this book De vera obedienda, Edmund Bonner Ed^. Bonner praefat. ad lib.
Gardineri.
B. of London prefixed a Preface, wherein among other words tending to the
approbation of that Book, he says of the Pope, That he is a ravening Wolf
dressed in sheep clothing; he calls him Jupiter of Olympus, which falsely has
arrogated to himself an absolute power without controulement; that he stirred
up other Kings and Princes traitorously against the King; that it is no new
thing to be against the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome; that the Popes
supremacy is falsely pretended; that the book of Guard. will well content those
who favor the truth and hate the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and his
Satanicall fraudulent falsehood. Besides the same Bonner did take the very like
oath as Gardener had done, subscribing to it, and confirming it, both by his
hand and Seal.

The like oath for acknowledgement of the Kings Soueraignetie not only in
Temporal but in Ecclesiastical Causes, and condemning the Popes usurpation in
them both, was taken by Ioh. Stokesley Ioh Stockesley and alij, eorum Iurament.
ex^at in Act and Monum. loc. ^it. pa. 965.
, Bishop of London, Edward Le, Archbishop of York, Cuthbard Tunstall, B. of
Durham, and many more.

The University of Cambridge Academ. Cantabridg. eius literae extant. ibid pa.
965.
, though then addicted to Popish Religion, having debated and discussed this
point, resolved in this manner, We affirm it as a conclusion undoubted, that
the Bishop of Rome has no more authority and jurisdiction given him by God in
the Scriptures, over this Realm of England, then any other externe Bishop
has: and that is none at all.

Card. Poole Card Poole lib. de summo Pontif. ca. 23.
, By these words it is showed, that Christ's Kingdom was spiritual and
celestial; his Church is not Regnum huius mundi, no kingdom of this world,
but of heaven: This Kingdom Christ has left to St. Peter, and his
Successors; And though he call Ibid. cap. 29.
it Imperium totius orbis, an Empire of the whole world, yet he plainly
shows Ibid ca. 24. in fine.
that he means not that it is any Temporal Empire, Such as takes away others
Empires and Kingdoms, but a Spiritual, such as by spiritual direction
corroborates, and confirms them all, by drawing them unto faith and piety.

Card. Alane Card. Alanus in Resp ad perseq Angl. ca. 3. pa. 319.
, one of their learnedest, and most eager maintainers of the Popes supremacy
in spiritual matters, sets this down as a rule; Quilibet princeps, summus est
suorum, etiam Episcoporum gubernator, Every Prince is the Supreme Governor,
even of his Bishops, but not in all causes: he means in Temporal, but not in
Spiritual. Again Ibid ca. 5. in Princ.
, Princes quoad regnum suum and ciuilem gubernationem nullos superiores
agnoscunt, do hold none to be their Superiors, in respect of their Kingdoms
and civil government: and he every where insists on this.

The Divines of Rhemes Rhemists Testam. in Math. 22. annot. 3.
allege and approve that saying of Hosius, and call them godly words, Neither
is it lawful for us (Bishops) to hold an Empire in earth, neither have thou O
Emperor, power over incens^ and sacred things.

Stapleton Tho Stapleton in hjs Counterblast. lib. 1. diuis. 5. pa. 29.
, It is true that the Prince is supreme Governor of all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal: And again Idem, Doctrine. Princ. lib. 5. ca. 18.
, alleging and allowing that saying of Constantine, You are Bishops within and
I without the Church; he thus expounds them, you do praesse, are chief in
Ecclesiastical causes (to wit, for deciding of doubts of faith in them) I in
secular affairs, and for ordering them.

Nich. Sanders Nich. Sanders de Vis. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4. Quapropter.
, There are two powers in the Church, vna tantum spiritualis cuiusmodi est illa
ministrorum, the former is only spiritual, and such is the power of Bishops:
the other is mixed, being originally secular, but in respect of the end
spiritual, such is the power of Kings. Again Ibid.. Non tantum.
, we do not say that all Kingdoms and Dominions are in all things subject to
the Church by divine law: then certainly is not the Pope the Temporal Monarch
over them all.

Vega Didac. Vega super 4. poenitent. conc. 2.
, We must here say as generally do the Fathers of the Church, Hierom, Austen,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Cassidore, that David said this, because being a
King, nemini nisi Deo subdebatur, he was subject to none but to God, He was
bound by no humane laws: for a King, though he be subject to humane laws, in
respect of direction, yet not in respect of coaction.

Pererius Pererius com. in cap. 13. ad Romans disp. 1.
the Jesuit, says of that precept of St. Paul, Let every soul be subject to
the higher power; That it is meant only of secular power: and every soul,
that is every man (is not the Pope one?) ought to be subject to those secular
powers, in those things which they may lawfully command.

Bishop Canus Mele. Canus, loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap 6.. Aliud.
approues the profession of faith made by Pope Agatho, subscribed unto and
allowed by the sixth Council. Now in that profession the Pope with all the
Western Bishops, most clearly acknowledge Act 4 Council. genesis 6.
the Emperor to be their Lord, and themselves his servants, their City and
Province, his servile City, and servile Province. An evidence that neither
Agatho, nor the sixth Council, nor Canus, (nor any who approve that Council)
thought the Pope a Temporal Monarch above the Emperor.

Corn. Iansenius Cor Iansenius Conc. Euang* ca. 66. in illa verba, and tibi
dabo claues, etc.
, Although Peter's power be in earth, yet Christ said not that he would give
him the keys of the kingdom of earth, but of the kingdom of heaven* that
Peter might know, suam potestatem extendi tantum ad spiritualia, that his power
did extend only to spiritual matters, which belong to the kingdom of heaven,
and not to temporal things, but only as they are referred to spiritual.

Franc. Costerus Fran. Costern. Euchir ca. 3. propos. 3.
the Jesuit, Christ by his coming did not change the Political
administration or government, but left it unto Princes, and commanded to give
to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar.

Iacobus de Valentia Iac. de Valent. in Psalm. 50.
entreating of David, says, that he offended only to God, Quia nullum alium
superiorem habebat, because he had none but God above him, And being a King, he
could be punished by none other.

Lorinus Lorinus in Psalm. 50.
the Jesuit, God only is able to punish the sin of him that was a King, nee
superiorem haberet, and who had none but God Superior unto him. Again,
whereas Cassiodore says, that the King is punishable only by God,
Turrecremata observes, that this is not because the seculare Magistrate, is
with us more worthy then the Ecclesiastical, but because Rex in suo ordine non
habet superiorem, the King in his own Order (of secular Governors) has none
above him.

Hector Pintus Hect Pintus in Ezech. ca. 45.
, In spiritual matters Bishops are above Kings, but in secular matters, Reges
non subijciuntur sacerdotibus, Kings are not subject to Bishops; Again, Habent
Reges in temporalibus superiorem neminem, Kings have none above them in secular
matters.

Thom. Harding Tho. Harding. confut. of the Apology. part. 6. cap. 12.. It was.
, The Kings place is chief among the lay, even when they are in the Church at
the service of God; and without the Church in all temporal things and causes,
he is over the Priests themselves.

James Bosgraue Iac. Bosgraue eius scriptum manu ipsius confignatum apud nos
extat. Tortur. Tort^. pa. 24.
, a Jesuit, and with them an holy Confeffour and Martyr Nomina myrtyrum,
Campianus, Bosgrauius. Concertat. Eccle. cathol. part. 2. pa. 60.
; I profess before God, that I do think, and am in conscience persuaded,
that the Pope nec de facto, nec de iure, neither has, nor ought to have power
to loose the subjects of any Prince from their fidelity.

John Rishton Ioh. Rishton. (...). in Tort. Torti. pa. 24.
, another of their Confessors also, made the like profession; adding further,
as Bosgraue and John Heart also did, That Ibib. p. 227*
they would not revolt from the Queen, nor forsake their obedience to her,
though the Pope himself should come with forces against her. The like
profession was made by Henry Horton Henry Horton ibid.
another of their holy Martyrs Concert. eccle. cathol. loc. citat.
.

John Heart John Heart. Epist. sua ante colloq. cum Ranoldo.
another of their Confessors, I think that although the spiritual power be
more excellent then the temporal, yet they are both of God, neither does the
one depend on the other. Whereupon I gather this certain conclusion, that the
opinion of them who hold the Pope to be a temporal Lord over Kings and
Princes, is unreasonable, and unprofitable altogether.

Dureus Dureus confut. respons. Whitak. fol. 321.
the Jesuit, approues that saying of Bernard, Both Swords are the Churches,
but the material is to be used for the Church, the spiritual by the Church. Now
it is as clear as the Sun, that Saint Bernard denied temporal Monarchical
authority to all Bishops, and particularly to the Pope.

Adam Blackuodeus Adam Blackued. lib de coniunct. Relig and Imperij.
, If Kings offend, God only, and no man is to be their Judge. Again Ibid.
, they are set in the place of God, to rule and restrain others, not that they
should be restrained a quoquam, by any; then sure not by the Pope, for Kings
rule their subjects, but over Kings themselves, Solius est Imperium Iouis, God
only is a ruler of them.

Guil. Barclay, Guil Barclaius lib. 4. contra Monarchom. cap 4 in^t.
If Kings offend they are to be judged by God only, for they are subject only
to God; which I mean of temporal judgment and subjection. Again Idem lib. de
potest. Papae cap. 1.. Est.
, speaking of Thomas Bozius, who stiffely holds the Pope to be a Temporal
Monarch of the World, he calls him, Parasitum Papalem, the Popes Parasite, his
opinion he calls it delirium Deliriorum Bozij. ibid. Huius.
, a very dotage: and whereas Card. Hostiensis is of the same opinion, he says
Ibid.
; That opinion of Hostiensis, a Theologis, firmissima ratione est da^nata, is
condemned by Divines, and that by a strong reason. He adds Ibidem.
of the same opinion of Bozius, and Hostiensis, that it is Putida opinio quae
sol^s ineptijs, and captiunculis suffulta est, a putid opinion, which is
supported only by foolery and sophistry. Yea, he proceeds further, and
condemns Ibid.. Mihi
both the direct and indirect power, claimed to the Pope in Temporal matters;
proving Per totum librum.
that the Pope neither directly nor indirectly and in order to the spiritual
good, has any power to excommunicate or depose Kings, or to absolve subjects
from their oaths.

Ninianus Wincetus Nin. Winc^t. lib cont. Bu canan. pa. 180.
This is the true divinity of the Prophet, that a King, though he be never so
wicked, Dei iudicio relinquendus est, it is to be left to Gods judgment.
Skulkenius Skulken. Apol. pro Bell. contra Widd^ing. cap. 3. pa. 78.
confesses, that thus much is meant by Wincetus, That the King has no
political or temporal power above him, to judge or punish him.

Pet. Pitheus Pet Pitheus lib de libert. Eccle. Gallic.
, in his book published by the authority of the French Court, says, the
liberty of France re^ies on two Maxims, quas Francia semper vt certas
approbauit, which France has ever approved as certain. The one is this, that
the Pope cannot command or decree ought either in general or in particular,
quod attinet ad res temporales, concerning any temporal matters within the
kingdom of France.

Jacob. Leschesserius Iac. Leschesser apud Bochel. lib. 4. tit. 21. ca. 1.
sets down this as the foundation whereon the liberties of the French Church
are built, that neither Pope, nor the whole Clergy ius habet de vlla re
temporali statuendi, has any right to decree ought in temporal matters, multo
minus de vllo regno, much less of any Empire or supreme kingdom.

Of late years there was a memorable controversy betwixt the Pope and the
Venetians Respub. Veta
, the Pope pretended their Laws Verba Legati Pontif. in Consid. P. M. Pauli..
Quae aperta. pa. 95.
to be contrary to the liberty of the Church; and therefore to be nullas and
inualidas, to be no laws, nor of any force: And he commanded the State, under
the censure of excommunication, to revoke and adnull the same laws. Did they
regard these thundering threats, excommunications, or Interdicts? Did they
hearken to his command, or yield obedience to this their Monarch? No, they
constantly persisted in defense of their laws, and plainly told Respons.
Senatus Venet. lib. eod. pa. 95.
him, That the reuoking of those laws, which for so long time had been
continued, was the euersion of the foundation of their State; that they were
made summi Principis authoritate, by the authority of the supreme Prince; (by
this they meant their own State) and they conclude, that they were subject to
no censure; yea they proclaimed Tract. d^ Interdicto. propos. 16.
the Popes excommunications and Interdicts against them to be an abuse of his
power, to be such as that the person or State who has not Principem
superiorem, a Superior Prince unto it (such they esteem themselves) may and
ought to resist, by all means granted by God. So in defense of their own
Soueraignetie, they demonstrated to the eyes of the whole world, the Pope not
to be a Monarch, no not in Italy, nor in his next neighbor Cities, much less
over all Kingdoms and Empires upon earth.

Anto. Quirinus Ant* Qu^rinus dissertat. de ^ure Reip. Venet. pa. 61.
in defense of the Venetian State, writes thus; Christ did not diminish the
rights of Empires, Cities and Princes, but he confirmed the same, yea, he would
not in any sort meddle in that, quod res mundanas and temporales spectat, not
with temporal causes. Again Ibid.
, It is most evident, that the Venetian Commonwealth is as a free Prince, qui
a nemine pendet ex natura sui principatus, which by the very nature of
Principality, depends on none: Again Ibid. pa. 62.
, This Venetian Commonwealth does profess Dominium suum a solo Deo habere
quod ipsis est ius fundamentale, that it has their dominion from God only,
and this is the very fundamental law of their State; and to this subscribed
Antonius Rebetti, Michael Angelu, and many others both Divines and Lawyers.

Friar Paul Fr. Paulns. Consid. sup. Censur. Pauli ^.
in the same quarrel writes in this manner, The Venetian State potestatem sibi
a Deo datam, exercises that power which is given unto them by God, even from
the beginning of their State unto this time: And what power that is, he
declares, calling it antiquam and absolutam very sui Imperij libertatem, the
ancient and absolute, (and therefore not depending on the Pope) liberty of
their true Empire.

Card. Bellarmine Card. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Pontif. Romans ca. 2. and seq.
at large handles this Argument, concerning which he sets down Ia. Gretz in
sua defens. lib. 5. Bellar de Romans Pontif.
three assertions, and proves them all. First, that the Pope is not Lord of the
whole world: secondly, that he is not Lord of the Christian world: thirdly,
that the Pope iure diuino, by any right from Christ, is not Lord of any
Province or Town, Nullamque habet iurisdictionem mere temporalem, and has no
jurisdiction merely temporal. Yea Bellarmine answers and refutes, and that
very soundly all those reasons which are brought to prove that Christ had any
such temporal dominion.

Gretzer Ia. Gretz in sua defens. lib. 5. Bellar de Romans Pontif.
not only defends Bellarmine herein, but refutes Gretz. ibid. defens. ca. 4.
and 5.
the whole dispute of Alex. Carerius, for the Popes temporal Monarchy against
Bellarmine, and shows how weak, feeble, and unjust that Anathema Ibid.. Sed
en.
is which Carerius denounced against Bellarmine, for denying that temporal
Monarchy to the Pope.

Skulkenius Adulph. Skulchen. Apol. pro Bellar. contra Widdring. pa. 70.
says of Anto. Rossellus, Omnino nobiscum sentit, he is altogether in this
matter of our mind; For he teaches, that the Pope as Pope has not the direct
dominion of temporal things, and non esse vniuersalem totius orbis Monarcham,
and that he is not the universal Monarch of the world. Again, speaking of
those words of Otho Frising. Reges nullum praeter deum supra le habent, Kings
have none above them but God, Otho, says he Ibid. pa. 78.
, meant this de superiori politico sieve temporali, of a Political or Temporal
Monarch, such an one Kings have not above them. Again Ibid. pa. 108
, The height of Emperors and Kings has not any temporal power superior to
them. In this sense, Independens est a potestate superiore temporali, it does
not depend on a superior power, but has his immediate dependence on God.

Breirley Breireley Apolog. protest. in Praef. sect. 20.
, in his Apology for the Roman faith, taken out of diverse wrested and
miserably perverted testimonies of Protestants; and by him called the
Protestant Apology, says, They exceed measure who load the supreme Pastor of
the Church, with incompetent attributes of Temporal authority, and of the
principality of the whole world.

Rob. Parsons Rob. Persons Treatis of Mitigat. ca. 2. nu. 29.
, that Jesuitical Polypragmon in all States, Whereas they say, that we
Catholics, ascribe Monarchical, civil power and Soueraignetie over Kings
unto the Pope: this of civil Sovereignty, is a mere fiction and calumniation,
for we ascribe no such power unto the Pope over Princes, or their subjects,
but that Soueraignetie only which belongs to the spiritual head, which is
only spiritual, and for spiritual ends. Again Idem, in his answer to Sir
Edw. Coke. ca. 2. nu. 31.
, Though Kings and Emperors he Supreme in Temporal authority, yet in
Spiritual, Bishops are more eminent then they.

George Blackwell Georg Blackwell epist. ad Bellar. Fateor me illud iuramentum
sustepisse.
their Archpriest, having by solemn oath professed, That the Pope neither of
himself, nor by any authory of the Church or See of Rome, has any power or
authority to depose Kings, afterward not only maintained the same assertion,
but in more express manner explained the same: of the opinion of the
Canonists, that the Pope is directly the Lord of the whole world in
temporalibus, he says Large Examine of Geor. Blackwell. pa. 35.
; That as he swear, so he does constantly affirm, that he holds the
opinion concerning the Popes direct Dominion in Temporalibus, to be untrue:
that Ibid pa. 55. 56. and seq.
the Pope is not Lord of the whole world; nor yet of the Christian world; that
he has no Temporal dominion of any one place iure diuino. After this he
professes Ibid. pa. 70. 71.
further, That as the Pope has no direct Dominion in Temporalibus, so neither
has he indirectly, and in reference to spiritual ends, authority to depose
Princes, to absolve subjects, or the like: and that Card. Bellarmines reasons,
to prove this indirect power in Temporalibus, are weak Ibid. pa. 65. 66.
, and insufficient. In sum, that his Ibid. pa. 79.
judgment is, that the Popes spiritual authority extends no further, then to
the censures of the Church properly so called, and that the Pope has no
authority in Temporalibus, either directly or indirectly to depose Kings.

Temporal things, says Suares Suares disput. 16. de Excomm. mayor. sect. 1.
, do fall but indirectly under the power of the Spiritual, that is, in order
to a spiritual end.

Nauar Nauar Relect cap. Nouit. de Iudic. not. 3. pa. 196.
, Ecclesiastical power shall extend it self so far, as the order of things
supernatural does require, and no further.

The Catholic Author Le Franc. d^scourse pa 14.
of the Franck discourse, entreating of this, which he calls a Jesuitical
position, That the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings, to free subjects
from their oaths of Allegiance, to deprive them of their Scepters and Crowns,
calls it in express terms a pestilent and pernicious doctrine, flatly Ibid.
pa 16.
repugnant to the World and will of God, adding, This Pa. 18.
has ever been the judgment of the Church of France, to excommunicate all
those that avouch these and such assertions, as Authors of a barbarous and most
accursed doctrine, which begets a world of murders, and a sea of ahhomination.

Another of their Catholics Jesuits Catechism lib. 3. c^. 17.. For.
in his Jesuits Catechism, We hold it for an Article firm and indubitate,
that our King is not subject to the Popes excommunication; And he not only
often inueigheth against that Jesuitical doctrine of excommunicating and
deposing Kings, but says Lib eod. ca. 9. in Titulo.
, That it is an heresy, to approve the killing of Princes, though they be
Heretics.

Permulti alij Angli Catholici English Catholics vt testatur Widdring. in
Apol. Princ. contr. Bell. nu. 3.
, very many English Catholics, do profess that it is not sufficiently
proved, either by testimony of Scripture, or Apostolical tradition, or by
authority of the holy Fathers, or by Theological reason, summum Pontificem
vllum prorsus habere ex Christi institutione rerum temporalium dominum, that
the Pope has any dominion at all in Temporal matters granted him from Christ,
so that he may either directly or indirectly, that is in respect of the
spiriuall good, depose Princes.

Mart. Becanus a Jesuit, published anno 1612. a book entitled Controuersia
Anglicana, wherein he has these assertions, Catholics Becan. controu. Anglic.
cap. 3. q. 2. nu. 1
do affirm, and that rightly, that the Pope who may excommunicate Kings, may
also depose them: having cited many examples of Kings deposed by Popes, he
says Cap. eod. q. 3. nu 14.
, What those Popes did, they did by right, and they had power and authority to
depose Kings. The Ibid. nu. 17.
usual way of deposing Kings, is to absolve subjects a debito vinculo
subiectionis, from their due bond of subjection, and this the Pope may lawfully
do: and many the like. Of these and like assertions of Becanus, the Faculty
of Paris Censura Facult. Paris. de lib. Becani. pa. 15.
gives this censure, that he falsely ascribes to Catholics, the defending of
new errors and crimes, that he brings in dangerous scismes, depraues the
Scriptures, spoils Temporal Lords of their rights, makes the killing of
Princes which is execrable, to be thought lawful. They Ibid.
call this book of Becanus, Pestilentissimum librum, a most pestilent book:
the doctrine contained therein, pestilentem doctrinam Ibid. pa. 17*
, pestilent doctrine, which robs Princes of their supreme power, and stirs
up subjects to rebellion and parricide. Johan. Filesacke a Doctor of that
Faculty professes Ibid. pa. 15.
after he had read that book, alium a se pestilentiorem nunquam visum, that he
never saw a more pestilent book. Georg. Erogerius Censura Frogerii. de lib.
Becani. ibid. pa. 23. 24.
one of the Sorbonist Doctors, says, He could not choose, but be exceedingly
incensed against Becanus, dirum et pessime feriatum hominum, that wicked and
execrable man, he could not but reject, yea proculcare trample under his feet,
his maniacall, and demoniacall book, and oppose the sacred scripture, aduersus
istam pestilentissimam, furiosissimamque Becani buccam, against that most
pestilent and furious doctrine of Becanus. Claudius Aquauiua Censura Claud.
Aqua^^iu. de lib. Becan. ibid. pa. 22.
, provost General of the Jesuits, censures the selfsame book, as written
rashly, as being disallowed by the society of the Jesuits. Besides these,
Card. Bellarmine Censur. Card. Bell^rmini de libro Becani. ibid pa. 10.
, (whose very doctrine, and no other, Becanus defends) yea Pope Paulus the fifth
Censura Pauli 5. de lib. Becan. ibid.
himself, whose authority is therein maintained, they both censure that book
as containing many false, timerarious, scandalous, and seditious matters, and
they utterly prohibited it to be read, or so much as kept by any, until it be
corrected.

And to allege no more, (for it were even an endless and irksome work to
cite all, they being in number so infinite) I will conclude with that
testimony of Bellarmine Bellar. l. b. 5. de Romans Pont. ca. 1.
This, that the Pope as Pope has not directly and immediately any Temporal
power, but only spiritual, est Catholicorum Theologorum Catholioi Theologi.
communis sententia, it is the common judgment of Catholic Divines.

Thus we see, that this Temporal Monarchical Sovereignty now claimed for the
Pope, has been by Apostles, Councels, Popes, Fathers, Bishops, and learned
Writers; yea even by the most earnest Romanists, and chief pillars of their
present Church, with an uniform consent oppugned and condemned in all
successiue ages of the Church, even from the days of Christ unto this very
present time.

CHAP. XII.
That the Popes Temporal Monarchy is condemned by Emperors, Kings, and
Imperial States in the several ages of the Church.
AFter Councels, Fathers, Bishops, and learned Writers in all ages of the
Church, by which as you have seen the Popes temporal Monarchy has bin
condemned, there remains in the last place one consideration touching Kings
and Emperors, of whom they pretend Vt supra ostensum est. ca. 1.
, that they not only have acknowledged this Monarchical Sovereignty, but in
token thereof, have subjected themselves, and yielded up their Kingdoms to the
Pope. How to this purpose Steuchus and Gretzer have published many Writings,
Grants, and Donations of several Kings and Kingdoms, I have before entreated.
To both these I must here adioyne a Vaticane Manuscript of one Nicholas Card.
of Arragonia, from whom both Steuchus and Gretzer borrowed, and with much ease
exscribed those very Gifts and Grants which they so venditate to the world.
This Nicholas, being as earnest for the Popes Temporal Monarchy, as either
Bozius, or Scioppius, tells us, that Popes Nichol. Card de Art. M. s. fol. 61.
as Christ's Vicares having the fullness of power, vtrumque gladium possunt ad
libitum exercere, may at their pleasure exercise either sword, Excommunicate,
and depose Kings and Emperors. And that both de iure and de facto diverse
worthy Popes have exercised this power, he shows Ibid. fol. 61. and seq.
by an whole Catalogue of Emperors and Kings, no fewer then 28. deposed by
them. For the further advancing of this Papal Temporal Monarchy, the same
Nicholas, has, and that as he tells Ibid. in Tit. lib.
us, with great labor and industry, compiled out of diverse Registries and
Chronicles, those same (and many other) writings and grants made to the Popes,
of Rome, Italy, Spain, France, England, Denmark, Hungary, Russia, Croatia,
Bohemia, and diverse others, which for the most part in the books of Steuchus
and Gretzer are to be seen. Nor can either the name of Nicholas, or the
Manuscript left by him, add credit or countenance to those Grants and
writings. What worth and credit he and his Records are of, it may be perceived
by his commending of the Charter Ibid. fol. 46. and seq.
of Constautines Donation, and diverse such like; but I will only here mention
two of his passages, by which you may conjecture his verity in the rest. The
former is, That Idem fol. 88.
when Constantine builded the Church of our Savior in the Laterane (that was
as he elsewhere Ibid. fol. 46.
says, The fourth day after he was baptized by Siluester) he placed in that
Church, the Arc of the Testament, which Titus carried away from Jerusalem, the
golden Emerods, the golden Mise, the tables of the Testament, the rod of Aaron,
the golden pot, with Manna, the seemlesse coat of Christ, the vestment of John
Baptist, the sheeres wherewith John the Evangelist was polled. Rare monuments,
able to cause long pilgrimages and devout adoration, if the Roman Bishops have
kept til these days those Deposita. The other is the prophecy of Romulus
touching Christ. Nicholas entreating of the Palaces in Rome, (he reckons 16.)
In the Palace of Romulus, who builded Rome, Romulus, says he Ibid. fol. 74.
, set up his own statue made of gold, saying, Non cadet donec Virgo pariet,
This my statue shall not fall till a Virgin bring forth a child. And as soon
as ever the Virgin Mary had brought forth Christ, statua illa corruit, says
Nicholas, that statue fell down to the ground. Such rare and admirable Records
and Monuments has Nicholas compiled, and out of him Steuchus and Gretzer
published; which though in themselves they might justly be contemned, yet
because the Popes and their flatterers applaud and please themselves with such
toys and fancies, let us see how weak they are to support that Monarchical
Sovereignty, which they build on such sandy foundations; and I nothing doubt
to make it evident, that by none of all their pretenses, none of those most
renowned and glorious Empires ever were, or ever will be brought under the
yoke of subjection to the Popes Temporal Monarchy.

Here first in general for all kingdoms it may be rightly said, that the
admitting of this one Universal Temporal Monarchy of the Pope, is the utter
ruinating, adnulling and annihilating of all other kingdoms in the world.
Scioppius truly says Sciop. in 540 Ecclesiast. ca. 46. pa. 15^.
, This one kingdom, tollit omnia alia regna mu^di, does abolish all other
temporal kingdoms. And to the like purpose Amb. Catharinus Amb. Cathar. in cap.
13. ad Rom.. Verum.
, If the Pope be the temporal Monarch of the whole world, nulli ergo vere
terrarum Domini essent in temporalibus, sed solus Pontifex, then should none
else be truly Temporal Kings here upon earth, but only the Pope. For seeing
Sovereignty (which as I have formerly proved, is the very essence of Regal
authority) should then be in the Pope alone, he alone and none else should
truly be King: Al others should be but Viceroyes, Deputies, or Lieutenants
under him, subject to him, as their supreme Lord both for their persons and
possessions. So this very position of the Popes Universal temporal Dominion
above all Kings, implies an evident and unavoidable contradiction to it self.
For if the Pope be such a Monarch, there can be no other Kings to acknowledge
this Papal Monarchy. And if there be any other Kings to acknowledge this,
even eo nomine, for that they are Kings, they do directly deny and overthrow
his Monarchical Sovereignty.

But if you please to descend to particulars, it will clearly appear, that
the acknowledgment of this Papal Monarchy is neither so general, nor so true
as they pretend and boast. Let us begin with the most Christian King, and his
Kingdom of France; for which there are so many evidences easy to be produced,
that by it alone the pretended Temporal Monarchy of the Pope is undeniably
refuted. Of it Ioh. Mayor Ioh. Mayor in 4. Sentent. did. 24. q. 3. Concl. 3.
says, The Pope has nullum titulum, no title at all in temporal matters in
the Kingdom of France. The French King, says Ioh. Igneus Ioh. Igneus Repet.
in le. Donationes. nu. 28.
, Non recognoscit superiorem in temporalibus, does not acknowledge any to be
his superior in Temporal matters. Guil. Benedictus speaking of the French
State, says Guil Bened. in repet. cap. Rai^u^ij Decil. 2. (...). 27. 28.
, If one do appeal, it must be to the King, not to the Pope, for seeing he is
an Emperor in his kingdom, and the Empire is notorie quoad temporalia a
superioritate Papae exemptum, notoriously known for Temporal matters to be
exempted from the superiority of the Pope, there is no appeal from the King,
seeing the kingdom of France is none of those which are held in fee from the
Pope. Aegidius Romanus writes very Aegid. Rom quaest. de vtraque Potestat.
artic. 5.
fully to this purpose, The French King a solo Deo immediate tenet and possidet
Regnum suum, non ab homine quoqua^, holds immediately his kingdom from God
only, and not from any man. He holds it not of the Pope, neither as he is a
man, neither as he is the Vicar of Christ. And if you reply, that though he do
not de facto acknowledge any Superior, yet de Iure, he ought so to do.
Respondemus quod non, we answer (says he,) that de Iure he ought not. The
French Lib. eod. art. 4.
King is not subject to the Pope, nec ei tenetur^ respondere, neither ought to
answer him for the Fee of his kingdom. The French King, says Cassaneus
Cassan. Catal. glor mundi part. 5. consid. 24 nu. 179.
, acknowledges no Superior; He Idem. part. 5. cons. 31.. 1
in his kingdom, like the Emperor solus in temporalibus praeesse debet, alone
ought to be Supreme in Temporal matters. Again Ibid.. 2.
, Although Boniface the eight by his Constitution sent to Philip the fair,
declared the kingdom of France to be subject to the Pope in temporal matters,
yet Clement the fifth his successor, eam constitutionem reuocauit, revoked that
Constitution made by Boniface, as it is evident in the Extrau^ cap. Meruit. I
omit many other like evident testimonies, the rather because I have often
before touched this point; and that one express Confession, yea Decree of Pope
Innocentius is so clear, that there needs no further proof in this matter.
The French King, says he Cap. Per Venerabilem, extr. qui fill. sint Legi^.
, superiorem in Temporalibus minime recognoscit, does acknowledge none to be
his superior in Temporal affairs. Of which words Cassaneus thus Cassan lib.
cit. Cons. 28.. Ex quo etia^.
writes, I find it determined by the Popes, that the French King
acknowledges none to be his superior in temporail matters, ca. Per
Venerabilem: which text loquitur de Iure, et non de facto, speaks not of the
fact, but of the right, because the Pope (in his Decrees) namquam loquitur in
facto sed in iure tantum, never declares what is done, but what in right ought
to be done. And though it were easy by very many examples of the dealings of
the French Kings with the Pope to confirm this truth, some of which I have
before expressed, yet I will mention at this time no more, but that one of
Philip the fair. He to the letters of Boniface the eight, signifying to him,
that he was subject to the Pope, both in temporal and spiritual matters,
returned an answer to Boniface in this manner Li^erae Philippi apud Nichol.
Gillium in Phil. pulch.
: Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, Let your great foolishness understand and know,
that in temporal matters we are subject to none, and those who think
otherwise (one of the chief of which was the Pope) dementes et fatuos
reputamus, we account mad men and fools.

For the Catholic King, and his kingdoms of Spain, how directly repugnant
to this Papal Monarchy are those clear and evident Testimonies of their best
learned writers of that Nation? That of Cardinal Turrecremata Turrecrem. in
Sum. de Eccles li. 2. c. 113.
, The Pope by reason of the Papacy has no direct power in temporal matters,
extra principatum suum ecclesiasticum, out of his own Ecclesiastical
principallitie: no part of which is the kingdom of Spain. That of Franc. a
Victoria Fr. a Victor Relect 1. de potest. Eccles sec. 6. nu. 8.
, There is no direct temporal power at all in the Pope: then certainly no
Monarchical sovereignty in Spain. Whereof he gives a true reason, because
there is no power in the Pope, which is directed to a temporal end: and such
is that power which is merely temporal. That of Dom. Soto D^m. Soto. in 4.
sent. did. 25. q 2. art. 1. concl. 5.
, Every King (then doubtless the King of Spain) is in his own kingdom the
supreme Judge for temporal matters. That of Did. Couarruuias r a Lawyer and
Bishop also, Did. Couar. Pract. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 2.
Semper mansit apud Regem ipsum suprema iurisdictio, Supreme jurisdiction
remained ever in the King of Spain himself. And this he proves besides other
reasons, by a pragmaticall sanction of Ferdinand and Elizabeth, an. 1502. That
of John de la Puente, their late and famous Chronicler, whose scope is to show
the conueniencie of a double Catholic Monarchy. Iuan de la Pu^nt. de la
conueniencia de las dos Mo^arquias Catholicas. Cit. lib^i*
The one of which only, (to wit the Spiritual) to belong to the Pope, whom he
compares to the Greater light, vt praesit vrbi and orbi: The other (to wit the
Temporal) to belong to him, whom he compares to the lesser light, vt subdatur
vrbi and dominetur orbi, the very frontispice of his book does make most
evident. To these Spanish writers of best note, may be added that of John Mayor
Ioh Mayor. in did. 24 q. 3.. Tertia conclusio.
, The Pope nullum habet titulum super regem Hispaniarum in temporalibus, has
no title or authority over the king of Spain in temporal matters: And that of
Cassancus Cass^n. in Cacal glot. mundi part. 5. Consid. 28.. ^mo. etiam.
, Those Princes which do acknowledge any superior unto them, are called
superillustnes. Among which he expressly reckons the Kings of Spain.

How distasteful was this Papal Monarchy to that kingdom, when not many
years since the whole Gold. in su^ Repl c. 9. p 83.
eleventh tome of Card. Baronius his ecclesiastical Annals were by the kings
Edict prohibited, and that under the pain of high treason either to be printed
or sold in Spain, because there was inserted into that Tome, the book of
Baron, touching the Monarchy of Sicilie, wherein he labors to prove* not the
king of Spain, but the Pope to be the Monarch thereof? When Card. Columna
further writ a very sharp censure Censura Tract, Baronij de Monar. Sicil. per
Card. Colum.
both of Baron himself, and of his book, taking it indignly (as justly he
might) that the king of Spain Lib. cit. pa. 159.
qui ea Monarchia potitur et fruitur, who does now (says he) possess and
enjoy, and that also, haereditario iure Ibid. pa. 161.
, by a rightful inheritance, that Monarchy, should be called by Card. Baronius
a monster D^ram nimis vt is Ecclesiae monstru^ dicatur and oftentum ibid, p.
^5^.
, a tyrant ^yrannus and Ecclesiae hostibus de terror. ibid.
, one worse then the enemies of the Church. Will they patiently endure the Pope
to be called the Supreme Direct Monarch and Temporal Lord of all Spain, yea
of all the world, who so hardly can digest his Te^porall Monarchy in that one
little Island?

Have they not also given diverse eminent and evident tokens of their dislike to
that Monarchy? When Clement the seventh fearing the greatness of Charles the
fifth, then king of Spain, sought Occulta eu^ venetis consilia inijt, vt
Caesa^em Mediola^o exueret. Onuph. in vit. ^lem, 7. pa. 400
by cunning dealing to deprive him of Millane, and for that purpose made an
holy league, as they called it, Charles being for this and some other like
causes incensed, sent an Imperator nihil prius habuit quam exercitum in Italiam
mittere. Parahp. Abb. Vrsperg. ann. 1527.
army into Italic under the leading of Carolus Burbonius. When the Caesarean
army approached to Rome, the Roman Jupiter thunders out his Excommunications
Ibid.
against the Lutherans, (so he called the French;) and against the Marranes,
(so in contumely he called the Spaniards:) Did either the Spanish or French
fear or regard those censures? Nothing less. They besieged Append. ad Chron.
Nauclan. 1527. and Guiccard. lib. 18. hist. pa. 774.
Rome, took it, and made such hauock therein, vt ab Hunnorum et Gothoru^
diebus, that the like miserable spoil had never been seen, since the days
that the Goths and Vandals surprised Rome: or as Onuphrius Onuph. loc. cit.
pa. 402.
says: Never in the memory of man, maiori truculentia saeuitu^, was there
greater cruelty used either against Turks or most deadly enemies. The Pope and
thirteen Cardinals who being taken prisoners, and kept in the Castle of Saint
Angelo, were glad to Onuph. loc. cit. and Guiccard lib. 18. pa. 782.
make covenants upon very hard conditions. First, that the Pope cuncta quae
Caesar imperasset se facturu^ polliceretur, should promise to do whatsoever
Charles the fifth should command. Next, that himself with his 13 Cardinals
should stay in prison till their ransomes (which surmounted many hundred
thousand pounds) were paid: then to be kept at Naples or Caieta, and there
exspect what Charles the Emperor would decree of them.

It is a wonder to see how shameless Surius, Card. Alane, and others are, in
striving to excuse Charles 5. in this action. All this was done (say they
Surius co^m. rer. in orb gest. an. 1527* Card. Alan. in lib. ad Persequutores
Anglos. contra Justice. Britan.
) insciente et inuito Caesare, Charles neither knowing, nor approouing thereof:
and in token of his dislike hereof, as soon as the report came into Spain,
presently the King commanded those sportes and joyful celebrities (which then
were used for joy of his son Philips birth) to be left off, yea he
diligently excused himself both to the Pope and other Princes. Thus they;
whose whole narrations is quite contrary to the truth. For first Charles
Paralip. ad Abb. Vrsper. an. cit. pa. 472.
purposely sent his army into Italy, qui cunctis minaretur, threatening revenge
to all who were confederates in that holy league: and the Pope was author
conspirationis, the very author and ringleader of that conspiracy: Then,
Guiccardine (who is of all the most faithful relator of these matters,
happening in his own time) expressly notes Guic. lib. 18 pa. 790.
, that Charles though in words he said he was sorry for the Popes being taken,
tamen ei gratissimam fuisse animadvertebatur, yet it was observed to have been
gladsome news unto him. Neither did he, says Guiccardine, conceal this,
seeing inceptos ob filij natalem ludos, non intermisit, he did not so much as
break off or interrupt those plays, sports, and celebrities which was then
begun for joy of his sons birth; yea, he was so far also from excusing
this fact either to the Pope or other Princes, that he purposed to have
brought the Pope prisoner into Spain: but partly the infamy of doing so with
the vicare of Christ restrained him; and partly the earnest solicitation of
Henry the eight, King of England, of Francis the French King, and others
moved him to send to Lanoy, the General of his army, to set the Pope at
liberty.

The same Charles upon another displeasure against the Pope, set forth an Edict
Guiccard. lib. 17 pa. 6. 8.
in Spain, whereby he prohibited his subjects to have their causes debated in
the Roman Court. Whence upon a solemn day of pleading, a Spaniard in the
Kings name openly in the Roman Court, commanded diverse, vt a litibus in eo
foro prosequendis desisterent, that they should desist from prosecuting their
causes in the Popes Court.

The like may be seen in Philip the second, son of this Charles. He to
revenge the manifold injuries Quae contra regem suum a pontificatus initio
molitus fuerat sigillatim aperiens. Onuph. in vit. Paul. 4. pa 451
offered unto him by Paul the fourth, sent Guil. Paradon. lib. de motibus
Galliae. apud Scard. to. 4.
Duke D'alua with a mighty army into Italy against the Pope; Qui Pontificiae
ditionis fines perpopulatus, who having exceedingly wasted the Popes
Territories, besiedged the City, spoiled the Citizens, burnt many fair
houses, slew many of the people, Pontificem sacra ditione exturbaturus, and
would have thrust the Pope from his patrimony and holy seat, if the French King
ayding the Pope, had not removed the danger at that time. Do these seem
either in Charles or Philip or others acknowledgements of the Popes supreme
and Universal Temporal Monarchy?

Now whereas Carerius Carer and Tho Boz. cit. ca. 1. pa. 22.
and Thomas Bozius boaste, that the Pope gave the Indies unto the King of
Spain, by virtue of which Donation he still holds them; they are many ways,
and childishly mistaken in this matter. The Kings of Spain have to those parts
of the Indies which they justly possess, a far stronger title then any
Charter from Pope Alexander, as Franc. a Victoria at large declares Fran a
Vict. Relect. de Indis.
. Nay that Charter of Alexander to give them no title at all thereunto, Card.
Bellarmine does witness, who thus writes; The Bell lib. 5. de Romans Pontis.
ca. ^.. At Alexander.
Pope divided the Indies betwixt the Kings of Spain and Portugal, not to this
end that they should subdue those Infidels, et eorum regna occupare, and take
their kingdoms unto themselves, sed solum vt eo adducerent praedicatores, but
only that they should bring thither Preachers of the Christian faith, and
defend them, and such Christians as they converted. There may also another
answer be given to Carerius, touching that Papal Donation; even the same which
Attabaliba an Indian King, of the Province of Peruana, gave in this very
matter: but the answer is such, as argues more acuteness, magnanimity, and
wisdom, the^ one would easily expect of a barbarous Indian. Vincentius the
Dominican, made a pithy Benzo. Histor. noui orbis. lib. 3. ca. 3.
Oration to persuade him to the Christian faith, he declared unto him both the
Popes power, who had given those unknown Countries to the King of Spain; and
the puissance of the King of Spain, totius orbis Monarchae, as he there calls
him: aduising Attabaliba to embrace his friendship, and become tributarie unto
him; which if he would not willingly do, he should vi ^t armis be enforced
thereunto. To this Attabaliba answered, That he did willingly ^ccept the
friendship of the highest Monarch of the world, but it was not equal that a
free King should become tributary to him who^ he never saw. And for the Pope he
added, Pontificem insigniter fatuum et impudentem esse, eo facile prodi, quod
alienatam liberaliter largiatur, the Pope to be exceeding foolish and
shameless is hereby evident, in that he is so liberal in giving that which is
none of his own, but belongs to others. For the other example of the Kingdom
of Nauar, of which Scioppius says, that it is held nullo alio tuulo, but by
the Popes Donation: were it free to discourse of such points, it were easy to
show, how their own Genebrard Gil. Geneb. in sua Chron.
fets down another, and far stronger Title to that Kingdom, yea such also,
as wholly excludes the Popes donation: easy again to show, how by that, which
some other Frank. discourse.
of their own Catholics relate touching that very kingdom of Nauar, that
there is no comfort for any Prince to hold any kingdom by that title. But as
it was unfit for Scioppius to be so peremptory, so neither is it fit for me,
nor will I presume to enter into the discussion of such arguments. This which I
have already said being sufficient to be spoken of the kingdom of Spain.

For the kingdom of England, their insolency in pretending the Popes Temporal
Sovereignty over it, enforces me more at large to manifest the vanity of such
their boasting. And I nothing doubt, but to make clear unto them that which
Bracton says, and that Bract. de legib. and consuet. Anglo. lib. 1. c. 8. nu.
2. 5.
most truly, Every subject is under the King, ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub
Deo but the King himself is subject to none but only to God. Let us begin at
the Conquest, which fell out in that very age wherein both the mists of
superstition had much darkened the faith, and the pride of the Roman See, by
the means of Hildebrand, was now advanced to the zenith of their highest
exaltation.

How far that renowned Conqueror was from acknowledging their Papal
Monarchy, or superiority in this kingdom, his own Epistle written to Pope
Hildebrand, recorded in an ancient Manuscript Cod. ille M. S extat in nobili
Biblioth. Dom. Rob. Cottoni. and citat a Ioh. Pichardo ad Epist. 83. lib. 3.
Epist. Anselmi. and a Ioh. Speed in Chron. in vita Guil. Rufi.
among the Epistles of Lanfranc, does demonstrate. Hubert your Legate came unto
me, warning me from your Holiness, that I should do feolty unto you, and to
your successors, and warning me also to consider better of that money which my
ancestors used to send to the Roman Church. I have yielded to the one, I have
not yielded to the other. Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo, I neither would
do feolty to you, neither will I. Because I neither promised it my self, nor
do I find, that my predecessors have done that to your predecessors. Could
he more fully or expressly deny that Papal Sovereignty, and testify his
Ancestors, the Kings of England never to have acknowledged the same?

In the next Kings days there fell out great contention betwixt William Rufus,
the son of the Conqueror, and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury. When Math.
Paris. in Guil. 2. an. 1094. Hoc.
Anselme showed his purpose to go to Rome to Pope Vrbane, the King waxed
exceeding angry thereat, and told him, quod nullus Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus
Regni sui, curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset, That no Archbishop or Bishop of
this Kingdom was subject to the Roman Court, or to the Pope. Specially,
seeing the King of England eandem potestatem haberet, had the same power in his
kingdom, (and that even from Ex Eadmero citant tum Hollinsh chro. in Will.
Rufus. an. 1099. pa. 24. tum Speed. Chron. in Will. Ruf.
the Conversion of this Realm unto the Christian faith) which the Emperor
challenged in the Empire, And what Hollinsh. loc. cit.
said he, has the Pope to do in the Empire, or in my kingdom touching
temporal liberties? It is his duty to be careful for the soul of man, and to
see that heresies do not spring up. Yea Anselme Mat. Paris. loc. cit.
, ob hanc rem vt laesae maiestatis reus postulatur, was accused as guilty of
high treason for this very cause, of seeking to appeal to the Pope: and to
this accusation plurimi Episcopi suum calculum adijciebant, most of the Bishops
consented that it was just and right. Neither would the King make any agreement
with Anselme, nisi protestaretur cum iuramento, unless he made protestation,
and that with an oath, that he would not obey the command of Pope Vrbane; but
if he would swear not to go to the Pope, nec Proposuit mihi Rex ne aliquando
Apostolicum appellarem. Ansel. Epist. 40. lib. 3.
pro quouis negotio Romanae sedis audientiam appellaturum, neither to appeal
to the Roman See for any business whatsoever, then he should enjoy all favor
and tranquillity. If otherwise he would adventure to pass over sea, that is to
say, to go to the Pope, nullam reuertendi spem in posterum ei futuram, he
told him he should never return into his Realm again.

In the time of Henry the first, when Anselme was recalled to his See, the
contention about Inuestitures, which was begun with William Rufus, continuing,
Anselme Epist. Anfel ni ad Pascalem. Quae re^itatur in Act. and Monument. in
Hen. 1. pa. 178.
writ thus to Pope Pascalis, I showed them the Apostolic Decree, that none
should take Inuestiture of Lay men, or become the Kings man for it: and that no
man should presume to consecrate him that did offend herein. When the King, his
Nobles, and the Bishops themselves and others of lower degree, heard these
things, they took them so grievously, that they said they would in no case
agree to this thing; (tam iniquo Papae decreto, as others Vt ex Iornal. hist.
and Walt. Covent. dicitur in Antiq. Brit. in Anselm.
say;) and that they would rather drive me out of the kingdom, and forsake the
Romish Church, then keep those things: or as others Ibid.
set it down, rather then approve this Decree or sentence of the Pope, a iure
Regis Regnique consuetudine prorsus alienam, being utterly repugnant to the
right of the King, and custom of the kingdom. Thurstane being elect
Archbishop of york, obtained Math. Paris. an. 1119. in initio.
leave of the same King Henry the first, to go to the Council at Rhemes, but
with condition, that he should not receive consecration from the Pope. When
contrary to his promise, he received the Papal consecration, the King
understanding thereof, Omnem dominationis suaelo cum ei inter dixit, he forbad
him to come within his kingdoms or dominions. Evident tokens that the King and
State of England, held not the Pope for their Temporal Lord, seeing even in
Spiritual causes they yielded so slender subjection, that they were ready to
renounce and forsake the Roman Church, rather then consent to the Pope in
those things.

In the reign of Henry the second, the King Math. Paris. in Hen. 2. ann.
1164. in initio
called a very great assembly to Clarendon, at which were present the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and Nobles of the
Kingdom. In it was made a Recognition and confirmation of the customs and
liberties of the kingdom, anciently vsea in the times of former Kings, and
which debebant in Regno, and ab omnibus teneri, ought to be observed in this
kingdom, and maintained by all. One of those ancient customs was this, That
no Archbishop, Bishop, or other person of this kingdom, might go out of the
Realm (to wit, to the Pope) abque licentia Domini Regis, without the Kings
leave: and if the King granted them leave, yet they should put in security,
that neither in going, returning, nor staying, they should do ought to the
hurt or damage of the King or kingdom. Another custom was, That if any
appealed, it should be from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from him to the
Archbishop, and from him to the King, ita quod non debeat vltra procedi absque
assensu Domini Regis, from the King they might appeal to none, nor proceed
further in the cause without the Kings license. When the King and whole State
confirmed these decrees, they did even demonstrate, that they held not the Pope
to be a superior Lord or higher Judge, then the King, no not in
Ecclesiastical, much less in civil causes. To these Decrees at Clarendon,
Thomas Becket Hanc recognitionem Archiepiscopi, etc. cum proceribus cunctis
iurauerunt, and firmiter pro miserunt obseruandas, etc. Math. Paris. ibid. pa.
135. and Iho. Cantuar. cum eas leges obseruare iuramento firmasset. ibid.. His
itaque.
(whom they call a Martyr, but who was in truth, one of the most insolent and
perjured Traitors, that ever England bare or bred) consented and swore to
observe the same, and that bona fide and absque malo ingenio in perpetuum,
faithfully and without fraud for ever, as did also the other Bishops, Abbots,
and Clergy, with the Earls, Barons, and all the Nobles. Beckot not long after
(such is the bonafides of a true Romanist) repented Ibid. and. Alexander.
of this ^ath, procured absolution from it at the hands of Alexander, the
supposed Pope: (for in truth he was but an intruder and Pseudo-Pope, as by that
which I have formerly Sup. ca. 7.
said, is evident) and attempted Math. Paris. lo. cit.. Videns.
to go to Rome without the Kings leave, but was driven back by the wind: for
which and other offenses he was called, and came to another great assembly De
quo Rog. Houed. part. 2. post an. 1165. pa. 283. and Paris. loc. cit. pa. 137.
of the State, both Bishops and Barons held at Northampton. Where fearing what
sentence would pass against him, he (being again perjured) appealed to the
Pope. The judgment Rog. Houed. loc. cit.
of the Barons was, that he was worthy to be apprehended and imprisoned: But
before he heard their judgment he went away, omnibus clamantibus and
dicentibus, Quo progrederis proditor, all crying after him, and calling him
Traitor. Did they account the Pope the supreme Lord or Judge, when both by
oath they bind all, not to appeal unto him, and judged the very appealing to
him, to be an act of Treason?

If we look into the Acts of Parliaments, wherein is expressed the consenting
voice and judgment of the whole kingdom, it is easy to observe, and evident
to be seen, that in them the Kings of this Realm are usually called, The
Sovereign Lords; as in the Statute of Merton, an. 20. Hen. 3. an. 3. Edw. 1.
an. 1. Edw. 2. and in like sort in the reign of every King following. Can
there be a more clear and certain demonstration, that the Popes Sovereignty
and Monarchy was not here admitted, when by the whole State the King is with
one voice proclaimed to be the Supreme Lord? Or can any be Superior to him
that is Supreme?

In the reign of Edw. the first, in the Statute at Carlisle Stat. an. 25. Ed.
1. quod repetitur. 25. Ed. 3.
, complaint being made, that the ^ishop of Rome usurping the segniories in
Ecclesiastical dignities and Benefices, bestowing and granting the same to
aliens, and to whom he pleased, as if he were the Patron of them, it was
decreed by the whole Parliament, that such oppressions, greeuances, and
damages, should not be from thenceforth suffered, yea, they plainly affirm,
such usurpation (so they call it) of the Pope, to be the disinherison of the
King, Earls, Barons, and others, and to be the destruction of the laws of
this Realm. In the same Kings reign there arose a very great contention about
the Dominion of Scotland, which King Edward claimed Vt vider^ est, in literis
Edw. 1. ad Bonisac. 8. apud Math. Westan. an. 1301.
to belong to the Kings of England, as the direct and supreme Lords thereof;
Boniface the eight (who challenged Vt liquet ex literis Bonifacij 8. ad Edw. 1
apud Westmo. anno eodem*
most earnestly the same kingdom to belong to the Pope, saying; Nulli in
dubium veniat, that none should so much as doubt thereof:) writ to the King,
willing him to Volumus quod tuos procuratores and nuncios mittas etc. ibid.
send his Procurators and Legates to Rome, with a Declaration of his Title,
that there he might receive judgment in that cause in the Remane Court. The
King resolutely, and constantly refused either to write or send, in forma
iudicij, as if he would receive any judgment of the Pope therein. And calling
a very great assembly of his Barons to Lincoln, they with one consent returned
this answer to the Pope. That Literae Comitum and Baronu^ Angliae, Bonif. 8.
ibid e^ apud Math. Westmonast.
the Kings of England, by the pre-eminence of their royal dignity, and by the
custom cunctis temporibus irrefragabiliter obseruatae, which had been
observed in all times without any contradiction, neither have answered, nor
ought to answer for the right in that kingdom, aut alijs suis temporalibus,
or for any other of their temporalties, to any either Ecclesiastical or
secular Judge. And this is our unanimous consent, that our King for any of his
temporalties, nullatenus respondeat iudicialiter coram vobis, nec iudicium
subeat quoquo modo, shall in no sort answer iudicially unto you, nor by any
means undergo any judgment: neither send Proctor or messenger about such
matters. And hereof they give this remarkable reason, because the doing of it
did manifestly tend to the disinherison of the State of the kingdom, and to
the prejudice of those liberties, customs, and laws, to the observing and
defending of which they were bound by oath; Neither do we, nor will we in any
sort permit, sicut nec possumus nec debemus, as indeed we may not that our King
shall do so unaccustomed, undue, and prejudicial Acts. Could they more
plainly, or more constantly deny the Papal, and aver the Regal Sovereignty
in temporal matters?

In the reign of Edward the third, and express Statute was made, That if
Stat. of Purueiers an. 25. Edw. 3. ca. 22.
any purchase or procure any Provisions from Rome of any Abbeys or Priories, he
and his executors shall be out of the Kings protection, and that any man may
do with them as with the enemies of the King; and he that offends against
such Prouisors in body or in goods, shall be excused against al people, nor
shall ever be impeached or grieved for the same. In another Statute Stat. of
Prouisors, an. 25. Edw. 3.
made the same year, both the Statute of Edward the first against Prouisors,
was repeated and ratified, and it was further ordained, that the King and other
Lords should rightly present to Benefices, notwithstanding the Popes
provisions. And in case the presentees of the King, or other Patrons be
disturbed by such Prouisors, so that either they may not have the possession of
such benefices, or being in possession, be impeached by such Prouisors, then
the said Prouisors, their Procurators, Executors, and Maintainers, to abide in
prison till they have made fine and ransom to the King at his will, and agreed
with the party that shall be grieved. And further, that they shall not be
delivered out of prison till they make full renunciation, and find sufficient
surety not to attempt such things in time to come, nor to sue Process either by
themselves or others, against any man in the Court of Rome. It was not long
after by another Statute Stat. an 27. Edw. 3. ca. 1.
enacted, That if any of the Kings people, of what condition soever they be,
do draw any out of the Realm for any Plea, the cognizance whereof pertains
to the Kings Court, or which do sue in another Court, to defeat or impeach
the judgments given in the kings Court, such should personally answer for such
their offense within two months, and if they came not within that time, they,
their Atturneyes, Procurators, Eexcutors, and Mainteiners should be put out of
the Kings protection, and their Lands, Goods, and Chattels, forfeit to the
King. And of such offenders, it is there expressly said, that they did those
things in prejudice and disinherison of the King, and of his Crown, and (which
I do specially observe) to the destruction of the Common Law of the said
Realm, at all times used. So that never from the first erection of the
Kingdom, was the Popes Soueraignetie, acknowledged therein, but at all times
repugnant to the Laws thereof, by the consenting voice, decree, and judgment
of the whole State, the King, the Nobles, and Commons. The very like was again
enacted Stat. an. 38. Edw. 3. ca. 1.
in the same Kings reign, against such as procured Citations from Rome, upon
causes, whose Cognizance and Final discussion (observe Final) pertains to
the King and his Royal Court* or who got Impetrations and provisions of
Benefices or offices in the Church, Deaneries, Archdeaconries, or the like,
They all, their mainteiners, Counselors, and Abetters, if they be convicted of
any of these things, shall have the punishment comprised in the Statute of 25.
Edw. 3 before mentioned.

In the reign of Richard the second, it was ordained Stat. an. 13. Ric. 2. ca.
2.
, that for all Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, and other dignities and Benefices
elective, the Statute made by Edward the third, should firmly hold. And if any
make acceptance of any Benefice contrary to this Statute, and if it be duly
proved, if he be beyond the sea, he shall abide in exile, and be banished for
ever, and his lands, goods, and tenements, forfeit to the King. If he be within
the Realm, he shall be exiled and banished, and incur the same forfeiture. In
the same reign stat. an. 16. Ric. 2. ca. 4. and 5.
complaint being made of diverse Processes, Excommunications, and Translations
made by the Pope to the prejudice of the Crown, it was ordained, That if any
purchased or pursued, or caused to purchase or pursue any such Translations,
Processes, Exco^munications, Bulls, or Instruments, or if any receive them, or
make notification of them, both they and their maintainers and abetters, should
al be put out of the Kings protection, and their lands, goods, and chattels
forfeit to the King. And if this be not sufficient, these express words are
set down in that Statute, worthy to be written in golden letters; The Crown
of England has been so free at all times (note All times) that it has been
in subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject to GOD, and to none other.

In the reign of Henry the fourth, it was ordained stat. ann. 2. Hen. 4 ca. 3.
, That if any provision be made by the Bishop of Rome, to any person of
religion, to be exempt of obedience regular, or of obedience ordinary, or to
have any office perpetual within houses of religion, if such Prouisors do
accept, or enjoy any such provision, they shall incur the punishment
comprised in the Statute of Prouisors, made an. 13. Richard the second; and
that was perpetual banishment, and loss of all their lands and goods. The
like punishment was set down Ibid. ca 4*
for those who procured Bulls from Rome, to be quit or discharged to pay the
dismes of their lands.

In the reign of Henry the sixth, the Pope 1. Hen. 7. 10.
writ letters in derogation of the King and his Regalitie: and whereas the
Churchmen durst not speak against it, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester cast them
into the fire. So little did that noble and loyal heart esteem the Popes
authority, when it was derogatorie to the royal dignity. In his reign also,
when Hollinsh. in Hen. 6. ann. 1460.
Richard Duke of York had overcome Henry, he claimed the Crown as in right
belonging to himself, and expressing the royal dignity thereof, said, That
he was subject to no man, but only to God.

In Edward the fourths time, the Pope 2. Hen. 7. 10
sent a Legate to Callis to come into England, who sent to the King to have
safe coming; the King by advise of his Council would not suffer him to come
within England, until he had taken an oath that he should attempt nothing
against the King and his Crown, which oath the Legate took, and then came.

That in the reign of Henry the eight, this Papal usurping of Jurisdiction,
was utterly exstirpated, and the Regal Dignity or Sovereignty of the Crown
declared, none is ignorant. The whole State of the kingdom, both
Ecclesiastical and Laicall, even then when for other matters, (as the Mass,
Adoration of Images, Purgatory, and the like, they were as zealous for the
Romish doctrine, as at any time before) with one voice Stat. an. 24. Hen 8. ca.
12: and an. 25. Hen. 8. ca. 21.
declared, That this Realm of England is an Empire, as by ancient and
authenticke Histories and Chronicles is manifest: that this Empire is governed
by one Supreme head and King, having the dignity and royal estate of the
Imperial Crown of this Realm: That this Realm recogniseth no superior under
God but the King: That the whole body politic, both the Spiritualty and
Temporalty is bound, and ought to bear a natural and humble obedience to the
King thereof Next unto God: That the King has plenarie and entire power,
authority, prerogative, and jurisdiction, to render Justice, and final
determination to all his subjects, in all causes and contentions, without
either restraint from, or provocation to any foreign Prince or Potentate in
the world: That the Pope by his Exactions, Procurations, Provisions, Bulls, and
Appeals, has usurped therein, to the derogation of the Imperial Crown, and
authority royal, contrary both to right and conscience. And that it might be
known to all, that these Statutes whereby they abandon the Papal, and
manifest the Kings royal Sovereignty in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, that these, I say are no Introductory Statutes, such as give a new,
but only Declaratorie, such as explain the ancient authority and rights of
the King, they add, that in decreeing these, they did no other thing then
former Kings had done for the conservation of the prerogatives, liberties, and
pre-eminence of this Imperial Crown, and by name, as Edw. 1. Edw. 2. Rich. 2.
and Hen. 4. had done.

The same Sovereignty was acknowledged to be in Queen Marie, the whole State
declaring Stat 1. (...) part. 2. (...).
that all Regal power, dignity, authority, and Jurisdiction did, and of right
ought to appertain unto her, in as full and and ample manner, as it did to any
of her Noble Progenitors. By virtue of which Supreme power, when ^ust. Britan.
pa. 49. and Pars* answer to Sir Edw. Coke, ca. 14.. 15.
Pope Paul the fourth being displeased with Card. Poole, meant to take from him
his Legantine authority, and give it to Friar Peto; for which purpose the Pope
chose him Cardinal, and sent him the Cardinals hat, and other ensigns of his
new authority, as far as Callice; Queen Marie (for all her devotion to the
Roman faith) by the advice of her Nobles and Judges, in favor of Card. Poole,
sent to Callice, straightly forbidding the Popes Nuncio so much as to set foot
within England, though he was sent thither by the Roman Monarch. And though
the Pope threatened and stormed thereat, yet Card. Poole quietly enjoyed his
dignity, but Friar Peto the Popes Minion, was feign to go up and down the
streets of London like a begging Friar, without his Cardinals hat.

Thus from the Conquest to the beginning of Q. Elizabeth (since which time the
clear light of the Gospel has most happily shined throughout this Realm) the
Popes Sovereignty has been ever rejected by this most renowned kingdom. And
that long before the Conquest the like was done, yea even since the very first
planting of the Gospel in this Island, there are pregnant evidences. I do
purposely pass by that of S. Edward the Confessor, in whose laws Leg. Sancti
Edw. ca. 19.
the King of England is called the Vicare of the highest King, to rule the holy
Church, and defend the same. I omit also that of King Edgar, who in a Council
at Winchester speaking of himself, says Edgari verba extant in cod. M. S.
liter^s aur^is exarato in Bibl D Rob. Cotton.
, Vicarius Christie eliminaui, I being the Vicar of Christ, have cast out
troops of ungodly Friars, which were in the Monasteries of my kingdom. Who
also used that memorable saying to his Clergy, Ego Constantini, vos Petri
gladium habetis, I have Constantines, and you have S. Peter's sword: Let us
join hands together, and swords together, to cast out leprous persons out of
the Temple. Nor will I insist on the saying of Pope Eleutherius, who in his
Epistle to Lucius King of Britain, says thus unto him; that you may reign
with God, ^uius vicarius estis in praedicto regno, whose Vicar you are in your
kingdom; and again, Rex quia vicarius summi regis est, the King, because he
is the Vicar of the highest King, is appointed to this end, that he should
honor the holy Church, and rule it. And yet I could wish to stay here a
little, to castigate the vanity, and shameless dealing of F. Parsons, who to
decline this testimony, would gladly persuade Pars. triple Conuers. part. 1.
ca, 4. nu. 22. and 29.
you, that this is but a fained Epistle, yea even fained If it be true and not
fained by Mr. Fox ib. nu. 20.
by Master Fox. Whereas beside other Records thereof, the samewhole Epistle is
Verbatim set down in a very ancient Manuscript, written diverse hundredth of
years before Master Fox was borne, which among others my self have, and
others may see in the most worthy Library of Sir Robert Cotton, that honorable
favorer of learning, and learned Antiquities.

The special reasons which I will use to prove the truth thereof, are two. The
former is taken from the Common Law of this Realm. A law so ancient Vid. 6.
part. Reports of Sir Edw. Coke in Praefat. and the^ Reports of Sir John Dauis
in Praefat.
, that no certain beginning is known thereof, (as neither of the Law of
Nations:) but it was received and grew into use by the continued, constant, and
unchanged practice of wise and judicious men in this Realm, ever since a
Commonweal has been settled therein: and because it was both by Common
experience of all approved, as a most fit rule of Justice, and also generally
or commonly practiced In omnibus nationum ^uarum (Britonum, Romanoru^, Saxonum,
Danorum, and Normanorum) and regum earum temporibus, regnum hoc (Angliae) ^sdem
quibus ^am regitur consuetudinibus continue regulatum est. Fo^tesc. de Polit.
Angl. ca. 17.
, first in the reign of the Brittanes, then of the Romans, then in the
several kingdoms of the Heptarchy of the Saxons, then of the Danes, and
lastly of the Normans; it seems to have obtained the name of the Common, that
is the generally approved Law of this Realm. That by it the Popes Sovereignty
and Supreme Jurisdiction, was never approved in this Realm, in the books of
Law are set down many authorities. In Henry the seuenths time 1. Hen. 7. 10
, The Pope excommunicated all such persons as bought Allume of the Florentines.
It was adjudged that the Popes excommunication ought not to be allowed. In
Richard the thirds time, it was holden 2. Ric. 3. fol. 22.
, that a judgment in the Court of Rome, should not prejudice any man at the
Common Law. The like was held in Edward the fourths time, that the Popes 12.
Edw. 4. fol. 16.
excommunication was not to be allowed in the kings Court. In Henry the fourths
time, it was ruled for 14. Hen. 4. fol. 14.
Law, that it is no plea for the defendant to say, that the plaintiff is
excommunicated by the Pope, although he show forth the Popes Bull to witness
it; For the Judges ought not to allow such an excommunication: and that the
Certificate of no excommunication is available in Law, but such as is made by
some Bishop in England. In Edw. 1. time 30. Edw. 3. lib. 3. Assis. pl. 19.
, one brought an excommunication against another from the Pope: The kings
pleasure was, that according to the law he should be hanged and drawn, as a
Traitor, but the Chancellor and Treasurer kneeled for him before the king; so
he had judgment only to abjure the realm. Many the like authorities are set
down in the book 5. Part of his Reports.
of the right Honorable Sr. Edward Coke, whose exact knowledge in that
profession is not unknown to any. But these few, (which by the help of those
who are very learned in that profession, I was desirous to examine for my own
satisfaction) are sufficient to testify the Popes authority, even his
Censures of excommunication, not to have been of force in this Realm by the
Common Law thereof.

And I was much more earnest and glad to be satisfied herein, because with such
as are not either themselves expert, or seek not, as I profess I have done,
to be informed by them who are learned in the Law; the collusions of F.
Parsons, who would seem to make some answer Pars. answer to the 5. part of
Reports set forth by Sir Edw. Coke.
to that Treatise, may perhaps cast a mist before their eyes, whereas if the
truth be duly and fully scanned, the Jesuit by that his answer, has
maruelously both disgraced himself, and bewrayed the weakness of that cause
of the Popes Supremacy, which he undertook to defend; but he could no
otherwise support it, but by flying to Impertinent, Sophistical, and Reuiling
euasions, on which his whole dispute does consist.

Of the Impertinency of his dispute, take this demonstration. We in all our
writings do profess and make evident, that by the Sovereign authority which
we give unto kings in causes Ecclesiastical, we intend not any either Supreme
or subordinate power to preach, to administer Sacraments, to ordeine, to
suspend, excommunicate, and absolve, or iudicially to decide and define doubts
of faith: This power is given to no Laicall, but only to Ecclesiastical
persons; and given or derived to them only from Christ, by the mediation of
his Apostles and Bishops. And because in all these there is a direction in the
ways of God, but no corporal force or punishment, coacting men to walk in
those ways, therefore is this rightly called a Directive power, or a power of
executing those Spiritual duties. But the power which we acknowledge to
belong to Kings in causes Ecclesiastical, is an Imperial, not Spiritual; a
Supreme coactiue, not a directive power; a power Mandatorie, commanding those
Ecclesiastical duties to be done, not Executory, as doing those themselves:
Such a power, as by which all Kings and Princes are authorized by God, as being
his immediate Vicegerents upon earth, not only to permit with liberty and
freedom, but to see all those spiritual duties performed in their kingdoms
by Ecclesiastical persons, yea, to coact and compel both them to perform,
and others to embrace the same duties of piety and religion. This being the
doctrine which we every where proclaim, F. Parsons not being able with any
color to oppugn this truth, that he might seem to say somewhat in the Popes
behalf, and against us, slily declines the maine point touching the Supreme
Coactiue power, and as if we gave unto Princes the Directive power in causes
Ecclesiastical (which we never so much as once dream of) he labors to prove
against us, that Princes have not that Ecclesiastical power Spiritual power
is a commission of bindeing and loosing. Pars. lib. cit. ca. 2. nu. 7. The
spiritual Ecclesiastical power consists in binding and loosing sins, by
means of sacraments, in judging causes of the Church, it is a power to teach
and direct, to punish by spiritual censures of suspension, excommunication,
etc. ibid. ca. 2. nu. 16. 17.
, not such power They give unto her (Q. Eliz.) all and all manner of
Jurisdiction, etc:
as Popes, Archbishops and Bishops have: That it is absurd Ibid ca. 3. nu. 23.
The absurdity of the statute, etc.
(which he says we teach) that all Spiritual power is originally in a King;
yea in a child, yea in a woman, and from them must be derived to others: That
it is likewise Ibid.
absurd (which he persuades you, that we teach) that a King, a child, yea a
woman has power not only to give this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction unto
others, but much more to use and exercise the same in their own persons; as
namely, to give holy orders, to create and consecrate Bishops, absolve sins,
administer Sacraments, teach, preach, judge, and determine in points of faith.
Thus disputes the great Jesuit against us. In all which every one may see that
this grand Master in their Romish school, does not so much as once touch the
point which he undertook, but fights only with his own shadow; and when
he has refuted this idle and sottish conceit of his own devising, then he
insultes, and triumphs as if he had killed the wise and worthy Ulysses, whereas
in very deed the blind Polyphemus has done nothing else but hackt and hewed in
pieces one of his own hogs.

As his dispute is Impertinent, so is it in every part Sophistical. I will
instance only in this whereof we now entreat touching the rejecting of the
Popes Excommunications. He seeing that they were often and expressly by the Law
rejected, deuiseth this shift, (and it is very frequent Pars. lib. cit. ca. 11.
nu. 24. and ca. 12. nu. 15 and saepe alibi.
and usual in him) that the rejecting of them proceeded not from any want of
respect to the Pope, nor from the denial of his authority in this kingdom, but
from want of a Certificate from the Archbishop or Bishop, that those writings
were indeed the Popes Bulls, and not counterfeit. Wherein besides his supine
ignorance, he bewrayes a resolute intent rather to cauil and wrangle, then to
dispute and argue. It is true, that in the books of the Law there is often
mention of having a Certificate from the Bishop. But that Certificate was not
to testify that this was truly and certainly the Popes Bull or
Excommunication, (for how could any Bishop here, be able to certify that?) but
to certify that the party (whom that excommunication did concern) was by the
Archbishop or Bishop himself excommunicated. Which to be the true meaning of
those words, there are many clear proofs. By the Statute an. 27. of Edw. 3.
cap. 1. it is expressly declared, that the very suing to the Court of Rome, and
seeking by such courses to hinder or impeach judgment in the Kings Court, was
the very destruction of the Common Law, used at all times in this Realm. So by
the consenting voice of the whole State, explaining and confirming the Common
Law, the very Act of procuring the Popes Excommunication, (and not the want of
a Certificate of the truth thereof) is declared to be an Act contrary to the
Common Law, and therefore to be condemned and rejected by that Law; and that
also at al times. Had the want of a Certificate from the Bishop, been once
known to avoid the force of the Popes Bull of Excommunication, would any,
think you, after that, have been so simple or careless in their own causes,
as not to have brought always with the Popes Bull, a Certificate thereof from
a Bishop? Would Edward the first have been so rigorous, nay tyrannical, as to
condemn one for Treason, and will that he should be hanged and drawn, or but
to be abiured the land, for omitting a part of the form in legal proceeding?
for want of a Bishops Certificate of the Popes Bull? Did ever the Statute or
Common Law judge such an omission to be so heinous, and even a Capital offense
against the Crown? Long before this, the ancient Laws of the Land were
recognized and confirmed by all the States of the kingdom, and that also by
oath in the reign of Henry the second, as both Math. Paris. whom before I
cited, and an Act of Parliament An. 10. Hen. 2. verba Parliam. citantur a D.
Edw. Coke in 6. part. Relat. in Praef.
under the same Henry the second, witnesses. It was then declared to be an
Act unlawful and prejudicial to the King, for any to Appeal to the Pope in
any cause, without the Kings consent. Whence it is clear, that the very suing
for the Popes Excommunication, and not want of a Certificate was the offense in
Law taken at those writs. Nay the Certificate, that such a writ was truly
procured from the Pope, had been an assurance of the offense, not an help to
the offender. Besides, in the 14. of Henry the fourth, fol. 14. it is said,
that the Certificate of no excommunication is available in Law, but only of
such excommunications as are made by the Archbishop or Bishop. And therefore
though the Popes Excommunication had been by all the Bishops in the Realm
certified, yet in law it was not available, because it was the Popes
Excommunication, and not the Bishops. Nay it is further there said (which is a
clear demonstration of this truth) that though an Excommunication was
certified by the Archbishop of Canterbury, under his seal, yet for that the
same Excommunication was but in execution of a Sentence in the Court of Rome,
and was not upon any cause originally depending before the Archbishop, it was
ruled, that the said Excommunication should not be allowed. How much more then
was the Popes own Excommunication (though certified by a Bishop) by the Law
rejected, when even those Excommunications made and certified by Bishops, which
of themselves were of force, lost their allowance in law, when they had
reference and dependence to the Pope, and at his soliciting of the Bishops,
were made against any for execution of a sentence in his Court? Lastly, the
reasons why those Excommunications of the Pope are in law rejected, do
undeniably convince this. One reason hereof was, because 12. Edw. 4. fol. 16.
it was against the Kings regalitie and Crown. To want a Certificate that the
Bull was truly the Popes Bull, none can imagine to be prejudicial to the King,
or to his royalty: at the most that is but an error and oversight in the
party that pleads, it is no derogation to the kings right. But to bring an
excommunication from the Pope, as from a superior Judge then the King; to bring
the Popes authority and writ, to hinder the proceeding of Justice in the Kings
Court, and to ouermaster the Kings authority, this indeed directly, and in
Capite touches the Crown and the Kings royalty; for in effect it is a very
denial of the Kings Sovereignty, a denial that he is in truth a King. Another
reason which is often set down in the books of Law 12. Edw 4. fol. 16. and
alibi.
, is this, because the Pope is not a Minister or Officer to the Kings Court.
Whereby is meant, that such Excommunications as are of force in Law, must be
made by those who are ministers, and subject to the King. And the reason hereof
is evident: because if the Excommunication be unjust, the Court in the Kings
name may command, and the King may compel them to redress the same. Now to
the Pope, neither could the Judges (as they say) write, (to wit, authoritatiue
to command him) nor could the King compel him to revoke or redress his
Excommunication, though it were never so unjust. By all which it is evident,
that the Popes excommunications were by the Common Law, and that at all times
rejected, eo nomine, because they were the Popes, and so were derogatorie to
the royal dignity; not as the Jesuit cauilleth, because they wanted the
Bishops Certificate to testify the truth of them: for which his fancy as
those who are very learned in that profession, assure me, he has no ground at
all in the books of the Law. But F. Parsons thought by his equiuocating, and
cauilling about the Bishops Certificate (whereof he knew there was mention in
the books of Law) to delude the simple and unskillful Reader, who either
cannot, or will not regard to inform themselves in such matters. But howsoever
among his own ignorant proselites he may gain an applause, yet by his so vile
and malicious sophisticating with the Law, among all men of sound learning and
upright judgment, he has made himself a very Ludibrium unto them.

Parsons fearing his Sophistry would fail him, as it has in this, turns him
to his other shift, which is indeed his last refuge, and that is open Railing
and Reuiling: an Art wherein of all that ever I have read, he is most skillful
and expert, able to put Shemie, Rabshe^ah, and Thersites himself to the
school. I will not Camerinam mouere, not offend your ears with stirring that
sink: Do but hear how contumeliously, how spitefully he derideth and
declameth against the very Laws of that land, which bred and brought up such
an unnatural Viper. What is that Common Law? says he Pars. lib. cit. ca. 11.
^u. 22.
, that ancient Common Law? How was it made? By whom? Where? at what time? upon
what occasion? To avouch a Common Law, an ancient Common Law, without
beginning, author, cause, occasion, or record of Introduction, is a strange
Metaphysicall contemplation. This Common Lib. eod. ca. 13. nu. 16.
Law, it is E^s transcendens, or rather Ens Rationis, nay it is a very Chymera,
(an Ibid. nu 17
old Chymera, an Imaginary Law) such as has no essence or being at all a part
Rei, but only in imagination. And in this common place, as in a large field
he exspatiates almost throughout his whole book, and in deriding the Law,
makes himself most ridiculous. I cannot more fitly answer him, then with the
words of S. Hierom, Imperitia confidentiam, scientia timorem creat. Modesty and
humility attend upon knowledge, pride and confidence are the companions of
Ignorance: or with that of the Poet, Omnia quae nescit dicit spernenda colonus.
The dignity and honor of this Law (under which this renowned kingdom does
now most happily, and has for more then 16. hundredth years, continued in a
flourishing estate:) is by so many most worthy men, and learned in that
profession, so amply set forth, that as it needs no Apology at all, specially
not of me, so mean and unworthy an Encomiast; so can it no whit at all be
blemished by the contu^elies of him who does but reprehend, what he does not
comprehend. Thus much only let me say, that all his scoffing and opprobrious
demands do equally, and with as much force fight against the Law of Nations:
yea, for the most part against the Law of Nature also. What is this Law of
Nations? How was it made? By whom? Where? at what time? Upon what occasion?
Seeing notwithstanding all these frivolous demands, the Law of Nations is
acknowledged by all learned men, yea even by Parsons Pa^s. answ to Sir Edw.
Coke. ca. 2. nu. 7.
himself, (who is to be ranked in another predicament) to have a true
realitie, let him either profess the like Realitie and essence in the Common
Law, or with it let him condemn the other, as a Chymericall imagination; and
so at once bid battle, not only to this one kingdom, but even to all
mankind, and all Nations. Now his book consisting of these and such like
Impertinent, Sophistical, and Reuiling discourses, what other answer could he
expect, or should he receive from him whom according to the Proverb, Dares
Entellum, he made his (though a most unequal) Antagonist in this cause, but
that which he has returned Sir Edw. Coke 6. part of his Reports in Prae^at.
against him, a Writ of Nihil dicit, for in very deed, he speaks Nihil ad
Rhombum. But to pass from him, seeing it is now clear, that by the Common
Law, the Popes supreme authority even in Ecclesiastical, and then much more
in Temporal causes, of which we entreat, is rejected; and seeing that Law is
the selfsame now that it was always, it being a certain, immutable and
inflexible rule; it remains as clear and certain, that not only since the
Conquest, but ever since there was a Common Law in this Realm (that was ever
since there was a Commonweal therein;) which knew the Pope, the Popes
Sovereignty has bin by the Church of this Realm, and that even by the law of
the land rejected.

The other reason to prove this, is drawn from the Brittanes and their Church.
That their Church was not subject to the Popes Jurisdiction, no not in
Ecclesiastical (much less in Temporal) causes, the Bed lib. 2. hist. Angl
ca. ^
manner of their baptising, and others Ceremonies far different from the
Roman, and that even when Austen the Monk came hither, being sent from Pope
Gregory the Great; and especially their different observing of Easter, is a
certain and undoubted evidence. For seeing the Popes, specially Victor, as
Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 5 hist. ca. 24.
shows, were so earnest to draw the Asiaticall Churches to the Roman custom
in the observation of that day, none may think but that they would provide to
have conformity in such Churches as were subject to their own Jurisdiction.
Besides this difference of Rites, the Brittane Bishops manifestly declared that
they held not their Church nor themselves to be subject to the Pope, nor to his
authority. Pope Gregory appointed Austen to be their Archbishop. We Gregorij
verba apud Bedam lib. 1. ca. 27 in Respons. 9.
commit unto you omnes Britaniarum Episcopos, all the Bishops of Britain,
that the weak may be confirmed, and the obstinate corrected. The Britain
Bishops knew that Pope Gregory had given to Austen this authority over them,
as by Bid Bed. lib. 2. ca 2.
and others is evident, seeing Austen labored Amad. Xieriens* apud An^iq
Britan. in August.
to bring them to his obedience Apostolica authoritate, by the Popes
authority. Had those Catholic Bishops known and believed either the Pope to
be a Supreme Judge and Commander in the whole Church in causes
Ecclesiastical, or themselves to be subject to his command and authority in
such causes, they would no doubt have yielded obedience to Austen, and in him
to the Pope. See now how far they were from doing or acknowledging this.
Austen used both prayers and threats Minitans p^aedixit. Bed. lib 2. ca ^.
to move them to consent, and to conform themselves to the Roman Church,
though not in other things, yet at least for Ibid.
their manner of baptising and celebrating Easter. Neque precibus, neque
increpationibus Augustini assensun^ praebere voluerunt, they would neither
yield to his entreating, nor increpation, but told him plainly, they would
observe their own Traditions. When he the second time required of them mihi
obtemperare Ibid.
, to be obedient to him in those motions, their answer was, nihil se horum
facturos, that they would yield to none of them all: and they further added,
Illum pro Archiepiscopo se non habituros, that they would not accept of him for
an Archbishop over them: Yea Galf. Monumet. lib. 11 ca. 7.
Dinoth the Abbot of Bangor, a man of great learning, made it appear by diverse
arguments, when Austen required the Bishops to be subject unto him, that they
ought him no subjection. They further added, as some Antiq. Britan. in August.
pa. 46.
set down, That they had an Archbishop of their own, residing at Caerlegion,
or Legancestria (that is Chester whither it seems the Metropolitan See, which
while the Britain Monarchy continued, was at York, was now removed:) Him
they ought and would obey, externo vero Episcopo minime subiectos sore, but
they would not be subject to any foreign Bishop, and then not to the Pope, much
less to Austen.

This example of the Brittanes is so ancient, and withal so pregnant against
the Popes supremacy, and that even in Ecclesiastical causes, that Baronius
Baron. ann. 604. nu. 65.
being no other ways able to avoid the force thereof, slanders those Bishops
with the imputation of schism, because they would not yield obedience to the
Pope. Wherein Baronius shamefully begs the maine question in that his dispute.
Neither could he, nor will others ever prove, either that all Churches, or that
this of Britain in particular, did owe subjection to the Roman B. The Church
of Britain Bert. in sua Diatrib.
in ancient time, like other Provinces, had a Patriarch, or Patriarchall
Primate of her own: to him the other Bishops in this Church were subject, as
they in Aegipt to the Patriarch of Alexandria, diverse in the Eastern parts of
Asia, to the Patriarch of Antioch; they in Italy to the Patriarch of Rome, and
so in other Provinces. Among these Patriarchs, and Patriarchall Primates, by
reason of the Imperial seat, and other seats of Justice in several Provinces,
there was a Primacy, or Precedence of one before another, but no authority of
one above another, no subordination or subjection of one unto another. Admit
those Bishops had then separated themselves from the Pope, (which yet does not
appear:) it is not the separation from the Pope, or from any Bishop, no nor
from any Church, but only the cause of separation that makes a schismaticke:
And seeing the Pope then sought to oppress the ancient liberties of the
Britain Church, and to bring them under his yoke to whom they were not
subject; the Cause of their separation from the Pope being just, could not make
them Schismatic; but if the Pope and his adherents did for this cause
forsake or refuse communion with them, or separate themselves from them, he
and his adherents must rightly and truly be herein accounted Schismatikes. Of
which point, because in another Treatise: I have at large even against Boronius
entreated: I will add no more in this place.

F. Parsons is more cholerike against the Brittans then Baronius, and therefore
imputes an higher fault, even the crime of Heresy unto them; and because they
would not obey Austens persuasions to observe Easter, as the Roman Church did,
he makes them guilty of the Heresy of the Quartadecimanes. To which purpose he
faith: Pars. triple. Conu. part. 1. ca. 8. nu. 27.
The Brittons observed a Jewish Ceremony against the order and faith of the
Church of Rome. And he accounts this a substantial point of faith, saying,
Ibid nu. 28
for other substantial points of faith (this then is one) they agreed with
Augustine. And again, Lib. eod. ca. 9. nu. 4.
Austen at his coming, found no other substantial difference of belief, in
the British faith from that which he brought from Rome. And yet more plainly.
Lib. eod. ca. 3 nu. 14.
The Eastern custom of celebrating Easter, used by the Brittans, has been
condemned, not only for an error, but also for an Heresy. Wherein the Jesuit
bewrayes a great deal both of ignorance and malice. For the Heresy of the
Quartadecimanes, did not consist in the bare observing of Easter, on the 14.
day of the Moon of March, seeing not only the Churches of Britain but diverse
also in Asia, as Eusebius testifies, Eusebius lib. 5. hist cap. 2^. 23
observed that same day, who were not held Heretical in this point, no not by
the Roman Bishops, who Praedecessores tui Enc haristiam miserunt Eccles^is,
quae aliam co^suetudinem sequutae sunt. ait. Iren. Victori. ibid.
retained commuinion with them. But the Essence and formality of that Heresy,
was their teaching that Easter ought of Necessity to be kept on that day and
none other: which Necessity they grounded upon the Mosaicall Law, wherein that
day is precisely commanded, from which law they thought and taught others, that
none might depart, and so by their doctrine they covertly and closely labored
to reduce Iudaisme, and all the Judicial rites, one of which was this of
Easter; and for which, having most colorable pretenses, they used it but as a
pully to draw on the rest. Tertullian shows this fully, who speaking of
Blastus the Author of that Heresy, says: Tert. lib. de praescrip. cap. 53.
iuxt. Pam.
Latenter Iudaismum introducere voluit dicens, Pasca non aliter ^nstodiendum
esse nisi secundum legem Mosis 14. luna mensis. He endeavored cunningly to
bring Iudaisme into the Church, teaching that Easter was on no other day to be
kept, but on the 14. as Moses commanded. With this Heresy (which quite
abolisheth Christ, and euacuateth the whole Gospel) those famous Churches in
Asia, and this of Britain had no affinity. For although they celebrated the
same day that the Jews did, and the Quartadecimanes urged, yet they kept it
neither after the manner, nor upon that ground that the Jews and Heretics
did. The Jews and Heretics observed that day eo nomine, because Moses in his
Ceremonial Law, prescribed it. The Churches in Asia and Britain observed it
as a tradition from Saint John the Evangelist, and by the example of St. John,
and all the Churches subject to him, as Policrates in Eusebius Nec Policarpo
per^^adere potuit An^cetus ne id re^^neret quod cum Iohanne obseruasset. Iren
apud Eusebius. loc. cit. Johannes Apostolus, Policarpus. 14. Luna Pasca
obseruabant Eusebius. lib. cit. cap. 23.
, and long after him B. Coleman expressly declared in that disputation which
Bid Ipsum est quod B. Johannes cum omnibus quibus praecrat Ecclesiis
celebrasse legitur. and, Iohannis Apostoli exemplu^ sectamur. Beda lib. 3. cap.
25.
sets down: and St John to have observed that day, B. Wilfrid Johannes 14 die
mensis primi incipiebat celebrationem sesti pascatis, nihil curans, an haec
Sabbato an alia qu^libet feria proneniter. Wilf verba ibid.
who was earnest for the custom of the Roman Church expressly confesses. The
Jews and Quartadecimans taught that it ought necessarily to be observed on
that 14. day, and on no other; the Brittane and Asiaticall Churches, used it as
a rite Indifferent, which might either on that 14. or another day, according to
different custom of Churches be celebrated: For which cause they did not
renounce Communion, nor break the unity of the Church, with such as observed
another day, as by that famous example of Policarp Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. Hist.
ca. 24.
and Anicetus is most evident. And though the Nicene council decreed Decret
Nicsynod. recitatur apud Eusebius. lib. ^. de vit, Constant. cap. 17. and 18.
that Easter should not be kept on the foureteenth day after the manner of the
Jews, but one another, to which order of the holy general Counsel every
particular Church was in duty to have conformed it self, yet because that
Decree of the Council, was not a Decree of faith (no further then it condemned
the Necessity of observing the foureteenth day, and so condemned the
Quartade^^manes) but a Decree of Order, of Discipline and Uniformity in the
Church, when it was once known and evident that any particular Church
condemned the Necessity of that 14. day, the Church by a Conniuence permitted,
and did not censure the bare observing of that day, so long as it was observed,
but as an indifferent and mutable rite, nor as a Mosaicall, but as an
Apostolical tradition or custom: even as in that other Nicene Canon Conc.
Nic. Can. 20.
, that on every Lords day from Easter to Whitsontide, none should pray
kneeling, but standing, the Church both now and ever, used the like Conniuence,
or Indulgence. So long as there is a consent, unity, and agreement in the
Doctrines of Faith, the Church never uses to be rigorous with particular
Churches, which are her own Children for the variety and difference in ourward
Rites, though commanded by her self. Every particular Church like the Kings
daughter, must have the same glory of faith within, though they have diversity
of rites, like variety of colors in their garments without. And this to have
been the very judgment of the church touching the Britain Church and Bishops,
her self declared: seeing not long after that Nicene decree, both at the
General and holy holy Council of Sardica, and after that, in another at
Ariminum, (which Baronius and Binius Bin. Not. in Concilium Ariminense.
profess to have been also a general and holy Council) and at which were
present about four hundred Catholic Bishops, they as willingly and gladly
received the Bishops of Britain Episcopos Britanniae interfuisse Concilio
Sardicensi, testatur, Epist Synodalis illius Conc. apud Athan. Apol 2. Tres
^tiam Britanniae, Epis. inter^ui^^e Concilio Arimine^si rest^tur* Sulp. Sever.
lib 2. hist. (...).
(though obseruers of the foureteenth day) as any of other Provinces, who
observed another. Doubtless had the Church esteemed either the bare observing
of that foureteenth day, to make an-hereticke, or the Church and Bishops of
Britain, for observing that day to be heretical, Hosius, Athanasius, and
other, most holy and orthodoxall Bishops would never have admitted them unto,
or permitted them to sit and give sentence with them in those holy assemblies.
It was some Ignorance, but much more Malice in Parsons, to account those
Brittanes who would not yield obedience to Austen, Heretics, and tax them as
observing that rite against the Faith, yea against a Substantial point of
Faith, whereas it is clear that they were at that time as Amandus Xierixensis
Amand. Xierix. apud Antiquit. Brit. in August. Britones fuerunt Catholici.
expressly and truly calls them, Catholics; every way, if not more, as Catholic
as Austen himself.

It does now appear, that the Popes supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, was not believed nor received, but directly oppugned and
rejected in this Realm, at that time when Austen came, seeing the Catholic
Brittanes, British Bishops, and Church refused Austen for their Archbishop,
and in that rejected the Popes authority, by which they knew he was appointed
to be their Archbishop. But there are besides this, some other important
consequents. First Father Parsons tells us Pa^s. trip. Conu. part. 1. ca. 8. nu.
28. and ca. 9. nu. 3.
, that in all substantial points of faith, excepting that Ceremony (so
himself expressly A Jewish ceremony observed against faith. ibid. ca. 8. nu.
27.
calls it) of observing Easter, the Religion of the Brittanes did wholly agree
with that of the Romans at that time, which was the time of Gregory the
Great. Now seeing it is clear that the doctrine of the Popes Supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical, was no point of the Brittanes faith, but a doctrine
which both by their profession and practice they did utterly condemn and
reject: it hence follows, that the same doctrine was condemned by Pope
Gregory, and all Catholics at that time. Again, Parsons tells us Ibid. ca. 9.
nu. 1. 2. 3. 6.
, That the faith which the Britains formerly had in the time of Eleutherius,
and before that also in the Apostles time, was the selfsame in all material
and substantial points (excepting that Ceremony of Easter) which they had
when Austen came* in all that time neither did the Church of Rome change her
faith, nor the Britains theirs. And Galfr. Monumetensis leaving out that
ridiculous exception of Parsons, testifies Galf. Monumet. lib. 11. ca. 7.
, (as Parsons also confesses Verba Galf. citat. Pars. lib. eod. ca. 2. nu. 13.
of him) that the same doctrine of Christianity which was received in the time
of Eleutherius, failed not among the Britains, but remained in force when
Austen came. Whence it again and certainly follows, that seeing the doctrine
of the Popes supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, was no part of the
faith of the Britains when Austen came; therefore neither was it any part of
their faith in Eleutherius days, no nor in the Apostles neither: nay seeing
the faith of the Britains (as Parsons truly affirms Pars. ca. 9. cit. nu 2.
) was then the same which the Roman Church, and all Catholics embraced, it
further follows, that the Popes Supremacy, was no part of the faith of the
Church of Rome, or of any Catholics either in Eleutherius, or in the Apostles
time. So is it clearly proved, and that with a large overplus, that as the
Supreme authority of the Pope in causes Ecclesiastical, (and a fortiori in
Temporal) was rejected by this Realm ever since the Conquest, so was it also
during the whole time of the Saxons and Britains, ever since there was a
Church planted therein, and that is ever since the days of the Apostles, in
whose time, by the confession of all learned men, there was a Church in
Britain.

To this Demonstration, and evident Deduction of the truth, let me add
somewhat touching those three pretenses which they allege, and whereby they
strive to prove the Popes* Sovereignty and Monarchical authority in this
kingdom. The first, as you have seen Sup. ca. 1.
, is the payment of Peter Pence, begun by King Ina, about the year 716. and
confirmed by Offa, Adelphus, William the Conqueror, and others, till the time
of Henry the eight: which payment, because Polydore Pol. Virg. hist. Angl.
lib. 4.. Post hunc
calls a Tribute, they thence infer, that the Kingdom of England was
Tributary to the Pope, and he the direct or Supreme Lord thereof. But what a
slender witness is Polydore for so weighty a matter? An Italian, one of the
Popes Pentioners, Collectors, and flatterers also: such an one as Card.
Bellarmine himself misdoubts in this very matter, saying Bell. Apol. pro Tort
ca. 4.. Quanquam.
; England is tributarie to the Pope, si Polidoro Virgilio credimus. If we will
believe Polydore. And sure the Cardinal had reason to doubt that Polydore
meant not any such thing as they collect: for he expressly says Pol. Vir. loc.
cit.
, that those Peter Pence were paid to the Pope, pietatis et religionis causa,
for piety and devotion. So by Polydores testimony, that was a tribute of
Devotion, not of Duty, a tribute given for Piety, or given in Pios vsus, not
a payment of subjection, or service. But what speak I of Polydore? That those
Peter pence were indeed nothing else but a voluntary Alms given to the Church
of Rome, partly for the use of some English Church there erected, partly for
the relief of English Pilgrims and Travelers who came thither, either upon
devotion or otherwise, there are such authentic Records witnessing the same,
that the poor and petite testimony of Polydore, (on which, but with extreme
diffidence, they build that their idle fancy) is not to be named, much less
compared with them. In that old Manuscript collection of Nicholas Card. of
Arragonia, of which before I spoke: among other Records there is set down a
Writ or Instrument Instrumentum quod Mr. Sintius Camerae dom. Papae clericus,
Nuncius Apostolicae sedisin Anglia ad Curia^ apportauit. Cod. M. S. ante citat.
fol. 41.
which Mr. Sintius Clerk of the Popes Exchequer, and the Popes Nuncio in
England brought to the Roman Court, concerning these Peter pence. In it is
expressed, both how those pence ought to be collected, at what time, and where
to be paid, what forfeiture for not payment thereof, and which I principally
observe the very reason why the King paid them to Rome, which is this, Quoniam
denarius hic Elemosyna Regis est, because those Peterpence are the Alms of the
King. Among the Laws of S. Edward the Confessor, which are extant in another
ancient Manuscript Cod. M. S. legum antiq. Inter leges. St. Edw. fol. 35: extat
in Bibl. D. Rob. Cot.
, the very same touching all those particulars, are expressly and verbatim set
down, as in the Instrument of Sintius, the same reason of payment is there
also expressed, Quoniam Denarius hic Elemosyna Regis est. William Conqueror, to
the end Rog. Houed. Annal. part. 2. in Hen. 2. pa. 343.
he might be undoubtedly certified of the true Laws, which were formerly used
by the Saxons in this Realm, caused a collection of them to be made by the
consent of sworn men, 12 to be chosen out of every Shire of England. They all
(witnesses for number, antiquity, and credit above all exception) among other
ancient Laws and Customs, mention this concerning Romescot or Peter Pence, in
the very same manner and words as the former did; and this very reason, for the
payment thereof by them is expressed, Quoniam Denarius hic Elemosyna Regis est.
By all which it is evident, that by those Peter pence, the Pope and Church of
Rome is certainly proved, to be Elemosynarius a Beeds-man to the Kings and
kingdom of England, as receiving that Annual Alms from them, to the payment
whereof they voluntary bound themselves. And from this voluntary gift of an
Alms, to conclude that the Pope is the highest Lord of England, is even such a
reason, as if a beggar from the gift of a penny, or an Hospital from the
gift of twenty shillings, which you promise or bind your self yearly to
pay, should conclude that they are certainly your Landlord, and that you hold
all your lands and possessions of them, and in token of recognition thereof, do
pay yearly to the one a penny, or to the other a pound.

Their next pretense, and that wherein they do most confidently and continually
triumph, is that famous, nay infamous, and as Math. Paris Charta saeculis
omnibus detestanda. Math. Paris. M. S. hist. minor in Ioh.. Dum ita.
Detestabilis illa charta. Idem. hist. mayor. an, 1245,. Di^bus vero,
, and Math. West. Math. West. ad an. 1213.
, rightly call it that lamentable execrable, and detestable Charter, made by
King John, by which he resigned for the Popes use, into the hands of his
Legate, the Realms of England and Ireland, and as Feudatarie, took them of
the Pope again, for the annual rent of 1000. Marks. For answer whereunto, I
wish them first to consider what they will say to Sir Thomas Moore, an holy
Martyr Sand de Schis. p. 29.
among the^, who denies Sir Thomas Moore in the suplication of souls.
the Fact and that any such Deed was at all made by King John. For my own
part, I do not consent to their Martyr in this point. For besides that the
Copy of the Charter made to Pandulph the Popes Legate, is set down in Math.
Parisiensis Paris. an. 1213. Rebus
, and Math. Westmonasteriensis Westmon. an. 1213.
, who lived near those times, there is extant a Bull of Innocentius. 3. which
(reciting Verbatim, every word in John's Charter to Pandulf,) the Pope sent unto
K. John: declaring how willingly and joyfully he accepted the Kingdoms so
resigned, and let them unto King John again. The very autographum of that
papal Bull, dated on the 4. of November, Anno 1213. signed with the Popes own
hand and mark, witnessed by the subscriptions and marks of 12. Cardinals and
3. Bishops, sealed also with the Popes seal of lead, imprinted on the one side
with the name of Innocentius 3. and on the other, with the Images of Peter and
Paul, after I had seen In Bibl. D. Rob. Cotton.
and perused, it left no scruple at all touching the fact in my mind. Besides
this Charter made to Pandulph at Dover, on the 15. day of May, an 14. Iohannis;
the Pope afterward solicited and induced King John, by Nicholas* Bishop of
Tusculum, the Popes Legate, to renew Exacta est a Rege and innouata, illa non
formosa sed samo^a subiectio. Math. Paris An. 1213.. Veniente.
the same grant of resignation; and so John did. This second Charter was made
for the Popes use to Nicholas the Legate, at London, in the Church of St. Paul,
dated on the 3. of October, an. 15. of King John, and Anno Domini 1213. sealed
Charta prior caera signata fuerat, nunc auro bullata est Paris. ibid. Verba
Chartae sunt ista, per hanc chartam aurea bulla munitam.
with gold, whereas the former was but with wax. The Copy of which Grant being
wholly set down in that Manuscript Collection of Nicholas Card. of Arragonia,
of which before I spoke, after I had also seen In Bib. praedicta.
, perused, and compared with the former, it did fully satisfy me for the Fact
again. And though it be not easy to conjecture what the Popes policy might
be in procuring this second resignation, seeing for every Material and
substantial point, it does Verbatim agree with the former; yet thus much I
think may be easily observed, that both these may well be inualide, but that
they both should be of force it is impossible: the validity of either one,
makes the other utterly inualid. For if the former was of force, then John
having passed away all his right to the Kingdom by it, he could have nothing
to pass by the later to the Pope; and then the later is utterly void and of no
force at all: Again, if the later be of force, so that by it John granted or
resigned the Kingdom to the Pope, then was nothing at all past away, granted,
or resigned by the former, and then the former is utterly inualide. And of the
two, though they esteem more of the gold, yet if I might advise the^, they
should hold them to the wax: specially for that the golden Charter (as
Parisiensis Math. Par: an. 1245.. Diebus.
tells them was said by many to have been melted in that fire at Lions, which
Innocentius the 3. himself, was thought to have kindled in his own Palace,
that under pretense of that loss, he might more colourably exact a Collection
of the Clergy: the fire prevailing further then the Pope intended, devoured
that golden Jewel, and some other of lesser value.

But on whether soever they set their rest, it is certainly no better then a
staff of Reed, to support the pretended Dominion of the Pope. For though we
suppose it to have been sometimes of force, yet the saying of Polidore their
own witness, and the Popes Favorer is very true in this case. Omnia Polid.
Virg. lib 15.. His. dictis.
illa onera Iohanni tantummodo imposita sunt, non item successoribus; Those
bands tied, and those burdens were laid upon King John alone, they bound not
any of his successors; and this, says he, Satis constat, is very clear and
certain. For as Accursius, Albericus, and other Lawyers teach De quibus vid.
sup. part. 1. cu 8. pa. 170.
of the Donation of Constantine, that it could not prejudice his successors,
the very same may be said of the Donation of King John: as the Charters, so
the validity of them is not unlike. Yea, by the judgment of Lucias de Penna,
the grant or Alienation of a Kingdom though confirmed by oath also, as was
Iurauit rex se iudicio Ecclesiae pariturum, Math. Paris. an. 1213.. Rex denique.
this, could not be of force, no not against King John himself. For though an
Emperor, says he Sup. par. 1. ca. 8. pa. 169.
, swear that he will not revoke such royalties as are given away to the
prejudice of his Crown, yet he may revoke them notwithstanding that his oath.
And the reason is, because the Emperor at the time of his Coronation, having
sworn to keep safe the honor and rights belonging to his Empire, his second
and contrary Oath (whereby he swears to alienate the rights of his Empire, or
suffer them to be alienated or withheld) being unlawful, neither does it, nor
can it bind him to violate his former, just and lawful Oath; for Iuramentum
is not Vinculum Iniquitatis. And this directly concerns the very case of King
John. Nay, what if the Pope himself adnulled this grant of King John. Both the
Charters were made in that one year. 1213. as by their date appears. Of the
next year thus writes the Author of the Eulogium; Euglogium. Cod. M. S. in
Bibl. D. Rob. Cotton.
Anno 1214. conuocatum est, This year there was a Parliament called at London,
the Archbishop and all the Clergy, cum tota laicali secta with all the
Laikes, being present therein. Per domini papae praeceptum illa obligatio
praefata, quam Rex domino papaefecerat cum fidelitate and ^omagio relaxatur
omnino 1 die Iulii. In this Parliament, that obligation spoken of before, which
the King had made to the Pope, with feolty and homage done unto him, was wholly
released by the Commandment of the Lord Pope on the first day of July. Thus
the Eulogium, evidently witnessing what force or validity soever, was in either
of the Charters granted by King John, the same by the Popes own Act of
Relaxatio^, was the next year wholly adnulled.

And all this I have spoken, upon supposall that those Charters, or either of
them, made by John, had sometimes bin of force. But the truth is, that neither
of the^ was ever of any force to transfer or give away the Kingdom; but ab
initio, even from the very first making of them, there was an inualidity and a
mere Nullity in those grants, both in respect of the Giver, of the Gift, of
the Cause, and manner of giving thereof. The Giver was John, who as he was
never rightly Johannes nunquam fuit verus Rex. verba Philippi Regis Franc^ae.
apud. Mat. West. an. 1216
King, so neither had he, nor could have any power at all to give away the
Kingdom, which was not his, nor of right belonged unto him. For of the six
Hanc esse veram genealogiam filioru^ Henr. 2. videre licet praeter alios in
Chron. Ioh. Speed in ^n Hen. 2. nu. 102. and seq. and in Chron. Hollinsh. in
Hen. 2 page 115
Sons of Henry the second, John was the youngest; William and Henry dyed
before their Father, and without Issue; Richard the third son, reigned after
his Father, and dyed without Issue. The fourth son was Geffray, who dyed a
little before his Father; but left issue, Arthur Duke of Britain; and Elenor,
called the Damsel of Britain. Phillip the fifth son dyed young, and without
Issue. After the death of Richard, the Kingdom in right belonged to Arthur;
but John (the youngest son of Henry the second) by force invaded, and by force
withheld the Crown from him. After the death of Arthur (which was in the
fourth year, Speed Chr. in Ioh. nu. 19. and 20.
after John had taken the Kingdom) the whole right to the Crown descended,
and in right belonged to Elenor, the Sister of Arthur, who lived full 23.
years after the death of John: for John dyed Math Paris: Math. Westminster. Hollins.
Speed in Ioh
, anno 1217. and Elenor dyed Math Paris. an. 1241. Et circa. pa. 770. and
Speed in Iohane. ^ n 20.
anno 1241. which was the 24. year of Henry the 3. son of John. After which
time all the brothers of John and their issue also being extinct, the right of
the Crown remained in the issue of John. By this now it is evident that John
at no time (and least of all, when he was deposed and deprived of his Kingdom
by the Popes judicial sentence as then he was when this Charter was made) had
any right to the Kingdom; and seeing he had no right to take it to himself,
much less had he right to give it to another. He could give no more the^ he
had: Right to the Kingdom he had none in himself, right to the Kingdom he
could give none to the Pope. Of his gift that may be said which is usually
spoken in another matter, Nihil habuit dare, Nihil dedit. And although such
Acts of John as concerned the making of Laws, or administration of Justice
either betwixt subject and subject, or himself and the subjects are to be held
of force, as were also the like Acts of some other, and namely of Richard the
third, one known and confessed by all to be an Usurper: though those Acts, I
say, of John be rightly judged to be of force, because the State of the
Kingdom consented to his government, and yielded obedience unto him, thinking
it better to accept and obey such a King as had but a pretended title, rather
then to have no King or ruler at all; yet for his other Acts betwixt him and
strangers, such as concerned the rights of the whole Kingdom and Regality of
the Crown, and which tended to the bringing of the whole Kingdom into bondage
and vassallage unto others; for these, neither the Act of John, nor of any
other were, or were ever judged to be of force; there was an Inualiditie in
John to do such Acts, and when he did any such, there was a mere Nullitie in
the same.

As the Giver had no power to give, so neither was the kingdom such a Gift as
could be passed away by John. For no Emperor can without the consent of his
State, give his Empire to a stranger; seeing in so doing, he should prejudice
the rights of others, and make them subjects and vassals to another, without
their own consent: whereas both equity and natural reason teaches, as out
of Lupoldus Lupol. de Iur. regni and Imp. ca. 14.
was before declared, that the Act which preiudiceth the right of others must
be approved by them all. Now although in the Charters, King John is made to
say, that he did this communi consilio Baronum, by the common consent of his
Barons; yet was that clause, as many other, most falsely and fraudulently put
into the Charters by the Popes Legates. The Barons and State were so far from
consenting to this Grant, that when the first Charter was sealed at Dover,
Henry Archbishop of Dublin the principal man in that assembly, (in the name
as it seems of the rest) did Reclamare Math. Paris. an. 1213.. Charta itaqae
and Speed in Chron. in Ioh. nu. 48.
, openly disclaim the same, and grieve thereat. And when the second was sealed
in Paul's, Stephen Lancton, the Archbishop of Canterbury, (a Cardinal, and the
Popes own creature, but in this a true lover of his Country) Appellationes
Math. Paris (...). 1231.. Defunctae.
solenniter fecit ante altar, made solemn Appeals before the altar against
that writing, which was Ibid.
toti mundo execrabile, detestable to the whole world. By virtue of these
appeals Innixus iuri and Appellationibus Stephani. ibib.
, as also of the right in the cause it self. Rafe Neuil Chancellor of England
doubted not openly to say, and his speech was related to the Pope himself by
Simon Langeton, That the yoke Excuteret Angliam de sub iugo domini Papae, etc.
ibid.
of the Pope to which John had subjected England, might justly be shaken off,
and that for so doing, himself would strive even to the loss of his head. How
much the Barons disliked this Grant of King John, his own words to Pope
Innocentius, as also the Popes answer, do witness: Our Earls and Barons,
says he Verba Epist. Iohannis ad Innoc citantur in resp. ad Apol. Bellar. ca.
3.. Frater.
, and the Pope writes In illum insurgunt postquam ecclesiae satisfecit, qui
assistebant eidem quando ecclesiam offendebat. in Epist. Innoc. 3. apud. Math.
Paris. an 1214. Innocentius pa. 356.
the like, were devout and loving unto us, till we had subjected our selves to
your dominion, but since that time, and specialiter ob hoc, and specially even
for so doing, they all rise up against us. The manifold opprobrious speeches
used by the Barons against King John, for this subiecting himself and his
kingdom to the Pope, do declare the same* John, said they Derisionibus
multiplicatis subsannando dixeru^t Math. Paris. an. 1215.. His peractis.
, is no King, but the shame of Kings; Better to be no King then such a King:
Behold a King without a kingdom: a Lord without Dominion; Alas thou wretch,
and servant of lowest condition, to what misery of thraldom have thou brought
thy self? Fuisti Rex, nunc fex, Thou wast a King, now thou art a Cow-heard,
Thou wast the highest, now the lowest. Fie Idem. ann. 1216.. Circa* h^^s.
on thee, John, the last of Kings, the abomination of English Princes, the
confusion of English Nobility; Alas England, that thou art made tributarie,
and subject to the rule of base servants! of strangers! and which is most
miserable, subject to the servant of servants! Thou John, whose memory will be
woeful in future time, thou of a most free King, have made thy self tributary,
a farmer, a vassal, and that to servitude it self: this thou have done, that
all might be drowned in barathro Romanae auaritiae, in the Hell of the Romish
avarice. Yea, so detestable was both this fact of John, and dealing of the
Pope, that Philip the French King, though the mortal enemy of King John,
hearing thereof, even upon this very point, that the Barons and State did not
consent to that Act, did proclaim both the absolute freedom of the kingdom
of England, notwithstanding this Grant of John, and declaime also against the
Pope, for seeking to enthrall kingdoms unto him. For when Gualo Math. West.
an. 1216. and Math. Paris. hist. minor. M. S. in Johan.
the Popes Legate, told him that the kingdom of England was now become the
Popes patrimony, by the gift of King John, Philip presently replied, and his
words are very remarkable, Regnum Angliae patrimonium B. Petri nunquam fuit,
nec est, nec erit; The kingdom of England never was, nor is, nor shall be the
Patrimony of Peter. And the King gave two reasons of his so worthy and
resolute assertion; the one Math. West. loc. cit.
, because John was never King, and therefore could not give away the kingdom;
The other, because Math. West. and Paris. M. S. locis citat.
Nullus Rex, No King nor Prince can give away the kingdom (which is the
Commonwealths) without the assent of his Barons, who are bound to defend the
kingdom; and if the Pope being allured by the lust of Dominion, determine to
maintain this error, he gives a pernicious example unto all kingdoms. At
which saying Math. West. loc. cit.
, all the Noble men of France that were present, began vno ore clamare, to cry
with one voice, That they would stand to this truth vsque ad mortem, even to
death, That the Pope cannot at his pleasure give kingdoms, or make Kings
tributary, whereby their Nobles shall be made slaves to whom he will: Nay, they
did not only say it, but swear Math Paris. M. S. loc. cit.
also, that they would spend their lives in this quarrel. Besides all which,
there is yet a far more authentic proof of the inualidity of King John's
grant, and that is the Judgment of the whole kingdom assembled in Parliament
in the time of Edward the third. This matter touching the Grant which King John
made to the Pope, being proposed and discussed in that Parliament; Upon Ex
Rotulo Parliam. an. 40. Ed. 3. nu. 8.
full deliberation, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Commons answered
and said with one accord, that neither the said King John, nor any other, can
put him, nor his Realm, nor his people in such subjection without their
assent: and as by many evidences appears, if it was done, it was done without
their assent, and contrary to his own oath at his Coronation. And besides
this, the Dukes, Earls, Barons, Gentlemen, and Commons, do accord and agree,
that in case the Pope shall enforce, or attempt by process, or by any other
manner of doing, to constrain the King or his subjects to perform this, (as
it is said he will) these parties will resist and withstand it with all their
puissance. Thus are the words of the Act: A demonstration above all exception,
that to the Grant or Charter made by K. John to the Pope, there was no assent
of the Realm; and therefore that K. John neither did, nor could by that his
Grant, or by either of those Charters, resign or transfer his kingdom to
the Pope, but that in his very Act of doing it, there is not only an
Inualiditie, but a mere Nullitie.

The third Nullitie arises from the Cause, which moved John to make this Grant
to the Pope. And though in both the Charters John is made to say that he did
it, for piety and devotion, to make satisfaction to God and the Church for his
sins; that he did it also bona nostra spontaneaque voluntate, of his own
free accord, and with a willing mind; yet are these in truth, nothing else but
pretenses: An easy matter it was for the Pope and his Legates, to make John
write what colorable pretense they listed, when they made him give away his
kingdom to whom, and as they listed. The true and only Cause inducing, nay
enforcing John to make this Grant, was that imminent danger and fear, to loose
both his Crown and his life also, into which extremity, both of danger and
fear, the Pope himself had now first brought John, that so he might be
pliable to his own persuasions, and then held him so fast inwrapped and
ensnared, that without the Popes help he was now inextricable. His land was
now under a general Interdict Math. Paris. an. 1208. Lo^doniensis.
, and had so remained for five whole years, like an Heathenish Nation, without
celebration of divine Service and Sacraments. John himself was by name
Excommunicated Idem. ann. 1209.. Sub his.
, and had so remained for diverse years: All Idem ann. 1212.. Circa hos.
his subjects were released and freed a Regis fidelitate et subiectione, from
owing either fidelity or subjection to him; yea they were forbidden, and that
under the pain of excommunication, so much as to company or converse with him,
either at Table, or in counsel, or in speech and conference. Further yet, John
was deposed from his kingdom, and that iudicially, a Math. Paris hist min. M.
S. in Ioh.. Dum ita.
iure regni abdicatus et sententialiter condemnatus in Curia Romana, being in
the Roman Court deprived of all right to his kingdom, and iudicially
condemned; and that Sentence Westmon: an. 1213. and Math. Par an. eod.. Anno
1213:
of his Deposition and Deprivation, was solenniter promulgata, solemly
denounced and promulgated, before the French King, Clergy, and people of
France. Neither only was John thus deposed, but his kingdom also given away
by the Pope, and that even to his most mortal enemy. For the Pope Paris. loc.
cit. pa. 310.
to bring his sentence to execution, writ unto Philip the French King,
persuading, yea inioyning Westminster. loc. cit. ex part do. Papae regi Francorum
alijsque iniunxerunt and ide^ ait Paris. pa. 311.
him to undertake that labor of dethroning John (actually, as iudicially he
was before) and expelling him from the kingdom, promising unto him, not only
remission of all his sins, but that ipse et successores sui regnum Angliae
iure perpetuo possiderent, he and his heirs should for ever have the kingdom
of England: withal the Pope Paris. loc. cit.
writ letters to all Nobles, Soldiers, and Warriers in diverse Countries, to
sign themselves with the Cross, and assist Philip for the deiection of John.
Philip was not a little glad of such an offer, gathered forces Paris. and West.
loc. cit.
, and all things fit for such an expedition, expending in that preparation no
less then Paris. ann. 1213.. His ita
60 thousand pounds. All Idem an. eod.. Rex Angl.
these things being notified to King John, did not a little daunt him; And
though he was too sensible of the impendent calamities, yet to strike a greater
terror into his amazed heart, and make a more dreadful impression in his
mind, of the dangers which now were ready to fall on his head, Pandulph was
sent from the Pope unto him, to negotiate about the resigning of his kingdom,
to which if he would consent, he should find favor, protection, and
deliverance at the Popes hands. Pandulph by a crafty kind of Romish Oratorie,
at his coming to the King, expressed, yea painted out in most lively colors
all the difficulties and dangers Paris an. cit.. Dum autem.
to which the King was subject, The loss of his Crown, the loss of his
honor, the loss of his life. That there was Math. West. loc. cit.
no other way in the world to escape them, nisi sub alis domini Papae potenter
protegatur, but by protection under the Popes wings. John Paris loc. cit.. Rex
denique
seeing dangers vndique imminere, to hang over him on every side, by the French
abroad, by the Barons at home, and being dejected, and mente Ibid.
nimis perturbatus, utterly dismayed and confounded with the ponderation of
them, resolved for saving his life, to loose his liberty and honor: and to
save his kingdom from his open adversary, to loose it and give it quite away
to his secret, but worst enemy that he had: doing herein as if one for fear
of being slain in the open field, should kill himself in his own chamber. It
was not piety but extreme peril; nor devotion, but fear only, and despair
that caused, and even enforced John against his will, to make this Grant to the
Pope. Parisiensis rightly observed this when he said Math. Paris. hist. min. M.
S.. Dum ita.
, Demersus Rex in desperationem, King John being then drowned in Despair, made
that shameful agreement, volens nolens, with an unwilling will to the Pope.
And truly the very same cause induced John to make the second Charter. For
besides that the Interdict Licet terra Interd^cta fuisset, (cum aduenit
Nicolaus) etc. Math. Par hist. mayor an. 1213.. Eodem anno ci^ca. pa. 329.
was not then released, K. John knew by experience, that if he had incensed the
Pope, by not yielding to his motion, the Pope would, and could as easily now as
before, use his power of Excommunication, Deposition, and giving away his
kingdom. As Fear and Force imminent, caused him to make the first, so Fear
and Force foreseen, caused and compelled him to make the second Charter. And
what validity can there possibly be in those Acts which are done per vim and
Metum? It is a rule in the Law Cod. de Transaction. l. Interpositas.
, confirmed by a perpetual Edict, Interpositas metu transactiones ratas non
haberi, that such agreements as are made for fear, are of no validity. We
command, say the Emperors Honor. and Theod. Cod. de ijs quae vi and m^tu gesta
^^nt l. Venditiones.
, that those Venditions, Donations, and Transactions be void, quae per
potentia^ extortae sunt, which by force and power are extorted. Innocentius
himself declares the same, even in another Act of this King John. The Barons
Math Paris. (...) 1214.. (...)
not prevailing by persuasions with him, took the City of London from him,
and being in arms, forced him to confirm some liberties and laws unto them.
John having made complaint thereof to Pope Innocentius, he thus writ Idem eod.
an. Innocentius pa. 357.
of that matter, John being destitute of help and advise also, durst not deny
what they required, vnde compulsus est per vim and metum, whereupon he was
compelled by Force and Fear ( which may fall into a man though he be most
constant) to make both a shameful and wicked composition with them; That
composition reprobamus penitus ac damnamus, we utterly reject and condemn; and
all the Covenants and Obligations contained therein, we make altogether
frustrate and void. Boniface 8. entreating of some things done by the Kings of
Scotland, which seemed prejudicial to their right, says Bonif. in suis literis
ad rege^ Angl. apud Math. Westminster. an. 1301.
, Ea vtpote per vim and metum elicita nequaquam debent de iure subsistere,
those things being done by reason of Force and Fear, (which may happen to a
constant man) ought not in Law to be of validity, nor to redound to the
prejudice of the kingdom. Whose saying does equally in every respect, show the
inualiditie in this Act of King John. Pope Pascalis with an whole Council
decreed the like. He being imprisoned Ab. Vsperg. an. 1112. Alb. Stad. et
Naucl. eod. ann. and Conc. Later. sub. Pasc. 2.
by Henry 5. by a fair Charter resigned unto the Emperor, the Inuesti^ures
of Bishops, and ordering of the Sea Apostolic. The Pope was no sooner at
liberty, and the fear past, but calling a Laterane Council, they revoke and
adiudge that Grant, even because it was per violentiam extortum, made by
constraint, to be of no force, to be Prauilegium, not Priuilegium. Were they
not quite blinded with partiality, they could not choose but confess, that
much more this Charter and Grant of King John must be inualid; the Grant to
Henry was just and lawful, being that which in right belonged unto him: this
Grant of John was sundry ways injurious; injurious to John himself, it being
contrary to his just oath formerly taken: injurious to the whole State and
kingdom, whose liberties it enthralled: injurious to the Crown, as taking
away the Regality thereof. Seeing they upon that rule of Gesta per vim et metu^
non valent, adnull the just Charter and Grant of Pope Pascalis to the Emperor,
they do warrant us by the same rule to pronounce a Nullity of the injurious
Charters and Grant of King John unto the Pope.

The last Inualidity, arises out of the very Manner of the Grant, and of the
making thereof. For after all that K. John either resigneth, gives or grants
any way to the Pope, this Prouiso and Exception, or Reservation is expressly set
down, Saluis nobis et haeredibus nostris, Iustitijs, Libertatibus, et
Regalibus nostris. Saving to us and to our heirs, our Rights, Liberties, and
Regalities. Which words being expressed in the former Charter, the Copy whereof
is vulgarly extant and obuious unto all, I supposed that the principal, if not
the only reason, why the Pope procured his second writing had been, to have
this clause (which adnulleth all the former Grant) expunged and left out in the
second and golden Charter. But when I found the selfe^same Prouiso, and that
totidem verbis, expressed in both the Charters, I did even wonder to see their
vanity, and with what insolency they boast that Sovereignty of Dominion is here
given to the Pope, and the King made an homager and vassal unto him by this
Grant: all which this one Prouiso does manifest to be untrue. For the Right of
a King is Sovereignty of Dominion: The Liberty of a King, is Freely and
Absolutely to rule, without being subject or servant to any other mortal man.
And the very essence of Regalitie, as I have before showed, is Supremacy of
authority, Independent of any, save only of God. Seeing all these are
expressly and directly excepted in both the Charters, they utterly made void
whatsoever is before mentioned, either as granting Sovereignty to the Pope, or
as acknowledging subjection in the King. In both these respects, by reason of
this one Prouiso and Exception, there is a certain Nullity of the Grant made
in both the Charters. Much more might be added; But for further satisfaction in
this whole point concerning these Grants, I gladly refer the Reader to the
History of King John's life, so faithfully, exactly, and iudiciously set forth
Ea est quae extat in Chro. Johan: Spend.
, by my learned friend Mr Dr Barkam, that were the rest of our Country Story
suitable thereunto, few humane Histories of kingdoms could be preferred before
it.

Their third and last proof, concerns Henry the second, father of this King
John. Card. Allen Card. Allan. admonit. to the Nobil. an. 1588. pa. 8. and cit.
in Blackw* larg. examine. pa. 18.
pretends that Henry the second, when he was absolved for the death of Thomas
Becket, made an agreement with Pope Alexander the third, that none might
lawfully take the kingdom of England till he were confirmed by the Pope. And
both Baronius Bar. an. 1173 nu. 9.
and Bellarmine Bell. Apol. pro Tort. cap. 3. Extat.
, and after them Becanus Bec. Contr. Angli. q. 9 nu. 1. 2. and seq.
and Gretser Grets in co^. Exeget. sieve Basil. dor. ca. 5. si temporalia.
allege to this purpose, an Epistle of Henry the second, set down among the
Epistles of Pet. Blesensis Epist 136 inter Epist Pet. Bla^s.
, wherein King Henry acknowledges the Pope to be his temporal Lord, and
himself the Popes Feudatary. Vestrae Iurisdictionis est Regnum Angliae: The
Kingdom of England belongs to your Jurisdiction, and by Feudatary obligation I
am bound and obnoxious to none but to you. Let England know what the Pope can
do; and because the Church uses not material weapons, let it defend the
Patrimony of Saint Peter by the spiritual Sword. Whereunto I answer, that
both this pretense of a Covenant, and Feudatary subjection, is untrue; and that
Epistle going under the name of Henry the second, wherein this is acknowledged,
is either wholly forged, or in that part or passage corrupted. Whereof there
are so many evident profes, or rather Demonstrations, that none of sound
judgment duly pondering the same, can justly make any doubt thereof. Had the
Pope known this Kingdom to have been the Popes Patrimony, and the Kings
thereof Feudatary unto them in the time of Henry the father of K. John, or could
they have showed that King Henry had acknowledged this under his hand and
seal, would they have been so simple as to have labored so earnestly and
craftily to draw King John to make those Charters of Resignation, and that
grant of the Sovereignty thereof unto them? What could either K. John resign,
grant, or give unto them, or the Popes receive more then was their own before,
and that by the authentical acknowledgment of King Henry? Seeing this
acknowledgement of King Henry, utterly adnuls the Grant, and both the Charters
of K. John, wherein they so much triumph, and for which (as also for the Popes
earnest labor to obtain the same) there are so cretaine and undoubtful
Records, even themselves must either confess this Epistle and acknowledgement of
King Henry, to be a Forgery, or else for ever disclaim the Charters of King
John, and whatsoever is granted therein unto them. Had the Pope known this
Kingdom to be his Patrimony, and himself to be the Lord thereof, by any
acknowledgement of King Henry, why did he not protect K. John, and his
Kingdom against the Barons, against Philip the French K. and against Lewis his
son, as well before John had made those Charters, as he did after? specially
seeing he gives this very reason why he protected John, because Admonet papa
Philippum ne permitter et Ludouicum Angliam hostiliter adire vel Rege^ Anglorum
inquietare in aliquo; sed ipsum vt Romans Ecclesiae vassallum protegeret and
defenderet. Math Paris. an. 1216. Sub. his. pa. 375. Ecce qualiter patrimonium
B. Petri Angliam ponti^ic^s defendunt, dicunt Barons, quorum inso: lentiam
minis* and censuris co^pescit Innoc^ntius 3. in suis literis apud Math Paris.
an. 1215. pa. 362.
he was his Vassal, and a Feudatarte unto him, one whom in duty he was to
protect and defend. For thus said Paris. an. 1216. Tunc: dixit. pa. 381.
the Pope to the Legates of Jews. He ought not to make war (no not just
war) against King John, but he must make complaint to John's higher Lord, to
wit the Pope, Cui subest Rex Angliae tanuqam vassallus eius, whose Vassal King
John is. Nay why did the Pope incite K. Philip, to invade England, to dethrone
King John, and promise his Kingdom unto him, if it was the Patrimony of St.
Peter, by any Grant or acknowledgement from K. Henry? Or how could Innocentius
the third, in his Bull Bulla Innoc. de qua supra.
of Acceptance of John's Charter, have said in such a glorying manner, That now
upon K. John's Grant, was fulfilled, that which Saint Peter says: Regnum
Sacerdotale, et Sacerdotum regale. The Pope being now made (in respect of
England) like Melchisedek, both a King and a Priest! That this and other
Provinces, quae olim, which formerly held the Roman Church, for her Mistress
in spiritual matters, Nunc etiam in Temporalibus Dominam habeant specialem,
has the same Church now (upon King John's Grant) for her Lady in Temporal
affairs also? Innocentius does hereby clearly witness that this Realm of
England, never till K. John's time acknowledged the Roman Church for her Lord in
temporal matters. And therefore by the Popes own judgment, neither Henry the
second, nor any former King did ever acknowledge, as in that forged Epistle
Henry is made to do, this Realm to have been the Patrimony of Peter, or the
Kings thereof Feudataries to the Pope.

Besides this there are diverse reasons that may persuade that K. Henry never
writ that Epistle, at least not that passage therein, nor ever made any such
acknowledgement. There is extant a Letter Epist. Hen. (...) in M. S. cod. in
Bib D. Rob. Cot.
of this King Henry, to Pascalis the third, who succeeded to Octauianus, called
Victor the 3. and was chosen Pope in the time when Rowland called Alexander the
3. held the Sea. Pascalis is accounted by them Galt. Chron. in saecul. 12.
for an Antipope, but as before I showed, Alexander was indeed a Pseudopope,
which much impaireth the credit of Henry's E-Epistle and acknowledgement made
unto him. Henry after congratulation for his election, and signification how he
sent that pension of Peterpence unto him, which he expressly calls Beneficium,
as noting it to be given in courtesy, and as an Alms, not as a duty, he thus
says, What honor and obedience your See had in the time of my father, and
Predecessors, the same I will that you have in my time: In this tenor that I
also do entirely enjoy those dignities and customs in my Kingdom, which my
Ancestors had in the same: And I certify you that as long as I live, the
dignities and customs of my Kingdom shall not (God willing) be impaired. And
though I (which God forbid) should so much deiect my self, yet my Nohles, imo
totus Angliae populus id nullo modo pateretur; yea the whole Kingdom of
England will not suffer the impayring thereof. So clearly and constantly does
King Henry protest that neither himself would, neither would his people permit
the impayring of the dignities and custom of the Kingdom: and therefore that
neither himself nor they would ever acknowledge such Feudatary subjection to
the Pope, as in that forged Epistle is both against the mind, the hand and
seal of the King, and against the consent of the Kingdom acknowledged. Those
other acts of King Henry, recorded in Historians, do show the same. He forbad
Rog. Ho^ed. Annal. part. 2. fol. 289. Amantissimo.
any to appeal to the Pope, and that also, qualicunque de causa, for any cause
whatsoever, without the Kings leave. He accounted and often called, Ille Thomas
proditor. literae Henry 2. ad Episcop. Londin. apud Math. Paris. an. 1149.. Per
Idem: and ad Ludou. Regem Franc. scripsit ne inimicum suam ac proditorem Thomam
^oue^et. lit. Henr. apud Westminster. 1168. and saepe alibi.
Thomas Becket a Traitor for applealing to the Pope, and seeking help of him
against the King: He entreated Literae. Hen. 2. ad Frid. Imper. apud
Westmonast. loco citato.
aid of Frederick the Emperor, to depose Alexander the Pope, eo quod
proditoris Thomae causam fouit, because he took part with the Traitor Thomas
against him: He decreed, that if any Rog. Ho^ed lib. cit. fol. 284.
brought into England either any letters or mandate from the Pope, containing
an interdict of the land, he should be apprehended, and justice without delay
done unto him, Sicut de traditore Regis ac Regni, as on a Traitor to the King
and Kingdom. He decreed that Ibid. fol. 290.
neither Archbishop nor other, should without his leave go out of the Kingdom,
no not ad vocationem domini Papae, though the Pope called him: He professed
Ibid. fol. 287.
obedience to the Popes sacred commands, but with this Prouiso. Salua sibi sua,
regnique sui dignitate: always saving his own dignity and the Kingdoms (by
which one Prouiso his regal Sovereignty is kept safe.) His oath taken at that
very time when he was absolved, after the death of Becket, is worthy observing.
One part whereof was this, that he Ibid. fol. 303
would not revolt from Pope Alexander and his successors, quamdiu ipsum sicut
Regem catholicum ^abuerint, so long as they entreated him as a Catholic King
(and that is, so long as they touch not his regal Sovereignty, or attempted
ought against it.) Another part was, that he Ibid.
would not hinder appeals to the Pope in causes Ecclesiastical (in civil he
would) but yet with this Prouiso (which kept his sovereignty safe) that if any
were suspected, they should put in security, that they would not hurt either
him or his Kingdom: Upon such security, he permitted only, but allowed not,
and that only in Ecclesiastical causes, appeals to the Pope. These and a
number the like, as they are clear evidences, that he still as well after as
before the death of Becket, kept the Sovereignty of the Kingdom in himself,
so they demonstrate that acknowledgement of the Popes superior authority unto
him, and that himself was a Feudatarie to the Pope, mentioned in that Epistle
to be a mere fiction and forgery, devised by some unskillful fauorer of the
Pope.

To all which may be added the judgment of their learned Archpriest, who
entreating of that accord betwixt King Henry the second, and Pope Alexander the
third, which Cardinal Allane mentions, not only taxes Georg. Blackw. in his
large Examinat. pa. 18. 19 and 20. He must needs acknowledge his oversight in
that point.
the Cardinal for oversight in that point, but further also of his assertion
resolutely says: It is untrue, adding that King Henry the second never made
any such accord, for ought that he could ever read in any Chronicle of credit.
Now it is not to be doubted, but that so learned a man, exercised in the
diligent search of such matters, had both read and knew right well of this
Epistle, going under the name of King Henry the second, so familiar and obuious
in their writings; but because he judged that Epistle to be of no credit, he
therefore denied any such grant to have bin ever made. But enough touching
England, to manifest the vanity of their boasting, that the Kingdom thereof,
even ex quo Christi nomen ibi clarificatum est, ever since Christianity was
embraced therein, has been in the hand and power of S. Peter, as Pope Epist.
Alex. 2 ext. apud. Bar. an. 1068. nu. 1.
Alexander the 2. says, or as Stan. Christanouic Christanou. Examen. Cathol.
sol. 33.
explaines it, has at all times bin tributarie to the Pope: whereas we have
now by many and by authenticke evidences demonstrated, that ever since the
first planting of the faith in this Land, it has still been an Imperial
Kingdom, subject to none but only and immediately unto God.

For the Kingdom of Scotland, I will only here mention two Testimonies. The
former of Cassaneus Cassaneus citat. apud Episc. Roffe. contra Bell. lib 1. ca.
8.
. The King of Scots, non habet superiorem nisi ipsum Creatore, has no superior
unto him but only God. The other of the whole State of England. When Boniface
the 8. challenged Literae Bonif. 8. extant apud Math. Westmon. an. 1301.
the Kingdom of Scotland to belong pleno iure, in full right to the Church of
Rome, as to the direct and supreme Lord thereof, the Earls, Barons and Nobles
of England after diligent examination of the whole matter, with one consent
returned this answer Literae Gomitum and Baronum Angl. extat apud. ^und.
Westminster. an. citato.
to Boniface. The Kingdom of Scotland, nullis temporibus, in temporalibus
pertinuit, vel pertinet quouis iure, ad Ecclesiam vestram, does not now, nor at
any time did belong by any right unto your Roman Church. Which one authentic
testimony is enough to silence for ever their vain pretenses for that Kingdom.

For the Kingdom of Ireland, how far it was from acknowledgement of the
Popes temporal Monarchy, may certainly be discerned by their condemning his
Ecclesiastical sovereignty, and that by consenting voice in their Parliaments.
In the time of King Statute of Ireland. an. 10. Hen. 7. ca. 5.
Henry the 7. all the statutes made in England against Prouisors, were
authorized, confirmed and decreed to be of force for Ireland. The like Statute
against Prouisors was made in the time of Henry the sixth An. 32. Hen. 6 ca. 1.
, yea a more severe law was made in the time of Edw. the fourth, That Stat. of
Irel an. 16. Edw. 4. ca. 4. not printed, sed citat^^ in the first pa^ of the
repor^ of Sir John Dauis, in the case of Praemunire fol. 87.
such as purchase any Bulls of Provision in the Court of Rome, as soon as they
have published or executed the same to the hurt of any Incumbent, should be
adjudged Traitors.

The like might be declared of the Kingdoms of Denmark, Suetia, Hungaria,
Russia, and the rest, which are mentioned in Nicholas Cardinal of Arragonia,
and after him in Steuchus and Gretzer: for them all in general, that one
testimony of their own, Dom. Soto, being so full and clear to our purpose,
may suffice at this time. Pope Innocentius, says he Dom. Sot. in 4. Sent.
distinc. 25. q. 2. art. 1. concl. 3.. Quod si.
, ingeniously confesses, that he has no power in temporal matters, over the
French King: Et quiquid alij somniant, id de omnibus regnis intelligit, and
whatsoever others dream, the Pope understands this of all other Kingdoms. But
omitting other particulars touching them, I will only now in the last place
entreat of the Roman Empire, which both by Act and Word, to have rejected their
papal Monarchy, might by innumerable testimonies and examples, be made
evident. Of them all, I will briefly mention but a few, having in many
passages before set down much to this purpose.

Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor, was so far from
acknowledging that Papal monarchy, that himself exercised supreme authority,
and that not only in Civil, but even in Ecclesiastical causes. The Donatists
brought unto him a very troublesome cause, and many accusations against
Cecilianus. He being at the first unacquainted Imperatorem ^^arum rerum adhuc
ignaru^. Opt. lib. 1. cont. Parm. pa. 28.
with the Canons, durst Non Ausus est ipse iudicare. August. Epist. 162. and 166
not (personally, or by himself) give sentence therein, but he did that which
demonstrated his Sovereignty both of authority and judgment; for causam Aug.
Epist. 166.
iudicandam atque finendam Episcopis delegauit, he delegated and deputed
Bishops to judge in his room, and to end that business: first Maternus,
Optat. loc. cit. and Epist. Constant. Miltiad. apud Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 5.
Rhetilius, and Marinus, to whom he joined Pope Meltiades, and iunxit Aug. in
Breuic. collat* die. 3.. Quinto ergo.
causam audiendam, and he enjoined or gave a precept to the Pope and them to
hear the cause, and to end it. When the Donatists appealed from the Synodall
judgment of the Pope* the Emperor Aug. Epist. 166.
dedit alios iudices, appointed other Judges at Arles, to judge even of the
Popes judgment. When the Donatists yet again appealed from them also,
Constantine though he might iusty have rejected their appeal after so many
judgments given by those Bishops, yet he took the judgment Aug. Epist. 162.
thereof into his own hands, a sanctis Antistitibus postea veniam petiturus,
says Saint Austen, purposing to crave pardon of the Bishops, for undertaking
to judge in that same cause which he had appointed to be ended by the^.
Himself Idem Epist. 68.
personally then heard the whole cause, and Episcopalem causam cognitam
terminauit, says S. Austen, he made a final conclusion and determination of
all that ecclesiastical matter; and withal made a most severe law against the
Donatists. Can there be desired more, or more clear euide^ces, that this most
religious Emperor esteemed not the papal, but his own Imperial authority to be
supreme in these causes? His delegating and appoynting of Judges, even the Pope
for one, his receiving appeals, and giving other Judges after the Popes
judicial sentence past, his own personal hearing the cause, and final
ending of it by his own judgment, are evident proofs of his superiority
above the Pope. And this Imperial judgment was so approved by the Church,
that S. Austen little less then triumphs therein against the Donatists.
Constantine, says he Aug. Epist 166.
, is dead, Sed iudicium Constantini contra vos viuit, but the judgment of
Constantine against you does still live. The Emperors ( Constantine, Gratian,
Theodosius and Valentinean) do command the same that Christ's commands, because
when they command what is good, per illos non iubet nisi Christus, none but
Christ does command by them: yea S. Austen, in this very cause, besides this of
Imperial superiority above the Pope, expressly declares that there is another
judge in Ecclesiastical causes above him: for speaking of the Synodall
judgment of Pope Meltiades, of which the Donatists complained as unjust, Let
us, says he Aug. Epist. 162.
, suppose those Bishops who judged this cause at Rome, to have been ill
judges, restabat adhuc plenarium Ecclesiae concilium, there remained yet a
general Council of the Church, where the cause might be debated, cum ipsis
iudicibus, even with judges themselves, one of which was the Pope. No marvel
if Stapleton Staplet. Counterblast. ca. ^9 pa. 17.
was so displeased at this example, so ancient, and withal so pregnant against
their doctrine, that he, reuiling Constantine, for that very judgment, for
which S. Austen and the whole Church honored him, shamed not to say of him,
that he waded far beyond the borders of his own vocation. But wisdom is
justified of her own children.

Justinian in his Imperial laws fully declares this Sovereignty of Emperors
above the Pope, There is says he Justin. Novel. 133. in praefat.
, nothing exempt Sic legitur in antiquis Cod. and sic legendu^ agnoscit. Stap.
in suo Counterbl. ca. 19. p. 184. in nonnullis edit. aliter habetur.
from the Princes inquisition, who has received from God commune^ in omnes
homines moderationem, and principatum, a common Regiment and Sovereignty over
all men. His own acts also, as by name the Banishing of Pope Siluerius, the
commanding Pope Vigilius to come to Constantinople, and staying him there till
the Emperor gave him leave to depart, and diverse the like, do manifest that
he judged the Imperial authority to be a superior even a commanding power
above the Papal.

The like Sovereignty does Basilius the Emperor testify to belong to himself
and all the Emperors, when in the presence, and with the approbation of that,
which they call the eight general Council, he expressly thus said Conc. Genesis
8. Act. 1
, The government of the Ecclesiastical ship (that is of the whole Church) is
by divine providence nobis commissa, committed to us who are Emperors.

I would gladly stay a little in speaking of Charles the Great, specially
because Sciopius has so insolently and so vildly misused him, metamorphising
Is porro (Carolus) tantus Asinus, Sciop. c. ^47.
him into an Ass, into a right Issachar, that is into a strong Ass, yea into
an Ass with Bells about his neck, that it will not seem amiss, for
vindicating his honor against such railing Shemeys to make manifest how this
renowned Emperor was in very deed the high co^mander both of the Pope and all
others in his Empire. See first how by his commanding authority he calls the
Pope and other Bishops out of their Provinces to the Council at Frankford.
Iussimus Rescriptum Caroli ad Elipandum. tom. 3. Conc. p. 425.
Synodale Concilium, we have commanded a Council to be held at Frankford of
all the Bishops within our dominions. Among those Bishops the Pope was one, who
at the Emperors command was present in that Council by his two Legates Athel.
in Ann. Franc. an 794. Reghin. in eund. an. and Ado Vien. atque alij*
Theophilactus and Stephanus, whom he sent to supply his room therein. Let
Scioppius now say who was then the Ass, the Pope, who obeyed the Emperors
command, or Charles who like the chief muliter drove the Pope to what fould
he listed.

See next how this great Emperor not only resisted the Popes doctrine and
direction, and that also in a matter of faith, but like the holy Angel of God,
reproved the Romish Balaam, and his Baaliticall Idolatry, in their adoration of
Images. There are extant four large books called Libri Carolini, wherein not
only the doctrine and decree of their second Nicene Council about Images is
fully, and by many divine authorities and reasons refuted, but that second
Nicene Synod is as Hincmarus Hincm. lib. cont. Hincma. rum laudum. c. 20.
says, penitus abdicata, utterly rejected therein, yea Athelmus Athel. loc.
ci^*
adds, that the second Nicene Synod was so wholly rejected, vt nec septima nec
vniuerssalis haberetur, dicereturue, that it should neither be esteemed nor
called the seventh, or any general Council. That Charles the great was the
Author and writer of this book, Aug. Steuchus witnesses, saying Steuc. lib.
de Donat. Constable. p. 111.
, Charles the great writing of Images in the first book and sixth chapter,
thus says: and then he repeateth that whole Chapter of the Li^ri Carolini.
The like is witnessed by Eckius Eck. in Euchir c. de Imaginibus.
, Charles the great quaituor libros scripsit writ four books against such as
take away Images. Bellarmine Bell. lib. 2 de Council. c. 8. Primo qu^a.
is of opinion that they were not Ibid.. Quod autem.
writ by Charles, but by the Counsel at Frankford, seeing there is set down
the very acts of that Council, and this both out of Hincmarus, and the books
themselves he declares. Both their opinions are in part true, for it is
certain, that some parts of those books were written by Charles: Of the
Preface, in which Nam eodem ord^ne cum Ariminensi censetur Praef. lib 1 Carol.
p. 97.
their 2. Nicene Synod is rejected, it is evident to be the preface of Charles,
This Ibid.
work we have undertaken with the consent of those Bishops which are set over
Catholic flocks, in regno a Deo nobis concesso, in the kingdom given unto
us by God; which words can agree to none but to Charles. Again of the last
Chapter, wherein Charles professes Secundum quod continet Epist. ^. Gregorij
ad Serenum. lib. 4. c. vlt.
to follow the judgment of Gregory the great, who writ thus to Serenus, We
Greg. Epist. 9. lib. 9* Indi. 4
praise you that you forbad them to adore Images, but we reprove you that ye
brake them down. This chapter to be the true writing of Charles the great,
Pope Hadrian Had. 1 Epist 3. quae est ad Carolum. c. vlt
expressly testifies. So both the beginning and ending of those books are the
writing of Charles. The rest of the books wherein all of any moment which is
set down in the second Nicene Synod is repeated and refuted, seems indeed to
be written* as Bellarmine says, by the Council at Frankford, but yet so, that
it was approved by Charles. And because according to the law Cod. lib. 1. de
veteri iure Eccl.
, Omnia nostra facimus quibus nostram impartimur authoritatem, they were
usually and rightly said to be the books of Charles. This, Hincmarus
witnesses, saying Hinc. loc. cit*
, By the authority of the Council of Frankford, the worshipping of Images was
somewhat repressed, yet Hadrian and other Popes after the death of Charles,
suarum pupparum cultum vehementius promouerunt, did more earnestly labor for
the worshipping of their puppets, so that Jews the son of Charles, libro
long acriori insectatus sit imaginum cultum quam Carolus* did in a more sharp
book write against the worshipping of Images then Charles had done, where he
plainly testifies those books writ against the adoration of Images to be the
books of Charles. The Council at Paris held in the time of Jews, witnesses
also those books to have bin written with the allowance and approbation, yea in
part by the direction of Charles. When your father Charles, say they Synod
Paris. sub Ludouico and Lothario in principio.
, had caused the second Nicene Synod to be read before himself and his Bishops
(in the Council at Frankford) et multis in locis vt dignum erat
reprehendisset, and when he had in many places reproved it, as it well
deserved, and when further he had noted and observed certain chapters of the
Nicene Synod which were to be reproved, he sent the same chapters by
Euguilbert an Abbot to Pope Hadrian, vt illius indicio et authoritate
corrigeretur, that they should be amended by Pope Hadrianus authority and
judgment. Now seeing those books which Charles sent to Hadrian, and which
Hadrian answered, were no other but these very four Libri Carolini, as
Bellarmine Bell. lib de Council. c. 8. Primo quia.
rightly professes, and as any who compares the one with the other, cannot
choose but acknowledge; it evidently hence follows, that what Chapters of the
second Nicene Council are in those books reproved, the reproof was either
praenotata observed, or at least allowed by Charles. Seeing so great an Emperor
as Charles not only rejected and condemned their second Nicene Synod which
Pope Hadrian had confirmed, but writ or published large books, and that under
his own name against that Synod, yea when he admonished the Pope to correct
and amend his Nicene Synod, and the Decrees thereof: let Scioppius here again
say, who seems to him in this cause to be the Muliter, and who the Ass; and
whether Charles be such a wise that is obedient Ass as he foolishly boasts
he was.

See lastly how in this very point touching the Popes temporal Monarchy, (in
respect whereof Scioppius accounts and calls him one of their greatest Asses)
he was in very truth one of their Popes greatest Muliters and Commanders.
Charles the great, says Iac. Almane Iac. Alm. lib. de Potest. Eccl and lai^.
1. q. 1. c. ^4.. De Inst. niano.
did not acknowledge any superiorem in temporalibus, to be above him in
temporal matters. Nay he took, and that rightly a Sovereignty above all,
even in the Pope himself. He had Did. 63. c. Had^ianus.
the election of the Pope, he had the ordering of the Apostolical See; he had
the Sovereign disposing Sigon. lib. 4. de reg. Italan principio.
of Rome and Italy, having conquered and obtained it iure belli, he gave (as to
Tenants under himself) Dukedomes and Cities, to whom he would, Permisit
pontifici, he permitted the Pope to have the Exarchate of of Rauenna, the
Dukedom of Rome, and other Cities, and he permitted the Pope with this Prouiso
to have them, Iure principatus and ditione sibi retenta: he let the Pope have
only vsum fructum, the use, profit and commodity of those territories, but the
Sovereignty and supreme dominion he reserved still to himself, as Sigonius
and 300. years before him, Eutropius witnesses: who says Eutrop. ^ongobar.
tract. de Iuris and priu. Imper.
that Charles ordained that all the people of Rome, tam Episcopi, quam la^ci,
as well Bishops as Laymen, should be Homines Imperatoris, the Emperors men.
Now because Scioppius says Deus Romam Ecclesiae donauit, and hunc corpori suo
velut cibum hanc gregi suo cau^ ^ am daturu^ se promisit Sciop. Eccles. ca. 51.
, that Rome is the meat, and the fould of the Church, whether the Pope and his
Cardinals, who eat such Fodder, and are couped in that Fould, be to be
called Asses, or Charles who allowed them this Fodder and this Fould, I leave
it to the judgment of any save only Scioppius, who accounts himself* and not
without cause, one of that fould Cuiusmodi Asini simus nos Catholici. Sciop.
lib. cit. ca. 14^. pa. 534 in marg.
of Asses.

O but, Charles cried out, says Scioppius Ca. ^od. pa. 537.
to all the fould of Asses, lets honor the Roman Church (that is the Pope) and
bear with humility, whatsoever yoke he imposes though it be almost
insupportable: which is the saying of a right Issachar. But why does not
Scioppius tell you, where Charles the great said this? Or how knows he, that
Charles ever used such a true Issachars saying? If he rely, as Baronius Bar.
an. ^01 nu. 10.
does herein, on Gratians authority, where Did. 19. ca. In memoriam.
this is cited under the name of Charles, their own Posseuine Post. in
Gratiane.
will tell him, and that most truly, that Gratian very often erres in citing
sayings under the names of such Authors, as never writ them. And this to be
certainly one of those errors of Gratian, that which I have already said of
Charles, does make evident. For Charles would neither himself endure, nor
suffer others to bear that yoke of adoration of Images, though imposed by the
Pope: neither would he bear or endure to hear of that other insupportable
yoke of the Popes Temporal Monarchy, but himself imposed his own yoke of
Sovereignty upon the Pope, permitting him no otherwise to have Rome, and other
Cities in Italy, but so that the Sovereignty and highest dominion should still
remain in himself. So both the Doctrine and Actions of Charles demonstrate
that Issachars saying to be none of his. Scioppius may learn of Burchardus
Burchardus citat. ex council. Triburiensi. Nota Gregor. ad ca. citat.
the whole Chapter; In memoriam, which Gratian falsely ascribed to Charles, was
indeed a Decree of the counsel Conc. Tribur. ca. 30. totidem omnino verbis
decretu^ illum habet, vt apud Gratianum citatur.
at Triburia, held in the time of Pope Formosus, 80. years Conc. Trib. habitu^
est an. 895. Carolus obij^ an. 814.
after the death of Charles the great. But whether soever of them was Author of
that Decree, certain it is, that neither the one nor the other, can thence be
proved to be such a very Ass or right Issachar as Scioppius fancieth. For in
that Decree, there is neither mention nor intention of bearing the yoke of the
Popes temporal Monarchy, wherein consists the very essence of A^inity. This
yoke Charles as has bin undeniably demonstrated, could not endure, but he as I
have showed imposed upon the Pope, the yoke of his own Sovereignty. The
counsel of Triburia also, was so far from once dreaming of that Papal yoke,
that they directly subject the Pope to the yoke of the Emperors authority and
Sovereignty, saying Conc. Trib. in prooemio.
of Arnulphus the Emperor, that God had preferred him, omnibus ecclesiasticae
sublimitatis ordinibus, above all orders of Ecclesiastical sublimity, then
certainly above the Popes. The Decree (which was indeed made by the Counsel
Ab Episcopis decretum illu^ factum iudicant, illa verba quae nobis est matter
Ecclesiasticae dignitatis.
, and not by Charles) speaks only of Ecclesiastical Orders, Rites or
Ceremonies as their own words declare, Let us say they, honor the Roman See,
that she who is the mother of priestly dignity unto us, esse debeat
Ecclesiasticae magistra rationis, may also be the Mistres of Ecclesiastical
reason; that is order and discipline. So the true meaning of the Decree is,
that such Ecclesiastical Orders, Rites or Ceremonies, as that our mother
Church imposes on us, let us with patience and humility observe, though
otherwise the yoke of them be scarce tolerable. From whence to conclude any
acknowledgement, that all, even Kings and Emperors must bear the yoke of the
Popes temporal Monarchy, it beseemed none but only such as Scioppius is, one
who is eminent in that his fould of Asses.

Otho the great, besides many other ways demonstrated his Imperial
Sovereignty above the Pope, and that also with the approbation of the whole
Church, when he deposed Litpr. lib 6. ca. 6. 7. and seq.
John the twelfth (though for age but a boy Pope, yet for wickedness a
Monster) and placed Leo the 8. in his See, as before we have declared.

Pope Hadrian the fourth, had writ a letter Epist. Hadr. extat. apud Radeu lib
1. cap. 9 and apud Nauc. an. 1155.
to the Emperor Frederick the first, wherein he reproues the Emperor of
insolency and arrogance, for setting in his letters, his own name before the
Popes, telling him, that he conferred the imperial dignities unto him: Coronae
Radeu. loc. cit. and ca. 15.
beneficium tibi contulimus, we have given unto. you the benefit of the
Imperial Crown. Here was a fit occasion for the Emperor to have
acknowledged the Popes right, if he had known it. But see how the Emperor
answered Epist. Frider. extat apud Radeu lib. 1. ca. 10. and Naucl. an. citato.
the Pope: Ad illam vocem nefandam, at the hearing of that speech, detestable
and void of all truth, (that the Empire is conferred by the Pope) not only our
Imperial Majesty conceived just indignation, but all the Princes who were
present, were so filled with wrath and anger, that they had condemned to death
those 2. wicked Priests who brought that message, unless we had stayed them.
Again, seeing by the election of the Princes, a solo deo regnum and Imperium
nostrum sit, our Kingdom and Empire is from God only, Whosoever shall say,
that we receive the Imperial Crown, pro beneficio a domino Papa, as a gift
from the Pope is guilty of a lie and of gain saying, the divine Institution
and Doctrine of S. Peter. Again Apud. Naucl. ^oc. cit.
, Seeing Christ both for himself and Peter, paid tribute to Caesar, he gives
you an example that you also should do so. Had Siluester any regality in the
time of Constantine? By Constantines concession, liberty was given to the
Church, and quicquid regalis, Papatus vester habere dignoscitur, largitione
principum obtinet, and whatsoever regalitie the Papacy has, it obtained it by
the bounty of Princes. This was the Emperors, and most true judgment of the
Popes Sovereignty.

Frederick the second though he was often excommunicated and deposed by the
Pope, not only Trit. in Chr* Hirsang. an. 1244.
contemned all the Popes censures, and sentence, quam iniustam and friuolam
esse dicebat, which he called unjust and frivolous, but held his Empire with
great honor, the Princes, Nobles, and Imperial cities adhering to him, vsque
ad morte^, even to his dying day, so that neither the Pope nor any other could
prevail against him: yea he so vexed and punished the Pope vt vitae taederet,
that he was weary of his life, and wished he had never deposed him. The same
Emperor said Epist. (...) ^apud (...) vinc^. Epist. 3. lib. 1^
, that it was a ridiculous thing to subject the Emperor, of whom to take
punishment belongs to God, and not to man, cum temporalem hominem superiorem
non habeat, seeing the Emperor has no mortal man above him.

When there was great contention about the right and dignities of the Empire,
in the time of Jews of Bauare, omni ambiguitate mature solerterque discussa,
all doubts being maturely and exactly discussed by the holy Bishops, the
Emperor made and promulged this law, which being set down by Alberic. de
Rosate Alber. ^. Been a Zeo^e tit* de Quadrien. prae^c.
and Hier. Balbus Hier. Balb. l^b de Coronat. pa 65.
is most worthy to be writ in golden letters, as expressing the true dignity
and authority of imperial majesty: some parcels of which I will here recite.
He decrees, that the Emperor is truly made by the election only of those who
have right to elect without either confirmation or approbation of any other,
quoniam in terris quoad temporalia non habet superiorem, because the Emperor
has none upon earth his superior. Again, Their doctrines are pestiferous and
seditious, and their assertions detestable who say, that Imperial dignity and
power is from the Pope, and that the party elected is not truly Emperor nor
king unless he be confirmed, approved and crowned by the Pope. We by the
consent of the Electors, and other Princes of the Empire do declare, quod
imperialis dignitas and potestas est immediate a solo Deo, that Imperial
dignity and power is immediately from God alone, and that upon the consent in
election, he is forthwith truly Emperor, and has plenary imperial power; nor
does he need either approbation, confirmation, or consent of the Pope or any
other, and this we decree by a law for ever to be observed: and whosoever shall
presume either to speak or to consent to those who speak against those things
thus declared, decreed, and defined by us, we decree them to be ipso iure et
facto both by law and actually deprived of all lands, jurisdictions,
privileges and immunities which they hold of the Empire; and further to have
incurred, and to be subject to all the punishments which are due unto Traitors.

Hereunto may be joined that of Guntharus the next elected Cuspin. in Carolo.
4.
Emperor to this Jews, who renewed and ratified this Edict of Jews,
decreeing Gunthari decretum extat inter Imperiales. Constit tom. 3. p. 414.
by the like consent of the Imperial states, that the Pope, secundum omnia
iura diuina ac humana subesse debet imperio, ought to be subject to the
Emperors according to the laws both of God and man, and that the Emperor nec
illi nec vlli personae in temporalibus subiectus est, is subject neither to the
Pope nor to any other person in temporal matters. He decreed also, that
whosouer would presume either to speak or do ought* or to consent to any who
did speak or do against this their decree, such should be accounted rebels
to the Emperor and Empire, and be deprived ipso iure et facto of all benefit
and dignity which they hold of the Empire, and should also be subject to all
the punishments due unto Traitors.

Many like examples and decrees of other most worthy and renowned Emperors
might be added, but these few which I have mentioned are so pregnant that I
will now end this whole treatise with these so ample and evident demonstrations
both of the Popes subjection to Emperors, and of the Emperors Sovereignty above
the Pope, by either of which their Babylonish Monarchy does of it self fall to
the ground.

FINIS.
Errata in 2. part. de Tempor. Monar.
In Textu.
Page 7. line 4. to be read, to be held. page 18. line 17. 200. read 2000. p.
23. l. 14. service which. r. service of which. p. ead. l. 15. that the, r. that
he. p. 45. l. 11. such such. r. such sort. p. 137. l. 4. twentieth r. twenty
eight. p. 171. l. 5. powers. r. power. p. 184. l. vlt. John. r. Edward. p. 203.
l. 18. who being. dele who. p. 219. l. 27. Edw. 2. r. Edw. 3.

Part. 2. in margin.
Page 6. line 20. cap. 38. read cap* 37. p. 13. l. vlt. epist. 8. r. epist. 7
p. 19. l. 29 c. 4. sect. r. c. 3. sect. p. 24. l. 40. q. 3 r. c. 3. q. 3. p.
77. l. 26. Did. 96. r. Did. 63. p. 79. l. 39. c. 10. r. c. 8. p. 101. l. vlt.
c. 4. r. c. 14. p. 108. l. vlt. an. 1112. r. an. 1122. p. 109. l. vlt. c. 71.
r. c 69. p. 136. l. 23. an. 132^. r. an. 1329. p. 138. l. 4. c. 43. r. c. 42.
p. 140. l. 9. nu. 8. 9 r. nu. 17. p. 153. l. 7. Act. q. r. Art. 9. p. 163. l.
6. Tit 3. r. Tit. 4. p. ead. l. penul. 134. r. 734. p. 169. l. 2. and 4.
Platin. r. Onuph. p. 175. l. 4. Quartum. r. Quantum. p. eadem. l. 10. nu. 5. r.
nu. 3. p. 187. l. 11. and 14. p. 95. r. 91. p. 191. l. 19. p 106. r p. 96. p.
192. l. 14. q. 12. r. q. 2. p. 205. l. 15. ^om. 4. r. tom. 3. p. 219. l. vlt.
part. r. parlium. p. 223. l. 2. lib. 3. Ass. r. lib. Assis. p. 225. l. 30. etc.
r. etc. ibid. c. 3. nu. 19. p. 226. l. 3. nu. 15. r* nu. 28. p. 242. l. 6. c.
4. r. c. 3. p. 245 l. ^6. p. 29. r. p. 129. p. 256. l. 5. * Circa hos. read.
per idem.


