A SUBPAENA from the high Imperial Court of Heaven, to be served upon all
men: upon an Information preferred by JUSTICE against Mankind.

With the Answer, and Reply from MERCY, and her directions how to come to
Heaven, if we avoid Sin.

Shrink not from this Subpaena, which is pend;
esteem it well, for sure thou must appear:
What thou have been, and how thou do offend.
each word and thought will be prescribed there.
Rightly that Judge, will thy Records forth call;
daily therefore prepare unto thy trial:
None is exempt, all must then prostrate fall
at Deaths command, no man can make denial.
Now then provide, on pain of thy damnation,
here to amend thy former evil ways:
Oh sinner, learn to seek for thy salvation,
if thou in Heaven would have eternal loyes.
O Jesus ardens (...).

Imprinted at London by I. White.

1620.

A SVBPAENA.
The Information of Justice.
ALmighty GOD,
thou Monarch of all might.
Who made the Sea, the Earth,
the Heavens and all:
Whose Malestie,
whose power is infinite:
at whose command all powers do prostrare foll:
By whom all Monarchs of the world do reign;
who sets up, and pulls down again.
Instice complains, whereas our of thy Grace,
thou made a Creature of the earthly frame,
And put him in a most delightful place,
with all abundance richly in the same,
Where nothing wanted to content desire,
which heart or soul for solace might require.
His Will and Wish were joined both in one,
his liberty was absolute in mind:
No fear of Death; for sinning there was none,
he had restraint but only in one kind:
On pain of Death, he was forbid to taste
the Fruit in midst of Paradise was plast.
Being alone thy Majesty thought good
to make a Woman for his more delight,
Which should be of the self same slesh and blood;
his consort and his comfort day and night:
But at her motion he forthwith rebelled,
and justly was from Paradise expelled.
By disobedience he did thus begin
to bring Mankind in bondage to the Devil
He was the first original of sin,
which brought in death with all succeeding cu^
That by his fall, posterity was stained,
both Hell and Death by disobedience, gained
Now did he see his nakedness and sin.
and might detest the cause of such a fall,
He lost that state he was created in,
to bring in Death upon himself and all,
He lost thy fauonr being so beloved:
to cast him off in Justice thou wast moved.
But thou (although by so rebellious deed,
he was to death and just damnation brought)
Did make a promise, by the Woman's seed,
death and damnation should be over wrought:
And what he lost by his committed crime,
both that and more, should be regained in time:
In the mean space, thou leftst him Natures law,
a Chancerie within his secret breast:
Which Conscience might keep his flesh in awe,
in flying sin, and following what was best:
But weak or wilful whether was the cause,
he flies out and breaks Natures laws.
A second Law thou did by Moses give,
more full and which did Natures law express:
But after neither of them he does live,
his sinful actions evermore increase:
He does complain and says, they Laws are such
his weakness great, their burden is too much.
Fullness of time brings in the Law of Grace,
the promised Seed to Eua was foretold,
Should clear the guilt, and help all Adams race,
is now performed; and what has been in hold,
In debted thrals to death, to Hell for sin,
Jesus frees all, and calls the reckoning in.
This Law of Grace, which as himself has said,
the burden's light, and easy for to bear:
Who bears this yoke, was never ouerlaid,
when love bears all, and not enforced fear;
But for this law, as all-the rest he cares,
for love or fear, the breach of neither spares.
For heavenly joys thou did man create,
Though Lucisor through pride from thence did fall
Thou would advance him to that glorious state
what Angels lost, man should attains to all:
Where Angels fell, they had no reparation,
their fall was wilful, and without temptation.
But man was tempted by a potent foe,
who most envying that an earthly wight
Should by his Maker be advanced so:
sought by all means with hate of malice might
To wrest him our of favor and of grace.
to put him from that everlasting place.
Man that did fall through Adams strong temptation
him to redeem, thou sent'st thy only Son,
Resoring him to favor and salvation:
What Adam lost, the Woman's seed has won
Who fell not tempted, is adiud'gd to Hell:
Man is redeemed, who by temptation fell.
Eternal God, what should thy Mercy move,
for to forbear this deadly sinner so?
He yields no show of thanks for all thy love,
no benefits make him his sin forgo:
What thou do hate, that wicked life he follows;
as Hogs in dirt, in silthy ways he wallowes.
Thy Laws can not his sinful life restrain,
his care is for thy benefits but small:
His life declares thy threats he holds but vain:
his works do show he loves thee not at all;
Long suffering Mercy makes him so to trust,
that he forgets that thou art also Just.
Like as the Child cares not for Fathers threats,
words are but wind, he follows on his play:
This creature so himself and thee forgets,
till thou thy Rod of Justice on him lay:
In all his pleasures, from thee he does fly,
he seeks thee not, but when he fears to die.
What is that seeking, forced by constraint,
all youthful days to run it out in pleasure,
And when that Death, or sickness makes him faint,
then he seeks homeward; thou must wait his leisure:
Not like to Abel, offering thee the best,
but like to Cain, the worst of all the rest.
His prime of Youth, and all his golden years,
his wits and, wealth, all given to the Devil:
When fe^ble age drawn on, with hoary Hayres,
that now (...) to practice former evil:
When sin (...) him that he can sin no more*
he seeks to thee, who served thy foe before.
Caust thou in Justice such presumption like,
the benefit thou give him out of Grace,
To draw him, home, before thy hand would strike
to turn all to a clean contrary case?
Gods Mercy passes all his Works (he says,)
therefore presuming, he his sin delayeth,
Thy Mercy is to such as do repent;
but not to sinners, which remain in sin:
Who was a sinner, if he have intent
to change his life, he may thy Mercy win:
But who presuming, sins in that kind,
by Justice, he may never Mercy find.
He runs on, such arguments are rise,
with him who takes in sin so great delight,
They may give color to a sinful life,
presuming thou in Justice wilt not smite:
A damned life does evermore invent,
such reasons which may further his intent.
This creature cares not that thy Son was slain,
the only cause such pains he did abide,
To pay his debts, and bring him home again;
wounded in hands, in heart, head, feet, and side:
Though for his sin, thy dearest Son did die;
his howrely sins do still him crucify.
Vertue^ (...) fled and banished away.
what virtue now at all is put in ure?
All deadly sins do each where bear the swaye
Oh great Jehovah, how can thou endure?
Fullness of sin does now so much abound,
it anoyes the heavens, and ouercharge the ground.
Behold my case, O God, I may be bold
to say, my Sword and balance are sore shaken:
Can thou endure I should be bought and sold,
that poor men's suits for bribs should be forsaken:
Descend, O God, to earth down from the skies,
for none but thou, redresseth poor men's cries.
Who cares for poor? yet poor as dear to thee,
as is the greatest Monarch which does reign;
His ransom like, and Heaven for him as free:
yet poverty is held in great disdain:
So did the Glutton Lazarus despise,
but now this joys, and he in torment lies.
Do they love thee, when thou thy self have said,
who does releive and gives to the Poor,
Does all to me, and they shall be repayd
full weight and measure, yea an hundred more?
They show their trust and love to thee is small,
the Poor get nothing, though thou give all.
Thy Creatures made for man in thy creation,
in Sea, on Land, in and above the Skies,
They all agree in making exclamation,
they still power out for Justice gricuous cries:
Thou gave them Man, for to be rightly used;
but clean contrary they are all abused.
For natures use, Apparel is charged quite,
all is converted to excessive pride:
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the day, and night.
cry their abuse may be in Justice tried;
Thy meats and drinks, thy Gold and earthly treasure
are all abused in Just and fleshly pleasure.
Shorten the time (Almighty:) it is too long
that man runs on in wickeanes and sin:
Hastenin Iustise to revenge thy wrong,
send Death abroad to call all sinners in;
Grant out Subp^nass, let not Death make stay,
but to thy Iudgemeus bring all flesh away.
A Subpaena from the Court Imperial.
THE GOD of Gods,
who all the world has wrought,
And out of Nothing,
made the worlds wide frame:
Who man's salvation by all means has sought,
and by his blood has ransomed the same:
By this Subpaena gives charge to thee,
thou fail not at his Judgment feat to be.
And that thou fail not for to bring in place,
all those Records thy Conscience does hold;
That Chauncery can best declare thy case,
what it is now, what it has been of old:
Of this thy charge thou may not make denial,
for that is the day appointed for thy trial.
Fail not upon the hope of thy salvation,
to clear thy reckoning at that dreadful day:
Provide thy self on pain of thy damnation,
to free thy charge; and answer as thou may:
Within this world thou may to Mercy trust,
but I have sworn that day I will be Just.
Witness my self, who at thy first creation,
made thee a Man; the Heavens and all for thee,
Witness my self, who to work thy Salvation,
sent my dear Somie, by Blood to set thee free,
Doc not refuse these Mercies, which are mine,
least Hels damnation fall out to be thine.
The Speeches of Death, provided to execute the Subpaenae.
IAm at hand (full well I know my charge)
with all post have I Will make a quick dispatch
But let me have Commission at large,
then shall I frustrate many a sinful match:
Then God by man shall not be so offended,
for with my Dart, all flesh shall soon be ended.
I Will make the proud to stoop, for all his pride:
Ile'bring the Rich for all his Gold away:
The Leecher shall not in his silth abide:
the Glutton shall not for his dainties stay:
They are now careless, but when I do wound,
I terrify the loftiest lives on ground.
Oh how they offer to redeem their days,
they would give all so death would set them free;
If Death would be corrupted any ways,
not all the world so rich as Death might be:
In health and youth, who value Death but small,
when death does strike, to Death they offer all.
But what says Mercy, she does look as if
she would endeavor to procure my stay:
She loves me not, she holds me as a thelfe,
who would so soon her dearling bring away,
If she begin to speak, I know her mind,
out of her love, she pleads for Mankind.
Mercy her speech for Mankind.
GReat King of Heaven,
Justice speaks true,
Man justly does provoke
thy wrath and ire:
If thou in Justice should pay him his due,
he has deserved everlasting fire;
But in this World thy Mercy thou have plast,
whilst it indures, so let thy Mercy last.
Send out Subp^^^s that I grant it fit.
to let men know they have a reckoning day,
For execution, stay thy Justice yet,
their lives amend perhaps some sinners may;
It Is known thy Mercy yields the more content;
then Iustica can, if sinners would repent.
It Is not the sinners death thou do desire,
it is his conversion thou have ever sought:
If man receive for sin a sinners hire,
it comes from that which he himself has wrought:
Grace and Salvation thy desire is known:
if Hell and Death, the sin and fault his own.
Respite the time, that I may do my best,
to let men know the danger they stand in:
Thy hate to sin, by Justice is expressed:
I Will try if Love may move him from his sin.
Justice is stern, Severity plays his part,
Mercy (perhaps) may sooner move the heart.
The speech of Mercy to Mankind.
WHen all Mankind by Adams fall had lost
both Paradise, the hope of Heaven and all:
In those distresses, then I helped most;
I promised upon that grievous fall,
In time a Fruit should spring from Woman's seed,
should clear the guilt, and cancel Adams deed.
What I did promise, I performed truly,
the precious choice I took for mankinds sake
Gods dearest Son, who did perform it duly,
for man's salvation, did man's Nature take;
And by his Passion, whereas man was thrall
to Death and Hell, he freed him out of all.
Justice does now as ever heretofore,
call on that sinners may receive their due;
And I endeavor now as evermore,
for man's repentance, and Salvation sue:
At Mercies suit, God ever grants Grace,
and for repentance gives sinners space.
O that I might make suit, with that success
to mortal men, as when I do to God;
That they would yield to me that readiness,
to fly the danger of his heavy rod:
I ever found God ready upon trial,
why then should man give Mercies sure denial?
I sue not for my self, but for thy gain,
to make them heyren of Heaven and those joys:
I Will show them how they may thereto attain,
and reasone why to sly all worldly toys,
If Man will put what I direct in ^^e,
of Heavenly bliss and joys he shall be sure.
The true state of a Sinner.
FIrst let me show what is his grievous state,
who does in sin, and sinful life delight:
Which misery may force a man to hate
the causes which do work that woeful plight:
What mischief more, then live in fear and grief,
when heaven or earth can yield him no relief?
If to the Heavens he dare lift up his eyes,
his heart and soul with trembling fear do grudge
His Bird in breast most heavy on him lies,
and tells him thence he must look for his Judge:
Whose terror is to all which run astray,
most dreadful at the maine tribunal day.
If he the World and all her creatures view
upon the earth which creep, that fly, or swim,
Their thought and sight will make his heart to rue,
that all were made for him, abused by him,
No thought that is, will sinners more dismay,
then things abused, at their dying day.
The Usurer how is he rackt with Gold
when he is dying, gasping out his breath?
What torment has the Leacher to behold
fair Dames, when he is yielding unto death?
In life, what did delight the sinner chief,
at Death, does force the greatest woe and grief.
To hear of Death, the sinners heart does shrink,
the day of Doom does rent his soul in twain
It Is terrible to call to mind, and think
how Death and Judgment have to him amain:
No day nor night the sinner finds quiet
a spotted soul and conscience does deny it,
Those black Records within the dismal book,
fast locked within the closet of the Breast,
When as the sinner thereupon does look,
with fears and terrors then is he oppressed:
In all the world no torment, grief, or pain,
are like the thoughts which do the conscience stain.
These are the foes which inwardly do dwell
which sinners do about them ever bear,
Who still torment them in their inward Hell.
racking and rending of them every where,
When others laugh they make a pleasant show,
with face dissembling in the mainest woe.
Let mortal men consider in this case,
think of the time they are to tarry here;
Behold the Sun how swift he runs his race;
so do man's days, their death approaches near:
Forfeit not Heaven for the flowers of May,
what are they worth once withered away?
Let man consider in his Conscience thi^,
when he has rashly done some deadly sin,
And comes to think that he has done amiss,
what grief of mind he forth with falls in:
But when the time of doing good is spent,
those thoughts do yield him joy and all content.
Man was provided for eternal joys,
his proper Country is with God above:
Why should he dote upon these worldly toys?
what is the gain of all this worldly love?
A Conscience cloyd, and naked sent away,
a sore accuser at the latter day.
Consider on the work of thy Creation,
how far thou art in debt to God therefore,
Then think upon the work of thy Redemption,
in which thy debt is multiplied more:
Let these two things thy heart and conscience move
urge not his wrath who thou art bound to love.
When wicked thoughts, or motions breeding sin
within thy heart temptations do inflame:
When that thou find Reason does begin
to yield consent to execute the same;
Then have recourse to meditate on this,
and hardly thou shall dare to do amiss.
A daily Meditation, which Mercy offers to Mankind.
The day of Death.
Think now thou lie on thy dying bed,
thy heart, thy head, thy Senses all do fall,
Striving for life, each member ghastly spread,
trembling at death, which makes so fierce assail:
If at Deaths hour, thy sins thou do desie,
then dare not live, in state thou dare not die.
Think furthermore thou have all worldly pleasure,
and every thing which may the flesh delight:
Suppose thou have thy fill of worldly treasure,
what is all worth, when death shall claim his right:
What was once sweet, is turned now to sour,
the case quite altered in this dreadful hour.
For now those things that were thy heart content
thy wealth and pleasure, force thy bitter woe:
With trembling conscience, now thou do repent
the day, the hour, thou did abuse them so.
The Judgment day.
Think furthermore,
thou heardst the dreadful sound,
The Trumpet calling of the dead to rise:
And all the world of flaming fire round,
the Judge appearing dreadful in the skies:
Ask now thy conscience, durst it in bad thought
(...) wicked life before that seat be brought?
If that thy conscience tremble for to think
upon the terror of that dreadful day:
If that Tribunal make thy heart to shrink,
let the^ this thought drive sinful thoughts away
And dare not do those wicked actions here
in which thou dare not at that day appear.
Conside thou who now in health do live,
the day of death, and dreadful hour will come,
Of all thy debts thou must a reckoning give,
thou can not void this dreadful day of doom:
No wit, no wealth, no beauty, force, nor strength,
but must come to this Judgment at the length.
The pains of Hell.
THe pains of Hell they must endured be,
most infinite for torment and for date;
For sin is wrought against infinite degree,
against God whose power exceeds all estimate:
When infinite that Godhead is offended,
those pains in Justice, never shall be ended.
Eternal torments correspond the Will:
should thou live ever, thou would ever sin:
Thou justly then deseruest torments still,
who would still run that course thou live in?
Eternal torments justly do agree,
where Will and Sin would both eternal be.
No thought, no tongue, can comprehend or tell
what are the torments of that damned Fire:
The plagues, the scourges, tortures are in Hell,
which Justice does provide for sinners hire:
A rufull noise, when damned Souls forlorn,
cry ever, woe the hour we were borne.
The joys of Heaven.
Think what it is to come to heavenly bliss;
to live with God, where Saints and angels dwell
Those glorious joys which God prouides for his
no heart, no tongue, can comprehend or tell:
No care has heard, or eye did ever see
the heavenly bliss, or joys of that degree.
Where Majesty so infinite excels,
has all abundance Majesty may have:
Where the omnipotent in glory dwells,
with those elect whom Jesus blood did save,
All Joys must be still flowing in that place,
where Saints behold the glory of his face.
These heavenly joys are certain, without date,
Old Age renewes to youth without decaying:
Eternal health and treasures without rate:
no fear of cross or trouble ouerswaying.
Who would dote on the worldly pleasures so,
for love of them to let the Heavenly go?
Lo here is the end of every mortal man,
which he comes to at first or at the last:
There Is no avoydance since the world began,
Time flies away, and Death approaches fast:
Consider then of things that shall endure,
take Mercies offer, and thy Soul is sure.
The young man says, these are too grave for me,
the old man says, these thoughts do charge me sore
To please their humors each of these agree,
to slight them off, and think of them no more,
Shift as they will and let them take their pleasure:
but let them know Death staieth no man's leisure.
Counsel to prepare our selves to return to God, before the day of our Death;
for after death there is no repentance.
IF ye love God, or fear ye Hels damnation;
O then repent, defer the time no more:
Here in this life you may obtain salvation,
now seek, O seek, for heavenly joys therefore
After that Death thy soul away has taken,
none can repent the time is then too late:
Duly therefore let since away be shaken,
remove thy self from wicked sinners states*
Each day or night, ye^ (...) the time does know
when Christ our Judge, in judgment seat will stand
Ever do think thou hearst his trumpet blow
sure the time is even now at hand.
The Books to the Reader.
THis debt is due upon Doomes day,
which you are summoned to pay:
Wherefore my Author well content,
because he warnes you to repent:
Repentance true God does require,
it keeps you from eternal fire.
FINIS.
Vi veneranda Sons.

