The copy of certain lettres sent to the Queen, and also to doctor Martin and
doctor Storye, by the most Reverend father in God, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop
of Cantorburye from prison in Oxeforde: who (after long and most grievous strayt
emprisoning and cruel handlyng) most constauntly and willingly suffered
Martyrdom there, for the true testimony of Christ, in March* 1556.
Psalm 119. I spoke of thy testimonies (O Lord) even before Kings, and was not
confounded. To the reader.
THe Lord of light lyghten thine eyes, to se the thing that is right, and give
the an heart to obey the same, Amen. Thou may (good reader) besides the
open tyranny, as in a glass, plainly see in these lettres, that the popish
kingdom is the kingdom of faces (that is, the mighty Antichrist that Daniel
writes of) if thou consydre only, what face of justice (in most open
injustice) it makes toward the most mylde Moses, Thomas Cra^mer that most
worthy Archbishop of Cantorbury. He cyteth him to appear to make answer at
Rome, giving him.lxxx. days respite, for his appearaunce there. Is this any
thing but a face of justice? as though the court of Rome would condemn no
man, before he answered for him self, as both law and equity require? But
the very same instaunt time, Antichrists holiness (contrary to that visoured
justice) sent his commission unto that perjured beastly Brockes B. of
Gloucestre, to degrade and deprive him of his dignity. Which thing he did, not
only before the.lxxx. days were ended, but before there were.iiij. of the^
spent. Furthermore where as the said most reverend father was fast deteyned in
most grievous and strayt prison, so as he could not appear (which thing was
notorious both in England, and also in the Romish court) and therefore had a
lawful and most just excuse of his absence, by all laws, even popish and
other: yet at Rome in the end of the said.lxxx. days, was that mylde good man
decreed Cont^max: that is, sturdely, frowardly, and wilfully absent. And in
pain of the same his absence, condemned: and in fine most cruelly and
mercyleslye martyred (alas for pytie) even by the ministry of them, for whose
souls sauegarde, he put him self to that hasarde, and gave his life. Consydre
therefore (I pray thee) how the shaven hipocrites with their accomplices have
rolled the Queen's majesty in wilful murder by their wynking wyles. For what
is it but wilful murder to cause a man to be cyted, and yet to detayne him
still in fast prison, knowing his absence to be his condemnacio^. Considre also
what manifest perjury and tyranny they have wrapped not the Queen alone, but
with her the hole realm of England in. For which the indignacion of God is so
provoked, that he can not longer forbear to plage, as he has begone
alreadye^ and will (no doubt) proceed onles spedy repentance follow. The Lord
vttre their falseh^d and treason. AMEN*

Tharchebish* of Cantorburies letters to the Queen's highness.
IT may please your majesty to perdone my presu^pcio^, yt I dare be so bold
to wryt to your highness. But very necessity co^strayneth me, that your
majesty may know my mind rather by mine own writing, than by other men's
reports. So it is yt upon Saturdaye being the.7. day of this month, I was
cited to appear at Rome, ye.lxxx. day after, there to make answer to such
matters, as should be objected against me, upon the behalf of the king and your
most excellent majesty: which matters the Thursday following were objected
against me by Doctor Martin, and D. Story your majesty's proctours, before
the bishop of Gloucestre, sittyng in judgment by Commission from Rome. But
alas, it can not but grieve the heart of any natural subject, to be accused of
the king and Queen of his own realm: and specially before an outward judge,
or by authority coming from any person out of this Realm. Where the king and
Queen, as they were subjects within their own realm, shall complain, and
require justice at a strangers hands against their own subject, being
already condemned to death by their own laws. As though the king and Queen
could not do or have justice wtin their own realms, against their own
subjects, but they must seek it at a strangers hands in a strange land.
The like whereof (I think) was never seen. I would have wished to have had some
meaner adversaries: and I think, that death shall not grieve me much more,
than to have my most dradde and most gracious sovereign Lord and lady (to whom
under God I do owe all obedience) to be mine accusers in judgment, The furst
cause why tharchebish. would not make answer to the popes comissary, is to
avoid perjury
within their own realm, before any stranger and outward power. But for
as much as in the time of the prince of most famous memory king Henry the.8.
your graces father, I was sworn never to consent, that the bishop of Rome
should have or exercise any autorite or iurisdicio^ in this realm of England.
Therefore least I should allow his authority contrary to mine oath, I refused to
make answer to the B. of Gloucestre sittyng here in judgment by ye popes
authority, least I should run in to perjury.

An other cause why I refused the Popes authority is this: The.2. cause is that
the popes Laws are contrary to the crown and laws of England.
that his autororitie (as he claymeth it) repugneth to the crown imperial of
this realm, and to the laws of the same, which every true subject is bounden
to defend. Furst so that the pope says, that all manner of power as well
temporal as spiritual, is given furst to him of God. And yt ye temporal al
power he gives unto emperors and kings, to use it under him: The crown and
temporal power is taken immediately from God
But so as it be always at his commandment and beck.

But contrary to this claim, the emperial crown and iurisdicion temporal of
this realm is taken immediately from God, to be used under him only, and is
subject unto non, but to God alone. The oath of the king and justices and the
duty of Subjects.


Moreover themperiall laws and customs of this realm the king in his
Coronacion, and all Justices wha^ they receive their offices, be sworn, and
all the hole realm is bounden to defend and mayntene. But contrary hereunto
the Pope by his authority makes void and commands to blotte out of our
books, all laws and customs being repugnaunt to his laws: And declares
accursed all rulers and governors, all the makers, wrytours, and executours of
such laws or customs: as it appears by many of the popes laws, whereof one
or two I shall rehearse. In ye decrees, Distinct. 10. is written thus:
Constitutiones contra Canones and decreta praesulum Romanoru^ vel bonos mores
nullius sunt momenti. That is. The constituciones or statutes enacted against
the canones and decrees of the bishops of Rome or their good customs, are of
non effect. Also.

Extra de sententia excommunicationis, Nouerit: Excommunicamus omnes haereticos
vtriusque sexus, quocunque nomine censeantur, and fautores and receptatores and
defensores eorum: nec non and qui de caetero seruari fecerint statuta aedita
and consuetudines contra ecclesiae libertatem, nisi ea de capitularibus suis
intra duos menses post huiusmodi publicationem sententiae fecerint am^ueri.
Item excommunicamus statutarios, and scriptores statutoru^ ipsoru^, necnon
potestates, consules, rectores, and conciliarios locorum, vbi de caetero
huiusmodi statuta and co^suetudines aeditae fuerint vel seruatae: necnon and
illos qui secundum ea praesumpserint iudicare, vel in publicam formam scribere
iudicata.

That is to say: We exco^municat all heretics of both sexes, what name so
ever they be called by: and their favorers and receptours, and defendours: and
also them that shall hereafter cause to be observed statutes and customs made
against the liberty of the church, except they cause the same to be put out of
their books or records within two months after the publicacion of this
sentence. Also we excommunicate the statute makers and wrytours of those
statutes, and all the potestates, co^sules, governors and counsaillours of
places, where such statutes and customs shall be made or kept: and also those
that shall presume to give judgment according to them, or to write in to
public form the matters so judged. Other the popes laws be unlawful, or else
all England is accursed.


Now by these laws, if the bishop of Romes authority which he claymeth by God,
be lawful: all your graces laws and customs of your realm, being contrary
to the popes laws, be naught. And as well your majesty as your judges,
Justices and all other executours of the same, stand accursed among heritikes,
which God forbid. And yet this curse can never be avoided (if ye pope have
such power as he claymeth) until such times, Note wherein the popes laws and
the laws of England do varye.
as the laws and customs of this realm (being contrary to his laws) be
taken away and blotted out of the law books. And although there be many laws
of this realm contrary to the laws of Rome, yet I named but a few: as to
conuicte a clearke before any temporal judge of this realm, for debte,
felonye, murder, or for any other tryme: which clearkes by the popes laws, be
so exempte from the kings laws, yt they can be no where sued, but before their
ordinary. Also the pope by his laws may give all Bishoprikes and benefices
spiritual, which by the laws of this realm, ca^ be given but only by the
king and other patrons of the same, except they fall in to the lapse.

By the popes laws Ius patronat^^^ shall be sued only before the ecclesiastical
judge. But by the laws of this realm, it shall be sued before the temporal
judges. And to be short, ye laws of this realm do agree with the popes
laws, like fire and water. And yet the kings of this realm have provided for
their laws, by the Praemunire: so that if any man have let the execucion of
the laws of this realm, by any authority from the sea of Rome, he falls in
to the Praemunire. But to mete with this, the popes have provided for their
laws by cursing. For who so ever lets the popes laws to have full course
within this realm, by the popes power stands accursed. So yt the Popes power
treads al ye laws and customs of this realm under his fete: cursing all that execute them, until such time as they give place unto his laws. But it
may be said, that notwithstanding all the popes decrees, yet we do execute
still the laws and customs of this realm. Nay not al quietly without
interruption of the pope. And where we do execute them, yet we do it unjustly
(if the Popes power be of force) and for ye same we stand excommunicate, and
shall do, until we leave thexecucion of our own laws and customs.

Thus we be well reconciled to Rome, Mark this well.
allowing such authority, whereby the realm stands accursed before God, if
the Pope have any such authority.

These things (as I suppose) were not fully opened in the parliament house,
when the Popes authority was received again within this realm. For if they
had, I do not believe, that either the King or Queen's Majesty or the nobles of
this realm, or the commons of the same would ever have consented to receive
again such a forain authority, so injurious, hurtful, and prejudicial as well
to the crown, as to the laws and customs, and state of this realm: as
whereby they must needs acknowledge them selves to be accursed. The duty of the
cleargye neclected in the parliament.
But none could open this matter well, but ye clergy, and that such of them as
had read the Popes laws, whereby the Pope has made himself, as it were a God.
These seek to mayntene the pope, whom they desired to have their chief head, to
the intent they might have as it were a kingdom and laws within them selves,
distinct from the laws of the crown, and where with the crown may not meddle.
And so being exe^pt from ye laws of the realm, might live in this realm,
like lords and kings, without damage or fear of any man, so yt they please
their high and supreme head at Rome. For this consideracion (I wene) some yt
knew the truth, held their peace at the parliament: where as if they hade
done their duties to the crown and hole realm, they should have opened their
mouths, declared the truth, and showed the periles and dangers, that might
ensue to the crown and realm. And if I should agree to allow such authority
within this realm, whereby I must needs confess, that your most gracious
hyghnes and also your realm should ever continue accursed, until you shall
cease from thexecucion of your own laws and customs of your realm: I
could not think my self true, either to your highness, or to this my
natural country, knowing ye I do know. Ignorance (I know) may excuse other
men: Note.
but he that knows how prejudicial and injurious the power and authority
(which he chalengeth every where) is to the crown, laws and customs of this
realm, and yet will allow the same: I can not see in any wise, how he can keep
his due allegeau^ce, The.3. cause why he could not allow the Pope. The popes
religion is against Christ's religion
fidelity, and truth to the crown and state of this realm.

An other cause I alleged, why I could not allow the authority of the pope,
which is this. That by his authority he subuerteth not only the laws of this
realm, but also ye laws of god So that who soever be under his authority, he
suffers them not to be under Christ's religion purely, as Christ did
commau^de. And for one example I brought furthe: that where as by Gods laws,
all christian people be bounden diligently to learn his word, that they may
know, how to believe and live accordingly. And for that purpose be ordained
holy days, wha^ they ought (leauyng aparte all other business) to give them
selves holly to know and serve God. why latin service ought not to be restored
in England.
Therefore Gods will and commandment is, that wha^ the people be gathered
together, ye ministers should use such language, as the people may
understand, and take profit thereby, or else hold their peace. For as an
harp or lute, if it give no certain sound, that me may know, what is
stricken, who can dance after it, for all the sound is in vain? so is it
vain and profits nothing (says almighty God, by the mouth of S. Paul) if
the priest speak to the people in a language which they know not. For else
he may profit him self, but profits not ye people, says S. Paul.

But herein I was answered thus: that S. Paul spoke only of preachi^g, that
the preacher should speak in a tongue which the people did know: or else his
preaching avails nothing. This I would have spoken, and could not be suffered.
But if the preaching avails nothing, being spoken in a language, which the
people understand not: how should any other service avail them, being spoken
in the same language? And yet S. Paul meant not only of preaching, it appears
plainly by his own words. For he speaking by name expressly of prayeng,
singing, lauding, and thanking of God, and of all other things which the
priests say in the churches, whereunto the people say Amen: which they used
not in preachi^g, but in other divine service: that whether the priests
rehearse the wonderful works of God, or the great benefits of God unto
mankind above all other creatures: or give thanks unto God, or make open
profession of their faith, or humble confession of their sins, with earnest
request of mercy and forgiveness: or make suit or request unto God, for any
thing: that than all the people understanding what the priests say, might
give their minds and voices with them, and say, Amen. That is to say, allow
what the priests say, that the rehearsal of Gods universal works and
benefits, the giving of thanks, the profession of faith, the confession of
sins, and the requests and peticions of the priests and the people might
ascend up into the ears of God altogether, and be as a sweet savor, odor,
and incense in his nose, and thus was it used many hundred years after
Christ's ascension. But thaforesaid things can not be done, wha^ the priests
speak to yt people in a language not known. And so they (or their clearke in
their name) say Amen* but they ca^ not tell whereunto: Where as S. Paul says,
how can ye people say Amen to thy well saying, when they understand not what
thou say. And thus was S. Paul understood of al interpretours both
Greeks and latins, old and new, schole autors and others, that I have read,
until about xxx. years past. At which time one Eckius with other of his sort,
began to devise a new exposicion, understanding S. Paul of preaching only.
But when a good number of the best learned men reputed within this realm, some
fauouri^g the old, some the new learning, as they term it (where in deed that
which they call the old, is the new: and that which they call the new, is in
deed ye old) but when a great number of such learned men of both sorts were
gathered together at mynsor, The papists can say yea and nay to one thing
with one breathe.
for the reformacion of the service of the church: It was agreed by both without
controversy (not one saying contrary) that the service of the church ought to
be in the mother tongue: and that S. Paul in the xiiij. chap. to the
Corinthianes was so to be understood. And so is S. Paul to be understood
in the civil law more than a thousau^t years paste: where Iustinianus (a
most godly Emperor) in a synod writes on this manner. Iubemus vt omnes
episcopi pariter and presbiteri non tacito modo, sed clara voce quae a fideli
populo exaudiantur, Sacram oblationem and praeces in sacro baptismate adhibitas
celebrent, quo maiori exinde deuotione in depromendis Domini Dei laudibus
audientium animi efferantur. Ita enim and Diuus Paulus docet in epistola ad
Corinth. Si solu^modo benedicat spiritus, quomodo is qui priuati locum tenet,
dicet ad gratiarum actionem tuam, Amen? Quandoquidem quid dicas no^ videt. Tu
quidem pulchre gratias agis, alter ^^tem non aedificatur.

That is to say: We command, that all Bishops and priests celebrate the
holy oblacion and prayers used in holy Baptism, not after a still close manner,
but with a clear loud voice, that they may be plainly heard of the
faithful people, so as the hearers minds may be lyfted up thereby with the
greater devotion, in vttring the praises of the Lord God. For so Paul
teaches also in the epistle to the Corinthians. If the spirit do only bless
(or say well) how shall he that occupies the place of a private person, say
Amen to thy thanks giving? For he perceaueth not what thou say. Thou do
give thanks well, but the other is not edified.

And not only the civil law and al other writours a thousaunt and five
hundred years continually together have expounded S. Paul not of preaching
only, but of other service said in the church, but also reason gives the
same, that if men be commanded to hear any thing, it must be spoken in a
language which the hearers understand, The pope commands both against God
and natural reason.
or else as S. Paul says, what avails it to hear? So that the Pope
giving a contrary commandment, that the people coming to the church shall
hear they wot not what, and shall answer they know not where unto, takes
upon him to command not only against reason, The Sacrament ought to be
received in both kinds of all christianes.
but also directly against God.

And again I said, where as our saueour Christ ordained the sacrament of his
most precious body and blood to be received of all christian people under the
forms both of bread and wine, and said of the cup, Drink ye al of this:
the pope gives a clean contrary commandment, that no lay men shall drink of
the cup of their salvation: as though the cup of salvation by the blood of
Christ, perteined not to lay men. And where as Theophilus Alexandrinus (whose
works S. Jerome did translate about.xi. hundred years past) says, that if
Christ had been crucified for the deuilles, his cup should not be denied them.
Yet the Pope denies the cup of Christ to christian people, for who^ Christ was
crucified. So that if I should obey the pope in these things, I must needs
disobey my saueour Christ. Mark well.
But I was answered herunto as commonly the papists do answer, yt under ye
form of bread is hole Christ's flesh and blood: so that whosoever receaueth
ye form of bread, receaueth as well Christ's blood as his flesh. Let it be so.
Yet in the form of bread only, Christ's blood is not dronken, but eaten: nor
is received in the cup in the form of wine, as Christ commanded: but eaten
with the flesh under the form of bread. And moreover the bread is not ye
sacrament of his blood, but of his flesh only: nor the cup is not the
sacrament of his flesh, but of his blood only.

And so the pope keeps from all lay persons the sacrament of their
rede^pcion by Christ's blood, which Christ commands to be given unto the^.

And furthermore Christ ordained the sacrament in two kinds, the one separated
from the other, to be a representacion of his death, where his blood was
separated from his flesh, which is not represe^ted in one kind alone. So that
the lay people receive not the hole sacrament, whereby Christ's death is
represented, as he commanded.

Moreover as the pope takes upon him to give the temporal sword, or royal
and Imperial power to kings and princes, so does he likewise take upon him
to depose them from their Imperial states, if they be disobedient to him: and
commands the subjects to disobeye their princes, assoiling the subjects
as well of their obedience, as of their laufull oaths made unto their true
kings and princes directly contrary to Gods commandment, who commands
all subjects to obey their kings, or their rulers under them. One Johan
Patriarch of Consta^tinopole in the time of saint Gregory claymed superiority
above all other bishops. To whom Saint Gregory writes, that therein he did
injury to his three brethren, which were equal with him: yt is to say, the
Bishop of Rome, the bishop of Alexandria, and of Antiochia: which three were
patriarchal seas, as well as Constantinopole, and were brethren one to an
other. But (says saint Gregory) If any one shall exalte him self above all
the rest, to be the universal bishop, the same passes in pride. But now the
Bis. of Rome exalts him self, not only above al bishops, but also above all
kings and Emperors, and above all the hole world: taking upon him to give
and take away, to set up and put down, as he shall think good. The devil and
the pope are like.
And as the Devil having no such authority, yet took upon him to give unto
Christ all the kingdoms of ye world, if he would fall down and worship him: in
like manner the pope takes upon him to give empires and kingdoms (being non of
his) to such as will fall down and worship him, and kiss his fete. And
moreover his lawers and glosers so flattre him, that they feyne he may
command emperors and kings to hold his styrrop, when he lights upon his
horse, and to be his fotemen. And that if any emperor or king give him any
thing, they give him nothing, but that is his own. And that he may dispense
against Gods word, against both the old and new testament, against saint
Paul's epistles, and against the Gospel. And furthermore whatsoever he does,
although he draw innumerable people by heaps with him self in to hell: Yet
may no mortal man reprove him: because he being judge of all men, may be
judged of no man. And thus he sytteth in the temple of God, The pope is
Antichrist, that is, Christ's enemy.
as he were a God, and names him self Gods vicare: And yet he dispenses
against God. If this be not to play Antichrists part, I can not tell what is
Antichrist: which is no more to say, but Christ's enemy and adversary: who
shall sit in the temple of god aduaunceing him self above all other: yet by
hypocrisy and feyned religion shall subuerte the true religion of Christ. And
under pretense and color of christian religion shall work against Christ,
wherefore the pope is ^ichrist.
and therefore has the name of Antichrist. Now if any man lift him self
higher than the Pope has done, who lifts him self above all the world: or
can be more aduersarye to Christ, ^an to dispense against Gods laws, and
where Christ has given any commandment, to command directly the contrary:
yt man must needs be taken for Antichrist. But until the time that such a
person may be found, me^ may easily conjecture, where to find Antichrist.

Wherefore seeing the pope thus (to overthrow both Gods laws and man's
laws) takes upon him, to make emperors and kings to be vassailes and
subjects unto him, and specially the crown of this realm, with the laws and
customs of the same: I see no mean, how I may co^sente to admyt this usurped
power within this realm, Note this conclusion
contrary to mine oath, mine obedience to Gods law, mine allegeaunce and
duty to your majesty, and my love and affection to this realm. This that I
have spoken against the power and authority of the pope, The causes why the
Archbishop spoke and wrote thus
I have not spoken (I take God to record and judge) for any malice I owe to ye
popes person, whom I know not, but I shall pray to God to give him grace, that
he may seek above all things to promote Gods honor and glory, and not to
follow ye trade of his p^decessours in these later days. Nor I have not spoken
it for fear of punisheme^t and to avoid ye same, thinki^g it rather an
occasion to aggrauate tha^ to diminish my trouble: but I have spoken it for my
most bou^de^ duty to yt crown, liberties, laws and customs of this realm
of England, but most specially to discharge my conscience in uttering ye truth
to gods glory, casting away al fear, by ye comfort which I have in Christ,
who says: Fear not them that kill the body, and can not kill the soul: but
fear him that can cast both body and soul in to hell fire. He that for fear
to lose this life, will forsake the truth, shall lose the everlasting life.
And he that for the truths sake will spend his life, shall find everlasting
life. And Christ promyseth to stand fast with the^ before his father, which
will stand fast with him here. Which comfort is so great, yt whosoever has
his eyes fixed upon Christ, can not greatly pass on this life, knowing that he
may be sure to have Christ stand by him, in the presence of his father in
heaven.

And as touching ye Sacrament, The sacrament.
I said: Forasmuch as the hole matter stands in ye understanding of these
words of Christ, This is my body, This is my blood: I said, that Christ in
these words made demonstracion of ye bread and wine, and spoke figuratively,
calling bread his body, and wine his blood: because he ordained them to be
sacraments of his body and blood. And where ye papists say in those two
points contrary unto me, yt Christ called not bread his body, but a substance
uncertain, nor spoke figuratively: Herein I said, I would be judged by the
old church. And which doctrine could be proved the elder, that I would stand
unto. And forasmuch as I have alleged in my book many old autors both Greeks
and latins, which about a thousaunt years after Christ continually taught as
I do: if they could bring furthe but one old author, that says in these two
points, as they say: I offered vj. or vij. years agoo, and do offer yet
still, yt I will give place unto them. But when I bring furthe any author that
says in most plain terms as I do, yet says the other party, that the
autors meant not so: as who should say, that ye autors spoke one thing, and
meant clean contrary. And upon the other part, when they can not find any one
author, that says in words, as they say, yet say they, that the autors me^t
as they say. Now whether I or they speak more to the purpose herein, I
refer me to the judgment of al indifferent hearers. Yea the old church of
Rome above a thousaunt years together, neither believed nor used the Sacrament,
as ye church of Rome has done of late years. For in the beginning ye church
of Rome taught a pure and a sound doctrine of the sacrament. But after that
the church of Rome fell in to a new doctrine of transubstanciacion: with the
doctrine they changed the use of the sacrament, contrary to that Christ
commanded, and the old church of Rome used above a thousaunt years. And yet
to deface the old, they say that the new is the old: wherein for my part, I
am content to the trial of stand. The papists make Christ two bodies.
But their doctrine is so fond and uncomfortable, that I maruail, that any man
would allow it, if he knew what it is. But what so ever they bear the people
in hand, that which they write in their books has another truth nor comfort.
For by their doctrine, of one body of Christ is made two bodies: one natural,
having distaunce of members with form and proporcion of a man's perfect body, and
this body is in heaven.

But the body of Christ in the sacrament, by their own doctrine, must needs be
a monstrous body, having neither distau^ce of members, nor form, facion, or
proporcion of a man's natural body. And such a body is in the sacrament,
teach they: and goth in to the mouth with the form of bread, and enters no
farther tha^ the form of bread gothe: nor tarieth no longer than the form of
bread is by natural heat in digesting. So that when the form of bread is
digested, that body of Christ is gone. Mark.


And forasmuch as evil men be as long in digesting as good men, the body of
Christ (by their doctrine) enters as far, and tarieth as long in wicked men,
as in godly men. And what comfort can be herein to any christian men, to
receive Christ's unshapen body, and it to enter no farther than the stomach,
and to depart by and by, as soon as the bread is consumed?

It seems to me a more sound and comfortable doctrine, The sound true
doctrine of the Sacrament.
that Christ has but one body, and that has form and facio^ of a man's
true body: which body spiritually enters into the hole man, body and soul.
And though the sacrament be consumed, yet hole Christ remains, and fedeth the
receauer unto eternal life, if he continue in godliness: and never departs,
until ye receauer forsake him. And as for the wicked, they have not Christ
within them at al, who can not be where Belial is. And this is my faith, and
(as me seems) a sound doctrine, according to gods word, and sufficient for
a christian to believe in that matter. That can they never do.
And if it can be showed unto me, that the Popes authority is not prejudicial
to the things before mentioned: or that my doctrine in ye sacrament is
erroneous (which I think can not be showed) than I was never nor will be so
perverse, to stand wilfully in mine own opinion, but I shall (with all
humility) submit my self unto the Pope, The bishop of Gloucestres perjury.
not only to kiss his fete, but an other part also.

An other cause why I refused to take the b. of Gloucestre for my judge, was
the respect of his own person being more than ones perjured. Furst for that
he being diverse times sworn, never to consent that the B. of Rome should have
any iurisdicio^ within this realm, but to take the king, and his successors
for supreme heads of this realm, as by gods laws they be. Contrary to that
lawful oath the said B. sat than in judgment by authority from Rome, wherein
he was perjured, and not worthy to sit as a judge.

The second perjury was, that he took his bishoprike both of ye Queen's
Majesty and of ye Pope, making to each of them a solemn oath. Which oaths be
so contrary, that the one must needs be perjured. And furthermore in swearing
to the pope, The B. of Gloucestre a traitor and an enemy to the realm.
to maintene his laws, decrees, co^stitutio^s, ordinances reseruacio^s, and
provisions he declares him self an enemy to the Imperial crown, and to the
laws and state of this realm: whereby he declared him self not worthy to sit
as a judge win this realm. And for these co^sideracio^s I refused to take him
for my judge.

This was written in an other lettre to the Queen.
I Learned by D. Martin, that at the day of your Majesty's coronacion, you
took an oath of obedience to the pope of Rome. And yt same time you took an
other oath to this realm, to mayntene ye laws, liberties, and customs of ye
same. And if your Majesty did make an oath to ye pope. I think it was
according to ye other oaths, which he uses to ministre to princes: which is to
be obedient to him, to defend his person, to mayntene his authority, honor,
laws, lands, and privileges. And if it be so (which I know not, but by
report) tha^ I beseech your majesty, to look upon your oath made to the
crown and realm: and to expende and weighe the two oaths together, to see how
they do agree, and as your graces conscience shall give you. For I am surely
persuaded, that willingly your Majesty will not offe^de, nor do against your
conscience for nothing.

But I fear me, worthy oaths whereby perjury must needs be committed.
that there be contradictiones in your oaths, and that those which should have
informed your grace thoroughly, did not their duties therein. And if your
Majesty pondre ye two oaths diligently, I think you shall perceive, you were
deceived: and than your highness may use ye matter, as God shall put in your
heart. Furthermore I am kept here from company of learned men, from books,
from cou^sail, from pen and ink, saving at this time to writ unto your
Majesty: which all were necessary for a man being in my case. Wherefore I
beseech your majesty, yt I may have such of these, as may stand with your
Majesty's pleasure. No, ye shall be despeched nerer home.
And as for mine appearaunce at Rome, if your Majesty will give me leave, I
will appear there. And I trust, that God shall put in my mouth, to defend his
truth there, as well as here. But I refer it holly to your majesty's pleasure.

To Doctor Martin, and Doctor Storye.
I Have me commended unto you. And as I promised, I have sent my lettres unto
the Queen's Majesty vnsigned: Praieng you to sign the^ and deliver them with al
speed. I might have sent them by the ^aryer sooner, but not surer. But hearing
M. Balif say, that he would goo to yt court on Frydaye, I thought him a meter
messagier, to send my lettres by. For better is later and surer, tha^ sooner
and never to be delivered. yet one thing I have written to the Queen's Ma.
enclosed and sealed: which I require you may be so delivered, with out delay, and
not be opened, until it be deliuerd unto her graces own hands. I have
written al yt I remember I said, except yt which I spoke against ye B. of Glou.
own person: which I thought not mete to write. And in some places I have
written more tha^ I said: which I would have answered to ye B. if you would have
suffered me. You promised I should see mine answer to ye.xvi. articles, yt I
might correct, amend and change them, where I thought good: which your
promise you kept not. And mine answer was not made upon mine oath, Martyn and
Story promise breakers.
nor repeted nor made in Iudicio but extra iudiciu^, as I protested: nor to ye
B. of Glou. as judge, but to you ye kings and Queen's proctours. I trust you
deal syncerely with me without fraud or craft: and use me as you would wish
to be used in like case your selves Remember yt Qua mensura mensi fueritis,
eadam remetietur vobis. That is, what measure you meat, ye same shall be
measured to you again. Thus fare you well. And God send you his spirit to
induce you in to all truth.


