The craft of Graffing and planting of trees,


TO graffe fruit that shall have no core. Take a graffe and bow it both ends
combing, and cut both ends graf wise, and so fasten them into the stoke. And if
it grow so with the tree cut a way the great end, and let ye smaler end
grow, and his fruit shall have no core.

if thou wylt make apples read, take a grafe of an apple tree and graffe it in
a stoke of elm or allere and it shall bear read apples.

Also another for the same, bore an hole in an apple tree to the pithe and
temper it with water what color thou will, and then put it in the hole and
stope it with a pin and the apple shall be of the same color that thou putest in
the tree.

It is to be noted that every tree that is plantede and set on. S. Lambardes
day in the earth, shall not perish but prove and come to profyt.

if thou wylt have a Pere tree full of fruit or else as much as it has been wont
to bear, tempre scamony with water and put it into an hole that is perced to
the pith of the tree, and stop the hole with a pynne of that same tree or of a
another, and it shall bear as yt was wont and much more.

And if thou wylt have the^ to smell like spyces or as musk or bawme or other
spices, make an hole in lykwise in the tree and stop it again, and the fruit
shall smell and savor after the spices that thou putest into the tree.

If an old tree begin to wax dry, do in this wise quicken him a gain. Se
that ye ears that is bout the rotes be done a way, and cleue.ii. or.iii. of
the greatest, rotes with an axe, and put a wedge in to the cleuyng, and cover
the root again with the same earth.

Another for the same, perce the tree through with apercer cross wise or with
a wymble, and the strength of the tree shall begin to wax young.

If thou wylt have a fruit tree that is sour, to be made sweet fruit, delue
the tree round about, and donge the rotes with pigs donge, and so shall the
fruit be made sweet.

Also another for the same, make an hole in ye sour tree with a percer to the
pythe, and into the hole put water tempred with honey, and stop that hole
again with a pynne of the same tree.

And if thou will plant an almonde tree or a wall not tree, or a Therye tree
or a Peche tree, put the kernels of which thou will in water four days, and
than put many kernelles together into the earth or severally and when they
spring and be grown out and has stand so an hole year, than take them out
of ye ground, and set them than where thou wylt, and it is to be noted that
every tree the branches must be cut in setting time, save the peche tree
which must have his dry branches cut only.

if the peche tree begine to droupe, let him be well moysted at ye rote with
dregs of wine, and the same moysting shall keep him from sheding of his
fruit, and some say that and the roots be moysted with water of the
decoccyon of benes, it shall quicke^ ye tree greatly, and if he casle his fruit
or they be ripe, make holes with a wymbel in the rotees, and mayke pinnes of
wylowe and smite them fast in, and the fruit shall abide on fast enough.

If an apple tree begin to rote or any of the apples begene to wax rosty, then
the bark of him is sick then cut it with a knife, let it be opened, and
when ye humor there of is sum what flowen over, let dong him well and stop
dilygentlye his wound with claie.

The quince tree all the time that he is able to be translated, he would be
removed eueri four year, and that shall make him bear great plenty of fruit
after ward.

The chery tree loves cold air and moist ground but sum chery trees be
full lykyng in hylly places the best setting of chery trees is in the month of
Nouembre, and if nedebe in the latter end of Ianuari And if the chery tree
rote, in anywyse make an hole with a percer under the rote, that the water yt
causes ye rottyng may have issue out, it is to suppose that this medecyne is
good for all manner of trees that begeneth to rot.

Also it is good for all manner of trees when a bough is cut a way, that ye
place that is cut be covered w claie or some other defensable plaster for the
defense of the rain, that it make note the tree to rot.

The playntyng of prunes, in oulde and moysti places is best in february and
March and the stones must beset a hand bread in the earth, and when they
have stand so an hole year, take up ye springes of them, and set them deper in
the ground, and the stones must lie in water three days or they beset.

The medler will bear well if he be plantyd, but graffe him in a white thorn
called an hauthorne, and they will be are the more plenteously.

If thou will have any roses in thy garden, thou must take the hard pepyns of
ye same roses, that be right ripe, and sow them in the earth in Febuary or in
March. And when the spring, temper them with watersand after ye space of a
year thou must translate them, and depart them farther from other in whrt
other place ye will.

If thou wylt that a vine bear white grapes, and on the other side reed,
puruay that a white vine and a read he set nere together. And when they be
roted measurably both like much, and of either pare away half endlong upon ye
pythe, and twyne them together and bynd them so, that either sap met without
disioining, and wrape it together with a souple linne^ cloth. and every three
day moist it with water till it grow. And after that they be grown together
thou may cut a way the one rote. And ye other may bear it, and that vine
shall bear both red grapes and white not with standing the one rote be done a
way, and also thou may do so with tow pere trees tow apple trees branches.

Also if thou will have grapes grow in a plomtre or a therie tree, set a vine
under one of thous trees which thou will, and when the vine begins to
grow, bore ye other tree through with a percer, according to the greatness of
the vine, the^ draw through the tree and pare a way the upper end of the
same vine as far as it shall be in the hole, and so suffer it to grow, and
when both be joined together cut away the rote end of the vine by the tree
and sowde that place well of that cuttyng and drawing of the vine throught the
hole and the cuttyng away of the root of the vine and yt must be done in
march, and some me^ will say it must be done or ye knottes be give to burgyne,
that for that straet drawyng the burgeos be not hurt, and tha^ may thou dow
the sam with diverse trees and diverse fruits, and make one tree bear to diverse
fruytes of diverse colors.

Also it is to wit that at the vine be good earth, and syred it self of to
many scurges, it is good to ent yt of with a knyfe, and if it lack yet
ouermoche delue the stock a boutand fill the pyt^full of grauel of a floude
meddled with ashes. Also sum men say, do in to ye pyt a good quantyte of small
stones, and that is good therefore.

Item it is to wite that wha^ the moon is in Tauro, it is good time to plant
trees of graeues and pepins, and when she is in La^cro Leo or Libra it is good
workyng of trees that be new sproung, and wha^ the moon is virgo, it is good
time to sow all manner things. And from the mids of Septembre unto ye mids
of December is open time of plantynge, and right so from the mids of Ianuari
to the mids of March, but yet in these times it is good to those when thee
moon is.v. vi. vii. viii. or.x. days be fore the full moan. And after the
full in cone when she is xxi. xxii. xxiii. xxiiii. or. xxv. days old, for
this quarter of the moon is most temperate.

Item every plantynge is to dispose it so that the son beams may come to ye
rote or to ye earth from the hour of terce unto none. And be planted in the
best manner. And that the trees that be bearing and of great height that party
that stood toward the north he be set against the northwynde, and the northwest
wind. For the heyght, northwynde, and the northwest wynd has kind to kill and
dry to much the trees that be new set for their unmeasurable greatness, ye
earth must be ordained so that it be neither to fat nor grauelly but
proporcionably.

Al manner of pepyus carnels and greynes must be set in the earth in depenes of
four or five fingers bread that each be from other half a fore. Always keeping
this special rule that the end or grain of ye pepyn that stands next the
rotte be northest in ye setting and that other end upward toward heaven. And
that thou moist them twice or thryse in the day, not rottyng but dewyng or
springlyng, this is a preuitie among conning men that in uere is most
conuenable time for seeds. graeues and pepyns, and Autumn of sprynges and
plants.

When thou wylt take a setteleng that spryngeth cut of an other tree rote, make
a delue there about after the quantite thereof and so deep, till thou come to ye
great rote that the spring grows out of, and thou must cut it of, and
holding the edge of the knyfe toward the tree ground, and cut it so with a
slope draught and leave as much of the earth about ye root and stock of the
setting as thou may, and set it in a good ground ordained therefore, and in a
convenient time as it is before said, and if any spryng so grows out of any
tree chose it that grows right out that be not over long, but even without
any small branches, holding the knife in the cutting always toward the tree as
is above said.

Also if thou wylt remove a tree that is great or bearyng fruit, chose the a
full moon from the mids of Octobre to the mids of Dicembre, having up the
roots as hole as thou may, leaving as much of his own earch about the rote as
you may with the same manner and other as thou do with setting of small trees
and settling it is no force though the moon be not even in the full so she be
in the.ii. or.iii. quarter, the gouernayle of these plants is dublynge of
bearyng of fruit.

Also if thou will keep late set pla^tes, keep the^ from velpertyn raynes and
from winds, namely in harvest for it is not great difficulte in vere, against
the coming of winter set or stick about the settling many bows that the
northen wind or greatness of other wyndes destroy it not, put donge meddled wc
straw about the stock toward the root of a good thicknes that frost and snow
congyle not on the rote, and make a deep valey about the rote ye space of.vi.
or.vii. foot that the water abide not and frese about the rote, in harvest,
that is between somer and winter, that when winter comes it may be filled with
donge and solet it stand all the winter, and in ver put under the dong new
earth and cut a way all the unprofitable branches and mayke it clean about the
stock, and the rotes from worms scurfes and mosses and evil wedes goinge
about the braynches. all the close of thine or charde wole be set a bout with
other hithe trees that bear on fruit, that the fleuers mygte be kept safe
from winds. And beware yt no fruit be gathered of no tree before the time,
for that is a right great and at preuy harmyng to the tree.

The manner of graffyng.
The great stock must be chosen in good ground, and it must be smothe and
even, and cut it with out the earth ye length of a fout or more, if it be as
great as thy thombe or moore, if it be greater look that the cutyng be even
ouerthwarte the stock and a side and it must be cloven a boue in ye mids of
the pith the length of two fyngers bread, and in the clyfte set thy graffe
which must be chosen of the best tree. The stock is of the chief graffe that
stands right upward, that has a knot of the forne year. And an inche beneth
that said knot cut thy graffe and white it on both sides even in manner of a
wedge as far as it shall go in to the clifte of the stock, it must be so even
twhiten yt the air may not com be twene the clyfte and the graffe, and then
close it with good te^perate earth a boute the graffe for defense of rain
and wether.

If thou will graffe diverse fruits upon one stock that has as many branches
as thou will have graffes on, and in euere brau^che set agraffe in manner and
form as it is said before, and evermore chose thy graffe on the sun side
of the tree that bears it, and next the top if you may, and than may thou
graffe diverse fruits in one clifte, but none of them may be thycker then
other as thy reason will tell them the workyng.

To have fruit without cores, look thou have a sufficient graffe stock. and
there wc as I said be fore chose a graffe of good merle tree, and cut it on
this manner that the end of the graffe that was upward next the fyrmament must
be twhiten like the neder of a common graffe, and the nether end turned upward
it is to be done slelye, this rule is true in all trees that have stones and
kernels, but a vine it behooves to cut that is down ward next ye earth with
great co^ninge and fleyghte.

If thou wylt have a vine grow on a chery tree and have the taste of cherys.
set a vine by a chery tree till it grow, and in the begenning of seuerel what
time it be, make an hole through ye cheritre, in what place thou wylt, and as
often as thou will and draw through the hole a brau^che of the vine, so that
it fyl the hole, and shave a way the old bark of the vine as much as shall be in
the hole. And put it in so that the shaven place of the branche stop full the
hole of the chery tree, and tha^ cut away the rot end of the vine and wrape it
well a bout with good earth and bind it well with a little cloth, and keep it
well in all things it is said in other graffynges, but some men leave the rote
end on cut a year till it be sowdred with the chery tree, and than cut it a
waey, and this is a good manner and a sure, and so it may be done with diverse
trees of diverse fruytes, and the grape and the vine shall have savor of them:
And so of every tree may be graffed in other, and it is a marvelous graffyng.

If thou wylt have a tree bear diverse fruytes and of diverse colors, and
diverse sauoure, in ye first year graffe in diverse branches of a chery tree,
diverse apylys to thy lykyng, and cleave some of ye brauches vngrafted, the
second year make holes through the chery tree, and draw through that hole vine
branches, the utter end shaue^ of as is before said and in the same manner
through an another hole, read rose and therewith as is be fore said of the vine,
and this diversity thou may do after thine own liking.

If thou will have fentes of diverse colors thou shall make an hole in a tree
nyghe, to the root even to the pith of the tree, and a none do in the hole
good a sure of almayne, so that it be nygh full, and than stop the hole well
and just with a shorth pyn, and wrappe it well with tempered earth and bind
it well as thou do a graffe, and the fruits shall be blewe color, and this
may be done with all colors.

Also here begins a little treatise of the.iiii. seasons of the year, and
also of the.iiii. elements, which they be and of what nature, and of the
canyculer days.
THe four elements be these, air, fire, earth and water, also there ben
four himours in man, and they be these, blood, read color, black to
lolour, and fleweme. Also there be four seasons in the year, in which a man
ought and behooves to be governed. The first is vere and that begins the
viii. I Would of february, and endures to the.vii. I Would of May in this thime
wexeth blood, this is the first humor of man and accords with the air, that
is the first element, for it is watery and hot as is vere, that is the first
time of the year. And that time books of medecyne lerneth us to take drynckes
solyble for to purge ye body of evil humors, and to eat flesh, and drink
drynkes that be wholesome for manes body, as young porcke and clean moton and
lambs flesh, and kyddes and fowls that be of the land, but no water fowls
And fresh water porttes, tame neps and percely, and other herbs of medecin,
and to drink good clean ale, and no strong ale. And these things make
clean blood, so they be not surfetly taken.

The second time and season of the year is somer, and begins the.vi. I Would.
of May and lasts unto the.vii. of August. In that time waxes red color to
the second element, that is fire for that is hot and dry. I that time men
should not drink herbs nor let blood, but if it were for great nedenor
much fast.

It is good in that time to eat well soden flesh of all manner of beasles and
all manner of fowls, save porcke in May is good to forbear, and eat all manner
of fyshe with vyneger, or yuse of grappes of ver gius made with good herbs,
sage, and sauery, and sede of anneys. fenell sede and comin, and it is good to
drink wormoode, iii. times in the weke tempred with wine, all so temper it
with water and drink no strong ale, and use louage seed and letous and they
shall temper well the red color and keep them from sycknes.

The thyred time of the year is Autumpnus or harvest, and it be gynneth
the.vii. I Would of August. and lasts unto the.vii. I Would of Nouembre, and in that
time wax the black color, yt is the third humor in man, and accords to
the.iii. eleme^t, that is earth and that is could and dry. In that time is it
good to take drink solyble that purges the body of eueri black color that
much is in a man, and he may some time be let blood in that season. And eat
litel fyshe flesh, and namely fruits biefe and milk is good to drink and
good wine mesurably and good stayle ale, and new ale, and eat scaled fyshe
and peper with ginger and galingale, and eat bays and stanmarchesed and
common, and browort rotes with wine or with other lycoure fasting, and eat not
an hour or two after.

The.iiii. time and season in the year is hyems or winter, and begeneth
the.vii. I Would of Nouembre and lasts to the, vii. I Would of February, and in that
time enters flewme, and that is ye fourth humor in man. and accords to ye
fourth element yt is water, for yt is cold and most as is winter, and in that
time men should let them blood in their bodies by grafynge, but not no veins,
but if it be the more need. And a man must keep him from drinkyng of strong
drynkes And poudred flesh is good to eat, and for as much as al fishes after
water be flumattike, therefore they be better roast than soden, and use mustard
and peper and often time chewe in thy month pellater of spain and such other
things as will cause the flew me to void, and also eat fenelsede, common, and
each of these seeds destroy flewme that all the euylles in man's body
begins of.

THe Laniculer days begins the.xv. kale^, des of August and endure to
the.iiii. Nonas of Septembre in which season is great peril to take syckenes,
and it is perilous to take drinks or medecines or to be let blood but if it
be great need and that must be after the mids of the day.

The form and the measure to mete land by.
THe lenght of a barlei corn three times make an ynche, so that the barley
grow in common sort not to leue^ to much composted, and.xii. inches make a
foot, and.iiii. foot makes a yearde, and.v. quarters of the yard make an
elle, five foot make a pace a hundred.xxv. pace make a forlonge, and eight
forlonges make an english inyle, and syxtene forlonges make a french lewge,
five yardes din make a perch in London to mete land by, and that perch is xv.
foot din long, in diverse other places in this la^d they mete ground by poles,
gaddes and r^ddes, so me be of.xviii, foot, some of.xx. and some of.xxi. But of
what length so ever they be.c. lx. perches make an aker. for as a mark of
englysh money conteyneth on.c. lx. pence, so every aker of land conteyneth.c.
lx. perches, and as a noble conteyneth.lxxx. pence, so half an aker of land
conteyneth.lxxx. perches and as the half a noble conteyneth.xl, pence. so a
rode land coteyneth.xl. perches, and a perch of ground shall contain in
length of that perch every way in the manner of a checker, so that it be as
long as broad.

xvi ^ote and a half makes a perch as is a boue said that is.v. yardes and a
half.vi. L. foot by liuescore to the hundred makes a forlong, that is.xxviii.
perches save two foot, viii. furlonges make an english mile that is.v. M. foot,
and so. LL. and.iii. perches al so are an english mile.

Here ends this little treatise that speaks of plantyng and graffeyng of
trees, and diverse other matters, and also of diverse medycynes for man's health.
Imprynted at London in Lothbery over agay^nst S. Bargarets church by me
Wyllyam Lopland.


