AN AVNSVVERE BY THE REVEREND FATHER in God Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, Unto a crafty and Sophistical
cauillation, devised by Stephen Gardener Doctor of Law, late Bishop of
Winchester against the true and godly doctrine of the most holy Sacrament, of
the body and blood of our Savior IESV CHRIST..

Wherein is also, as occasion serves, answered such places of the book of
Doct. Richard Smith, as may seem any thing worthy the aunsweryng.

Here is also the true Copy of the book written, and in open Court delivered,
by D. Stephen Gardener, not one word added or diminished, but faithfully in all
points agreeyng with the Original.

Reuised, and corrected by the said Archbishop at Oxford before his Martyrdom:
Wherein he has beautified Gardiners doings, with as much diligence as might
be, by applying Notes in the Margent, and marks to the Doctors saying: which
before wanted in the first Impression.

Hereunto is prefixed the discourse of the said Archbyshops life, and
Martyrdom, briefly collected out of his Hystory of the Acts and Monumentes,
and in the end is added certain Notes, wherein Gardener varied, both from him
self, and other Papists, gathered by the said Archbishop.

Read with Judgment, and confer with diligence, laying aside all affection
on either party, and thou shall easily perceive (good Reader) how slender and
weak the allegations and persuasions of the Papists are, wherewith they go
about to defend their erroneous and false doctrine, and to impugn the truth.
Anno. M. D. LI.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martines.
Anno. 1580.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio, Regiae Maiestatis.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Think it good gentle Reader, here in the beginning to admonish thee of
certain words and kinds of speeches, which I do use sometime in this mine
answer to the late Bishop of Winchesters book, least in mistakyng, thou do
as it were stumble at them.

First this word (Sacrament) I do sometimes use (as it is many times taken
among writers and holy Doctors) for the Sacramental bread, Sacrament.
water, or wine, as when they say, that Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum, a
Sacrament is the sign of an holy thing. But where I use to speak sometimes
(as the old Authors do) that Christ is in the Sacraments, I mean the same as
they did understand the matter, that is to say, not of Christ's carnal
presence in the outward Sacrament, but sometimes of his Sacramental presence.
And sometime by this word (Sacrament) I mean the whole ministration and
receiuyng of the Sacraments, either of Baptism, or of the Lords Supper, and
so the old writers many times do say, that Christ and the holy Ghost be
present in the Sacraments, not meaning by that manner of speech, that Christ
and the holy Ghost be present in the water, bread, or wine (which be only the
outward visible Sacraments (but that in the due ministration of the
Sacraments according to Christ's ordinance and institution, Christ and his
holy spirit be truly and in deed present by their mighty and sanctifiyng
power, virtue and grace, in all them that worthily receive the same.

Moreover, when I say and repeat many times in my book, yt the body of Christ
is present in them that worthily receive the Sacrament, Christ's presence in
the godly receiver.
least any man should mystake my words, and think that I mean, that
although Christ be not corporally in the outward visible signs, yet he is
corporally in the persons that duly receive them, this is to advertise the
Reader, that I mean no such thing, but my meaning is, that the force, the
grace, the virtue and benefit of Christ's body that was Crucified for us, and
of his blood that was shed for us, be really, and effectually present with all
them that duly receive the Sacraments, but all this I understand of his
spiritual presence, of the which he says, I will be with you until the
worlds end. And wheresoever two or three be gathered together in my name,
there am I in the myddest of them. Math. 6. Math. 18.
And he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. Nor no more truly is he corporally or really present in the due
ministration of the Lords Supper, John. 6.
than he is in the due ministration of Baptism: That is to say, in both
spiritually by grace. And wheresoever in the Scripture it is said that Christ,
God or the holy Ghost is in any man, the same is understand spiritually by
grace.

The third thing to admonish the Reader of is this, that when I name Doctor
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, The naming of the late Bishop of
Winchester.
I mean not that he is so now, but forasmuch as he was Bishop of Winchester at
the time when he wrote his book against me, therefore I answer his book as
written by the Bishop of Winchester, which else needed greatly none answer
for any great learning or substance of matter that is in it.

The real presence of Christ should prove no Transubstantiation of the bread
and wine.
The last admonition to the Reader is this, where the said late Bishop thinks
that he has sufficiently proved Transubstantiation, (that is to say, that the
substance of bread and wine can not be in the Sacrament, if the body and blood
of Christ were there) because two bodies can not be togethers in one place,
although the truth be, that in the Sacrament of Christ's body, there is
corporallye but the substance of bread only, and in the Sacrament of the
blood, the substance of wine only, yet how far he is deceived, and does
vary from the doctrine of other Papists, and also from the principles of
Philosophy (which he takes for the foundation of his doctrine in this point)
the Reader hereby may easily perceive. For if we speak of Gods power, the
Papists affirm, that by Gods power, two bodies may be together in one place,
and then why may not Christ's blood be with the wine in the cup, and his flesh
in the same place where the substance of the bread is? And if we consider the
cause wherefore two bodies can not be together in one place by the rules of
nature, it shall evidently appear, that the body of Christ may rather be in
one place with the substance of the bread, the^ with the accidents thereof, and
so likewise his blood with the wine. For the natural cause wherefore two bodies
can not be together in one place (as the Philosophers say) is their accidents,
their bigness, and thicknes, and not their substaunces. And then by the very
order of nature it repugneth more yt ye body of Christ should be present with the
accidents of bread, and his blood with the accidents of wine, then with the
substaunces either of bread or wine. This shall suffice for the admonition to
the Reader, ioynyng thereto the Preface in my first book, which is this:

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Our Savior Christ Jesus, according to the will of his eternal Father, The
great mercy and benefits of God toward us.
when the time thereto was fully complished, taking our nature upon him came
into this world from the high throne of his Father, to declare unto miserable
sinners, good news, to heal them that were sick, to make the blind to see,
the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, to set prisoners at liberty, to
show that the time of grace and mercy was come, to give light to them that were
in darkness and in the shadow of death, and to preach and give pardon and full
remission of sin to all his elected. And to perform the same he made a
sacrifice and oblation of his own body upon the cross, which was a full
redemption, satisfaction and propitiation for the sins of the whole world.
And to commend this his sacrifice unto all his faithful people, and to
confirm their faith and hope of eternal salvation in the same, he has
ordained a perpetual memory of his said sacrifice, daily to be used in the
Church to his perpetual laud and praise, and to our synguler comfort and
consolation, That is to say the celebration of his holy supper, wherein he does
not cease to give himself, with all his benefits to all those that duly
receive the same supper, according to his blessed ordinance. The erroneous
doctrine of the papists obscuring the same.
But the Romish Antichrist, to deface this great benefit of Christ, hatht that
his sacrifice upon the cross is not sufficient hereunto, without any other
sacrifice devised by him, and made by the priest, or else without Indulgences,
Beads, Pardons, Pilgrimages, and such other Pelfray, to to supply Christ's
imperfection. And that Christen people cannot apply to themselves the
benefytes of Christ's passion, but that the same is in the distribution of the
Bishop of Rome, or else that by Christ we have no full remission but be
delivered only from sin, and yet remains temporal pain in Purgatory due
for the same, to be remitted after this life by the Romish Antichrist and his
ministers, who take upon them to do for us that thing, which Christ either
would not, or could not do. O heinous blasphemy and most detestable injury
against Christ. O wicked abomination in the temple of God. O pride
intolerable of Antechrist, and most manifest token of the son of perdition,
extolling himself above God, and with Lucifer exalting his seat and power
above the throne of God. For he that takes upon him to supply that thing which
he pretends to be imperfect in Christ, must needs make himself above Christ,
and so very Antichrist. For what is this else, but to be against Christ, and to
bring him in contempt, as one that either for lack of charity would not, or for
lack of power he could not, with all his bloudshedding and death, clearly
deliver his faithful, and give them full remission of their sins, but that
the full perfection thereof must be had at the hands of Antichrist of Rome and
his ministers? What man of knowledge and zeal to Gods honor can with dry eyes
see this injury to Christ, and look upon the estate of religion brought in by
the Papists, The state of religion brought in by ye papists.
perceiving the true sense of Gods words subverted by false gloses of man's
devising, the true christen religion turned into certain hypocritical and
superstitious sects, the people praying with their mouths, and hearing with
their ears, they wist not what, and so ignorant in Gods word, that they could
not discern hypocrisy and superstition from true and sincere religion? This
was of late years the face of religion within this realm of England, and yet
remains in diverse realms. But thanks be to almighty God and to the Kings
Majesty, with his father a Prince of most famous memory, the superstitious
sects of Monks and friars (that were in this realm) be clean taken away, the
scripture is restored unto the proper and true understanding, the people may
daily read and hear Gods heavenly word, and pray in their own language which
they understand, so that their hearts and mouths may go together, and be none
of those people whom Christ complained saying: Math. 15.
These people honor me with their lips, but their hearts be far from me.
Thanks be to God, many corrupt weeds be plucked up, which were wont to rot
the flock of Christ, and to let the growing of the Lords harvest.

The chief roots of all errors.
But what avails it to take away beads, pardons, pilgremages, and such other
like Popery, so long as two chief roots remain vnpulled up? whereof so long
as they remain, will spring again all former impediments of the Lords
harvest, and corruption of his flock. The rest is but branches and leaves,
the cutting away whereof, is but like topping and loppyng of a tree, or cutting
down of weeds, leaving the body standing, and the roots in the ground, but
the very body of the tree, or rather the roots of the weeds, is the Popish
doctrine of Transubsta^tiation, of the real presence of Christ's flesh and
blood in the sacrament of the altar, (as they call it) and of the sacrifice
and oblation of Christ made by the priest, for the salvation of the quick and
the dead. Which roots if they be suffered to grow in the Lords vineyard, they
will ouerspread all the ground again, with the old errors and superstitions.
What moved the author to write.
These injuries to Christ be so intolerable, that no christen heart can
willingly bear them. Wherefore seeing that many have set to their hands, and
whetted their tools, to pluck up the weeds, and to cut down the tree of
error, I not knowing otherwise how to excuse my self at the last day, have in
this book set to my hand and axe with the rest, to cut down this tree, and to
pluck up the weeds and plants by the roots which our heavenly father never
planted, but were grafted and sown in his vineyard by his adversary the devil,
and Antichrist his minister. The lord grant, that this my travail and labor
in his vineyard be not in vayn, but that it may prosper and bring forth good
fruits to his honor and glory. For when I see his vineyard ouergrowen with
thorns, brambles and weeds, I know that everlasting woe appertains unto me,
if I hold my peace, and put not to my hands and tongue, to labor in purging
his vineyard. God I take to witness (who sees the hearts of all men thoroughly
unto the bottom) that I take this labor for none other consideration, but for
the glory of his name, and the discharge of my duty, and the zeal that I bear
toward the flock of Christ. I know in what office God has placed me, and to
what purpose, that is to say, to set forth his word truly unto his people, to
the uttermost of my power, without respect of person, or regard of thing in the
world, but of him alone. I know what account I shall make to him here of at the
last day, when every man shall answer for his vocation, and receive for the
same good or ill, according as he has done. I know how Antichrist has
obscured the glory of god, and the true knowledge of his word, ouercasting the
same with mistes and clouds of error and ignorance, through false gloses and
interpretations. It pittieth me to see the simple and hungry flock of Christ
led into corrupt pastures, to be carried blindfield they know not whether, and
to be fed with poiso^ in the stead of wholesome meats. And moved by the duty,
office and place, A warnyng given by the Author.
whereunto it has pleased God to call me, I give warning in his name unto all
that profess Christ, that they flee far from Babylon, if they will save their
souls, and to beware of that great harlot, that is to say, Ierem. 51.
the pestiferous sea of Rome, Apoc. 14. 17. 18.
that she make you not drunk with her pleasant wine. Trust not her sweet
promises, nor banquet not with her for in stead of wine she wilgeue you sower
dregs, and for meat she will feed you with rank poison: But come to our
redeemer and Savior Christ, Math. 11.
who refreshes all that truly come unto him, be their anguish and heaviness
never so great. Give credit unto him, 1. Pet. 2. Esaias. 53.
in whose mouth was never found guile, nor untruth. By him you shall be
clearly delivered from all your diseases, of him you shall have full remission
A poena and a culpa. He it is that feeds continually all that belong unto
him, with his own flesh that hanged upon the Cross, and gives them drink of
the blood, flowing out of his own side, and makes to spring within them,
John. 4.
water that flows unto everlasting life. Listen not to the false
incantatio^s, sweet whisperinges, and crafty iugling of the subtle Papists,
wherewith they have this many years deluded and bewitched the world, but harken
to Christ, give ear unto his words, which lead you the right way unto
everlasting life, there with him to live ever as heirs of his kingdom. AMEN.

JOHN. VI. It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing.

I. Parkhursti.
Accipe praeclarum Lector studiose libellum,
Quem tibi Cranmerus scripserat ante rogos.
Hic docta sanctam tractat ratione synaxin,
Insistens, Patres quas docuere, vijs.
Hic Gardnere tuas Phaleratas detegit arts,
Detrabit and laruam sine tyranne tuam.
A tque tuo ipsius iugulum transuerberat ense,
Vt iaceas veluti sensibus absque fera.
Denique rixosis hic obstruit ora Papistis,
Rixandi posset si tamen esse modus.
Soluitur in cineres corpus, men's scandit ad astra,
Fama superstes erit tempus in omne memor.
The life, state, and story of the Reverend pastor and Prelate Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Caunterbury Martyr, burned at Oxford for the confession of
Christ's true doctrine. An. 1556. March. 21.
FOr as much as the life and estate of the most Reverend Father in God and
worthy Prelate of godly memory Thomas Cra^mer late Archb. of Cant. Thomas
Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury.
together with the original cause and occasion of his preferment to the
dignity Archiepiscopall, whereunto he was advanced immediately upon the death
of Bishop Warham Archbishop of the same, beyond all expectation without support
of money or friends, Doct. Cranmer made Archb. of Cant. by king Henry.
by the only well liking of the most renowned king of famous memory Henry the
eight, who with a fatherly care mainteyned his countenance, and defended his
innocent life, undermined sundry times by the manifold atte^ptes of the
horrible Arche enemy of Christ and his Gospel Stephen Gardener and other his
accomplices, Doct. Cranmer always defended by king Henry.
with diverse other circumstaunces of his most commendable conversation,
charitable consideration of the poor, constant care in reformation of corrupt
Religion, his undaunted courage in continual defense of the same, and the
perseueraunce therein to the loss of his life, be already described at large
in the book of Acts and Monumentes of Martyrs. Look for the story at large
in the book of the Acts and Monumentes in the last Edition, page 1752.
It may seem needelesse to make a thorough discourse thereof again at this
present. Nevertheless partly to stop the mouths of slanderous Sycophants,
and partly for the ease of such as would happily be desirous upon the view of
the title of this book, to be acquainted with the life of the Author being
otherwise not able to have recourse to the story at large, as also because his
virtuous life and glorious death was such, as can never be commended
sufficiently I have thought it not altogether amiss to renew the remembrance
thereof by certain brief Notes, referring them that be desirous to know the
whole to the story thereof at large.

It is first therefore to be noted and considered, that the same Thomas Cranmer
coming of ancient parentage, Thomas Cranmer a Gentleman borne.
from the Conquest to be deducted, and continuyng since in the name and
family of a Gentleman, was borne in a Uillage called Arselacton in Notyngha^
shyre. Of whose said name and family there remains at these days one Manor
and mansion house in Lincoln shyre called Cranmer Hall etc. some times of
heritage of the said stock and family. Who being from his infancy kept at
School, and brought up not without much good civility, came in process of
time unto the University of Cambridge, Thom. Cra^mer first coming to
Cambridge^
and there prospering in right good knowledge amongst the better sort of
Stude^tes, was chosen fellow of Jesus College in Cambridge. Thomas Cranmer
fellow of Jesus college.
And so being Master of Art, and fellow of the same College, it chanced him
to mary a Gentleman's daughter: by means whereof he lost and gave over his
fellowship there, and became the Reader in Buckingham College: and for that he
would with more diligence apply that his office of Reading, placed his said
wife in an Inn called the Dolphin in Cambridge, the wife of the house being of
affinity unto her. By means of whose abode in that Inn, and his often
repair unto her, arose a certain slau^derous report, after he was preferred
to be Archbishop of Caunterbury, bruted abroad by the malicious disdain of
certain Sycophanticall Papists that he was but an Hosteler, and altogether
deuoyde of learning, which how falsely was forged upon him, may easily appear
hereby: That the Masters and Fellows of Jesus College notyng the virtuous
disposition of the man, Thom. Cra^mer after ye decease of his wife, chosen
again fellow into Jesus College.
and the great travail he took, notwithstanding his marriage, whiles he
continued Reader in Buckingha^ College, immediately upon the death of his wife
(who not long, after their enter marriage was in Childbed surprised by death)
refin^ed him into their Fellowship again: where he so behaved him self that
in few years, after he became the Reader of the Divinity Lecture in the same
College, and in such special estimation and reputation with the whole
University, that being Doctor of Divinity he was commonly appointed one of
the heads (which are two or three of the chiefest learned men) to examine such
as yearly profess in Commenceme^t, either Bachelors, or Doctors of
Divinity, by whose approbation the whole University lice^ceth them to
proceed unto their degree: and again by whose disalowaunce the University
also rejects them for a time to proceed until they be better furnished with
more knowledge.

Doct. Cranmer public examiner in Cambridge, of them that were to proceed.
Now, Doct. Cranmer ever much ^auouring the knowledge of the Scripture, would
never admit any to proceed in Divinity, unless they were substa^tially seen
in the story of the Bible: by means whereof certain Friars and other Religious
persons, who were principally brought up in the study of School Authors
without regard had to the authority of Scriptures, were commonly rejected by
him, so that he was greatly for that his severe examination of the Religious
sort, much hated and had in great indignation: Friars in hatred with Doct.
Cranmer.
and yet it came to pass in the end that diverse of them being thus compelled
to study the Scriptures, became afterward very well learned and well
affected, in so much, that when they proceeded Doctors of Divinity, could not
overmuch extol and commend Master Doct. Cranmers goodness toward them, who
had for a time put them back, to aspire unto better knowledge and perfection.
Amongst whom Doct. Barret. a white Friar who afterward dwelt at Norwich was
after that sort handled, Doct. Barret
giuyng him no less comme^dation for his happy rejecting of him for a better
amendment. Thus much I repeat that our Apish and Popish sort of ignorant
Priests may well understand that this his exercise, kind of life, and
vocation was not altogether Hostelerlike.

Doct. Cranmer solicited to be fellow of the Cardinals College in Oxford,
refused it.
I omit here how Cardinal Wolsey after the foundation of his College in
Oxford, hearing the fame of his learning used all means possible to place him
in ye same: which he refused with great danger of indignation, conte^tyng him
self with his former Fellowship in Cambridge. Until upon occasion of the
plague being in Cambridge he resorted to Waltha^ Abbey and soiourned with one
M. Cressey there, whose wife was Doct. Cranmers niece, and two of her children
his pupilles in Cambridge During this time the great and weighty cause of king
Henry the viij. his divorce, Question of the kings divorce with Katherine
Dowager.
with the Lady Katherine Dowager of Spain was in question. Wherein two
Cardinals Campeius and Wolsey were appointed in Commission from the Pope to
hear and determine the controversy between the King and the Queen, who by
many dilatories dallying and delaying the whole summer until the month and of
August, taking occasion to finish their Commission, so moved the patience of
the king, that in all have he removed from London to Waltha^ for a night or
twain, whiles the Dukes of Northfolke and Suffolk dispatched Cardinal
Campeius home again to Rome. Doct. Stephens and Doct. Fox chief furtherers of
the kings divorce.
By means whereof it chanced that the kings herbengers lodged Doct. Stephens
Secretary and Doct. Fox Almosiner (who were the chief furtherers, preferrers
and defenders of the foresaid cause in the kings behalf) in the house of the
said M. Cressey, where Doct. Cranmer was also resiaunt as before. When Supper
time came, and all three Doctors met together, being of old acquaintance,
they entertained each other familiarly: Doct. Stephens, D. Fox, Doct. Cranmer
co^ferryng together of the kings cause.
and the said Doct. Stephens and Doct. Fox taking occasion of their happy
meetyng together, began to confer with Doct. Cranmer concerning the kings
cause, requestyng him to declare his opinion therein.

Whereunto Doct. Cranmer answered that he could say little in the matter, for
that he had not studied nor looked for it. Notwithstanding he said to them,
that in his opinion they made more add in prosecutyng the laws
Ecclesiastical, Doct. Cranmers answer in the question of the kings divorce.
then needed. It were better as I suppose (quoth Doct. Cranmer) that the
question, whether a man may mary his brothers wife or no, were decided and
discussed by the Divines, and by the authority of the word of God, whereby the
conscience of the Prince might be better satisfied and quieted, then thus from
year to year by frustratory delays to prolong the time, leaving the very
truth of the matter vnbu^ted out by the word of God. There is but one truth in
it, which the Scripture will soon declare, make open, and manifest being by
learned men well handled, and that may be as well done in England in the
Uniuersities here, as at Rome or else where in any foreine nation, the
authority whereof will compel any Judge soon to come to a diffinitiue
sentence: and therefore as I take it, you might this way have made an end of
this matter long since. Doct. Cranmers devise well lyked of.
When Doct. Cranmer had thus ended his tale, the other two well liked of his
devise, and wished that they had so proceeded before time, and thereupon
conceived some matter of that devise to instruct the king withal, who then was
minded to send to Rome again for a new Commission.

Now the next day when the king removed to Grenewich, like as he took him
self not well handled by the Cardinals in thus differryng his cause, so his
mind being unquieted and desirous of an end of his long and tedious suit, The
king troubled about the cause of his divorce.
he called to him this his ij. principal doers of his said cause, namely the
said Doct. Stephens and D. Fox, saying unto the^: What now my Masters (quoth
the king) shall we do in this infinite cause of mine? I see by it there must be
a new Commission procured from Rome, and when we shall have an end God knows
and not I. When the king had said somewhat his mind herein, the Almosiner
Doct. Fox said unto the king again: we trust that there shall be better ways
devised for your Majesty, then to make travail so far to Rome any more in
your highness cause, which by chance was put into our heads this other night
being at Waltham, and so discovered to the king their meetyng and conference
with Doct. Cranmer at M. Cresseys house.

Whereupon Doct. Cranmer was sent for in post being as then removed from Waltham
toward his friends in Lincoln shyre and so brought to the Court to the king.
Doct. Cranmer sent for to the king in post.
Whom the noble Prince benignely acceptyng demanded his name, and said unto
him: Were you not at Waltham such a time, in the company of my Secretary and my
Almosiner? Talk between the king and Doct. Cranmer.
Doct. Cranmer affirmyng the same, the king said again: had you not conference
with them concerning our matter of divorce now in question after this sort,
repeatyng the manner and order thereof? That is right true, if it please your
highness, quoth Doct. Cranmer. Well said the king, I well perceive that you have
the right scope of this matter. You must understand quoth the king, that I have
been long troubled in conscience, The king troubled in conscience.
and now I perceive that by this means I might have been long ago releaued
one way or other, from the same, if we had this way proceeded. And therefore
Master Doctor I pray you, and nevertheless because you are a subject I charge
and commau^de you (all your other business and affairs set apart) to take some
pains to see this my cause to be furthered according to your devise, as much as
it may lie in you, with many other words in commendation of the Queens
Majesty.

Doct. Cranmer much disablyng him self to meddle in so weighty a matter, Doct.
Cranmer excusing and disabling himself to the king.
besought the kings highness to commit the trial and examinyng of this matter
by the word of God, unto the best learned me^ of both his Uniuersities
Cambridge and Oxford. You say well, said the king, and I am content there with.
But yet nevertheless, I will have you specially to write your mind therein. And
so calling the Earl of Wiltshyre to him, Doct. Cranmer assigned by the king to
search the Scriptures in the cause of his divorce.
said: I pray you my Lord, let D. Cranmer have intertaynement in your house at
Durham place for a time, to the intent he may be there quiet to accomplish my
request, and let him lack neither books ne any thing requisite for his study.
And thus after the kings departure, Doct. Cranmer went with my Lord of
Wiltshyre unto his house, where he incontinent wrote his mind concerning the
kings question, addyng to the same besides, the authorities of Scriptures, of
general Councels, and of ancient writers: The king first given to understand
that the Pope has no authority to dispense with the word of God.
also his opinion, which was this: that the Bishop of Rome had no such
authority, as whereby he might dispense with the word of God and the
Scriptures. When Doct. Cranmer had made this book, and committed it to the
king, the king said to him: will you abide by this, that you have here written
before the Bishop of Rome? That will I do, by Gods grace, quoth Doct. Cranmer,
if your Majesty do send me thither. Mary quoth the king, I will send you even
to him in a sure Embassage.

And thus by means of Doct. Cranmers handlyng of this matter with the king,
The kings matter removed from the popes Canon law, to the trial of the
Scriptures.
not only certain learned men were sent abroad to the most part of the
Uniuersities in Christendom to dispute the question, but also the same being
by Commission disputed by the Divines in both the Uniuersities of Cambridge and
Oxford, it was there concluded that no such Matrimony was by the word of God
lawful. Whereupon a solemn Embassage was prepared and sent to the Bishop of
Rome then being at Bonony, The kings Marriage found by Gods word unlawful.
wherein went the Earl of Wiltshyre, Doct. Cranmer, Doct. Stokesly, Doct.
Carne, Doct. Bennet, and diverse other learned men and Gentlemen. And when the
time came that they should come before the Bishop of Rome to declare the cause
of their Embassage, Doct. Cranmer with other s^nt to Rome Ambassador to the
Pope.
the Bishop sittyng on high in his cloth of estate, and in his rich apparel,
with his sandales on his feet, offering, as it were, his foot to be kissed of
ye Ambassadors, the Earl of Wiltshyre with the rest of the Ambassadors
disdainyng thereat, stood still, and made no countenance thereunto, and so
kept them selves from that Idolatry. In fine the Pontifical Bishop seeing their
constancy without any farther ceremony gave ear to the Ambassadors.

Arguing to the popes face, that contrary to the word of God he had no power to
dispense.
Who entryng there before the Bishop, offered on the kings behalf to be
defended, that no man Iure divine could or ought to mary his brothers wife: and
that the Bishop of Rome by no means ought to dispense to the contrary. Diverse
promises were made, and sundry days appointed, wherein the question should
have been disputed, and when our part was ready to answer, no man there
appeared to dispute in that behalf. So in the end the Bishop making to our
Ambassadors good countenance, Doct. Cranmer made the popes Penitentiary.
and gratiffyng Doctor Cranmer with the Office of the Penitentiarishyp,
dismissed them vndisputed withal.

Doct. Cranmer Ambassador to the Emperor.
Whereupon the Earl of Wiltshyre and other Commissioners, saving Doct. Cranmer,
returned home again into England. And forthwith Doct. Cranmer went to the
Emperor being in his journey toward Vienna in expedition against the Turk,
there to answer such learned men of the Emperors Counsel, as would or
could say any thing to the contrary part. Where, amongst the rest at the same
time, Conference between Bishop Cranmer and Cornelius Agrippa.
was Cornelius Agrippa an high Officer in the Emperors Court, who having
private conference with Doct. Cranmer in the question, was so fully resolved
and satisfied in the matter, that afterward there was never disputation
openly offered to Doct. Cranmer in that behalf. For through the persuasion of
Agrippa, all other learned men there were much discouraged.

This matter thus prosperyng on D. Cranmers behalf, as well touching the kings
question, as concerning the inualiditie of the Bishop of Romes authority,
Bishop Warrham then Archbishop of Caunterbury departed this transitory life,
Doct. Cranmer made Archbishop of Cant.
whereby that dignity then being in the kings gift and disposition, was
immediately given to Doct. Cra^mer as worthy for his travail, of such a
promotio^. Thus much touching the preferme^t of Doct. Cranmer unto his
dignity, and by what means he atchiued unto the same: not by flattery, nor by
bribes, nor by none other unlawful means: which thing I have more at large
discoursed, to stop the raylyng mouths of such, who being them selves
obscure and unlearned, shame not so to detract a learned man most ignominiously
with the surname of an Hostler, whom for his godly zeal unto sincere Religion,
they ought with much humility to have had in regard and reputation.

Now as concerning his behavior and trade of life toward God and the world,
being entered into his said dignity: True it is, that he was so thoroughly
furnished withal properties, qualities, and conditions belongyng to a true
Bishop, as that it shall be very hard in these strange days to find many, 1.
Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
that so nearely resemble that lively exemplar described by S. Paul the
Apostle in his several Epistles to Titus and Timothee. So far he swarued from
the common course of common Bishops in his time. But because the same is very
well decipbred in the story at large, it shall not be so needful to discourse
all the parts thereof in this place. Yet may not this be forgotten. That
notwithstanding the great charge now committed unto him: The worthy Prelate
gave him self evermore to continual study, The order of Doct. Cranmers study.
not breakyng the order that he used commonly in the University. To wit by v.
of the clock in the morning in his study, and so until ix. continuyng in
prayer and study. From thence until dinner time to hear suitors (if the Princes
affairs did not call him away) committyng his temporal affairs as well of
household as other foreine business to his officers. For the most part he would
occupy him self in reformation of corrupt Religion, and setting forth true and
sincere doctrine, wherein he would associate him self always with learned
men, for the siftyng and boultyng out one matter or other for the commodity
and profit of the Church of England. After dynner if any suitors were, he would
diligently hear them and dispatch them: in such sort as every man commended
his lenity and gentleness. That done to his ordinary study again until five
of the clock, which hour he bestowed in hearing common prayer. After Supper
he would consume an hour at the least in some godly conference, and then
again until it. of the clock at one kind of study or other. So that no
hour of the day was spent in vain, but was bestowed as tended to Gods glory,
the service of his Prince, or the commodity of the Church.

As touching his affability and easines to be entreated it was such, The
gentle nature of Doctor Cranmer.
as that in all honest causes wherein his letter, counsel, or speech might
gratify either nobleman Gentleman, mean man or poor man, no man could be
more tractable or sooner won to yield. Only in causes appertainyng to God and
his Prince, no man more stout, more constant, Doct. Cranmer stout and
constant in Gods cause.
or more hard to be won: as in that part his earnest defense in the Parlame^t
house above three days together in disputyng against the vi. Articles of
Gardiners devise, ca^ testify. And though the king would needs have them upon
some politic consideration to go forward, yet he so handled him self as well
in the Parliament house as afterward by writing, so obediently and with such
humble behavior in words toward his Prince, Doct. Cranmer a stout enemy
against the s^^ Articles.
protesting the cause not to be his but almighty Gods, who was the author of
all truth, that the king did not only well like his defense, willing him to
depart out of the Parlame^t house into the Counsel chamber, whilst the Act
should pass and be granted, for safeguard of his conscience, which he with
humble pro^estatio^ refused, hopyng that his Majesty in process of time would
revoke them again: but also after the Parliament was finished, the king
perceiuyng the zealous affection that the Archb. bare toward the defense of
his cause, which many ways by Scriptures and manifold authorities and reasons
he had substauntially confirmed and defended, sent the Lord Cromwell then
Uicegerent, Of this coming of the I. Cromwell, and the two Dukes to the
Archbishop.
with the two Dukes of Northfolke and Suffolk and all the Lords of the
Parliament, to dyne with him at Lambeth: Where it was declared by the
Uicegerent, and the two Dukes, that it was the kings pleasure, that they all
should in his highness behalf, cherish, comfort and animate him, as one that
for his travail in that Parliament, had showed him self both greatly learned,
and also discret and wise, and therefore they willed him not to be discouraged
for any thing that was passed contrary to his allegations. He most humbly
thanked the kings Majesty of his great goodness toward him, and them all
for their pains, saying: I hope in God, that hereafter my allegatio^s and
authorities shall take place to the glory of God and the commodity of the
Realm, in the mean time I will satisfy my self with the honorable consent
of your honors and the whole Parliament.

Here is to be noted, that this man's stout and godly defense of the truth
herein, so bound the Princes conscience, that he would not permit the truth in
that man to be clean overthrown with authority and power, and therefore this
way God workyng in the Princes mind, a plain token was declared hereby that
all things were not so sincerely handled in the confirmation of the said vi.
Articles, as it ought to have been, for else the Prince might have had just
cause to have borne his great indignation toward the Archbishop. Example for
Ecclesiastical Pastors.
Let us pray that both the like stoutnes may be perceived in all
Ecclesiastical and learned men where the truth ought to be defended, and also
the like relentyng and flexibilitie may take place in Princes and Noble men,
when they shall have occasion offered them to maintain the same, so that they
utterly ouerwhelme not the truth by self will, power, and authority. Now in
the end this Archbyshops constancy was such toward Gods cause, that he
confirmed all his doings by bitter death in the fire, with out respect of any
worldly treasure or pleasure. And as touching his stoutnesse in his Princes
cause, the contrary resistaunce of the Duke of Northumberland against him
proved right well his good mind that way: Archb. Cra^mer in displeasure about
the imployng of Chauntrey lands.
which chanced by reason that he would not consent to the dissoluyng of
Chauntreys until the king came of age, to the intent that they might then
better serve to furnish his royal estate, then to have so great treasure
consumed in his noneage. Which his stoutnes joined with such simplicity,
surely was thought to diverse of the Counsel, a thing incredible, specially in
such sort to contend with him who was so accounted in this Realm, as few or
none would or durst gaynstand him.

So dear was to him the cause of God, and of his Prince, that for the one he
would not keep his conscience clogged, nor for the other lurk or hide his
head. Otherwise (as it is said) his very enemies might easily entreat him in
any cause reasonable: and such things as he granted, he did without any
suspicion of rebraidyng or meede therefore: So that he was altogethers void of
the vice of the stubb^rnes, and rather culpable of over much facility and
gentleness. Surely if overmuch patience may be a vice, this man may seem
peradventure to offend rather on this part then on the contrary. Albeit for all
his doings I can not say: for the most part, The singular patience of this
Archbishop.
such was his mortification that way, that few we shall find in who^ the
saying of our Savior Christ so much prevailed as with him, who would not only
have a man to forgive his enemies, but also to pray for them: that lesson never
went out of his memory. For it was known that he had many cruel enemies, not
for his own deserts, but only for his Religion sake: and yet what soever he
was that either sought his hinderaunce, either in goods, estimation, or life,
and upon conference would seem never so slenderly any thing to relent or
excuse him self, he would both forget the offense committed, and also evermore
afterward friendly entertayne him, and show such pleasure to him, as by any
means possible he might perform or declare: In so much that it came into a
common Proverb: Do unto my Lord of Canterbury displeasure or a shrewed turn,
and then you may be sure to have him your friend whiles he lives. Of which his
gentle disposition in absteinyng from reuengement, amongst many examples
thereof I will repeat here one.

A story between the Archb. of Caunterbury and a popish Priest his enemy.
It chanced an ignorant Priest and Parson in the North parts, the Town is not
now in remembrance, but he was a kinsman of one Chersey a Grocer dwelling
within London (being one of those Priests that use more to study at the
Alchouse the^ in his chamber or in his study) to sit on a time with his honest
neighbors at the Alchouse within his own Parish, where was co^municatio^
ministered in commendation of my Lord Cra^mer Archb. of Cant. This said Parson
envying his name only for Religion sake, said to his neighbors: what make you
of him (quoth he) he was but an Hostler, and has no more learning the^ the
goslyngs that goes yonder on the green, with such like sclaunderous and
uncomely words. These honest neighbors of his not well bearyng those his
unseemly words, The railing of a popish Priest against Doct. Cranmer.
Articled against him, and sent their co^playnt unto the Lord Cromwell, the^
Uicegerent in causes Ecclesiastical, who sent for the Priest and committed him
to the Fleet, mindyng to have had him recant those his sclaunderous words at
Paul's Cross. Howbeit the Lord Cromwell having great affairs of the Prince
then in hand, forgot his prisoner in the Fleet: So that this Chersey the
Grosser understanding that his kinsman was in duraunce in the Fleet, only for
speaking words against my Lord of Canterbury consulted with the Priest, and
between them devised to make suit rather unto the Archbishop for his
deliverance, then to the Lord Cromwell, before whom he was accused:
understanding right well that there was great diversity of natures between
those two estates, the one gentle and full of clemency, and the other severe
and somewhat intractable, namely against a Papist: So that Chersey took upon
him first to try my Lord of Ca^terburies benignity, namely for that his
cousins accusation touched only the offense against him and none other.
Whereupon the said Chersey came to one of the Archbyshops Gentlemen whose
father bought yearly all his spices and fruit of the said Chersey, and so
thereby of familiar acquaintance with the Gentleman) who openyng to him the
trouble wherein his kinsman was, requested that he would be a means to my Lord
his Master to hear his suit in the behalf of his kinsman.

The matter was moved. The Archbishop like as he was of nature gentle, and of
much clemency, so would he never show him self strange unto suitors, but
incontinently sent for the said Chersey. When he came before him, Chersey
declared, that there was a kinsman of his in the Fleet, a Priest of the North
country, and as I may tell your grace the truth (quoth Chersey) a man of small
civility and of less learning. Chersey ^^yng for his kynse^^, to the Archb.
And yet he has a personage there, which now (by reason that my Lord Cromwell
has laid him in prison being in his cure) is unserved, and he has continued
in duraunce above two months, and is called to no answer, and knows not
when he shall come to any end, so that this his imprisonment consumes his
substance, will utterly undo him, unless your Grace be his good Lord. I know
not the man (said the Archbishop) nor what he has done why he should be thus
in trouble.

Said Chersey again, he only has offended against your Grace, and against no
man else, as may well be perceived by the Articles objected against him: the
Copy whereof the said Chersey then exhibited unto the said Archbishop of
Caunterbury. Who well perusing the said Articles, said: This is the common
talk of all the ignorant Papisticall Priests in England against me. Surely,
said he, I was never made privy unto this accusation, nor of his induraunce I
never heard before this time. Notwithstanding if there be nothing else to charge
him withal, against the Prince or any of the Counsel, I will at your request
take order with him, and send him home again to his Cure to do his duty: and
so thereupon sent his ryng to the Warden of the Fleet, The Priest sent for, to
the Archbishop.
willing him to send the prisoner unto him with his keeper at after noone.

When the keeper had brought the prisoner at the hour appointed, and Chersey
had well instructed his Cousin in any wise to submit him self unto the
Archbishop, confessing his fault, whereby that way he should most easily have
an end and win his favor: thus the Parson being brought into the garden at
Lambeth, and there sittyng under the vine, the Archbishop demanded of the
Parson what was the cause of his induraunce, and who committed him to the
Fleet: The Parson answered and said: that the Lord Cromwell sent him thither,
for that certain malicious Parishioners of his Parish, had wrongfully accused
him of words which he never spoke nor ment^ Chersey hearing his foolish Cousin
so far out of the way from his former instruction, said: Thou dasterdly ^olt
and varlet, is this thy promise that thou made to me? Is there not a great
number of thy honest neighbors hands against thee to prove thee a liar?
Surely my Lord (quoth Chersey) it is pity to do him good. I am sorry that I
have troubled your Grace thus far with him.

Well, said the Archbishop unto the Parson, if you have not offended me, The
Archbyshops words unto the Parson.
I ca^ do you no good, for I am entreated to help one out of trouble that has
offended against me. If my Lord Cromwell has committed you to prison
wrongfully, that lies in him self to amend and not in me. If your offense
only touch me, I will be bold to do somewhat for your friends sake here. If
you have not offended against me, the^ have I nothing to do with you, but that
you may go and remain from whence you came. Lord what a^^ his kinsman Chersey
made with him, calling him all kind of opprobrious names. In the end my Lord
of Canterbury seemyng to rise and go his ways, the fond Priest fell down on
his knees, and said: I beseech your Grace to forgive me this offense: The
Priest confesses his fault to the Archb.
assuryng your Grace that I spoke those words being drunk and not well
advised. Ah, said my Lord, this is somewhat, and yet it is no good excuse, for
drunkenness evermore utters that which lies hid in the heart of man when
he is sober, alledgyng a te^t or twain out of the Scriptures concerning the
vice of drunkenness, which comes not now to remembrance.

Now therefore (said the Archbishop) that you acknowledge somewhat your fault, I
am content to common with you, hopyng that you are at this present of an
indifferent sobriety. Tell me then, quoth he, did you ever see me, or were you
ever acquainted with me before this day? The Priest answered and said, that
never in his life, he saw his Grace. Why then (said the Archbishop) what
occasion had you to call me an Hostler: The ra^he t^^nge^ of men sclaunderously
speaking ^uill by me^ who^ they never knew, nor saw before.
and that I had not so much learning as the goslinges which then went on the
green before your face? If I have no learning, you may now try it, and be out
of doubt thereof: therefore I pray you appose me, either in Grammar or in other
liberal sciences, for I have at one time or other tasted partly of them. Or
else if you are a Divine, say some what that way.

The Priest being amassed at my Lords familiar talk, made answer and said:
The Priestest answer.
I beseeth your Grace to pardon me. I am altogethers unlearned, and understand
not the Latin tongue but very simply. My only study has been to say my service
and Mass fair and deliberate, which I can do as well as any Priest in the
country where I dwell, I thank God. Well, said the other, if you will not
appose me, I will be so bold to appose you, and yet as easly as I can devise,
and that only in the story of the Bible now in English, in which I suppose
that you are daily exercised. The Mass Priest ignorant in the Scripture.
Tell me therefore who was king David's father, said my Lord? The Priest stood
still pausing a white and said: In good says my Lord, I have forgotten his
name. Then said the other again to him: if you can not tell that, I pray you
tell me then who was Salomons Father? The fond foolish Priest without all
consideration what was demanded of him before, made answer: Good my Lord
bear with me, I am not further seen in the Bible, then is daily read in our
service in the Church.

The Archbishop then aunsweryng said: this my question may be found well
answered in your service. But I now well perceive, howsoever you have judged
heretofore of my learning, The gi^e of popish Priests when they favor not the
Religion of a man: they sclau^der his person.
sure I am that you have none at all. But this is the common practice of all
you, which are ignorant and superstitious Priestes^ to sclaunder, backbite,
and hate all such as are learned and well affected toward Gods word and
sincere Religion. Common reason might have taught you, what an unlikely thing
it was, and contrary to all manner of reason, that a Prince having two
Uniuersities within his realm of well learned men, and desirous to be resolved
of as doubtful a question as in these many years, was not moved the like
within Christendom, should be driven to that necessity for the defense of his
cause, to send out of his Realm an Hostler, being a man of no better knowledge
then is a goslyng, in an Ambassade to answer all learned men, both in the
Court of Rome, and in the Emperors Court, in so difficult a question as
touches the kings Matrimony, and the divorce thereof. I say, if you were men
of any reasonable consideration, you might think it both unseemly and
uncomely for a Prince so to. Evil will never said well.
But look where malice reigns in men, there reason can take no place: and
therefore I see by it, that you all are at a point with me, that no reason or
authority can persuade you to favor my name, who never meant evil to you, but
your both commodity and profit. Howbeit God amend you all, forgive you, and
send you better minds.

With these words the Priest seemed to weep, and desired his Grace to pardon
his fault and frayltie, so that by his means he might return to his Cure
again, and he would sure recant those his foolish words before his
Parishioners so soon as he came home, and would become a new man. Well, said
the Archbishop, so had you need. And geuyng him a godly admonition to refuse
the hauntyng of the Al^house, The Archbishop forg^^eth and dismisseth the
Priest.
and to bestow his time better in the continual readyng of the Scriptures, he
dismissed him from the Fleet.

How little this Prelate we speak of, was infected with filthy desire of lucre,
and how he was no niggard, The liberal doings of this Archbishop.
all kind of people that knew him, as well learned beyond the Seas and on this
side, to whom yearly he gave in exhibition no small sums of money, as other,
both Gentlemen, mean men, and poor men, who had in their necessity that
which he could conveniently spare, lend, or make, can well testify. And
albeit such was his liberality to all sorts of men, that no man did lack
whom he could do for, either in giuyng or lendyng: yet nevertheless such was
again his circumspection, that when he was apprehended and committed by Queen
Mary to the Tower, he ought no man living a penny that could or would demand
any duty of him, but satisfied every man to the uttermost: where else no small
sums of money were ^wyng to him of diverse persons, which by breakyng their
bills and obligations he freely forgave and suppressed before his attainter:
The Archbishop clearyng all his debtes before his attainder.
In so much that when he perceived the fatal end of king Edward should work to
him no good success touching his body and goods, he incontinently called his
Officers, his Steward and other, commaundyng them in any wise to pay, where any
penny was owyng, which was out of hand dispatched.

In which Archbishop this moreover is to be noted, with a memorandum, touching
the relief of the poor, impotent, sick, and such as then came from the
wars at Bullein, and other parts beyond the seas, lame, wounded, and
destitute, for whom he provided, besides his mansion house at Beckisborne in
Kent, the Personage barn well furnished with certain lodgings for the sick
and maimed Souloiours. To whom were also appointed the Almosiner, a Physician,
and Surgion, to attend upon them, and to dress and cure such as were not able
to resort to their countries, having daily from the Bishops kitchen hoate broth
and meat, for otherwise the common Alms of the household was bestowed upon the
poor neighbors of the shyre. And when any of the impotent did recover, and
were able to travail, they had conue^ient money delivered to bear their
charges, according to the number of miles from that place distant. And this
good example of mercy and liberal benignity, I thought here good not in
silence to be suppressed, whereby other may be moved, according to their
vocation, to walk in the steps of no less liberality, then in him in this
behal^e appeared.

Amongst all other his virtues his constancy, in Christ's cause and setting
forth the Gospel purely and sincerely was such that he would neither for dread
or meede, affection or favor to swar^e at any time or in any point from the
truth, as appeared by his sundry trials: wherein neither fauonr of his Prince,
nor fear of the indignation of the same, The Archb. Cranmer ever constant in
defense of Christ's truth and Gospel.
nor any other worldly respect could alienate or change his purpose grounded
upon that infallible doctrine of the Gospel. Notwithstanding, his constant
defense of Gods truth was ever joined with such meekness toward the king,
that he never took occasion of offense against him.

At the setting forth of the vi. Articles, mention was made before in the story
of king Henry's time, how aduenturously this Archbishop Thomas Cranmer did
oppose him self, standing, as it were, post alone against the whole Parliament,
disputyng and replyng three days together against the said Articles: in so much
that the king, when neither he could mislike his reasons, and yet would needs
have these Articles to pass, required him to absent him self for the time out
of the chamber, while the Act should pass, as is already declared before. And
this was done during yet the state and time of the Lord Cromwels authority.
And now that it may appear likewise that after the decay of the Lord Cromwell,
yet his constancy in Christ's cause did not decay, you shall hear what
followed after.

For after the apprehension of the Lord Cromwell, when the adversaries of the
Gospel thought all things sure now on their side, it was so appointed
amongst them, that x. or xij. Bishops and other learned men joined together in
Commission, came to the said Archb. of Canterbury for the establishyng of
certain Articles of our Religion, which the Papists then thought to win to
their purpose against the said Archbishop. For having now the Lord Cromwell
fast and sure, they thought all had been safe and sure for ever: As in deed to
all men's reasonable consideration, that time appeared so dangerous, that there
was no manner hope that Religion reformed should any one week longer stand,
such account was then made of the kings untowardness thereunto: The Archb. alone
stands in defense of the truth.
in so much that of all those Commissioners, there was not one left to stay on
the Archbyshops part, but he alone against them all stood in defense of the
truth: and those that he most trusted to, namely Bishop Heath, and Bishop
Skippe left him in the plain field: Bishop Heath, and Bishop Skippe forsake
the Archb. in the plain field. The Archb. incensed by B. Heath and B. Skippe
to give over the defense of the Gospel.
who then so turned against him, that they took upon them to persuade him to
their purpose: and having him down from the rest of the Commissioners into his
garden at Lambeth, there by all manner of effe^^uall persuasions entreated him
to leave of his overmuch constancy, and to incline unto the kings intent, who
was fully set to have it otherwise then he then had penned or meant to have set
abroad. When those two his familiars, with one or two others his friends, had
used all their eloquence and policy, he little regardyng their inconstancy and
remisnes in Gods cause or quarrel, said unto them right notably:

You make much ado to have me come to your purpose, The answer of the Archb.
to Doct. Heath, and Skippe.
alleging that it is the kings pleasure to have the Articles in that sort you
have devised them to proceed, and now that you do perceive his highness by
sinister information to be bent that way, you think it a convenient thing to
apply unto his highness mind. You be my friends both, especially the one of
you I did put to his Majesty as of trust. Beware I say, what you do. There is
but one truth in our Articles to be concluded upon, which if you do hide from
his highness by consentyng unto a contrary doctrine, and then after in process
of time when the truth ca^ not be hidden from him, his highness shall perceive
how that you have dealt colourably with him, I know his Graces nature so well
(quoth the Archbishop) that he will never after trust and credit you, or put
any good confidence in you. And as you are both my friends, so therefore I will
you to beware thereof in time, and discharge your consciences in mainteinaunce
of the truth. But all this would not serve, for they still swarued: and in the
end by dischargyng of his conscience, and declaryng the truth unto the king,
God so wrought with the king, that his highness joined with him against the
rest, so that the book of Articles passing on his side, he wanne the gole from
them all, contrary to all their expectations, when many wagers would have been
laid in London, that he should have been laid up with Cromwell at that time in
the Tower, for his stiff sta^dyng to his tackle. After that day there could
neither Cou^se^ler, Bishop, or Papist win him out of the kings favor.

The Papists busy to bring the Archb. out of credit with the king.
Notwithstanding not long after that, certain of the Counsel, whose names
need not to be repeated, by the entisement and provocation of his ancient
enemy the Bishop of Winchester and other of the same sect, attempted the king
against him, declaryng plainly, that the Realm was so infected with heresies
and heretics, that it was dangerous for his highness farther to permit it
unreformed, The Archbishop again accused to the king.
lest peradventure by long sufferyng, such contention should arise and ensue in
the Realm among his subjects, that thereby might spryng horrible commotions
and vprores, like as in some parts of Germany it did not long ago: the
enormitie whereof they could not impute to any so much, as to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who by his own preaching and his Chapleines, had filled the whole
Realm full of diverse pernicious heresies. The king would needs know his
accusers. They answered, that for as much as he was a Counselor, no man durst
take upon him to accuse him: but if it please his highness to commit him to the
Tower for a time, there would be accusations and proufes enough against him,
for otherwise just testimony and witness against him would not appear, and
therefore your highness (said they) must needs give us the Counsel liberty
and leave to commit him to duraunce.

The king perceiuyng their importune suit against the Archbishop (but yet
meaning not to have him wronged and utterly given over unto their hands)
granted to them, that they should the next day commit him to the Tower for his
trial. The king sent Sir Antony Deny at midnight for the Archb.
When night came, the king sent Sir Antony Deny about midnight to Lambeth to
the Archbishop, willing him forth with to resort unto him at the Court. The
message done, the Archbishop speedely addressed him self to the Court, and
coming into the Gallery where the king walked and tarried for him, his highness
said: Ah my Lord of Canterbury, I can tell you news. The kings words and
advise for the supportation of the Archbishop.
For diverse weighty considerations it is determined by me and the Counsel,
that you to morrow at ix. of the clock shall be committed to the Tower, for
that you and your Chaplains (as information is given us) have taught and
Preached, and thereby sown within the Realm, such a number of execrable
heresies, that it is feared, the whole Realm being infected with them, no
small contentions and commotions will rise thereby amongst my subjects, as of
late days the like was in diverse parts of Germany: and therefore the Counsel
have requested me for the trial of this matter, to suffer them to commit you
to the Tower, or else no man dare come forth as witness in these matters, you
being a Counselor.

The Archbyshops answer to the king.
When the king had said his mind, the Archbishop kneeled down, and said: I am
content if it please your Grace, with all may heart, to go thither at your
highness commandment, and I most humbly thank your Majesty, that I may come
to my trial, for there be that have many ways sclaundered me, and now this
way I hope to try my self not worthy of such a report.

The king perceiuyng the man's uprightness, joined with such simplicity, said:
Oh Lord, what manner a man be you? what simplicity is in you? I had thought that
you would rather have sued to us to have taken the pains to have heard you and
your accusers together for your trial without any such indurance. Do not you
know what state you be in with the whole world, and how many great enemies you
have? Do you not consider what an easy thing it is to procure three or four
false knaves to witness against you? Think you to have better luck that way,
then your master Christ had? I see it, you will run headlong to your
undoing, if I would suffer you. The kings favorable care and consideration
toward the Archb. of Cant.
Your enemies shall not so prevail against you, for I have otherwise devised
with my self to keep you out of their hands. Yet notwithstanding, to morrow
when the Counsel shall sit and send for you, resort unto them, and if in
chargyng you with this matter, they do commit you to the Tower: require of
them, because you are one of them, a Counselor, that you may have your
accusers brought before them, and that you may answer their accusations
before them, without any further induraunce, and use for you self as good
persuasions that way as you may devise, The king sends his ^^gnet in the
behalf of the Archb. of Canterbury.
and if no entreaty or reasonable request will serve, then deliver unto them
this my ryng (which then the king delivered unto the Archbishop) and say unto
them, if there be no remedy my Lords, but that I must needs go to the
Tower, then I revoke my cause from you and appeal to the kings own person by
this his token unto you all, for (said the king then unto the Archbishop) so
soon as they shall see this my ryng, they know it so well, that they shall
understand, that I have resumed the whole cause into mine own hands and
determination, and that I have discharged them thereof.

The Archbishop perceiuyng the kings benignity so much to him wards, had much
a^o to forbear tears. Well, said the king, go your ways my Lord, and do as
I have bydden you. My Lord humblyng him self with thanks, took his leave of
the kings highness for that night.

On the morrow about ix. of the clock before noone: The Archbishop being one of
the Counsel, made to stand at the Counsel chamber door waityng. Doct. Buttes
the kings Physician, a friend of the Archb.
the Counsel sent a Gentleman busher for the Archbishop, who when he came to
the Counsel chamber door, could not be let in, but of purpose (as it seemed)
was compelled there to wait among the pages, lackeys, and seruyngmen all
alone. Doct. Buttes the kings Physician resortyng that way, and espying how my
Lord of Canterbury was handled, went to the kings highness and said: My Lord of
Canterbury if it please your Grace, is well promoted: for now he is become a
lackey or a seruyngman, for yonder he stands this half hour without the
Counsel chamber door amongst them. It is not so, quoth the king, I trow,
nor the Counsel has not so little discretion as to use the Metropolitan of
the Realm in that sort, specially being one of their own number: but let
them alone (said the king) and we shall here more soon.

Anon the Archbishop was called into the Counsel Chamber: to whom was
alleged, as before is rehearsed. The Archbishop called before the Counsel.
The Archbishop answered in like sort as the king had advised him: and in the
end when he perceived that no manner of persuasion or entreaty could serve, he
delivered to them the kings ryng, reuokyng his cause into the kings hands.
The whole Counsel being thereat somewhat amassed: The Counsel being set
against the Archb. he shows the kings King and appealeth from them.
the Earl of Bedford with a loud voice confirmyng his words with a solemn
oath, said: When you first began this matter my Lords, I told you what would
come of it. Do you think that the king will suffer this man's finger to ache?
much more (I warrant you) will he defend his life against brablyng varlets. You
do but comber your selves to hear tales and fables against him. And so
incontinently upon the recept of the kings token, they all rose and carried to
the king his ryng, surrenderyng that matter as the order and use was, into his
own hands.

When they were all come to the kings presence, his highness with a severe
countenance, The kings words to the Counsel in defense of the Archbishop.
said unto the^: Ah my Lords, I thought I had had wiser men of my Counsel
then now I find you. What discretion was this in you, thus to make the Primate
of the Realm and one of you in office, to wait at the Counsel Chamber door
amongst seruyngmen? You might have considered that he was a Counselor as well
as you, and you had no such Commission of me so to handle him. I was content
that you should try him as a Counselor, and not as a mean subject. But now I
well perceive that things be done against him maliciously, and if some of you
might have had your minds, you would have tried him to the uttermost. But I
do you all to wit, and protest, that if a Prince may be beholding unto his
subject (and so solemly laying his hand upon his breast) said: by the faith I
owe to God, I take this man here my Lord of Caunterbury, to be of all other a
most faithful subject unto us, and one to whom we are much beholding, giuyng
him great commendations otherwise. And with that one or two of the chiefest of
the Counsel, making their excuse, declared, that in requestyng his
induraunce, it was rather meant for his trial and his purgation against the
common fame and sclaunder of the world, then for any malice conceived against
him. Well, well my Lords, The Lords of the Counsel glad to be friends again
with the Archbysh^p.
quoth the king, take him and well use him, as he is worthy to be, and make no
more ado. And with that every man caught him by the hand, and made fair wether
of altogethers, which might easily be done with that man.

And it was much to be marueiled that they would go so far with him, thus
to seek his undoing, this well understanding before, The king a great
supporter of Cranmer.
that the king most entirely loved him, and always would stand in his defense
who soever spoke against him: as many other times the kings patience was by
sinister informations, against him tried: In so much that the Lord Cromwell was
evermore wont to say unto him: My Lord of Canterbury, you are most happy of all
men: The Lord Cro^wels words to the Archbishop.
for you may do and speak what you lift, and say what all men can against
you, the king will never believe one word, to your detriment or hinderaunce.

After the death of king Henry, immediately succeeded his son king Edward,
under whose government and protection the state of this Archbishop, being his
Godfather, was nothing appaired, but rather more advanced.

During all this mean time of king Henry aforesaid, until the entryng of king
Edward, it seems that Cranmer was scarsely yet thoroughly persuaded in the
right knowledge of the Sacrament, or at least, was not yet fully rypened in the
same: wherein shortly after he being more groundly confirmed by conference with
Bishop Ridley, in process of time did so profit in more ryper knowledge, that
at last he took upon him the defense of that whole doctrine, that is, to
refute and throw down first the corporal presence: secondly the fantastical
transubstantiation: thirdly the Idolatrous adoration: fourthly the false error
of the Papists, that wicked men do eat the natural body of Christ: The true
and go^ly doctrine of the Sacrament in five books set forth by the Archb. of
Canterbury.
and lastly the blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass. Whereupon in conclusion he
wrote five books, for the public instruction of the Church of England, which
instruction yet to this day stands and is received in this Church of England.

Against these five books of the Archbishop, Stephen Gardener, the Archenemy
to Christ and his Gospel, being then in the Tower, slubbereth up a certain
answer such as it was, which he in open Court exhibited up at Lambeth, being
there examined by the Archbishop aforesaid, and other the kings Commissioners
in king Edwardes days, which book was entitled: An Explication and assertion
of the true Catholic faith, touching the blessed Sacrament of the altar,
with a confutation of a book written against the same.

An explication of Stephen Gardener against Cranmer Archbishop of Ca^t.
Against this Explication, or rather a ca^illyng Sophistication of Stephens
Gardener Doctor of Law, the said Archbishop of Canterbury learnedly and
copiously replying again, makes answer, as by the discourse thereof renewed
in Print, is evident to be seen to all such as with indifferent eye will Read
and peruse the same.

Besides these books above recited, of this Archbishop diverse other things
there were also of his doing, as the book of Reformation, with the book of
Homelies, whereof part was by him contrived, part by his procurement approved
and published. Whereunto also may be adjoined an other writing or confutation of
his against 88. Articles by the Co^uocation devised and propounded, but yet not
ratified nor received, in the reign and time of king Henry.

And thus much hitherto concerning the deynges and travails of this Archbishop
of Caunterbury during the lines both of king Henry, and of king Edward his
son. Which two kings so long as they continued, this Archbishop lacked no
stay of maintenance against all his maligners.

After the death of king Edward, Queen Mary coming now to the Crown, and
being established in the possession of the Realm, not long after came to
London, and after she had caused first the two Dukes of Northumberland and
Suffolk, and their two children, the Lady Jane, and the Lord Guilford, both in
age tender and innocent of that crime to be executed: She put the rest of the
Nobility to their lines, and forgave them the Archbishop of Canterbury only
except. Who though he desired pardon by mean of friends, could obtain none:
in so much that the Queen would not once ^ouchsafe to see him: Man^taltame^te
repostum Iudicium paridis, spraetaeque inniria matris. Virg. AEneid. 1.
For as yet the old grudges against the Archbishop for the diuorcement of her
mother, remained hid in the bottom of her heart. Besides this divorce, she
remembered the state of Religion changed: all which was reputed to the
Archbishop, as the chief cause thereof.

While these things were in doing, a rumor was in all men's mouths, that the
Archbishop, to curry favor with the Queen, had promised to say a Dirige Mass
after the old custom, This Doctor Thornton was after the Bishop of Dover, a
cruel and wicked persecuter.
for the funeral of king Edward her brother. Neither wanted there some, which
reported that he had already said Mass at Caunterbury: which Mass in deed
was said by Doct. Thornton. This rumor Cranmer thinkyng speedely to stay, gave
forth a writing in his purgation: the tenor whereof being set out at large in
the book of Acts and Monumentes. I need not here again to recite.

This Bill being thus written, and lying openly a window in his chamber,
comes in by chance Master Scory, Bishop then of Rochester, who after he had
read and perused the same, required of the Archbishop to have a Copy of the
Bill. The Archbishop when he had granted and permitted the same to Master
Scory, by the occasion thereof M. Scory lending it to some friend of his, there
were diverse Copies taken out thereof, and the thing published abroad among the
common people: in so much that every Scriueners shop almost, was occupied in
writing and copying out the same, and so at length some of those Copies coming
to the Bishops hands, and so brought to the Counsel, and they sending it to
the Commissioners, the matter was known, and so he commanded to appear.

Whereupon Doct. Cranmer at his day prefixed, This Bishop was Doctor Heath,
Bishop after of York^.
appeared before the said Commissioners, bringing a true Inventory, as he was
commanded, of all his goods. That done, a Bishop of the Queens privy
Counsel, being one of the said Commissioners, after the Inventory was
received, bringing in mention of the Bill: My Lord (said he) there is a Bill
put forth in your name, wherein you seem to be agreeued with setting up the
Mass again: we doubt not but you are sorry that it is gone abroad.

To whom the Archbishop aunswering again, saying: as I do not deny my self
to be the very Author of that Bill or Letter, so must I confess here unto
you, concerning the same Bill, that I am sorry that the said Bill went from me
in such sort as it did. For when I had written it, M. Scory got the Copy of
me, and is now come abroad, and as I understand, the City is full of it. For
which I am sorry, that it so passed my hands: for I had intended otherwise to
have made it in a more large and ample manner, and minded to have set it on
Paul's Church door, and on the doors of all the Churches in London, with mine
own feel joined thereto.

At which words when they saw the constantnesse of the man, they dismissed
him, affirming they had no more at that present to say unto him, but that
shortly he should hear further. The said Bishop declared afterward to one of
Doct. Cranmers friends, that notwithstanding his attainder of treason, the
Queens determination at that time was, that Cranmer should only have been
deprived of his Archbishopricke, and have had a sufficient living assigned him,
upon his exhibiting of a true Inventory, with commandment to keep his house
without medlyng in matters of Religion. But how that was true, I have not to
say. This is certain, that not long after this, he was sent unto the Tower,
and soon after condemned of treason. Cranmer condemned of treason.
Notwithstanding, the Queen when she could not honestly deny him his pardon,
seeing all the rest were discharged, and specially seeing he last of all other
subscribed to king Edwardes request, and that against his own will, released
to him his action of treason, and accused him only of heresy: Cranmer
released of treason, and accused of heresy.
which liked the Archbishop right well, and came to pass as he wished, because
the cause was not now his own, but Christ's, not the Queens, but the
Churches. Thus stood the cause of Cranmer, till at length it was determined by
the Queen and the Counsel, that he should be remoned from the Tower where he
was prisoner, to Oxford, there to dispute with the Doctors and Divines. And
privily word was sent before to them of Oxford to prepare them selves, and make
them ready to dispute. And although the Queen and the Bishops had concluded
before what should become of him, yet it pleased them that the matter should be
debated with Arguments, that under some honest show of disputation, the
murder of the man might be covered. Cranmer had to Oxford.
Neither could their hasty speed of reuengement abide any long delay: and
therefore in all have he was carried to Oxford.

What this disputation was, and how it was handled, what were the questions,
and reasons on both sides, and also touching his condemnation by the
University and the Prolocutor, because sufficiently it has been declared in
the story at large, we mind now therefore to proceed to his final judgment
and order of condemnation, which was the xii. day of September. an. 1556. and
seven days before the condemnation of Bishop Ridley and Master Latimer.

After the disputations done and finished in Oxford between the Doctors of
both Uniuersities and the three worthy Bishops, Of this comdemnation, read in
the last (...), page 1554.
Doct. Cranmer, Ridley, and Larymer, sentence condemnatory immediately upon the
same was ministered against them by Doct. Weston and other of the University:
whereby they were judged to be heretics, and so committed to the Mayor and
Sheriffs of Oxford, by whom he was carried to Bocardo their common Gaile in
Oxford.

In this mean time, while the Archbishop was thus remainyng in duraunce (who^
they had kept now in prison almost the space of three years) the Doctors and
Divines of Oxford, busied them selves all that ever they could about Master
Cranmer, to have him recant, assaying by all crafty practices and allurementes
they might devise, how to bring their purpose to pass. And to the intent they
might win him easily, they had him to the Deanes house of Christ's Church in
the said University, where he lacked no delicate fare, played at the bowls,
had his pleasure for walking, and all other things that might bring him from
Christ. Over and besides all this, secretly and slightly, they suborned
certain men, which when they could not expugne him by arguments and
disputation, should by entreatie and fair promises, or any other means allure
him to recantation: perceiuyng otherwise what a great wound they should
receive, if the Archbishop had stood steadfast in his sentence: and again on
the other side, how great profit they should get, if he as the principal
standerd bearer, should be overthrown. By reason whereof the wily Papists
flocked about him, with threatening, flattering, entreating and promising, and
all other means: especially Henry Sydall, and Friar John a Spaniard, De villa
Garcina, to the end to drive him to the uttermost of their possibility, from
his former sentence, The Archbishop contented to recant.
to recantation: whose force his manly constancy did a great while resist: but
at last when they made no end of calling and crying upon him, the Archbishop
being overcome, whether through their importunity, or by his own
imbecillitie, or of what mind I can not tell, at length gave his hand.

Causes mouyng the Archbishop to give with the time.
It might be supposed that it was done for the hope of life, and better days to
come. But as we may since perceive by a Letter of his sent to a Lawyer, the
most cause why he desired his time to be delayed, was that he would make an end
of Marcus Antonius, which he had already begone; but howsoever it was he
recanted, though plain against his conscience.

The Queen^s heart set against Cranmer.
Mary the Queen having now gotten a time to revenge her old grief, received
his recantation very gladly: but of her purpose to put him to death, she would
nothing relent. But taking secret Counsel, how to dispatch Cranmer out of the
way (who as yet knew nothing of her secret hate, and looked for nothing less
then death) appointed Doct. Cole, and secretly gave him in commandment, that
against the 21. of March, he should prepare a funeral Sermon for Cranmers
burning, The Queen conferreth with Doct. Cole about Cranmers burning.
and so instructing him orderly and diligently of her will and pleasure in that
behalf, sends him away.

L. William of Them, L. Sha^doys, Sir Thomas Bridges, Sir John Brown,
appourted to be at Cranmers execution.
Some after, the Lord Williams of Tame, and the Lord Sha^doys Sir Thomas
Bridges, and Sir John Brown were sent for, with other worshipful men and
Justices, commanded in the Queens name, to be at Oxford at the same day, with
their servants and retinue, lest Cranmers death should raise there any tumult.

Cole the Doctor having his lesson given him before, and charged by her
commandment, returned to Oxford ready to play his part, who as the day of
execution drew near, eue^ the day before came into the prison to Cra^mer, to
try whether he abode in the Catholic faith, wherein before he had left him. To
whom when Cranmer had answered, that by Gods grace, he would daily be more
confirmed in the Catholic faith: Cole departing for that time, the next day
following repaired to the Archbishop again, giving no signification as yet of
his death that was prepared: And therefore in the morning, which was the 21.
day of March appointed for Cranmers execution, the said Cole coming to him
asked, if he had any money. To whom when he answered that he had none, he
delivered him 1^. Crowns to give the poor to who^ he would: and so exhorting
him so much as he could to constancy in faith, departed thence about his
business, as to his Sermon appertained.

By this partly, and other like arguments, the Archbishop began more and more
to surmise what they went about. The^, because the day was not far past, and
the Lords and Knights that were looked for, were not yet come, there came to
him the Spanish Friar, witness of his recantation, bringyng a paper with
Articles, which Cranmer should openly profess in his recantation before the
people, earnestly desiring that he would write the said instrument with the
Articles with his own hand, Cranmer writteth and subscribeth the Articles with
his own hands.
and sign it with his name: which when he had done, the said Friar desired
that he would write an other Copy thereof, which should remain with him, and
that he did also. But yet the Archbishop being not ignorant whereunto their
secret devises tended, and thinking that the time was at hand, in which he
could no longer dissemble the profession of his faith with Christ's people, he
put secretly in his bosom his Prayer with his exhortation, written in an other
paper, which he minded to recite to the people, before he should make the last
profession of his says, fearyng lest if they had heard the Confession of his
faith first, they would not afterward have suffered him to exhort the people.

Some after, about ix. of the clock, the Lord Williams, Sir Thomas Bridges,
Sir John Brown, and the other Justices with certain other Noble men, that
were sent of the Queens Counsel, came to Oxford with a great train of
waiting men. Also of the other multitude on every side (as is wont in such a
matter) was made a great concourse and greater expectation.

In this so great frequence and expectation, Cranmer at length comes from the
prison Bocardo, Doct. Cranmer brought to D. Coals Serino^.
unto S. Mary's Church (because it was a foul and a raynie day) the chief
Church in the University, in this order. The Mayor went before, next him the
Aldermen in their place and degree: after them was Cranmer brought, between two
Friars, which mombling to and fro certain Psalms in the streets, answered
one an other until they came to the Church door, and there they began the song
of Simeon, Nunc dimittis: and entering into the Church, the Psalm saying
Friars brought him to his standing, and there left him. There was a stage set
up over against the Pulpit, Doct. Cranmer set upon a stage,
of a mean height from the ground, Cranmer had his standing, waytyng until
Cole made him ready to his Sermon.

The lamentable case and sight of that man gave a sorrowful spectacle to all
Christian eyes that beheld him. He that late was Archbishop, Metropolitan, and
Primate of England, and the kings privy Counselor, being now in a bare and
ragged gown, and ill fauoredly clothed, with an old square cap, exposed to the
contempt of all men, did admonish me^ not only of his own calamity, but also
of their state and fortune. For who would not pity his case, and bewail his
fortune, and might not fear his own chance, to see such a Prelate, so grave a
Counselor, and of so long continued honor, after so many dignities, in his
old years to be deprived of his estate, adjudged to dye, and in so paynfull a
death to end his life, and now presently from such fresh ornaments, to desce^d
to such vile and ragged apparel?

In this habit when he had stood a good space upon the stage, turnyng to a
pillar near adjoining thereunto, he lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed
to God once or twice: till at the length Doct. Cole coming into the Pulpit,
and beginning his Sermon, entered first into mention of Tobias and Zachary. Whom
after that he had praised in the beginning of his Sermon, for their
perseueraunce in the true worshyppyng of God, he then divided his whole Sermon
into three parts (according to the solemn custom of the Schools) entendyng
to speak first of the mercy of God, Doct. Coals Sermon divided into three
parts.
secondly of his Justice to be showed: and last of all, how the Princes
secrets are not to be opened. And proceedyng a little from the beginning, he
took occasion by and by to turn his tale to Cranmer, The sum and effect of
Doct. Coals Sermon at Oxford.
and with many ho^e words reproved him, that once he being endued with the
favor and feelyng of wholesome and Catholic doctrine, fell into the contrary
opinion of pernicious error, which he had only defended by writings, and all
his power: but also allured other men to the like, with great liberality of
gifts, as it were, appointyng rewards for error: and after he had allured
them, by all means did cherish them.

It were to long to repeat all things, that in long order were then
pronounced. The sum of this tripartite declamation was, If Cole gave this
judgment upon Cranmer when he had repented, what judgment is then to be
given of Cole which always has p^^dured in error, and never yet repented.
that he said Gods mercy was so tempered with his Justice, that he did not
altogether require punishment according to the merits of offenders, nor yet
sometimes suffered the same altogether to go unpunished, yea though they had
repented. As in David, who when he was bidden choose of three kinds of
punishments which he would, and he had chosen Pestilence for three days: the
Lord forgave gave him half the time, but didnt release all: And that the same
thing came to pass in him also, to whom although pardon and reconciliation was
due according to the Canons, seeing he repented from his errors: yet there
were causes, why the Queen and the Counsel at this time judged him to death:
of which, lest he should marvel to much, he should hear some.

First, that being a traitor, he had dissolved the lawful Matrimony between
the king her father and mother: besides the driuyng out of the Popes
authority, while he was Metropolitan.

If all heretics in England should be burned, where should Doct. Cole have
been ere now.
Secondly, that he had been an heretic, from whom as from an Author and only
fountain, all heretical doctrine and schismatic opinions, that so many
years have prevailed in England, did first rise and spryng: of which he had
not been a secret favorer only, but also a most earnest defender even to the
end of his life, sowyng them abroad by writings and Arguments, privately and
openly, not without great ruin and decay of the Catholic Church.

Lex non aequalitatis, sed i^iquitatis.
And further, it seemed meet, according to the law of equality, that as the
death of the Duke of Northumberland of late, made even with Thomas More
Chancellor that dyed for the Church, so there should be one that should make
even with Fisher of Rochester: and because that Ridley, Hoper, Farrar, were not
able to make even with that man, it seemed meet, that Cranmer should be joined
to them to fill up this part of equality.

Beside these, there were other just and weighty causes, which seemed to the
Queen and the Counsel, which was not meet at that time to be opened to the
common people.

After this, turnyng his tale to the hearers, he bad all men beware by this
man's example, that among men nothing is so high, that can promise it self
safety on the earth, and that Gods vengeance is equally stretched against all
men, and spares none: therefore they should beware and learn to fear their
Prince. No state in this earth so hye nor so sure, but it may fall.
And seeing the Queens Majesty would not spare so notable a man as this, much
less in the like cause she would spare other men, that no man should think to
make thereby any defense of his error, either in riches or any kind of
authority. They had now an example to teach them all, by whose calamity every
man might consider his own fortune: who from the top of dignity, none being
more honorable then he in the whole Realm, and next the king, was fallen into
so great misery, as they might now see, being a man of so high degree,
sometime one of the chiefest Prelates in the Church and an Archbishop, the
chief of the Counsel, the second person in the Realm of long time, a man
thought in greatest assurau^ce, having a king on his side: notwithstanding all
his authority and defense to be debased from high estate, to a low degree, of
a Counselor to become a caitiffe, and to be set in so wretched a state, that
the poorest wretch would not change condition with him: briefly so heaped with
misery on all sides, that neither was left in him any hope of better fortune,
nor place for worse.

Doct. Cole encourages the Archb. to take his death patiently.
The latter part of his Sermon he converted to the Archbishop: whom he comforted
and encouraged to take his death well, by many places of Scripture, as with
these and such like: hiddyng him not mistrust, but he should incontinently
receive that the thief did, to whom Christ said: Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso,
that is, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And out of S. Paul he
armed him against the terror of the fire, by this: 1. Cor. 10.
Dominus fidelis est, non sinet vos tentari vltra quam far potestis, that is,
The Lord is faithful which will not suffer you to be tempted above your
strength, by the example of the three children, to whom God made the flame to
seem like a pleasant dew, addyng also the rejoicing of S. Andrew in his
Cross, the patience of S. Laurence on the fire, assuryng him, that God, if he
called on him, and to such as dye in his faith, either would abate the fury of
the flame, or give him strength to abide it.

Doct. Cole reioyseth in the Archbyshops conversion, b^t that rejoicing lasted
not long.
He glorified God much in his conversion, because it appeared to be only his
work, declaryng what travel and conference had been with him to convert him,
and all prevailed not till that it pleased God of his mercy to reclayme him,
and call him home. In discoursing of which place, he much commended Cranmer,
and qualified his former doings, thus temperyng his judgment and talk of
him, that while the time (said he) he flowed in riches and honor, he was
unworthy of his life: and now that he might not live, Dir^ges and Masses
promised for Cranmers soul.
he was unworthy of death. But lest he should carry with him no comfort, he
would diligently labor (he said) and also he did promise in the name of all
the Priests that were present, immediately after his death, there should be
Diriges, Masses, and funerals executed for him in all the Churches of Oxford
for the succor of his soul.

Cranmer in all this mean time with what great grief of mind he stood
hearing this Sermon, the outward shows of his body and countenance did better
express, the^ any man can declare: one while liftyng up his hands and eyes
unto heaven, and then again for shame lettyng the^ down to the earth. A man
might have seen the very image and shape of perfect sorrow lively in him
expressed. More then twenty several times the tears gushed out abundantly,
The tears of the Archb.
dropped down marueilously from his fatherly face. They which were present do
testify, that they never saw in any child more tears, the^ brast out from him
at that time, all the Sermon while: but specially when he recited his Prayer
before the people. It it is marvelous what commiseration and pity moved all
men's hearts, that beheld so heavy a countenance and such abundance of
tears in an old man of so reverend dignity.

Cole after he had ended his Sermon, called back the people that were ready to
depart, to Prayers. Brethren (said he) lest any man should doubt of this man's
earnest conversion and repentance, you shall hear him speak before you, and
therefore I pray you Master Cranmer, Cranmer required to declare his faith.
that you will now perform that you promised not long ago, namely that you
would openly express the true and undoubted profession of your faith, that you
may take away all suspicion from men, and that all men may understand that you
are a Catholic in deed. Cra^mer willing to declare his faith.
I will do it (said the Archbishop) and with a good will: who by and by rising
up, and putting of his cap, began to speak thus unto the people.

I desire you well beloved brethren in the Lord, that you will pray to God for
me, to forgive me my sins, The words of the Archb. to the people.
which above all men both in number and greatness, I have committed: but among
all the rest, there is one offense which of all at this time does vex and
trouble me, whereof in process of my talk you shall hear more in his proper
place, and then puttyng his hand into his bosom, he drew forth his Prayer,
which he recited to the people in this sense.

The Prayer of Doct. Cranmer Archb. of Cant. at his death.
GOod Christen people, The Prayer of the Archb.
my dearly beloved brethren and sisters in Christ, I beseech you most heartily
to pray for me to almighty God, that he will forgive me all my sins and
offenses, which be many, without number, and great above measure. But yet one
thing greeueth my conscience more then all the rest, whereof God willing, I
entend to speak more hereafter. But how great and how many soever my sins
be, I beseech you to pray God of his mercy to pardon and forgive them all. And
here kneelyng down, he said: O Father of heaven: O Son of God redeemer of
the world: O holy Ghost three persons and one God, have mercy upon me most
wretched caitiffe and miserable sinner. I have offended both against heaven and
earth more then my tongue can express. Whether then may I go, or whether
should I fly? To heaven I may be ashamed to lift up mine eyes, and in earth I
find no place of refuge or succor. To thee therefore (O Lord) do Irunne: to
thee do I humble my self, saying: O Lord my God, my sins be great, but yet
have mercy upon me for thy great mercy. The great mystery that God became man,
was not wrought for little or few offenses. Thou did nor give thy son (O
heavenly Father) unto death for small sins only, but for all the greatest
sins of the world, so that the sinner return to thee with his whole heart, as
I do here at this present. Wherefore have mercy on me O God, whose property is
always to have mercy: have mercy upon me O Lord, for thy great mercy. I crave
nothing O Lord, for mine own merits, but for thy names sake, that it may be
hallowed thereby, and for thy dear son Jesus Christ sake: And now therefore,
our Father of heaven, hallowed by thy name. etc.

And then he rising, said:

Every man (good people) desires at that time of their death to give some good
exhortation, that other may remember the same before their death, The last
words of exhortation of the Archb. to the people.
and be the better thereby: so I beseech God grant me grace, that I may speak
some thing at this my departing, whereby God may be glorified, and you edified.

First, it is an heavy case to see that so many folk be so much doted upon
the love of this false world, and so careful for it, that of the love of God,
or the world to come, they seem to care very little or nothing. Therefore this
shall be my first exhortation, Exhortation to contempt of the world.
that you set not your minds over much upon this glosing world, but upon God
and upon the world to come: and to learn to know what this lesson means,
which S. John teaches, That the love of this world is hatred against God.

Exhortation to obedience.
The second exhortation is, that next under God you obey your King and Queen
willingly and gladly, without murmuryng or grudgyng: not for fear of them
only, but much more for the fear of God: knowing that they be Gods Ministers,
appointed by God to rule and govern you: and therefore who soever resists
them, resists the ordinance of GOD.

Exhortation to brotherly love.
The third exhortation is, that you love altogether like brethren and sisters.
For alas, pity it is to see what contention and hatred one Christen man
bears to an other, not taking each other as brother and sister, but rather as
strangers and mortal enemies. But I pray you learn and bear well away this
one lesson, to do good unto all men, as much as in you lies, and to hurt no
man, no more then you would hurt your own natural loving brother or sister.
For this you may be sure of, that who soever hates any person and goes about
maliciously to hinder or hurt him, surely and without all doubt, God is not
with that man, although he think him self never so much in Gods favor.

Exhortation to rich me^ of this world, mouyng them to charitable alms.
The fourth exhortation shall be to them that have great substance and riches of
this world, that they will well consider and wey three sayings of the
Scripture.

Luke. 18.
One is of our Savior Christ him self, who says: It is hard for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven. A sore saying, and yet spoken of him that
knows the truth.

1. John. 3.
The second is of S. John, whose saying is this: He that has the substance of
this world, and sees his brother in necessity, and shuts up his mercy from
him, how can he say that he loves God?

The third is of S. James, who speaks to the covetous rich man after this
manner: Weep you and howl for the misery that shall come upon you: your
riches do rotte, your clothes be moth eaten, your gold and silver does canker
and rust, and their rust shall bear witness against you, and consume you like
fire: you gather a horde or treasure of Gods indignation against the last day.
Let them that be rich, ponder well these three sentences: for if ever they had
occasion to show their charity, they have it now at this present, the poor
people being so many, and victuals so dear.

And now, for as much as I am come to the last end of my life, whereupon
hangs all my life past, and all my life to come, either to live with my
Master Christ for ever in joy, or else to be in pain for ever with wicked
devils in hell, and see before mine eyes presently either heaven ready to
receive me, or else hell ready to swallow me up: I shall therefore declare unto
you my very faith how I believe, without any color or The description of Doct.
Cranmer, how he was plucked down from the stage by Friars and Papists, for
the true Confession of his Faith.
dissimulation: for now is no time to dissemble, what soever I have said or
written in time past.

First, I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. etc.
The Archb. declares the true confession of his faith without all color or
dissemblyng.
And I believe every Article of the Catholic faith, every word and sentence
taught by our Savior Jesus Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, in the new and
old Testament.

And now I come to the great thing that so much troubles my conscience more
the^ any thing that ever I did or said in my whole life, and that is the
setting abroad of a writing contrary to the truth: The Archb. reuoketh his
former recantation and repents the same.
which now here I renounce and refuse as things written with my hand, contrary
to the truth which I thought in my heart, and written for fear of death, and to
save my life if it might be, and that is, all such Bills and papers, which I
have written or signed with my hand since my degradation: wherein I have
written many things untrue. And for as much as my hand offended, written
contrary to my heart, my hand shall first be punished therefore: for may I come
to the fire, it shall be first burned.

And as for the Pope, The Archb. refuses the Pope as Christ's enemy, and
Antichrist.
I refuse him as Christ's enemy and Antichrist, with all his false doctrine.

And as for the Sacrament, I believe as I have taught in my book against the
Bishop of Winchester, the which my book teaches so true a doctrine of the
Sacrament, that it shall stand at the last day before the Judgment of God, The
Archb. stands to his book written against Wincester.
where the Papisticall doctrine contrary thereto, shall be ashamed to show her
face.

Here the standers by were all astonyed, maruailed, were amassed, did look one
upon an other, whose expectation he had so notably deceived. Some began to
admonish him of his recantation, and to accuse him of falshode. The expectation
of the Papists deceived.


Briefly, it was a world to see the Doctors beguiled of so great an hope. I
think there was never cruelty more notably or better in time deluded and
deceived. For it is not to be doubted but they looked for a glorious victory
and a perpetual triumph by this man's retractation. Who as soon as they heard
these things, began to let down their ears, The Popistes in a great chafe
against the Archbishop.
to rage, fret, and fume: and so much the more, because they could not revenge
their grief: for they could now no longer threaten or hurt him. For the most
miserable man in the world can dye but once: and where as of necessity he must
needs dye that day, though the Papists had been never so well pleased: now
being never so much offended with him, yet could he not be twice killed of
them. And so when they could do nothing else unto him, yet lest they should say
nothing, they ceased not to object unto him his falsehode and dissimulation.

Unto which accusation he answered: Cranmers answer to the Papists.
Ah my Masters (quoth he) do not you take it so. Always since I lived
hitherto, I have been a hater of falsehode, and a lover of simplicity, and
never before this time have I dissembled: and in saying this, all the tears
that remained in his body, appeared in his eyes. And when he began to speak
more of the Sacrament and of the Papacy, some of them began to cry out, yalpe,
and baule, and and specially Cole cried out upon him: stop the heretics
mouth, and take him away.

And then Cranmer being pulled down from the stage, Cranmer pulled down from
the stage.
was led to the fire, accompanied with those Friars, vexyng, troublyng, and
threatnyng him most cruelly. What madness (say they) has brought thee again
into this error, by which thou will draw innumerable souls with thee into
hell? Cranmer led to the fire.
To whom he answered nothing, but directed all his talk to the people, saving
that to one troublyng him in the way, he spoke and exhorted him to get him home
to his study, and apply his book diligently, saying if he did diligently call
upon God, by reading more he should get knowledge. But the other Spanish
barker, ragyng and fomyng was almost out of his wits, always having this in
his mouth: Non fecisti? did thou it not?

But when he came to the place where the holy Bishops and Martyrs of God, The
Archb. brought to the place of execution.
Hugh Latymer and Ridley, were burnt before him for the confession of the
truth: kneeling down, he prayed to God, and not long tarying in Prayers,
puttyng of his garments to his shirt, he prepared him self to death. His
shirt was made long down to his feet. His feet were bare. Likewise his head,
when both his cappes were of, was so bare, that not one hear could be seen
upon it. His beard was long and thick, coueryng his face with marvelous
gravity. Such a countenance of gravity moved the hearts, both of his friends
and of his enemies.

Then the Spanish Friars, John and Richard, of whom mention was made before,
began to exhort him and play their parts with him a fresh, but with vain and
lost labor, Cranmer with steadfast purpose abidyng in the profession of his
doctrine, gave his hand to certain old men, and other that stood by, biddyng
them farewell. And when he had thought to have done so likewise to Ely, the
said Ely drew back his hand and refused, M. Ely refuses to give his hand to
the Archb.
saying: it was not lawful to salute heretics, and specially such a one as
falsely returned unto the opinions that he had foresworne. And if he had
known before that he would have done so, he would never have used his company
so familiarly, and chid those Sergeauntes and Citizens, which had not refused
to give him their hands. This Ely was a Priest lately made, and Student in
Divinity, being then one of the Fellows of Brasennose.

The Archb. tied to tht ^^^ke.
Then was an iron chain tied about Cranmer, whom when they perceived to be more
steadfast then that he could be moved from his sentence, they commanded the
fire to be set unto him. And when the wood was kindled, and the fire began to
burn near him, Cranmer puts his right hand which subscribed first into the
^r^.
stretchyng out his arm, he put his right hand into the flame: which he held
so steadfast and immouable (saving that once with the same hand he wiped his
face) that all men might see his hand burned before his body was touched. His
body did so abide the burning of the flame, with such constancy and
steadfastness, that standing always in one place without mouyng of his body,
he seemed to move no more then the stake to which he was bound: his eyes were
lifted up into heaven, and often times he repeated, his unworthy right hand,
The last word^ of Cranmer at his death.
so long as his voice would suffer him: and using often the words of Stephen,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, in the greatness of the flame, he gave up the
Ghost.

This fortitude of mind, which perchance is rare and not used among the
Spaniardes, when Friar John saw, thinkyng it came not of fortitude but of
desperation (although such manner examples which are of the like constancy
have been common here in England) ran to the Lord Williams of Lame, The Friars
lying report of Cranmer.
crying that the Archbishop was vexed in mind, and dyed in great desperation.
But he which was not ignorant of the Archbyshops constancy, being unknown
to the Spaniardes, smiled only, and (as it were) by silence rebuked the Friars
tollie. And this was the end of this learned Archbishop, whom, lest by evil
subscribyng he should have perished, by well recantyng God preserved: and lest
he should have lived longer with shame and reproof, it pleased God rather to
take him away, to the glory of his name and profit of his Church. So good was
the Lord both to his Church in fortifying the same, with the testimony and
blood of such a Martyr: and so good also to the man, with this Cross of
tribulation to purge his offenses in his world, not only of his recantatio^,
but also of his standing against John Lambert, and M. Allen, or if there were
any other with whose burning and blood his hands had been before any thing
polluted. But especially he had to rejoice, that dying in such a cause, he was
to be numbered amongst Christ's Martyrs, much more worthy the name of S. Thomas
of Caunterbury then he whom the Pope falsely before did Canonise.

The end of Cranmers life Archb. of Cant.
The burning of the Archbishop of Canterbury Doct. Cranmer, in the Townedich at
Oxford, thrustyng his hand first into the fire flame, wherewith he had
subscribed.


A crafty and Sophistical cauillation devised by M. Steven Gardener Doctor of
Law, late Bishop of Winchester, against the true and godly doctrine of the most
holy sacrament of the body and blood of our savior Christ (called by him An
explication and assertion thereof) with an answer unto the same, made by the
most reverend father in God, Thomas Archbishop of Caunterbury, Primate of all
England and Metropolitan. The title of the book of Steven Gardener late
Bishop of Winchester. An Explication and assertion of the true catholic faith,
touching the most blessed Sacrament of the altar, with confutation of a book
written against the same. The answer of Thomas Archbishop of Caunterbury, etc.
HERE before the beginning of your book, you have prefixed a goodly title, but
it agrees with the argument and matter thereof, as water agrees with the fire.
For your book is so far from an explication and assertion of the true
catholic faith in the matter of the sacrament, that it is but a crafty
cauillation and subtle sophisticatio^, to obscure the truth thereof, and to
hyde the same, that it should not appear. And in your whole book, the reader
(if he mark it well) shall easily perceive, how little learning is showed therein
and how few authors you have alleged, other then such as I brought forth in
my book, and made answer unto: but there is showed what may be done by fine
wit, and new devises, to deceive the reader, and by false interpretations to
avoid the plain words of scripture and of the old authors.

Wherefore in as much as I purpose God willing, in this defense of my former
book, not only to answer you, but by ye way also to touch D. Smith two things
I would wish in you both: The one is truth with simplicity: the other is, yt
either of you both had so much learning as you think you have, or else yt you
thought of your self no more then you have in deed: but to au^swer both your
books in few words: yt one shows nothing else, but what railing without reason
or learning: the other what frowardnes armed with wit and eloquence, be able to
do against the truth. And Smith because he would be vehement, and show his heat
in the manner of speech, where the matter is cold, has framed in a manner all
his sentences through out his whole book, by interrogations. But if the reader
of both your books do no more, but diligently read over my book once again,
he shall find the same not so slenderly made, but that I have foreseen all
that could be said to the contrary: and that I have fully answered before hand
all that you both have said, or is able to say.

Winchester.
FOrasmuch as among other mine allegations for defense of I would as much as
may be do my due to the matter and him also.
because it may possible he that his name is abused, wherewith to set forth the
matter being himself of such dignity and authority in the common wealth, as
for that respect should be inviolable. For which consideration, I shall in my
speech of such reproof as the untruth of the matter necessarily requires,
omitting the special title of the author of the book, speak only of the
author in general, being a thing to me greatly to be meruayled at, yt such
matter should now be published out of my lord of Canterburies pen, but because
he is a man, I will not wonder, and because he is such a man, I will reverently
use him, and forbearing further to name him, talk only of the author by that
general name.

Caunterbury.
THe first entry of your book shows to them that be wise, what they The
craft of winchester in the beginning.
Now the beginning is framed with such slight and subtletie, that it may
deceive the reader notably in two things. The one, that he should think you
were called into judgment before the kings majesty's commissioners at Lamhith
for your catholic faith in the Sacrament: The other, that you made your book
for your defense therein, which be both utterly untrue For your book was made
or ever ye were called before the said commissioners, and after you were
called, then you altered only two lines in the beginning of your book, and
made that beginning which it has now. This am I able to prove, as well
otherwise, as by a book which I have of your own hand writing, wherein
appears plainly the alteration of the beginning.

And as concerning the cause wherefore ye were called before the Commissioners,
whereas by your own importune suit and procurement, and as it were enforcing
the matter, you were called to justice for your manifest contempt and
continual disobedience from time to time, or rather rebellion against the
kings majesty, and were justly deprived of your estate for the same, you
would turn it now to a matter of the sacrament, that the world should think
your trouble rose for your faith in the sacrament, which was no matter nor
occasion thereof, nor no such matter was objected against you, wherefore you need
to make any such defense. And where you would make that matter the occasion of
your worthy deprivation and punishment, (which was no cause thereof) and cloak
your wilful obstinacy and disobedience (which was the only cause thereof) all
me^ of judgment may well perceive, that you could mean no goodness thereby,
neither to the kings majesty, nor to his realm.

But as touching the matter now in controversy, I impugn not ye true I do) but
I impugn the false Papisticall faith, invented, devised, and imagined by
Antichrist and his ministers.



Winchester.
THis author denies the real presence of Christ's most precious body and
blood in the Sacrament.

The sum of the book.
This author denies Transubstantiation.

This author denies evil men to eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
in the Sacrament.

These three denials only impugn and tend to destroy that faith which this
author fermeth the Popish to err in, calling now all popish that believe either
of these three articles by him denied, the truth whereof shall hereafter be
opened.

Because the author pretends a defense of the catholic faith, it were reason
to know what it is.
if we ask this author what is his says which he calls true and catholic,
it is only this, as we may learn by his book, that in our Lords supper be
consecrate bread and wine, and delivered as tokens only to signify Christ's
body and blood, he calls them holy tokens, but yet notes that the bread and
wine be never the holyer, he says nevertheless they be not bare tokens, and
yet concludes, The effect of that this author calls his faith. Untrue report.
there is nothing to be worshipped, for there is nothing present, but in figure
and in a sign: which who so ever says, calls the thing in deed absent. And
yet the author says: Christ is in

Caunterbury.


And as concerning holiness of bread and wine (whereunto I may add the water
into baptism) how can a dombe or an insensible and liuelesse creature receive
into it self any food, Bread, wine, and water, be not holy, but holy tokens.
and feed thereupon? No more is it possible that a spiritlesse creature should
receive any spiritual sanctification or holiness. And yet do I not utterly
deprive the outward sacraments of the name of holy things, because of the holy
use whereunto they serve, and not because of any holiness yt lies hid in the
insensible creature. Which although they have no holiness in them, yet they be
signs and tokens of the marvelous works and holy effects, which god works
in us by his omnipotent power.

They be not bare tokens.
And they be no vain or bare tokens, as you would persuade (for a bare token is
that which betokens only and geneth nothing, as a painted fire, which gives
neither light nor heat) but in the due ministration of the Sacraments God is
present, working with his word and Sacraments.

And although (to speak properly) in the bread and wine be nothing in

Christ is present in his sacraments.
And therefore you gather of my sayings unjustly, that Christ is in deed

Winchester.
A catholic faith.
Now a catholic faith, is an universal faith taught and preached through all,
and so Thus authors faith has no point of a catholic faith.
which be the tokens and marks of a true catholic faith, whereof no one can
be found in the faith this author calls catholic.

Untrue report. Scripture in letter favors not thus autors faith.
First there is no scripture that in letter maynteineth ye doctrine of this
authors book. for Christ says not that the bread does o^^ly signify his body
absent, nor S Paul says

Caunterbury.
THe first part of your description of a catholic faith, is crafty and full My
doctrine is catholic by your own description.
for what you mean by (all) you do not express. The second part is very true,
and agrees fully with my doctrine in every thing, as well in the matter of
transubstantiation, of the presence of Christ in the sacrament, and of the
eating and drinking of him, as in the sacrifice propitiatory. For as I have
taught in these 4. matters of controversy, so learned I the same of the holy
scripture, so is it testified by all old writers and learned men of all ages,
so was it universally taught and preached, received and believed, until the sea
of Rome, the chief adversary unto Christ, corrupted all together, and by
hypocrisy and simulation, in the stead of Christ, erected Autichrist, who
being the son of perdition, has extolled and advanced himself, and sits
in the temple of God, as he were God himself, losing and bynding at his
pleasure, in heaven, hell, and earth: condemning, absoluing, canonising and
damning, as to his judgment he thinks good.

But as concerning your doctrine of Transubstantiation, of the real, corporal
and natural presence of Christ's body in the bread, and blood in the wine:
that ill men do eat his flesh and drink his blood: that Christ is Panis quem
frangimus, 1. Cor. 10.
nonne communicatio corporis Christi est? Is not ye bread which we break, the
communion of Christ's body? And that evil men do not eat Christ his flesh,
nor drink his blood, for the scripture says expressly: He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.
dwells in me and I in him, which is not true of ill men. And for the
corporal absence of Christ, what can be more plainly said in the letter, then
he said of himself, that he forsook the world? Ioh. 16.
besides other scriptures which I have alleged in my 3. book, the 4. chapter.
And the scripture speaks plainly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 7.9. and
10.
that Christ was never more offered then once.

Christ is spiritually present.
unto a new scope devised by you, that I should absolutely deny the presence of
Christ, and say: That the bread does only signify Christ's body absent, which
thing I never said nor thought. And as Christ says not so, nor Paul says not
so, even so like wise I say not so, and my book in diverse places says clean
contrary, that Christ is with us spiritually present, is eaten and dronken of
us, and dwells within us, although corporally he be departed out of this
world, and is ascended up into heaven.

Winchester.
An issue.
I will here in this place (as I will hereafter likewise when the case
occurreth) join as it were an issue with this author, that is to say, to make
a stay with him in this point triable (as they say) by evidence and soon
tried. For in this point the scriptures be already by the author brought
forth, the letter whereof proves not his faith. And albeit he trauaileth and
brings forth the saying of many approved writers, yet is there no one of them
that writes in express words the doctrine of that faith, which this author
calls the faith catholic. And to make the issue plain, and to join it
directly, thus I say.

No writer approved, testifies this authors faith.
that is to say, Ignatius, Polycarpe, Iustine, Irene, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Hilary, Gregory Nazianzene, Basil, Emissen, Ambrose, Cyrill,
Hierome, Augustine, Damascene, Theophilast, none of these has this doctrine in
plain terms, The sum of the issue.
that the bread only signifies Christ's body absent, nor this sentence, that
the bread and wine be never the holyer after consecration, nor that Christ's
body is none otherwise present in the Sacrament, but in a signification: nor
this sentence, that the Sacrament is not to be worshipped, because there is
nothing present but in a sign. And herein what the truth is, may soon
appear, as it shall by their works never appear to have been taught and
preached, received and believed universally, and therefore can be called no
catholic faith (that is to say) allowed in the whole, through and in outward
teaching, Outward teaching.
preached and believed.

Caunterbury.
Your doctrine is not catholic by your own description.
But I will join with you this issue, that neither scripture nor ancient
author writes in express words the doctrine of your faith. And to make the
issue plain, and to join directly with you therein, thus I say: That no
ancient and catholic author has your doctrine in plain terms. And because
I will not take my issue in bye matters (as you do) I will make if in the four
principal points, wherein we vary, and whereupon my book rests.

My issue.
This therefore shall be mine issue: That as no scripture, so no ancient per legem
Talionis.

Winchester.
If this author setting apart the word (Catholic) would of his own will go
about to

I notable matter, a man to be condemned by his own former writings, Bertram
confessed to be of this opinion.
First, the prejudice and sentence, given as it were by his own mouth against
himself,

Secondly, that about vij. C. year ago, one Bertram (if the book set forth in
his name

Thirdly, Berengarius being in deed but an Archdeaco^, about v. C. years past,
after he

Fourthly, Wickliffe not much above an C. years past, enterprised the same,
whose

Fifthly, how Luther in his works, handled them that would have in our time
raised This authors doctrine often rejected as false.
and such as God has not prospered and sauoured to be received at any time
openly, as his true teaching.

Herein whether I say true or no, let the stories try me, and it is matter
worthy to be Acts. v.
because Gamaliels observation written in the Acts of the Apostles in allowed
to mark, how they prosper and go forward in their doctrine, that be authors of
any news teaching.

Caunterbury.
I Have not proved in my book my iiij. assertions by mine own wit, but

My Catechism.
As concerning the Catechism by me set forth, I have answered in my

Bertrame.
And as for Bertrame, he did nothing else but at the request of king he would
write against the received doctrine of ye church in those days. And if he had,
it is without all doubt, that some learned man, either in his time or fithens,
would have written against him, or at the least not have commended him so much
as they have done.

Berengarius.
but by the tiranity of Nicholas the 2. he was constrained to make a devilish
recantation, as I have declared in my first book, the 17. chapter.

Wickliffe.
but Antichrist that sits in gods temple, boasting himself as god, has by
gods sufferance prevailed against many holy men, and sucked the blood of
martirs these late years.

Luther.
it seems you be sore pressed, that be feign to pray aid of him, whom you
have hitherto ever detested. The fox is sore hunted that is feign to take his
borow, and the wolf that is feign to take the lions den for a shift, or to run
for succor unto a beast which he most hates. And no man condemns your
doctrine of Transubstantiation, and of the propiciatory sacrifice of the mass,
more severely and earnestly, then does Martin Luther.

But it appears by your conclusion, The Papists have been the cause why the
catholic doctrine has been hundred, and has not had good success these
late ye^es.
that you have waded so far in rhetorike, that you have forgotten your
logike. For this is your argument: Bertrame taught this doctrine and prevailed
not, Berengarius attempted the same, and failed in his purpose: Wickliffe
enterprised the same, whose teaching god prospered not, therefore god has not
prospered and favored it to be received at any time openly as his true
teaching. I will make the like reason. The Prophet Osee taught in Samaria to
the ten tribes, the true doctrine of god, to bring them from their abominable
superstitions and idolatry: Ioell, Am^s, and Mitheas attempted ye same, whose
doctrine prevailed not, god prospered not their teaching among those people,
but they were condemned with their doctrine, therefore god has not prospered
and favored it to be received at any time openly as his true teaching.

If you will answer (as you must needs do) that the cause why that among those
people the true teaching prevailed not, was by reason of the abundant
superstition and idolatry that blinded their eyes, you have fully answered your
own argument, and have plainly declared the cause, why the true doctrine in
this matter has not prevailed these 500. years, the church of Rome (which all
that time has borne the chief swinge) being overflowed and drowned in all
kind of superstition and idolatry, and therefore might not abide to hear of the
truth. And the true doctrine of the sacrament (which I have set out plainly in
my book) was never condemned by no council, nor your false papisticall
doctrine allowed, until the devil caused Antichrist his son and heir Pope
Nicholas the second, with his monks and friars, to condemn the truth, and
confirm these your heresies.

days to idolatry, hypocrisy and superstition, through traditions of
Phariseis, and therefore he moved the rest of the Council to beware, that they
did not rashly and unadvisedly condemn that doctrine and religion which was
approved by God, least in so doing they should not only resist the Apostles,
but God himself, which counsel if you had marked and followed, you would not
have done so vnsoberly in many things as you have done.

And as for the prosperity of them that have professed Christ and his true
doctrine they prospered with the Papists, as S. John Baptist prospered with
Herod, and our savior Christ with Pilate, Annas and Caiphas. Now which of
these prospered best say you? Was as the doctrine of Christ and S. John any
whit the worse, because the cruel tirantes and Jews put them to death for the
same?

Winchester.
But all this set apart, and putting aside all testimonies of the old church,
and resortyng only to the letter of the scripture, These words, This is my
body agree in sense with the rest of the scripture. Untrue report. This author
has no words of scripture for the ground of his faith.
there to search out an understanding, and in doing thereof, to forget what has
been taught hitherto: How shall this author establish upon

Caunterbury.
This is my body, is no proper speech.
THe Scripture is plain, and you confess also, that it was bread that

Gods omnipotency. Psalm. 115. Romans 9.
As for the great power and omnipotency of God, it is no place here to

Winchester.
An answer to the like speeches in appearance.
I am the door, I am the vine, he is Helias, and such other, and because it is
a figurative speech in them, it may be so here, which makes no kind of proof,
that it is so here: But yet if by way of reasoning I would yield to him therein,
and call it a figurative The faith of this author is but to ^eleue a story.
what other point of faith is there then in the matter, but to believe the
story, that Christ did institute such a supper, wherein he gave bread and wine
for a token of his body and blood, which is now after this understanding no
secret mystery at all, The Lords supper has n^ miracle in it by this authors
understanding. No promise made to a token in the supper, or in y^ 6. of John.
or any ordinance above reason. For commonly men use to ordeyne in sensible
things remembraunces of themselves when they dye or depart the country. So as
in the ordinance of this supper, after this understanding Christ showed not
his omnipotency, but only benevolence, that he loved us, and would be
remembered of us. For Christ did not say: Whosoever eats this token, eats my
body, or eats my flesh, or shall have any profit of it in special, but do
this in remembrance of me.

Caunterbury.


Injury to baptism.
like fond reasoning might ungodly men make of the sacrament of Baptism, and
so scoff out both these high mysteries of Christ. For when Christ said these
words after his resurrection, Go into the whole world, and preach unto all
people, baptising them in the name of the Father, Math. v ^. Mark. vit.
the Son, and the holy Ghost: Here might wicked blasphemers say: What point
of faith is in these words, but to believe the story, that Christ did institute
such a sacrament, wherein he commanded to give water for a token: which is now
after this understanding, no secret mystery at all, or any ordinance above
reason: so as in the ordinance of this sacrament after this understanding,
Christ showed not his omnipotency: For he said not then, Whosoever receives
this token of water, shall receuie remission of sin, or the holy ghost, or
shall have any profit of it in especial, but, Do this.

Winchester.
Tokens be but tokens howsoever they be garnished with gay words without
scripture. For apparel page 30. numero. 9.
yet and they be only tokens, they have no warrant signed by scripture, for any
apparel at all. For the vi of John speaks not of any promise made, to the
eating of a token of Christ's flesh, but to the eating of Christ's very flesh,
whereof the bread (as this author would have it) is but a figure in Christ's
words, when he said (This is my body.) And if it be but a figure in Christ's
words, it is but a figure in S. Paul's words when he said: The bread which we
break, is it not the communication of Christ's body? that is to say, a figure
of the communication of Christ's body (if this authors doctrine be true) and
not the communication in deed. Untrue report.
Every special sacrament has promise annexed and has a secret hidden truth.
but only commandment to do it in remembrance. After which doctrine why
should it be noted absolutely for a Sacrament and special mystery, that has
nothing hidden in it, but a plain open ordinance of a token for a
remembrance: to the eating of which token, is annered no promise expressly,
ne any holiness to be accounted to be in the bread or wine (as this author
teaches) but to be called holy, because they be deputed to an holy use. If I
ask the use, he declares to signify. If I should ask what to signify?
There must be a sort of good words framed without scripture. For scripture
expresses no matter of signification of special effect.

Caunterbury.
Bread is not a vayn and bare token.
IF I granted for your pleasure that the bare bread (having no further

But yet importune adversaries, and such as be wilful and obstinate, will never
be satisfied, but quarrel further, saying: What of all this? Here be a

But to express the true effect of the sacraments: As the washing outwardly
in water is not a vain token, but teaches such a washing as god works
inwardly, in them that duly receive the same: So likewise is not the bread a
vain token, but shows and preaches to the godly receyuer, what God works
in him by his almighty power secretly and inuisibly.

I warrant. Ioh. 6.
And this eating has a warrant signed by Christ himself in the vj. of

And where you say that Scripture expresses no matter of signification
special effect in the sacraments of bread and wine, if your eyes were not
blinded with popish errors, frowardnes and selfeloue, ye might see in the 22.
of Luke, Luc. 22.
where Christ himself expresses a matter of signification, saying: Hoc facite
in mei commemorationem. Do this in remembrance of me. And S. Paul likewise 1.
Cor. 11. has the very same thing, 1. Cor. 11.
which is a plain and direct answer to that same your last question, whereupon
you triumph at your pleasure, as though ye victory were all yours. For ye say,
when this question is demanded of me what to signify? Here must be a sort of
good words framed without scripture. But here S. Paul answers your
question in express words, 1. Cor. 11.
that it is the lords death that shall be signified, represented and preached
in these holy mysteries, until his coming again. And this remembrance,
representation and preaching of Christ's death, cannot be without special
effect, except you will say that Christ works not effectually with his word
and sacraments. And S. Paul, expresses the effect, when he says: 1. Cor. 10
The bread which we break, is the communion of Christ's body. But by this
place and such like in your book, ye disclose your self to all men of
judgment, either how wilful in your opinion, or how flender in knowledge of
the scriptures you be.

Winchester.
And therefore like as the teaching is new, to say it is an only figure, or only
signifies: A new teaching of only figure. How can ^ faith be called catholic
that begunneth to be published now.
so the matter of signification must be newly devised, and new wine have new
bottels, and be thoroughly new, after xv. C. l. years in the very year of
Iubiley (as they were wont to call it) to be newly erected and builded in
English men's hearts.

Caunterbury.
IT seems that you be very desirous to abuse the peoples ears with this term
(New) and with the year of Iubiley, as though the true doctrine of the
sacrament by me taught, should be but a new doctrine and yours old (as the
Jews slaundered the doctrine of Christ by the name of newness) or else that in
this year of Iubiley, Mark. 1.
you would put the people in remembrance of the full remission of sin, which
they were wont to have at Rome this year, that they might long to return to
Rome for pardons again, as the children of Israel longed to return to Egypt
for the flesh that they were went to have there.

But all men of learning and judgment know well enough that this your doctrine
is no elder then the bishop of Romes usurped supremacy, which though it be of
good age by number of years, yet is it new to Christ and his word. If there
were such darkness in the world now, as has been in that world which you note
for old, the people might drink new wine of the whore of Babilons cup, until
they were as drunk with hypocrisy and superstition, as they might well stand
upon their legs, and no man once say, black is their eye. But now thanks be
to God, the light of his word so shines in the world, that your dronkennes in
this year of Iubiley is espied, so that you cannot erect and build your popish
kingdom any longer in Englishmens hattes, without your own scorn, shame and
confusion. The old popish bottels must needs brast, when ye new wine of Gods
holy word is poured into them.

Winchester.
Which new teaching, whether it proceeds from the spirit of truth or no,
shall more plainly appear by such matter as this author utters wherewith to
impugn the true faith taught hitherto. Tokens how to discern truth from
falsehood.
For amo^ng many other profes, whereby truth after much trauail in contention,
at the last preuayleth and has victory, there is none more notable, then when
the very adversaries of truth (who pretend nevertheless to be truths friends)
do by some evident untruth bewrap them selves. According whereunto, when the two
women contended before King Solomon for the child yet alive: Solomon decerned
the true natural mother from the other, ^. Reg. 3.
by their speeches and sayings. Which in the very mother were ever conformable
unto nature, and in the other, at the last evidently against nature. The very
true mother spoke always like her self, and never disagreed from A lesson of
Salomons judgment.
and therefore spoke that was in nature, an evidence that she lain calling her
self mother, and saying let it be divided, which no natural mother could say
of her own child. Whereupon proceeds Salomons most wise judgment, which has
this lesson in it, ever where contention is, on that part to be the truth,
Truth needs no aid of lies.
where all sayings and doings appear uniformly consonant to the truth
pretended, and on what side a notable ^y^ appears, the rest may be judged to
be after the same sort. For truth needs no aid of lies, exast or slight
wherewith to be supported or maintained. So as in the entreating of the truth of
this high and ineffable mystery of the sacrament, on what past thou reader
see craft, slight, shift, obliquitie, or in any one point, an open manifest
lie, there thou may consider what soever pretense be made of truth, Truth
loves simplicity and playnnes.
yet the victory of truth not to be

Caunterbury.
The Church of Rome is not the true mother of the catholic faith.
IF either division or confusion may try the true mother, the wicked church the
Rome (not in speech only, but in all other practices) has long gone about

Absurda and falsa.
For here in this one matter of controversy between you, Smith, and me, you
divide against nature the accidents of bread and wine, from their substances,
and the substance of Christ from his accidences, and contray to the scripture
you divide our eternal life, attributing unto the sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross, only the beginning thereof and the continuance thereof you ascribe unto
the sacrifice of popish priests. And in the sacraments you separate Christ's
body from his spirit, affirming that in Baptism we receive but his spirit,
and in the communion but his flesh. And that Christ's spirit renueth our life,
but increases it not, and that his flesh increceth our life, but gives it
not. And against all nature, reason and truth, you confound the substance of
bread and wine, with the substance of Christ's body and blood, in such wise as
you make but one nature and person of them all. And against scripture and all
comformity of nature, you confound and iumble so together the natural members
of Christ's body in the sacrament, that you leave no distinction, proportion
nor fashion of man's body at all.

And can your church be taken for the true natural mother, of the true
doctrine of Christ, that thus unnaturally speaks, deuydeth and confounds
Christ's body? The speaking of the true mother.


If Solomon were alive, he would surely give judgment that Christ should be
taken from that woman, that speaks so unnaturally, and so unlike his mother,
and be given to the true church of the faithful, that never digressed from the
truth of Gods word, nor from the true speech of Christ's natural body, but
speak according to the same that Christ's body, although it be inseparable
annexed unto his Godhead, yet it has all the natural conditions and
properties of a very man's body, occupying one place, and being of a certain
height and measure, having all members distinct and set in good order and
proportion. And yet the same body joined unto his diuinitye, is not only the
beginning, but also the contynuance and consummation of our eternal and
celestial life. By him we be regenerated, by him we be fed and nourished
from time to time, as he has taught us most certainly to believe by his holy
word and sacraments which remain in their former substance and nature, as
Christ does in his, without mixtion or confusion. This is the true and natural
speaking in this matter like a true natural mother, and like a true and right
believing christian man.

Marye of that doctrine which you teach, I cannot deny but the church of Rome
is the mother thereof, Rome to the mother of the papistical faith.
which in scripture is called Babilo^, because of commixtion or confusion.
Which in all her doings and teachinges so does mixte and confound error with
truth, superstition with religion, godliness with hypocrisy, scripture with
traditions, that she shows her self always uniform and consonant, to
confound all the doctrine of Christ, yea Christ him self, showing her self to
be Christ's stepmother, and the true natural mother of Antichrist.



Winchester.
The name of the Author great wherewith to put men to silence.
I shall note certain evident and manifest untruths, which this author is not
afraid to utter, (a matter wonderful considering his dignity, if he that is
named be the author in deed) which should be a great stay of contradiction, if
any thing were to be regarded against the truth.

An impudent untruth.
to be the faith of ye papists: which saying, what foundation it has, thou
may consider of that follows.

Luther that professed openly to abhor at that might be noted papish,
defended stoutly

Bucer that is here in England, in a solemn work that he writes upon the
Gospels, professes the same faith of the real and substanciall presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, which be affirms to have been believed of all
the church of Christ from the beginning hitherto.

Iustus Jonas has translated a Catechism out of dutch into latin, The says
of the Sacrament in the Catechism unproueth this Authors doctrine now.
taught in the city of Noremberge in Germany, where Hosiander is chief
preacher, in which Catechism they be accounted for no true Christian men, that
deny the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. The words really and
substancially, be not expressed as they be in Bucer, but the word ( truly) is
there, and as Buter says, that is substancially. Which Catechism was
translated into english in this authors name about two years past.

Phillip Melancton no papist nor priest, writes a very wise epistle in this
matter to Decolampadius, and signifiyng soberly his belief of the presence of
Christ's very body in the Sacrament: and to prove the same to have been the
faith of the old church from ye beginning, alleges the sayings of Irene,
Ciprian, Chrysostom, Hillary, Cirill, Ambrose and Theophilacte, which authors
he estemeth both worthy credit, and to affirm the presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament plainly without ambiguity. He answers to certain places of
S. Augustine and says, all Decolampadius enterprise to depend upon
conjectures, and arguments applausible to idle wits, with much more wise
matter as that epistle does purport, which is set out in a book of a good
volume among the other Epistles of Decolampadius, so as no man may suspecte any
thing counterfayte in the matter.

One Hippinus, or Oepinus of Hamborough, greatly esteemed among the Lutherians,
has written a book to the Kings Majesty that now is, published abroad in
printe, wherein much inueyng against the church of Rome, does in the matter of
the sacrament write as follows: Encharistia is called by it self a
sacrifice, because it is a remembrance of the true sacrifice offered upon the
cross, and that in it is dispensed the true body and true blood of Christ,
which is plainly the same in essence, that is to say substance, and the same
blood in essence signifiyng, though the manner of presence be spiritual, yet
the substance of that is present, is the same with that in heaven.

Erasmus noted a man that durst and did speak of all abuses in the church
liberallye, taken for no papist, and among us to much esteemed, as his
peraphrasis of the Gospel is ordered to be had in every church of this Realm,
declares in diverse of his works most manifestly his faith of the presence of
Christ's body in ye Sacrament, and by his Epistles, recommendeth to the world
the work of Algerus in that matter of the Sacrament, Erasmus commends to the
world the work of Algerus upon the Sacrament.
whom he notes well exercised in the scriptures, and the old doctors,
Ciprian, Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Basil, Chrysostom. And for
Erasmus own judgment, he says we have an inviolable fountation of Christ's
own words (this is my body) rehearsed again by S. Paul: The body of Christ
hidden under the signs.
he says further, the body of Christ is hidden under those signs, and
shows also upon what occasions men have erred in reading the old fathers, and
wishes that they which have followed Berengarius in error, Erasmus would all to
repent, that follow Berengarius error.
would also follow him in repentance. I will not (reader) encombre thee with mo
words of Erasmus.

Peter Martyr of Oxford taken for no Papist, in a treatise he made of late of
the Sacrament, which is now translated into English, shows how as touching
the real presence of Christ's body, it is not only the sentence of the
papists, but of other also, whom the said Peter nevertheless does with as
many shifts and lies as he may, impugn for that point, Peter Martyr does with
lies impugn the faith of the Sacrament.
as well as he does the Papists for transubstantiation, but yet he does not as
this author does impute, that faith of the real presence of Christ's body and
blood to the An issue.
as this author does considerately slander it to be, and desire therefore that
according to Salamons judgment this may serve for a note and mark, This
Author would with the envious words of papish oppress the truth.
to give sentence for the true mother of the child. For what should this mean
so without shame openly and untruly to call this faith papishe, but only with
the envious word of Papist to ouermatche the truth.

Caunterbury.
THis explication of the true catholic faith, notes to the Reader certain
which only be rejected as untrue. But this untruth is to be noted in him
generally, that he either ignorantly mistaketh, or willingly misreporteth
almost all that I say. But now note good Reader, the evident and manifest
untruths which I utter as he says. Four manifest untruths.
The first is, that the faith of the real presence is the faith of the
papists. An other is, that these word^s, my flesh is verily meat. I do
translate thus: My flesh is very meat. An other is that I handle not sincerely
the words of S. Augustine speaking of the eating of Christ's body. The fourth
is, that by these words, this is my body, Christ inte^deth not to make the
bread his body, but to signify yt such as receive that worthily, be members of
Christ's body. These be the heinous and manifest errors which I have uttered.

As touching the first, that the faith of the real and substancial presence The
first untruth, that the faith of the real presence to the faith of the papists.
this is no untruth, but a most certain truth. For you confess your self, and
defend in this book, that it is your faith: and so do likewise all ye
papists. And here I will make an issue with you, that the papists believe the
real, corporal, and natural presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament. Answer me directly without color, whether it be so or not. If
they believe not so, then they believe as I do, for I believe not so: and then
let them openly confess that my belief is true. And if they believe so, then
say I true when I say that it is the papists faith. And then is my saying no
manifest untruth, but a mere truth, and so the verdict in the issue passes
upon my side by your own confession.

And here the Reader may note well that once again you be feign to fly Luther.
Bucer. Jonas. Melancthon. Epinus.
whose names were wont to be so hateful unto you, that you could never with
patience abide the hearing of them: and yet their sayings help you nothing at
all. For although these men in this and many other things, have in times past,
and yet peradventure some do (the veil of old darcknes not clearly in every
point removed from their eyes) agree with the papists in part of this matter,
yet they agree not in the wholl: and therefore it is true nevertheless that
this faith which you teach is the Papists faith. For if you would conclude,
that this is not the Papists faith because Luther, Bucer, and other, believe in
many things as the papists do, the^ by the same reason you may conclude that ye
papists believe not yt Christ was borne, crucified, dyed, rose again, and
ascended into heaven, which things Luther, Bucer, and the other, constantly
does taught, and believed: and yet the faith of ye real presence, may be called
rather ye faith of the papists then of ye other, not only because the papists
do so believe, but specially, for that the papists were the first authors and
inuentors of that faith, and have been the chief spreaders abroad of it, and
were the cause that other were blinded with the same error.

But here may the Reader note one thing by the way, that it is a foul cloute
that you would refuse to wipe your nose withal, when you take such men to prove
your matter, whom you have hitherto accounted most vile, and filthy
heretics. And yet now you be glad to fly to them for succor, whom you take
for Gods enemies, and to whom you have ever had a singular hatred. You pretend
that you stay your self upon ancient writers: And why run you now to such
men for aid, as be not only new, but also as you think, be evil and corrupt
in judgment: And to such as think you, by your writings and doings, as
rank a Papiste, as is any at Rome.

And yet not one of these new men (whom you allege) do throughlye agree with
your doctrine, either in transubstantiation, or in carnal eating and drinking
of Christ's flesh and blood, or in the sacrifice of Christ in the mass, nor
yet throughlye in the real presence. For they affirm not such a gross
presence of Christ's body, as expels the substance of bread, and is made by
conversion thereof into the substance of Christ's body, and is eaten with the
mouth. And yet if they did, the ancient authors that were next unto Christ's
time (whom I have alleged) may not give place unto these new men in this
matter, although they were men of excellent learning and judgment, how so ever
it likes you to accept them.

But I may conclude that your faith in the Sacrament is popish, until such
time as you can prove that your doctrine of transubstantiation, and of the real
presence, was universally received and believed, before the bishops of Rome
defined and determined the same. And when you have proved that, then will I
grant that in your first note you have convinced me of an evident and manifest
untruth, and that I untruly charge you with the envious name of a papisticall
faith.

But in your issue you term the words at your pleasure, and report me Mine
issue.
that the papisticall church is the mother of transubstantiation, and of all
the four principal errors which I impugn in my book.

Winchester.
It shall be now to purpose to consider the scriptures touching the matter of the
Sacrament, which the author pretending to bring forth faithfully as the majesty
thereof requires: in the rehearsal of the words of Christ out of the gospel
of S. John: he begins

Here is also a fault in the translation of the text, which should be thus in
one place. For my flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily drink. In which
speech, the verb that coupeleth the words (flesh) and (meat) together,
knitteth them together in their proper signification, so as the flesh of Christ
is verily meat, and not figuratively meat, as the author would persuade. And
in these words of Christ may appear plainly, how Christ taught the mystery of
the food of his humanity which he promised to give for food, even the same
flesh that he said he would give for the life of the world, and so expresses
the first sentence of this scripture here by me wholly brought forth, that is to
say, and the bread which I shall give you is my flesh which I shall give for
the life of the world, and so is it plain that Christ spoke of flesh in the
same sense that S. John speaks in, saying: The word was made flesh,
signifying by flesh the whole humanity. And so did Cyril agree to Nestorius,
when he upon these textes, reasoned how this eating is to be understood of
Christ's humanitye, to which nature in Christ's person, is properly attribute
to be eaten as meat spiritually to nourish man, dispensed and given in the
Sacrament. And between Nestorius and Cyrill was this diversity in
understanding the misterye, Cyrill and ^^^storius.
that Nestorius esteeming of each nature in Christ a several person, as it was
objected to him, and so dissoluinge the ineffable Unity, did so repute the
body of Christ to be eaten as the body of a man separate. Cyrill maintained the
body of Christ to be eaten as a body inseparable united to the Godhead, and for
the ineffable mystery of that Union, the same to be a flesh that gives life.
And then as Christ says. If we eat not the flesh of the In baptism we
receive Christ's spirit to give life, in the Lords Supper we receive his flesh
and blood to continue life.
for the renuinge of our life, so

And therefore in the same form of words Christ spoke to Nichodemus of
baptism, that he speaks here of the eating of his body, and drinking of his
blood, and in both Sacraments gives, dispenses, and exhibiteth in deed,
those celestial gifts in sensible elements, as Chrysostom says. And
because the true faithful believing men do only by faith know the son of
man to be in unity of person the son of God, so as for the unity of the two
natures in Christ, in one person, the flesh of the Son of man, is the proper
flesh of the son of God.

Saint Augustine said well when he noted these words of Christ: Uerely,
verily, unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. to be a figurative
speech, because after ye bare letter it seems unprofitable, considering that
flesh profits nothing in it self, esteemed in the own nature alone, but as the
same flesh in Christ is united to the divine nature, so is it as Christ said
(after Cyrilles exposition) spirit and life, not changed into the divine
nature of the spirit, but for the ineffable union in the person of Christ
thereunto: It is viuificatrix, (as Cyrill said) and as the holy Ephc^ine
Council decreed: A flesh giving life, according to Christ's words: Who eats
my flesh; and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the later day. And then to declare unto us, how in geeuinge this life to us,
Christ uses the instrument of his very humayne body: it follows. For my
flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. So like as Christ
sanctifies by his godly spirit, so does he sanctify us by his godly flesh,
and therefore repeteth again, to inculcate the celestial thing of this
mystery, and says: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells
to me and I in him, which is the natural, and corporal union, between us and
Christ. Whereupon follows, that as Christ is naturally in his Father, and his
Father in him, so he that eats verily the flesh of Christ, he is by nature
in Christ, and Christ is naturally in him, and the worthy receauer has life
increase, augmented, and confirmed by the participation of the flesh of Christ.

And because of the ineffable union of the two natures, Christ said: This is
the food that came down from heaven, because God (whose proper flesh it is)
came down from heaven, and has an other virtue then Manna had, because this
gives life to them that worthily receive it: which Manna (being but a figure
thereof) did not, but being in this food Christ's very flesh, inseparably
united to the Godhead, the same is of such efficacye, as he that worthily
eats of it, shall live for ever. And thus I have declared the sense of
Christ's words brought forth out of the Gospel of S. John. Whereby appears
how evidently they set forth the doctrine of the mystery of the eating of
Christ's flesh, and drinking

Canterbury.
HEre before you enter into my second untruth (as you call it) you find
fault by the way, that in the rehearsal of the words of Christ, out of the
Gospel of S. John, I begine a little to low. But if the reader consider the
matter for the which I allege S. John, he shall well perceive that I began at
ye right place where I ought to begin. For I do not bring forth S. John for
the matter of the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, whereof is no
mention made in that chapter, and as it would not have served me for that
purpose, no more does it serve you, although ye cyted the whole Gospel. But I
bring saint John for the matter of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his
blood, wherein I passed over nothing that pertains to the matter, but rehearse
the whole fully and faithfully. And because the Reader may the better
understand the matter, and judge between us both, I shall rehearse the words
of my former book, which be these.

Chap. 1.
THe Supper of the Lord, otherwise called the holy communion or sacrament of the
body and blood of our Savior Christ, has been of many men, and by sundry
ways very much abused, The abuse of the Lords supper.
but specially within these four or five hundred years. Of some it has been
used as a Sacrifice propiciatory for sin: and otherwise superstitiouslye, far
from the intent that Christ did first ordain the same at the beginning, doing
therein great wrong and injury to his death and passion. And of other some it
has been very lightly esteemed, or rather contemned and despiced as a thing of
small or of none effect. And thus between both the parties has been much
variance and contention in diverse parts of Christendom. Therefore to the
intent that this holy Sacrament or Lords Supper may hereafter neither of the
one party be contemned or lightly esteemed, nor of the other party be abused to
any other purpose then Christ himself did first appoint and ordain the same,
and that so the contention on both parties may be quieted and ended the most
sure and plain way is to cleave unto holy scripture. Wherein whatsoever is
found, must be taken for a most sure ground, and an infallible truth, and
whatsoever cannot be grounded upon the same, touching our faith, is man's devise
changeable and uncertain. And therefore here are set forth the very words that
Christ him self and his Apostle S. Paul spoke, both of the eating and
drinking of Christ's body and blood, and also of the eating and drinking of the
sacrament of the same. First, Chap. 2. The eating of the body of Christ. John.
6.
as concerning the eating of the body, and drinkinge of the blood of our
Savior Christ, he speaks him self in the sixte Chapter of Saint John in
this wise.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man
and drink his blood, you have no life in you. who so eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him. As the living father
has sent me, and I live by the father, even so he that eats me, shall live
by me. This is the bread which came down from heaven. Not as your fathers did
eat Manna, and are dead. He that eats this bread, shall live for ever.

Here have I rehearsed the words of Christ faithfully and fully, so much

The second untruth for verily meat, translatyng very meat.
And this is another of the euydent and manifest untruths by me uttered, as
you esteem it. Wherein a man may see, how hard it is to escape ye reproaches of
Momus. For what an horrible crime (trow you) is committed here, to call very
meat, that which is verily meat? As who should say, that very meat is not
verily meat, or yt which is verily meat, were not very meat. The old
Authors say very meat, (...). verus cibus, Origenes in Leuit. hom. 7.
Propterea er go and caro cius verus est cibus, and sanguis eius verus est
potus. Et in Math. hom. 12. Caro mea vera est esca, and sanguis meus verus est
potus. Hierom. in Eccle. cap. 3. Caro enim verus est cibus, and sanguis eius
verus est potus. August. in Psalm. 33. Caro mea vera est esca, and sanguis meus
vere potus est. Damas. lib. 4. ca. 14. Caro mea verus est cibus, and sanguis
meus verus est potus. Euthyimus in lo. cap. 9. Caro mea verus est cibus. and
sanguis meas verus est potus.
in a hundredth places.

And what skilleth it for the diuersitye of the words, where no diversity is
in the sense? And whether we say, very meat, or verily meat, it is a
figurative speech in this place, and the sense is all one. And if you will
look upon the new testament lately set forth in Greek by Robert Steuens, you
shall see that he had three Greek copyes, which in the said sixth chap. of John
have (...) and not (...). So that I may be bold to say, that you find fault
here where none is.

And here in this place, you show forth your old condition (which you use much
in this book) in following the nature of a cuttil. The nature of a cuttil
Plim. lib. 9. ca. 29.
The property of the cuttill says Pliny, is to cast out a black incke or color
when soever she spieth her self in danger to be taken, that the water being
troubled and darckned therewith, she may hide her self and to escape untaken.
After like manner do you throughout this wholl book, for when you see no other
way to fly and escape, then you cast out your black colors, and mask your
self so in clouds, and darcknes, that men should not discern where you
become, which is a manifest argument of untrue meaning: for he that means
plainly, speaks plainly: Eccle. 37.
Et qui sophistice loquitur, odibilis est, says the wise man. For he that
speaks obscurely and darckly it is a token that he goes about to cast mistes
before men's eyes that they should not see, rather then to open their eyes
that they may clearly see the truth.

Christ is verily and truly given in the Sacrament, but yet spiritually.
was given also upon the cross, and is given daily in the ministration of the
Sacrament. But although it be one thing, yet it was diversely given. For upon
the cross, Christ was carnally given to suffer and to dye. At his last Supper
he was spiritually given in a promise of his death: and in the Sacrament he is
daily given in remembrance of his death. And yet it is all but one Christ that
was promised to die, that died in deed, and whose death is remembered, that is
to say, the very same Christ, the eternal word that was made flesh. And the
same flesh was also given to be spiritually eaten, and was eaten in deed
before his supper, yea and before his incarnation also. Of which eating, and
not of Sacramental eating, he spoke in the sixth of John. My flesh is very
meat, and my blood is very drink: John. 6,
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

And Cyrill (I grant) agreed to Nestorius in the substance of the thing Cyrill
Lanathematismo. 11.
that Christ is eaten only by a pure faith, and not that he is eaten
corporally with our mouths; as other meats be. Nor that he is eaten in the
Sacrament only.

Nestorius.
And it seems you understand not the matter of Nestorius, who did not esteem
Christ to be made of two several natures and several persons, (as you report
of him,) but his error was, that Christ had in him naturallye, but one nature
and one person, affirming that he was a pure man, and not God by nature, but
that the Godhed by grace inhabited, as he does in other men.

Injury to baptism.
And where you say that in baptism we receive the Spirit of Christ, and
Quicunque in Christo baptizati estis, Christu^ induistis: Galat. 3,
as many as be baptized in Christ, put Christ upon them: Nevertheless, this is
done in diverse respects, for in baptism it is done in respect of
regeneration: and in the holy communion, in respect of nourishment and
augmentation.

In the sixth chapter of John, Christ spoke not of corporal eating.
But your understanding of the sixth chapter of John is such as never was
uttered of any man before your time, and as declares you to be utterly
ignoraunte of Gods mysteries. For who ever said or taught before this time,
that the Sacrament was the cause why Christ said: If we eat not the flesh of
the son of man, we have not life in us. John. 6:
The spiritual eating of fallax a non causa, vt causa, which is another trick
of the devils sophistry.

And that in the sixth of John, Christ spoke neither of corporal, nor
sacramental John. 6.
And: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and Im
him, and has everlasting life. At which time the sacramental bread was not
yet Christ's flesh. For the Sacrament was not then yet ordained, and yet at that
time all that believed in Christ, did eat his flesh, and drink his blood, or
else they could not have dwelled in Christ, nor Christ in them.

John. 8.
Moreover, you say your self that in the sixth of S. John's gospel, when Christ
said, John. 1.
the bread is my flesh. By the word (flesh) he meant his wholl humanity, (as is
meant in this sentence: The word was made flesh,) which he meant not in the word
(body) when he said of bread, this is my body. Where by he meant not his wholl
humanitye, but his flesh only, and neither his blood nor his soul. And in the
vi. of John, Christ made not bread his flesh, when he said, the bread is my
flesh: but he expounded in those words, what bread it was that he meant of,
when he promised them bread that should give them eternal life. He declared in
those words, that himself was the bread that should give life, because they
should not have their fantasies of any bread made of corn. And so the eating
of that heavenly bread could not be understood of the Sacrament, nor of
corporal eating with the mouth: but of spiritual eating by faith, as all ye
old authors do most clearly expound and declare. And seeing that there is no
corporal eating, but chawing with the teeth or swallowing (as all men do
know) if we eat Christ corporally, the^ you must confess that we either
swallow up Christ's flesh, or chaw and tear it with our teeth (as pope
Nicholas constrained Berengarius to confess,) which S. Augustine says, is a
wicked and heinous thing. But in few words to answer to this second evident
and manifest untruth (as you object against me) I would wish you as truly to
understand these words of the sixth chap. of John, as I have truly translated
them.

Winchester.
Now where the author to exclude the mystery of corporal manducatio^, brings
forth

Caunterbury.
The 3. untruth of the handling the words of S. Augustine.
and manifest untruth whereof you note me. And because you say that in citing
of S. Augustine in this place, I handle not the matter so sincerely as it
requires, let here be an issue between you and me, which of us both does
handle this matter more sincerely, Mine issue.
and I will bring such manifest evidence for me, that you shall not be able to
open your mouth against it. For I allege S. Augustine justly as he speaks,
adding nothing of my self. The words in my book be these.

Of these words of Christ it is plain and manifest, August. in 10 an. Tractat.
26.
that the eating of Christ's body, and drincking of his blood, is not like to
the eating and drinking of other meats and drinks. For although without meat
and drink man cannot live yet it follows not that he that eats and
drinks shall live for ever. But as touching this meat and drink of the body
and blood of Christ it is true, both he that eats and drinks them, has
everlasting life. And also he that eats and drinks them not, Eodem tract.
Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 25.
has not everlasting life. For to eat that meat, and drink that drink, is
to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him, and therefore no man can
say or think that he eats the body of Christ or drinks his blood except he
dwells in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in him. Thus have you heard of the
eating and drinking of the very flesh and blood of our Savior Christ.

Thus allege I S. Augustine truly, without adding any thing of mine own head,
or taking any thing away. And what slight I used, is easy to worthily.
And the same you do to ye very words of Christ him self, who speaks
absolutely and plainly without adding of any such word as you put thereto. What
sophistry this is, you know well enough. Now if this be permitted unto you to
add what you list, and to expound how you list, then you may say what you list
without controlment of any man, which it seems you look for.

And not of like sort, but of like euilnes do you handle (in reprehending of
my second untruth as you call it) an other place of S. Augustine in his book
de doctrina Christiana, August. de doctrina Christiana lib. 3. cap. 13.
where he says, that the eating and drinkinge of Christ's flesh and blood is a
figurative speech: which place you expound so far from S. Augustines meaning,
How Christ's flesh is eaten.
that who soever looks upon his words, may by and by discern that you do
not, or will not understand him. But it is most like (the words of him being so
plain and easy) that purposely you will not understand him, nor nothing else
that is against your will, rather then you will go from any part of your will
and received opinion. For it is plain and clear that S. Augustine in that
place speaks not one word of the separation of the two natures in Christ,
and although Christ's flesh be never so surely and inseparably united unto his
Godhead (without which union it could profit nothing) yet being so joined, it
is a very man's flesh, the eating whereof (after the proper speech of eating) is
horrible and abominable. Wherefore the eating of Christ's flesh must needs be
otherwise understood, then after the proper and common eatinge of other
meats with the mouth, which eating after such sort could avail nothing. And
therefore S. Augustine in that place declares the eating of Christ's flesh to
be only a figurative speech. And he opens the figure so, as the eatinge must
be meant with the mind, not with the mouth: that is to say, by chawing and
digesting in our minds, to our great consolation and profit, that Christ dyed
for us. Thus does S. Augustine open the figure and meaning of Christ when he
spoke of the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood. And his flesh
being thus eaten, it must also be joined unto his divinity, or else it could
not give everlasting life, as Cyrill and the council Ephesin truly decreed.
But S. Augustine declared the figurative speech of Christ to be in the eating,
not in the union. And where as to shift of the plain words of Christ, spoken in
the sixth of John, John 6.
he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him:
you say that dwelling in Christ is not Cyprian. in sermon de caena Domini.
who says: quod mansio nostra in ipso, sit manducatio, that our dwelling in
him, is the eating. And also against S. Augustine, August. in Joan. tra. 26.
whose words be these: Hoc est ergo manducare escam illam, and illum bibere
potum, in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere: This is to eat that
meat, and drink that drink, to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling
in him. And although the eating and drinking of Christ, be here defined by the
effect (for the very eating is the believing) yet where so ever the eating is,
the effect must be also, if the definition of S. Augustine be truly given. And
therefore although good and bad eat carnally with their teeth bread, being the
Sacrament of Christ's body, yet no man eats his very flesh, which is
spiritually eaten, but he that dwells in Christ, and Christ in him.

And where in the end you refer the Reader to the declaration of Christ's

Now before I answer to the fourth untruth which I am appeached of, I will
rehearse what I have said in the matter, and what fault you have found: my book
has thus:

Now as touching the Sacraments of the same, Cap. 3.
our Savior Christ did institute them in bread and wine at his last Supper
which he had with his Apostles the night before his death, at which time as
Matthew says: The eating of the Sacrament of his body. Mat. 26.
When they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it and gave it to his disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body:
And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them;
saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, that
is shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not
drink hence forth of this fruit of the vine, until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.

This thing is rehearsed also of S. Mark, in these words.
As they did eat, Marck. 14.
Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he brake it, and gave it to them,
and said: Take, eat, this is my body, and taking the cup, when he had given
thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it, and he said to them,
This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many: verily, I say
unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that
I drink it new in the kingdom of God.

The Evangelist S. Luke, utters this matter on this wise.
When the hour was come, he sat down, Luke. 2^.
and the twelve Apostles with him. And he said unto them. I have greatly
desired to eat this Pascha with you before I suffer. For I say unto you,
he^ceforth I will not eat of it any more until it be fulfilled in the kingdom
of God. And he took the cup and gave thanks, and said: Take this and divide
it among you. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine,
until the kingdom of God come. And he took bread and when he had given
thanks he brake it and gave it unto them, saying: This is my body, which is
geeuen for you. This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also when he had
supped, he took the cup saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood,
which is shed for you.

Hitherto you have herd all that the evangelists declare, that Christ spoke or
did at his last supper, concerning thinstitutio^ of the communion and sacrament
of his body and blood. Now you shall here what S. Paul says concerning the
same, in the tenth chapter of the first to the Corinthians, where he writes
thus.

Is not the cup of blessing, which we bless, a communion of the blood of
Christ? 1. Cor. 10.
Is not the bread, which we break, a communion of the body of Christ? We being
many, are one bread, and one body: For we al are partakers of one bread, and
one cup.

And in the eleventh he speaks on this manner.
That which I delivered unto you I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus the
same night, 1. Cor. 11.
in the which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body which is broaken for you: do
this in remembrance of me. Likewise also he took the cup. when Supper was
done, saying: This cup is the new testament, in my blood. Do this as often as
ye drink it, in remembrance of me, for as often as you shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup, you show forth the Lords death til he come. Wherefore who
soever shall eat of this bread, or drink of this cup unworthily, shall be
gilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine him self and so
eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, because he makes no
difference of the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sick among
you, and many do sleep.

By these words of Christ, rehearsed of the Evangelists, and by the doctrine
also of Saint Paul, which he confesses that he received of Christ, two
things specially are to be noted.

Cap. 4.
First, that our Savior Christ called the material bread which he brake, his
body: and the wine which was the fruit of the vine, his blood. And yet he spoke
not this to the intent that men should think that the material bread is his
very body, or that his very body is material bread: Christ called the
material bread his body.
Neither that wine made of grapes is his very blood, or that his very blood is
wine made of grapes. But to signify unto us, 1. Cor. 10.
as S. Paul says, that the cup is a communion of Christ's blood that was
shed for us, and the bread is a communion of his flesh that was crucified for
us. So that although in the truth of his humain nature, Christ be in heaven,
Marck. vii.
and sits on the right hand of God the Father, yet whosoever eats of the
bread in the Supper of the Lord, according to Christ's institution and
ordinance, is assured of Christ's own promise and testament, that he is a
member of his body, and receaueth the benefits of his passion, which he
suffered for us upon the cross. And likewise he that drinks of that holy
cup in the Supper of the Lord, according to Christ's institution, is
certified by Christ's legacy and testament, that he is made partaker of the
blood of Christ which was shed for us. And this meant S. Paul, when he says,
is not the cup of blessing which we bless, a communion of the blood of Christ?
Is not the can bread, which we break, a communion of the body of Christ so
that no man conte^ne or lightly esteem this holy communion, except he conte^ne
also Christ's body and blood, and pass not whether he have any fellowship with
him or no. And of those men S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
that they eat and drink their own damnation, because they esteem not the body
of Christ.

The second thing which may be learned of the forsaid words of Christ and S.
Paul is this: Cap. 5.
that although none eats the body of Christ and drinks his blood, but they
have eternal life (as apereth by the words before recited of S. John) yet
both the good and the bad do eat and drink the bread and wine, which be the
Sacraments of the same. Evil men do eat the Sacrament but not the body of
Christ.
But beside the Sacraments, the good eat everlasting life, the evil
everlasting death. Therefore S. Paul says: Who soever shall eat of the bread,
or drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily, he shall be gilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. Here S. paul says not, that he that eats the bread, 1.
Cor. 11.
or drinks the cup of the Lord un worthily, eats and drinks the body and
blood of the Lord: but is gilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But what he
eats and drynketh S. Paul declares saying: he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own da^natio^: thus is declared the sum of
all that scripture speaks of the eating and drinking, both of the body and
blood of Christ, and also of the sacrament of the same.

And as these things be most certainly true, Cap. 6.
because they be spoken by Christ him self, the auctor of all truth, and by
his holy Apostle S. Paul as he received them of Christ, so all doctrines
contrary to the same, be most certainly false and untrue, and of al Christen
men to be eschued, because they be contrary to Gods word. And all doctrine
concerning this matter, that is more then this, which is not grounded upon Gods
word, is of no necessity, neither ought the peoples heads to be busied, or
their consciences troubled with the same. These things suffice for a christian
man's faith concerning this Sacrament.
So that things spoken and done by Christ, and written by the holy Evangelists
and S, Paul, ought to suffice the faith of Christian people, as touching the
doctrine of the Lords Supper, and holy communion or sacrament of his body and
blood.

Which thing being well considered and wayed, shall be a just occasion to
pacify and agree both parties, as well them that hitherto have contemned or
lightly esteemed it, as also them which have hitherto for lack of knowledge or
otherwise, ungodly abused it.

Christ ordained the Sacrament to move and stir all men to frendshippe, Cap.
7.
love, and concord, and to put away all hatred, variance, and discord, and to
testify a brotherly and unfeigned love between all them that be the members of
Christ: The Sacrament which was ordained to make love and concord is turned
into ye occasion of variance and discord
But the devil, the enemy of Christ and of all his members, has so craftily
iugled herein, that of nothing rises so much contention, as of this holy
Sacrament.

God grant that al contention set aside, both the parties may come to this
holy communion with such a lively faith in Christ, and such an unfeigned love to
all Christ's members, that as they carnallye eat with their mouths this
Sacramental bread, and drink the wine, so spiritually they may eat and drink
the very flesh and blood of Christ which is in heaven, and sits on the right
hand of his father. And that finally by his means, they may enjoy with him the
glory and kingdom of heaven, Amen.

Winchester.
Now let us consider the tertes of the Evangelists, and S. Paul, which be
brought in by the Author as follows.

Math. 26.
When they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks he
brake it, gave it to his disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And
he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying:
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new testament, that is shed
for many for the remission of sins: But I say unto you, I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink it
new with you in my fathers kingdom.

As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he brake it, and
gave it to them, Mark. 14.
and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And taking the cup, when he had given
thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it, and he said unto them:
This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. Uerely, I say
unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day, that
I drink it new in the kingedome of God.

When the hour was come, he sat down and the twelve Apostles with him, and
he said unto them: I have greatly desired to eat this Pascha with you, before
I suffer: for I say unto you, Luke. 22.
henceforth I will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the
kingdom of God. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said: Take this,
and divide it among you, for I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of
the vine, until the kingdom of God come. And he took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave it unto them, saying: This is my body,
whith is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also when he
had supped, he took the cup, saying: This cup is the new testament in my
blood, which is shed for you.

1. Cor. 10.
Is not the cup of blessing, which we bless, a communion of the blood of
Christ? Is not the bread which we break, a communion of the body of Christ? We
being many, are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of one bread,
and of one cup.

1. Cor. 11.
That which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus,
the same night in the which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body, which is broaken
for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also he took the cup when
supper was done, saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood: Do this as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, for as often as you shall eat this
bread, and drink of this cup ye show forth the Lords death till he come:
wherefore who soever shall eat of this bread, or drink of this cup unworthily,
shall be gilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine
himself, and so eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, because he
makes no difference of the Lords body: For this cause, many are weak and
sick among you, and many do sleep.

After these tertes brought in, the author does in the 4. chap. begin to
trauers Christ's intent, The 4. untruth that by these words hoc est corpus
meum, Christ meant not to make the bread his body.
that he intended not by these words (this is my body) to make the bread his
body remember Christ to be very God, we must grant him omnipotent, and by
reason thereof,

First, in the sixth of John, when Christ had taught of the eating of him, being
the bread



But to show that Christ should not mean of his very body when he so spoke.
Neither Saint Paul. nor the Evangelists, add any words whereby to take away
the signification of bread and wine.
Neither S. Paul after, ne the Evangelists in the place, add any words or
circumstaunces, whereby to take away the proper signification of the words
(body) and (blood) so as the same might seem not in deed given (as the
catholic faith teaches) but in signification as the author would have it.
For as for the words of Christ (the Spirit gives life, the flesh profits
nothing) be to declare the two natures in Christ, each in their property a part
considered, but not as they be in Christ's person united, the mystery of which
vnio^, such as believed not Christ to be God, could not consider, and yet to
insinuate that unto them, Christ made mention of his descention from heaven,
and after of his ascension thither again, whereby they might understand him
very God, whose flesh taken in the virgins womb, and so given spiritually to
be eaten of us, is (as I have before opened) viuifike, and gives life.

And this shall suffice here to show how Christ's intent was to give verily (as
he did in deed) his precious body and blood to be eaten and dronken, according
as he taught the^

Caunterbury.
The fourth untruth ye Christ intended not by these words, this is my body to
make ye bread his body.
NOw we be come to the very pith of the matter, and the chief point whereupon
the wholl controversy hangs, whether in these words, this is my body: Christ
called bread his body, wherein you and Smith agree like a man and a woman that
dwelled in Lincolnshere (as I have heard reported) that what pleased the one
misliked the other, saving that they both agreed in wilfulness. The variaunce
between you, and Smith.
So do Smith and you agree both in this point, that Christ made bread his body,
but yt it was bread which he called his body when he said. This is my body,
this you grant, but Smith denies it. And because all Smithes buildinges
clearly fall down, if this his chief foundation be overthrown, therefore
must I first prove against Smith, Against Smith
that Christ called the material bread his body, and the wine which was the
fruit of the vine, Christ called bread his body,
his blood. For why did you not prove this my Lord (says Smith) would you
that men should take you for a prophet, or for one that could not err in his
sayings?

First I allege against Smithes negation, your affirmation, which, as it is
more true in this point then his negation, so for your estimation it is able to
counteruail his saying, if there were nothing else: and yet if Smith had well
pondered what I have written in the second chap. of my second book, and in the
7. and 8. chapters of my third book, he should have found this matter so fully
proved, that he neither is, nor never shall be able to answer thereto. For I
have alleged the scripture, I have alleged the consent of the old writers,
holy fathers, and martirs, to prove that Christ called bread his body, and
wine his blood. For the Evangelists speaking of the Lords supper, Mat. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke. 22.
say, yt he took bread, blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his disciples,
saying: This is my body: and of the wine he said: Take this, divide it among
you, and drink it: this is my blood. I have alleged Irene, Ireneus.
saying that Christ confessed bread to be his body, and the cup to be his blood
I have cyted Tertullia^ who says in many places, Tertullianus.
that Christ called bread his body. I have brought in for the same purpose
Cyprian, Cyprianus.
who says that Christ called such bread as is made of many corns joined
together, his body: and such wine he named his blood, as is pressed out of many
grapes. I have written the words of Epiphanius, Epiphanius.
which be these, that Christ speakinge of a loaf which is round in fashion,
and can neither see, hear, nor feel, said of it: This is my body. And S.
Hierom writing ad Hedibiam, Heironymus.
says that Christ called the bread which he brake, his body. And S. Augustine
says, Augustinus.
that Jesus called meat, his body, and drink his blood. And Cyrill says more
plainly, Cyrillus.
that Christ called the pieces of bread his body. And last of all I brought
forth Theodorete, Theodorus.
whose saying is this, that when Christ gave the holy mysteries, he called
bread his body, and the cup mixed with wine and water, he called his blood.
All these Authors I alleged, to prove that Christ called bread his body, and
wine his blood.

Which because they speak the thing so plainly as nothing can be more, and
Smith sees that he can devise nothing to answer these Authors, like a wily
fox, he steals away by them softly, as he had a flea in his ear saying
nothing to all these authors, but that they prove not my purpose. If this be a
sufficient answer let the Reader be judge, for in such sort I could make a
short answer to Smithes whole book in this one sentence that nothing that he
says proves his purpose. And as for proofs of his saying, Smith has utterly
none but only this fond reason: That if Christ had called bread his body, then
should bread have been crucified for us, because Christ added these words: this
is my body, which shall be given to death for you. If such wise reason shall take
place, a man may not take a loaf in his hand made of wheat that came out of
Danske, and say this is wheat that grew in Danske, but it must follow, that
the loaf grew in Danske. And if the wife shall say: this is butter of my own
cow, Smith shall prove by this speech that her maid milked butter. But to this
fantastical or rather frantike reason, I have spoaken more in mine answer to
Smithes preface.

How be it, you have taken a wiser way then this, granting that Christ called
bread his body, and wine his blood: but adding thereto, that Christ's calling
was making. Yet here may they that be wise, learn by ye way how evil fauoredly
you and Smith agree among your selves.

And forasmuch as Smith has not made answer unto the Authors by me alleged
in this part, I may justly require that for lack of answer in time and place
where he ought to have answered, he may be condemned as one that stands mute.
And being condemned in this his chief demur, he has after nothing to answer
at al. For this foundation being ouerthrown all the rest falls down withal.

Wherefore now will I return to answer you in this matter, which is the last
of the evident, and manifest untruths, whereof you appeach me.

I perceive here how untoward you be to learn the truth, being brought up all
your life in Papisticall errors. If you could forget your law, which has been
your chief profession and study from your youth, and specially the Canon law
which purposely corrupts the truth of Gods word you should be much more apt
to understand and receive the secrets of holy scripture. But before those
scales fall from your sawlish eyes, you neither can, nor will perceive the true
doctrine of this holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood. But yet I shall do
as much as lies in me, to teach and instruct you, as occasion shall serve, so
that the fault shall be either in your evil bringing up altogether in popery,
or in your dulnes, or frowardnes, if you attain not true understanding of this
matter.

Gods miraculous works in the Sacrament
to make bread his body, you must first learn that the bread is not made
really Christ's body, nor the wine his blood, but sacrame^tally: And the
miraculous working is not in the bread, but in them that duly eat the bread,
and drink yt drink. For the marvelous work of God is in the feeding, and it
is Christen people that be fed, and not the bread.

And so the true confession and belief of the universal Church, from the
beginning, is not such as you many times affirm, Imuty to baptism.
but never can prove: for the Catholic church acknowledges no such division
between Christ's Mine issue.
And you shall find, that although you think I lack law where with to follow
my plea, yet I doubt not but I shall have help of Gods word enough, to make al
men perceive that you be but a simple divine, so that for lack of your
proofs, I doubt not but the sentence shall be given upon my side by all
learned and indifferent judges that understand the matter which is in
controversy between us.

And where you say that we must repress our thoughts and imaginations, Gods
omnipotency.
judge his intent by his will, it is a most certain truth that Gods absolute
and determinate will is the chief governor of all things, and the rule whereby
all things must be ordered, and thereto obey. But where (I pray you) have you
any such will of Christ, that he is really, carnally, corporally, and
naturally, under the forms of bread and wine: There is no such will of Christ
set forth in the scripture as you pretend by a false understanding of these
words, this is my body. Why take you then so boldly upon you, to say that this
is Christ's will and intent, when you have no warrant in scripture to bear you?

It is not a sufficient proof in Scripture, to say, God does it, because he
can do it. Mat. 16.
For he can do many things which he neither does, nor will do. He could
have sent more then twelve Legions of Angels to deliver Christ from the wicked
Jews, Genesis 1.
and yet he would not do it. He could have created the world and all things
therein, in one moment of time, and yet his pleasure was to do it in six days.

In all matters of our christen faith, written in holy Scripture, for our
instruction and doctrine, how far so ever they seem discrepant from reason,
we must repress our imaginations, and consider Gods pleasure and will, and
yeald thereto, believing him to be omnipotent: And that by his omnipotent power,
such things are verelye so as holy scripture teaches. Like as we believe that
Christ was borne of ye blessed virgin Mary, without company of man: that our
Savior Christ the third day rose again from death: that he in his humanity
ascended into heaven: that our bodies at the day of judgment shall rise
again, and many other such like things, which we all that be true christian
men, do believe firmly, because we find these things written iu Scripture.
And therefore we (knowing Gods omnipotency) do believe that he has brought some
of ye said things to pass already, and those things that are yet to come, he
will by the same omnipotency without doubt likewise bring to pass.

Now if you can prove that your transubstantiation, your fleshly presence of
Christ's body and blood, your carnal eating and drinking of the same, your
propitiatory sacrifice of the mass, are taught us as plainly in ye scripture,
as the said articles of our faith be, then I will believe that it is so in
deed. Otherwise, neither I nor any man that is in his right wits, will
believe your said articles, because God is omnipotent, and can make it so. For
you might so under pretense of Gods omnipotency, make as many articles of our
faith as you list if such arguments might take place, that God by his
omnipotent power, can convert the substance of bread and wine, in to the
substance of his flesh and blood: ergo he does so in deed.



Eating signifies believing.
and start not from it an other time. And mark the same I pray thee (gentle
Reader.) For this one sentence assoyleth almost all the arguments that be
brought by this Lawyer in his wholl book against the truth.

And yet to the said true saying, you have joined an other untruth, and have
yoaked them both together in one sentence. untruths uttered by you in this one
place.
For when Christ had taught of the eating of him, being the bread descended
from heaven there was no murmuring thereat, (say you.) Which your saying I can
not but wonder at, to see you so far deceived in a matter so plain and
manifest. The first.
And if I had spoaken such an evident and manifest untruth, I doubt not but it
should have been spoaken of to Rome gates. For the text says there plainly,
Murmur abant Iudaei de illo, qoud dixisset: Ego sum panis vinus, qui de coelo
descendi: John 6.
The Jews murmured at him because he said, I am the bread of life that came
from heaven. But when you wrote this, it seems you looked a little to low and
should have looked higher.

And here by this one place the Reader may gather of your own words, your
intent and meaning in this your book, if that be true which you said before,
that ever where contention is, on what part the Reader sees in any one point
an open manifest lie, there he may consider (whatsoever excuse be made of
truth) yet the victory of truth not to be there intended.

The second^
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. John 6.
In these words (say you) Christ makes mention of two gifts But what be those
two gifts I pray you? And by what words is the diversity of those two gifts
expressed? If the giving (as Smith says) be giving to death, then those two
gifts declare that Christ dyed for us twice. And if one of Christ's gifts
have livery and seisyn, why has not the other likewise? And when was then that
livery and seisyn given? And if eating of Christ be believing (as you said even
now) then liuerey and seisyn is given when we first believe, whether it be in
baptism, or at any other time.

But what you mean by these words, that Christ gave in his supper, his body as
really to be eaten of us, as he did to be crucified for us, I understand not,
except you would have Christ so really eaten of his Apostles at his supper with
their teeth, as he was after crucified, whipped, and thrust to the dyed any
more? And if he were so eaten at his supper, then did his Apostles tear his
flesh at the supper, as the Jews did the day following. And then how could he
now be eaten again? Or how could he be crucified the day following, if the
night before he were after that sort eaten all up? But aptly (say you) and
conveniently: Mary Sir, I thank you: but what is ye aptly and conveniently,
but spiritually, and by faith (as you said before) not grossly with the teeth as
he was crucified. And so the manner was diverse (I grant) and the substance all
one.

The third.
But when Christ said, the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world, That Christ fulfilled not his promise to give
us life at his supper.
if he had fulfilled this promise at his supper (as you say he did) then what
needed he after to dye that we might live, if he fulfilled his promise of life
at his supper? Why said the Prophets, that he should be wounded for our
iniquities, and that by his wounds we should be healed if we had life, and were
healed before he was wounded? John. 6 Esaias. 53. Romans 32 Heb. 9. Gal. 6.
Why does the catholic faith teach us to believe that we be redeemed by his
blud sheading, if he gave us life (which is our redem^ion) the night before he
shed his blood? And why says S. Paul that there is no remission without blood
sheading? Yea why did he say: Absit mihi gloriari, nisi in cruce, God forbid
that I should rejoice, but in the cross only. Why did he not rather say?
Absit mihi gloriari, nisi in caena Domini. God forbid that I should rejoice,
but in ye Lords supper: whereat as you say, ye promise of life was fulfilled.
This is godly doctrine for such men to make, as being ignorant in Gods word,
wander in fantasies of their own devises, Romans 1.
and putantes se esse sapientes, stulti facti sunt. But the true faithful
believing man professes, that Christ by his death, overcame him that was the
Author of death, and has reconcyled us to his Father, Hebr. 2. Ephesians. 1. John. 3.
making us his children, and heirs of his kingdom: that as many as believe in
him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. Thus says the true
christian man, putting his hope of life and eternal salvation, neither in
Christ's supper, (although the same be to him a great confirmation of his
faith) nor in any thing else, but with S. Paul faith: Mihi absit gloriari, nisi
in cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi: Gal. 3.
God save me that I rejoice in nothing, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And when this true believing man comes to the Lords Supper, and (according
to Christ's commandment) receaueth the bread broaken, in remembrance that
Christ's body was broaken for him upon the cross, and drinks the wine in
remembrance of the effusion of Christ's blood for his sins, and unfeignedly
believes the same, to him the words of our Savior Christ be effectuous and
operatory. Mat. 16. Marck. 14. Luke. 22.
Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for thee: And drink of this, for
this is my blood which is shed for thee, to the remission of thy sins. And as
S. Paul says, the bread unto him is the communion of Christ's body, 1. Cor. 10.
and the wine the communion of his blood. For the effect of his godly eating
(as you truly herein gather of S. Paul's words) is the communication of
Christ's body and blood, but to the faithful receauer, and not to the dumme
creatures of bread and wine, under whose forms the catholic faith teaches
not the body and blood of Christ inuisibly to be hidden. And as to the godly
eater, (who duly esteems Christ's body, and has it in such price and
estimation as he ought to have) the effect is the communication of Christ's
body: so to the wicked eater, the effect is damnation, and everlasting woe.

And now I am glad that here your self have found out a warrante for the
apparel of bread and wine, A warrant for apparel.
that they shall not go altogether naked, and be nude and bare tokens, but
have promyses of effectual signification, which now you have spyed out both in
the words of Christ, and S. Paul.

Christ's ambiguous speechess were not always opened by the Evangelists.
that such speeches of Christ as might have ambiguity, the Evangelists either
plainly or by circumstances open them. For Christ speaking so many things in
parables, similies, allegories, metaphores, and other tropes and figures,
although sometime Christ himself, and sometime the Evangelists open ye
meaning, yet for the most part the meaning is left to the judgment of the
hearers, without any declaration. As when Christ said: Luke. 12.
gird your loins, and take light candles in your hands. And when he said: No
man that sets his hand to the plough, Luke 9. John. 12.
and looks behind him, is meet for the kingdom of God. And when he said:
Except the grain of wheat falling upon the ground, dye, it remains sole.
And as S. Matthew says: 1 Math. 13.
Christ spoke not to the people without parables, that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled, which prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 77.
that he should open his mouth in parables.

And although some of his parables, This is my body, is no proper speech.
Christ opened to the people, some to his Apostles only, yet some he opened to
neither of both, as can appear, but left them to be considered by the
discretion of the hearers. And when Christ called Herod a Fox, Judas a Devil,
himself a Door, a way, a Uine, a well: Neither he nor the Evangelists
expounded these words, nor gave warning to the hearers that he spoke in
figures: For every man that had any manner of sense or reason, might well
perceive, that these sentences could not be true in plain form of words as
they were spoaken. For who is so ignorant, but he knows that a man is not a
Fox a Devil, A Door, a Way, a Uine, a Well.

And so likewise when Christ brake the bread, and commanded his disciples to
eat it, and said: This is my body: and of the wine he said: Divide it among
you, drink it, this is my blood. No man that was there present was so fond,
but he knew well that the bread was not Christ's body, nor the wine his blood.
And therefore they might well know that Christ called the bread his body, and
the wine his blood for some figure, similitude, and property of the bread and
wine unto his flesh and blood: For as bread and wine be foodes to nourish our
bodies, so is the flesh and blood of our Savior Christ, (being annexed unto
his Deity,) the everlasting food of our souls.

And although the Evangelists in that place do not fully express the words
in this sense, yet adjoining the sixth chapter of John (speaking of the
spiritual manduratio^ of Christ) to the circumstances of the text in the three
Evangelists, (reciting Christ's last Supper) the wholl matter is fully gathered
as old authors of the Church have declared. For do not the circumstances of
the text, both before and after the eating and drinking, declare that there is
very bread and wine? Is not that which is broken and eaten, bread? And that
which is divided, dronken? And the fruit of the vine, is it not very wine? And
does not the nature of Sacraments require that the sensible elements should
remain in their proper nature, to signify an higher mystery, and secret
working of God inwardly, as the sensible elements be ministered outwardly? And
is not the visible and corporal feeding upon bread and wine, a convenient and
apt figure and similitude to put us in remembrance, and to admonish us how we
be fed inuisibly and spiritually, by the flesh and blood of Christ, God, and
man? And is not the Sacrament taken away, when the element is taken away? Or
can the accidents of the element be the Sacrament of substanciall feeding? Or
did ever any old author say, that the accidents were the Sacramental signs
without the substances?

But for the conclusion of your matter, here I would wish that you would once
truly understand me. For I do not say that Christ's body and blood be given
to us in signification, and not in deed. But I do as plainly speak as I can,
that Christ's body and blood, be given to us in deed, yet not corporally, and
carnally, but spiritually, and effectually, as you confess your self within
twelve lines after.

Winchester.
The Author utters a great many words, from the eight to the seuententh
chapter of the first book, declaryng spiritual hunger and thirst, and the
releuing of the same by spyrituall feeding in Christ, and of Christ, as we
constantly believe in him, to the confirmation of which belief, the author
would have the Sacraments of Baptism, and of the body and blood of Christ, to
be adminicles as it were, and that we by them be preached unto, as in water,
bread and wine, and by them all our sins (as it were) spoken unto, or
properly touched, which matter in the gross, although there be some words by
the way not tolerable, yet if those words set apart, the same were in the
sum granted, to be good teaching and wholesome exhortation, it contains so
no more but good matter, not well applied. For the Catholic church that
professes the truth of the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, would
therewith use that declaration of hunger of Christ, and that spiritual
refreshing in Christ, with theffect of Christ's passion and death, and the same
to be the only mean of man's regeneratio, and feeding also, with the
differences of that feeding, from bodilye feeding, for continuing this earthly
life. But this touches not the principal point that should be entreated.
Whether Christ so ordered to feed such as be regenerate in him, to give to
them in the Sacrament the same his body, that he gave to be crucified for us.
The good man is fed by faith, and by merits of Christ's passion, being the
mean of the gift of that faith, and other gifts also, and by the suffering of
the body of Christ, and shedding of his most precious blood on the altar of the
Cross: which work and passion of Christ is preached unto us, by words and
Sacraments, and the same doctrine received of us by faith, and theffect of it
also. And thus far goes the doctrine of this author.

But the Catholic teaching, by the scriptures, goes further, confessing
Christ to feed such as be regenerate in him, not only by his body and blood,
but also with his body and blood, delivered in this Sacrament, by him in deed
to us which the faithful, by his institution and commandment, receive with
their faith and with their mouth also, and with those special deinties, be fed
specially at Christ's table: And so God does not only preach in his Sacraments,
but also works in them, and with them, and in sensible things gives
celestial gifts, after the doctrine of each Sacrament, as in baptism the
spirit of Christ, and in the Sacrament of the altar, the very body and blood
of Christ, according to the plain sense of his words which he spoke: This
is my body. etc. And this is the Catholic faith, against which, how the
Author will fortifye, that he would have called Catholic, and confute that he
improueth, I intend hereafter more particularly to touch in discussion of that
is said.

Caunterbury.
I Mystrust not the indifferency of the reader so much, but he can well
perceive how simple and slender a rehearsal you have made here of my eight
annotations, and how little matter you have here to say against them, and how
little your sayings require any answer.

And because this may the more evidently appear to the reader, I shall
rehearse my words hear again.

Although in this treaty of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our savior
Christ, Cap. 6.
I have already sufficiently declared the institution and meaning of the same,
according to the very words of the Gospel and of saint Paul, yet it shall
not be in vain somewhat more at large to declare the same, according to the
mind, as well of holy scripture, as of old ancient authors, and that so
sincerely and plainly, without doubts, ambiguities, or vain questions, that the
very simple and unlearned people, may easily understand the same, and be
edified thereby.

And this by Gods grace is mine only intent and desire, that the flock of
Christ dispersed in this Realm (among whom I am appointed a special pastor)
may no longer lack the commodite and fruit, which springs of this heavenly
knowledge. For the more clearly it is understood the more swetnes, fruit,
comfort, and edification it brings to the godly receauers thereof. And to the
clear understanding of this Sacrament, diverse things must be considered.

First, that as all men of them selves be sinners, and through sin be in gods
wrath, Cap. 9. The spiritual hunger and thirstines of the soul.
banished far away from him, condemned to hell and everlasting damnation, and
none is clearly innocent, but Christ alone: so every soul inspired by god, is
desirous to be delivered from sin and hell, and to obtain at Gods hands,
mercy, favor, righteousness, and everlasting salvation.

And this earnest and great desire is called in scripture, The hunger and
thirst of the soul: Ephesians. 2. Romans 3:
with which kind of hunger David was taken, when he said: As an heart longs
for springes of water, so does my soul long for thee O God. My soul thyrsteth
after God, Psalm. 41. Psalm. 62.
who is the well of life. My soul thyrsteth for thee, my flesh wishes for
thee.

And this hunger the seely poor sinful soul is driven unto, by means of the
law, which shows unto her the horriblenes of sin, the terror of Gods
indignation, and the horror of death and everlasting damnation.

And when she sees nothing but damnation for her offenses, Romans 4. Romans 7.
by justice and accusation of the law, and this damnation is ever before her
eyes, then in this great distress the soul being pressed with heuinesse and
sorrow, seeks for some comfort, Romans 8.
and desires some remedy for her miserable and sorrowful estate. And this
felyng of her damnable condition, and greedy desire of refreshing, is the
spiritual hunger of the soul.

And who so ever has this godly hunger, Math. 5.
is blessed of God, and shall have meat and drink enough, as Christ himself
said: Blessed be they that hunger and thyrst for righteousness, for they shall be
filled full. And on the other side, they that see not their own sinful and
damnable estate, but think themselves holy enough, and in good case and
condition enough, as they have no spiritual hunger, so shall they not be fed
of God with any spiritual food. For as almighty God feeds them that be
hungry, Luke. 1.
so does he send away empty all that be not hungry.

But this hunger and thyrst is not easily perceived of the carnal man. For
when he hears the holy ghost speak of meat and drink, his mind is by and
by in the kytchen and buttery, and he thinks upon his dishes and pottes, his
mouth and his belly.

But the Scripture in sundry places uses special words, whereby to draw our
gross minds from the phantasying of our teeth and belly, and from this
carnal and fleshly imagination. For the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ,
when they were yet carnal, knew not what was meant by this kind of hunger, and
meat, and therefore when they desired him to eat, (to withdraw their minds
from carnal meat) he said unto them: I have other meat to eat which you know
not. John. 4.
And why knew they it not? Forsooth because their minds were gross as yet,
and had not received the fulness of the Spirit. And therefore our Savior Christ
minding to draw them from this grossenes, told them of an other kind of meat
then they fantasied (as it were) rebuking them, for that they perceived not
that there was any other kind of eating and drinking, besides that eating and
drinking which is with the mouth and throat.

John. 4.
Likewise when he said to the woman of Samaria: Who soever shall drink of that
water that I shall give him, shall never be thirsty again. They that heard him
speak those words, might well perceive that he went about to make them well
acquainted with an other kind of drinking, then is the drinking with the mouth
and throat. For there is no such kind of drink, that with once drinking can
quench the thirst of a man's body for ever. Wherefore, in saying he shall never
be thirsty again: he did draw their minds from drinking with the mouth, unto
another kind of drinking whereof they knew not, and unto another kind of
thirsting, wherewith as yet they were not acquainted. And also when our Savior
Christ said, he that comes to me shall not hunger, John 6.
and he that believes on me shall never be thirsty: he gave them a plain
watcheworde, that there was another kind of meat and drink, then that
wherewith he fed them at the other side of the water, and an other kind of
hungryng and thirstyng, then was the hungryng and thyrstyng, of the body. By
these words therefore he drove the people to understand an other kind of
eating and drynking, of hungring and thirsting, then that which belongs
only for the preservation of temporal life.

Now then as the thing that comfort the body, is called meat and drink, of
a like sort the scripture calls the same thing that comfort the soul,
meat and drink.

Cap. 10.
Wherefore as here before in the first note is declared the hunger and drought of
the soul, Mat. 11. The spiritual food of ye soul.
so is it now secondly to be noted, what is the meat, drink and food of the
soul.

The meat, drink, food and refreshing of the soul, is our Savior Christ,
John. 7.
as he said himself: Come unto me all you that travail and be laden, and I
will refresh you. And, If any man be dry (says he) let him come to me and
drink. He that believes in me, John. 6.
floudes of water of life shall flow out of his bellye. And, I am the bread of
life (says Christ,) he that comes to me, shall not be hungry: and he that
believes in me, shall never be dry. For as meat and drink do comfort the
hungry body, so does the death of Christ's body and the shedding of his blood
comfort the soul, when she is after her sort, hungry. What thing is it that
comfort and nourishes the body. Forsooth meat and drink. By what names
then shall we call the body and blood of our savior Christ (which do comfort
and nourish the hungry soul) but by the names of meat and drink? And this
symilitude caused our Savior to say: my flesh is very meat, and my blood is
very drink. For there is no kind of meat that is comfortable to the soul,
but only the death of Christ's blessed body. Nor no kind of drink that can
quench her thirst, but only the bloudsheading of our Savior Christ, which was
shed for her offenses. For as there is a carnal generation, and a carnal
feeding and nourishment, so is there also a spiritual generation, and a
spiritual feeding.

And as every man by carnal generation of father and mother, is carnally
begotten and borne unto this mortal life: so is every good christian
spiritually borne by Christ unto eternal life.

And as every man is carnally fed and nourished in his body by meat and
drink, even so is every good christian man spiritually fed and nourished in
his soul, by the flesh and blood of our Savior Christ.

And this Christ himself teaches us in this syxt of John, John 6.
saying: Verily verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Who so eats my flesh
and drynketh my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day: For my flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. He that eats
my flesh, and drynketh my blood dwells in me, and I in him, As the living
father has sent me, and I live by the father, even so he that eats me, shall
live by me.

And this S. Paul confessed him self: saying: That I have life, I have it by
faith in the Son of God. And now it is not I that live, Gal. 2.
but Christ lives in me.

The third thing to be noted is this, that although our Savior Christ
resembles his flesh and blood to meat and drink, Cap. 11.
yet he far passes and excels all corporal meats and drynkes: For
although eorporall meats and drynkes do nourish and continue our life here in
this world, Christ far excels all corporal food.
yet they begin not our life. For the beginning of our life, we have of our
fathers and mothers and the meat after we be begotten, does feed and nourish
us, and so preserves us for a time. But our savior Christ is both the first
beginner of our spiritual life, (who first begets us unto God his father)
and also afterward he is our lively food and nourishment.

Moreover meat and drink do feed and nourishe only our bodies, but CHRIST
is the true and perfect nourishment both of body and soul. And besides that,
bodily food preserves the life but for a time, but Christ is such a
spiritual and perfect food, that he preserves both body and soul for ever:
as he said unto Martha: I am a resurrection and life. He that believes in me,
although he dye yet shall he live. And he that lives and believes in me,
John. 11.
shall not dye for ever.

Fourthly it is to be noted, that the true knowledge of these things, is the
true knowledge of Christ, Cap. 12.
and to teach these things, is to teach Christ. and the believing and feelyng
of these things, The sacraments were ordained to confirm our faith.
is the beleuyng and feelyng of Christ in our hearts. And the more clearly we
see, understand and believe these things, the more clearly we see and
understand Christ, and have more fully our faith and comfort in him.

And although our carnal generation and our carnal nourishment, be known to all
men by daily experyence, and by our common senses, yet this our spiritual
generation and our spiritual nutrition, be so obscure and hyd unto us, that we
cannot attain to the true and perfect knowledge and feelyng of them, but only
by faith, which must be grounded upon Gods most holy word and sacraments.

And for this consideration our Savior Christ has not only set forth these
things most plainly in his holy word, that we may hear them with our ears,
but he has also ordained one visible sacrament of spiritual regeneration in
water, and an other visible sacrament of spiritual nourishment, in bread and
wine, to the intent, that as much as is possible for man, we may see Christ
with our eyes, smell him at our nose, taste him with our mouths, grope him
with our hands, and perceive him with all our senses. For as the word of God
preached, puts Christ into our ears, so likewise these elements of water,
bread and wine, joined to Gods word, do after a sacramental manner, put Christ
into our eyes, mouths, hands, and all our senses.

And for this cause Christ ordained baptism in water, that as surely as we se,
feel and touch water with our bodies, and be washed with water, so assuredly
ought we to believe, when we be baptized, that Christ is verily present with us,
and that by him we be newly borne again spiritually, and wafhed from our
sins, and grafted in the stock of Christ's own body, and be apparailed,
clothed, and harnessed with him, in such wise, that as the devil has no power
against Christ, so has he none against us, so long as we remain, grafted in
that stock, and be clothed with that apparel, and harnessed with that armor.
So that the washing in water of baptism, is as it were showing of Christ
before our eyes, and a sensible touching, feelyng and gropyng of him, to the
confirmation of the inward faith, which we have in him.

And in like manner Christ ordained the sacrament of his body and blood in
bread and wine, to preach unto us, that as our bodies be fed, nourished and
preserved with meat and drink (so as touching our spiritual life toward
God) we be fed, nourished and preserved by the body and blood of our Savior
Christ, and also that he is such a preservation unto us, that neither the
devils of hell, nor eternal death, nor sin, can be able to prevail against
us, so long as by true and constant faith, we be fed and nourished with that
meat and drynk. And for this cause Christ ordained this sacrament in bread and
wine (which we eat and drink, Hugo de S. vict. de Sacramentis tractat. 6.
cap. 3.
and be chief nutrimentes of our body (to the intent, that as surely as we see
the bread and wine, with our eyes, smell them with our noses, touch them with
our hands, and taste them with our mouths, so assuredlye ought we to believe,
that Christ is a spiritual life and sustinaunce of our souls, like as the
said bread and wine is the food and sustinance of our bodies. And no less
ought we to doubt, that our souls be fed and live by Christ, then that our
bodies be fed and live by meat and drink. Thus our savior Christ, knowing us
to be in this world (as it were) but babes and weakelinges in faith, has
ordained sensible signs and tokens, whereby to allure and draw us to more
strength and more constant faith in him. So that the eating and drynkyng of
this sacramental bread and wine, is as it were showing of Christ before our
eyes, a smellyng of him with our noses, felyng and gropyng of him with our
hands, and an eating, chawing, digestyng and feedyng upon him to our
spiritual strength and perfection.

Cap. 13.
Fiftely it is to be noted, that although there be many kinds of meats and
drinks, which feed the body, yet our Savior Christ (as many ancient authors
write) ordained this sacrament of our spiritual feding in bread and wine,
Wherefore this sacrament was ordained in bred and wine.
rather then in other meats and drynkes, because that bread and wine do most
lively represent unto us the spiritual union and knot of all faithful people,
as well unto Christ, as also among them selves. For like as bread is made of
a great number of grains of corn, ground, baken, Hugo de S. vict. de
Sacramentis tractat. 6. cap. 3.
and so joined together that thereof is made one lose: And an infinite number of
grapes be pressed together in one vessel, and thereof is made wine: likewise
the whole multitude of true christen people spiritually joined, first to
Christ, and then among them selves together in one faith, one baptism, one
holy spirit, one knot and bond of love.

Sixthly it is to be noted, that as the bread and wine which we do eat, Cap.
14.
be turned into our flesh and blood, and be made our very flesh and very
blood, and so be joined and myxed with our flesh and blood, The unity of
Christ's mystical body.
that they be made one whole body together: even so be all faithful
christians, spiritually turned into the body of Christ, and so be joined unto
Christ, and also together among them selves, that they do make but one
mystical body of Christ, as S. Paul says: We be one bread and one body, as
many as be partakers of one bread and one cup. And as one lofe is given among
many men, 1. Cor. 10.
so that every one is partaker of the same lofe: and likewise one cup of wine
is distributed unto many persons, whereof every one is partaker, Dionysios.
eccle. Hie. cap. 31
even so our Savior Christ (whose flesh and blood be represented by the
mystical bread and wine in the Lords Supper) does give him self unto al his
true members, spiritually to feed them, nourish them, and to give them
continual life by him. And as the branches of a tree, or member of a body, if
they be dead; or cut of, they neither live, nor receive any nourishment, or
sustinance of the body, or tree: so likewise ungodly and wicked people, which
be cut of from Christ's mystical body, or be dead members of the same, do not
spiritually feed upon Christ's body and blood, nor have any life, strength, or
sustentation thereby.

Seventhly, it is to be noted, Cap. 14. This sacrament moves all men to love
and friendship.
that where as nothing in this life is more acceptable before God, or more
pleasant unto man, the^ christen people to live together quietly in love and
peace, unity and concord this Sacrament does most aptly and effectuously move
us thereunto. For when we be made all partakers of this one table, what ought
we to think, but that we be all members of one spiritual body, whereof Christ
is the head, that we be joined together in one Christ, as a great number of
graynes of corn be joined together in one loaf. Surely, they have very hard
and stony hearts, which with these things be not moved: and more cruel and
unreasonable be they then bruit beasts, that cannot be persuaded to be good to
their christen brethren and neighbors, for whom Christ suffered death, when
in this Sacrament they be put in remembrance that the Son of God bestowed his
life for his enemies. For we see by daily experience, that eating and drinking
together makes friends, and continues frendshippe: much more then ought the
table of Christ to move us so to do. Wild beasts and birds be made gentile
by giving them meat and drink, why then should not christen men wax meek
and gentle with this heavenly meat of Christ? Hereunto we be stirred, and
moved, as well by the bread, and wine in this holy Supper, as by the words of
holy Scripture, recited in the same. Wherefore, whose heart soever this holy
Sacrament, Communion, and Supper of Christ, will not kindle with love unto his
neighbors, and cause him to put out of his heart, all envy, hatred, and
malice, and to grave in the same all amity, frendshippe, and concord, he
deceaueth him self, if he think that he has the spirit of Christ dwelling
within him.

But all these foresaid godly admonitions, exhortations, and comforts, do the
Papists (as much as lies in them) take away from all christen people, by
their transubstantiation.

The doctrine of Transubsta^tia^ion does clean subvert our faith in Christ.
For if we receive no bread nor wine in the holy Communion, then all these
lessons and comfortes be gone, which we should learn, and receive, by eating
of the bread, and drinking of the wine: and that fantastical imagination,
gives an occasion utterly to subvert our wholl faith in Christ. For seeing
that this Sacrament was ordained in bread and wine (which be foodes for the
body) to signify and declare unto us our spiritual food by Christ, then if
our corporal feeding upon the bread and wine, be but fantastical (so that
there is no bread, nor wine there in deed to feed upon, although they appear
there to be) then it does us to understand, that our spiritual feeding in
Christ, is also fantastical, and that in deed we feed not of him: which
sophistry is so deuilish and wicked, and so much injurious to Christ, that it
could not come from any other person, but only from the Devil himself, and
from his special minister Antichrist.

The eight thing that is to be noted, is, that this spiritual meat of Christ's
body and blood, Cap. 16.
is not received in the mouth, and digested in the stomach (as corporal meats
and drinks commonly be) but it is received with a pure heart, and a sincere
faith. The spiritual eating in with the heart, not with the teeth.
And the true eating and drinking of the said body and blood of Christ, is with
a constant, and lively faith to believe, that Christ gave his body, and shed
his blood upon the cross for us, and that he does so join, and incorporate
him self to us, that he is our head, and we his members, and flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones, having him dwelling in us, and we in him. And
herein stands the wholl effect and strength of this Sacrament. And this
faith God works inwardly in our hearts by his holy Spirit, and confirms the
same outwardly to our ears, by hearing of his word: and to our other senses,
by eating and drinking of the Sacramental bread and wine in his holy Supper.

What thing then can be more comfortable to us, then to eat this meat, and
drink this drink? whereby Christ certifieth us, that we be spiritually, and
truly, fed and nourished by him, and that we dwell in him, and he in us. Can
this be showed unto us more plainly, then when he says him self: He that
eats me, shall live by me? John. 6.


Wherefore, who so ever does not contemn the everlasting life, how can he but
highly esteem this Sacrament? how can he but embrace it, as a sure pledge of
his salvation? And when he sees godly people devoutly receive the same, how
can he but be desirous oftentimes to receive it with them? Surely no man that
well understands, and diligently wayeth these things, can be without a great
desire to come to this holy Supper.

All men desire to have Gods favor, and when they know the contrary, that they
be in his indignation, and cast out of his favor, what thing can comfort them?
how be their minds vexed? what trouble is in their consciences? all Gods
creatures seem to be against them, and do make them afraid, as things being
ministers of Gods wrath and indignation toward them, and rest or comfort can
they find none, neither within them, nor without them. And in this case they
do hate as well God, as the Devil. God, as an unmerciful and extreme Judge,
and the Devil as a most malicious and cruel tormentor.

And in this sorrowful heaviness, holy Scripture teaches them, that our
heavenly Father can by no means be pleased with the^ again, but by the
Sacrifice, and death of his only begotten Son, whereby God has made a
perpetual amity, and peace with us, does pardon the sins of them that believe
in him, makes them his children, and gives them to his first begotten Son
Christ, to be incorporate into him, to be saved by him, and to be made heirs
of heaven with him. And in the receiving of the holy Supper of our Lord, we be
put in remembrance of this his death, and of the wholl mystery of our
redemption. In the which Supper, is made mention of his testament, and of the
aforesaid communion of us with Christ, and of the remission of our sins, by
his Sacrifice upon the Cross.

Wherefore in this Sacrament, (if it be rightly received with a true faith) we
be assured that our sins be forgiven, and the league of peace and the
Testament of God is confirmed between him and us, so that who so ever by a true
faith does eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, has everlasting life by
him. Which thing when we feel in our hearts, at the receiving of the Lords
supper, what thing can be more joyful, more pleasant, or more comfortable
unto us.

All this to be true, is most certain by the words of Christ him self, when
he did first institute his holy Supper, the night before his death, as it
appears as well by the words of the Evangelists, as of S. Paul. Do this
(says Christ) as often as you drink it, Luke. 21.
in remembrance of me. And S. Paul says: As often as you eat this bread and
drink this cup, 1. Cor. 11. Mat. 26. Luke. 22. Mark. 14.
you shall show the Lords death until he come. And again Christ said: This
cup is a new testament in mine own blood, which shall be shed for the
remission of sins.

This doctrine here recyted, may suffice for all that be humble and Godly, and
seek nothing that is superfluous, but that is necessary and profitable. And
therefore unto such persons may be made here an end of this book. But unto
them that be contentious Papists and Idolaters, nothing is enough. And yet
because they shall not glory in their subtle inventions and deceiuable
doctrine (as though no man were able to answer them) I shall desire the
readers of patience, to suffer me a little while, to spend some time in vain,
to confute their most vain vanities. And yet the time shall not be al together
spent in vain, for thereby shall more clearly appear the light from the
darcknes, the truth from false sophistical subtilties, and the certain word
of God, from men's dreams and fantastical inventions.



And as for your catholic confession, that Christ does in deed feed such as be

Thus you have labored sore in this matter, and sponne a fair threde, and
brought this your first book to a goodly conclusion. Injury to both
Sacrament^s.
For you conclude your book with blasphemous words against both the sacrament
of baptism and the Lords supper, nigardly pinching gods gifts, and
diminishing his lyberall promises made unto us in them. For where Christ hat^
promised in both the sacraments to be assistant with us wholl both in body and
spirit (in the one to be our spiritual regeneration and apparel, and in the
other to be our spiritual meat and drink) you clyp his liberal benefits in
such sort, that in the one you make him to give but only his spirit, and in
the other but only his body. And yet you call your book an Explication and
assertion of the true catholic faith.

D. Smith.
Here you make an end of your first book, leaving unanswered the rest of my
book. And yet forasmuch as Smith busieth him self in this place with the
answer thereof, he may not pass unanswered again, where the matter
requires. The words of my book be these.

Cap. 17.
But these things cannot manifestly appear to the reader, except the
principal points be first set our, wherein the Papists vary from the truth
of gods word, principal errors of the Papists.
which be chiefly four.

First the Papists say, that in the supper of the Lord, after the words of
consecration (as they call it) there is none other substance remaining, but
the substance of Christ's flesh and blood, The first is of the presence of
Christ.
so that there remains neither bread to be eaten, nor wine to be dronken. And
although there be the color of bread and wine, the savor, the smell, the
bigness, the fashion, and all other (as they call them) accidents, or
qualities and quantitees of bread and wine, yet (say they) there is no very
bread nor wine, but they be turned into the flesh and blood of Christ. And this
conversion they call transubstantiation, that is to say, turning of one
substance into an other substance. And although all the accidents, both of the
bread and wine, remain still, yet (say they) the same accidents, be in no
manner of thing, but hang alone in the air, without any thing to stay them
upon. For in the body and blood of Christ (say they) these accidents cannot
be, nor yet in the air, for the body and blood of Christ and the air, be
neither of that bigness, fashion, smell, nor color, that the bread and wine
be. Nor in the bread and wine (say they) these accidents can not be, for the
substance of bread and wine (as they affirm) be clean gone. And so there
remains whitenes, but nothing is white: there remains colors, but nothing
is colored therewith: there remains roundnes, but nothing is round: and there
is bigness, and yet nothing is big: there is sweetenes, without any sweet
thing: softnes without any soft thing: breaking, without any thing broaken:
division, without any thing divided: and so other qualities and quantities,
without any thing to receive them. And this doctrine they teach as a necessary
article of our faith.

But it is not the doctrine of Christ, but the subtle invention of Antichrist,
first decreed by Innocent the third, Innocent. 3.
and after more at large set forth by school authors, whose study was ever to
defend and set abroad to the world, all such matters, De summa trin. and fide
catholica firmiter, paragrapho. vna.
as the bishop of Rome had once decreed. And the Devil by his minister
Antichrist, had so daseled the eyes of a great multitude of christian people in
these latter days, that they sought not for their faith at the clear light of
Gods word, but at the Romish Antichrist, believing what so ever he prescribed
unto them, yea though it were against all reason, al senses, and Gods most holy
word also. For else he could not have been very Antichrist in deed, except he
had been so repugnant unto Christ, whose doctrine is clean contrary to this
doctrine of Antichrist. For Christ teaches that we receive very bread, and
wine, in the most blessed Supper of the Lord, as Sacraments to admonish us,
that as we be fed with bread and wine bodily, so we be fed with the body
and blood of our savior Christ spirituallye. As in our baptism we receive
very water, to signify unto us that as water is an eleme^t to wash the body
outwardly, so be our souls washed by the holy ghost inwardly.

The second principal thing, The second is of the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament.
wherein the Papists vary from the truth of gods word, is this: They say,
that the very natural flesh and blood of Christ, which suffered for us upon
the cross, and sits at the right hand of father in heaven, is also really,
substancially, corporally, and naturally, in or under the accidents of the
sacramental bread and wine, which they call the fourmes of bread and wine. And
yet here they vary not a little among the^ selves, for some say, that the very
natural body of Christ is there, but not naturally, nor sensibly. And other
say, that it is there naturally and sensibly, and of the same bigness and
fashion that it is in heaven, and as the same was borne of the blessed virgin
Mary, and that is there broken and torn in pieces with our teeth. And this
appears partly by the schole authors, and partly by the confession of
Berengarius, De co^secra, did. 1. Ego Be^eng. Lege Roffen. contra Oerol. in
proaemio. lib. 3. corroborat. 5.
which Nicholas the second constrained him to make, which was this: That of the
Sacraments of the Lords table the said Berengarius should promise to hold
that faith, which the said Pope Nicholas and his counsel held, which was, that
not only the sacraments of bread and wine, but also the very flesh and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, are sensibly handled of the priest in the altar, broken
and torn with the teeth of the faithful people. But the true catholic faith,
grounded upon Gods most infallible word, teaches us, that our savior Christ
(as concerning his man's nature and bodily presence) is gone up unto heaven,
Christ is not corporally in earth.
and sits at the right hand of his father, and there shall he tarry until
the worlds end, at what time he shall come again to judge both the quick and
the dead, as he says him self in many Scriptures. I forsake the world (says
he) and go to my Father. John 6.
And in another place he says: You shall ever have poor men among you, but me
shall not you ever have. Math. 26. Mark. 24.
And again he says: Many hereafter shall come and say, look here is Christ,
or look there he is, but believe them not. And S. Peter says in the Acts,
that heaven must receive Christ, Acts. 3.
until the time that all things shall be restored. And S. Paul writing to
the Colossians, Coloss. 3.
agrees hereto saying: Seek for things that be aaboue, where Christ is,
sitting at the right hand of the Father. And Saint Paul speaking of the very
Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
says: As often as you shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, show
forth the Lords death until he come. Till he come, says Saint. Paul,
signifying, that he is not there corporally present. For what speech were this?
or who uses of him that is already present, to say: until he come? For,
until he come, signifies that he is not yet present. This is the catholic
faith, which we learn from our youth, in our common Creed, and which Christ
taught, the Apostles followed, and the Martirs confirmed with their blood.

And although Christ in his humain nature, substantially, really, corporally,
naturally, and sensibly, be present with his Father in heaven, yet
Sacramentally, and Spiritually, he is here present. For in water, bread, and
wine, he is present, as in signs and Sacraments: but he is in deed
Spiritually in those faithful, christian people, which according to Christ's
ordinance be baptized, or receive the holy communion, or unfeignedly believe
in him. Thus have you heard the second principal article, wherein the Papists
vary from the truth of Gods word, and from the Catholic faith. Now the third
thing, wherein they vary, is this.

The Papists say, that evil and ungodly men, receive in this Sacrament, t^^
very body and blood of Christ, and eat and drink the self same thing, that
the good and godly men do. The third is, that evil men eat and drink the
very body and blood of Christ.
But the truth of Gods word is contrary, that all those that be godly members
of Christ, as they corporally eat the bread, and drink the wine, so
spiritually they eat and drink Christ's very flesh and blood. And as for the
wicked members of the Devil, they eat the Sacramental bread, and drink the
Sacrame^tall wine, but they do not spiritually eat Christ's flesh, nor drink
his blood, but they eat and drink their own damnation.

The fourth thing, The fourth, is of the daily sacrifice of Christ.
wherein the Popish priests dissent from the manifest word of God, is this.
They say that they offer Christ every day for remission of sin, and
distribute by their Masses, the merits of Christ's passion. But the Prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists, do say that Christ himself in his own person made
a sacrifice for our sins upon the Cross, by whose wounds all our diseases
were healed, and our sins pardoned, and so did never no priest, man nor
creature, but he, nor he did the same never more then once. And the benefit
hereof is in no man's power to give unto any other, but every man must receive
it at Christ's hands himself, Ibacuk. 2.
by his own faith and belief, as the Prophet says.

Here Smith finds him self much grieved at two false reports, wherewith he
says that I untruly charge the Papists. One when I write that some say, that
the very natural body of Christ is in the Sacrament naturally, D. Smith. Some
say that Christ in naturally in the sament.
and sensibly, which thing Smith utterly denies any of them to say, and that I
falsely lay this unto their charge. And moreover it is very false, (says he)
that you lay unto our charges, that we say, that Christ's body is in the
Sacrament as it was borne of the virgin, and that it is broken, and torn in
pieces with our teeth. This also Smith says is a false report of me.

But whether I have made any untrue report or no, let the books be judges. As
touching the first, the Bishop writes thus in his book of the Devils
sophistry, the 14. leaf. Good men were never offended with breaking of the
host, which they daily saw, being also persuaded Christ's body to be present
in the Sacrament naturally, and really. And in the 18. leaf he says these
words, Christ, God and man, is naturally present in the Sacrament. And in ten,
or twelve places of this his last book, he says, yt Christ is present in the
Sacrament, naturally, corporally, sensibly, and carnally, as shall appear
evidently in the reading thereof. So that I make no false report herein, who
report no otherwise, then the ^apistes have written, and published openly in
their books.

And it is not to be passed over, but worthy to be noted, how manifest
falshoode is used in the printing of this Bishops book, A manifest falshoode
in the printing of the Bishops book.
in the 136. leaf. For where the Bishop wrote (as I have two coppies to
show, one of his own hand, and another exhibited by him in open court, before
the Kings Commissioners) that Christ's body in the Sacrament, is truly
present, and therefore really present, corporally also, and naturally. The
printed book now set abroad, has changed this word (naturally) and in the
stead thereof has put these words (but yet supernaturally) corrupting, and
manifestly falsefying the Bishops book.

Who was the Author of this untrue act, I cannot certainly define, but if
conjectures may have place, I think the Bishop himself would not command to
altar the book in the printing, and then set it forth with this title, that it
was the same book that was exhibited by his own hand for his defense, to the
kings majesty's commissioners at Lamhith.

And I think the Printer, being a French man, would not have enterprised so
false a deed of his own head, for yt which he should have no thanks at all, but
be accused of the Author as a falsifier of his book.

Now for as much as it is not like, that either the Bishop, or the Printer,
would play any such pranks, it must then be some other, that was of counsel in
the printing of the book, which being printed in France, (whether you be now
fled from your own native country) what person is more like to have done such
a noble act, then you? who being so full of craft and untruth in your own
country, show your self to be no changeling, where soever you become. And the
rather it seems to me to be you, then any other person, because that the
book is altered in this word (naturally) upon which word stands the reproof
of your saying. For he says, that Christ is in the Sacrament naturally, and
you deny that any man so says, but that Christ is there supernaturally. Who is
more like therefore to change in his book (naturally) into supernatural, then
you whom the matter touches, and no man else? but whether my conjectures be
good in this matter, I will not determine, but refer it to the judgment of
the indifferent Reader.

Now as concerning the second untrue report, which I should make of the
Papists, Some say that Christ is rent and torn with teeth in the sacrament.
I have alleged the words of Berengarius recantation, appointed by Pope
Nicholas the 2. and written De consecrat did. 2. which be these, that not only
the Sacraments of bread and wine, but also the very flesh and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, are sensibly handeled of the Priest in the Altar, broaken, and
torn with the teeth of the faithful people.

Thus the Reader may see, that I misreport not the Papists, nor charge them
with any other words then they do write, that is to say, that the body of
Christ is naturally, and sensibly, in the Sacrament, and broken, and torn in
pieces with our teeth.

But (says Smith) the meaning of Berengarius in his recantatio^ was otherwise,
that the forms of bread and wine are broaken, and torn with our teeth, but
Christ is received wholly, without breaking of his body, or tearing with our
teeth. Well, what so ever the meaning of Berengarius was, his words be as I
report, so that I make no false report of the Papists, nor untruly charge
them with that they say not. But how should men know what the Papists mean,
when they say one thing, and mean another? For Berengarius said, that not only
the Sacraments be broken and torn with our teeth (and you say he meant
contrary, that only the Sacraments be broken and torn with our teeth.)
Berengarius said, that also the very flesh and blood of Christ be broken and
torn, (and you say, he meant clean contrary, that the flesh and blood of Christ
be not broaken, and torn.) Well, then would I feign learn, how it may be
known what the Papists mean, if they mean yea, when they say nay, and mean
nay, when they say yea.

And as for S. John Chrisostom, and other old authors, by whom you would excuse
this manner of speech, they help you herein nothing at all. For not one of
them speak after this sort, that Berengarius does. For although though they
say sometimes that we see Christ, touch him, and break him, (understanding
that speech not of Christ him self, but of the Sacraments which represent him)
yet they use no such form of speech, as was prescribed to Berengarius, that we
see, feel, and break, not only the sacraments, but also Christ him self.

And likewise of Loath, Abraham, Jacob, Iosue, Mary Magdalen, and the Apostles
(whom you bring forth in this matter) there is no such speech in ye scripture,
as Berengarius uses. So that all these things be brought out in vame, having
no color to serve for your purpose, saving that same thing you must say to
make out your book.

And as for all the rest that you say in this process, concerning the presence of
Christ visible, and invisible, needs no answer at all, because you prove
nothing of all that you say in that matter: which may easily therefore be denied
by as good authority, as you affirm ye same. And yet all the old writers
that speak of the diversity of Christ's substantial presence, and absence,
declare this diversity to be in the diversity of his two natures, (that in the
nature of his humanity he is gone hence, and present in the nature of his
divinity) and not that in diverse respects and qualities of one nature, he is
both present and absent, which I have proved in my third book, the fifth
chapter.

And for as much as you have not brought one author for the proof of your
saying, but your own bare words, nor have answered to the authorities
alleged by me in the forsaid place of my third book, reason would that my
proofs should stand, and have place, until such time as you have proved your
sayings, or brought some evident matter to improve mine. And this (I trust,)
shall suffice to any indifferent Reader, for the defense of my first book.

Winchester.
Wherein I will keep this order. First, to consider the third book, that
speaks against the faith of the real presence of Christ's most precious body
and blood, in the Sacrament: then against the fourth and so return to the
second, speaking of Transubstantiation, whereof to talk, the real presence not
being discussed, were clearly superfluous. And finally, I will somewhat say of
the fifte book also.

Caunterbury.
Why the order of my book was changed by the Bishop.
BUt now to return to the conclusion of the Bishops book. As it began with a
marvelous slight and suttlety, so does he conclude the same, with a like
notable suttlety, changing the order of my books, not answering the^ in such
order as I wrote them, nor as the nature of the things requires. For seeing
that by all men's confessions, there is bread and wine before the
consecration, the first thing to be discussed in this matter, is, whether the
same bread and wine remain still after the co^secratio^, as Sacraments of
Christ's most precious body and blood. And next, by order of nature, and reason,
is to be discussed, whether the body and blood of Christ, represented by those
Sacraments, be present also with the said Sacraments. And what manner of
presence Christ has, both in the Sacraments, and in the^ that receive the
Sacraments.

But for what intent the Bishop changed this order, it is easy to perceive.
For he saw the matter of Transubstantiation, so flat and plain against him,
that it was hard for him to devise an answer in that matter, yt should have
any appearance of truth, but all ye world should evidently see him clearly
overthrown, at the first onset. Wherefore he thought, that although the matter
of the real presence has no truth in it at all, yet for as much as it seemed
to him, to have some more apparaunce of truth, then the matter of
Transubstantiation has, he thought best to begin with that first, trusting
so to iuggle in the matter, and to dasell the eyes of them that be simple, and
ignorant, and specially of such as were already persuaded in the matter, that
they should not well see, nor perceive his lieger de main. And when he had won
credit with them in that matter, by making them to wonder at his crafty
iuggeling, then thought he, it should be a fit and meet time, for him to
bring in the matter of Transubstantiation. For when men be amassed, they do
wonder, rather then judge: And when they be muffeled, and blindfolded, they
cannot find the right way, though they seek it never so fast, nor yet follow
it, if it chance them to find it, but give up clearly their own judgment,
and follow whom so ever they take to be their guid^ And so shall they lightly
follow me in this matter of Transubstantiation, (thought the bishop) if I can
first persuade them, and get their good wills in the real presence. This
slight and suttlety, thou may judge certainly, good Reader, to be the cause,
and none other, wherefore the order of my book is changed without ground, or
reason.

The end of the first book.
THE CONFVTATION OF THE THIRD BOOK.
IN the beginning of the third book, the author has thought good to note
certain differences, which I will also particularly consider. It follows in
him thus.

They teach that Christ is in the bread and wine: But we say according to the
truth, that he is in them that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine.

Untrue report.
Note here (Reader) even in the entry of the comparison of The teaching hitherto
even at this day of the church of England agrees with that this author calls
papists.
in the distribution of the holy Communion, in that it is there said, the body
and blood of Christ to be under the form of bread and wine. And thus much
serves for declaration of the wrong, and untrue report, of the faith of the
Catholic Church, made of this Author, in the setting forth of this difference
on yt part, which it pleases him to name Papists.

And now to speak of the other part of the difference on the Authors side,
when he would tell what he and his say, he conueyeth a sense craftily in words
to serve for a difference, Crafty conueiance of spech by this Author.
such as no Catholic man would deny. For every Catholic teacher grants,
Worthy receiving of Christ's precious body and blood.
but into his own temple, which be ye (S. Paul says) and yet he that has not
Christ's Spirit in him, is not his. As for calling it bread and wine, a
Catholic man forbeareth not that name, signifiyng what those creatures 1. Cor.
6.
in the lieu and place of a difference, which he pretends he would show,
brings in that under a ( But) which every Catholic man must needs confess,
that Christ is in them who worthily eat and drink the Sacrament of his body
and blood, or the bread, and wine, as this Author speaks.

But as this Author would have speaken plainly, and compared truly the
difference of the two teachinges, A difference should be of contraries.
he should in the second part have said from what contrary to that

Caunterbury.
NOw the crafts, wiles, and untruths of the first book being, partly
detected, after I have also answered to this book, I shall leave to the
indifferent Reader, to judge whether it be of the same sort or no. But before I
make further answer, I shall rehearse the words of mine own third book,
which you attempt next, (out of order) to impugn. My words be these.

Now this matter of Transubstantiation, being (as I trust) sufficiently
resolved, Chap. 1.
which is the first part before rehearsed, wherein the Papisticall doctrine
varieth from the Catholic truth, The presence of Christ in the sacrament.
order requires, next to entreat of the second part which is of the manner of
the presence of the body and blood of our Savior Christ in the Sacrament
thereof, wherein is no less co^tentio^, the^ in the first part.

For a plain explication whereof, it is not unknown to all true faithful
christian people, that our Savior Christ (being perfect God, and in all
things equal, and coeternall with his Father) for our sakes became also a
perfect man, taking flesh and blood of his blessed mother, and virgin Mary, and
(saving sin) being in all things like unto us, adjoining unto his divinity,
a most perfect soul of man: And his body being made of very flesh and bones,
not only having all members of a perfect man's body, in due order and
proportion, but also being subject to hunger, thirst, labor, sweat, werines,
cold, heat, and all other like infirmities, and passions of a man, and unto
death also, and that the most vile and painful upon the cross, and after his
death he rose again, with the self same visible, and palpable body, and
appeared therewith, and showed the same unto his Apostles, and specially to
Thomas, making him to put his hands into his side, and to feel his wounds.
And with the self same body he forsook this world, and ascended into heaven,
(the Apostles seeing, Christ corporally is ascended into heaven. Act. 3.
and beholding his body when it ascended) and now sits at the right hand of
his Father, and there shall remain until the last day, when he shall come to
judge the quick and dead.

This is the true Catholic faith which the Scripture teaches, and the
universal Church of Christ has ever believed from the beginning, until
within these 4. or 5. hundredth years last passed, that the Bishop of Rome,
with the assistance of his Papists, has set up a new faith, and belief of
their own devising, that the same body, really, corporally, naturally, and
sensibly, is in this world still, and that in an hundred thousand places at
one time, being enclosed in every pixe, and bread consecrated.

And although we do affirm (according to Gods word) that Christ is in all
persons that truly believe in him, Cap. 2.
in such sort, that with his flesh and blood he does spiritually nourish and
feed them, and gives them everlasting life, and does assure them thereof, as
well by the promise of his word, as by the Sacramental bread and wine in his
holy supper, which he did institute for the same purpose, yet we do not a
little vary from the heinous errors of the Papists. For they teach that Christ
is in the bread and wine, but we say, (according to the truth) that he is in
them that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine. The difference between
the true and papisticall doctrine concerning the presence of Christ's body.


Here it pleases you to pass over all the rest of my sayings, and to
answer only to the difference between the Papists and the true Catholic
faith. Where, The first comparison.
in the first ye find fault that I have untruly reported the Papisticall
faith (which you call the faith of the Church) which teaches not (say you)
that Christ is in the bread and wine, but under the forms of bread and wine.
But to answer you, I say, that the Papists do teach, that Christ is in the
visible signs, and whether they list to call them bread and wine, or the
forms of bread and wine, all is one to me, for the truth is, that he is
neither corporally in the bread and wine, nor in or under the forms and
figures of them, but is corporally in heaven, and spiritually in his liuelye
members which be his temples where he inhabiteth. And what untrue report is
this, Misreport of bread and wine for the forms and figures of them.
when I speak of bread and wine to the Papists, to speak of them in the fame
sense that the Papists mean, taking bread and wine for the forms and
accidences of bread and wine.

And your self also do teach, to understand by the bread and wine, not their
substances, but accidents. And what have I offended then, in speaking to you
after your own manner of speech, which your self does approve and allow by and
by after, saying these words. As for calling it bread and wine, a Catholic
man forbeareth not that name: If a Catholic man forbeareth not that name, and
Catholic men be true men, then true men forbear not that name. And why then
charge you me with an untruth, for using that name, which you use your self,
and affirm Catholic men to use? But that you be given altogether to find
faults rather in other, then to amend your own, and to reprehend that in me,
which you allow in your self and other, and purposely will not understand my
meaning, because ye would seek occasion to carpe and control.

For else what man is so simple that reads my book, but he may know well,
that I mean not to charge you for affirming of Christ to be in the very bread
and wine. For I know that you say there is nether bread nor wine (although you
say untruly therein) but yet for as much as the accidents of bread and wine,
you call bread and wine, and say that in them is Christ, therefore I report of
you, that you say Christ is in the bread and wine, meaning (as you take bread
and wine) the accidents thereof.

Smyth.
Yet D. Smith was a more indifferent Reader of my book then you, in this place,
who understood my words as I meante, and as the Papists use, and therefore
would not purposely calu^niate, and reprehend that was well spoaken. But there
is no man so dull, as he that will not understand. For men know that your wit
is of as good capacity, as D. Smithes is, if your will agreed to the same.

But as for any untrue report made by me herein willingly against my

Tee book of common prayer.
And as concerning the form of doctrine used in this church of England,

The second part.
Now for the second part of the difference, you grant that our doctrine is
true, that Christ is in them that worthily eat and drunk the bread and is in
the very bread and wine. And if a Catholic man call ye bread and wine (as you
say in the second part of the difference) what meant you then in the first
part of this difference to charge me with so heinous a crime, (with a note to
the Reader) as though I had sinned against the holy Ghost, because I said that
the Papists do teach that Christ is in the bread and wine: do not you
affirm here yourselfe the same that I report? that the Papists, (which you
call the Catholics) do not forbear to call the Sacrament (wherein they put
the real and corporal presence) bread and wine? Let the Reader now judge,
whether you be caught in your own snare or no. But such is the success of them
that study to wrangle in words, without any respect of opening the truth.

But letting that matter pass, yet we vary from you in this difference. For we
say not (as you do) that the body of Christ is corporally, naturally, and
carnally, either in the bread and wine, or forms of bread and wine, or in them
that eat and drink thereof. But we say that he is corporally in heaven only,
and spiritually in them that worthily eat and drink ye bread, and wine. But
you make an article of the faith, which the old Church never believed nor
heard of.

And where you note in this second part of the difference, a slight and
craft: as you note an untruth in the first, even as much craft is in the one,
as untruth in the other, being neither slight nor untruth in either of both.

They say that Christ is corporally under, The difference.
or in the forms of bread and wine: We say, that Christ is not there, neither
corporally, nor spiritually, but in them that worthily eat and drink the
bread and wine, he is spiritually, and corporally in heaven.

Here I trust I have satisfied, as well the untrue report wittingly made, (as
you say) in the first part of the difference against my conscience, as the
craft and slight, used in the second part. But what be you eased now by
this? We say as the scripture teaches, that Christ is corporally ascended in
to heaven, and nevertheless he is so in them that worthily eat the bread, and
drink the wine, given, and distributed at his holy Supper, that he feeds and
nourishes them with his flesh and blood unto eternal life. But we say not (as
you do, clearly without ground of Scripture) that he is corporally under the
forms of bread and wine, where his presence should be, without any profit or
commodity, either to us, or to the bread and wine.

And here in this difference, Repugnaunce.
it seems that you have either clearly forgotten, or negligently ouershotte
yourselfe, uttering that thing unawares, which is contrary is your wholl book.
For the first part (which is of the being of Christ in the Sacramental bread
and wine) is of the substance of the Sacrament to be received, (say you) where
it is true, Christ to be present God and man: the second part (say you) which
is of the being of Christ in them that worthily eat and drink the bread and
wine, is of Christ's spiritual presence. Of your which words I se nothing to be
gathered, but that as concerning his substancial presence, Christ is received
into the Sacramental bread and wine, and as for them that worthily receive the
Sacrament, he is in them none otherwise then after a Spiritual presence: For
else why should ye say that the second part is of Christ's spiritual presence,
if it be as well of his corporal, as of his spiritual presence? Wherefore by
your own words, this difference should be understood of two different beings
of Christ, that in the Sacrament he is by his substance, and in the worthy
receauers spiritually, and not by his substance, for else ye differences repugne
not, as you object against me. Wherefore either you write one thing, and mean
another, or else (as you write of other) God so blinds the adversaries of the
truth, that in one place or other, they confess the truth unawares. Now follow
my words in the second comparison.

The 1. comparison.
They say, that when any man eats the bread, and drinks the cup, Christ
goes into his mouth or stomach, with the bread and wine, and no further. But
we say, that Christ is in the wholl man, both in body and soul of him, that
worthily eats the bread, and drinks the cup, and not in his mouth or
stomach only

Winchester.
In this comparison, the Author terms the true Catholic teaching at his
pleasure, contra Stercoranistas, I sect reproved yt were called Stercoranists.
is nothing to this teaching, nor the speech of any gloss (if there be any
such, were herein to be regarded. The Catholic doctrine is, that by the holy
communion in the Sacrament, we be joined to Christ really, because we receive
in the holy supper, the most precious substance of his glorious body, which is
a flesh giving life: And that is not digested with out flesh but works in us
and atte^pereth, by heavenly nuriture, our body and soul being partakers of
his passion, to be conformable to his will, and by such spiritual food to be
many more spiritual. In the receiving of which food, in the most blessed
Sacrament, our body and soul, in them that duly communicate, work together
in due order, without other discussion of the mystery, then God has appointed
(that is to say) the soul to believe as it is taught, and the body to do as
God has ordered, knowing that glorious flesh by our eating can not be consumed
or suffer, but to be most profitable unto such as do accustom worthily to
receive the same. But

Now where this Author in the second part, by an aduersatiue with a ( But) to
make the comparison, felleth what he and his say, he tells in effect that,
which every catholic man must needs, and does confess. For such as receive
Christ's most precious body and blood in the Sacrament worthily, they have
Christ dwelling in them, who comfort, both body and soul, which the church
has ever taught most plainly. So as this

Caunterbury.




And yet the book of common prayer, The book of common prayer.
neither uses any such speech nor gives any such doctrine, nor I in no point
improve that godly book, nor varye from it. But yet glad I am to hear that
the said book lyketh you so well, as noe man can mislike it, that has any
godliness in him joined with knowledge.

That the Papiste say that Christ go^ in no ^^rther the^ the mouth or stomach.
it is marvel that you never read, that Christ goes into the mouth or
stomach of that man that receaueth, and no further, being a lawyer, and seeing
that it is written in the gloss of the law, De-consecrat, did. 2. Tribus
gradibus, in these words. It is certain that as soon as the forms be torn
with the teeth, so sone the body of Christ is gone up into heaven. And in the
chapter, Non iste, is an other gloss to the same purpose. And if you had read
Thomas de Aquino and Bonauenture (great clearkes and holy Saints of the Popes
own making) and other school authors, Thomas Bonauentura.
then should you have known what the Papistee do say in this matter. For some
say that the body of Christ remains so long as the form and fashion of bread
remains; Read Smith Fol. 64
although it be in a dog, mouse, or in the iakes. And some say, it is not in
the mouse nor sakes, but remains only in the person that eats it, until
it be digested in the stomach, and the form of bread be gone. Some say, it
remains no longer then the Sacrament is in the eating, and may be felt,
seen, and tasted in the mouth.

And this (besides Hugo) says Pope Innocentius him self, Hugo. Innocentius. 3
li. ca. 25.
who was the best learned and the chief doer in this matter, of all the other
Popes. Red you never none of these authors? and yet take upon you the full
knowledge of this matter? Will you take upon you to defend the Papists, and
know not what they say? Or do you know it, and now be ashamed of it, and for
shame will deny it?

And seeing that you teach, that we receive the body of Christ with our
mouths, I pray you, tell whether it go any further then the mouth or no? and
how far it goes? that I may know your judgment herein: and so shall you be
charged no further, then with your own saying, and the reader shall perceive
what excellent knowledge you have in this matter.

And where you say, that to teach that we receive Christ at our mouth, and

And I say not that the Church teaches so (as you feign me to say) but that
the Papists say so. Wherefore I should wish you to report my words as I say,
and not as you imagine me to say, least you hear again (as you have heard
heretofore) of your wonderful learning, and practice in the Devils Sophistrye.

The second part.
Now as concerning the second part of this comparison, here you grant that my
saying therein is true, and that every Catholic man must needs, Innocent. 3.
then the forms of bread and wine go, and remayn in their proper kind.

And yet now your doctrine (as far as I can gather of your obscure words) is
this: That Christ is received at the mouth, with the forms of bread and wine,
and goes with them into ye stomach. And although they go no further in their
proper kinds, yet there Christ leaves them, and goes him self further into
every part of the man's body, and into his soul also: which your saying
seems to me to be very strange. For I have many times heard, that a soul
has gone into a body, but I never heard that a body went into a soul. But I
ween of all the Papists, you shall be alone in this matter, and find never a
fellow to say as you do.

And of these things which I have here spoaken, I may conclude, that

They say that Christ is received in the mouth, and enters in with the bread
and wine. We say that he is received in the heart, and enters in by faith.

Winchester.
Here is a pretty slight in this comparison, where both parts of the
comparison may be understood on both sides, and therefore here is by the
Author in this comparison no Non dicuns ista, nisi qui de mensa Domini vitam
sumu sumunt, August contra lit. Peti. lib. 2. cap. 47.
sicut Tetrus, non iudicium, sicut Indas, and tame^ ipsa vtrique fuit vina, sed
non vtrique valuit ad vnum, quia ipsi non erant vnum. Which words be thus much
to say: That they say not so (as was before entreated) but such as receive life
of our Lords table (as Peter did) not judgment, (as Judas) and yet the table
was all one to them both, but it was not to all one effect in them both,
because they were not one. Here S. Augustine notes the difference in the
receauer, not in the Sacrament received, which being received with the mouth
only, and Christ entering, in mystery only does not sanctify us, but is the
stone of stumbling, and our judgment and condemnation, but if he be received
with mouth and body, with heart and faith, to such he brings life and
nourishment. Wherefore in this comparison, the author has made no difference,
But) fashioned nevertheless in another phrase of speech then the church has
used, which is so common in this Author, that I will not hereafter note it any
more for a fault. But let us go further.

Caunterbury.
whether Christ be received in the mouth.
yet every indifferent Reader can. For when I report the Papists teaching,
that they say Christ is received in the mouth, and enters in with the bread
and wine, and for an aduersatiue thereto I say, that we (which follow the
Scriptures, and ancient writers) say that he is received in the heart, and
enters in by faith, every indifferent Reader understands this aduersatiue
upon our side, yt we say Christ is not received in the mouth, but in the heart,
specially seeing yt in my fourth book, the second and third chapters, I make
purposely a process thereof, to prove that Christ is not eaten with mouths and
teeth. And yet to eschew all such occasions of slight as you impute unto me in
this comparison, to make the comparison more full and plain, let this be the
comparison.

They say that Christ is received with the mouth, The difference.
and enters in with the bread and wine: we say that he is not received with
the mouth, but with

And as for S. Augustine serves nothing for your purpose, to prove that August
contra lit. Peti. lib. 2. cap. 47.
For he speaks not one word in the place by you alleged, neither of our
mouths, nor of Christ's body. But it seems you have so fervent desire to be
doing in this matter, that you be like to certain men which have such a fond
delight in shooting, that so they be doing, they pass not how far they
shoot from the mark. For in this place of S. Augustine against the Donatists,
he shoots not at this butte, whether Christ's very natural body be received
with our mouths, but whether the Sacraments in general be received both of
good and evil. And there he declares that it is all one water, whether Simon
Peter, or Simon Magus be christened in it. All one Table of the Lord and one
cup, whether Peter suppe thereat or Judas. All one oil, whether David or Saul
were anointed therewith. Wherefore he concludes thus: August. contra lit.
Peti. lib. 2. cap. 47.
Memento ergo Sacramentis Dei nihil obesse mores malorum hominum, quo illa vel
omnino non sint, vel minus sancta sint, sed ipsis malis hominibus vt haec
habeant ad testimonium damnationis, non ad adiutorium sanitatis. Remember
therefore (says S. Augustine) that the manners of evil men hinder not the
Sacraments of God, that either they utterly be not, or be less holy, but they
hinder the evil men them selves, so that they have the Sacraments to witness
of their damnation, not to help of their salvation. And all the process
spoaken there by S. Augustine, is spoaken chiefly of Baptism, against the
Donatistes, which said that the Baptism was naught, if either the minister or
the receauer were naught. Against whom S. Augustine concludes, that the
Sacraments of themselves be holy, and be all one, whether the minister or
receauer be good or bad. But this place of S. Augustine proves as well your
purpose, that Christ's body is received by the mouth, as it proves that
Poules steeple is higher then the cross in Cheap. For he speaks not one
word of any of them al. And therefore in this place where you pretend to
shoot at ye butte, you shoot quite at rouers, and clean from the mark.

John. 13.
And yet if Judas received Christ with the bread (as you say) and the devil 1.
Cor. 10.
that will wittingly maintayn an open error directly against God and his word,
and all holy ancient writers. Now follows the fourth comparison in my book.

The fourth comparyson.
They say that Christ is really in the Sacramental bread, being reserved a
wholl year, or so long as the form of bread remains: But after the
receiving thereof, he flies up ( say they) from the Receauer unto heaven, as
soon as the bread is chawed in the mouth, or changed in the stomach: But we
say, that Christ remains in the man that worthily receaueth it, so long as
the man remains a member of Christ.

Winchester.
This comparison is like the other before, whereof the first part is
garnished, and Pugnat cum alijs Papistis.
which in the matter it self is nevertheless most true. For undoubtedly,
really,) it serves only to express that truth in open words, Christ is the
body of all the figures.
which was before to be understood in sense. For in Christ, who was the body
of all the shadows and figures of the law, and who did exhibit and gave in
his Sacraments Really that is in deed.
And for certainty of the truth of his work therein, we profess he gives us
his body really, that is to say: in deed his body the thing it self, which is
the heavenly part of the Sacrament, called (Eucharistia) having the visible
form of bread and wine, and containing inuisibly the very body and blood of
our Savior Christ, which was not wont to be reserved otherwise, but to be
ready for such as in danger of death call for it, and the same so long as it
may be used, is still the same Sacrament, which only, time alters not.
Whereof Cirill Cyrillus ad Calosyrium episcopum.
it were reserved ouerlong. Mary where Hesychius in Leuit. li 3. ca. 3.
so sone as the bread is chawed in the mouth, or changed in the stomach, this
manner of speech implies as though Christ leaft the seat of his majesty in
heaven, to be present in the Sacrament, which is most untrue. Christ being
present in the sacrament is at the same time present in heaven.
The Church acknowledges, believes, and teaches truly, that Christ sits
on the right hand of his Father in glory, from whence he shall come to judge
the world, and also teaches Christ's very body and blood, and Christ him self
God and man, to be present in the Sacrament, not by shifting of place, but by
the determination of his will, declared in Scriptures, and believed of the
Catholic church, which articles be to reason impossible, but possible to God
omnipotent. So as being taught of his will, we should humbly submit all our
se^ses and reason, to the faith of his will, and work declared in his
Scriptures.

Truly, Really, Substantially
with the rest, be contained in the one word ( is) spoake^ out of his mouth,
that speaks as he means, truly, and certainly as Christ did, saying:
Augustine Psalm. 33.
without thinking or talking, of flying, of stying, of Christ again unto
heaven, where Christ is in the glory of his Father continually, and is
nevertheless (because he will so be) present in the Sacrament, wholl God and
man, and dwells corporally in him that receaueth him worthily.

What is found in a blind gloss, may not be taken for the teaching of the
church and yet I never red of flyng.
such as has been ever so taught. One thing I think good to admonish the
reader, that what soever I affirm, or precisely deny, I mean within the
compass of my knowledge, which I speak not because I am in any suspicion, or
doubt of that I affirm, or deny, but to avoid the temerity of denying, as (
never) or affirming, as ( ever) which be extremityes. And I mean also of
public doctrine by consent received, so taught, and believed, and not that
any one man might blindly write, as uttering his fancy, as this author does for
his pleasure. It is in man dangerous to affirm or deny extreamyties although
they be be true for it makes him suspect of presumtion.
There follows in the Author thus.

Caunterbury.
How long christ taryeth with the receyuour of the sacrament.
And where you say that Christ undoubtedly remains in the man that worthily
receaueth the sacrament, so long as that man remains a member of Christ. How
agrees this with the common saying of all the Papists, that Christ is
contained under the forms of bread and wine, and remains there no longer
then the forms of bread and wine remain? Wherefore in this point all the wholl
route of the Papists will condemn for untruth, that which you so constantly
affirm to be undoubtedly true.

And when the Papists teach that the body of Christ is really in the
sacrament Metonymia, Metonymia.
when one thing is called by the name of another, which it signifies, and it
has no such sense as you pretend, for these is a great diversity between
these two sayings. This is my body, and, the body of Christ is really in the
sacrament under the form of bread. But the Papists have set Christ's words
upon the tenters, and stretched them out so far, that they make his words to
signify as pleases them, not as he meant.

The Fathers in the old law received the same things in their sacraments that
we do in ours.
And this is a marvelous doctrine of you, to say that Christ was the body
Manna, that we have at the Lords table. Only this difference was between them
and us, that our redemption by Christ's death and passion was then only
promised, and now it is performed and past. And as their Sacraments were
figures of his death to come, so be our figures of the same now past and gone.
And yet it was all but one Christ to them and us. Who gave life, comfort, and
strength, to them by his death to come, and gives the same to us by his death
passed.

And he was in their Sacraments spiritually, and effectually present, and for
so much truly and really present (that is to say in deed) before he was born,
no less the^ he is now in our Sacraments present after his death and assention
into heaven. But as for carnal presence, he was to them not yet come. And to
us he is come, and gone again unto his Father, from whom he came.

Reservation. Cyrill Hesichius.
And as for the reservation of the Sacrament, neither Cyrill, nor Hesychius,

And as for the flying of Christ up into heaven, so soon as the bread is De
consecrat. d. 2. Tribus gradibus
Tribus gradibus, de Consecrat. did, a: and there you shall find these words.
Certum est, quod species quam cito dentibus teruntur, tam cito in Coelum
rapitur corpus Christi. And if this gloss be false and erroneous, why was it
published and set out by the authority of the Papists? Why has it been
written and printed in so many countries, and so many years without reprofe,
of any fault found therein by any man?

But here may wise men learn to beware of your doctrine. For you reprove those
Papists which have written of this matter, 4. or 5. hundredth years past, and
do invent a new devise of your own. And therefore wise men, when they see you
teach one doctrine, and the Papists that were before your time, teach another,
they will believe none of you all.

The benefit and comfort in this sacrament.
and consolation. What benefitte (I beseech you) is it to us, if Christ be
really and corporally in the forms of bread and wine, a month or two, or a
year or two? And if we receive him really and corporally with the bread and
wine into our mouths or stomachs, and no further, and there he tarieth not in
that sort, but departs away from us by and by again, what great benefit or
comfort (I pray you) is such a corporal presence unto us? And yet this is the
teaching of all the Papists, although you seem to vary from them in this last
point, of Christ's sudden departure. But when the matter shall be thoroughly
answered, I ween you will agree with the rest of the Papists, that as
concerning his carnal presence, Christ departs from us, at the least wheu
the forms of bread and wine be altered in the stomach. And then I pray you
declare what comfort and benefitte we have by this carnal presence which by
and by is absent, and taryeth not with us? Such comfort have weak and sick
consciences at the Papists hands, to tell them that Christ was with them, and
now he is gone from them. Nevertheless in the belief of this mystery (if it be
understood according to Gods word) is great benefit and consolation, but to
believe your addition, unto Gods word, is neither benefit nor wisdom.



And where you seem to be offended with the discussion of this matter, what
hurt, I pray you, can gold catch in the fire, or truth with discussing? Lies
only fear discussing. The Devil hates the light, because he has been a
liar from the beginning, and is loath that his lies should come to light and
trial. And all Hipocrites and Papists be of a like sort afraid, that their
doctrine should come to discussing, whereby it may evidently appear, that they
be endued with the spirit of error and lying. If the Papists had not feared,
that their doctrines should have been espied, and their opions have come to
discussing, the scriptures of God had been in the vulgar and English tongue
many years ago. But (God be praised) at the length your doctrine is come to
discussing, so that you can not so craftily walk in a cloud, but the light of
Gods word will always show where you be. Our Savior Christ in the fifth of
John, John. 5.
wills us to search the scriptures, and to try out the truth by them. And
shall not we then with humble reverence search the truth in Christ's
Sacraments?

The manner of presence.
why do you then say, that he is substantially present, corporally present,
naturally and carnally present?

And how sure be you that Christ is in substance present, because he is truly
present: Are you assured that this your doctrine agrees with Gods word? Does
not Gods word teach a true presence of Christ in spirit, where he is not
present in his corporal substance? As when he says: Math. 18.
Where two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. And also when he says: I shall be with you till the end of the world.
Math. 6.
Was it not a true presence that Christ in these places promised? And yet can
you not of this true presence gather such a corporal presence of the substance
of Christ's manhod, as you unlearnedly, contrary to the scriptures^ go about to
prove in the Sacrament. For when Christ said, This is my body, it was bread
which is called his body in a figurative speech, as all old authors teach, and
as I have proved in my third book the 8 and 11 chap. And the

And because you can find no repugnaunce between the two parts of

The comparion
They say, that Christ is really, and corporally in the sacramental bread being
reserved, so long as the form of bread remains, although it be an whole
years and more: but after the receiving thereof, he flies up from the receauer
into heaven, as soon as the bread is chawed in the mouth or digested in the
stomach. But we say, that after what manner Christ is received of us, in the
same wise he remains in us, so long as we remain the members of Christ.

And where in the end you admonish the reader, that what so ever you

Now follows in my book the fifth comparison.

The 5. comparison.
They say, that in the Sacrament the corporal members of Christ be not distant
in place one from an other, but that where so ever the head is, there be the
feet: and where so ever the arms be, there be the legs: so that in every
part of the bread and wine, is altogether, whole head, whole feet, whole flesh,
whole blood, whole heart, whole lunges, whole breast, whole back, and
altogyther whole confused and mixed without distinction or diversity. O what a
foolish and an abominable invention is this, to make of the most pure and
perfect body of Christ, such a confuse and monstrous body? And yet can the
Papists imagine nothing so foolish, but all Christian people must receive the
same, as an oracle of God, and as a most certain article of their faith,
without whisperyng to the contrary.

Winchester.
This is a maruaylous Rhetorique, and such as the author has ouerseene
himself Pugnat cum alijs Papistis.
where as al true Christian men believe symply Christ's words, and trouble not
their heads with such consequences, as seem to strive with reason. This is in
the Author no whisperyng, but plainly railing, wherein if he had remembered
himself well, he would not have spoken of all Christian men in the receypt of
that he entendeth to disprove. And if he would say he spoke it by an Irony or
skorne, yet it implies that all had received that he thus mocketh, which after
the sort he writes, was never devised by Papist, or other to be so taught,
otherwise then What is receued of all christen me^ has therein a manifest
token in truth.
is full of spots and folly. Gods works be all seemelynesse, without
confusion, monsier, or any such absurditee, as this Author supposes. Although
I can not in the Sacrament with the eye of my reason, locally distinct Christ's
head from his foot, his legs from his arm. And where in the book of common
prayer, it is truly said, in each part of the bread consecrate broken to be
Christ's whole body, if one of curiositee would question with me, and I of
folly would answer him, It is a folly to answer a corious demaunder.
first where is Christ's head? I should say, here (poynting with my finger) he
would think it first a little head. Then he would ask, where is his foot,
and I should say there, and point in the same place again, for there is none
other left. If he replied that I poynted before the same for the head, might
not the third a catholic man, that stood by, (trow you) wisely call us both
mad, to go about to discuss that we must grant we se not, and when by faith
we know only the being preset of Christ's most precious body, then by blind
reason, to discuss the manner of being in the situation of such parts, as we
do not see? Now if there came among us a fourth man as a mediator, and would
do as king Alexander did, Quintus Curtius makes mention of this faith of
Alexander.
when he could not open the knot of Gordius, he did cut it with his sword, if
this man should say, I will relieve this matter. You believe Christ's body is
present in deed really, and substa^tially. Leave out really and subta^tially,
and say his body is present in signification, and then it may be easily
conceived by reason, that Christ's body being never so great, Fath of God and
his work can not by man's devise have any qualification.
may be as well signified by a little piece of bread, as by a great piece of
bread: even as a man may write a great man's name, as well in small letters short
as in great letters at length. And to commend further his devise unto us, would
percase tell how many absurdities as he thinks and inconveniences might be
avoided by it. This fourth man I speak of, making himself a mediator, but in
deed unmeet therefore For he speaks of a ioly easy way without any mystery or
marvel at all. But our faith is of hearing, as has been preached continually
from the beginning, grounded upon the most sure truth of the word of God, and
therefore can not be attempered as man would devise it, to exclude travail in
carnal reason. For then the Sabellians were to be harkned Sabellians.
who by their heresy took away all the hard and difficile questions in the
mystery of the Trinity.

Arrians.
The Arrians also releued much man's reason in consideration of Christ's death,
denying him to be of the same substance with his father, which ^as a pestilent
heresy. Now in the Sacrament to say Christ's body is present only by
signification, as it releueth in some men's judgments the absurdities in
reason, which ought not to be releued, so it condemns Bernard super Cant.
ser. 31.
in this to feed us. Which doings of Christ we must understand to have been
perfited, not in an imagination in a figure and signification, but really in
very deed, truly, and unfeignedly, not because we believe it so, but because
he wrought it so, whose works we must believe to be most perfitly true,
according to the truth of the letter where no absurdity in scripture drives
us from it, howsoever it seem repugnant to our reason, be we never so wise, and
witty, which man's reason now a days enflamed with fury of language is the
only adversary against the most blessed Sacrament, as it may appear by these
comparysons of differences thoroughly considered.

Caunterbury.
DId not you believe (I pray you) many years together, that the bishop

If you did not, you wittingly and willingly defended a false error in the
open Parliament. But since that time, you have called that belief (as it is
in deed) very folish. And if you confessed your ignorance in that matter, be
no more abashed to confess it in this, if you have respect more unto Gods
truth, then to your own estimation. It is lawful and commendable for a man,
to learn from time to time, and to go from his ignorance, that he may receive
and embrace the truth. It is good at al times to convert from error to truth.
And as for me, I am not (I grant) of that nature, that the Papists for the
most part be, who study to devise all shameful shifts, rather then they will
forsake any error, wherewith they were infected in youth. I am glad to
acknowledge my former ignorance (as S. Paul, S. Ciprian. S. Augustine, and many
other holy men did, who now be with Christ) to bring other to the knowledge of
the truth, of whose ignorance I have much ruth and pity. I am content to
give place to Gods word, that the victory may be Christ's. What a member had the
church of God lost, if Paul would have been as froward as some Papists be,
that will stick to their error tooth and nail, though the Scripture and
ancient writers be never so plain and f^at against them? Although S. Paul
erred, 1. Tim. 1.
yet because his error was not wilful, but of ignorance, so that he gave
place to the truth, when it was opened unto him, he became of a most cruel
persecutor, a most seruent setter forth of the truth, and Apostle of Christ.

And would God I were as sure, that you be changed in deed in those matters
of religion, wherein with the alteration of this realm you pretend a change,
as I am glad even from the bottom of my heart, that it has pleased almighty God
in this latter end of my years, to give me knowledge of my former error, and
a will to embrace the truth, setting a part all manner of worldly respects,
which be special hindrances, that hold back many from the free profession of
Christ and his word.

The book of common prayer.
although it say, that in each part of the bread broken is received the whole
body of Christ, yet it says not so of the parts unbroken, nor yet of the
parts, or whole reserved, as the Papists teach: But as in baptism we receive
the holy ghost, and put Christ upon us, as well if we be Christened in one
dysh full of water taken out of the font, as if we were chistned in the whole
font, or river, so we be as truly fed, refreshed and comforted by Christ,
receiving a piece of bread at the Lords holy table, as if we did eat an whole
loaf. For as in every part of the water in baptism is wholl Christ and the
holy spirit, sacramentally, so be they in every part of the bread broken, but
not corporally and naturally as the Papists teach.

The Papists say, that whole Christ is in every part of the consecrated bread
but I say that the Papists so teach. And because you deny it, read the chief
pillars of the Papists, Duns, and Thomas de Aquino, which the Papists call S.
Thomas, who say, that Christ is whole under every part of the forms of bread
and wine, not only when the host is broken, but when it is wholl also. And
there is no distance (says he) of parts, one from an other, as of one eye
from another or of the eye from the ear, or the head from the feet. These be
Thomas wrds. Thomas. 3. part. sum. q. 76. art. 3.
Christus totus est sub qualibit part specicru^ panis and vini, non solu^ cu^
frangitur hostia, sed etia^ cu^ integra manet. Nec est dista^tia partiu^ ab
innice^, vt oculi ab oculo, aut oculi ab aure, eut capitis a pedibus, sicut est
in alijs corporibus orgameis. Talis enim distantia est in ipso corpore Christi
vero, sed non prout est in hoc Sacra^e^to. And not only the Papists do thus
write and teach but the Pope himself, Innocentius the third. Innocentius. 3.
lib. 4. cap. 8.
And so bear I in hand, or report of the Papisies nothing, but that which they
say indeed.

And yet you say, the church says not so which I affirm also and then it must
needs follow, that the doctrine of the Papists, is not the doctrine of the
church. Which Papists not by reason with out faith, but against as well reason
as faith, would direct our minds to seek in every little crum of bread, whole
Christ, and to find him in so many places there, as be small crumbs in the bread.



follow, that the parts in their own substance be not in the sacrament. And
if this distinction of parts, be in the true body of Christ, and not in the
sacrament (as Thomas says) then follows it again, that the true body of
Christ is not in the sacrament.

A subtle slight.
And forasmuch as I speak not one word of the comprehension of our senses, to
what purpose do you bring this in, if it be not to draw us to a new matter, to
avoid yt which is in controversy? You do herein as if James should by of John a
percell of land, and by his attorney take state and possession therein. And
after John should trauers the matter, and say, that there was never no state
delivered, and thereupon join their issue. And when James should bring forth
his witnesses for the state and possession, the^ should John run to a new
matter, and say that James saw the possession delivered: what were this
allegation of John to the purpose of the thing that was in issue, whether the
possession were delivered in deed or no? Were this any other thing, then to
avoid the issue craftily, by bringing in of a new matter? And yet this shift is
a common practice of you in this book, and this is another point of the devils
Sophistry, wherein it is pity that ever such a wit as you have, should be
occupied.

Wanton reason.
Again you say, that impudently I bear the Catholic church in hand,

True christian men.
And if they be no true christen men that trouble their heads with such matters
(as you affirm they be not) then was Innocent the third, ye chief author of
your doctrine, both of transubstantiation, and of the real presence, no true
christian man (as I believe well enough.) Then was your Saint Thomas no true
christian man. Then Gabriell, Duns, Durand, and the great rablement of the
school authors (which taught your doctrine of tra^substantiation and of the
real presence) were not true christen men. And in few words to comprehend the
whole, then were almost none that taught that doctrine, true christen men, but
your self alone. For almost all with one consent, do teach that wholl Christ
is really in every part of the host.

But your terms here of railing, mocking, and scorning, I would have taken
patiently at your hand, if your tongue and pen had not ouershot the^ selves in
braging so far, that the truth by you should be defaced. But now I shall be so
bold as to send those terms thither, from whence they came. And for the matter
it self, I am ready to ioyn an issue with you, notwithstanding all your stout
and boasting words.

But in Gods works (say you) as the Sacraments be, we must think the legs
be? which the Papists do teach, and your self seem to confess, when you
say: that the parts of Christ's body be distinct in themselves, one from
another in their own substance, but not by circumscription of several places.
And yet you seem again to deny the same in your wise dialogue, or quadriloge,
between the curious questioner; the folish ans^werer, your wise catholic man
standing by, and the mediator.

In which dialoge you bring in your wise catholic man to condemn of madness
all such as say, A Dialog.
that Christ's head is there where his feet be, and so you condemn of madness
not only all the scholasticall doctors, which say that Christ is wholl in every
part of the consecrated bread, but also your own former saying, where you deny
the distinction of the parts of Christ's body in several places. Wherefore the
mediator seems wiser then you all, who losing this knot of Gordius, says:
that Christ's body (how big soever it be) may be as well signified by a little
piece of bread as by a great: and so as concerning the reason of a sacrament,
al is one, whether it be an whole bread, or a piece of it, as it skilleth not
whether a man be christened in the wholl font, or in a part of the water
taken out thereof. For the respect and consideration of the Sacrament is all one
in the less and more.

What is to be wondered at in the Sacrament.
For the wonder is not, how God works in the outward visible Sacrament, but
his marvelous work is in the worthy receauers of the Sacraments. The
wonderful work of God is not in the water, which only washes the body, but
God by his omnipotent power, works wonderfully in the receauers thereof,
scouring, washing, and making them clean inwardly, and as it were new me^, and
celestial creatures. This have all^olde authors wondered at, this wonder
passes the capacities of all men's wits how damnation is turned into salvation,
and of the Son of the devil condemned into hell, is made the Son of God,
and inheritour of heaven. This wonderful work of God all men may marvel and
wonder at, but no creature is able sufficiently to comprehend it. And as this
is wondered at in the Sacrament of Baptism, how he that was subject unto death,
receives life by Christ, and his holy Spirit. So is this wondered at in the
Sacrament of Christ's holy Table, how the same life is continued and endures
for ever, by continual feeding upon Christ's flesh and his blood. And these
wonderful works of God toward us, we be taught by Gods holy word, and his
Sacraments of bread, wine, and water, and yet be not these wonderful works
of God in the Sacraments, but in us.

And although many authors use this manner of speech, that Christ makes bread
his body, and wine his blood, and wonder thereat: yet those authors mean not of
the bread and wine in them selves, but of the bread and wine eaten and dronken
of faithful people. For when Christ called bread his body, and wine his blood,
he wake not those words to the bread and wine but to the eaters and drinkers of
them, saying: Eat, this is my body. Drink this is my blood, signifying to the^
that worthily do eat that bread and drink that cup, that they be inwardly and
inuisibly fed with Christ's flesh and blood, as they outwardly and visibly
receive the sacraments of them.

To be short, here in this process you use plenty of words at your pleasure to
make the reader believe, that I should suppose confusion, monstrousnes,
absurdity and unseemliness to be in Gods holy sacraments, where as I do no
more but tell what monstrous absurdities and errors the Papists do Canma
facunda, and is used only of them that hunt for their own praise by the
dispraise of their adversary, which is yet an other trick of the devils
sophistry.

Sabellius. Arrius.
And because you would bring me into more extreme hatred, you couple me with
Sabellius and Arrius, whose doctrines (as you say) were facile and easy, as
here you confess mine for to be. But if all such expositions as make the
Scriptures plain, should by and by be slanderously compared to the doctrines
of Arrius and Sabellius, then should all the expositions of ye doctors be
brought in danger, because that by their pains they have made hard questions
facile and easy. And yet whether the doctrine which I set forth be easy to
understand or not, I cannot define, but it seems so hard, that you cannot
understand it, except you will put all the fault in your own wilfulnes, that
you can, and will not understand it. Now follows the sixth comparison.

Furthermore the Papists say, that a dog or a cat eats the body of Christ,
if they by chance do eat the Sacramental bread. We say: That no earthly
creature can eat the body of Christ, nor drink his blood, but only man.

Winchester.
The contrary hereof is noted for a doctrine.
I have red that some entreat these chances of dogs and cattes, but I never
heard any of that opinion, to say or write so (as a doctrine) that a dog or a
catte eats the body of Christ, and set it forth for a teaching, as this
author most impudently supposes, and I marvel much that such a word, and
such a report, can come out of a christian man's mouth, and therefore this is
by the author a marvelous surmise, Whereupon to take occasion to bring the
aduersatiue ( But) for the Authors part, being such a saying on that side, as
all christendom has ever taught, that no creature can eat the body, and
drink the blood of Christ, but only man. Pugnat cum alijs Papistis.
But this abominable surmysed no truth in the former part of his comparison,
may be taken for a proof, whether such beastly asseuerations proceed from the
spirit of truth or now, And whether truth be there intended, where such
blasphemy is surmised. But let us see the rest.

Caunterbury.
YEt still in these comparisons you grant, that part of the difference to be
true, which I affirm, but you say that I report untruly of the Papists,
impudently bearing them in hand, to say such abominable and beastly
asseuerations as you never heard. Whereby appears your impudent arrogance in
denial of that thing, which either you know the Papists do say, or you are in
doubt whether they say, or saying having not read what it is that they say.
Whether a bird or ^east eat the body of Christ.
For why do they reject the Master of the sentences in this point, that he
said, a mouse or brute beast receaueth not the body of Christ, although they
seem to receau it? Wherein if you say (as the Master did) that ye mouse
receives not the body of Christ, Lib. 4. distinct. 13. In erroribus fol 134.
b. Vide Marcum Constantium. fol. 72. object. 94.
look for no favor at ye papists hands, but to be rejected as the Master was,
unles they forbear you upon favor, and because that in other matters you have
been so good a captain for them, they will pardon you this one fault. And so
is this first Thomas. 3. part. sum. q. 80. art. 3.
Quidam vero dixerunt, quod qua^ primum Sacramentum sumitur a mure vel cane,
desinit ibi esse corpus Christi. Sed hoc deregat veritati huius Sacramenti.
Substantia enim panis sumpta a peccatore, I am diu manet, dion per calorem
naturalem est in digestione, igitur tam diu manet corpus Christi sub speciebus
Sacramentalibus. And Perin in his book printed, Peryn.
and set abroad in this matter for all men to read, says: That although the
mouse, or any other beast do eat the Sacrament, yet nevertheless the same is
the very, and real body of Christ. And he asks what inconvenience it is
against the verity of Christ's real body in the Sacrament, though the
impassible body lie in the mouth or maw of the beast? Is it not therefore the
body of Christ? Yes undoubtedly says he. So that now these abominable
opinions, and beastly asseuerations (as you truly term them, meaning thereby
to bite me as appears) be fit terms and meet for the Papists, whose
asseuerations they be. Now follows the seventh comparyson.

They say, that every man, good and evil, eats the body of Christ. We say
that both do eat the Sacramental bread, and drink the wine, but none do eat
the very body of Christ, and drink his blood, but only they that be lively
members of his body.

Winchester.
In this comparison the former part, speaking of such men as be by baptism
received A demurre upon this Issue.
whereupon to fly the truth of the hole matter, if that doctrine, called by this
author the doctrine of the Papists, and is in deed the Catholic doctrine, be
not in this point true, let all be so judged for me. If it be true, as it is
most true, let that be a mark whereby to judge the rest of this authors untrue
asseuerations. For undoubtedly S. Augustine August. contra litteras Pe til.
lib. 20.
We may not of men's matters esteem the Sacraments, they be made by him whose
they be, but worthily used they bring reward, unworthily handled they bring
judgment. He that dispenses the Sacrament worthily, and he that uses it
unworthily, lie not one, but that thing is one, whether it be handled worthily
or unworthily, so as if is neither better ne worse, but life or death of them
that use it. Thus says S. Augustine, and therefore be the receauers worthy or
unworthy, Marcus consta^tius dicit quod Ethnici ide^ fortasse sumunt quod bruti
i. sacrame^tumtantu^
good or evil, the substance of Christ's Sacrament is all one, as being Gods
work, who works uniformly, and yet is not in all that receive of like
effect, not of any alteration or diminution in it, but for the diversity of
him that receaueth. So as the report made here of the doctrine of the
Catholic Church under the name of Papists, is a very true report, and for
want of grace reproved by the Author as though it were no true doctrine. And
the second part of the comparison We say) by them that in hypocrisy pretend to
be fruethes friends, contains an untruth to the simple reader, and yet has
a matter of wrangling to the learned reader, because of the word ( very) which
referred to the effect of eating the body of Christ, The word ( very) may make
wrangling.
whereby to receive life, may be so spoaken, that none receive the body of
Christ with the very effect of life, but such as eat the sacrament
spiritually, that is to say with true faith worthily. And yet evil men as
Judas, receive the same very

Caunterbury.
A demurre. whether evil men eat the body of Christ.
I Thank you for this demurre, for I my self could have chosen no better

Now must neither I nor you be judges in our own causes, therefore let Christ
be judge between us both, whose judgment it is not reason that you refuse.
Christ says: Who so ever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, John. 6.
dwells in me and I in him. As the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father, even so he that eats me, shall live by me. This is the bread
which came down from heaven. Not as your fathers did eat Manna and are dead. He
that eats this bread shall live for ever. Now I ask you this question,
whether evil men shall live for ever? Whether they live by Christ? Whether they
dwell in Christ? and have Christ dwelling in them? If you say nay (as you must
needs if you will say the truth) then have I proved my negative (wherein stood
the demurre) that ill men eat not Christ's body nor drink his blood, for if
they did, then by Christ's own words, they should live for ever, and dwell in
Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them. And what proofs will you require
more upon my part in this demurre? For if Christ be with me, who can be able to
stand against me.

But you allege for you S. Paul, who speaks for you nothing at al. 1. Cor.
11.
speaks expressly of the unworthy eating of the bread, but in no place of the
unworthy eating of the body of Christ. And if he do, show the place, or it is
the demurre passes against you and the wholl matter tried with me, by your own
pact and covenant. And yet for further proof of this demure, I refer me to the
1.2.3.4. and 5. chapters of my 4. book.

August. contra lit. Petil. li. 2. cap 37.
And where you bring S. Augustine to be witness, his witness in that place
helps nothing your cause. For he speaks there generally of the using

And here ye use such a subtilty to deceive the simple reader, that he has
good cause to suspect your proceedinges, and to take good heed of you in all
your writings, who do nothing else, but go about to deceive him. For you
conclude the matter of the substance of the Sacrament, that the reader might
think that place to speak only of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and
to speak of the substance thereof, where S. Augustine neither, has that word,
Substance, nor speaks not one word specially of that sacrament, but all his
process goes chiefly of Baptism which is alone (says S. Augustine against
the Donatists, which reproved Baptism for the vice of the minister) whether
the minister be good or ill, and whether he minister it to good or to ill. For
the Sacraments is all one, although the effect be diverse to good and to evil.

And as for them whom ye say that in hypocrisy pretend to be truths Truths
fained friends.
all that be learned and have any judgment, know that it is the Papists, which
no few years passed, by hypocrisy and fained religion, have uttered and sold
their lies and fables in sted of Gods eternal truth, and in the place of
Christ have set up idols and Antichrist.

And for the conclusion of this comparison, in this word ( Very) you make such
a wrangling, Very.
(where none occasion is given) as never was had before this time of any
learned man. For who heard ever before this time, that an adjective was
referred to a verb, and not to his proper substantive, of any man that had any
learning at all?

August. in Ioh. tra. 59.
Nor no man can receive the body of Christ unworthily, although he may receive
unworthily the Sacrament thereof.

And hitherto D. Smyth has found no fault at all in my comparisons, Smyth.
whereby the reader may see, how nature passes art, seeing here much more
captiousnesse in a subtle sophistical wit, then in him that has but learned
the Sophistical art. Now follows the eight comparyson. The 8. comparison.


They say, that good men eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, only at
that time when they receive the Sacrament. We say that they eat, drink and feed
of Christ continually, so long as they be members of his body.

Winchester.
What forehead, I pray you, is so hardened, that can utter this among them,
that know 3. Manner of eatinges.
one spiritual only: which is here affirmed in the second part of ( We say,)
wherein the author and his say as the church says. Another eating is both
sacramentally and spiritually, which is when men worthily communicate in the
supper. The third is sacramentally only, which is by men unworthy, who eat and
drink in the holy supper to their condemnation only. And the learned me^ in
Christ's church say, that the ignorance and want of observation of these three
manner of eatinges, causes the error in the understanding of the scriptures
and such fathers Cause of error.
as have written of the sacrament. And when the Church speaks of these three
manner of eatinges, what an impudency is it, to say, that the church teaches
good men only to eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, when they receive
the Sacrament, being the truth otherwise, and yet a diversity there is of eating
spiritually only, and eating spiritually and sacrame^tally, because in yt
supper they receue his very flesh and blood in deed, with the effects of al
graces and gifts to such as receue it spiritually and worthily: where as out of
the supper, when we eat only spiritually by faith, God that works without his
sacraments, as seems to him, does releaue those that believe and trust in him,
and suffers them not to be destitute of that is necessary for them, whereof
we may not presume contemning the sacrament, but ordenaryly seek God, where he
has ordered himself to be sought, and there to assure our self of his
couenaunts and promyses, which be most certainly annexed to his sacraments,
Gods promises annexed to his Sacraments. We must in teaching exalt the
Sacraments after their dignity.
whereunto we ought to give most certain trust and confidence, wherefore to
teach the spiritual manducation to be equal with the spiritual manducation
and sacramental also: that is to diminish the effect of the institution of the
Sacrament, which no Christen man ought to do.

Caunterbury.
WHo is so ignorant that has red any thing at all, but he knows that 3.
Manner of eatinges.
That some eat only the sacrament of Christ's body, but not the very body it
self, some eat his body and not the Sacrament, and some eat the Sacrament and
body both together. The Sacrament (that is to say, the bread) is corporally
eaten and chawed with the teth in the mouth. The very body is eaten and chawed
with faith in the spirit. Ungodly men when they receive the Sacrament, they
chaw in their mouths (like unto Judas) the Sacrame^tal bread, but they eat not
the celestial bread, which is Christ. Faithful Christian people (such as be
Christ's true disciples) continually from time to time record in their minds
the beneficial death of our Savior Christ, chawing it by faith in the cud of
their spirit, and digesting it in their hearts, feding and comforting themselves
with that heavenly meat, although they daily receive not the Sacrament thereof,
and so they eat Christ's body spiritually, although not the sacrament thereof.
True sacrame^tall eating.
But when such men for their more comfort and confirmation of eternal life,
given unto them by Christ's death, come unto the Lords holy Table, then as
before ehey fed spiritually upon Christ, so now they feed corporally also upon
the sacramental bread. By which sacrame^tal feeding in Christ's promises, their
former spiritual feding is increased, and they grow and wax continually more
strong in Christ, until at the last they shall come to the full measure and
perfection in Christ. This is the teaching of the true Catholic Church, as it
is taught by Gods word. And therefore S. Paul speaking of them that unworthily
eat, says, that they eat the bread, but not that they eat the body of Christ,
1. Cor. 11.
but their own damnation.

Whether Christ be really eaten without the sacrament.
And where you set out with your accustomed rethorical colors a great

They say that after such a sort as Christ is in the sacrament, and there
eaten, so good men eat his body and blood only, when they receive the
sacrament, The comparion.
so do they eat, drink, and feed upon him continually, so long as they be
members of his body.

Now the Papists say, that Christ is corporally present in the sacrament and is
so eaten only when men receive the sacrament. But we say, that the presence of
Christ in his holy supper, is a spiritual presence: and as he is spiritually
present, so is he spiritually eaten of all faithful christian men, not only
when they receive the sacrament, but continually so long as they be members
spiritual of Christ's mystical body.

Really
And yet this is really also (as you have expounded the word) that is to say, in
deed and effectually. And as the holy ghost does not only come to us in
Baptism, and Christ does there eloth us, but they do the same to us
continually so long as we dwell in Christ, so likewise does Christ feed us so
long as we dwell in him and he in us, and not only when we receive the
sacrament. So that as touching Christ himself, ye presence is all one, the
clothing all one, and the feeding al one, although the one for the more comfort
and consolation, have the sacrament added to it, and the other be without the
sacrament. The rest that is here spoken, is contentious wrangling to no purpose.

But now comes in Smith with his 5. eggs, Smyth.
saying that I have made hete 5. lies in these comparisons. The first lie is
(says he) that the Papists do say, that good men do eat and drink Christ's
body and blood only when they receive the sacrament, which thing Smyth says
the Papists do not say, but that they then only do eat Christ's body, and
drink his blood corporally, which suffices for my purpose. For I mean no
other thing, but that the Papists teach such a corporal eating of Christ's
body as indureth not, but vanishes away, and cease at the furthest within
few hours after the Sacrament is received. But for as much as Smith agrees
here with you, the answer made before to you, will serve for him also. And yet
Smith here shall serve me in good stead against you, who have imputed unto me
so many impudent lies made against the Papists in the comparisons before
rehearsed: and Smith says that this is the first lie, which is in the 8.
comparison. And so shall Smith (being mine adversary and your friend) be such a
witness for me, as you cannot except against, to prove that those things which
before you said were impudent lies, be no lies at all. For this is ye first lie
says Smith, and then my sayings before must be all true, and not impudent
lies. Now to the ninth comparison.

They say that the body of Christ that is in the Sacrament, has his own proper
form and quantity. We say that Christ is there Sacramentally and spiritually,
without form or quantitye.

Winchester.
In this comparison is both slight and craft, in the first part of it, which
is that they say, there is mention of the body of Christ, which is proper of
the humanity of Christ. Christ's body is understood of his humanity
In the second part, which is of ( we say) there is no mention of Christ's
body but of Christ, who in his divine nature is understood present without a
body. Now the Sacrament is institute of Christ's body and blood, and because
the divine nature in Christ continues

Now for the other part whereof this author is, and with his faith ( we say)
the words seem to employ, that Christ's humain body is not in the Sacrament,
in that it is said: Christ to be there Sacramentally and spiritually, without
form or quantity, which saying has no Scripture for it. I marvelous saying
of this ^^ there without Scripture.
For the Scripture speaks of Christ's body which was betrayed for us, to be
given us to be eaten. Where also Christ's divinity is present, as accompanyng
his humanity, Christ in thinstitution of the Sacrament, spoke of his humanity,
saying. This is my body.
which humanity is specially spoken of, the presence of which humanity, when
it is denied, then is there no text to prove the presence of Christ's divinity
Qui quam in forma Dei esset.) Who when he was in the form of God. So as if
Christ be present in the sacrament without all form, Phil. 4.
then is he there, neither as God nor man, which is a stranger teaching then
yet has been hear or red of, but into such absurdities in deed do they fall,
who entreat irreuerently and untruly this high mystery. This is here worthy a
spesyall note, how by the manner of the speech in the latter part of this
difference, the teaching seems to be, that Christ is spiritually present in
the Sacrament, because of the word ( there) which thou reader may compare
how it agrees with the rest of this authors doctrine. There. Note this
contrariety in the Author.
Let us go to the next.

Caunterbury.
SUch is the nature of many, that they can find many knots in a plain rush,
and doubts where no doubts ought to be found. So find you slight and craft,
where I meant all things symply and plainly. And to avoid such slight and
craft as you gather of my words, I shall express the^ plainly thus.

The comparison.
The Papists say, that the body of Christ that is in the Sacrament, has his
own proper form and quantity. We say, that the body of Christ has not his
proper form and quantity, neither in the sacrament, nor in them yt receive the
Sacrament, but is in the sacrament sacramentally, and in the worthy receauers
spiritually without the proper form and quantity of his body. This was my
meaning at the first, and no man that had looked of this place indifferently,
would have taken the second part of this comparison to be understood of
Christ's divine nature: for the bread and wine be sacraments of his body and
blood, Theodoret. dialog. 1.
and not of his divinity (as Theodoretus says) and therefore his divine nature
is not sacramentally in the sacrament,

The reader by this one place among many other, may easyly discern, how
captious you be to reprehend what so ever I say, and to pervert every thing
into a wrong sense: So that in respect of you, Smith is a very indifferent
taker of my words, D. Smith.
although in deed he far passes the bonds of honesty.

Whether in the Sacrament. Christ's body has his proper form and quantity.
But to come directly to the matter, if it be true that you say, that in the
sacrament Christ's body has all the forms and quantities of a natural body,
why say you then that his body is not there present after the manner of
quantity? Declare what difference is between form and quantity, and the
manner of quantity? And if Christ's body in the Sacrament have the same
quantity, that is to say, the same length, breadth, and thicknes, and the same
form, that is to say, the same due order, and proportion of the members and
parts of his body, that he had when he was crucified, and has now in heaven
(as he has by your saying here in this place) then I pray you declare further,
how the length, breadth, and thicknes of a man, should be contained in
quantity, within the compass of a piece of bread, no longer nor broader then
one or two inches, nor much thicker then one leaf of paper. How an inch may be
as long as an elle, and an elle as short as an inch. How length and roundnes
shall agree in one proportion: and a thick and thin thing be both of one
thicknes: which you must warrant to be brought to pass, if the form and
quantity of Christ's body be contained under the form and quantity of such
bread and wine as we now use.

But as Smyth in the last comparison did me good service against you, D. Smith.
so shall you in this comparison do me good service against him. For among the
five lies, wherewith he charge me in these comparisons, he accompteth this
for one, that I report of the Papists, that Christ's body in the sacrament has
his proper form and quantity, which you say is a truth. And therefore if I
make a lie herein (as Smyth says I do) yet I lie not alone, but have you to
bear me company. And yet once again more may the reader here note, how the
Papists vary among them selves.

And it is untrue that you say, that good men believe upon the credit of
Christ, that there is truly in the Sacrament, the very true body of Christ.
For Christ called bread his body and wine his blood (which as the old authors
say, must needs be understood figuratively) but he never said that his true
body is truly in the Sacrament, as you here report of him.

And the manner of his presence you call so high a mystery, that the carnal
man can not reach it. And in deed as you feign, the matter it is so high a
mystery, that never man could reach it, but your self alone. For you make the
manner of Christ's being in the Sacrament so spiritual, that you say his
flesh, blood and bones be there really and carnally, and yet you confess in
your book, that you never red any old author that so said. And this manner of
handling of so pure a mystery, is neither godly foolishnes nor worldly, but
rather a mere fransy and madness.

And although the scripture speak of Christ's body to be eaten of us, yet that
is understood of spiritual and not of corporal eating, and of spiritual not
of corporal presence. The scripture says, John 16. Mark. 16 Luke. 24.^Act. 1.
that Christ has forspoken the world, and is ascended into heaven. Upon which
words S. Augustine Uigilius, and other ancient authors do prove, that as
concerning the nature



And when I say that Christ is in the Sacrament Sacramentally and without form
and quantity, who would think any man so captious, so ignorant, or so full of
sophistry, to draw my words to the form of Christ's divinity, which I speak
most plainly of the form and quantity of his body and humanity? as I have
before declared. And although some other might be so far ouerseen, yet
specially you ought not so to take my words. Forasmuch as you said not past 16.
lines before, that my words seem to implye, that I meant of Christ's humayne
body.

And because it may appear how truly and faithfully you report my words, you
add this word ( all) which is more then I speak, All.
and marteth all the wholl matter. And you gather thereof such absurdities as I
never spoke, but as you sophistically do gather, to make a great matter^ of
nothing.

And where of this word ( there) you would conclude repugnaunce in my There.
that where in other places I have written, that Christ is spiritually present
in them that receive the sacrament, and not in the sacraments of bread and
wine, and now it should seem that I teach contrary; yt Christ is spiritually
present in the very bread and wine, if you pleased to understand my words
rightly, there is no repugnaunce in my words at al. For by this word ( there) I
mean not in the Sacraments of bread and wine, but in the ministration of the
Sacrament, as the old authors for the most part, when they speak of the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, they mean in the ministration of the
Sacrament.

Which my saying varyeth from no doctrine that I have taught in any part of my
book. Now follows the tenth comparyson.

They say, that the fathers, and Prophets of the old Testament did not eat the
body, or drink the blood of Christ. We say, that they did eat his body and
drink his blood, although he was not yet borne nor incarnated.

Winchester.
A riddle may co^taine truth of nay, and pea. being in appeara^ce two
contraries.
This comparison of difference is clerkly conveyed, as it were of a riddle,
wherein, nay and yea, when they be opened, agree and consent. The fathers did
eat Christ's body and Augustinus. I special difference in S. Augustine.
Thus he says: And this is evident of it self, how to us in the holy supper
(Christ says) This is my body that shall be betrayed for you, take come, and to
come,) as S. August. says, differs. But Christ is one, by whom all was
created, and man's fall repaired, from whom is all feeding corporal and
spiritual, and in whom all is restored in heaven and in earth. In this faith of
Christ, the fathers were fed with heavenly spiritual food, which was the same
with ours in respect of the restitution by Christ, and redemption by them
hoped, which is achieved by the mystery of the body and blood of Christ, by
reason whereof I deny not, but it may be said in a good sense, how they did eat
the body and blood of Christ, before he was incarnat, but as I said before,
Scripture speaks not so, and it is no wholesome fashion of speech at this ^^ne
of Kentes (...).
that is to say, that Christ took nothing of the Uirgine, but brought his body
with him from above, being a thing worthy to be noted, how the old heresy,
denying the true taking of the flesh of Christ in the virgins womb, at the
same time to revive. When the true deliverance of Christ's flesh in the holy
supper to be of us eaten, is also denied. For as it is a mere truth without
figure, and yet an high mystery, Gods work in the incarnation of Christ,
wherein our flesh was of Christ truly taken of the virgins substance: So is it
a mere truth, without figure in the substance of the celestial thing, and
yet an high mystery and Gods work, in the giving of the same true flesh,
truly to be in the supper eaten. When I exclude figure in the sacrament, I
mean not of the visible part which is called a figure of the celestial
invisible part, which is truly there without figure, Nouelty of speech.
so as by that figure is not impaired the truth of that presence, which I ad to
avoid cauilation. And make an end of this comparison, this I say, that this
article declares wantonness to make a difference in words, where none is in the
sense rightly taken, with a novelty of speech not necessary to be uttered now.

Caunterbury.
NOte well here reader, how the cuttill comes in with his dark colors.

Where I speak of the substance of the thing that is eaten, you turn it to
the manner and circumstaunces thereof, to blind the simple reader, and that
you may make thereof a riddle of yea and nay, as you be wont to make black
white, and white black: or one thing yea and nay, black and white at your
pleasure.

The fathers did eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood.
this I say, that the fathers and prophets did eat Christ's body and drink his
blood in promise of redemption to be wrought, and we eat and drink the same
flesh and blood in confirmation of our faith in the redemption all ready
wrought.

But as the fathers did eat and drink, so did also the Apostles at Christ his
supper, in promise of redemtion to be wrought, not in confirmation of
redemption already wrought. So that if wrought and to be wrought, make the
diversity of presence and not presence, then the Apostles did not eat and
drink the flesh and blood of Christ really present, because the redemption was
not then already wrought, but promised the next day to be wrought.



And although in the manner of signifiyng there be great difference between
their sacraments and ours, yet (as S. Augustine says) both we and they receive
one thing in the diversity of Sacraments. The diversity of the sacraments of
the new and old testament. August. in. Joan. Tract. 26.
And our Sacraments contain presently the very things signified, no more then
theirs did. For in their sacraments they were by Christ presently regenerated
and fed, as we be in ours, although their sacraments were figures of the death
of Christ to com, and ours be figurs of his death now past. And as it is al one
Christ that was to be borne and to dye for us, and afterward was borne in deed
and dyed in deed (whose birth and death be now passed) so was the same Christ,
and the same flesh and blood eaten and drunken of the faithful fathers before
he was borne or dead, and of his Apostles after he was born and before he was
dead, and of faithful christen people is now daily eaten and drunken after
that both his nativity and death be passed. And al is but one Christ, one flesh
and one blood, as concerning the sustance, yet that which to the fathers was to
come, is to us passed. And nevertheless the eating and drinking is all one,
for neither the fathers did, nor we do eat carnally and corporally with our
mouths, but both the fathers did and we do eat spiritually by true and lively
faith. The Fathers did eat Christ's body and drink his blood before he was
borne.
The body of Christ was and is all one to the fathers and to us, but corporally
and locally he was yet borne unto them, and from us he is gone: and ascended up
into heaven. So that to neither he was nor is carnally, substantially and
corporally present, but to them he was and to us he is spiritually present and
sacramentally also, and of both sacrame^tally, spiritually and effectually
eaten and drunken, to eternal salvation and everlasting life.

And this is plainly enough declared in the Scripture, to them that have Eccle.
24. in the person of Christ thus: They that eat me, shall yet hunger, and they
that drink me shall yet be thirsty.

1. Cor. 10.
And S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, saying: Our fathers did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, and they
drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ.
August. de vtil. paeniten.
These words S. Augustine expounding says: What is to eat the same meat: but
that they did eat the same which we do. Who so ever in Manna understood
Christ, did eat the same spiritual meat that we do, yt is to say, that meat
which was received with faith and not with bodies. Therefore to them that
understood and believed, it was the same meat and the same drink. So that to
such as understood not, the meat was only Manna, and the drink, only
water, but to such as understood, it was the same that is now. For the^ was
Christ to come, who is now come. To come and is come, be diverse words, but it
is the same Christ. These be S. Augustines sayings.

And because you say, that it is more agreeable to the scripture, to say, that
the fathers before Christ's nativity did not eat the body and drink the blood
August. in psalm. 77.
Psalm S. Augustine says also: The stone was Christ. Therefore the same was
the meat and drink of the fathers in the mystery, which is ours, but in
signification the same, not in outward form. For it is one Christ him self,
that to them was figured in the stone, and to us manyfestly appeared in flesh.
August. in Ioa^. Tract. 26.
And saint Augustine says plainly, that both Manna and our Sacrament
signifies Christ, and that although the Sacraments were diverse, yet in the
thing by them meant and understand, they were both like. And so after the mind
of S. Augustine it is clear, that the same things were given to the faithful
receivers in the Sacraments of the old Testament, that be given in the new: the
same to them was circumcision, that to us is baptism: and to them by Manna was
given the same thing, that now is given to us in the sacramental bread.

And if I would grant for your pleasure, that in their sacraments Christ was
promised, and that in ours, he is really given, does it not then follow as well
that Christ is given in the sacrament of Baptism, as that he is given in the
Sacrament of his flesh and blood? And S. Augustine contra Faustum, August.
contra Faustum lib. 19. cap. 16. and 20. cap 21.
esteems them mad, that think diversity between the things signified in
the old and new testament, because the signs be diverse. And expressing the
matter plainly, says, that the flesh and blood of our sacryfice before
Christ's coming, was promised ^ y sacryfices of similitudes, in his passion was
given indeed, and after his as^^ntion is solemnly put in our memory by the
Sacrament.

And the thing which you say S. Augustine notes to be given in the sacraments
of the new testament, August. in psalm. 73.
and to be promised in the sacraments of the old, S. Augustine expresses the
thing which he meant, that is to say, salvation and eternal life by Christ. And
yet in this mortal life we have not eternal life in possession, but in
promise, as the prophets had. But S. Augustine says, that we have the promise,
because we have Christ all ready come, which by ye Prophets was promised before
that he should come, and therefore S. John the Baptist was called more then a
Prophet, because he said: John. 1.
Here is the lamb of God already preset, which the Prophets taught us to look
for, until he came.

The effect therefore of S. Augustins words plainly to be expressed, was this,
that the prophets in the old testament Promised a savior to come, and redeem
the world, (which the sacraments of that time testified until his coming):
but now he is already come, and has by his death performed that was promised,
which our sacraments testify unto us, as S. Augustine declares more plainly
in his book De fide ad Petrum, the xix. chapter. So that S. Augustine speaks
of the giving of Christ to death, August. de fide ad Pet. cap. 19.
(which the sacraments of the old testament, testified to come, and ours
testify to be done) and not of the giving of him in the sacraments.

And forasmuch as S. Augustine spoke generally of all the sacraments, therefore
if you will by his words prove, that Christ is corporally in the sacrament of
the holy communion, you may as well prove, that he is corporally in baptism.
For saint Augustine speaks no more of the one then of the other. But where
saint Augustine speaks generally of all the sacraments, you restrain the
matter particularly to the sacrament of the Lords supper only, that the
ignorant reader should think, that saint Augustine spoke of the corporal
presence of Christ in the sacraments, and that only in the sacraments of
bread and wine, where as saint Augustine himself speaks only of our
salvation by Christ, and of the sacraments in general.

And nevertheless as the fathers had the same Christ and mediator that we have
(as you here confess) so did they spiritually eat his f^esh and drink his
blood (as we do) and spiritually feed of him, and by faith he was present with
the^ (as he is with us) although carnally and corporally he was yet to come
unto the^, and from us is gone up to his father into heaven.

This besides saint Augustine is plainly set out by Bertrame above 6. hundredth
years passed, Bertram.
whose judgment in this matter of the sacrament, although you allow not
(because it utterly condemns your doctrine therein) yet forasmuch as hitherto
his teaching was never reproved by none, but by you alone, and that he is
commended of other, as an excellent learned man in holy scripture, and a
notable famous man, as well in living as learning, and yt among his excellent
works this one is specially praised, which he wrote of the matter of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, therefore I shall rehearse his
teaching in this point, how the holy fathers and Prophets before the coming of
Christ did eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood: So that although Bertrams
saying be not esteemed with you, yet the indifferent reader may see what was
written in this matter, before your doctrine was invented. And although his
authority be not received of you, yet his words may serve against Smyth, Smyth.
who herein more learnedly, and with more judgment then you, approves this
author. This is Bertrams doctrine S. Paul says, that all the old fathers did
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. But
peradventure thou will ask, Which the same? Even the very same that christen
people do daily eat and drink in the church. For we may not understand diverse
things, when it is one and the self same Christ, which in times past did feed
with his flesh, and made to drink of his blood, the people that were baptized
in the cloud and sea, in the wilderness, and which does now in the church feed
christen people with the bread of his body, and gives the^ to drink the flood
of his blood. When he had not yet taken man's nature upon him, when he had not
yet tasted death for the salvation of the world, not redeemed us with his blood,
nevertheless even then our forefathers by spiritual meat and invisible drink did
eat his body in the wilderness and drink his blood, as the Apostle bears
witness, saying: The same spiritual meat, the same spiritual drink. For he
that now in the church by his omnipotent power does spiritually convert bread
and wine into the flesh of his body, and into the flood of his own blood, he
did the^ inuisibly so work, that Manna which came from heaven was his body,
and the water his blood. Now by the things here by me alleged, it evidently
appears, that this is no nouelty of speech to say, that the holy fathers and
Prophets did eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood. For both the scripture and
old authors use so to speak, how much soever ye spech mislike them, that like
no fashion but their own.

Ione of Kent.
And what does this further ye pestilent heresy of Ione of Kent? Is this The 11.
comparison.


They say, that the body of Christ is every day many times made, as often as
there be Masses said, and that then and there he is made of bread and wine. We
say, that Christ's body was never but once made, and then not of the nature and
substance of bread and wine, but of the substance of his blessed mother.

Winchester.
The body of Christ, is by Gods omnipotency, who so works in his word, made
present unto us at such time, as the church pray, it may please him so to do,
which prayer is ordered to be made in the book of common prayer now set forth.
The book of common prayer in this Realm.
Wherein we require of Christ's body in the sacrament is not made of ye matter
of bread.
that Christ's most

Caunterbury.
Christ is present when so ever the church prays unto him, and is gathered
together in his name. And the bread and wine be made unto us ye The book of
common prayer
(as it is in the book of common prayer) but not by changing the substance of
bread and wine into the substance of Christ's natural body and blood, but
that, in the godly using of the^, they be unto the receauers Christ's body and
blood. As of some the Scripture says, yt their riches is their redemption, and
to some it is their damnation: Proverb. 23. Romans 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 2. Iac.
8. Esaias. 1. Math. 22. 1. Pet. 2. John. 11.
And as Gods word to some is life, to some it is death and a snare (as the
prophet says.) And Christ himself to some is a stone to stumble at, to some is
a raising from death, not by conversion of substances, but by good or evil
use: that thing which to the godly is salvation; to the ungodly is damnation.
So is the water in baptism, and the bread and wine in the Lords supper, to the
worthy receauers, Christ himself and eternal life, and to the unworthy
receauers everlasting death and damnation, not by conversion of one substance
into an other, but by godly or ungodly use thereof. And therefore in the book of
the holy communion we do not pray absolutely, that the bread and wine may be
made the body and blood of Christ, but that unto us in that holy mystery they
may be so, that is to say, Domin. 3. post Trin. Secret Muneram libidinem quibus
oblata sanctifica, vt tui, nobis vnigeniti corpus and sa^guis fiant ad medela^.
that we may so worthily receive the same, that we may be partakers of Christ's
body and blood, and that therewith in spirit and in truth we may be spiritually
nourished. And a like prayer of old time were all the people wont to make at
the communion, of all such offerings, as at that time all the people used to
offer, praying that their offerings might be unto them the body and blood of
Christ.

And where you say, it was never taught as I say, Whether the body of Christ be
made of bread.
that Christ's body is that the substance of the bread neither remains still
nor is turned into nothing, but into the body of Christ? And do not your self
also say here in this place, that the substance of bread is converted into
Christ's precious body? And what is that else, but the body of Christ to be made
of bread, and to be made of a new matter? For if the bread do not vanish away
into nothing, but be turned into Christ's body, then is Christ's body made of
it, and then Ex pane fit Corpus Christi, of bread is made the body of Christ,
and that the substance of bread is turned into the substance therof^ And what
reason, sentence, or english, could be in this saying, Christ's body is made
present of bread? Marye to be present in bread might be some sentence, but ye
speech will you in no wise admit.

And this your saying here (if the reader mark it well) turns over quite and
clean all the wholl Papisticall doctrine in this matter of the Sacrament,
Pugnat cum alijs Papistis.
as well touching transubstantiation, as also the carnal presence. For their
doctrine with one whole consent and agreement is this. That the substance of
bread remains not, but is turned into the substance of Christ's

And you varry so much from your self herein, that although you deny the
Papists sayings in words, that Christ's body is made of bread, yet in effect
you grant and maintayn the same, which you say is intolerable, and not to be
devised by a scoffer in a play. For you say, that Christ calls bread his
body, and that his calling is making. And then if he make bread his body, it
must needs follow that he makes his body of the bread: moreover you say,
Making by conversion.
that Christ's body is made present by conversion, or turning of the substance
of bread, into the substance of his precious body, where of must follow, that
his body is made of bread. For when so ever one substance is turned into
another, the^ the second is made of the first. As, because earth was turned
into the body of Adam, Genesis 2.
we say that Adam was made of earth and that Eve was made of Adams ribbe: And
the wine in Galily made of water, John. 2.
because the water was turned into wine, and the ribbe of Adames side into the
body of Eve. If the water had been put out of the pottes, and wine put in for
the water, we might have said that the wine had been made present there, where
the water was before: But then we might not have said that the wine had been
made of the water, because ye water was emptied out, and not turned into wine.
But when Christ turned the water into the wine, then by reason of that turning,
we say that ye wine was made of the water. So likewise if the bread be turned
into the substance of Christ his body, we must not only say that the body of
Christ is present, where the bread was before, but also that it is made of the
bread, because that the substance of the bread is converted and turned into the
substance of his body. Which thing the papists saw must needs follow, and
therefore they plainly confessed, that the body of Christ was made of bread,
which doctrine (as you truly say in this place) is intolerable, and not to be
devised by a scoffer in a play, when his fellow had forgotten his part. And
yet you so far forget your self in this book, that throughout the same (what
so ever you say here) you defend the same intolerable doctrine, not to be
devised by a scoffer.

And where Smith accounts here my fourth lie, that I say, D. Smith.
that the Papists say, that Christ's body is made of bread and wine. Here
Smith and you agree both together in one lie. For it is truth and no lie, that
the Papists so say and teach, as Smith in other parts of his book says, that
Christ's body is made of bread, and that priests do make Christ's body. My
12. comparison is this.

They say that the mass is a Sacrifice satisfactory for sin, by the devotion
of the Priest that offreth, and not by the thing that is offered. But we say
that their saying is a most heinous, yea and detestable error against the glory
of Christ: for the satisfaction for our sins, is not the devotion nor
offering of the Priest, but the only host and satisfaction for all the sins
of the world, is the death of Christ, and the oblation of his body upon the
Cross, that is to say: The oblation that Christ him self offered once upon the
cross, and never but once, not never any but he. And therefore that oblation
which the Priests make daily in their papisticall masses, cannot be a
satisfaction for other men's sins by the Priests devotion: but it is a mere
illusion, and subtle craft of the Devil, whereby Antichrist has many years
blinded and deceived the world.

Winchester.
Christ is our satisfaction.
who has paid our wholl debt to God the Father, for the appeasing of his just
wrath against us, and has cancelled the bill obligatory (as S Paul says)
that was against us. For further opening whereof, if it be asked how he
satisfied: How Christ satisfied.
we answer, as we be taught by the Scriptures: By the accomplishment of the
will of his Father, in his innocent willing, and obedient suffering the
miseries of this world without sin, and the violent persecution of the world,
even to the death of the Cross, and sheading of his most precious blood.
Wherein was perfited the willing Sacrifice that he made of him self to God the
Father for us, of whom it was written in the beginning of the book, that he
should lie the body and perfectt accomplishment of all Sacrifices, as of whom
all other sacrifices before, were shadows and figures.

And here is to be considered, Christ's wi^^.
how the obedient will in Christ's Sacrifice is specially to be noted, who
suffered because he would. Which S. Paul sets forth in declaration of
Christ's humility. And although that willing obedience was ended and perfected
on the cross, to the which it continued from the beginning, by reason whereof
the oblatio^ is in S. Paul's speech attributed thereunto: Yet as in the
Sacrifice of Abraham when he offered Isaac, the earnest will of offering was
accounted for the offering in deed, whereupon it is said in Scripture that
Abraham offered Isaac, and the declaration of the will of Abraham

Christ's once offering.
And this I write because this author speaks so precisely, how Christ offered
himself Phil. 1.
under the word of humiliation, to have continued the wholl time of Christ's
conversation here, even to ye death the death of the cross. And that this
obedience to God, in humility is called offering, appears oblationem
gentium) to bring them to the faith. Romans 12.
And Abraham's willing obedience ready at Gods commandment to offer Isaac, is
called the offering of Isaac, and is in very deed a true offering: And every
man offers himself to God when he yealdeth to Gods calling, and presents
himself ready to do Gods will and commandment, who then may be said to
offer his service, (that is to say,) to place his service in sight, and before
him, before whom it should be done. And because our Savior Christ by the
decree of the wholl Trinity, took man's

We read in S. Ciprian how Christ offered himself in his supper, fulfilling
the figure of Melchisedech, who by the offering of bread and wine, signified
that high mystery of Christ's Supper, in which Christ (under the form of bread
and wine) gave his very body and blood to be eaten and dronken, and in the
giving thereof declared the determination of his glorious passion, and the fruit
and effect thereof. Which doing was a sweet and pleasant oblation to God the
Father, containing a most perfect obedience to Gods will and pleasure. And in
the mystery of this Supper was written, made, and sealed, a most perfect
testimony for an effectual memory of Christ's offering of him self to his
Father, and of his death and passion, with the fruit thereof. And therefore
Christ ordained this Supper to be observed fruit of his death, to pertayne as
well to us as to them. Of which death we be assured by his own mouth, that he
suffered the same to the effect he spoke of, and the continual feding in this
high mystery of the same very body that suffered, and feeding of it without
consumption, being continually exhibited unto us a living body, and a lively
blood, not only our soul is specially and spiritually comforted, and our body
thereby reduced to more comfortable obedience to the soul, but also we by the
participation of this most precious body and blood be ascertained of the
resurrection and regeneration of our bodies and flesh, to be by Gods power made
incorruptible and immortal, to live, and have fruition in God, with our souls
for ever.

Wherefore having this mystery of Christ's Supper, so many truths in it, ye
Church has celebrate the^ all, and knowledged them all, of one certainty in
truth, not as figures, Truths linked together.
but really and in deed, that is to say, as our bodies shall be in the general
resurrection regenerate in deed: so we believe we feed here of Christ's body
in deed. And as it is true that Christ's body in deed is betrayed for us: so
it is true that he gives us to eat his very body in deed. And as it is true
yt Christ was in earth, and did celebrate this Supper: so it is true that he
commanded it to be celebrated by us till he come. And as it is true that
Christ was very God omnipotent, and very man: so it is true that he could do
that he affirmed by his word him self to do. And as he is most sinceere
truth: so may we be truly assured, that he would, and did, as he said. And as
it is true that he is most just: so it is true that he assisteth the doing of
his commandment in the celebration of the holy Supper. And therefore as he is
author of this most holy Sacrament of his precious body and blood: so is he the
maker of it, and is the invisible priest, who as Emissene says by his secret
power, Emissenus, Christ is the invisible priest. 1. Cor. 4.
with his word, changes the visible creatures, into the substance of his body
and blood. Wherein man, the visible priest and minister by order of the church
is only a dispencer of the mystery, doing and saying as the holy ghost has
taught the church to do and say.

Finally, as we be taught by faith all these to be true: so when wanton reason
(faith being aslepe) goes about by curiosity to empaire any one of these
truths, the chain is broaken, the linkes sparckle abroad, and all is brought
in danger to be scattered and scambled at. Truths have been abused, but yet
they be true, as they were before, for no man can make that is true, false: and
abuse is man's fault, not the things. Scripture in speech, gives to man as
Gods minister, the name of that action which God specially works in that
mystery. So it pleases God to honor the ministry of man in his Church, by
whom it also pleases him to work effectually. And Christ said, they that
believe in me, Errors. One offering of Christ, not many.
shall do the works that I do, and greater. When all this honor is given to
man, as spiritually to regenerate, when the minister says (I baptize thee) and
to remitte sin to such as fall after, to be also a minister in consecration
of Christ's most precious body, with the ministration of other Sacraments,
benediction, and prayer. If man should then wax proud, 1. John. 2.
and glory as of him self, and extol his own devotion in these ministeries,
such men should bewray their own naughty hypocrisy, and yet thereby empayr not
the very dignity of ye ministry, ne the very true fruit and effect thereof. And
therefore when the Church by the minister, and with the minister prays that
the creatures of bread and wine, set on the altar (as the book of common
prayer in this Realm has ordered) may be unto us the body and blood of our
savior Christ, we require then the celebration of the same Supper, which
Christ made to his Apostles, for to be the continual memory of his death, with
all fruit and effect, such as the same had in the first institution.

Wherefore when the minister pronounces Christ's words, as spoaken of his
mouth, it is to be believed, that Christ does now, as he did then. And it is to
be noted, yt although in the Sacrament of Baptism, the minister says (I
baptize thee,) yet in the celebration of his Supper, the words be spoaken in
Christ's person, as saying him self, this is my body that is broaken for you,
which is to us not only a memory, but an effectual memory does assist, and
absolutely perform in his Church, his mystical body. Now when we have
Christ's body thus present in the celebration of the holy Supper, and by
Christ's mouth present unto us, saying, this is my body which is betrayed for
you. Then have we Christ's body recommended unto us as our Sacrifice, and a
Sacrifice propitiatory for all the sins of the world, being the only
Sacrifice of Christ's Church, the pure and clean Sacrifice whereof the Prophet
Malachie spoke, Mala. 1.
and whereof the Fathers in Christ's church have since the beginning continually
written, the very true presence whereof, most constantly believed, has
increased from time to time such ceremonies as have been used in the
celebration of that Supper, in which by Christ's own mouth we be ascertained of
his most glorious death and passion, and the self same body that suffered,
delivered unto us in mystery to be eaten of us, and therefore so to be
worshipped and acknowledged of us, as our very only Sacrifice, in whom, by
whom, and for whom, our other private gifts and Sacrifices be acceptable, and
no otherwise.

Errors.
And therefore as Christ declares in the Supper himself an offering, and
Sacrifice for our sin: offering himself to his Father as our Mediator, and
so therewith recommendeth to his Father the Church his body, for which he
suffers: so the Church at the same The whole church by the minister the priest
offers Christ present as a sacrifice propitiatory, wherein is showed our Lords
death.
with such other gifts as they have received from God, join them selves with
their head Christ, presenting, and offering him, as one by whom, for whom, and
in whom, all that by Gods grace man can do well, is auailable, and acceptable,
and without whom, nothing by us done, can be pleasant in the sight of God.
Whereupon this persuasion has been truly conceived, which is also in the book
of common prayer, in the celebration of the holy supper retained, that it is
very profitable at that time, when the memory of Christ's death is solemnized,
to remember with prayer all estates of the Church, and to recommend them to
God, which S. Paul to Timothy, seems to require. At which time as Christ
signifies unto us the certainty of his death, and gives us to be eaten, as it
were in pledge, the same his precious body that suffered: So we for declaration
of our confidence in the death and Sacrifice, do kindly remember with thanks
his special gifts: and charitably remember the rest of the members of
Christ's church with prayer, and as we are able, should with our bodily goods
remember at that time specially to relieve such as have need by poverty.

And again, as Christ puts us in remembrance of his great benefit, so we
should thoroughly remember him for our part, with the true confession of this
mystery, wherein is recapitulate a memorial of all gifts and mysteries that
God in Christ has wrought for us. In the consideration and estimation whereof,
as there has been a fault in the security of such, as so their names were
remembered in this holy time of memory, they cared not how much they forgot
themselves: So there may be a fault in such, as neglecting it, care Jacob. 5.
But S. James said truly ( Multum valet oration iusti assidua.) It is to be
abhorred to have hipocrites that counterfaite devotion, but true devotion is to
be wished of God and prayed for, which is Gods gift, not to obscure his glory,
but to set it forth, not that we should then trust in men's merits and
prayers, but laud and glorify God in them ( Qui talem potestatem dedit
hominibus) one to be judged able to relieve another with his prayer, referring
all to proceed from God, by the mediation of our Savior and redeemer Jesus
Christ.

I have tarried long in this matter, to declare that for the effect of all
celestial or worldly gifts to be obtained of God in the celebration of
Christ's holy Supper, when we call it the communion, is now prayed for to be
present, and is present, and with Gods favor shall be obtained, if we
devoutly, reverently, charitably, and quietly, use and frequents the same,
without other innouations then the order of the book prescribes. Now to the
last difference.

Caunterbury.
HOw is this comparison out of the matter of the presence of Christ's most
precious body in the Sacrament, when the Papists say that the mass is not a
sacrifice propiciatory, but because the presence of Christ's most precious body
being presently there? And yet if this comparison be out of the matter (as you
say it is) why do you then wrestle and wrangle with it so much? And do I
seem to grant the peesence of Christ's body in the first part of my
comparison, when I do nothing there but rehearce what ye Papists do say? But
because all this proceeds (which you bring in here out of tune and time)
belongs to the last book, I will pass it over unto the propper place, only
by the way touching shortly some notable words.

Whether the Mass be satisfactory by the devotion of the priest.
yet nevertheless the papists do so teach, and you may find it in their S.
Thomas, Thom. part. 3. q^ 79. art 5.
both in his Sum, and upon the 4. of the sentences, whose words have been
red in the Uninersities almost these 300. years, and never until this day
reproved by any of the papists in this point. He says: Quod Sacrificium
Sacerdotis habet vim satisfactiuam, sed in satisfactione magis attenditur
affectus offerentis, quam quantitas oblationis. I Would satisfactoria est illis pro
quibus offertur, vel etiam offerentibus, secundum quantitatem suae deuotionis,
and non pro tota paena.

Ioh. 11.


And yet the Reader may note your inconstancy. For afterward in the last book
you give Christ such a nippe, that of that whole satisfaction, you pinch half
away from him, and ascribe it to the sacrifice of the Priest, as I shall more
fully declare in my answer to ye last book. For you say there that the
sacrifice of Christ gives us life, and that the sacrifice of the priest
continues our life.

And here good Reader, thou art to be warned that this writer in this place,
goes about craftily to draw thee from the very work of our full redemption,
wrought by our Savior Christ upon the cross, unto a Sacrifice (as they say)
made by him, the night before at his last supper. And forasmuch as every priest
(as the papists say) makes the same sacrifice in his mass, therefore
consequently it follows by this writer, that we must seek our redemption at
the priests sacrifice. And so Christ's blessed passion (which he most
obediently and willingly suffered for our salvation upon the cross,) was not
the only and sufficient sacrifice for remission of our sins.

The only will (I grant) both in good things and evil, is accepted, or
rejected before God, and sometime has the name of the fact, as the will of
Abraham to offer his son, is called the oblation of his son: The
declaration of Christ's will to die, was not a sacrifice propiciatory for sin.
and Christ called him an adulterer, in his heart that desires another man's
wife, although there be no fact committed in deed.

Heb. 11.
but his will declared by many factes and circumstances: Math. 5. Genesis 22.
For he carried his son three days journey to the place where God had
appointed him to slay and offer his son Isaac, whom he most entirely loved.
He cut wood to make the fire for that purpose, he laid the wood upon his
sons back, and made him to carry ye same wood wherewith he should be brent.
And Abraham himself (commanding his servants to tarry at the foot of the
hill) carried the fire and sword wherewith he intended (as God had commanded) to
kill his own son whom he so dearly loved. And by the way as they went, his
son said unto his father: Father, see, here is fire and wood, but where is
the sacrifice that must be killed? How these words of the son pierced the
fathers heart, every louinge father may judge by the affection which he bears
to his own children. For what man would not have been abashed and stayed at
these words? thinking thus within him self: Alas sweet son, thou do
ask me where the sacrifice is, thy self art the same sacrifice that must be
slain, and thou (poor innocent) caryest thine own death upon thy back, and
the wood wherewith thy self must be brent. Thou art he whom I must slay, which
art most innocent, and never offended. Such thoughts you may be sure, pierced
through Abraham's heart, no les then the very death of his son should have done.
2. Reg. 12.
As David lamentably bewailed his son lying in ye panges of death, but after
he was dead, he took his death quietly and co^fortably enough. But nothing
could altar Abraham's heart, or move him to disobey God, but forth on he goes
with his son to the place which God had appointed, and there he made an
altar, and laid the wood upon it, and bound his son, and laid him upon the
heap of ye wood in the altar, and took the sword in his hand, and lifted up
his arm to strike, and kill his son, and would have done so in deed if the
angel of God had not let him, commanding him in the stead of his son to
take a ram, that was fast by the horns in the briars. This obedience of
Abraham unto Gods commandment in offering of his son, declared by so many
acts and circumstances, is called in the Scripture the offering of his son,
and not the will only.

Nor the scripture calls not the declaration of Christ's will in his last
supper to suffer death, by the name of a sacrifice satisfactory for sin, nor
says not that he was there offered in deed. For the will of a thing is not in
deed the thing. And if the declaration of his will to die, had been an oblation
and sacrifice propitiatory for sin: Then had Christ been offered not only in
his supper, but as often as he declared his will to dye. As when he said long
before his Supper many times, that he should be betrayed, Math. 20. Marc. 10.
Luc. 18. John. 2. John. 6. John. 10.
scourged, spitte upon, and crucified, and that the third day he should rise
again. And when he had them destroy the temple of his body, and he would
build it up again within three days. And when he said that he would give his
flesh for the life of the world, and his life for his sheep.

And if these were sacrifices propitiatory or satisfactory, for remission of
sin, what needed he then after to dye, if he had made the propitiatory
sacrifice for sin already? For either the other was not vailable thereto, or
else his death was in vain, as S. Paul reasons of the priests of the old
law, and of Christ. And it is not red in any scripture, that Christ's will
declared at his supper, Heb. 2.
was effectuous and sufficient for our redemtion, but that his most willing
death and passion, was the oblation sufficient to endure for ever and ever,
world without end.

But what sleights and shifts this writer does use to wind the Reader into his
error, it is wonder to see, by devising to make two sacrifices of one will, the
one by declaration, the other by execution, a devise such as was never imagined
before of no man, and meet to come out of a pha^tast ^^all Romans 6. Heb. 7. 9.
10. 1. Pet. 3.
because ye scripture so precisely and so many times says so, and having ye
same for my warrant, it makes me ye bolder to stand against you, yt deny ye
thing which is so often times repeated in scripture. And where you say, that
there is Heb. 9.
yt as it is ordained for every man to dye but once, so Christ was offered
but once. Ibidem.
And says further, that sin is not forgiven but by effusio^ of blood, and
therefore if Christ had been offered many times, he should have dyed many times.
Phil. 2.
And of any other offering of Christ's body for sin, the scripture speaks
not. For although S. Paul to the Phillippia^s, speaks of the humiliatio^ of
Christ by his incarnation, and so to worldly miseries and afflictions, eue^
unto death upon the cross, yet he calls not every humiliatio^ of Christ, a
sacrifice and oblatio^ Cyprianus lib. 2. epi. 3.
to my remembrance, any such words that Christ offered himself in his supper,
but he says, yt Christ offered the fame thing which Melchisedech offered. And
if Ciprian say in any place, that Christ offered himself in his supper, yet he
said not, that Christ did so for this cause, that in his supper he declared his
death. And therefore here you make a deceitful fallax in sophistry, pretending
to show that thing to be a cause, which is not the true cause in deed. For the
cause why Ciprian, and other old authors, say yt Christ made an oblation, and
offering of him self in his last supper, was not that he declared there, that
he would suffer death, for yt he had declared many times before, but the cause
was that there he ordained a perpetual memory of his death, which he would all
faithful christian people to observe from time to time, remembering his death,
with thanks for his benefits, until his coming again. And therefore the
memorial of the true sacrifice made upon the cross (as S. Augustine says) is
called by the name of a sacrifice, August. ad Bonifacium epist. 23.
as a thing that signifies an other thing, is called by the name of the thing
which it signifies, although in very deed it be not the same.

And the long discourse that you make of Christ's true presence, and of the
true eating of him, and of his true assisting us in our doing of his
commandment, all these be true. For Christ's flesh and blood be in the
sacrament Save vostre grace. And he offered not him self then for them upon
the cross, and now offers himself for us daily in the Mass, but upon the
cross he offered him self both for us and for them. For that his one
sacrifice of his body than only offered, is now unto us by faith as auailable,
as it was then for them. For with one sacrifice (as S. Paul says) he has made
perfect for ever them that be sanctified.

Heb. 10.
And where you speak of the participation of Christ's flesh and blood, if you
mean of the sacramental participatio^ only, that thereby we be ascertayned of
the regeneration of our bodies, that they shall live, and have the fruition of
God with our souls for ever, you be in an horrible error, And if you mean a
spiritual participation of Christ's body and blood, then all this your
process is in vain, and serves nothing for your purpose, to prove that
Christ's flesh and blood be corporally in the sacrament, under the forms of
bread and wine, and participated of them that be evil (as you teach) which be
no whit thereby the more certain of their salvation, but of their damnation, as
S. Paul says.

1. Cor. 11.
And although the holy supper of the Lord be not a vain or fantastical supper,
wherein things should be promised, which be not performed, to them that
worthily come thereunto, but Christ's flesh and blood be there truly eaten and
dronken in deed, yet that mystical supper can not be without mysteries and
figures. And although we feed in deed of Christ's body, and drink in deed
his blood, yet not corporally, quantitatiuely, and palpably, as we shall be
regenerated at the resurrection, and as he was betrayed, walked here in earth,
and was very man. And therefore although the things by you rehearsed, be all
truly done, yet all be not done after one sort and fashion, but some
corporally and visibly, some spiritually and inuisibly. And therefore to al your
comparisons or similitudes here by you rehearsed, if there be given to every
one his true understanding, they may be so granted all to be true. But if you
will link all these together in one sort and fashion, and make a chain
thereof, you shall far pass the bonds of wanton reason, making a chain of
gold and copper together, confounding and mixing together, corporal and
spiritual, heavenly and earthly things, and bring all to very madness and
impiety, or plain and manifest heresy.

A chain of errors.
And because one single error pleases you not, shortly after you link Malac.
14.
and that Christ does now in the celebration of this supper, as he did when he
gave the same to his Apostles, and that he offreth himself now as he did then,
and that the same offering is not now renewed again. This is your chain of
errors, wherein is not one link of pure gold, but all be copper, feigned, and
cou^terfaite: For neither is Christ's body verily, and corporally, present in
the celebration of his holy supper, but spiritually. Nor his body is not the
very sacrifice, but the thing whereof the sacrifice was made: and the very
sacrifice was the crucifying of his body, and the effusion of his blood unto
death. Wherefore of his body was not made a sacrifice propitiatory for all the
sins of the world at his supper, but the next day after upon the cross.
Therefore says the Prophet that we were made whole by his wounds: Liuore eius
sanati sumus. Esaias. 53.


Nor that sacrifice of Christ in the celebration of the supper, is not the only
sacrifice of the church, but all the works that christen people do to the
glory of God, be sacrifices of the church, smelling sweetly before God. And
they be also the pure and clean sacrifice, whereof the Prophet Malachy did
speak. For the Prophet Malachy spoke of no such sacrifices as only priests
make, but of such sacrifice as all christen people make both day and night, at
all times, and in all places.

Nor Christ does not now as he did at his last Supper which he had with his
Apostles^ for then (as you say) he declared his will, that he would dye for us.
And if he do now as he did the^, the^ does he now declare that he will dye for
us again.

But as for offering him self now as he did then, this speech may have a true
sense, being like to that which sometime was used at the admission of unlearned
friars and monks unto their degrees in the Uniuersities: where the Doctor that
presented them, deposed that they were meet for the said degrees, as well in
learning as in virtue. And yet that depositio^ in one sense was true, when in
deed they were meet neither in the one nor in the other. So likewise, in that
sense Christ offers himself now, as well as he did in his supper, for in
deed he offered himself a sacrifice propiciatory for remission of sin in
neither of both, but only upon the cross, making there a sacrifice full and
perfect for our redemption, and yet by that sufficient offering made only at
that time, he is a daily intercessor for us to his father for ever. Finally, it
is not true that the offering in the celebration of the supper, is not renewed
again. Heb. 7.
For the same offering that is made in one Supper, is daily renewed and made
again in every supper, and is called the daily Sacrifice of the church.

Thus have I broaken your chain, and scattered your linkes, which may be
called the very chain of Beelzebub, able to draw into hell as many as come
within the compass thereof. And how would you require that men should give you
credit, who within so few lines, knitte together so many manifest lies. It is
another untruth also which you say after, that Christ declared in the Supper
him self an offering and sacrifice for sin, for he declared in his Supper,
not that he was then a sacrifice, but that a sacrifice should be made of his
body, which was done the next day after, by the voluntary effusion of his
blood: and of any other sacrificing of Christ for sin, the Scripture speaks
not. For although the Scripture says that our Savior Christ is a continual
intercessor for us unto his father, yet no Scripture calls that intercession,
a sacrifice for sin, but only the effusion of his blood, which it seems
you make him to do still, when you say that he suffers, and so by your
imagination he should now still be crucified, if he now suffer as you say he
does. But it seems you pass not greatly what you say, so that you may
multiply many gallant words to the admiration of the hearers. But for as much
as you say, that Christ offers him self in the celebration of the Supper,
and also that the church offers him, here I would have you declare how the
Church offers Christ, and how he offers him self, and wherein those
offeringes stand, in words, deeds, or thoughts, that we may know what you
mean by your daily offering of Christ. Of offering our selves unto God in all
our acts and deeds, with lauds and thanks giving, the scripture makes
mention in many places: But that Christ himself in the holy communion, or that
the priests make any other oblation then all christen people do, because these
be papisticall inventions without Scripture, I require nothing but reason of
you, that you should so plainly set out these devised offeringes, that men
might plainly understand what they be, and wherein they rest. Now in this
comparyson, truth it is (as you say) that you have spent many words: but
utterly in vain, not to declare, but to darcken the matter. But if you would
have followed the plain words of Scripture, you needed not to have tarried so
long, and yet should you have made the matter more clear a great deal.

Now follows my last comparison.

They say that Christ is corporally in many places at one time, affirming that
his body is corporally, The 13. comparyson.
and really present in as many places, as there be hosts consecrated. We say
that as the son corporally is ever in heaven, and no where else, and yet by
his operation and virtue, the son is hear in earth, by whose influence and
virtue all things in the world be corporally regenerated, increased, and grow
to their perfect state: So likewise our savior Christ bodily and corporally is
in heaven, sitting at the right hand of his Father, although spiritually he
has promised to be present with us upon earth, unto the worlds end. And when
soever two or three be gathered together in his name, he is there in the
midst among them, by whose supernall grace, all godly men be first by him
spiritually regenerated, and after increase and grow to their spiritual
perfection in God, spiritually by faith eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood, although the same corporally be in heaven, far distant from our sight.

Winchester.
The true teaching is, that Christ's very body is present under the form of
bread, in Really, substa^tially, truly, corporally.
, which words really and substantially be implied, when we say, truly
present. The word corporally may have an ambiguite and doublenes in respect and
relation, one is to the truth of the body present, and so it may be said,
Christ is corporally present in Sacrament, if the word corporally be referred
to the manner of the presence Manner of presence.
, then we should say, Christ's body were present after a corporal manner,
which we say not, but in a spiritual manner, and therefore not locally nor by
manner of quantity, but in such manner as God only knows, and yet does us to
understand by faith, The true simple docerme of the presence of Christ's body in
the sacraments.
the truth of the very presence, exceeding our capacity to comprehend the manner
(how). This is the very true teaching to affirm the truth of the presence of
Christ's very body in the Sacrament, even of the same body that suffered in
plain simple evident terms and words, such as can not by cauilation be
mistaken and construed, so near as possibly man's infirmity permits and
suffers. Now let us consider in what sort the author and his company which he
calls (we say) do understand the Sacrament, who go about to express the same
by a similitude of the creature Gods m^steries cannot be throrowly (...) by
similitudes.
which son (this author says) is ever corporally in heaven, and no where
else, and yet by operation and virtue, is here in earth: so Christ is corporally
in heaven. etc. In this matter of similitudes, it is to be taken for a truth
undoubted, that there is no creature by similitude, ne any language of man able
to express God and his mysteryes. For and things that be seen or herd, might
thoroughly express Gods invisible misteryes, the nature whereof is that they can
not thoroughly be expressed, they were no mysteries, and yet it is true, that of
things visible, wherein God works wonderfully, there may be great
resemblances, some shadows, and as it were inductions, to make a man astonished,
in consideration of things invisible, when he sees things visible so
wonderfully wrought, and to have so maruaylous effects. And diverse good
catholic devout men have by diverse natural things gone about to open unto
us the mystery of the trinity, partly by the son, as the author does in the
Sacrament, partly by fire, partly by the soul of man, by the Musicians
science, the art, the touch with the players fingers, and the sound of the
cord, wherein will has all travailed the matter, yet remains dark, ne can
not be thoroughly set forth by any similitude. But to the purpose of this
similitude of the son, which son this author says is only corporally in
heaven, and no where else, and in the earth the operation and virtue of the
son: So as by this authors supposall, the substance of the son should not
be in earth, but only by operation and virtue: wherein if this author erreth,
he does the reader to understand, that if he err in consideration of natural
things, it is no maruayle though he err in heavenly things. For because I
will not of my self begin the contention with this author: of the natural
work of the Son, I will bring forth the saying of Martin Bucer Bucerus.
now resident at Cambridge, who vehemently and for so much truly, affirms the
true real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament: For he says, Christ
said not, This is my spirit, this is my virtue, but, This is my body:
Wherefore he says we must believe Christ's body to be there, the same that did
hang upon the cross, our Lord him self, which in some part to declare, he
uses the similitude of the son for his purpose, to prove Christ's body
present really and substancially in the sacrament, where this author uses the
same similitude to prove the body of Christ really absent. I will write in here
as Bucer speaks it in Latin, expounding the xrvi. chapter of Saint Matthew,
and then I will put the same in english. Bucers words be these.

Vt Sol vere vno in loco coeli visibilis circumscriptus est, Bucerus in Mat.
cap. 26.
radys tamen suis, praesens vere and substantialiter exhibetur vbilibet orbis:
Ita Dominus etiam si circumscribatur vno loco coeli, arcani and diuini, id est
gloriae patris, verbo tamen suo, and sacris symbolis, vere and totus ipse deus
and homo praesens exhibetur in sacra coena, eoque substantialiter, quam
praesentiam non minus certo agnoscit men's credens verbis his Domini and
simbolis, quam oculi vident and habent Solemn praesentem demonstratum and
exhibitum sua corporali luce. Res ista arcana est and noui Testamenti, res
sidei, non sunt igitur huc admittende cogitationes de presentatione corporis,
quae constar ratione huius vitae etiamnum patibilis and fluxae. Verbo Domini
simpliciter inhaerendum est, and debet fides sensuum de fectui praebere
supplimentum. Which is thus much in English. As the son is truly placed
determinately in one place of the visible heaven, and yet is truly and
substantially present by means of his beams else where in the world abroad: So
our Lord although he be comprehended in one place of the secret and divine
heaven, that is to say, the glory of his father, yet nevertheless by his word
and holy tokens, he is exhibit present truly, whole God and man, and therefore
in substance in his holy supper, which presence man's mind giving credit to his
words and tokens with no less certainty acknowlegeth, then our eyes see, and
have the son present exhibited and showed with his corporally light. This is
a deep secret matter and of the new testament, and a matter of faith, and
therefore herein thoughts be not to be received of such a presentation of the
body, as consists in the manner of this life transitory and subject to
suffer. We must simply cleave to the word of Christ, and faith must releue the
default of our senses.

Thus has Bucer expressed his mind, whereunto because the similitude of the
son does not answer in all parts, he notes wisely in the end, how this is
a matter of faith, and therefore upon the foundation of faith, we must speak
of it, thereby to supply where our senses fail. For the presence of Christ,
and whole Christ God and man is true, although we can not think of the manner
(how.) The chief cause why I bring in Bucer is this, to show how in his
judgment we have not only in earth the operation and virtue of the son, but
also the substance of the son, by incane of the son beams, which be of the
same substance with the son, and can not be divided in substance from it,
and therefore we have in earth the substantial presence of the son not only
the operation and virtue. And howsoever the son above in the distaunce
appears unto us of an other sort, yet the beams that touch the earth, be of
the same substance with it as clerks say, or at the lest as Bucer says, whom
I never hard accounted Papiste, and yet for the real and substantial
presence of Christ's very body in the Sacrament, writes pithely and plainly,
and here encountreth this auctor with his similitude of the son directly,
whereby may appear how much soever Bucer is esteemed otherwise, he is not
with this auctor regarded in the truth of the sacrament, August sermon. de
tempore 159.
If I could tell reason, there were no faith: If I could show the like, it were
not singular. Which does be notable in this sacrament where co^de^yning all
reason, good men both constantly believe that Christ sits on the right hand
of his father very God and man, and also without change of place, does
nevertheless make himself by his power present, both God and man under the
form of bread and wine, at the prayer of the Church and by the ministry of
the same, to give life to such as with faith do according to his institution
in his holy supper worthily receive him, and to the condemnation of such as do
unworthely presume to receive him there. For the worthy receiving of whom we
must come endued with Christ, and clothed with him

Caunterbury.
IN this comparison I am glad that at the last we be come so near together, A
concord in the spiritual presence.


But if the substance of the Son be here corporally present with us upon
earth, The presence of the Son.
then I grant that Christ's body is so likewise. So that he err also in the
other. Therefore I am content that the reader judge indifferently between you
and me, in the corporal presence of the son, and he that is found to err,
and to be a foose therein, let him be judged to err also in the corporal
presence of Christ's body.

But now master Bucer help this man at need: M. Bucer^
For he that has ever hitherto cried out against you, now being at a pinch
driven to his shifts cries for help upon you. And although he was never your
friend, yet exte^d your charity to help him in his necessity. But master Bucer
says not so much as you do: and yet if you both said that the beams of the
son, be of the same substance with the son, who would believe either of you
both? Is the light of the candle the substance of the candle? or the light of
the fire the substance of the fire? Or is the beams of the son any thing but
the clear light of the son? Now as you said even now of me, if you err so
far from the true judgment of natuarll things, that all men may perceive
your error, what marvel is it if you err in heavenly things?



And you say further, that before we receive the Sacrament, we must Gal. 3.
as well as in his holy Supper we eat and drink him.

Winchester.
Thus I have perused these differences, which well considered, me think
sufficient to take away, and appease all such differences as might be moved
against the Sacrament, the faith whereof has ever prevailed against such as
have impugned it. And I

Caunterbury.
YOu have so perused these differences, that you have made more difference then
ever was before: for where before there were no more but Three parts made of
two.
you have devised a new voluntary descant, so far out of tune, that it
agrees neither with the tenor, nor mean, but makes such a shameful jar,
that godly ears abhor to hear it. For you have taught such a doctrine, as
never was written before this time, and uttered therein so many untruths, and
so many strange sayings, that every indifferent Reader may easily discern,
that the true christen faith in this matter is not to be sought at your hands.
And yet in your own writings appears some thing to confirm the truth, quite
against your own enterprise, which makes me have some hope, that after my
answer heard, we shall in the principal matter no more strive for the child,
seeing that your self have confessed that Christ is but after a spiritual
manner present with us. And there is good hope that God shall prosper this child
to live many years, seeing that now I trust you will help to foster and
nourish it up as well as I.

And yet if diuisyon may show a stepmother, then be not you the true mother of
the child, The true mother of the child.
which in the Sacrament make so many divisions. per concomitantiam, and you
divide the sacrament so, that the priest receaueth both the Sacrament of
Christ's body, and of his blood: and the lay people (as you call them) receive
no more but the sacrament of his body, as though the sacrament of his blood,
and of our redemption, pertayned only to the priests. And the cause of our
eternal life and salvation you divide in such sort between Christ and the
priest, that you attribute the beginning thereof to the sacrifice of Christ upon
the cross, and the continuance thereof you attribute to the sacrifice of the
priest in the mass, as you do write plainly in your last book. Oh wicked
Stepmothers, that so divide Christ, his Sacraments, and his people.

After the differences follows the 3.4.5. and 6. chapters of my book which
you bind as it were all together in one fardel, and cast them quite away, by
the figure which you call reiection, not answering one word to any Scripture,
or old writer, which I have there alleged for the defense of the truth. But
because the Reader may see the matter plainly before his eyes, I shall hear
rehearse my words again, and join thereto your answer. My words be these.

Now to return to the principal matter, lest it might be thought a new devise
of us, that Christ, as concerning his body and his human nature, is in heaven
and not in earth: therefore by Gods grace it shall be evidently proved, that this
is no new devised matter, but that it was ever the old faith of the catholic
Church, until the Papists invented a new faith, that Christ really,
corporally, Cap. 3. Christ corporally is in heaven and not in earth.
naturally, and sensibly is here still with us in earth, shut up in a box or
within the compass of bread and wine.

This needs no better nor stronger proof, then that which the old authors
bring for the same, that is to say, the general profession of all Christen
people in the common creed, The proof thereof by our profession in our
commune Creed.
wherein as concerning Christ's humanitye, they be taught to believe after this
sort: That he was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary: That
he suffered under Pontius Pilate: Was crucified, dead and buried: that he
decended into hell and rose again the third day That he ascended into heaven;
and sits at the right hand of his almighty Father: And from thence shall come
to judge the quick and dead.

This has been ever the catholic faith of Christen people, that Christ (as
concerning his body and his manhood) is in heaven, and shall there continue
until he come down at the last judgment.

And for as much as the Creed makes so express mention of the Article of his
ascension, and departing hence from us, if it had been an other article of our
faith, that his body taryeth also here with us in earth, surely in this place
of the Creed was so urgent an occasion given to make some mention thereof,
that doubtless it would not have been passed over in our Creed with silence.
For if Christ (as concerning his humanity) be both here, and gone hence, and
both those two be articles of our faith, when mention was made of the one in
the Creed, it was necessary to make mention of the other, least by professing
the one we should be dissuaded from believing the other, being so contrary the
one to the other.

To this article of our Creed accords holy Scripture, Cap. 4. The proof hereof
by the scripture. Ioh. 16. Mat. 16. Mat. 24.
and all the old ancient doctors of Christ's church, for Christ him self said,
I leave the world, and go to my father. And also he said: you shall ever have
poor folks with you, but you shall not ever have me with you. And he gave
warning of this error before hand, saying that the time would come, when many
deceauers should be in the world, and say: Here is Christ, and there is Christ,
but believe them not, said Christ. And S. Mark writes in the last chapter of
his gospel, Mar. vl.
that the Lord Jesus was taken up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
his father. And S. Paul exhorts all men to seek for things that be above in
heaven, where Christ (says he) sits at the right hand of God his father.
Colos. 3.
Also he says, that we have such a bishop, Heb. 8.
that sits in heaven at the right hand of the throne of Gods majesty. And
that he having offered one sacrifice for sins, sits continually at the
right hand of God, Heb. 10.
until his enemies be put under his feet as a footstool. And hereunto
consent all the old doctors of the church.

First Origin upon Matthew reasons this matter, Cap. 5.
how Christ may be called a stranger that is departed into another country,
seeing that he is with us always unto the worlds end, The proof thereof by
ancient authors.
and is among all them that be gathered together in his name, and also in the
midst of them that know him not, and thus he reasons. If he be here among
us still, how can he be gone hence as a stranger departed into another
country? whereunto he answers, Origin. in Nath. ho. 33.
that Christ is both God and man, having in him two natures. And as a man he is
not with us unto the worlds end, nor is present with all his faihtfull that be
gathered together in his name. But his divine power and spirit is ever with
us. Paul (says he) was absent from the Corinthes in his body, when he was
present with the^ in his spirit: So is Christ (says he) gone hence, and
absent in his humanity, which in his divine nature is every where. And in this
saying (says Origin) we divide not his humanity `(for S. John writes, that
no spirit that deuideth Jesus can be of God) but we reserve to both his
natures, their own properties.

In these words Origin, has plainly declared his mind, that Christ's body is
not both present here with us, and also gone hence and estranged from us. For
that were to make two natures of one body, and to divide the body of Jesus,
forasmuch as one nature can not at one time be both with us, and abse^t from
us. And therefore says Origin: that the presence must be understood of his
divinity, and the absence of his humanity.

And according hereunto S. Austine writes thus in a pistle Ad dardanum,
August. ad Dar. dan. epist. 57.
Doubt not but Jesus Christ as concerning the nature of his manhood is now
there, from whence he shall come. And remember well and believe the profession
of a christian man, that he rose from death ascended into heaven, sits at
the right hand of his father, and from that place and none other, shall he come
to judge the quick and the dead. And he shall come (as the Angels said) as he
was seen go into heaven, that is to say, in the same form and substance, unto
the which he gave immortallytie, but changed not nature. After this form
(says he, meaning his man's nature, we may not think that he is every where.
For we must beware, that we do not so stablish his divinity, that we take away
the verity of his body. These be S. Augustines plain words. And by and by
after he adds these words. The Lord Jesus as God, is every where, and as man
is in heaven. And finally he concludes this matter in these few words. Doubt
not but our Lord Jesus Christ is every where as God, and as a dweller he is in
man that is the temple of God, and he is in a certain place in heaven, because
of the measure of a very body.

And again S. Augustine) writes upon the Gospel of S. John. In Johan. Tract.
30.
Our savior Jesus Christ (says S. Augustine) is above, but yet his truth is
here. His body wherein he arose is in one place, but his truth is spread every
where.

And in an other place of the same book S. Augustine expounding these words
of Christ. (You shall ever have poor men with you, Tracta. 50.
but me you shall not ever have) says: that Christ spoke these words of the
presence of his body. For (says he) as concerning his divine majesty, as
concerning his providence as concerning his infallible and invisible grace,
these words be fulfilled which he spoke: I am with you unto the worlds end.
But as concerning the flesh which he took in his carnation, as concerning
that which was borne of the virgin: as concerning that which was apprehended
by the Jews, and crucified upon a tree, and taken down from the cross,
lapped in linen clothes and buried, and rose again, and appeared after his
resurrection, as concerning that flesh, he said: You shall not ever have me
with you. Wherefore senig that as concerning his flesh, he was conversant with
his disciples forty days, and they accompanying, seeing, and not following
him, he went up into heaven, both he is not here (for he sits at the right
hand of his father) and yet he is here, for he departed not hence as concerning
the presence of his divine Majesty. As concerning the presence of his Majesty,
we have Christ ever with us, but as concerning the presence of his flesh he
said truly to his disciples, ye shall not ever have me with you. For as
concerning the presence of his flesh, the church had Christ but a few days,
yet now it holds him fast by faith, though it see him not with eyes. All
these be S. Augustines words.

Also in an other book, entitled to S. Augustine, is written thus: De essentia
diuinitatis.
We must believe and confess, that the Son of God (as concerning his
divinity) is invisible, without a body, immortal, and in circumscriptible:
but as concerning his humanity, we ought to believe and confess that he is
visible, has a body, and it contained in a certain place, and has truly all
the members of a man.

Of these words of S. Augustine, it is most clear that the profession of the
catholic faith is, that Christ (as concerning his bodily substance and nature
of man) is in heaven, and not present here with us in earth. For the nature and
property of a very body, is to be in one place, and to occupy one place, and
not to be every where, or in many places at one time. And though the body of
Christ (after his resurrection and ascension) was made immortal, yet this
nature was not taken away, for then (as S. Augustine says) it were no very
body. And further S. August. shows both the manner and form how Christ is
here present with us in earth, and how he is absent, saying that he is present
by his divine nature and majesty, by his providence, and by grace: But by his
humain nature and very body, he is absent from this world, and present in
heaven.

Cyrillus likewise upon the gospel of S. John, Cyrillus in Johan. li. 6 cap.
14.
agrees fully with S. Augustine saying: Although Christ took away from hence
the presence of his body, yet in Majesty of his Godhead he is ever here, as he
promised to his disciples at his departing: saying: I am with you ever unto the
worlds end.

And in an other place of the same book, Libro. 6. cap. 11.
saynct Cyrill says thus: Christian people must believe, that although Christ
be absent from us, as concerning his body, yet by his power he governs us,
and all things, and is present with all them that love him. Therefore he said:
Truly, truly I say unto you, where so ever there be two or three gathered
together in my name, there am I in the mids of them. For like as when he was
conversant here in earth as a man, yet then he filled heaven, and did not leave
the company of angels: eue^ so being now in heaven with his flesh, yet he
fills the earth, and is in them that love him. And it is to be marked, that
although Christ should go away only as concerning his flesh, (for he is ever
present in the power of his divinity:) yet for a little time he said he would
be with his disciples. These be the words of Saynct Cyrill.

Saint Ambrose also says, Ambrosius in Lucam. li. 12. ca. 24.
that we must not seek Christ upon earth, nor in earth, but in heaven, where
he sits at the right hand of his father.

And likewise saynct Gregory writes thus. Gregorius in Ho. Paschatis.
Christ (says he) is not here by the presence of his flesh, and yet he is
absent no where by the presence of his Majesty.

What subtilty think thou (good reader) can the Papists now imagine, to
defend their pernicious error, that Christ his humayn nature is bodyly here in
earth, in the consecrated bread and wine: seeing that all the old Church of
Christ believed the contrary, and all the old authors wrote the contrary?

For they all affirmed and believed, that Christ being but one person, has
nevertheless in him two natures or substances, that is to sav, the nature of
his Godhead, and the nature of his manhood. They say furthermore, that Christ
is both gone hence from us unto heaven, and is also here with us in earth, but
not in his human nature, (as the Papists would have us to believe) but the
old authors say, that he is in heaven, as concerning his manhood, and
nevertheless both here and there, and every where, as concerning his Godhead.
For although his divinity be such, that it is infinite, without measure,
compass, or place, so that as concerning that nature, he is circumscribed with
no place, but is every where, and fills all the world: yet as concerning his
human nature, he has measure, compass, and place, so that when he was here
upon earth, he was not at the same time in heaven: and now that he is ascended
into heaven, as concerning that nature, he has now forsaken the earth, and is
only in heaven. For one nature that is circu^scribed, compassed, and measured,
can not be in diverse places at one time. That is the faith of the old Catholic
church, Chap. 6. One body can not be in diverse places at one time.
as appears, as well by the authors before rehearsed, as by these that
hereafter follows.

Ad Dardanum.
Saint Augustine speaking, that a body must needs be in some place, says:
that if it be not within the compass of a place, it is no where. And if it be
no where, than it is not. And Saint Cirill considering the proper nature of a
very body said: Cyrillus de Trin. li. 2.
that if the nature of the Godhead were a body, it must needs be in a place,
and have quantity, greatness, and circumscription.

If than the nature of the Godhead must needs be circumscribed, if it were a
body, much more must the nature of Christ's manhood be circumscribed, and
contained within the compass of a certain place.

Didimus also in his book De spiritu sancto, Didymus de spiritu sancto. li. 1.
c. 1.
(which Saint Hierom did translate) proves, that the holy Ghost is very God,
because he is in many places at one time, which no creature can be. For (says
he) all creatures visible, and invisible, be circumscribed and environed either
within one place (as corporal and visible things be) or within the propriety
of their own substance, (as angels and invisible creatures be) so that no
Angel (says he) can be at one time in two places. And forasmuch as the holy
ghost is in many men at one time, therefore (says he) the holy ghost must
needs be God.

The same affirms Saint Basil, Basilius de spiritu sancto ca. 22
That the Angel which was with Cornelius, was not at the same time with
Phillip, nor the Angel which spoke to Zachary in the altar, was not the same
time in his proper place in heaven. But the holy Ghost was at one time in
Abacuck, and in Daniell in Babylon, and with Jeremy in prison, and with
Ezechiell in Chober, whereby he proves, that the holy ghost is God.

Wherefore the Papists (which say, that the body of Christ is in an infinite
number of places at one time) do make his body to be God, and so confound the
two natures of Christ, attributing to his humain nature, that thing, which
belongs only to his divinity: which is a most heinous, and detestable
heresy.

Against whom writes Fulge^tius in this wise, speaking of the distinction,
and diversity of the two natures in Christ.

Fulgentius ad Trasimundum Regem. li. 2.
One and the self same Christ (says he) of mankind was made a man, compassed
in a place, who of his father is God, without measure or place. One and the
self same person, as concerning his man's substance, was not in heaven, when
he was in earth, and for sooke the earth when he ascended into heaven: but as
concerning his godly substance, (which is above all measure) he neither left
heaven when he came from heaven, nor he left not the earth, when he ascended
into heaven: which may be known by the most certain word of Christ himself,
who to show the placing of his humanity, said to his disciples: I ascend up to
my father, and your father, to my God, and your God. Also when he had said of
Lazarus that he was dead, he added, saying: I am glad for your sakes, that you
may believe, for I was not there. But to show the unmeasurable compass of his
divinity, he said to his disciples: behold I am with you always unto the
worlds end. Now how did he go up into heaven, but because he is a very man,
contained within a place? Or how is he present with faithful people but because
he is very God, being without measure?

Of these words of Fulgentius it is declared most certainly, that Christ is not
here with us in earth but by his Godhead, and that his humanity is in heaven
only, and absent from us.

Yet the same is more plainly showed (if more plainly can be spoken) by
Vigilius a bishop and an holy martyr. Vigilius contra Eutycche^ lib. 1.
He writes thus against the heretic Eutyches, which denied the humanity of
Christ, holding opinion that he was only God, and not man. Whose error Vigilius
confuting, proves that Christ had in him two natures joined together in one
person, the nature of his Godhead, and the nature of his manhood. Thus he
writes.

Christ said to his disciples: if you loved me you would be glad, John. 14.
for I go unto my father. And again he said: It is expedient for you that I go,
for if I go not, John. 16.
the comforter shall not come unto you. And yet surely the eternal word of
God, the virtue of God, the wisdom of God, was ever with his Father, and in
his Father, yea even at the same time when he was with us, and in us. For when
he did mercifully dwell in this world, he left not his habitation in heaven,
for he is every where wholl with his Father, equal in divinity, whom no place
can contain, for the Son fills all things, and there is no place that
lacks the presence of his divinity. From whence then, and whether did he say
he would go? Or how did he say, that he went to his Father, from whom doubtless
he never departed? But that to go to his Father, and from us, was to take from
this world that nature which he received of us. Thou see therefore that it was
the property of that nature to be taken away and go from us, which in the end
of the world shall be rendered again to us, as the angels witnessed, saying:
This Jesus which is taken from you, Actu. 1.
shall come again like as you saw him going up into heaven. For look upon the
miracle, look upon the mystery of both the natnres: the Son of God (as
concerning his humanity) went from us, as concerning his divinity, he said
unto us: Behold, I am with you all the days unto the worlds end.

Thus far have I rehearsed the words of Vigilius, Math. vl.
and by and by he concludes thus. He is with us, and not with us. For those
whom he left, and went from them, as concerning his humanity, those he left
not, nor forsook them not, as touching his divinity. For as touching the
form of a servant (which he took away from us into heaven) he is absent from
us, but by the form of God (which goes not from us) he is present with us in
earth, and nevertheless, both present and absent, he is all one Christ.

Hitherto you have heard Vigilius speak, that Christ (as concerning his bodily
presence and the nature of his manhood) is gone from us, taken from us, is gone
up into heaven, is not with us, has left us, has forsaken us. But as
concerning the other nature of his Deity, he is still with us, so that he is
both with us, and not with us, with us in the nature of his Deitye, and not
with us in the nature of his humanity. And yet more clearly does the same
Vigilius declare the same thing in another place, Contra Eutice^ lib. 4.
saying.

If the word and the flesh were both of one nature, seeing that the word is
every where, why is not the flesh then every where? For when it was in earth,
then verily it was not in heaven: and now when it is in heaven, it is not
surely in earth. And it is so sure that it is not in earth, that as concerning
it, we look for him to come from heaven, whom as concerning his eternal word:
we believe to be with us in earth. Therefore by your doctrine (says Vigilius
unto Eutiches, who defended that the divinity and humanity in Christ was but
one nature) either the word is contained in a place with his flesh: or else the
flesh is every where with the word. For one nature cannot receive in it self
two diverse and contrary things. But these two things be diverse and far
unlike, that is to say, to be contained in a place, and to be every where.
Therefore in as much as the word is every where, and the flesh is not every
where, it appears plainly, that one Christ himself has in him two natures.
And that by his divine nature he is every where, and by his humain nature he is
contained in a place, that he is created, and has no beginning, that he is
subject to death, and cannot die. Whereof one he has by the nature of his word
(whereby he is God) and the other he has hy the nature of his flesh, whereby the
same God is man also. Therefore one son of God, the self same was made the
son of man, and he has a beginning by the nature of his flesh, and no
beginning by the nature of his Godhead. He is created by the nature of his
flesh, and not created by the nature of his Godhead. He is comprehended in a
place by the nature of his flesh, and not comprehended in a place by the nature
of his Godhead. He is inferior to angels in the nature of his flesh, and is
equal to his Father in the nature of his Godhead. He dyed by the nature of his
flesh, and dyed not by the nature of his Godhead. This is the faith and
catholic confession, which the Apostles taught, the Martirs did corroborate,
and faithful people keep unto this day.

Al these be the sayings of Vigilius, who according to all the other authors
before rehearsed, and to the faith and catholic confession of the Apostles,
Martyrs, and all faithful people unto his time) says, that as concerning
Christ's humanity, when he was here on earth, he was not in heaven, and now
when he is in heaven, he is not in earth. for one nature cannot be both
contained in a place in heaven, and be also here in earth at one time. And for
as much as Christ is here with us in earth, and also is contained in a place in
heaven, he proves thereby, that Christ has two natures in him, the nature of a
man, whereby he is gone from us, and ascended into heaven, and the nature of his
Godhead, whereby he is here with us in earth. So that it is not one nature that
is here with us, and that is gone from us, that is ascended into heaven and
there contained, and that is permanent here with us in earth. Wherefore the
papists (which now of late years have made a new faith, that Christ's natural
body is really and naturally present both with us both here in earth, and
sits at the right hand of his Father in heaven) do err in two very
horrible heresies.

The one, that they confound his two natures, his Godhead and his Manhood
attributing unto his humanity, that thing which appertains only to his
divinity, that is to say, to be in heaven, earth, and in many places at one
time. The other is, that they divide and separate his humain nature or his
body, making of one body of Christ, two bodies and two natures, one which is in
heaven, visible and palpaple, having all members and proportions of a most
perfect natural man: and an other which they say is in earth here with us, in
every bread and wine that is consecrated, having no distinction, form, nor
proportion of members, which contrarieties and diversities (as this holy Martyr
Vigilius says) cannot be together in one nature.

Winchester.
These differences end in the xlviii. leaf in the second column. I entend now
to touch the further matter of the book with the manner of handlyng of it, and
where an evident untruth is, there to join an issue, and where slight and
craft is, there to note it in the whole.

The matter of the book, from thence unto the lvi. leaf, touching the being of
Christ in heaven and not in earth, is out of purpose superfluous. The article
of our Creed that Christ ascended to heaven, and sits on the right hand of
his father, has been and is most constantly believed of true Christian men,
which the true faith of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament does not touch
or empayre. Nor Christ being whole God and man in the Sacrament, is thereby
either out of heaven, or to be said conversant in earth, because the
conversation is not earthly, but spiritual and godly, Christ ascentio^ the end
of his conversation in earth. slight.
being the ascension of Christ, the end of his conversation in earth, and
therefore all that reasoning of the author, is clearly void, to travail to
prove that is not denied, only for a sleyght to make it seem as though it
were denied.

Caunterbury.
HEre is such a slight used by you, as is worthy to be noted of all men. A
slight to avoid aunswering.
For I go not only about to prove in this place, only that Christ as
concerning his humain nature is in heaven (which I know you deny not) but I
prove also that he is so in heaven, that he is not in earth, which you utterly
deny, and it is the chief point in contention between us. But by this craft
of appeaching me of slight, that I go about to prove that thing which you
deny not (which is untrue) you have used such a slight, that you pass over 8.
leaves of my book together, wherein I prove, that Christ (as concerning his
corporal presence) is not here in earth, and you answer not one word to any
of my arguments. And I pray thee note, good Reader, what a strange manner of
slight this is, to pass over eight leaves together clearly unanswered, and
that in the chief point that is in variance between us, under pretense that I
use slight, where in deed I use none, but prove plainly that Christ is not
bodily in heaven and in eareh, both at one time. If he had but touched mine
arguments glauncing by them, it had been somewhat: but utterly to fly away, and
not once to touch them, I think thou will judge no small slight and craft
therein. And me think in good reason, the matter ought to be judged against him,
for default of answer: who being preseut answers nothing at all to the
matter whereof he is accused, seeing that the Law says: Qui tacet, consentire
videtur.

Yet Smith is to be commended in respect of you, Smith.
who attempteth at the least to see what shifts he could make to avoid my
profes, and busyeth himself rather the^ he would stand mute, to say something to
them. And yet in deed it had been as good for him to have said nothing at all,
as to say that which is nothing to the purpose.

First to the Scriptures by me alleged particularly, Origin. Augustine.
he utterly answers nothing. To Origin, and S. Augustine by name, and to all
the other Authors by me alleged, he makes this brief answer in general, yt
whatsoever those authors say, they mean no more, but yt Christ is not here in
earth visibly, naturally, and by circumscriptio^, and yet nevertheless he is
in the sacrament above nature, inuisibly, and without circumscription. This
subtle distinction has Smith devised (or rather follows other Papists
therein) to answer the Authors which I have alleged. And yet of Smithes own
distinction it follows, that Christ is not in the sacrament carnally and
corporally. Smithes vain distinction.
For if Christ be in the Sacrament but supernaturally, inuisibly, and without
circumscription, then he is not there carnally, and corporally, as S. Augustine
reasons ad Dardanum. But yet Smith only says that the Authors so meant, and
proves not one word of his saying, supposing that the old holy writers be like
to the Papists, which write one thing, and when they list not, or cannot
defend it, they say they mean another.

For those Authors make no such distinction as Smith speaks of, affirming
diverse and contrary things to be in one nature of Christ in diverse respects,
but their distinction is of the two natures in Christ, that is to say, the
nature of his Godhead, and the nature of his manhood. And they affirm plainly
that the diversity whereof they spoke, cannot be in one nature (as you say it
is) but must needs argue and prove diversity of natures. And therefore by that
diversity and instinctio^ in Christ, they prove against the heretics, that
Christ has two natures in him, which were utterly no proof at all, if one
nature in diverse respects might have that diversity. For the heretics should
have had a ready answer at hand, that such diversity proves not that Christ
had two natures, for one nature may have such diversity (if it be true that
Smith says.) And so Smith, with other papists which says as he does puts a
sword in ye heretics hands, to fight against the catholic faith. This (good
Reader) thou shall easily perceive if thou do no more but read the authors
which I have in this place alleged.

And yet for thy more ready instruction, I shall make a brief rehearsal of the
chief effect of them, as concerning this matter. How both these sayings may be
true, that Christ is with us, and also gone from us.
To answer this question how it can be said that Christ is a stranger, and
gone hence into heaven, and yet is also here with us in earth, Smith and other
Papists resolve this matter by diverse respects in one nature of Christ, but
the old catholic writers which I alleged, resolve the matter by two natures
in Christ, The sum of thold authors writing in this matter.
affirming most certainly that such two diverse things can not have place both
in one nature. And therefore say they that Christ is gone hence, and is absent
in his humanity, who in his Deity is still here with us. They say also that as
concerning his man's nature, the Catholic profession in our Creed, teaches
us to believe that he has made it immortal, but not changed the nature of a
very man's body, for his body is in heaven, and in one certain place of
heaven, because that so requires the measure and compass of a very man's
body.

It is also (say they) visible, and has all the members of a perfect man's
body. And further they say, that if Christ's body were not contained within the
compass of a place, it were no body, in so much that if the Godhead were a
body, it must needs be in a place, and have quantity, bigness, and
circumscription. For all creatures (say they) visible, and invisible, be
circumscribed, and contained within a certain compass, either locally within one
place (as corporal and visible things be) or else within the property of their
own substance (as angels and invisible creatures be.) And this is one strong
argument, whereby they prove that the holy Ghost is God, because he is in many
places at one time, which no creature can be as they teach. And yet they say
moreover, that Christ did not ascend into heaven, but by his humanity, nor is
not hear in earth but by his divinity, which has no compass nor measure.
And finally they say that to go to his father from us, was to take from us that
nature which he received of us: and therefore when his body was in earth, then
surely it was not in heaven, and now when it is in heaven, surely it is not in
earth For one nature can not have in it self two sundry and contrary things.

All things here rehearsed be written by the old ancient authors which I have
alleged, and they conclude the whole matter in this wise that this is the
faith and Catholic confession, which the Apostles taught, the Martyrs did
corroborate, and faithful people keep unto this day. Whereby it appears
evidently, that the doctrine of Smyth and the Papists, at that day was not yet
sprung, nor had taken no root.

Wherefore diligently ponder and way (I beseech thee gentle reader) the sayings
of these authors, and see whether they say, that one nature in Christ may be
both in heaven and in earth, both here with us, and absent from us at one time,
and whether they resolve this matter of Christ's being in heaven and in earth
(as Smith does) to be understand of his ma^hoode in diversity of these
respects visible and invisible. And when thou have well considered the authors
sayings, then give credit to Smith as thou shall see cause.

But this allegation of these authors has made the matter so hot, that the
Bishop of Winchester durst not once touch it, and Smith as soon as he had
touched it, felt it so scawlding hot, that he durst not abide it, but shranke
away by and by for fear of burning his fingers. Now here what follows
further in my book.

But now seeing that it is so evident a matter, Cap. 7. An answer to the
Papists, alleging for them these words, This is my body.
both by the express words of Scripture, and also by all the old authors of
the same, that our Savior Christ (as concerning his bodily presence) is
ascended into heaven, and is not here in earth. And seeing that this has been
the true confession of the Catholic faith, ever since Christ's ascension, it
is now to be considered what moved the Papists to make a new and contrary
faith, and what Scriptures have they for their purpose. What moved them I know
not but their own iniquity, or the nature and condition of the sea of Rome,
which is of al other most contrary to Christ, and therefore most worthy to be
called the sea of Antichrist. And as for Scripture they allege none but only
one, and that not truly understood, but to serve their purpose wrested out
of tune, whereby they make it to jar, and sound contrary to all other
Scriptures pertaining to the matter.

Christ took bread (say they) blessed, and brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: This is my body: These words they ever still repeat and
beat upon, The argumet of the Papists.
that Christ said this is my body. And this saying they make their shooteanker,
to prove thereby as well the real and natural presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, as their imagined Transubstantiation. For these words of Christ, say
they, be most plain, and most true. Then for as much as he said, This is my
body, it must needs be true that that thing which the Priest holds is his
hands is Christ's body. And if it be Christ's body, then can it not be bread.
Whereof they gather by their reasoning, that there is Christ's body really
present, and noe bread.

The answer.
Now forasmuch as all their proof hangs only upon these words, this is my
body: the true sense and meaning of these words must be examined. But (say
they) what need they any examination? what words can be more plain, then to
say: This is my body.

The interpretation of these words, This is my body.
Truth it is in deed that the words be as plain as may be spoaken, but that the
sense is not so plain, it is manifest to every man that wayeth substantially
the circumstances of the place. For when Christ gave bread to his disciples and
said: This is my body. there is no man of any discretion, that understands
the english tongue, but he may well know by the order of the speech, that
Christ spoke those words of the bread, calling it his body: as all the old
authors also do affirm, although some of the Papists deny the same. Wherefore
this sentence can not mean as the words seem and purport, but there must
needs be some figure or mystery in this speech, more then appears in the
plain words. For by this manner of speech plainly understand without any
figure, as the words lie, can be gathered none other sense, but that bread is
Christ's body, and that Christ's body is bread, which all Christian ears do
abhor to hear. Wherefore in these words must needs be sought out another
sense and meaning then the words of themselves do bear.

Chap. 8. Christ called bread his body, and wine his blood.
And although the true sense and understanding of these words, be sufficiently
declared before, when I spoke of Transubstantiation, yet to make the matter so
plain, that no scrouple or doubt shall remain, here is occasion given, more
fully to entreat thereof. In which process shall be showed, that these
sentences of Christ, This is my body, This is my blood, be figurative speches.
And although it be manifest enough by the plain words of the gospel, and
proved before in the process of Transubstantiation, that Christ spoke of
bread, when he said, This is my body: likewise that it was very wine, which he
called his blood: yet least the Papists should say, that we suck this out of
our own fyngers, the same shall be proved by testimony of the old authors, to
be the true and old faith of the catholic Church. Where as the schole authors
and Papists, shall not be able to show so much as one word of any ancient
author to the contrary.

Ireneus contra Valent. lib. 4. ca 32. cap. 34. cap. 57.
First Ireneus, writing against the Valentinians in his fourth book says,
that Christ confessed bread (which is a creature) to be his body, and the cup
to be his blood. And in the same book he writes thus also: The bread wherein
the thanks be given is the body of the Lord. And yet again in the same book he
says, that Christ taking bread of the same sort that our bread is of,
confessed that it was his body. Lib. 5.
And that that thing which was tempered in the chalice, was his blood And in
the fifth book he writes further that of the chalice (which is his body) a man
is nourished and does grow by the bread, which is his body.

Turtulli. aduersus Iudaeos.
These words of Ireneus be most plain, that Christ taking very material bread,
a creature of God, and of such sort as other bread is which we do use, called
that his body, when he said: this is my body, and the wine also which does
feed and nourish us, he called his blood.

Tertullian likewise in his book written against the Jews, says that Christ
called bread his body. And in his book against Martian he oftentimes repeateth
the self same words. And S. Cipryan in the first book of his epistles,
Cyprian. ad Magnum. lib. ^. epist. 6.
says the same thing, that Christ called such bread as is made of many corns
joined together, his body: and such wine he called his blood, as is pressed out
of many grapes, and made into mine. And in his second book he says these
words: Water is not the blood of Christ, but wine. And again in the same
epistle he says: that it was wine which Christ called his blood, and that if
wine be not in the chalice,, then we drink not of the fruit of the vine. And
in the same Epistle he says: that meal alone, or water clone, is not the body
of Christ, except they be both joined together to make thereof bread.

Epiphanius also says, Epiphan. in Ancoprato.
that Christ speaking of a lofe which is round in fashion, and cannot see,
hear, nor feel, said of it: This is my body.

And S. Hierome writing ad Hedibiam, Hiero ad Hedibiam.
says these words: Let us mark that the bread which the Lord brake, and gave
to his disciples, was the body of our Savior Christ, as he said unto them:
Take and eat, this is my body. And S. Augustine also says, Augu de trin. lib.
3. cap. 4.
that although we may set forth Christ by mouth, by writing, and by the
sacrament of his body and blood, yet we call neither our tongue, nor words, nor
ink, letters, nor paper, the body and blood of christ but that we call the
body and blood of Christ, which is taken of the fruit of the earth, and
consecrated by mystical prayer. And also he says: Jesus called meat, his
body, and drink his blood,

Moreover Cyrill upon S. John says, De verbis apostol (...) Cy^ill. in Ioanne
lib. 4. (...).
that Christ gave to his disciples pieces of bread saying: Take, eat, this is
my body.

Likewise Theoderetus says, When Christ gave the holy mysteries, he called
bread his body, and the cup myxt with wine and water, he called his blood. By
all these foresaid authors and places, whith many mo, it is plainly proved,
that when our savior Christ gave bread unto his Disciples, saying, Take and
eat, this is my body, And likewise when he gave them the cup, saying, Divide
this among you, and drink you all of this, for this is my blood: he called
then the very material bread his body, and the very wine his blood.

That bread (I say) that is one of the creatures here in earth among us, and
that grows out of the earth, and is made of many graynes of corn beaten into
flower, and mixed with water, and so baken and made into bread, of such sort as
other our bread is, that has neither sense nor reason, and finally that
feeds and nourishes our bodies, such bread Christ called his body, when he
said, This is my body, And such wine as is made of grapes pressed together and
thereof is made drink, which nourishe the body, such wine he called his blood.

This is the true doctrine, confirmed as well by the holy scripture, as by all
ancient authors of Christ's Church, both Greeks and Latins, that is to say,
that when our Savior Christ gave bread and wine to his disciples, and spoke
these words, This is my body, This is my blood, it is very bread and wine which
he called his body and blood.

Now let the Papists show some authority for their opinion, either of
scripture, or of some aunciant author. And let them not constrayne all men to
follow their fond devises, only because they say, It is so, without any other
ground or authority, but their own bare words. For in such wise credit is
to be given to Gods word only, and not to the word of any man. As many of them
as I have red (the bishop of Winchester only excepted) do say, that Christ
called not bread his body, nor wine his blood, when he said, This is my body,
This is my blood. And yet in expou^ding these words, they vary among them
selves: which is a token that they be uncertain of their own doctrine.

For some of them say, that by this pronoune demonstratiue (this) Christ
understood not the bread and wine, but his body and blood.

And other some say, that by the pronoune (this) he meant neither the bread nor
wine, not his body nor blood, but that he meant a particular thing uncertain,
which they call Indiuiduum vagum, or Indiuiduum in genere, I trow some
Mathematical quiditee, they can not tell what.

But let all these Papists together show any one authority, either of
scripture, or of ancient author, either Greek or Latin, that says as they
say, that Christ called not bread and wine his body and blood, but Indiuiduum
vagum, and for my part I shall give them place and confess that they say true.

And if they can show nothing for them of antiquity, but only their own bare
words, then it is reason that they give place to the truth confirmed by so
many authorities, both of scripture and of ancient writers, which is, that
Christ called very material bread his body, and very wine made of grapes, his
blood.

Winchester.
After this the author occupies a great number of leaves, that is to say, from
the lvii. leaf unto the lxxiiii, to prove Christ's words. This is my body) to
be a figurative spech. Slight and shift is used in the matter without any
offectuall consecution, to him that is learned.

First the author says Christ called bread his body, Confessed bread his body.
To this is answered, Christ's calling is a making, as S. Paul says. Romans 4.
Vocat ea quae non sunt, tanque ea quae sint, He calls that be not as they
were. And so his calling (as Chrysostom and the greek commentaries say,
Chrisost. in epist. a. To. cap. 4.
is a making, which also the Catechism teaches, trnslated by Iustus Jonas in
Germany, and after by this author in english. Tertullian says, Tertulian
aduersus Marnonem lib. 4. Ciprianus de cena Domini.
Christ made bread his body, and it is all one spech in Christ being god,
declaring his ordinances, whither he use the word call, or make, for in his
mouth to call is

Cypryan says according hereunto hows bread is by Gods omnipotency made
flesh, whereupon also this spech (bread is flesh) is as much to say as made
flesh, not that bread being bread is flesh, but that was bread is flesh by Gods
omnipotency, and so this author entreating this matter as he does, has partly
opened the faith of transubstantiaon. For in deed bread being bread is not
Christ's body, but that was bread, is now Christ's body because bread is made
Christ's body, and because Christ called bread his

When Christ said (This is my body) there is necessity that the demonstration
(this) should be referred to the outward visible matter, but may be referred
to the invisible

An issue.
And here when this auctor takes his recreation to speak of the fainyng of the
papists I shall ioyn this Issue in this place that he understands not what he
says, and if his

Caunterbury.
HEre is an other slight, Another slight.
such as the like has not lightly been seen. For

And yet finally you grant that which Smyth denies, that it was bread which
Christ called his body, when he said: This is my body. And so that which was
not his body in deed, he called his body, who calls things that be not, as
they were the things in deed. Romans 4. Whether Christ's calling be making.
And if his calling be making, then his calling bread his body, is making bread
his body: and so is not only Christ's body made present, but also the bread is
made his body: because it is called his body, and so must bread be the thing
whereof Christ's body is made, which before you denied in the xi. comparison,
calling that saying so foolish, that it were not tolerable to be devised by a
scoffer in a play to supply when his fellow had forgotten his part. And thus
should you conclude your self, if Christ's calling were making, which in deed
is not true: for then should Christ have made him self a vine, when he called
himself a vine: Ioh. 15. Ioh. 19. Ioh. 15. Mat. 16.
and have made S. John the blessed virgin Mary's son, when he called him her
son: and should have made his Apostles vine branches, when he called them
so: and should have made Peter a devil, when he called him devil.

After when you come to make answer unto the authors cited by me in this
place, first you skip over Irene the eldest author of them all, Irenaeus.
because (I think) he is to hard meat for you well to digest, and therefore
you will not once taste of him.

Tertullian. Cyprian.
that when Christ said This is my body, It was bread that he called his body.
And so when he said (this) he meant the bread, Whether bread be called Christ's
body.
making demonstration upon it: as before you have said more at large in your
book, which you named the Detection of the devils sophestrie. And herein you
say more truly then the other Papists do, (which deny that the demonstration
was made upon the bread) although you say not true in the other part, that
Christ's calling was making.

And if his calling be changing of the bread, and making it the body
Conversion 2. manner of waiess.
and to say, that it is the body of Christ. For when one thing is changed into
an other, the first still remaining, it may be said both that it is made the
other thing, and that it is the other thing (as when cloth is made a gown, we
may say this cloth is made a gown, and also this cloth is a gown) but when
the former matter or state remains not, it may be said that it is made the
other thing, but not that it is the other thing: John 2.
As when Christ had turned water into wine. And likewise although we say, a
wicked man is made just, a sick man is made whole, or an whole man sick, yet
it is no true speech to say, a wicked man is just, a sick man is whole, or an
whole man is sick: because the former state remains not. And therefore
although it might in speech be allowed, that the bread is made Christ's body
when the bread is gone, yet can it not be proper and approved speech, to say,
it is his body, except the bread remain still. For of that thing, which is
not, it can not be said, that it is Christ's body. For if it be his body, it
must needs be, by the rule of the Logike, a tertio adiacente, ad secundum
adiacens.

And I marvel how you have over shot your self in this place, when you teach
how and after what manner bread is made Christ's body? not that bread (say you)
being bread is his body, but that which was bread is now made his body:
Christ's body made of bread. John. 1.
whereof it follows necessarily, that his body is made of bread. For as the
wine in the Cane of Galile was made of water, when the substance of water was
turned into the substance of wine: so if in the Sacrament the substance of
bread be turned into the substance of Christ's body, then is his body in the
sacrament made of bread, which is in the xi. comparison you affirmed to be so
foolish a saying, as were not tolerable to be devised by a scoffer in a play
to supply when his fellow had forgotten his part.

Therefore I have not here partly opened the faith of Transubstantiaon (as you
say of me) but you have here manifestly opened the wisdom of the Papisticall
doctrine, which is more foolish, then were to be devised by a scoffer in a play.

But what need I much to contend with you in this place, seeing that you grant
the thing for the which I cyted all these authors, that is to say that Christ
called bread his body, Whether Christ called bread his body.
when he said, This is my body?

And in your detection of the Devils sophestrie (as you call it) you say

And when you have confessed the whole matter that I do here prove,

But because neither you nor Smith dare join with me in mine issue I shall
repete mine issue again, Smyth.
and take it for confessed of you both, because neither of you dare say the
contrary, and join an issue with me therein. My issue is this, Mine Issue.
Let all the Papists together show any one authority, either of scripture or of
ancient author, either Greek or Latin, that says as they say, that Christ
called not bread and wine his body and blood, but Indiuiduum vagum, and for my
part I shall give them place, and confess that they say true. And if they can
show nothing for them of antiquity, but only their own bare words, then it
is reason that they give place to the truth, confirmed by so many authorities
both of scripture and of ancient writers, which is, that Christ called very
material bread his body, and very wine made of grapes, his blood.

Now it shall not be much amiss, to examine here the wise devise of M. Smith,
Smyth.
what he can say to this matter, that the opinion of diverse Doctors may be
known, as well of Doctor Smith, as of Doctor Gardyner. It is very false
(says Smith to me) that you do say, that as these words (This is my body) do
lie, there ca^ be gathered of them none other sense, but that bread is Christ's
body, and that Christ's body is bread. For there can no such thing be gathered
of those words, but only that Christ gave his disciples his very body to eat,
into which he had turned the bread, when he spoke those words. First, Smith
uses here a great and manifest falsehead in reciting of my sentence, leaving
out those words which should declare the truth of my saying. For I say that by
this manner of speech plainly understand without any figure, there can be
gathered none other sense, but that bread is Christ's body. In which my
sentence he leaves out these words (by this manner of spech plainly understand
without any figure) which words be so material, that in them rests the pith
and trial of the whole sentence.

When Christ took the v. loaves and ij. fishes, Math. 14. Marc. 6. Luc. 9.
John. 6.
and looking up into heaven blessed them, and brake them, and gave them unto
his disciples, that they should distribute them unto the people, if he had then
said, Eat, this is meat, which shall satisfy your hunger: by this manner of
speech plainly understand without any figure, could any other sense have been
gathered, but that the bread and fishes which he gave them was meat? And if at
the same time he had blessed wine, and commanding them to drink thereof, had
said: This is drink, which shall quench your thirst: what could have been
gathered of those words plainly understand without any figure, but that he
called wine drink? So likewise when he blessed bread and wine, and gave them
to his disciples, saying: Eat, this is my body: Drink, this is my blood: what
can be gathered of this manner of speech plainly understand without any figure,
but that he called the bread his body, and wine his blood? For Christ spoke not
one word there of any changyng or turning of the substance of the bread, no
more then he did when he gave the loaves and fishes. And therefore the manner of
speech is all one, and the changing of the substau^ces can no more be proved by
the phrase and fashion of speech, to be in the one then in the other,
whatsoever you Papists dream of your own heads without Scripture, that the
substance of the bread is turned into the substance of Christ's body.

But Smith brings here news, using such strange and novelty of speech,
Smith.
as other Papists use not, which he does either of ignorance of his Grammar,
or else that he dissenteth far from other Papists in judgment. For he says,
that Christ had turned the bread when he spoke these words, This is my body.
And if Smith remember his Accidence, the preterpluperfect tence signifies the
time that is more than perfectly past, so that if Christ had turned the bread
when he spoke those words, then was the turning done before and already past,
when he spoke those words, which the other Papists say was done after, or in
the pronunciation of the words. And therefore they use to speak after this
sort, that when he had spoken the words, the bread was turned, and not that he
had turned the bread when he spoke the words.

An other novelty of speech Smith uses in the same place, saying that Christ
called his body bread, because he turned bread into it, it seems and appears
still to be it, it has the quality and quantity of bread, and because it is
the food of the soul as corporal meat is of the body. These be Smithes
words: which if he understand of the outward form of bread, it is a novelty
to say, that it is the food of the soul: and if he mean of the very body of
Christ, it is a more strange novelty to say, that it has the quantity and
quality of bread. For there was never man (I trow) that used that manner of
speech, to say that the body of Christ has the quantity and quality of
bread, although the Papists use this spech, that the body of Christ is
contained under the form, that is to say, under the qua^tities and qualities
of bread.

Now when Smith should come to make a direct answer unto the authorities of
the old writers, which I have brought forth to prove that Christ called bread
his body when he said, This is my body: Smith answers no more but this: the
Doctors which you my Lord allege here for you, prove not your purpose. Forsooth
a substantial answer, and well proved, that the Doctors by me alleged prove
not my purpose, for Smith says so. I looked here that Smith should have
brought forth a great number of authors to approve his saying, and to reprove
mine, specially seeing that I offered fair play to him, and to all the Papists,
joined with him in one trowpe.

For after that I had alleged for the proof of my purpose, a great many
places of old authors, both Greeks and Latins, I provoked the Papists to say
what they could to the contrary. Let all the Papists together (said I) show
any one authority for them, either of Scripture or ancient Author, either
Greek or Latin, and for my part I shall give them place. And if they can show
nothing for them of antiquity, then is it reason that they give place to the
truth, confirmed by so many authorities, both of Scripture and of ancient
writers, which is, that Christ called very material bread his body, and very
wine made of grapes, his blood.

Now I refer to thy judgment, indifferent reader, whether I offered the
Papists reason or no? and whether they ought not, if they had any thing to
show, to have brought it forth here? And for as much as they have brought
nothing, (being thus provoked with all their counsel) whether thou ought
not to judge, that they have nothing in deed to show, which if they had,
without doubt we should have hard of it in this place. But we hear nothing at
all, but these their bare words, not one of all these Doctors says as ye do,
my Lord, Which I put in thy discretion, indifferent Reader, to view the Doctors
words by me alleged and so to judge.

But they say not that there is only bread in the Sacrament (says Smith) and
not Christ's body: what then? What is that to purpose here in this place, I
pray you? For I go not about in this place to prove that only bread is in the
sacrament, and not Christ's body: but in this place I prove only, that it was
very bread, which Christ called his body, and very wine which he called his
blood, when he said, This is my body: This is my blood. Which Smith with all
his rablement of the Papists deny, and yet all the old Authors affirm it with
Doctor Steven Gardener, late Bishope of Winchester also, who says that Christ
made demonstration upon the bread, when he said, This is my body. And as all
the old Authors be able to counteruayle the Papists: so is the late Bishope
able to match Smith in this matter, so that we have at the least a Rowland for
an Oliver. But shortly to comprehend the answer of Smith: where I have proved
my sayings, a dosen leaves together, by the authority of Scripture and old
catholic writers, is this a sufficient answer, only to say without any
proof, that al my trauayl is lost? and that all that I have alleged is
nothing to the purpose? Judge indifferently gentle Reader, whether I might not
by the same reason cast away all Smithes whole book, and reject it quite and
clean with one word, saying, All his labor is lost and to no purpose. Thus
Smith and Gardener being answered, I will return again to my book, where it
follows thus.

Now this being fully proved, it must needs follow consequently, that this
manner of speaking is a figurative speech. Cap. 9. Bread to my body. Wine to my
blood, be figurative speeches.
For in plain, and proper speech, it is not true, to say that bread is
Christ's body, or wine his blood. For Christ's body has a soul, life, sense,
and reason: but bread has neither soul, life sense, nor reason.

Likewise in plain speech it is not true, that we eat Christ's body, and
drink his blood. For eating and drinking in their proper and usual
signification, is with the tongue, teeth, and lyppes, to swallow, divide, and
chawe in pieces: which thing to do to the flesh and blood of Christ, is
horrible to be heard of any Christian.

So that these speeches, To eat Christ's body and drink his blood, Cha. 10.
To eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood be figurative speeches.
to call bread his body, and wine his blood, be speches not taken in the proper
signification of every word, but by translation of these words, (eating, and
drinking,) from the signification of a corporal thing, to signify a
spiritual thing: and by calling a thing that signifies, by the name of the
thing which is signified thereby. Which is no rare nor strange thing, but an
usual manner, and phrase in common speech. And yet least this fault should be
imputed unto us, that we do feign things of our own heads without
authority, (as the papists be accustomed to do,) here shall be cited
sufficient authority, as well of Scriptures, as of old ancient authors, to
approve the same.

First when our Savior Christ in the sixth of John said, that he was the bread
of life, which who so ever did eat, should not dye, but live for ever: and
that the bread which he would give us, was his flesh: and therefore who so ever
should eat his flesh, and drink his blood, should have everlasting life: and
they that should not eat his flesh, and drink his blood, should not have
everlasting life. When Christ had spoken these words, with many more, of the
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, both the Jews, and many also
of his disciples were offended with his words, and said: This is an hard
saying. For how can he give us his flesh to be eaten? Christ perceiving their
murmuring hearts (because they knew none other eating of his flesh, but by
chawing, and swallowing) to declare, that they should not eat his body after
that sort, nor that he meant of any such carnal eating, he said thus unto them:
What if you see the son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the
spirit that gives life, the flesh avails nothing: the words which I spoke
unto you, be spirit and life.

These words our Savior Christ spoke, to lift up their minds from earth to
heaven, and from carnal to spiritual eating, that they should not phantasy,
that they should with their teeth eat him present here in earth: for his flesh
so eaten (says he,) should nothing profit them. And yet so they should not
eat him, for he would take his body away from them, and ascend with it into
heaven: and there by faith, and not with teeth, they should spiritually eat
him sitting at the right hand of his father. And therefore (says he,) The
words which I do speak, be spirit and life: That is to say, are not to be
understand, that we shall eat Christ with our teeth, grossly, and carnally,
but that we shall spiritually, and gostly with our faith, eat him, being
carnally absent from us in heaven. And in such wise, as Abraham and other holy
fathers did eat him, many years before he was incarnated, and borne, as Saint
Paul says, 1. Cor. 20.
that all they did eat the same spiritual meat that we do, and drink the
same spiritual drink: that is to say, Christ. For they spiritually by their
faith, were fed and nourished with Christ's body and blood, and had eternal
life by him, before he was borne, as we have now, that come after his ascension.

Thus have you heard the declaration of Christ himself, and of Saint Paul that
the eating, and drinking of Christ's flesh, and blood, is not taken in the
common signification, with mouth, and teeth, to eat, and chaw a thing being
present, but by a lively faith in heart and mind, to chaw, and digest a thing
being absent, either ascended hence into heaven, or else not yet borne upon
earth.

Winchester.
In the lx. leaf the auctor entreats whether it be a plain speech of Christ
to say (eat in speaking of this high mystery. Wherein I will make the issue
with this author, that

Caunterbury.
The eating of Christ's body is not with teeth.
that young babes learn it, and know it before they ca^ speak, yet the Cut
till here with his black colors and dark speeches goes about so to cover
and hyde the matter, that neither young nor old, learned nor unlearned, should
understand what he means. But for all his masking who is so ignorant but he
knows, that eating, in the propper and usual signification, is to bite and
chaw in sunder with the teeth? And who knows not also, that Christ is not so
eaten? Who can then be ignorant, that here you speak a manifest untruth, when
you say, that Christ's body to be eaten, is of it self a propper speech and
not figurative? Which is by and by confessed by your self, when you say that
we do not eat that heaue^nly meat, as we do other carnal meats, which is by
chawing and dividing with the mouth and teeth. And yet we receive with the
mouth that is ordained to be received with the mouth, that is to say, the
Sacramental bread and wine, esteming them nevertheless unto us when we duly
receive them, according unto Christ's words and ordinance.

Ex ore tuo te iudico. For you both judge carnally in affirming a carnal
presence, and a carnal eating, Luke 19.
and also you discuss this question (how) when you say that Christ's body is
in the sacrament really, substauncially, corporally, carnally, sensible, and
naturally, as he was born of the virgin Mary, and suffered on the cross.

John. 6.
The words which I do speak be Spirit and life, I have not wrested them
with mine own gloss (as you misreport) but I have cited for me the
interpretation of the catholic doctors and holy fathers of the church, as I
refer to the judgment of the reader.

christian ears abhore for to hear.

But why should I join with you here an issue, in that matter which

And where you say, that in the holy Supper men use their mouth and teeth,
truth it is that they so do, but to chawe the Sacrament, not ye body of Christ.
And if they do not tear that most precious body and blood, why say you then
that they eat the body of Christ, as eating is taken in common speech? And
wherefore does that false Papisticall faith of Pope Nicolas, Nycolas the second.
(which you wrongfully call Catholic,) teach that Christ's body is torn with
the teeth of the faithful? De consecr. did. 2. Ego. De consecr, did, 2. Ego.


Now follow the particular authorities, which I have alleged for the
interpretation of Christ's words, which if you had well considered, you would
not have said (as you do) that I wrasted Christ's words with mine own gloss.
For I begin with Origene, saying:

Origin. in Leuit. Ho 7.
And Origene declaring the said eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his
blood, not to be understand as the words do sound, but figuratively, writes
thus upon these words of Christ: Except you eat my flesh and drink my blood,
you shall not have life in you. John. 6.
Consider (says Origin) that these things written in Gods books, are
figures, and therefore examine, and understand them as spiritual, and not as
carnal men. For if you understand them as carnal men, they hurt you, and
feed you not. For even in the Gospels is there found letter that kills. And
not only in the old Testament, but also in the new is there found letter that
slays him, that does not spiritually understand that which is spoken. For if
thou follow the letter or words of this that Christ said: Except you eat my
flesh, and drink my blood this letter kills.

Who can more plainly express in any words, that the eating and drinking of
Christ's flesh and blood, are not to be taken in common signification, as the
words pretend and sound, then Origene does in this place?

Winchester.
Now I will touch shortly what may be said to the particular authorities
brought in by this author. Origenes.
Origin is noted (among other writers of the church) to draw the text to all
egories, who does not thereby mean to destroy the truth of the letter, and
therefore when he speaks of a figure, says not there is only a figure,
which exclusive (only) being away, (as it is not found by any author Catholic
taught that the speech of Christ of ye eating of his flesh to be only a
figure) this author had nothing advanced his purpose. As for spiritual
understanding means not any destruction of the letter where the same may stand
with the rules of our faith. All Christ's words be life and spirit, containing
in the letter many times that is above our capacity, as specially in this place
of the eating of his flesh, to discuss the particularities of (how) and yet we
must believe to be true that Christ says (although we can not tell how:) For
when we go about to discuss of Gods mystery (how,) then we fall from faith,
and wax carnal men, and would have Gods ways like ours.

Caunterbury.
HEre may every man that reads the words of Origin plainly see, yt you seek
in this weighty matter nothing by shifts and cauillatio^s. For you have nothing
answered directly to Origin although he directly writes against your
doctrine. For you say that the eating of Chrstes flesh is taken in the proper
signification without a figure. Origin says there is a figure. And Origin
says further, that it is only a figurative spech, although not adding this
word (only) yet adding other words of the same effect. For he says, that we
may not understand the words as the letter sounds. And says further, that if
we understand the words of Christ in this place, as the letter sounds, the
letter kills. Now who knows not, that to say these words (not as the letter
sounds, and yt letter kills) be as much to say, as only spiritually, and
only otherwise then the letter sounds? Wherefore you must spit upon your
hands, and take better hold, or else you can not be able to pluck Origin so
shortly from me. And I maruayle that you be not ashamed, thus to trifle with
the ancient authors in so serious a matter, and such places, where the reader
only looking upon the authors words, may see your dealing.

The next is Chrysostom, whom I cite thus.

And Saynct John Chrysostom affirms the same, Chrysostom in Ioha^nem Hom.
46.
saying, that if any man understand the words of Christ carnally he shall
surely profit nothing thereby. For what mean these words, the flesh avails
nothing? He meant not of flesh (God forbid) but he meant of them that fleshly and
carnally understood those things that Christ spoke But what is carnal
understanding? To understand the words simply as they be spoken, and nothing
else. For we ought not so to understand the things which we see, but all
mysteries must be considered with inward eyes, and that is spiritually to
understand them.

In these words S. John Chrisosto^ shows plainly that the words of Christ
concerning the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, are not to be
understand simply, as they be spoken, but spiritually and figuratively.

Winchester.
Saint Chrisostom declares himself, Chrysostom.
how mysteries must be considered with inward eyes, which is a spiritual
understanding, whereby the truth of the mystery is not, (as it were by a
figurative spech empayred) but with an humility of understanding in a certain
faith of the truth maruayled at. And here the author of this book uses a
slight to join figuratively to spiritually, as though they were always all
one, which is not so.

Caunterbury.
AS you have handled Origin before, even so do you handle Chrisosto^. Wherefore
I only refer the reader to look upon the words of Chrysostom recited in my
book, who says, that to understand the words of eating of Christ's flesh,
symply as they be spoken, is a carnal understanding. And then can it be no
proper speech (as you say it is) because it can not be understand as the words
be spoken, but must have an other v^derstanding spiritually. Then follows
next Saint Augustine, of whom I write thus.

And yet most planely of all other, Augustine
S. Augustine does declare this matter in his book De doctrina christiana, de
doctrina Christ. li. 3.
in which book he instructs christian people, how they should understand
those places of Scripture, which seem hard and obscure.

Seldom (says he) is any difficulty in proper words, but either the
circumstance of the place, or the conferring of diverse translations, or else the
original tongue wherein it was written, will make the sense plain. But in words
that be altered from their proper signification, there is great diligence and
head to be taken. And specially we must beware, that we take not literally any
thing that is spoken figuratively. Nor contrary wise we must not take for a
figure any thing, that is spoken properly. Therefore must be declared (says S.
Augustine) the manner how to discern a proper spech from a figurative. Wherein
(says he) must be obserned this rule, that if the thing which is spoken, be to
the furtherance of charity, then it is a proper spech and no figure. So that if
it be a commandment, that forbids any evil or wicked act, or commands
any good or beneficial thing, then it is no figure. But if it command any ill
or wicked thing, or forbids any thing that is good and beneficial, then it
is a figurative spech. Now this saying of Christ: (Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you) seems
to command an haynons and wicked thing, therefore it is a figure, commanding
us to be partakers of Christ's passion, keeping in our minds to our great
comfort and profit, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. This is
briefly the sentence of S. Augustine in his book De doctrina Christiana.

And the like he writes in his book De catechisandis rudibus: De catech. rudi.
ca. 26. Contra aduersar. legis and Prophe. li. 2. ca. 9.
and in his book Contra aeduersarium legis and prophet arum, and in diverse
other places, which forte diowsnes I pass over.

For if I should rehearse all the authorityes of S. Augustine and other which
make mention of this matter, it would weary the reader to much.

Wherefore to all them that by any reasonable means will be satisfied, these
things before rehearsed are sufficient to prove that the eating of Christ's
flesh and drinking of his blood, is not to be understood simply and plainly
(as the words do properly signify) that we do eat and drink him with our
mouths: but it is a figurative spech spiritually to be understood, that we
must deeply print and fruitfully believe in our hearts, that his flesh was
crucified, and his blood shed for our redemption. And this our belief in him,
is to eat his flesh and drink his blood, although they be not present here with
us, but be ascended into heaven. As our forefathers before Christ's time, did
likewise eat his flesh and drink his blood, which was so far from them, that
he was not yet then borne.

Winchester.
Augustinus.
Saint Augustine according to his rules of a figurative and proper speech,
takes this letter they understand not: upon which consideration it seems
probable that the other fathers also signifiyng a great secrecy in this
mystery of the Sacrament, wherein is a Contrary.
to do as is commanded without carnal thought or murmuring in our sensual
devise how it can be so. And S. Augustine in the fame place speaking De
communicando passionibus Christi, declares plainly he means of the
Sacrament.

Caunterbury.
IF thou take not very good heed, reader, thou shall not perceive where the
cuttill becomes. He wrappeth himself so about in darcknesse, and he comes
not near the net by a mile, for fear he should be taken. But I will draw my
net nearer to him, that he shall not escape. I say that the words which Christ
spoke of the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood were spoken by a
figure, and he would avoid the matter, by saying that those words have a
spiritual mystery in them, which is most true, and nothing contrary to my
saying, but confirms the same. For ye words of eating and drinking be
figurative speches, because they have



In which one sentence be three notable errors or untruths. The first is, that
you say the letter sounds than we eat the carnal flesh of a common man:
which your saying the plain words of the gospel do maniestly reprove. For
Christ seperating himself in that spech from all other men, spoke only of
himself, saying, My flesh is very meat, John. 6.
and my blood is very drink: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. The second is, that you call the flesh of Christ a
spiritual flesh, as before you said that he is spiritually eaten. And so by
your doctrine his flesh is spiritual, and is spiritually eaten, and all is
spiritual: which has need of a favorable interpretation, if it should be
counted a sound and Catholic teaching. And if all be spiritual, and done
spiritually, what means it then, that in other places you make so often
mention, yt he is present and eaten carnally, corporally, and naturally?

The third is, that you say the spech of Christ is noted figurative in respect
of the eating of the flesh of a common man, which is utterly untrue. For the
authors note not the figurative spech in that respect: but as christ spoke of
his own flesh joined unto his divinity (whereby it gives life) even so do the
authors note a figurative spech in respect of Christ's own flesh, and say
thereof, that the letter can not be true without a figure. For although Christ
be both God and man, yet his flesh is a very man's flesh, and his blood is
truly man's blond (as is the flesh and blood of his blessed mother) and
therefore can not be eaten and drunken properly, but by a figure. For he is not
meat and drink of the body, to be eaten corporally with mouth and teeth, and to
be dygested in the stomach: but he is the meat of the soul, to be received
spiritually in our hearts and minds, and to be chawed and digested by faith.

And it is untrue that you here say, that the proper and special name of

And the Authors term it here a figure, not thereby to cover the mystery but to
open the mystery, which was in deed in Christ's words by fyguratiue speches
understand. And with the figurative spech were the Ethnik and carnal ears
offended, not with the mystery which they understood not. And not to the Ethnik
and carnal, but to the faithful and spiritual

Nor S. Augustine never wrote in all his long works as you do, that and
understand the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of his blood, which (as he
says) is this, To keep in our minds to our great comfort and profit, that
Christ was crucified and shed his blood for us, and so to be partakers of his
passion. This says S. Augustine is to eat his flesh and to drink his blood.

Nolite par are fauces sed cor, Prepare not your mouth or jaws, but your heart.
August de verbis domini sermon 33.
And in an other place he says, Quid paras ventrem and dentem? Creed and
manducasti, In Io. tract. 25.
Why do thou prepare thy belly and teeth? Believe, and thou have eaten.



Now thou see, good reader, what avail all those gloses, of carnal flesh
and spiritual flesh, of the flesh of Christ, and the flesh of a common man, of
a figure to the unfaithful, and not to the faithful, that the fathers termed
it a figure, because else the Ethnike ears could not abyd it, and because they
would reverently cover the mystery? And when none of these shifts will serve,
he runs to his shot anchor, that Saint Agustins rule pertains nothing to
Christ's supper. Thus may thou se with what sincerity he handles the old
writers. And yet he might right well have spared all his long talk in this
matter, seeing that he agrees fully with me in the state of the whole cause,
that to eat Christ's flesh and to drink his blood, be figurative speeches.
For he that declares the cause, why they be figurative speeches, agrees in
the matter, that they be figurative speeches. And so have I my full purpose in
this article. Now hear what follows in my book.

Cha. 11. This is my body: this is my blood, be figurative speeches. The bread
represents Christ's body and the wine his blood. Tertulianus contra Martionem
Lib. 1.
The same authors did say also, that when Christ called the bread his body, and
the wine his blood, it was no proper speech that he than used, but as all
Sacraments be figures of other things, and ye have the very names of the
things, which they do signify: so Christ instituting the sacrament of his
most precious body and blood, did use figurative speeches, calling the bread by
the name of his body: and the wine he called his blood, because it represented
his blood.

Tertullian herein writing against Martion, says these words: Christ did not
reprove bread, whereby he did represent his very body. And in the same book he
says, that Jesus taking bread, and distributing it amongs his disciples made
it his body, saying, This is my body. That is to say, (says Tertullian) a
figure of my body. And therefore says Tertullian, That Christ called bread his
body, and wine his blood: because that in the old Testament bread and wine were
figures of his body and blood.

Winchester.
Tertulianus. The author had left out (the same)
Tertullian speaking of the representation of Christ's very body, in which place
he terms (the same body) speaks catholiquely in such phrase as S. Hierom
speaks: and then Tertullian says afterward as this author therein truly
brings him forth that Christ made the bread his body, which bread was in the
mouth of the prophet (that is to say in Tertullian) should be only referred to
the explicacion of the first (this:) as when Tertullian had alleged Christ's
words saying (this is my body) and puts to of his own (that is to say the
figure of my body,) these words (that is to say) should serve to declare the
demonstration (this,) in this wise (that is to say, this) which the Prophet
called ye figure of the body, is now my body. And so Tertulian said before ye
Christ had made bread his body, which bread was a figure of his body with the
Prophet, and now ends in the very truth, being made his body by conversion
as (Cyprian certayntie in understanding but the figure of a body? Why should
not they say, that a body in Christ should ever be spoken of a body in a
figure, and so no certayntie of any true body in Christ by Tertullianes words?
This place of Tertullian is no secret point of learning, and has been of
Decolampadius and other alleged and by either

Caunterbury.
ON what a wrangling and wrasting is here made? What crookes be cast?
Tertullian says not, an only figure.
what leaping about is here, to avoid a foil? And yet I refer to any
indifferent man that shall read the place of Tertullain, to judge whether you
have truly expounded him, or in the wrestling with him be

Jesus taking bread, and distributing it among his disciples, made it his body,
saying: This is my body, that is to say a figure of my body.

Hear Tertullian expounds not the saying of the Prophet, but the saying of
Christ, this is my body. And where Tertullian has but once the word (This) you
say (the first this). And so you make a wise speech to say (the first,) where
is but one. And Tertullian speaks of (this) in Christ's words, when he said,
This is my body, and you refer them to the Prophets words, which be not
there, but the spoken of long after. And if you had not forgotten your gramer,
and all kind of speech, or else hurled away altogether purposely to serve your
own wilful devise, you would have referred the demonstration of his
antecedent before, and not to a thing that in order comes long after. And
bread in the prophet was but a figurative speech, but in Christ's words was
not only a figurative speech, but also a figurative thing, that is to say,
very material bread, which by a figurative speech Christ ordained to be a
figure and a sacrament of his body. For as the Prophet by this word (bread)
figured Christ's body so did Christ himsef institute very material bread, to
be a figure of his body in the sacrament. But you refer (this) to the bread
in the Prophet, which Christ spoke (as Tertullian says) of the bread in the
gospel. And Christ's words must needs be understood of the bread which he
gave to his Apostles, in the time of the gospel after he had ended the supper
of the law. And if Christ made the bread in the prophet his very body, which
was no material bread, but this word, (bread) then did Christ make this word
bread his body, and converted this word bread in to the substance of his body.
This is the conclusion of your subtell sophistication of Tertullians words.

Now as concerning Saint Ciprian (whom you here allege) he

And Tertullian proved not in that place the verity of Christ's body

Wherefore this which you say in aunswering to the plain words of

But if so plain speech of Tertullian (say you) that Christ made bread a
particulari ad universal? By your own manner of argumentation, because you
make a naughty argument here in this place, shall I conclude that you never
make none good? Surely this place of Tertullian (as you have handled it) is
neither secret nor manifest point, either of learning, wit, or reason, but a
mere sophistication, if it be no worse.

What other papists have answered to this place of Tertullian, I

Here the reader may note by the way, how many foul shifts you make to avoid
the saying of Tertullian. First you say, that bread was a figure in the
prophets mouth, but not in Christ's words. Second, that the thing which the
prophet spoke of, was not that which Christ spoke of. Third, that other have
answered this place of Tertullian before. Forth, that you call this matter but
a wrangling argument. Fifth, that if Tertulian call bread a figure, yet he
terms it not, only figure. These be your shifts. Now let the reader look
upon Tertullians plain words, which I have rehearsed in my book, and then
let him judge, whether you mean to declare Tertullians mind truly or no.

And it is not requiset for my purpose, to prove that bread is only a figure,
figure representing Christ's body, and the wine his blood. And if bread be a
figure, and not only a figure, than must you make bread, both the figure, and
the truth of the figure.

Now hear what other authors I do here allege.

And saint Ciprian the holy marter says of this matter, Ciprianus. lib. 2.
Epistola. 3.
that Christ's blood is showed in the wine, and the people in the water, that is
mixed with the wine: so that the mixture of the water to the wine, signifies
the spiritual commixtion and joining of us unto Christ.

By which similitude Ciprian meant not, that the blood of Christ is wine, or the
people water, but as the water does signify and represent the people, so
does the wine signify and represent Christ's blood: and the uniting of the
water and wine together, signifies the uniting of Christian people unto Christ
himself.

And the same saint Ciprian in an other place, writing here of says, De
vnction^ Chrismati.
that Christ in his last supper, gave to his apostles with his own hands
bread and wine, which he called his flesh and blood, but in the cross he gave
his very body, to be wounded with the hands of the soldiers, that the
apostles might declare to the world how and in what manner bread and wine may
be the flesh and blood of Christ. And the manner he straight ways declares
thus, that those things which do signifye, and those things which be signified
by them, may be both called by one name.

Here it is certain, by saint Ciprians mind, wherefore and in what wise bread is
called Christ's flesh, and wine his blood, that is to say, because that every
thing that represents and signifies an other thing, may be called by the
name of thing which it signifies.

And therefore Saint John Chrisostom says that Christ ordained the table of his
holy supper for this purpose, Chris in. Psa. 22
that in that sacrament he should daily show, unto us bread and wine for a
similitude of his body and blood.

Saint Hierom likewise says upon the gospel of Matthew, Iero. in Mat. 26.
that Christ took bread, which comfort man's heart, that he mght represent
thereby his very body and blood.

Also Saint Ambrose (if the book be his that is entitled De his qui misterijs
initianter) says, Ambros de his qui misterijs initiantur. cap. vlt.
that before the consecration, an other kind is named, but after the
consecration, the body of Christ is signified. Christ said his blood, before
the consecration it is called an other thing, but after the consecration is
signified the blood of Christ.

And in his book De sacramentis (if that be also his) he writes thus. De
sacramentis lib. 6. cap. 3.
Thou do receive the sacrament for a similitud of the flesh and blood of
Christ, but thou do obtain the grace and virtue of his true nature.

And receiving the bread, in that food thou art partaker of his godly
substance. And in the same book he says, As thou have in baptism reciued
the similitude of death, so likewise do thou in the sacrament drink the
similitude of Christ's precious blood. And again he says in the said book.
Lib. 4. cap. 4.
The priest says: Make unto us this oblation to be acceptable, Lib. 4. cap. 5.
which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And upon the epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.
he says that in eating and drinking the bread and wine, we do signify the
flesh and blood, which were offered for us. And the old tastament (he says)
was instituted in blood because that blood was a witness of gods benefit, in
signification and figure whereof we take the mistical cup of his blood, to the
tuitio^ of our body and soul.

Of these places of saint Chrisostom, saint Hierom and saint Ambrose, it is
clear, that in the sacramental bread and wine, is not rially and corporally
the very natural substance of the flesh and blood of Christ, Signs and
figures have the names of the things which they signify.
but that the bread and wine be similitudes, mysteries and representations,
significations, sacraments, figures and signs of his body and blood: and
therefore be called, and have the name of his very body flesh and blood.

Winchester.
Cyprianus. Chrysostom. Hieronym.
Ciprian shall be touched after, when we speak of him again.

Chrisostom shall open himself hereafter plainly.

Saint Hierom speaks here very pithely, using the word (represent) which
signifies

Saint Ambrose shall after declare himself, and it is not denied, but the
authors in speaking of the sacrament used these words, sign, figure,
similitude, token, Ambrosius.
but those speeches exclude not the verity and truth of the body and blood of
Christ, for no approved author has this exclution, No author says, an only
figure.
to say an only sign, an only token, an only similitude,

Canterbury.
HEre you shift of S. Ciprian and Chrisostom with fair promise to make answer
to them hearafter, who aproue plainly my saying, Hjeronimus.
that the bread represents Christ's body, and the, wine his blood, and so you
answer here only to S. Hierom. In aunswering to whom you were loath (I se well)
to leave behind any thing that might have any color to make for you, that
expound this word (represent) in S. Hierom, vocare to signify facere, and
facere to signify sacrificare, Represent.
as you do in your last book. And why should you not than in other words
(when it will serve for like purposes) have the like liberty to change the
signification of words when you list And if this word (represent) in saint
Hieroms words, signify real exhibition, then did Melchisedech really exhibit
Christ's flesh and blood, who (as the same saint Hierom says) did represent
his flesh and blood by offering bread and wine.

And yet in the lords supper ryghtly used is Christ's body exhibited Really.
if you take really, to signify only a spiritual and not a corporal and
carnal exhibition. But this real and spiritual exhibition is to the
receivers of the sacrament, and not to the bread and wine.

And mine issue in this place is no more, but to prove that these sayings

And as for the exelucion (only) many of the authors (as I proved before) have
the same exclusive, or other words equivalent thereto. And as for the
sacramental signs, they be only figures. And of the presence of Christ's
body, your self has this exclusive, that Christ is but after a spiritual
manner present, and I say he is but spiritually present.

Now follows Saint Augustine.

And yet S. Augustine shows this matter more clearly and fully then any of
the rest, Augustimus ad Bonefacium. Episto. 23.
specially in an epistle, which he wrote ad Bonifacium, where he says, that a
day or two before good Friday, we use in common speech to say thus: To morrow or
this day.ij. days, Christ suffered his passion. Where in very deed he never
suffered his passion but once, and that was many years passed. Likewise upon
Easter day we say, This day Christ rose from death. Where in very deed it is
many hundredth years since he rose from death. Why then do not men reprove us
as liars, when we speak in this sort. But because we call these days so, by a
similitude of those days, wherein these things were done in deed? And so it is
called that day, which is not that day in deed, but by the course of the year
it is a like day. And such things be said to be done that day, for the solemn
celebration of the sacrament, which things indede were not done that day, but
long before. Was Christ offered any more but once? And he offered him self,
and yet in a sacrament or representation, not only every solemn feast of
Easter, but every day he is offered to the people, so that he does not lie,
that says, He is every day offered. For if sacraments had no some similitude
or likeness of those things, whereof they be Sacraments, they could in no wise
be sacraments. And for their similitude and likeness, commonly they have the
name of the things, whereof they be sacraments. Therefore as after a certain
manner of speech, the sacrament of Christ's body, is Christ's body: the sacrament
of Christ's blood, is Christ's blood: so likewise the sacrament of faith, is
faith. And to believe is nothing else, but to have faith, And therefore when we
answer for young children in their baptism, that they believe, which have not
yet the mind to believe, we answer that they have faith, because they have the
sacrament of faith. And we say also that they turn unto God, because of the
sacrament of conversion unto God, for that answer pertayneth to the celebration
of the sacrament. And likewise speaks the Apostle of baptism, saying: that
by Baptism we be buried with him into death: he says not that we signify
burial, but he says plainly, that we be buried. So that the sacrament of so
great a thing, is not called but by the name of the thing it self.

Hitherto I have rehearsed the answer of S. Augustine unto Boniface a learned
bishop, who asked of him, how the parents and friends could answer for a young
babe in baptism, and say in his person that he believes and conuerteth unto
God, when the child can neither do, nor think any such things.

Whereunto the answer of S. Augustine is this: that for as much as baptism is
the sacrament of the profession of our faith, and of our conversion unto God,
it becomes us so to answer for young children coming thereunto, as to the
sacrament apertayneth, although the children indeed have no knowledge of such
things.

And yet in our said answers we ought not to be reprehended as vayn men or
liars, forasmuch as in common speech we use daily to call sacraments and
figures by the names of the things that be signified by them, although they be
not the same thing indede. As every Goodfriday (as often as it returns from
year to year) we call it the day of Christ's passion: and every Easter day,
we call the day of his resurrection: and every day in the year, we say that
Christ is offered: and the sacrament of his body, we call it his body: and the
sacrament of his blood, we call it his blood: and our baptism S. Paul calls
our burial with Christ. And yet in very deed Christ never suffered but once,
never arose but once, never was offered but once, nor in very deed in baptism
we be not buried, nor the sacrament of Christ's body is not his body, nor the
sacrament of his blood is not his blood. But so they be called, because they be
figures, sacraments, and representations of the things them self which they
signify, and whereof they bear the names. Thus does saint Augustine most
plainly open this matter in his epistle to Bonifacius.

Of this manner of speech (wherein a sign is called by the name of the thing,
which it signifies) speaks S. Augustine also right largely in his questions
super Leuiticum, Super Leuiticu^ quest. 15. Leuit. 57.
and contra Adamantium, declaring how blood in scripture is called the soul. A
thing which signifies (says he) is wont to be called by the name of the thing
which it signifies, as it is written in the scripture. The vij. ears, be vij.
years. Genesis 41.
The scripture says not signifies vij. years. And vij. kine; be seven
years, and many other like. And so said saint Paul, that the stone was
Christ, and not that it signified Christ, but even as it had been he indede, 1.
Cor. 10.
which nevertheless was not Christ by substance but by signification. Even so
(says saint Augustine) because the blood signifies and represents the
soul, therefore in a sacrament or signification, it is called the soul. And
contra Adamantium he writes much like, Contra adamantium cap. 12.
saying: In such wise is blood the soul, as the stone was Christ, and yet the
Apostle says not, that the stone signified Christ, but says it was Christ.
Leuit. 17.
And this sentence, Blood is the soul, may be understand to be spoken in a
sign or figure, for Christ did not stick to say, this is my body, when he gave
the sign of his body.

Here.S Augustine rehearsing diverse sentences, which were spoken figuratively,
that is to say, when one thing was called by the name of an other, and yet was
not the other in substance, but in signification: As the blood is the soul:
vij. kyne be vij. years: vij. ears be vij. years, the stone was Christ.
Among such manner of speeches, he reherseth those words which Christ spoke at
his last supper, this is my body. Math. 16.
Which declares plainly Saint Augustines mind, that Christ spoke those words
figuratively, not meaning that the bread was his body by substance, but by
signification.

Contra Maximinum. li. 3. cap. 22
And therefore S. Augustine says contra Maximinum, that in the sacraments we
must not consider what they be, but what they signify. for they be signs of
things, being one thing and signifiyng another. Which he does show specially
of this sacrament, saying, the heavenly bread which is Christ's flesh, by some
manner of speech is called Christ's body, In lib. sententiarum Prosperi de
consecrat. did. 2 Hoc est.
when in very deed it is the sacrament of his body. And that offering of the
flesh which is done by the priests hands, is called Christ's passion, death,
and crucifiyng, not in very deed, but in a mystical signification.

Winchester.
As for saint Agustine ( ad Bonifacium) the author shall perceive his fault at
Martyne Bucers hand, who in his epistle dedicatory of his enarations of the
gospels, reherseth his mind of Saint Augustine in this wise. Bucerus.
Est (scribit diuus Augustinus) secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis
Christi, Corpus Christi: sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi. At
secundum quem modum? Vt significet tantum corpus and sanguinem Domini absenta?
Absit, Honorari enim and percipi in simbolis visibilibus corpus and sanguinem
Domini, idem passim scribit. These words of Bucer may be thus englished. Saint
Augustine writes the sacrament of the body of Christ is after a certain manner,
ye body of christ, ye sacrament of ye blood of christ, ye blood of christ, but
after what manner? yt it should signify only the body and blood absent? Absit,
In no wise: for the same Saint (secundum quendam modum) after a certain manner,
whereunto to put (of speech) is an addition more then truth required of
necessity. In these words of Bucer may apeare his whole indgement concerning
S. Augustine, who affirms the very true presence of the thing signified in
the sacrament, which truth established in the matter, the calling it a sign,
or a token, a figure, a similitude, or a showing, makes no matter when we
understand the thing really present that is signified. Which and it were not in
deed in Authors for doctrine should be red where they expound ye matter without
contention.
and see what they say in expounding the special place, without contention,

Canterbury.
M. Bucer.
if you could answer your self? but because you be ashamed of the matter, you
would thrust Martine Bucer in your place, to receive rebuke for you. But in
this place he eases you nothing at all, for he says no more but that the body
and blood of Christ be exhibited unto the worthy receivers of the sacrament,
which is true, but yet spiritually, not corporally.

The true presense of Christ.
that he is truly and spiritually present, and truly and spiritually exhibited
unto the godly receiuours: but corporally is he neither in the receiuors, nor
in or under the fourmes of bread or wine, as you do teach, clearly with out the
consent of master Bucer, who writes no such thing.

sacrament of so great a thing, is called by the name of the thing. All these
be S. Augustines words, showing how in the common use of speech, one thing may
have the name of another. Wherefore when Doctor Gardener says, that S.
Augustine spoke not of yt manner of speech, thou may believe him hereafter as
thou shall see cause, but if thou trust his words to much, thou shall soon be
deceived.

As for the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, I grant that he Really.
after such sort as you expound really in this place, that is to say, indede,
and yet but spiritually. For you say your self, that he is but after a
spiritual manner there, and so is he spiritually honored, as S Augustine says.

But as concerning heat of disputation, mark well the words of S. Augustine,
good reader, cited in my book, and thou shall see clearly, that

But in this your answer to saint Augustine, you utter where you learned a good
part of your divinity, that is, of Albertus Pighius, Albertus Pighius.
who is the father of this shift, and with this fleight eludeth Saint Augustine
when he could no otherwise answer. As you do now shake of the same Saint
Augustine, resembling as it were in that point the lively countenance of your
father Pighius. Next in my book follows Theodoret

And to this purpose it is both pleasant, comfortable, and profitable to read
Theodoretus in his Dialogs, Theodoretus in dialogis.
where he disputes and shows at length, how the names of things be changed
in scripture, and yet things remain still. And for example he proves that
the flesh of Christ is in the scripture sometime called a veil or coueryng,
sometime a cloth, sometime a vestment, and sometime a stole: and the blood of
the grape is called Christ's blood, and the names of bread and wine, and of his
flesh and blood, Christ does so change, that sometime he calls his body,
corn or bread, and sometime contrary, he calls bread his body. And likewise
his blood sometime he calls wine, and sometime contrary he calls wine his
blood.

For the more plain understanding whereof, it shall not be amiss to recite his
own sayings in his foresaid dialogs, touching this matter of the holy
sacrament of Christ's flesh and blood. The speakers in these dialogs be
Orthodoxus, the right beleuer, and Eranistes his companyon, but not
understanding the right faith.

Orthodoxus says to his companion. In the first dialogue.
Do thou not know, that god caleth bread his flesh?

Eran. I know that.


Orth. And in an other place he calls his body corn.


Eran. I know that also, for I have heard him say: The hour is come, that the
son of man shall be glorified. etc. John. 12.
Except the grain of come, that falls in the ground dye, it remains sole,
but if it dye, then it brings forth much fruit.


Orth. When he gave the mysteries of sacraments, Math. 16. Mark. 14. Luc. 22.
he called bread his body, and that which was mixed in the cup he called blood.


Eran. So he called them.


Orth. But that also which was his natural body, may well be called his body
and his very blood also, may be called his blood.


Eran. It is plain.


Orth. But our savior without doubt changed the names, and gave to the body
the name of the sign or token, and to the token he gave the name of the body.
And so when he called himself a vine, he called blood that, which was the token
of blood. Ioh. 15.



Eran. Surely thou have spoken the truth. But I would know the cause wherefore
the names were changed.


Orth. The cause is manifest to them that be expert in true religion. For he
would that they which be partakers of the godly sacraments, Ioh 12. Math. 16.
Ioh. 15.
should not set their minds upon the nature of the things which they see, but
by the changing of the names, should believe the things which be wrought in them
by grace. For he that called that, which is his natural body, corn and bred,
and also called himself a vine, he did honor the visible tokens and signs,
with the names of his body and blood, not changing the nature, but adding grace
to nature.


Eran. Sacraments be spoken of sacramentally, and also by them be manifestly
declared things, which all men know not.


Ortho. Seeing then that it is certain, that the Patriarch called the lords
body a vestiment and apparel, Genesis 46.
and that now we be entered to speak of godly sacraments, tell me truly of what
thing think thou this holy meat to be a toke^ and figure of Christ's
divinity, or of his body and blood?


Eran. It is clear that it is the figure of those things, whereof it bears
the name.


Orth. Meanest thou of his body and blood?


Eran. Even so I mean


Orth. Thou have spoken as one that loves the truth, for the Lord when he
took the token or sign, he said not. This is my divinity, but This is my
body, and this is my blood. And in an other place. Ioh. 6.
The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.


Eran. These things be true, for they be Gods words.

All these writes Theodoretus in hi first Dialogue.' Dial. 20


And in the second he writes the same in effect (and yet in some thing more
plainly) against such heretics, as affirmed that after Christ's resurrection
and ascension, his humanity was changed from the very nature of man and turned
into his divinity. Against whom thus he writes.


Orth. Corruption, heals sickness, and death, be accedents, for they go and
come.


Era. It is meet they be so called.


Orth. Men's bodies after their resurrection be delivered from corruption,
death, and mortality, and yet they lose not their proper nature.


Eran. Truth it is.'


Orth. The body of Christ therefore did rise quite clean from all corruption
and death, Christ's body glorified has his form bigness and quantity.
and is impassible, immortal, glorified with the glory of God, and is honored
of the powers of heaven, and it is a body, and has the same bigness that it had
before.


Era. Thy saying seem true and according to reason, but after he was ascended
up into heaven, I think thou will not say, that his body was not turned into
the nature of his godhead.


Orth. I would not so say for the persuation of man's reason: nor I am not so
arrogant and presumptious, to affirm any thing which scripture passes over in
silence. But I have heard S. Paul cry, Act. 17.
that God has ordained a day when he will judge all the world in justice, by
that man which he appointed before, performing his promise to all men, and
raising him from death. I have learned also of the holy angels, Act. 1.
that he will come after that fashion, as his disciples saw him go to heaven.
But they saw a nature of a certain bigness, not a nature which had no bigness.
I heard furthermore the lord say, You shall see the son of man come in the
clouds of heaven. Math. 24.
And I know that every thing that men see, has a certain bigness. For that
nature that has no bigness, can not be seen. Moreover to sit in the throne of
glory, and to set the Lambs upon his right hand, and the goats upon his
left hand, signifies a thing that has quantity and bygnes.

Hitherto have I rehearsed Theodoretus words, and shortly after Eranistes says.


Eran. We must turn every stone (as the proverb says) to seek out the
truth, but specially when godly matters be propounded.


Orth. Tell me than the sacramental signs which be offered to God by his
priests, whereof be they signs, say thou?


Eran. Of the Lords body and blood.


Orth. Of a very body? or not of a very body?


Eran. Of a very body.


Orth. Very well, for an image must be made after a true pattern: for Paynters
follow nature, and paynt the images of such things, as we see with our;eyes.


Eran. Truth it is.


Orth. If therefore the godly sacraments represent a true body, than is the
Lords body yet still a body, not converted into the nature of his Godhead, but
replenished with Gods glory.


Eran. It comes in good time, that thou make mention of Gods sacraments,
for by the same I shall prove, that Christ's body is turned into an other
nature. Answer therefore unto my questions.


Orth. I shall answer.


Eran. What call thou that which is offered, before the invocation of the
priest?


Orth. We must not speak plainly, for it is like that some be present, which
have not professed Christ.


Eran. Answer covertly.


Orth. It is a nourishment made of seeds that be like.


Eran. Than how call we the other sign?


Orth. It is also a common name that signifies a kind of drink.


Eran. But how do thou call them after the sanctification.


Orth. The body of Christ, and the blood of Christ.


Eran. And do thou believe that thou art made partaker of Christ's body and
blood?


Orth. I believe so.


Eran. Therefore as the tokens of Gods body and blood, be other things before
the priests, invocation, but after the invocation they be changed, and be
other things: so also the body of Christ after his assumption, is changed into
his divine substance.


Ortho. Thou art taken with thine own net. For the sacramental signs go
not from their own nature after the sanctification, but continue in their
former substance, form and figure, and may be seen and touched as well as
before, yet in our minds we do consider, what they be made, and do repute and
esteem them and have them in reverence, according to the same things that they
be taken for. Therefore compare their images to the pattern, and thou shall see
them like. For figure must be like to the thing it self. For Christ's body
has his former fashion, figure, and bigness, and to speak at one word, the
same substance of his body: but after his resurrection, it was made immortal,
and of such power, that no corruption nor death could come unto it: and it was
exalted unto that dignity, that it was set at the right hand of the father,
and honored of all creatures, as the body of him that is the Lord of nature.


Eran. But the sacramental token changes his former name, for it is no more
called as it was before, but is called Christ's body. Therefore must his body
after his ascension be called God, and not a body.


Orth. Thou semest to me ignorant: for it is not called his body only but also
the bread of life, as the Lord called it. So the body of Christ we call a godly
body, a body that gives life, Gods body, the Lords body, our masters body,
name ning that it is not a common body, as other men's bodies be, but that it
is the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, both God and man.


This have I rehearsed of the great clerk and holy bishop Theodoretus, whom
some of the Papists perceiving to make so plainly against them, have defamed,
saying that he was infected with the error of Nestorius.

Here the Papists show their old accustomed nature and condition which is
even in a manifest matter, rather to lie without shame, than to give place unto
the truth, and confess their own error. And although his adversaries falsely
bruted such a fame against him, when he was yet a live, nevertheless he was
purged thereof by the whole Council of Calcedon, about a leven hundred years
ago.

And furthermore in his book which he wrote against heresies, he specially
condemns Nestorius by name. And also all his iij. books of his dialogues
before rehearsed, he wrote chiefly against Nestorius, and was never here in noted
of error this thousand year, but has ever been reputed and taken for an holy
Bishop, a great learned man, and a grave author, until now at this present
time, when the Papists have nothing to answer unto him, they begin in excusing
of them selves, to defame him.

Thus much have I spoken for Theodoretus, which I pray thee be not weary to
read (good reader) but often and with delectation, deliberation, and good
advertisement to read. For it contains plainly and breefly the true
instruction of a Christian man, concerning the matter, which in this book we
treat upon.

First, that our savior Christ in his last supper, when he gave bread and wine
to his apostles (saying: This is my body, This is my blood) it was bread which
he called his body and wine mixed in the cup which he called his blood: so that
he changed the names of the bread and wine (which were the mysteries,
sacraments, fignes, figures, and tokens of Christ's flesh and blood, and
called them by the names of the things, which they did represent and signify,
that is to say, the bread he called by the name of his very flesh, and the wine
by the name of his blood.





These things we ought to remember the reuolue in our minds, and to lift up
our hearts from the bread and wine unto Christ that sits above. And because
we should so do, therefore after the consecration they be no more called bread
and wine, but the body and blood of Christ.





And yet will they constrayne with fire and faggot all men to consent (contrary
to the manifest words of God) to these their errors in this matter of the
holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

First that there remains no bread nor wine after the consecration, but that
Christ's flesh and blood is made of them.

Second, that Christ's body is really, corporally, substantially, sensibly, and
naturally in the bread and wine.

Thirdly, that wicked persons do eat and drink Christ's very body and blood.

Fourthly, that priests offer Christ every day, and make of him a new
sacrifice propiciatory for sin.

Thus for shortness of time I do make an end of Theodoretus, with other old
ancient writers, which do most clearly affirm, that to eat Christ's body and
to drink his blood, be figurative speeches. And so be these sentenses likewise,
which Christ spoke at his supper: This is my body. This is my blood.

Winchester.
The author brings in Theodoret a greek, Theodoretus.
whom to discuss particularly, were long and tedious: one notable place there
is in him, which touches the point of the matter, which place Peter Marter
alleges in greek, and then translateth it into Latin, not exactly as other
have done to the truth, but as he has done, I will write in here. And then
will I write the same translated into english by one yt has translated Peter
Marters book: and then will I add the translation of this author, and finally
the very truth of the Latin, as I will abide by, and ioyn an issue with this
author in it, whereby thou reader shall perceive with what sincerity things be
handled.

Peter Marter has of Theodoret this in Latin, P. Marter
which the same Theodoret in a disputation with an Heritique makes the
catholic man to say. Captus es ijs quae tetenderas retibus. Neque enim post
sancti ficationem, mistica simbola illa propria sua natura egrediuntur, manent
enim in priori sua substantia, and figura, and specie, adeoque and videntur,
and palpantur, quemadmodum and antea. Intelliguntur autem quae facta sunt, and
creduntur, and adorantur tanquam ea existentia, quae creduntur. He that
translateth Peter Marter in english, does express these words thus. Lo thou
art new caught in the same net which thou had set to catch me in. For
those same mystical signs do not depart away out of their own proper nature
after the hallowing of them. For they remain still in their former substance,
and their former shape, and their former kind, and are even as well seen and
felt, as they were before. But the things that are done, are understood, and
are believed, and are worshipped, even as though they were in very deed the
things that are believed. This is the common translation into English of Peter
Marters book translated, which this author does translate after his fashion,
thus. Thou art taken with thine own net,, for the sacramental signs go not
from their own nature after the sanctification, but continue in their former
substance, form and figure, and be seen, and touched as well as before. Yet in
our minds we do consider what they be made, and do repute and esteem them, and
have them in reverence according to the same things, that they be taken for.
Thus is the translation of this author. Mine English of this latin is thus.

Thou art taken with the same nets thou did lay forth. For the mystical
tokens after the sanctification go not away, out of their proper nature. For
they abide in their But they be understood that they be made, and are
believed, and are worshipped, as being the same things, which he believed. This
is my translation, who in the first sentence mean not to vary from the other
translations touching the remain of substance, shape, form, or figure, I will
use all these names. But in the second part where Theodoret speaks of our
belief what the tokens be made, and where he says those tokens be worshipped,
as being the same things, which he believed, thou may see reader how this
author flies the words ( believe) and ( worship) which the common translation
in english does plainly and truly express, how soever the translator swarued
by color of the word ( tanquam) which there, after the greek, signifies the
truth and not the similitude only: like as saint Paul ( Vocat ea quae non
sunt, tanquam sint) which is to make to be indeed, not as though they were. And
the greek is the Adorantur) put by Peter in latin, signifieng adoring, being
the verb in Greek of such signification, as is used to express godly worship
with bowing of the knee. Now reader, what should I say by this author, that
conueieth these two words, of believing, and worshipping, and instead of them,
comes in with reverence, taking, reputing, and esteming, whereof thou may
esteem how this place of Theodoret pinched this author, who could not but see
that adoring of the sacrament signifies the presence of the body of Christ to
be adored, which else were an absurdity: and therefore the author took pain to
ease it with other words of calling, believing, reputing, and esteming, and for
adoration, reverence. Consider what praise this author gives Theodoret, which
praise condemns this author sore. For Theodoret in his doctrine would have us
believe the mystery, Adoration of the sacrament.
and adore the sacrament, where this author after in his doctrine professes
there is nothing to be worshipped at all. If one should now say to me, Yea sir,
but this Theodoret seems to condemn transubstantiation, because he speaks
so of the bread. Thereunto shall be answered when I speak of
transubstantiation, which shallbe after the iij. and iiij. book discussed. For
before the truth of the presence of the substance of Christ's body may appear,
what should we talk of transubstantiation? I will travail no more in
Theodoret, but leave it to thy judgment reader, what credit this author ought
to have that

Canterbury.
THis blader is so puffed up with wind, that it is maruayll it brasteth not.
Bnt be patient a while good reader, and suffer until the blast of wind be
past, and thou shall see a great calm, the bladder broken, and nothing in it
but all vanity.

There is no difference between your translation and mine, saving that mine is
more plain, and gives less occasion of error: and youres (as all your
doings be) is dark and obscure, and contains in it no little provocation to
Idolatry. For the words of Theodoret after your interpretation contain both
a plain untruth, and also manifest idolatry: for the signs and tokens which
he speaks of, be the very fourmes and substances of bread and wine. For the
nominative case to the verb of adoring in Theodoret, is not the body and blood
of Christ, but the mystical tokens by your own translation: which mystical
tokens if you will have to be tanquam or (...) signifies not the truth (as you
say) but is an Vocat ea quae non sunt, tanquam sint. For S. Paul says,
asthough they were. Which indede were not, as he said the next word before (
non sunt) they be not. And nevertheless unto God all things be present: and
those things which in their nature be not yet present, unto God were ever
present, in whom be not these successions of time, before and after: for
Christ the Lamb in his present was slain before the world began: and a
thousand year to his eyes, be but as it were yesterday: Apo. 13. Psalm. 83. 2.
Pet. 3.
and one day before him, is as it were a thousand year, and a thousand year
as one day.

Augustus de doct. Christ. li. 3. cap. 9.
And if you had read and considered a saying of Saint Augustine De doctrina
Christiana lib. 3. cap. 9. you might have understand this place of The odoret
better than you do. He serves under a sign (says Augustine) who works or
worshipeth any sign, not knowing what it signifies. But he that works or
worshipeth a profitable sign ordained of God, the strength and signification
whereof he understands, he worshipeth not that which is seen and is
transitory, but rather that thing, whereto all such signs ought to be referred.
And anon after he says further. At this time when our Lord Jesus Christ is
risen, we have a most manifest argument of our fredome, and be not burdeined
with the heavy yoke of signs, which we understand not: but the Lord and the
teaching of his Apostles has given to us a few signs for many, and those most
ease to be done, most exellent in understanding, and in performing most pure:
as the sacrament of baptism, and the celebration of the body and blood of our
Lord: which every man when he receives, knows whereunto they be referred,
being taught, that he worship not them with a carnal bondage, but rather with
a spiritual fredom. And as it is a vile bondage to follow the letter, and to
take the signs for the things signified by them: so to interpret the signs
to no profit, is an error that shewdly spreads abroad. These words of Saint
Augustine being conferred with the words of Theodoret, may declare plainly
what Theodoretes meaning was. For where he says that we may not worship with a
carnal bondage the visible signs, (meaning of water in baptism, and of bread
and wine in the holy communion) when we receive the same, but rather ought to
worship the things whereunto they be referred, he meant that although those
signs or sacraments, of water, bread and wine ought highly to be esteemed, and
not to be taken as other common water, bakers bread, or wine in the tauern, but
as signs dedicated, consecrated, and referred to an holy use: and by those
erthly things to represent things celestial, yet the very true honor and
worship, ought to be given to ye celestial things, which by ye visible signs
be understand, and not to the visible signs themselves. And nevertheless both
S. Augustine and Theodoret count it a certain kind of worshipping the signs,
the reverent esteming of them above other common and profane things, and yet
ye same principally to be referred to ye celestial things represented by ye
signs: and therefore says S. Augustine ( potius) rathar. And this worship is as
well in ye sacrament of baptism, as in the sacrament of Christ's body and blood.
And therefore although whosoever is baptized unto Christ, or eats his flesh,
and drinks his blood in his holy supper do first honor him, yet is he
corporally and carnally neither in the supper, nor in baptism, but spiritually
and effectually.

Now where you leave the judgment of Theodoret to the reader, even so do I
also, not doubting but the indifferent reader shall soon espy, how little cause
you have so to boast, and blow out your vain glorious words as you do. But
hear now what follows next in my book.

And marvel not, good reader, that Christ at that time spoke in figures,
Chap. 12. Figurative speches be not strange.
when he did institute that sacrament, seeing that it is the nature of all
sacraments to be figures. And although the scripture be full of Schemes,
tropes and figures, yet specially it uses them when it speaks of sacraments.

When the Ark (which represented Gods majesty) was come into the army of the
Isralites, the Philistians said that God was come into the army. And God him
self said by his prophet Nathan, 2. Re. 4. 2. Re. 7.
that from the time that he had brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt,
he dwelled not in howses, but that he was carried about in tents and
tabernacles. And yet was not God him self so carried about, or went in tents,
or tabernacles: but because the arc (which was a figure of God) was so removed
from place to place, he spoke of him self that thing, which was to be
understand of the arc.

Christ himself used figurative speches. Mat. 13.
And Christ him self often times spoke in similitudes, parables, and figures,
as when he said Mat. 11. and 17.
The field is the world, the enemy is the devil, the seed is the word of God
John. 16.
John is Helias John. 6.
I am a vine, and you be the branches John. 15.
I am bread of life Math. 3.
My father is an husband man, and he has his fan in his hand, and will make
clean his flower, and gather the wheat into his barn, but the chafe he will
cast into everlasting fire John. 4.
I have a meat to eat, which you know not John. 6.
Work not meat that perishes, but that indureth unto everlasting life John.
10.
I am a good shepherd Math. 15.
The son of man will set the sheep at his right hand, and the goats at his
left hand John. 10.
I am a door: one of you is the devil John. 6.
Whosoever does my fathers will, he is my brother, sister and mother. Math. 12
And when he said to his mother, and to John, John. 4.
This is thy son, this is thy mother.

Qui biberet ex aqua quam ego dabo. etc. Ibide^. Ego cibu^ habeo manducare que^
vos nescitis.
These with an infinite number of like sentences, Christ spoke in Parables,
Metaphores, tropes, and figures. But chiefly when he spoke of the sacraments,
he used figurative speeches.

Act. 1.
As when in Baptism he said, that we must be baptized with the holy ghost
meaning of spiritual baptism. And like speech used S. John the Baptiste:
saying of Christ, that he should baptize with the holy ghost and fire. And
Christ said, Math. 3.
that we must be borne again or else we can not see the kingdom of God. And
said also: Ioh. 4. John. 4.
Whosoever shall drink of that water which I shall give him, he shall never
be dry again. But the water which I shall give him, shall be made with in him
a well, which shall spring into everlasting life.

Romans 6. Gala. 3.
And S. Paul says, that in baptism we cloth us with Christ, and be buried
with him. This baptism and washing by the fire and the holy ghost, this new
birth, this water that springs in a man, and flows into everlasting life
and this clothing and burial can not be understand of any material baptism,
material washing, material birth, clothing, and burial: but by translation
of things visible, into things invisible, they must be understand spiritually
and figuratively.

After the same sort the mystery of our redemption, and the passion of our
savior Christ upon the cross, as well in the new, as in the old testament,
is expressed and declared by many figures and figurative speeches.

The Pascall Lamb.
As the pure Paschall lamb without spot, signified Christ. The effusion of the
lambs blood, signified the effusion of Christ's blood. And the salvation of
the Children of Israel from temporal death by the lambs blood, signified our
salvation from eternal death by Christ's blood.

And as almighty God passing through Egypt killed all the Egiptians heirs in
every house and left not one alive, and nevertheless he passed by the children
of Isreal's houses, where he saw the Lambs blood upon the doors, and hurted
none of them, but saved them all by the means of the Lambs blood: so likewise
at the last judgment of the whole world, none shall be passed over and saved,
but that shall be found marked with the blood of the most pure and immaculat
lamb Jesus Christ. And for as much as the shedding of that lambs blood was a
token and figure of the shedding of Christ's blood than to come: The Lords
supper.
and for as much also as all the sacraments and figures of the old testament,
ceased and had an end in Christ: least by our great unkindness we should
peradventure be forgetful of the great benefit of Christ, therefore at his
last supper (when he took his leave of his Apostles to depart out of the world)
he did make a new will and testament, wherein he bequethed unto us clean
remission of all our sins, and the everlasting inheritance of heaven. And
the same he confirmed the next day with his own blood and death.

And least we should forget the same, he ordained not a yearly memory (as the
Pascall lamb was eaten but once every year) but a daily remembrance he
ordained thereof in bread and wine, sanctified and dedicated to that purpose
saying: This is my body, This cup is my blood, which is shed for the
remission of sins: Do this in remembrance of me. Math. 26.
Admonishing us by these words, spoken at the making of his last will and
testament, and at his departing out of the world (because they should be the
better remembered) that whenever we do eat the bread in his holy supper; and
drink of that cup, we should remember how much Christ has done for us, and
how he dyed for our sakes. Therefore says S. Paul: As often as ye shall eat
this bread, 1 Cor. 11
and drink the cup, you shall show forth the Lords death until he come.

And forasmuch as this holy bread broken, and the wine divided, do represent
unto us the death of Christ now passed as the killing of the Pascall Lamb did
represent the same yet to come: therefore our savior Christ used the same
manner of speech of bread and wine, as God before used the Paschall Lamb.

For as in the old testament God said: this is the Lords passeby, or passover:
Exodus 12. Math. 26.
even so says Christ in the new Testament, This is my body, This is my blood.
But in the old mystery and sacrament, the Lamb was not the Lords very
Passover or passing by, but it was a figure which represented his passing by:
So likewise in the new Testament the bread and wine be not Christ's very body
and blood, but they be figures, which by Christ's institution be unto the godly
receauers thereof, Sacraments, tokens, significations, and representations of
his very flesh and blood: instructing their faith, that as the bread and wine
feed them corporally, and continue this temporal life, so the very flesh and
blood of Christ feeds them spiritually, and gives everlasting life.

And why should any man think it strange to admit a figure in these speches,
What figurative speeches were used at Christ's last supper. Math 26. Mar. 14.
Luc. 22.
This is my body, This is my blood, seeing that the communication the same
night, by the Papists own confessions, was so full of figurative speeches.
For the Apostles spoke figuratively when they asked Christ, where he would eat
his passover or passeby. And Christ him self used the same figure, when he
said: I have much desired to eat this passover with you.

Also, to eat Christ's body and to drink his blood, I am sure they will not say
that it is taken properly, to eat and drink, as we do eat other meats and
drinks.

And when Christ said: This cup is a new testament in my blood: here in one
sentence be two figures: one in this word, cup, which is not taken for the cup
it self, but for the thing contained in the cup: an other is in this word,
testament: for neither the cup, nor the wine contained in the cup, is Christ's
testament, but is a token, sign, and figure, whereby is represented unto us his
testament, confirmed by his blood.

And if the Papists will say (as they say in deed) that by this cup is neither
me^t the cup, nor the wine contained in the cup, but that thereby is me^t
Christ's blood contained in the cup, yet must they needs grant, that there is a
figure. For Christ's blood is not in proper speech the new testament, but it is
the thing that confirmed the new Testament. And yet by this strange
interpretation, the Papists make a very strange speech, more strange then any
figurative speech is. For this they make the sentence: this blood is a new
Testament in my blood. Which saying is so fond and so far from all reason, that
the foolishnes thereof is evident to every man.

Winchester.
As for the use of figurative speeches to be accustomed in scripture is not
denied. But Philip Melancthon in an epistle to Decolampadius of the sacrament,
Melancthon.
gives one good note of observation in difference between the speeches in gods
ordinances and commandments, and otherwise. For if in the understanding of
Gods ordinances and commandments, The speech in scripture where God
commands or orders is spiritually to be considered.
figures may be often received: truth shall by allegories be shortly subverted
and all our religion reduced to significations. There is no speech so plain
and simple but it has some piece of a figurative speech, but such as
expresses the common plain understanding, Figurative spech by custom made
proper.
and then the common use of the figure causes it to be taken as a common
proper speech. As these speeches, drink up this cup, or eat this dish, is in
deed a figurative speech, but by custom make so common that it is reputed the
plain speech, because if has but one only understanding commonly received.
And when Christ said: This cup is the new testament: the proper speech thereof
in letter, has an absurdity in reason, and faith also. But when Christ said,
this is my body, although

Canterbury.
I See well you would take a dong forke to fight with, rather then you would
lack a weapon. For how highly you have esteemed Melanctho^ in times past, it is
not unknown. But whatsoever Melancthon says or how soever you understand
Melancthon, where is so convenient a place to use figurative speeches, as when
figures and Sacraments be instituted? And S. Augustine gives a plain rule,
how we may know when Gods comma^deme^ts be given in figurative speches, and yet
shall neither the truth be subverted, nor our religion reduced to
significations. And how can it be but that in the understanding of Gods
ordinances and commandments, figures must needs be often received (contrary
to

And these words (This is my body) spoken of the bread, and (This is bread, a
conuersa ad conuertentem, for of the material bread, spoke Christ, those words
by your confession. And why have not these words of Christ (This is my body) an
absurdity both in faith and reason, as well as these words, (This cup is the new
Testament) seeing that these words were spoken by Christ, as well as the other,
and the credit of him is all one whatsoever he says?

But if you will needs understand these words of Christ (This is my body) as
the plain words signify in their proper sense (as in the end you seem to do,
repugning therein to your own former saying) you shall see how far you go,
not only from reason, but also from the true profession of the christian faith.

Christ spoke of bread (say you) This is my body: appoynting by this word
(this) the bread: whereof follows (as I said before) If bread be his body,
that his body is bread: And if his body be bread, it is a creature without
sense and reason, having neither life nor soul: which is horrible of any
christian man to be heard or spoken. Hear now what follows further in my
book.

Now forasmuch as it is plainly declared and manifestly proved, that Christ
called bread his body, and wine his blood, and that these sentences be
figurative speches, and that Christ, as concerning his humanity and bodily
presence, is ascended into heaven with his whole flesh and blood, Cap. 15.
Answer to the authorities and arguments of ye Papists.
and is not here upon earth, and that the substance of bread and wine do
remain still, and be received in the sacrament, and that although they
remain, yet they have changed their names, so that the bread is called Christ's
body, and the wine his blood, and that the cause why their names be changed is
this, yt we should list up our hearts and minds from the things which we se unto
the things which we believe and be above in heaven: whereof ye bread and wine
have the names, although they be not the vey same things in deed: these things
well considered and wayed, all the authorities and arguments, which the Papists
fayn to serve for their purpose, be clean wiped away.

For whether the authors (which they allege) say that we do eat Christ's
flesh and drink his blood, Cap. 14. One brief answer to all.
or that the bread and wine is converted into the substance of his flesh and
blood, or that we be turned into his flesh, or that in the Lords supper we do
receive his very flesh and blood, or that in the bread and wine is received
that which did hang upon the cross, or that Christ has left his flesh with
us, or that Christ is in us and we in him, or that he is whole here and whole
in heaven, or that the same thing is in the Chalice, which flowed out of his
side, or that the same thing is received with out mouth, which is believed with
our faith, or that the bread and wine after the Consecration be the body and
blood of Christ, or that we be nourished with the body and blood of Christ or
that Christ is both gone hence and is still here, or that Christ at his last
supper, bare himself in his own hands.

These and all other like sentences may be understood of Christ's humanity,
literally and carnally, as the words in common spech do properly signifye (for
so does no man eat Christ's flesh, nor drink his blood, nor so is not the
bread and wine after the consecration his flesh and blood, nor so is not his
flesh and blood whole here in earth, eaten with our mouths nor so did not
Christ take, him self in his own hands:) But these and all other like
sentences which declare Christ to be here in earth, and to be eaten and drunken
of Christian people) are to be understood either of his divine nature (whereby
he is every where) or else they must be understood figuratively, or
spiritually. For figuratively he is in the bread and wine, and spiritually he
is in them that worthily eat and drink the bread and wine, but really,
carnally, and corporally he is only in heaven, from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and dead.

This brief answer will suffice for all that the papists can bring for their
purpose, if it be aptly applied. And for, the more evidence hereof, I shall
apply the same to sum such places, as the Papists, think do make most for
the^ that by the answer to those places, the rest may be the more easily
answered unto.

Winchester.
In the lxxiiii, leaf this author goes about to give a general solution to
all that may be said of Christ's being in earth, in heaven, or in the
sacrament: and gives iustructions how these words of Christ's divine nature,
figuratively, spiritually, really, carnally, corporally, may be placed: and
thus he says: Christ in his divine nature may be said Really.
according to the true essence of his godhed: in deed every where? that is to
say, not in fantasy, nor imagination, but verily, truly, and therefore really
as we believe so in deed every where? And when Christ is spiritually in good men
by grace, is not Christ in them really by grace? but in fantasy and
imagination? And therefore what soever this author says, the word really may
not have such restraint to be referred only to heaven, unless the author would
deny that substance of the godhead, which as it comprehends all being
incomprensible, and is every where without limitation of place, so as it is,
truly it is, in deed is, and therefore really is, and therefore of Christ must
be said, wheresoever he is in his divine nature by power or grace, he is there
really, whether we speak of heaven or earth.

Carnally. Corporally.
As for the terms carnally and corporally, as this author seems to use them in
other places of this book, to express the manner of presence of the human
nature in Christ, I marvel by what scripture he shall prove that Christ's body
is so carnally and corporally in heaven. We be assured by faith, grounded upon
the scriptures, of the truth of the being of Christ's flesh and body there, and
the same to be a true flesh and a true body, but yet in such sense as this
author uses the terms carnal and corporal against the sacrament, to imply a
grossenes, he can not so attribute those terms to Christ's body in heaven S,
Augustine after the gross sense of carnally, says: Christ reigns not
carnally in heaven. And Gregory Nazianzen says: August. de ciuita^. dei.
Gregor. Nazianzen. de baptismo.
Although Christ shall come in the last day to judge, so as he shall be seen: yet
there is in him no grossenes, he says, and refers the manner of his being to
his knowledge only. And our resurrection, S. Augustine says, although it
shall be of our true flesh, yet it shall not be carnally. And when this author
had defamed as it were the terms carnally and corporally, as terms of
grossenes, to who^ he used always to put as an aduersatiue, the term
spiritually, as though carnally, and spiritually might not agree in one. Now
for all that he would place them both in heaven

I know these terms carnally and corporally may have a good understanding out
of the mouth of him that had not defamed them with grossenes, or made them
adversaries to spiritual: Now Christ may be said to be corporally and carnally
in heaven.
and a man may say Christ is corporally in heaven, because the truth of his
body is there, and carnally in heaven, because his flesh is truly there, but in
this understanding both the words carnally and corporally, may be coupled with
the word Spiritually, which is against this authors teaching, who appoints
the word spiritually to be spoken of Christ's presence in the man that received
the sacrament worthily which spech I do not disalow, but as Christ is
spiritually in the man that does receive the Sacrament worthily: so is he in
him spiritually before be receive, or else he can not receive worthily, as I
have before said. And by this appears how this author, to frame his general
solution, has used neither of the terms, really, carnally and corporally or
spiritually, in a convenient order, but has in his distribution misused them
notably. For Christ in his divine nature is really every where, Christ is
present in the sacrament as he is in heaven.
and in his human nature is carnally and corporally, as these words signify
substance of the flesh and body, continually in heaven to the day of judgment,
and nevertheless after that signification present in the sacrament also. And in
those terms in that signification the fathers have spoken of the effect of the
eating of Christ in the sacrament, as in the particular solutions to the
authors here

Caunterbury.
ALthough my chief study be to speak so plainly that all men may understand
every thing what I say, yet nothing is plain to him yt will

For what indifferent reader would have gathered of my words, that Christ in
his divine nature is not really in heaven? For I make a disjunctive, wherein I
declare a plain distinction between his divine nature and his human nature.
And of his divine nature I say in the first member of my division, which is in
the beginning of my aforesaid words, that by that nature he is every where. And
all the rest that follows is spoken of his humayne nature whereby he is
carnally and corporally only in heaven.

And as for this word (really) in such a sense as you expound it, Really.
(that is to say, not in phantasy nor imagination, but verily and truly) so I
grant that Christ is really, not only in them that duly receive the sacrament
of the Lords supper, but also in them that duly receive the sacrament of
Baptism, and in all other true christian people at other times when they
receive no sacrament. For all they be the members of Christ's body, and Temples
in whom he truly inhabiteth, although corporally and really, (as the Papists
take that word really) he be only in heaven and not in the sacrament. And
although in them that duly receive the sacrament, he is truly and in deed,
and not by phansy and imagination, and so really (as you understand really) yet
is he not in them corporally, but spiritual^ (as I say) and only after a
spiritual manner as you say.

And as for these words (carnally and corporally) I defame them not, Carnally
and corporally.
for I mean by carnally and corporally none otherwise, than after the form and
fashion of a man's body, as we shall be after our resurrection, that is to say,
visible, palpable, and circumscribed, having a very quantity with due
proportion and distinction of members, in place and order one from an other.
And if you will deny Christ so to be in heaven, I have so plain and manifest
scriptures against you, that I will take you for no christian man, except that
you revoke that error. For sure I am, that Christ's natural body has such a
grossenes, Grossly.
or stature and quantity, if you will so call it, because the word grosenes,
grosely taken, as you understand it, sounds not well in an incoruptible and
immortal body.

Marry as for any other grosenes, as of eating, drinking, and gross avoiding of
the same, with such other like corruptible grosenes, it is for gross heads to
imagine or think either of Christ, or of any body glorified.

Augustinus.
And although S. Augustine may say, that Christ reigns not carnally in heaven,
yet he says plainly, that his body is of such sort, that it is circumscribed
and contained in one place.

Nazianzenus.
And Gregory Nazianzene meant, that Christ should not com at the last judgment
in a corruptible and mortal flesh, as he had before his resurrection, and as
we have in this mortal life, (for such grosenes is not to be attributed to
bodies glorified) but yet shall he come with with such a body, Phil. 3.
that he shall change this vile body, that he may make it like unto his
glorious body. But that we shall have diversity of all members, and a due
proportion of men's natural bodies, the scripture manifestly declares, what
soever you can by a synister gloss gather of Nazianzene to the contrary, that
glorified bodies have no flesh nor grossenes.

But see you not how much this saying of S. Augustine (that our resurrection
shall not be carnally) makes against your self? For if we shall not rise
carnally, then is not Christ risen carnally nor is not in heaven carnally. And
if he be not in heaven, how can he be in the Sacrament carnally, and eaten and
drunken carnally with our mouths, as you say he is? And therefore as for the
terms (carnally, and corporally) it is you that defame the^ by your gross
taking of the^, and not I, that speak of none other grossenes, but of
distinction of the natural and substantial parts, with out the which no man's
body can be perfect.

And whereas here in this process you attribute unto Christ none other presence
in heaven, whether christ be in heaven but after a spiritual manner. An issue.
but spiritual, without all manner of grossenes or carnallity, you will add,
that his flesh and bones also be spiritual things and not carnal. And it is
not without some strange prognosticatio^, that you be now waxed altogether so
spiritual.

Now as concerning the word (figuratively) Figuratively.
what need this any proof

My words be these.

They allege S. Clement, Cap. 15. The answer to Clement. Episto. 2.
whose words be these as they report. The sacraments of Gods secrets are
committed to three degrees: to a Priest, a Deacon, and a minister: which with
fear and trembling ought to kep the leauings of the broken pieces of the Lords
body, that no corruption be found in the holy place, least by negligence great
injury be done to the portion of the Lords body. And by and by follows: So
many hosts must be offered in the altar, as will suffice for the people. And
if any remain, they must not be kept until the morning, but be spent and
consumed of the clearkes, with fear and trembling. And they that consume the
residue of the Lords body, may not by and by take other common meats, least
they should mixte that holy portion, with the meat which is digested by the
belly, and avoided by the fundement. Therefore if the Lords portion be eaten
in the morning, the ministers that consume it, must fast unto six of the
clock: and if they do take it at three or four of the clock, the minister
must fast until the evening.

Thus much writes Clement of this matter: if the Epistle which they allege,
were Clements (as in deed it is not, but they have feigned many things in other
men's names, thereby to stablish their feigned purposes) nevertheless whose soever
the Epistle was, if it be thoroughly considered, it makes much more against
the Papists, then for their purpose. For by the same Epistle appears
evidently three special things against the erroures of the Papists.

The first is, that the bread in the sacrament is called the Lords body: and
the pieces of the broken bread, be called the pieces and fragments of the Lords
body, which can not be understand, but figuratively.

The second is, that the bread ought not to be reserved and hanged up, as the
Papists every where do use.

The third is, that the priests ought not to receive the sacrament alone (as
the Papists commonly do, making a sail thereof unto the people) but they ought
to communicate with the people.

And here is diligently to be noted, that we ought not irreverently and
unadvisedly to approach unto this meat of the Lords table, as we do to other
common meats and drinks, but with great fear and dread, least we should come
to that holy table unworthily, wherein is not only represented, but also
spiritually given unto us very Christ himself.

And therefore we ought to come to that board of the Lord with all reverence
faith, love, and charity, fear and dread, according to the same.

Winchester.
Let us now consider what particular answers this author deuiseth to make to
the fathers of the church: and first what he says to S. Clements Epistle, his
handling where of is worthy to be noted.

First, he says the Epistle is not Cleme^ts but fained (as he says) Clement.
many other things be for their purpose (he says,) which solution is short and
may be sone learned of noughty men, and noughtily applied further as they list.
But this I may say, if this epistle were feigned of the Papists, then do they
show themself fools, that could feign no better but (pams sanctuary) but they
would not help this authors note, and yet for the other matter joined with
them, they would slander an other way. And therefore seeing this author has
left them out, I will go no further then is here alleged.

The calling of bread by enunciation for a name is not material, because it
signifies that was, but in that is here alleged is no mention of bread to
prove the note: and to

So as this speech having a figure, has it of necessity, to avoid the
absurdity, whereby to signify a multitude of bodies, which is not so, and the
sound of the speech christen ears do abhor. But this I ask, where is the
matter of this authors note, that bread is called Christ's body? where there is
no word of bread in the words alleged, and if there were, as there is not,
it were worthy no note at all. For that name is not abhorred, and the
catholic faith teaches that the fraction is in the outward sign, and not in
the body of Christ, inuisibly present, and signified so to be present by that
visible sign. The second note of this author is, touching reserving, which
Clement might seem to deny, because he ordered the remain, to be received of
the clerks, thinking so best: not Justin. apol. 2.
, who testifies a reservation to be sent to them that were sick, who and they
dwell far from the church, as they do in some places, it may by chance in
the way, or trouble in the sick man, tarry till the morning or it be received.
And Cyrill writes expressly, Cyrillus ad Calosyrium. Linnehood wrote a commet of
the constitutions prouinceall of England.
that in case it so does, the mistical benediction Peter Martyr. A marvelous
spech of Peter Martyr unless he be a sacrame^tary and the^ he speaks like
himself.
that words signify more clearly then these signs do, and says further in
his disputation with Chedsay, that we receive the body of Christ no less by
words, then by the Sacramental signs, which teaching if it were true, why
should this Sacrament be trembled at? But because this author notes the
Epistle of Clement to be feigned, I will not make with him any foundation of it,
but note to the reader the third note, gathered by this author of Clementes
words, which is, that Priests ought not to receive alone, which the words of
the epistle prove

And I never red any thing of order in law or ceremony forbidding the people to
communicate with the Priest, but all the old prayers and ceremonies sounded as
the people did communicate with the Priest. And when the people is prepared
for, and then come not, but fearyng and tre^bling forbear to come, that then
the Priest might not receive his part alone, the words of this epistle show
not. And Clement in that he speaks so of leauings, seems to think of that
case of disappointment of the people that should come providing in that case
the clearkes to receive the residue, whereby should appear, if there we no
store of clerks, but only one clearke, as some poor churches have no mo,
then a man might rather make a note of clements mind, that in that case one
Priest

And here I dare therefore join an issue with this author, An issue.
that none of his three fained Mensa, a table does signify in the xvi. of the
arts, and the x. of the Corinth. Act. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
Now if very Christ himself be given in the meat, then is he present in the
meat to be given. So as by this teaching very Christ himself is not only
figuratively in the table, that is to say, the meat of the table, which this
author now calls representing, but is also spiritually given in the table as
these words sound to me. But whether this author will say very Christ himself
is given spiritually in the meat, or by the meat, or with the meat, what
scripture has he to prove that he says, if the words of Christ be only a
figurative spech, and the bread only signify Christ's body? For if

Canterbury.
IT is no maruayle though this Epistle feigned by the Papists many and still
does, acording to S. Paul's saying: 1 Timothy 3.
Evil men and deceivers wax ever worse, both leading other into error, and
erring them selves. For at the first beginning they had no private Masses, no
pardons in purgatory, no reservation of the bread, they knew no masses of Scala
coeli, no Lady psalters, no transubstantiation: but of latter days all these,
and an infinite number of errors besides, were invented and devised without any
aucthority of Gods word. As your self have newly invented a great sort of new
devises contrary to the Papists before your time, as that Christ is in the
sacrament carnally and naturally: that the demonstration was made upon the
bread when Christ said, This is my body: that the word (satisfactorie)
signifies no more, but the Priest to do his duty, with many other things,
which here for shortness of time, I will omit at this present, purposing to
speak of them more hereafter. And the epistles of Clement were feigned before
the Papists had run so far in errors as they be now. For yet at that time was
not invented (as I said) the error of transubstantiation, nor the reservation
of the sacrament, nor the priests did not communicate alone without the
people. But that the said epistle of Clement was feigned, Clements epistles
feigned.
be many most certain arguments. For there be v. epistles of Clement so knit
together, and referring one to an other, that if one be feigned, all must needs
be feigned.

Now neither Eusebius in Ecclesiastica historia, nor S. Hierom, nor Gennadius,
nor any other old writer makes any mention of those epistles, which authors in
rehersing what works Clement wrotte, (not leaving out so much as one epistle
of his) would surely have made some mention of the v. Epistles which the
papists long before our time feigned in his name, if there had been any such in
their time.

Moreover those Epistles make mention, that Clement at James request wrote unto
him the manner of Peter's death, but how could that be, seeing that James was dead
vii. years before Peter? For James died ye vii. year. And Peter the xiiii. year
of Nero the Emperor.

Thirdly, it is contained in the same epistles, that Peter made Clement his
successor, which could not be true, forasmuch as next to Peter succeeded Linus,
as all the histories tell.

Fourthly the author of those Epistles says, that he made the book called
Itenerarium Clementis, which was but feigned in Clements name, as it is declared
did. 15. Sancta. And then it follows likewise of the other Epistles.

Fiftely, the author of those Epistles takes upon him to instruct S. James in
the sacraments, and in all manner fashion how he should use himself in his
vocation, as he should say, yt James (who learned of Christ himself) knew not
how to use himself in the necessary points of Christ's religion, except
Clement must teach him.

Sixthly, there be few things in those epistles, that either be observed at this
day, or were at any time observed since Christ's religion first began.

Seventhly, a great number of scriptures in those Epistles be so far wrasted
from the true sense thereof, that they have an evil opinion of Clement that
think that he would do such injury to Gods word.

Eighthly, those epistles spoke of Palles, and Archdeacons, and other inferior
orders, which is not like that those things began so soon, but (as the
histories) were invented many years after Peter's time.

And finally, in one of those epistles is contained a most pernicious heresy,
that al things ought to be common, and wives also, which could not be the
doctrine of Clement, being the most pestilent error of the Nicholaites, whom
the holy ghost does hate, as he testifies in the Apocalips. Apoc. 2.
.

Now all these things considered, who having either wit or good opinion of the
Apostles and their disciples, can think that they should write any such
epistles?

But the Epistle of S. Clement (say you) speaks not of bread, Clement spoke
of bread.
what

And then forasmuch as he calls the leauings of ye same, the broken pieces of
the Lords body, and the fragments and portion thereof, he calls ye fragments
and portion of the Lords body, he shows that the bread remains, and that
the calling thereof the lords body is a figurative speech. The body of Christ
has no fragments nor broken pieces, and therefore the calling here is so
material, Calling of bread is material.
that it proves fully the matter, that to call bread Christ's body, is a
figurative speech. And although to avoid the matter

And yet in this place of Clement the calling can in no wise signify that was
before consecration, but must needs signify that is after consecration. For
this place speaks of fragments, broken pieces, and leauings, which can have
no true understanding before consecration, at what time there be yet no broken
pieces, fragments, nor leauings, but be all done after consecration.

But you wrangle so much in this matter to avoid absurdities, that you snarle
your self into so many and heinous absurdities, as you shall never be able to
wind your self out. For you say that Christ's body (which in all the hosts,
and in all the parts of the hosts is but one, not broken,

Of reservation
Now as touching the second note: Clement declares expressly, that

And as for Iustine he speaks not one word of sick persons, as you report of
him.

And concerning Cirill ad Calosyrium, would to God that work of Cyrill might
come abroad, (for I doubt not but it would clearly discuss this matter) but I
fear that some Papists will suppress it, that it shall never come to light.
And where you say, that Linehood found fault with

Receiving with fear and trembling.
And as for the receiving of the Sacrament with fear and trembling

Aug. 50. homiliarum hom. 26.
And S. Augustine says, that the Gospel is to be received or heard Interrogo
vos fratres and sorores, dicite mihi: Quid? vobis plus esse videtur, verbum dei
an corpus Christi? Si vere vultis respondere, hoc vtique dicere debetis, quod
non sit minus verbum dei quam corpus Christi. Et ideo quanta solicitudine
obseruamus, quando nobis corpus Christi ministratur, vt nihil ex ipso, de
nostris manibus in terram cadat, tanta solicitudine obseruemus, ne verbum Dei
quod nobis erogatur, dum aliquid aut cogitamus aut loquimur, de cord nostro
pereat: quia non minus reus erit qui verbum Dei negligenter audierit, quam ille
qui corpus Christi in terram cadere sua negligentia permiserit.

I ask this question of you brethren and sisterne (says S. Augustine:) answer
me, Whether you think greater, the word of God, or the body of Christ? If you
will answer the truth, verily you ought to say thus: That the word of God is no
less then the body of Christ. And therefore with what carefullnes we take heed
when the body of Christ is ministered unto us, that no part thereof fall out of
our hands on the earth, with as great carefulnes let us take heed, that the
word of God which is ministered unto us, when we think or speak of vain
matters, perish not out of our hearts. For he that hears the word of God
negligently shall be guilty of no less fault, then he that suffers the body
of Christ to fall upon the ground thorough his negligence. This is the mind of
S. Augustine. And as much we have in Scripture for the reverent hearing and
reading of God his holy word, or the neglecting thereof, as we have for the
sacraments.

But it seems by your pen and vtteraunce of this matter, The causes of fear
and trembling.
that you understand not the ground and cause, whereupon should arise the great
fear and trembling in their hearts, that come to receive ye sacraments: for
you show another consideration thereof, than the scripture does. For you seem
to drive all the cause of fear, to the dignity of ye body of Christ, there
corporally present and received, but ye scripture declares the fear to rise
of the indignity and unworthiness of the receauers. He that eats and drinks
unworthily (threatens Gods word) eats and drinks his own damnation.

And Centurio considering his own unworthiness was abashed to receive Christ
into his house, saying: Math. 8.
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under the covering of my house.
And ye same thing made Peter afraid to be near unto Christ, and to say: Luc. 5.
Go from me O Lord, for I am a sinner. And all Christian men ought not to fear
and tremble only when they receive the sacraments, but when soever they hear
Gods word, and threatninges pronounced against sinners.

Now as concerning the third note, thou shall see plainly good reader, The
people received with ye priests.
that here is nothing here answered directly, but mere cauilations sought,
and shift to avoid. For if all the old prayers and ceremonies

But it apeareth by the words of the Epistle, that the whole multitude of the
people that was present, did communicate at those days, so that the priest
could not communicate alone, except he would communicate when no man was in the
church. But by the answer of this sophister and studious to draw, as it were
by force, all things to his purpose, to make them, at the least, to seem to
make for him, although they be never so much against him. As appears by all
these his suppositions, that all the people which were prepared for, should in
those days withdraw them selves from the communion, and not one of them come
unto it: that the clerks should receive all that was provided for the people:
that one clerk should receive that which many clerks ought to have received.
And so in conclusion by only his feigned suppositions he would persuade, that
the priest should receive all alone.

By such pretty cases, of the people disapoynting the priests: and of lack of
store of clerks, you might daily find cauilations with all godly ordenaunces.
For where as God ordained the pascall lamb to be eaten up clean in every
house: The Paschall Lamb.
and where there were not enough in one house to eat up the Lamb, they should
call of their neighbors so many as should suffice to eat up the hole Lamb,
so yt nothing should remain: Here you might bring in your (upon a chance) that
they that lacked company to eat up a hole Lamb, dwelt alone far from other
houses, and could not come together: or could not get any such Lamb as was
appointed for the feast, or if their neighbors lacked company also. And what
if they had no spitte to roast the lamb? And where as it was commanded, yt
they should be shooed, what if perchance they had no shoes? And if perchance
a man's wife were not at home, and all his servant falled sike of the sweat,
or plague, and no man durst come to his house, then must he turn the spitte
him self, and eat the Lamb all alone? Such chances you purposely devise, to
establishe your private Mass, that the priest may eat all alone. But by such a
like reason as you make here, a man might prove, that the priest should preach
or say mattens to him self alone, in case (as you say) that the people which
should come, would disapoynt him. For what if the people disapoynt the priest
(say you) and come not to ye communion? What if the people disapoynt ye priest
(say I) and come not to mattens nor sermon? shall he therefore say mattens and
preach, when no man is present but him self alone? But your imagined case has
such an absurdity in it, as is not tolerable to be thought to have been in
Christian people in that time, when Clements Epistles were written, that when
all the people should receive the communion with the priest, yet not one would
come, but all would disapoynt him. And yet in that case I doubt not, but the
priest would have absteined from ministration unto more opportunity and more
access of Christian people, as he would have done likewise in saying of
mattens and preaching. Wherefore in your case I might well answer you, (...),
aduersus Iouinianum, lib. 1.
as S. Hierom answered the argument made in the name of the heretic Iouinian,
which might be brought against the commendation of virginity. What if all men
would live virgins, and no man marry? How should then the world be mayntayned?
What if heaven fall, said S. Hierom? What if no man will come to ye church, is
your argument for all that came in those days received the communion. What if
heaven fall say I? For I have not so evil opinion of the holy church in those
days, to think that any such thing could chance among them, that no one would
come, when all ought to have come.

Min^ issue.
bynding me to the bare and only words of Clement, and refusing utterly his
mind. But take the words and the mind together, and I dare adventure an Issue
to pass by any indiferent readers, that I have proved all my three notes.





And although the sacramental tokens be only significations and figures, Bare
significacions.
yet does almighty God effectually work in them yt duly receive his
sacraments, those divine and celestial operations, which he has promised,
and by the sacraments be signified. For else they were vain and unfruitfully
Sacraments, as well to the godly as to the ungodly. And therefore I never said
of the whole supper, that it is but a signification or a bare memory of
Christ's death, but I teach that it is a spiritual refreshing, wherein our
souls be fed and nourished with Christ's very flesh and blood to eternal
life. And therefore bring you forth some place in my book, where I say, that ye
Lords suppper is but a bare signification without any effect or operation of
God in the same, or else eat your words again, and knowledge that you
untruly report me.

But hear what follows further in my book.

Here I pass over Ignatius and Ireneus, Ignatius in episto. ad Ephesianos.
Irenaeus. lib 5. contra Valentin.
which make nothing for the papists opinions, but stand in the commendation of
the holy Communion, and in exhortation of all men to the often and godly
receiving thereof. And yet neither they nor no man else, can extol and commend
the same sufficiently, according to the dignity thereof, if it be godly used as
it ought to be.

Winchester.
This author says he passes over Ignatius and Ireneus, and why? Because they
make nothing (he says) for the Papists purpose. Ignatius. Irenaeus.
With the word papist the author Philip. Melanct
yt he will allege none but such as speak plainly, he alleges Ireneus for
one, as apeareth by his said Epistle to Decolampadius. And he goes about to
answer) a man may evidently see how he masketh him self. And this author
brings in Clementes epistle, of which no great count is made, although it be
not contemned: and passes over Ireneus that speaks evidently in the matter,
and was as old as Clement or not much younger. And because Ignatius was of that
age, and is alleged by Theodorete to have written in his epistle ad
Smirnenses, whereof Theodoret. Dialogo. 3.
whom this author so much commends, the words of Ignatius be these:
Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse carnem seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quae pro peccatis nostris passa
est, quam pater sua benignitate suscitauit. Which words be thus much in
english, they do not admit ( Eucharistias and oblations) because they do not
confess Eucharistiam to be the flesh of our savior Jesus Christ: which flesh
suffered for our sins, which flesh the father by his benignity has stirred
up. These be Ignatius words, which I have not thoroughly englished, because the
word Eucharistia can not be well englished, being a word of mystery, and
signifieng (as Ireneus opens) both the parts of the sacrament, heavenly and
earthly, visible and invisible. But in that Ignatius opens his faith, thus he
takes Eucharistia to be the flesh of our savior Christ that suffered for us,
he declares the sense of Christ's words. This is my body, not to be
figurative only, but to express the truth of the very flesh there given: and
therefore (Ignatius says) Eucharistia, is the flesh of our savior Christ, the
same that suffered and the same that rose again. Which words of Ignatius so
pithely open the matter, as they declare therewith the faith also of Theodoret
that does allege him, so as if the author would make so absolute a work, as
to peruse all the fathers sayings, he should not thus leap over Ignatius, nor
Irene neither, as I have before declared. But this is a color of rethorik
called (Reiection) of that is hard to answer, Slight.
whereby (thou reader) may consider how this matter is handled.

Caunterbury.
IT shall not need to make any further answer to you here as concerning
Ireneus, but only to note one thing, that if any place of Ireneus had

Irene.
And as for the place of Irene alleged by Melancthon in an Epistle,

Why bread is called Christ's body and wine his blood.
But to return to answer Irene clearly and at large, his meaning was this
that as the water in baptism is called Aqua regenerans, ye water that does
regenerate, and yet it does not regenerate indeed, but is the Sacrament of
regeneration wrought by the Holy Ghost, and called so to make it to be esteemed
above other common waters: so Christ confessed ye creatures of bread and wine
joined unto his words in his holy supper, and there truly ministered, to be
his body and blood: meaning thereby, that they ought not to be taken as common
bread, or as bakers bread, and wine drunken in the tauern (as Smyth untruly
gesteth of me throughout his book) but that they ought to be taken for bread
and wine, Smyth.
wherein we give thanks to God, and therefore be called Eucharistia corporis and
sanguinis Domini, the thanking of Christ's body and blood (as Irene terms
them:) or Misteria corporis and sanguinis Domini, the mysteries of Christ's
flesh and blood, as Dionysius calls them: or Sacramenta corporis and
sanguinis Domini, the sacraments of Christ's flesh and blood, as diverse other
authors use to call them. And when Christ called bread and wine his body and
blood, why do the the old Authors change in many places that speech of
Christ, and call them Eucharistia, misteria, and sacramenta corporis and
sanguinis Domini? the thanks giving, the mysteries, and the sacraments of his
flesh and blood? but because they would clearly expound the meaning of
Christ's speech, that when he called the bread and wine his flesh and blood, he
meant to ordain them to be the sacraments of his flesh and blood? According to
such a spech as S. Augustine expresses, how the Sacraments of Christ's flesh
and blood be called his flesh and blood, and yet in deed they be not his flesh
and blood, but the sacraments thereof, signifying unto the godly receivers, that
as they corporally feed of the bread and wine (which comfort their hearts and
continue this corruptible life for a season) so spiritually they feed of
Christ's very flesh, and drink his very blood. And we be in such sort united
unto him that his flesh is made our flesh, his holy spirit vnityng him and us
so together, Ephe. 5. Ephe. 1. and 4. Coloss. 1.
that we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and make all one
mystical body, whereof he is the head and we the members. And as feding,
nourishing, and life comes from the head, and runs into all parts of the
body, so does eternal nourishment and life come from Christ unto us completely
and fully, as well into our bodies as souls. And therefore if Christ our head
be risen again, then shall we that be the members of his body surely rise
also, forasmuch as the members can not be separated from the head: 1. Cor. 15.
but seeing that as he is our head and eternal food, we must needs by him live
with him for ever. This is the argument of Irene against those heriticks which
denied the resurrection of our bodies. And these things the sacraments of bread
and wine declare unto us: but neither the carnal presence, nor the carnal
eating of Christ's flesh makes ye things so to be, nor Irene meant no such
thing. For then should all manner of persons that receive the sacraments, have
everlasting life, and none but they.



And Peter Martyr makes the matter so plain, Peter Martyr.
that he concludes Ireneus words to make directly against the doctrine of the
Papists.

The answer also is easily made to the place which you allege out of
Ignatius, where he calls Eucharistia ye flesh of our savior Jesus Christ.
Eucharistia of his flesh, as even now I declared in mine answer to Irene. And
your long process here may have a short answer gathered of your own words.
This word Eucharistia (say you) can not be well Englished, but the body of
Christ is good and plain English, and then if Eucharistia be such a thing as
cannot be well Englished, it can not be called the body of Christ, but by a
figurative speech. And how can you the^ conclude of Ignatius words, that this
is my body, is no figurative speech? It seems rather yt the clean contrary
may be concluded. For if these. ii. speeches be like and of one sense (
Eucharistia is Christ's body, and this is my body) and the first be a
declaration of the second, is this a good argument? The first is a figure, Ergo
the second is none? Is it not rather to be gathered upon the other side thus?
The first is a declaration of the second and yet the first is a figure, Ergo
the second is also a figure? And that rather then the first: because the
declaration should be a more plain speech then that which is declared by it.

And as for your coulor of Rhetoric which you call Reiectio^, it is so familiar

And yet one thing is necessary to admonish the reader, that Ignatius in this
epistle entreats not of ye manner of the presence of Christ in the sacrament,
but of the manner of his very body, as he was borne of his mother, crucified,
and rose again, appeared unto his Apostles, and ascended into heaven. Which
things diverse heretics said were not done verily in deed, but apparently to
men's sightes, and that in deed he had no such carnal and corporal body, as he
appeared to have. And against such errors speaks ye epistle, and not of the
real and corporal presence of Christ in the sacrament although Eucharistia or
the sacrament be ordained for a remembrance of that very body, and so has the
name of it, as the sacraments have the names of ye things which they signify.
But by this so manifest writhing of the mind of Ignatius from ye true sense and
purpose that was meant, to an other sense and purpose that was not meant, may
appear the truth of the Papists, who wrast and misconstrue all old ancient
writers and holy doctors to their wicked and ungodly purposes. Next in my book
follows mine answer to Dionisius.

The answer to Dionysius de eccles. Hierarch. cap. 3.
Dionysius also, Whom they allege to praise and extol this sacrament (as in
deed it is most worthy, being a sacrament of most high dignity and perfection,
representing unto us our most perfect spiritual conjunction unto Christ, and
our continual nourishing, feeding, comfort, and spiritual life in him,) yet he
never said that the flesh and blood of Christ was in the bread and wine,
really, corporally, sensibly and naturally, (as the Papists would bear us in
hand) but he calls ever the bread and wine signs, pledges, and tokens,
declaring unto the faithful receivers of the same, that they receive Christ
spiritually, and that they spiritually eat his flesh and drink his blood. And
although the bread and wine be figures, signs and tokens of Christ's flesh and
blood (as S. Dionyse calls them, both before the Consecration and after) yet
the Greek annotations upon the same Dionyse do say, that the very things
themselves be above in heaven.

And as the same Dionyse makes nothing for the Papists opinions in this point
of Christ's real and corporal presence: so in diverse other things he makes
quite and clean against them, and that specially in three points, in
Transubstantiation, in reservation of the Sacrament, and in the receiving of
the same by the Priest alone.

Winchester.
Dionysius.
and pleads therewith the form of the words really, corporally,

O great benevolence of God toward us: Chrisostomus de Sacerdo. li. 3.
he that sits above with the father at ye same hour, is holden here with
the hands of all men, and gives himself to them that

Canterbury.


of those words, and would very gladly have them put in silence, and so should
the variance between you and me clearly ended. For if you will confess, that
the body of Christ is not in the sacrament really, corporally, sensibly, and
naturally, then you and I shall shake hands, and be both earnest friends to the
truth.

Really and sensybly be not found in any old author.
And yet one thing you do here confess (which is worthy to be noted and had in
memory) that you read not in any old author, that ye body of Christ Smyth.
that ever Christian man so taught) although some say that it is there really,
some substantially, and some sensibly.

Now as concerning the high mystery which S. Denis speaks of, he declares
the same to be in the marvelous and secret working of God in Holiness in the
sacraments.
but be only tokens, significations, and sacraments of that holiness, which
almighty God by his omnipotent power works in us. And for their holy
significations they have ye name of holiness which almighty god by his
omnipotent power works in us. And for their holy significations they have the
name of holiness, as the water in baptism is called aqua sanctificans: Vnda
regenerans, Halowing or regenerating water, because it is the sacrament of
regeneration, and sanctification.

Christ in our hands.
Now as concerning Chrisostomes saying, that Christ is in our hands, Chrysostom
says (as I have rehearsed in my book) not only that he is in De verbis Domini
sermon. xxxiij. says clean contrary to Chrysostom, Augustinus de verbis
domini sermon. 3.3.
that we touch not Christ with our hands, Non tangi mus Dominum says he. This
speech therefore of Chrysostom declares not ye inward work of God in the
substance of the visible sacrament, but signifies what God works inwardly
in true beleuers.

And whereas you say, that my notes be Descant voluntary without ye Tenor
part, I have named both the book and chapter, where S. Dyonyse

Now follows Tertullian of whom I write thus.

Furthermore they do allege Tertullian that he constantly affirms, The
answer to Tertullianus De resurrectione ca^nis,
that in the sacrament of the alter we do eat the body and drink the blood of
our savior Christ. To whom we grant that our flesh eats and drinks the
bread and wine, which be called the body and blood of Christ because (as
Tertullian says) they do represent his body and blood, although they be not
really the same in very deed. And we grant also, that our souls by faith do
eat his very body and drink his blood, but that is spiritually, sucking out of
the same everlasting life. But we deny that unto this spiritual feeding is
requiring any real and corporal presence.

And therefore this Tertullian speaks nothing against the truth of our
catholic doctrine, but he speaks many things most plainly for us, and
against the Papists, and specially in three points.

First in that he says that Christ called bread his body.

The second, that Christ called it so, because it represents his body.

The third, in that he says, that by these words of Christ, This is my body,
is meant, This is a figure of my body.

Winchester.
Of Tertullian I have spoken before, and so has this author also forgotten
here one notable thing in Tertullian, Tertullianus.
where Tertullian says, that Christ made the bread his

Canterbury.
I Desire no more but that the reader will look upon the place of Tertullian
before mentioned, and see what you speak there, and what is mine answer
thereto, and so confer them together and judge.



is really, sensibly, corporally, naturally, carnally, and substantially
present in the visible forms of bread and wine, seeing that you cannot prove
any one of these your sayings, either by scripture or by ye consent of the
catholic church, but only by the Papisticall church, which now many years
has borne the whole swinge. Now follows Origin, to whom I answer thus.

The answer to Origin Numer. homil. 7.
Moreover they allege for them Origin (because they would seem to have many
ancient authors, favorers of their erronius doctrine) which Origin is most
clearly against them. For although he do say (as they allege) that those
things which before were signified by obscure figures, be now truly, indeed
and in their very nature and kind, accomplished and fulfilled: And for the
declaration in his word, in the sacrament of regeneration, and the sacraments
of bread and wine: Yet Origin meant not, that Christ is corporally either in his
word, or in the water of baptism, or in the bread and wine: nor that we
carnally and corporally be regenerated and borne again, or eat Christ's flesh
and blood. For our regeneration in Christ is spiritual, and our eating and
drinking is a spiritual feeding, which kind of regeneration and feeding
requires no real and corporal presence of Christ, but only his presence in
spirit, grace, and effectual operation.

And that Origin thus meant, that Christ's flesh is a spiritual meat, and his
blood a spiritual drink, and that the eating and drinking of his flesh and
blood may not be understand literally but spiritually, it is manifested by
Origens own words, in his seventh Homily upon the book called Leuiticus: In
Leuit. homil. 7.
where he shows that those words must be understand figuratively, and
whosoever understands them otherwise, they be deceived, and take harm by
their own gross understanding.

Winchester.
Origines.
Origens words be very plain, and meaning also, which speak of manifestation
and exhibition, which be two things to be verified three ways in our religion,
that is to say, in the word, and regeneration, and the sacrament of bread and
wine as this author terms it: which Origin says not so, but thus (the flesh
of the word of God) not meaning in every of these after one sort, but after the
truth of the Scripture in each of them. Origin has ( fact ad faciem) but I
take this author as he alleges Origin.
so as the sacrament of bread and wine should not only signify Christ, that is
to say, preach him, but also exhibit him sensibly, as Origens words be
reported here to be. So as Christ's Errors.
as Christ commanded when he said: Take eat etc. diuersely from the other two
ways, in which by Christ's spirit we be made participant When I say (by his
manhood) I mean corporally as Cyrill speaks.
But in this sacrament we be made participant of his Godhead, by his humanity
exhibit unto us for food, and so in this mystery we receive him man and God,
and in the other by mean of his godhead be participant of the effect of his
passion suffered in his manhod.

In this sacrament Christ's manhood is represented and truly present; whereunto
the godhead is most certainly united, whereby we receive a pledge of the
regeneration of Sensibly.
then is he in the sacrament indede, that is to say, Really: Really.
and then is he there substancially, Substancially
because the substance of the body is there: and is there corporally also,
Corporally.
because the very body is there: and naturally, Naturally.
because the natural body is there, not understanding corporally and naturally
in the manner of presence, nor sensibly neither. For then were the manner of

Caunterbury.


say spiritually, and for so much in one sort, as before you have confessed
your self. And Origene puts no such diversity as you here imagine, but
declares one manner of giving of Christ unto us in his word, in baptism, and
in the Lords supper, that is to say, in all these iii. secundum speciem. That
as unto the Jews Christ was given in figures, so to us he is given in specie,
that is to say, in rei veritate, in his very nature: meaning nothing else, but
that unto the Jews he was promised in figures, and to us after his incarnation
he is married and joined in his proper kind, and in his words and sacraments,
as it were sensibly given.

But how so ever I report Origene, you captiously and very untruly do report
me. For whereas I say, that in Gods word, and in ye sacraments of baptism, and
of the Lords supper, Christ is manifested and exhibited As it were
make a quarrel to this word (sensibly) or rather you make that word (sensibly)
ye foundation of all your weak building, as though there were no difference
between sensibly, and as it were sensibly: and as it were all one thing a man
to lie sleaping, and as he were sleaping: or dead, and as he were dead. Do not
I write thus in my first book, that the washing in the water of baptism, is
as it were a showing of Christ before our eyes, and a sensible touching,
feeling, and groping of him? And do these words import, that we see him and
grope him indede? And further I say, that the eating and drinking of ye
sacramental bread and wine, is as it were a showing of Christ before our eyes,
a smelling of him with our noses, and a feeling and groping of him with our
hands. And do we therefore see him indede with our corporal eyes, smell him
with our noses, and put our hands in his side and feel his wounds? If it were
so indede, I would not add these words, as it were. For what speech were this
of a thing that is in deed, to say, as it were? For these words as it were,
signify that it is not so indede. So now likewise in this place of Origene,
where it is said, that Christ in his words and sacraments is manifested and
exhibited unto us, as it were face to face, and sensibly, it is not meant that
Christ is so exhibited in deed face to face, and sensibly, but the sense is
clean contrary, that he is not there given sensibly nor face to face. Thus it
apeareth how uprightly you handell this matter, and how truly you report my
words. But the further you proceade in your answer, the more you show crafty
iuggeling, legier de Christ's sacraments, but be also blasphemous against the
ineffable unite of Christ's person, separating his divinity from his
humanity. Here may all men of judgment see by experience, how divinity is
handled, when it comes to the discussion of ignorant lawyers. And in all
these Three issues for my part.
I make an issue with you for the price of a faggot. And where you say that our
flesh in the general resurrection shall be spiritual, here I offer a like
issue: An issue.
except you understand a spiritual body to be a sensible and palpable body,
that has all perfect members distinct: which thing in sundry places of your
book, you seem utterly to deny.

The third issue.
that in baptism Christ is not really present, expounding Really present to
signify no more, but to be indede present, yet after a spiritual manner, if
you deny that presence to be in baptism, yet the third faggot I will adventure
with you, for your strange and ungodly doctrine within xx. lines together: who
may in equality of error contend with ye Ualentines, Arrians, or Anabaptists.

Aduerbes in lie.
sensibly really, substancially, corporally, and naturally) you speak so
fondly, unlearnedly, and ignorantly, as they that know you not, might think
that you understood neither grammar, english, nor reason. For who is so
ignorant but he knows that aduerbes that end in (ly) be aduerbes of
quallity, and being added to the verb, they express the manner, form and
fashion how a thing is, and not ye substance of it. As speaking wisely,
learnedly, and plainly, is to speak after such a form and manner as wise men
learned, and plain men do speak. And to do wisely and godly is to do in such
sort and fashion, as wise, and godly men do. And sometime the aduerbe (ly)
signifies the manner of a thing that is indede, and sometime the manner of a
thing that is not. As when a man speaks wisely, that is wise indede. And yet
sometime we say, fools speak wisely, which although they be not wise, yet they
utter some speeches in such sort, as though they were wise. The King we say
uses him self princely in all his doings (who is a prince in deed) but we
say also of an arrogant wilful and proud man, that he uses him self
princely and Imperiousely, although he be neither Prince nor Emperor: and yet
we use so to speak of him, because of the manner, form and fashion of using
him self. And if you answer foolishly and unlearnedly, be you therefore a
fool and unlearned? Nay, but then your au^swers be made in such wise, manner,
sort, and fashion, as you were neither learned nor wise. Or if you send to Rome
or receive private letters from thence, be you therefore a Papist? God is judge
thereof, but yet do you Popishly, that is to say, use such manner and fashion as
the Papists do. But where the form and manner lacks, there the aduerbes of
quality in (ly,) have no place, although the thing be there indede. As when a
wise man speaks not in such a sort, in such a fashion, and wise, as a wise
man should speak: not withstanding that he is wise in deed, yet we say not
that he speaks wisely, 2. Re. 1^.
but foolishly. And the godly King David, did ungodly when he took Bersabe, and
slew Urye her husband, because that manner of doing was not godly. So do all
English men understand by these words sensibly substancially, corporally,
naturally, carnally, spiritually, and such like, the manner and form of being,
and not the thing it self without the said forms and manners. For when Christ
was borne, and rose from death, and wrought miracles, we say not that he did
these things naturally, because the mean and manner was not after a natural
sort, although it was the self same Christ in nature: But we say that he did
eat, drink, sleep, labor, and sweat, talk, and speak naturally, not
because only of his nature, but because the manner and fashion of doing was
such as we use to do. Lu^. 4.
Likewise when Jesus passed through the people, and they saw him not, he was
not then sensibly and visibly among them, their eyes being let in such sort,
that they could not see and perceive him. And so in all the rest of your
aduerbes, the speech admits not to say that Christ is there substancially,
corporally, carnally, and sensibly, where he is not after a substanciall,
corporal, carnal, and sensual form and manner. This the husband man at his
plough, and his wife at her rock is able to judge, and to condemn you in this
point, and so can the boys in the gramer schole, that you speak neither
according to the english tongue, grammar, nor reason, when you say that these
words and aduerbes (sensibly, corporally and naturally) do not signify a
corporal, sensible, and natural manner. I have been here somewhat long and
tedious, but the reader must pardon me: for this subtle and evil devise of
your own brain without ground or authority, contains such absurdities, and
may cast such mistes before men's eyes to blind them that they should not see,
that I am constrained to speak thus much in this matter, and yet more shall
do, if this suffice not. But this one thing I wonder much at, that you being so
much used and accustomed to lie, do not yet know what lie means.

But at length in this matter (when you see none other shift) you be feign

The answer to Cyprian li. 2. epist. 3.
And likewise meant Ciprian, in those places which the adversaries of the truth
allege of him, concerning the true eating of Christ's very flesh and drinking
of his blood. For Ciprian spoke of no gross and carnal eating with the mouth,
but of an inward spiritual and pure eating with heart and mind: which is to
believe in our hearts that his flesh was rent and torn for us upon the cross,
and his blood shed for our redemption: and that the same flesh and blood now
sits at the right hand of the father, making continual intercession for us:
and to imprint and digest this in our minds, putting our whole affiance and
trust in him, as touching our salvation: and offering our selves clearly unto
him, to love and serve him all the days of our life. This is truly,
sincerely, and spiritually to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood.

And this sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, was that oblatio^ which Cipria^
says was figured and signified before it was done, Gen^. ^ Gen^. 14.
by the wine which Noe drank, and by the bread and wine which Melchisedech
gave to Abraham, and by many other figures which S. Cyprian there reherseth.
And now when Christ is come, and has accomplished that sacrifice, the same is
figured, signified, and represe^ted unto us, by that bread and wine, which
faithful people receive daily in the holy communion. Wherein like as with their
mouths carnally they eat the bread and drink the wine, so by their faith
spiritually they eat Christ's very flesh and drink his very blood. And
hereby it apeareth that S. Ciprian clearly affirms the most true doctrine,
and is wholly upon our side.

And against the papists he teaches most plainly, that the Communion ought to
be received of all men under both kinds: and that Christ called bread his
body, and wine his blood: and that there is not transubstantiation (but that
bread remains there as a figure to represent Christ's body, and wine to
represent his blood) and that those which be not the lively members of Christ,
do eat the bread and drink the wine, and be not nourished by them, but the
very flesh and blood of Christ they neither eat nor drink.

Thus have you declared the mind of S. Cyprian.

Winchester.
Cyprianus.
this author makes an exposition of his own devise, which he would have taken
for an answer unto him. Where as Ciprian of all other, like as Melancthon.
whose words in the affirmation of Christ's true presence in the sacrament had
no ambiguitie And like judgment does Hippinus in his book before alleged give
of Cyprianus faith in the sacrament, Hippinus.
which two I allege to counteruayle the judgment of this author, who speaks
of his own head as it likes him, playing with the words, gross, and carnal,
and using the word represent, as though it expressed a figure only. Hippinus in
the said book alleges Cyprian to say, Lib, 3. ad Quirinum that the body of
our Lord Ciprian. li. 3 ad quirinum.
meaning, as Hipinus says, ( Eucharistiam,) wherein S Augustine (as Hippinus
says further) in the prayer for his mother, speaking of the bread and wine of
Eucharistia, says that in it is dispensed the holy host and sacrifice, whereby
was cancelled the byl obligatory that was against us. And further Hippinus
says, that the old men called the bread and wine of our Lords supper, a
sacrifice, an host, and oblation for that specially, because they believed and
taught the true body of Christ and his true blood to be destribute in the bread
and wine of Eucharistia, and as S. Augustine says ad Ianuarium, Augustinus.
to enter in and be received with the mouth of them that eat. These be Hippinus
very words, who because he is I think in this authors opinion taken for no
Papist, I rather speak in his words then in mine own, whom in an other part
of this work, this author does as it were for charity by name sclaunder to be
a Papist. Wherefore the said Hippinus words shall be as I think more weighty to
oppress this authors talk then mine be, and therefore howsoever this author
handles before the words of S. Cyprian ( De unction chrismatis) and the word
(showing,) out of his epistles, yet the same Cyprians faith appears so
certain otherwise, as those places shall need no further answer of me here,
having brought forth the judgment of Hippinus and Melancton how they
understand S. Cyprians faith, which thou reader ought to regard more then
the assertion of this Author, specially when thou have red how he has handled
Hilray, Cyrill, Theophilact, and Damascene, as I shall hereafter touch.

Caunterbury.
WHether I make an exposition of Cyprian by mine own devise, I Melancthon.
Epinus.
and Epinus for succor?

And why do you allege their authority for you, which in no wise you admit
when they be brought against you? But it seems that you be faint hearted in
this matter, and begin to shrink, and like one that refuses the combat, and
finds the shift to put an other in his place, even so it seems you would
draw back your self from the danger, and set me to fight with other men, that
in the mean time you might be an idle looker on. And if you as graund
captain, take them but as mean soldiers to fight in your quarrel, you
shall have little aid at their hands: for their writings declare openly that
they be against you more then me, although in this place you bring them for
your part, and report them to say more, and otherwise then they say indeed.

And as for Cyprian and S. Augustine, here by you alleged, they serve nothing
for your purpose, nor speak nothing against me, by Epinus own judgment. For
Epinus says, that Eucharistia is called a sacrifice, because it is a
remembrance of the true sacrifice, which was offered upon the cross and that in
it is dispensed the very body and blood, yea the very death of Christ, (as he
alleges of S. Augustine in that place) the holy sacrifice whereby he blotted
out and canceled the obligation of death, which was against us, nayling it upon
the cross, and in his own person wanne the victory, and tryumphed against the
princes and powers of darkness. This passion, death, and victory of Christ is
dispe^sed and distributed in ye Lords holy supper, and daily among Christ's holy
people. And yet all this requires no corporal presence of Christ in the
sacrament nor the words of Cypria^ ad Quirinum neither. For if they did, then
was Christ's flesh corporally present in the sacrifice of the old testament
1500. years before he was borne: for of those sacrifices speaks that text
alleged by Cyprian ad Quirinum, Cyprian ad quirinum. cap. 94.
whereof Epinus and you gather these words, that the body of our Lord is our
sacrifice in flesh. And how so ever you wrast Melancthon or Epinus they
condemn clearly your doctrine, that Christ's body is corporally contained
under the forms or accidents of bread and wine.

Next in my book of Hilarious.

But Hylarius (think they) is playnest for them in this matter, whose words
they translate thus.

If the word were made very flesh, and we verily receive the word being flesh,
The answer to Hylarius. S. de trinitare.
in our lords meat, how shall not Christ be thought to dwell naturally in us? Who
being borne man, has taken unto him the nature of our flesh, that can not be
severed, and has put together ye nature of his flesh to the nature of his
eternity under the sacrament of the communion of his flesh unto us. For so we
be all one because the father is in Christ and Christ in us. Wherefore whosoever
will deny the father to be naturally in Christ, he must deny first either
himself to be naturally in Christ, or Christ to be naturally in him. For the
being of the father in Christ and the being of Christ in us, makes us to be
one in them. And therefore if Christ have taken verily the flesh of our body,
and the man that was verily born of the virgin Mary is Christ, and also we
receive under the true mystery the flesh of his body, by means whereof we
shall be one (for the father is in Christ, and Christ in us) how shall that be
called the unity of will, when the natural property, brought to pass by the
Sacrament, is the sacrament of unity?

Thus does the Papists (the adversaries of Gods word and of his truth) allege
the authority of Hilarious (either peruersely and purposely, as it seems,
untruly reciting him and wrasting his words to their purpose) or else not
truly understanding him.

For although he says that Christ is naturally in us, yet he says also that
we be naturally in him. And nevertheless in so saying, he meant not of the
natural and corporal presence of the substance of Christ's body and of ours
(for as our bodies be not after that sort within his body, so is not his body
after that sort within our bodies:) but he meant that Christ in his incarnation
received of us a mortal nature and united the same unto his divinity, and so be
we naturally in him.

And the sacraments of Baptism and of his holy supper (if we rightly use the
same) do most assuredly certify us, that we be partakers of his godly nature,
having given unto us by him, immortality and life everlasting, and so is Christ
naturally in us. And so be we one with Christ, and Christ with us, not only in
will and mind, but also in very natural properties.

And so concludes Hylarius against Arrius, that Christ is one with his father,
not in purpose and will only, but also in very nature.

And as the union between Christ and us in baptism is spiritual, and
requires no real and corporal presence: so likewise our union with Christ in
his holy supper is spiritual, and therefore requires no real and coporall
presence.

And therefore Hilarious speaking thereof, both the sacraments, makes no
difference between our union with Christ in baptism, and our union with him in
his holy supper. And says further, that as Christ is in us, so be we in him,
which the Papists cannot understand corporally and really, except they will
say, that all our bodies be corporally within Christ's body. Thus is Hylarius
answered unto, both plainly and shortly.

Winchester.
This answer to Hylary, in the lxxviii. leaf requires a plain precise
issue, worthy An issue.
because I have Hilary now better correct, which better correction sets
forth more lively the truth then the other did, and therefore that I did
translate was not so much to the advantage of that I aledged Hylary for, as is
that in the book that I have now better correct. Hilaries words in the book
newly corrected be these. Hylarius.
Si enim vere verbum caro factum est, and nos vere Verbum carnem cibo dominico
sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter manner in nobis existimandus est: qui and
naturam carnis nostrae iam inseparabilem sibi homo natus assumpserit, and
naturam carnis suae adnaturam aeternitatis sub sacrame^to nobis communicandae
carnis admiscuit? Itae enim omnes vnum sumus, quia and in Christo pater est,
and Christus in nobis est. Quisquis ergo naturaliter patrem in Christo negabit,
neget prius non naturaliter ille qui ex Maria natu^ fuit Christus est, nosque
vere sub misterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc vnum erimus, quia
pater in co est, and ille in nobis, quomodo voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum
naturalis per Sacramentum proprietas perfect sacramentum si^ vnitatis? My
translation is this. If the word was made verily flesh, and we verily receive
the word being flesh, in our Lords meat, how shall not Christ be thought to
dwell naturally in us: who being borne man, has taken unto him the nature of
our flesh that can not be severed, and has put together the nature of his
flesh to the nature of his eternity, under the Sacrament of the communion of
his flesh unto us, for so we be all one, because the father is in Christ, and
Christ in us. Wherefore whosoever will deny the father to be naturally in
Christ, must deny first either himself to be naturally in Christ, or Christ
not to be naturally in him, for the being of the father in Christ and the being
of Christ in us, makes us to be one in them. And therefore if Christ has taken
verily the flesh of our body, and the man that was born of the virgin Mary is
verily Christ, and allow verily receive under a mystery the flesh of his body,
by means whereof we shall be one, for the father is in Christ, and Christ in us:
how shall that be called the unity of will, when the natural propriety brought
to pass by the Sacrament, is the Sacrament of perfect unity?

This translation differs from mine other, whereat this author finds fault,
but wherein? the word ( Vero) was in the other copy an adjective, and I joined
it with ( Misterio) and therefore said the true mystery: which word (mystery)
needed no such adjective (true), for every mystery is true of it self. But to
say, as Hilary truly correct says, that we receive under the mystery, truly,
the flesh of Christ's body, that word (truly,) so placed, sets forth lively
the real presence, and substantial presence, of that is received, (Perfectae)
which (Perfecta) and so was joined to (Proprietas) which now in the genetiue
case joined to (Vnitatis) gives an excellent sense to the dignity of the
Sacrament, how the natural propriety by the Sacrrament, is a Sacrament of
perfect unity, so as the perfect unity of us with Christ, An issue.
is to have his flesh in us and to have Christ bodily and naturally dwelling in
us by his manhood, as he dwells in us spiritually by his Godhead:

And so I join now with this author an Issue, that I have not peruersely used
the allegation de Trinitate, entreats how many diverse ways we be Unity in
faith. Unity in baptism.
where he handles the matter above some capacities, and because there is but
one Baptism, and all that be baptized be so regenerate in one dispensation,
and do the same thing, and be one in one, they that be one by the same thing,
be, as he says, in nature one. From that unity in Baptism he comes to
declare our unity with Christ in flesh, Unity in flesh.
which he calls ye Sacrament of perfect unity, declaring how it is when
Christ, who took truly our flesh mortal, in the vyrgins womb, delivers us
the same flesh glorified truly to be communicate with our flesh, whereby as we
be naturally in Christ, so Christ is naturally in us: and when this is brought
to pass, then the unity between Christ and us is perfected. For as Christ is
naturally in the father of the same essence, by the divine nature: So we be
naturally in Christ by our natural flesh, which he took in the virgins womb,
and he naturally in us, by the same flesh in him glorified, and given to us,
and received of us in the Sacrament For Hilarie says in plain words, Hylarius.
how Christ's very flesh, and Christ's very blood received and drunken (Accepta
and hausta) bring this to pas. And it is notable how Hilarie compares together
ye (truly) in Christ's taking of our flesh in the virgins womb, with the
(truly) of our taking of his flesh (In cibo dominica) in our Lords meat: by
which words, he expresses the Sacrament, and after reproves those that said:
we were only united by obedience and will of religion to Christ, and by him so
to the Father, as though by the Sacrament of flesh and blood, no propriety of
natural communion were given unto us: whereas both by the honor given unto
us, we be the sons of God, and by the son dwelling carnally in us, and we
being corporally and inseparably unite in him, the mystery of true and natural
unity is to be preached. These be Hilaries words: for this latter part, where
thou hear reader, the son of God to dwell carnally in us, not after man's
gross imagination, for we may not so think of Godly mysteries, but (carnally)
is referred to the truth of Christ's flesh, Carnally.
given to us in this Sacrament: and so is (naturally) to be understood,
Naturally.
that we receive Christ's natural flesh, for the truth of it, as Christ
received our naurall flesh of the virgin, although we receive Christ's flesh
glorified incorruptible, very spiritual, and in a spiritual manner delivered
unto us. Here is mention made of the word (corporal) but I shall speak of
that in the discussio^ of Cyrill. This Hylary was before S. Augustine, and was
known both of him and S. Tubam latini eloquij) against the Arrians. Never man
found An issue.
yt in Hylary the matter is so plain otherwise then this author rehearses, as
it has no coulor of defense to the contrary. And what Hylary speaks of
Baptism and our unity therein, I have before touched, and this unity in flesh
is after treated apart.

What shall I say to this so manifest untruth? but that it confirms that I
have in other observed, how there was never one of them that I have red writing
against the Sacrament, but has in his writings said somewhat so evidently in
the matter, or out of the matter discrepant from truth, as might be a certain
mark to judge the quality of his spirit.

Canterbury.
Hylarius. Marry it might be that you had from Smyth a false copy written,
Smyth.
who informed me, that you had of him all the authorityes that be in your
book. And having all the authorities that he had with great travel gathered,
by and by you made your book, and stale from him all his thanck and glory,
like unto Esops choughe, which plumed himself with other birds feathers. But
whersoeuer you had your copy all the books setforth by public faith have
otherwise, then you have cited. And although the false allegatio^ of Hylary
touches you somewhat yet chiefly it touches Smyth, who has erred much worse
in his translation then you have done, albeit nether of you both handle the
matter sincerely and faithfully, nor agree the one with the other.

Quisquis ergo naturaliter patrem in Christo negabit, negit prius naturaliter
vel se in Christo, vel Christum sibi inesse) one false print for ( naturaliter)
has ( non naturaliter) it seems that you chanced upon that false print. Non
naturaliter
For if you have found Hilary truly corrected (as you say you have) your fault
is the more, that out of a true copy would pick out an untrue translation. And
if you have so done, then by putting in a little pretty (not) where none ought
to be, with that little prity trip you have clean overthrown your self. For
if it be an error to deny that Christ is not naturally in us, (as it his
rehearsed for an error) then must it be an error to affirm that Christ is
naturally in us. For it is all one thing, that he is not, and to affirm that
he is naturally in us. And so by your own translation you overthrow your self
quite and clean, in that you say in many places of your book, that Christ is
naturally in us, and ground your saying upon Hylarie. Whereas now by your own
translation, Hylary rejects that clearly as an heinous error.

Truly.
And as concerning this word (truly) it fetteth not lively forth a real and
substanciall presence (as you say it does) for Christ is truly in all his
faithful

Perfecta.
And as concerning the word ( perfecta or peafectae) in the print, which I

But for the perfectnes of the unity between Christ and us, you declare

Mine issue.
And although you have excused your peruersity by your false copy, yet here I
will join an issue with you, that you did neither aleage Hylaries John. 14.
John. 5. John. 6.
For as Christ being in his father, and his father in him, has life of his
father so he being in us, and we in him, gives unto us the nature of his
eternity, which he received of his father, that is to say, immortality and life
everlasting, which is the nature of his Godhead. And so have we the Father and
ye Son dwelling in us naturally, Naturally.
and we in them, forasmuch as he gives to us the nature of his eternity,
which he had of his father, and honors us with yt honors us with that
houour which he had of his father. But Christ gives not this nature of
eternity to the Sacrament, except you will say that the sacrament shall have
everlasting life, as you must needs say, if Christ dwell naturally in it,
after Hylaries manner of reasoning. For by the saying of Hylary, where Christ
dwells, there dwells his father, and gives eternal life by his son.

And so be you a goodly savior, that can bring to everlasting life both bread,
and drink, which never had life. But as this nature of eternity is not given
to the sacrament: so is it not given to them that unworthily receive the
sacrament, which eat and drink their own damnation. Nor it is not given to the
lively members of Christ, only when they receive the sacrament, but so long as
they spiritually feed upon Christ, eating his flesh and drinking his blood,
either in this life, or in the life to come. For so long have they Christ
naturally dwelling in them, and they in him. And as the Father naturally
dwells in Christ, so by Christ does he naturally dwell in us.

And this is Hylaries mind, to tell how Christ and his father dwell naturally in
his faithful members, and what unity we have with them (yt is to say, an unity
of nature, and not of will only) and not to tell how christ dwells in the
sacrament, or in them that unworthily receive it, that he dwells in them at
that time only, when they receive the sacrament.

Thus is plainly declared Hylaries mind, who meant nothing less the^ (as you
say) to entreat how many diverse ways we be one in Christ, but only to entreat
and prove that we be naturally in Christ, and Christ in us. And this one thing
he proves by our faith, and by the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the Lords
supper, and still he says as well that we be naturally and corporally in him,
as that he is naturally in us.

And where you speak of the unity in baptism, and say that Hylarius (because
there is but one Baptism, and all that be baptized be so regenerate in one
dispensation, and do the same thing, and be one in one, they that be one by the
same thing, be as he says, in nature one) and what that one thing is which
they do that be baptized, I think no man can tell, except you read the riddle
your self.

And now to your issue. If you can show of the words of Hylary in this place,
that Christ is naturally in the Sacraments of bread and wine, or in wicked
persons, or in godly persons only when they receive ye sacrament then will I
confess the issue to pass upon your side, that you have declared this Author
truly, and that he makes most clearly for you against me. And if you can not
show this by Hylaries words, then must you hold up your hand and say, Guilty.

And yet furthermore when Hylary says yt we be naturally in Christ, he means
not that our bodies be contained within the compass of his body, but that we
receive his natural eternity. And so likewise when he says that Christ
dwells naturally and carnally in us, he means not that his body is
contained corporally within the compase of our mouths or bodies, (which you
must prove by his plain words, if you will justify your issue, that he
speaks most clearly for you) but he means that Christ communicates and
gives unto us the nature of his eternity or everlasting life. And he dwells
in us by his incarnation, as S. John says: John. 1.
Verbum caro factum est, and habit auit in nobis, the word was made flesh and
dwelled in us. And as he may be said to dwell in us by receiving of our
mortal nature, so may we be said to dwell in him by receiving the nature of
his immortality. And never man found fault (as you truly say)

And when I said that Christ is in us naturally by his godhead, I forgatte 2.
Pet. 1.
And so be we one in the father, in the son, and in the holy ghost.

And where you say, that we receive Christ in the sacrament of his flesh and
blood, if we receive him worthily: here you have given good

And where you bid me trust him no more that told me, that Hilary Mine Issue.
the union is natural, and not in will only. And if you will say the
contrary, I must tell you the french answer that you would tell me. And herein
I will not refuse your issue.

Now come we to Ciril, of whom I write as follows.

The answer to Cyrillus. lib. 10. cap. 13.
And this answer to Hilarious will serve also unto Ciril, whom they allege to
speak after the same sort that Hilarious does, that Christ is naturally in us.
The words which the recite, be these. We deny not (says Cyril, against the
heretic) but we be spiritually joined to Christ by faith and sincere charity:
but that we should have no manner of conjunction in our flesh with Christ, that
we utterly deny, and think it utterly discrepant from Gods holy scriptures.
For who doubts, but Christ is so the vine tree, and we so the branches, as we
get thence our life. Hear what S. Paul says. We be all one body with Christ,
for though we be many, we be in one in him. All we participate in one food.
Thinks this heretic that we know not the strength and virtue of the
mystical benediction? which when it is made in us, does it not make Christ by
communication of his flesh to dwell corporally in us? Why be the members of
faithful men's bodies called the members of Christ? Know you not (says S.
Paul) that your members be the members of Christ? 1. Cor. 6.
And shall I make the members of Christ, parts of the whores body? God forbid.
And our savior also says: He that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood,
dwells in me: John. 6.
and I in him.

Although in these words Cyrill does say that Christ does dwell corporally in
us, when we receive the mystical benediction, yet he neither says that Christ
dwells corporally in the bread, nor that he dwells in us corporally only at
such times as we receive the sacrament, nor that he dwells in us, and not we
in him, but he says as well, that we dwell in him, as that he dwells in us.
Which dwelling is neither corporal nor local, but an heavenly, spiritual and
supernatural dwelling, whereby so long as we dwell in him and he in us, we have
by him everlasting life. John. 15.
And therefore Cyril says in the same place, that Christ is the vine, and we
the branches, because that by him we have life. For as the branches receive
life and nourishment of the body of the vine, so receive we by him the natural
property of his body, which is life and immortality, and by that means we
being his members, do live and are spiritually nourished.

And this meant Cirill by this word Corporally, when he says, that Christ
dwells corporally in us. And the same meant also S. Hilarious by this word
Naturally, Colo. 2.
when he said, that Christ dwells naturally in us. And as S. Paul, when he
said that in Christ dwells the full divinity Corporally, by this word
Corporally, he meant not that the divinity is a body, and so by that body
dwells bodily in Christ. But by this word Corporally, he meant, that the
divinity is not in Christ, accidentally, lightly and slenderly, but
substancially and perfectly with all his might and power: so that Christ was
not only a mortal man to suffer for us, but also he was immortal God able to
redeem us.

So S. Ciril, when he said that Christ is in us Corporally, he meant that we
have him in us, not lightly and to small effect and purpose, but that we have
him in us substancially, pithely and effectually, in such wise that we have by
him redemption and everlasting life.

And this I suck not out of mine own singers, In Ihon lib. 4. cap. 17.
but have it of Cirils own express words, where he says: A little
benediction draws the whole man to God, and fills him with his grace, and
after this manner Christ dwells in us, and we in Christ.

But as for corporal eating and drinking with our mouths, and digesting with
our bodies, Cirill never meant that Christ does so dwell in us, as he plainly
declares.

Our sacrament (says he) does not affirm the eating of a man, drawing
wickedly christen people to have gross imaginations and carnal fantasies of
such things as be fine and pure, Anathematismo 11.
and received only with a sincere faith. In Iho. li. 4. c. 17.
But as two waxes, that be molten and put together, they close so in one, that
every part of the one, is joined to every part of the other, even so (says
Cirill) he that receaueth the flesh and blood of the Lord, must needs be so
joined with Christ, that Christ must be in him, and he in Christ.

By these words of Cirill appears his mind plainly, that we may not grossly
and rudely think of the eating of Christ with our mouths, but with our faith,
by which eating (although he be absent hence bodily, and be in the eternal
life and glory with his father) yet we be made partakers of his nature, to be
immortal, and have eternal life and glory with him.

And thus is declared the mind as well of Cirill as of Hilarious.

Winchester.
Cirill.
The author says, such answer as he made to Hilary will serve for Cyrill: and
indeed (Corporaliter) in S. Paul, applied to the dwelling of the divinity in
Christ, and yet not content therewith, makes further search, and would gladly
have somewhat to confirm his phansy out of Cirill him self, and seeks in
Cirill where it is not to be found, and seeks not where it is to be found.
For Cirill tells him self plainly, what he means by the word (corporally)
which place and this author had found, be might have spared a great many of
words uttered by divination, but then the truth of that place hinders and
quayleth in manner all the book. I will at my peril bring forth Cirils own
words truly upon the seuententh chapter of S. John.

Lege Cuillum in Io. li. 9. c. 47.
Corporaliter filius per benedictionem misticam nobis vt homo vnitur,
spiritualiter autem Which be in English thus much to say. The son is unite as
man corporally to us by the mystical benediction, spiritually as god. These be
Cirils words, who names the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ the
mystical benediction land shows in this sentence, how him self
understands the words corporally and spiritually, That is to say, when
Christ unites him self to us as man, which he does giving

These words be by Decolampadius translated in this wise. Nonne igitur ^um qui
videtur filium and Christum, alium a deo verbo, qui ex deo esse affirmant, cui
apostolatus functio tributa sit? Non enim sacramentum nostrum hominis
manducationem asserit mentes credentium ad crassas cogitationes irreligiose
introtrudens, and humanis cogitationibus subijcere enitens, ea qua sola, and
pura, and inexquisita fide capiuntur. This is Decolampadius translation of the
Greek, as the same is by Decolampadius alleged. Which compared with the
Greek and the congruite and phrase of the Greek tongue considered, does
plainly open a corruption in the Greek text. First in the word (...) which
should be a participle in the singular number (...), as (...), and (...), all
which participles depend of the third person reproved of Cirill, and nominative
case to the verb (...) which has the nown (...), his accusative case: for
congruity will not suffer (...) to be the nominative case, as Decolampadius
makes it: because (...) and (...) should then depend on it, which be the
masculine gender, and (...) the neuter: and besides that the sense has so no
good reason, to attribute assertion to the mystery by the way of declaration,
the mystery of nature secret has need of declaration, and makes none but
hides rather: and the mystery cannot declare properly that should lead or
subdue men to vain imagination. But Cirill intending to reprove the conclution
of him that attributes to that is seen in Christ (the nature meaning, the
person of his humanity) the office of the apostle, and so thereby seems to make
in Christ two several persons, esteming that is seen an other son from the
second person, shows how that man so (...).
concluding does affirm an absurdity. That is to say, (...).
declares that mystery of our (humanam commixtionem) for so has the public
translation and not (...) which should signify eating of a man, as
Decolampadius would have it, and cannot with this construction to make (...)
the accusative case have any sense, and then that man so concluding, may be
said therewith (...).
lea^ing the mind of them that believe, into slender and dark imaginations or
thoughts, and so (...).
going about to bring under man's reasonings such things as be taken or
understood by an only simple bare, and no curious faith. And this is uttered
by Cirill by interogation: (...), which continues unto the last word of all
that is here written in Greek, ending in the word (...). But Decolampadius to
frame these words to his purpose, corrupts the participle (...), and makes
it, (...), whereby he might cut of the interrogatiue, and then is he yet feign
to ad evidently that is not in the Greek, a copulative causal (enim) and then
when (...) is by the cutting of the interrogation and the addition of (enim)
made the nominative case, then can not (...) and (...) depend of it, because of
the gender and (...), because of the article determines the principal mystery
in Christ's person, and after public translation it should seem the Greek
word was not (...), but (...) which in the public translation is expressed
with these two words humanam comm^xtionem. This one place, and there were no
mo^ like, may show with what conscience Decolampadius handeled the matter of
the sacrament: who was learned in the Greek tongue, much exercised in
translations, and had once written a grammar of the Greek, and yet in this
place abuses himself and the reader in perverting Cirill against all
congruites of the speech, against the proper significations of the words,
against the convenient connection of the matter, with deprauation of the
phrase, and corruption of certain words, all against the common and public
translation, and when he has done all this, concludes in the end that he has
translated the greek faithfully, when there is by him used no good faith at
all, but credit and estimation of learning by him abused, to deceive well
meaning simplicity, and serves for some defense to such as be bold to use and
follow his authority in this matter. As the author of the book seems to have
followed him herin, for else the public autentique translations which be
abroad, as I said of the printes of Basil and Colon have no such matter, and
therefore the fault of the author is to leave public truth and search matter
whispered in corners. But thus much must be granted, though in the principal
matter, that in the mystery of the sacrament we must exclude all grosen^s and
naturally, and carnally as Hilary says. And with this true understanding,
after the simplicity of a Christian faith, which was in these fathers, Hilary
and Cirill, the contention of these three envious words, in gross capacities
grossly taken, natural, carnal and corporal, which carnality has
engendered, might soon be much assuaged, and this author also considering with
him self, how much he has been ouerseen in the understanding of them, and the
speciality in this place of him self, and Decolampadius, might take occasion
to repent and call home himself, who wonderfully wandreth in this matter of
the sacrament, and having lost his right way, breaks up hedges, and leapeth
over diches, with a wondrous travail to go whether he would not, being

Caunterbury.
I Said very truly, when I said that such answer as I made to Hilary

Corporally.
Now whereas I have truly expounded this word (corporally) in Cirill, was in
deed, after he had a little inkling that it was a special friend of his that
killed the dear, and then being loath to find the suit, he plucked back his
hound, being in the right way, and appointed him to hunt in an other place
where the game was not: and so deceived all them that followed him, as you
would here do to as many as will follow you. For you promise to bring the
reader to a place, where he shall find the meaning of this word (corporally)
and when he comes to the place where you appoint, the word is spoken of
there, but the meaning thereof is not declared, neither by you nor by Cirill, in
that place: And so the reader by your fair promise is brought from the place,
where the game is truly in deed, and brought to an other place, where he is
utterly disapoynted of that he sought for.



Nevertheless Cirill means no more by these words, but that Christ is
united unto us two manner of ways, by his body and by his spirit. And he is
also a band and knot to bynd and join us to his father, being knit in nature
unto both, to us as a natural man, and to his father as natural God, and
himself knitting us and God his father together.

And although Cirill say, Cirill. in Ioh. li. 9 c. vlt. ita ego naturaliter
p^e^sum quia ex ipso natus, vos autem ex me, and ego in vobis etiam
naturaliter. ea ratione qua homo factus sum.
that Christ is united unto us corporally by the mistical benedictio^ yet in yt
place ye material benedictio^ may well be understand of his incarnation, which
as Cirill and Hilary both call an hye mystery so was it to us a marvelous
benedictio^, that he that was immortal God would become for us a mortal man:
which mystery S. Paul says was without controuersye great, and was hid from
the world, and at the last opened, that Gentiles should be made partakers of the
promises in Christ, which by his flesh came down unto us. 1. Tim. 3. Ephe. 3.


But to give you all the advantage that may be, I will grant for your
pleasure, that by the mystical benediction Cirill understood the sacrament of
Christ's flesh and blood (as you say) and that Christ is thereby united
corporally, unto us. Yet says not Cirill that this unity is only when we
receive ye sacrament, nor exte^deth to all that receive ye sacrament, but unto
the^ yt being renewed to a new life, be made partakers of the divine nature,
which nature Cirill himself upon ye vi. chapter of John, declares to be
life. But he speaks not one word of ye corporal presence of Christ in the
fourmes of bread and wine, nor no more does Hilary. And therefore I may well
approve that I said, that the answer made unto Hilary, will very well also
serve for Cirill. And yet neither of them both has one word, that serves for
your purpose, that Christ's flesh and blood should be in the sacrament under
the forms of bread and wine.

be not united corporally unto Christ, nor eat his flesh, nor drink his
blood, which is the plain mind both of Hilary and also of Cirill, and directly
with ye state of my fourth book, and against your answer to the same.

And here you pretending to declare again what is meant by this word

And where you say that I allege Cirill to deny in words the eating

And to make the matter plain (which it seems you yet understand not) I shall
shortly rehearse, as well the argument of Nestorius, as the answer of Cirill.
Nestorius the heretic said, Nestorius.
that Christ was but a pure man, and not God, and that he had but a common body
such as other men have, whereunto the Godhead was only assistant, as it is to
other men. And to prove the same, he alleged Christ's own words, when he
said, He that eats my flesh etc. and he that eats me, and as ye living
father sent me. Ihon. 6.
And forasmuch as Christ said, that he had flesh, and was eaten and sent, and
God cannot be eaten nor sent (said Nestorius) therefore concluded he, that
Christ was not God, but man, whose flesh might be eaten and sent: whose gross
argumentation Cirill confuting says, that by his rude reasoning of eating, he
draws men's minds wickedly to phansy of the eating of man's flesh (meaning of
the eating thereof with tooth and mouth) and so to imagine carnally and grosely
such things, of Christ, as be understand to be done with an only and pure
faith. And as Nestorius made his argument of the eating of man's flesh, even so
did Cirill make his answer of the eating of the same, and not of the commixtion
thereof. For unto what purpose should commixtion serve in that place and
whereunto should Christ's body be commixted? Or why should Cirill charge
Nestorius with co^mixtion in Christ, seeing that he was charged with the clean
contrary (as you say) that he separated the natures in Christ, and did not
confound and commixt them? And furthermore, if Nestorius had made his argument
of the eating, and Cirill had made his answer of the commixtion, they had
fowghten Andabatarum more (as the proverb says) like two blind men, that when
the one strikes in one place, the other holds up his buckler to defend in an
other place. Therefore may all men judge, that have any judgment at all, how
unjustly you judge and condemn that godly and excellent learned man.
Decolampadius for this word (...), which you say would be (...), which word in
Greek I think was never read, nor has in that place neither sense nor
reason. And what an heady and intolerable arrogance is this of you, of your
own vain coniecturing to alter the Greek text without any Greek copy to
ground your self upon altering (...) into (...), and (...) into (...) contrary
to the translations of Decolampadius and Musculus, not whispred in corners, (as
you with your railing words would defame the matter) but published abroad to
the world. And at the end you conclude altogether with interrogation, contrary
to the two translations which your self do allege, being printed the one at
Basil, and the other at Colen. And you using such a license to alter and
change all things at your pleasure, are offended with Decola^padius for
changing of any case, gender, number, verb or participle, yea for one tittell
or prick of interrogation, which liberty has ever been suffered in all
interpretours, so they went not from the true sense. But you can spy a little
mote in another man's eye, that can not see a great block in your own.

Nevertheless if I should divine without the book (as you do) I would rather
think that (...) should be (...) (for such small errors in one letter, be
easily committed in the printing) and than concluding with an Interrogation (as
you would have it) the sense of the Greek should be this in English. Does not
Nestorius affirm, that he who was seen and sent, is an other son and Christ
beside the word which is God of God? does not he say, that our sacrament is the
eating of a man, irreverently leading faithful minds unto vain and gross
imaginations? and going about to compass with man's phantasy those things,
which be received only with a pure and simple faith? Where Cirill in these
words reproves Nestorius, in that he said, that our sacrament is the eating
of a man. Does not he himself affirm the contrary, that our sacrament is not
the eating of a man, as I said in my book? For else why should he reprehend
Nestorius for saying the contrary? And does not Cirill say also, that this
sacrament is received only with a pure and simple faith? And yet you find
fault with me, because I say, that Cirill affirms the receiving in this
sacrament to be only by faith, which, your saying being so manifest contrary
to Cirills words, I refer me to the judgment of all indifferent readers,
what trust is to be given to you in this matter. And as for Decolampadius if
the Printer in the steed of (...) made (...) and for (...) printed (...) (which
may soon chance in printing) tha^ may (...) be ye nominative case,
notwithstanding all your vehement inueying and vain babbling against
Decola^padius.



And here you begin to smacke of some true understanding, when you say that
Christ dwells in them that worthily receive the sacrament, so that you would
add thereto, that he dwells not only in them when they receive the
sacrament, but whenever by a lively faith, they spiritually eat his flesh
and drink his blood.

And where you say, that by the variety of my doctrine it appears that

And in these ii. authors Hilary and Cirill, you vary three times from your
answer unto my iiii. book. For here you say no more, but that Christ is
corporally in them that receive the sacrament worthily: and in the answer to
my iiii. book you say, that he is corporally in all them that receive the
sacrament, whether it be worthily or unworthily. Now follows thus in my book.

Basilius. Nissenus and Nazianzenus.
And here may be well enough passed over Basilius, Gregorius Nissenus, and
Gregorius Nazianzenus, partly because they speak little of this matter, and
partly because they may be easily a^swered unto, by that which is before
declared and often repeted, which is, that a figure has the name of the thing
whereof it is the figure and therefore of the figure may be spoken the same thing
that may be spoken of the thing it self. And as concerning the eating of
Christ's flesh and drincking of his blood, they spoke of the spiritual eating
and drincking thereof by faith, and not of corporal eating and drincking with
the mouth and teeth.

Winchester.
Basilius. Grego. Nissenus. Grego. Nazianzenus. Messaliani heretici.
As for Basil, Gregory Nissen, and Gregory Nazianzen, this author says they
speak little of this matter, and indeed they spoke not so much as other do,
but that they speak is not discrepant, nor contrarieth not that other before
them had written. For in the old church, the truth of this mystery was never
impugned openly and directly

Antropomorphitae. Nestoriani.
The Antropomorphites also, who said the virtue of the mystical benediction
endured not to the next day, of whom Cirill speaks, and the Nestorians by
consecution of their learning, that divided Christ's flesh from the deity. And
where this author Only.
that is to be denied. And likewise it is not true that this author teaches,
that of the figure may be spoken the same thing

It may be said of the very thing being present there, that it is a high Of
corporal in ^ducation. lege Rosseum. et O Ecolampadius. lib. 3. cap 13. Augu.
In Io^n. tract. xxvi.
requires the reverent use of man's mouth, to receive our Lords meat and
drink, his own very flesh and blood, by his omnipotency prepared in that
supper, which not spiritually, that is to say, not innocently (as S. Angustine
in one place expounds spiritually) received, brings judgment and
condempnation, according to S Paul's words.

Caunterbury.


And as concerning Bertrame, Bertrame.
he did not write secretly, for he was required by king Charles to write in
this matter, and wrote therein as the doctrine of the Church was at that time, or
else some man would have reprehended him, which never none did before you, but
make mention of his works unto his great praise and commendation. Messaliani.
De is habetur in histo trip. lib. 7.^ 11. et in Theodoreto li. 4. cap. 11.
And the Massalians were not reproved for saying, that corporal eating does
neither good nor hurt, neither Epiphanius, nor of S. Augustine, nor Theodoret,
nor of any other ancient author that I have red. Mary that the sacraments do
neither good nor hurt, and namely Baptism, is laid unto ye Massalia^s charge
and yet the corporal receiving without ye spiritual avails nothing, but
rather hurts very much, as appeared in Judas and Simon Magus. And as for the
three heresies of the Massalians, Anthropomorphites, and Nestorians, I allow
none of them, although you report the^ otherwise the^ either Epiphanius or S.
Augustine does.



For I knowledge (as al good christen me^ do) that almighty God works
effectually with his sacraments.

Smyth.
And because you.ii. write both against my book, and a gree so evil one with an
other (as it is hard fo untrue sayers to agree in one tale (therefore in this
point I commit you together, to see which of you is most valiant

Corporali
that am ignorant in that thing, which every plough man knows. But you make
so fine a co^struction of this word (corporal) that neither you can tell what
you mean your self, nor no man can understand you, as I have opened before in
the discussing of Cyrils mind.

And as for the reverent use of man's mouth in the Lords holy supper,

The answer to Emissenus.
Likewise Eusebius Emissenus is shortly answered unto: for he speaks not of
any real and corporal conversion of bread and wine unto Christ's body and
blood: nor of any corporal and real eating and drinking of the same, but he
speaks of a sacramental conversion of bread and wine, and of a spiritual
eating and drinking of the body and blood. After which sort Christ is as well
present in baptism (as the same Eusebius plainly there declares) as he is in
the Lords table: Which is not carnally and corporally, but by faith and
spiritually. But of this author is spoken before more at large in the matter of
transubstatiation.

Winchester.
Emissen.
This author says, that Emissen is shortly answered unto, and so is he if a
man care Only.
And where this author coupleth together the two Sacraments, baptism, our
union with Christ is wrought, without the real presence of Christ's humanity,
only in the virtue and effect of Christ's blood, the whole Trinity there
working as author, in whose name the sacrament is expressly ministered, where
our soul is regenerate and made spiritual, but not our body indede, but in
hope only that for the spirit of Christ dwelling in us, our mortal bodies
shall be resuscitate, and as we have in baptism been buried with christ, so we
be assured to be partakers of his resurection. And so in this sacrament we be
unite to Christ's manhod by this deuinite. But in the sacrament of Christ's
body and blood, we be in nature united to Christ as man, and by his glorified
flesh made partakers also of his divinity, which mistical union represents
unto us the high estate of our glorification, wherein body and soul shall in
the general resurection, by a maruailous regeneration of the body, be made
both spiritual, the special pledge whereof, we receive in this sacrament, and
therefore it is the sacrament (as Hilary says) of perfect unity. And albeit
the soul of man be more precious then the body, and the nature of the godhead
in Christ more excellent then the nature of man in him glorified, and in
baptism man's soul is regenerate in the virtue and effect of Christ's passion
and blood, Christ's godhead present there without the real presence of his
humanity, although for these respects the excelency of baptism is great: yet
because the mystery of the sacrament of the alter, where Christ is present both
man and God in the effectual unity, that is wrought between our bodies, our
souls and Christ's in the use of this sacrament, signifies ye perfect
redemption of our bodies in the general resurection, which shall be the end
and consumatio^ of all our felicity. This sacrament of perfect unity is the
mystery of our perfect estate, when body and soul shall be all spiritual, and
has so a degree of excelencie, for the dignity that is esteemed in every end
and perfection, wherefore the word (spiritual) is a necessary word in this
sacrament, to call it a spiritual food, Spiritual.
as it is indede, for it is to work in our bodies a spiritual effect, not
only in our souls: and Christ's body and flesh is a spiritual body and
flesh, and yet a true body and very flesh. And it is present in this sacrament
after a spiritual manner, Spiritual manner.
granted and taught of all true teachers, which we should receive also
spiritually, Spiritually.
which is by having Christ before spiritually in us to receive it so worthily.
Wherefore, like as in the invisible substance of the sacrament there is nothing
carnal but all spiritual, taking the word carnal, as it signifies grossly
in man's carnal judgment: So where the receivers of that food bring carnal
lusts or desires, carnal fancies or imaginations with them, they receive the
same preciens food unworthily to their judgment and condemnation. For they
judge not truly after the simplicity of a true Christian faith, of the very
presence of Christ's body. And this suffices to wipe out that this Author has
spoken of Emissen against the truth.

Caunterbury.
I Have so plainly answered unto Emissene in my former book, partly

A slight.
so long as they seem to make with you. And when you come to the very place,
where Emissene declares the meaning of his words, there you leave all the
rest out of your book, which can not be without a great untruth and fraud, to
deceive the simple reader. For when you have recited these words of Emissene,
that the invisible priest by the secret power with his word, tourneth the
visible creatures into the substance of his body and blood, and so further as
serves to your affection, when you come even to the very place where Emissen
declares these words, there you leave and cut of your writing.

But because the reader may know, what you have cut of, and thereby These be
Emissens own words. Upon which words I gather his meaning in his former words
by you alleged. For where you bring in these words, that Christ by his
secret power with his word turns ye visible creatures into the substance of
his body and blood, straightwaies in these words by me now rehearsed, he
shows what manner of turning that is, and after what manner the earthly and
corruptible things be turned into the substance of Christ, eue^ so (says he)
as it is in baptism, wherein is no Transubstantiation. So that I gather his
meaning of his own plain words, and you gather his meaning of your own
imagination, deuisyng such fantastical things, as neither Emissen says, nor
yet be catholic.

Truth.
And this word (truth) you have put unto ye words of Emissen of your

Only.
I will pass over here to aggrauate yt matter, how untruly you add



Errors.
Or that we be not regenerated both body and soul as well in baptism, as in
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ? Or that in baptism we be not
united to Christ's divinity by his manhood? Or that baptism represe^teth not
to us the high state of our glorification and the perfect redemption of our
bodies in the general resurrection? In which things you make difference
between baptism and the sacrament (as you call it) of the aultare. Or what
man that were learned in gods word would affirm, that in the general
resurrection our bodies and souls shall be all spiritual? I know that S. Paul
says, that in the resurrection our bodies shall be spiritual, Spiritual.
meaning in the respect of such vileness, filthiness, sin, and corruption, as
we be subject unto in this miserable world. Yet he says not that our bodies
shall be all spiritual. For not withstanding such spiritualnes as S. Paul
speaks of, we shall have all such substantial parts and members, as
pertain to a very natural man's body. So that in this part our bodies shall be
carnal, corporal, real, and natural bodies, lacking nothing that belongs
to perfect men's bodies. And in the respect is the body of Christ also, carnal
and not spiritual. And yet we bring none other carnal imaginations of
Christ's body, nor, mean none other, but that Christ's body is carnal in this
respect, that it has the same flesh and natural substance which was borne of
the virgin Mary, and wherein he suffered and rose again, and now sits at
the right hand of his father in glory, and that the same his natural body now
glorified, has all the natural parts of a man's body in order, proportion and
place distinct, as our bodies shall be in these respects carnal after our
resurrection. Which manner of carnalnes and diversity of parts and members, if
you take away now from Christ in heaven, and from us after our resurrection,
you make Christ now to have no true ma^s body but a fantastical body, as
Martion and Ualentine did: and as concerning our bodies, you run into the error
of Origin, which phansied and imagined, that at the resurrection all things
should be so spiritual, that women should be turned into men, and bodies into
souls.

And yet it is to be noted by the way, that in your answer here to Emissene,
you make spiriturally, and a spiritual manner all one.

Now follows mine answer to S. Ambrose in this wise.

And now I will come to the saying of S. Ambrose, The answer to Ambrosius de
sacramentie lib. 4. cap. 4.
which is always in their mouths. Before the consecration says he (as they
allege) it is bread, but after the words of the consectation, it is the body
of Christ.

For answer hereunto, it must be first known what consecation is.

Consecration is the separation of any thing from a profane and worldly
Consecration.
use, unto a spiritual and godly use.

In i^^. Roffeam. 2. cap. 25.
And therefore when usual and common water is taken from other uses, and

Even so when common bread and wine be taken and severed from other bread and
wine, to the use of the holy communion, that portion of bread and wine,
although it be of the same substance that the other is, from the which it is
severed, yet it is now called consecrated or holy bread and holy wine.

Not that the bread and wine have or can have any holiness in the^, but that
they be used to an holy work, and represent holy and godly things. And
therefore S. Dionise calls the bread, De ecc. Hierar. cap. 3.
holy bread and the cup an holy cup, as soon as they bebe set upon the aultare
to the use of the holy communion.

But specially they may be called holy and consecrated, when they be separated
to that holy use by Christ's own words, which he spoke for that purpose
saying of the bread: Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
This is my body, And of the wine: This is my blood.

So that commonly the authors, before those words be spoken, do take the bread
and wine but as other common bread and wine, but after those words be
pronounced over the^, then they take the^ for consecrated and holy bread and
wine.

Not that the bread and wine can be partakers of any holiness or godliness, or
can be the body and blood of Christ, but that they represent the very body and
blood of Christ, and the holy food and nourishment, which we have by him. And
so they be called by the names of the body and blood of Christ, as the sign,
token and figure is called by the name of the very thing, which it shows and
signifies,

And therefore as S. Ambrose in the words before cited by the adversaries
says, that before the consecration, it is bread, and after the consecration it
is Christ's body, so in other places he does more plainly set forth his meaning
saying these words: De his qui misterij^ in iciantur cap. Vlt.
Before the benediction of the heavenly words, it is called an other kind of
thing, but after the consecration, is signisied the body of christ Likewise
before the consecartion it is called an other thing, but after the
consecration, it is named the blood of Christ. And again he says: When I
treated of the sacraments, I told you, that that thing which is offered,
before the words of Christ, De sacramentis lib. 5. cap. 4
is called bread, but when the words of Christ be pronounced, then it is not
called bread, but it is called by the name of Christ's body.

"By which words of S. Ambrose, it appears plainly, that the bread is called

And as the bread is a corporal meat, and corporally eaten, so says S.
Ambrose, is the body of Christ a spiritual meat, De sacramentis lib. 6. cap. 1.
and spiritually eaten, and that requires no corporal presence.

Winchester.
Ambrostus.
As touching S. Ambrose, this author takes a great enterprise to wrestle with
him whose plain and evident words must needs be a rule to try his other words
by, if any might be writhed. What can be more plainly spoken the^ S. Ambrose
speaks, when he says these words? It is bread consecration, but after it is
Christ's body. By the word consecration, Consecration.
is siguified (as it is here placed) Gods omnipotent work. Wherefore in this
place it co^prehendeth as much as Emissen said in these words, he conuerteth by
the secret power of his word. God is the worker, and so consecration signifies
the Melancthon.
S. Ambrose would never have travailed to accumulate so many miracles as he
does, speaking of this matter to declare Gods omnipotency, and he had not
thought the nature of bread to be changed in this mystery. These be
Melancthons very words. Now to answer the question, as it were at the word
change, this Sacramental change.
S. Ambrose does express plainly what the change is, when he writes the
words before rehearsed.

It is bread before the consecration, but after it is the body of Christ. Can a
change 1. Tim. 4. De peccat^ne. and ^e. li. 2. cap. 26.
that the creatures be sanctified by the word of God and prayer, and S.
Augustine writes of sanctified bread to be given to them that be catechized
before they be

And in an other place this author says, Fol. 86. pa. 2.
that as hot and burning iron is iron still, and yet has the force of fire:
so the bread and wine be turned into the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood. By
which similitude bread may conceive virtue, as iron conceyueth fire, and then
as we call iron burning and fyry, so we may call bread virtuous and holy unless
the author would again resemble bread to a whetstone that may make sharp and
have no sharpenee in it at all. Which matter I declare thus, to show that as
this author dissenteth from truth in other, so be dissenteth from that he
utters for truth himself, and walks in a maze, impugning the very truth in
this sacrament, and would have that

S. Ambrose as this author says in an other place says thus: Before the
Benediction of the heavenly words, it is called an other kind of thing, but
after the consecration is signified the body and blood of Christ. And an other
speech thus. Before the consecration it is called an other thing, but after the
consecration it is named the blood of Christ and yet a third speech where the
word (call) is used before and after both, as thou reader may see in this
authors book in the 83. leaf. Now good reader, was there ever man so ouersene
as this author is, who sees not S. Ambrose in these three latter speeches to
speak as plainly as in the first. For in the last speech S, Ambrose says, it
is called bread before the consecration and called the body of Christ after the
consecration. And I would demand of this author, does not this word (call)
signify the truth that is bread in deed before the consecration? which if it be
so, why shall not ye same word (call) signify also the very truth added to the
words of the body of Christ after the consecration? And likewise when he
says, speaking of the body of Christ the word (signified) or (named) which is
as much as (call). The body of Christ is signified there, for Christ said this
is my body. etc. vsyng the outward signs of the visible creatures to signify
the body and blood present, Luc. ^.
and not absent. Was not Christ the true son of God, because the angel said,
he shall be called the son of God? But in these places of S. Ambrose, to
express plainly what he meant by (calling) he puts that word (call) to the
bread, before the consecration, as well as to the body of Christ after the
consecration, thereby to declare how in his understanding the word (call)
signifies as much truth in the thing where unto it is added after consecration
as before, and therefore as it is by S. Ambrose called bread before
consecration, signif^ing it was so indeed, so it is called signified or named
(which three thus placed be all one in effect) the body of Christ after the
consecration and is so in deed agreeable to the plain spech of S. Ambrose,
where he says: It is bread before consecration and it is the body of Christ
after consecration. As touching the spirituality of the meat of Christ's body,
I have spoken before, but where this author adds it requires no corporal
presence, he speaks in his dream being oppressed with sleep of ignorance and
can not tell what (corporal) means as I have opened before by ye authority
of Cyril. Now let us see what this author says to Chrysostom.

Caunterbury.
IT is not I that wrestle with S. Ambrose, but you, who take great Whether
bread be Christ's body.
It is bread before consecration, and after it is Christ's body? These words of
S. Ambrose be not fully so plain as you pretend, but clean contrary. For what
can be spoken either more vnplayn or untrue, then to say of bread after
consecration, that it is the body of Christ, unless the same be understand in a
figurative spech? For although Christ's body (as you say) be there after
consecration, yet the bread is not his body, nor his body is not made of itby
your confession. And therefore the saying of S. Ambrose that it is Christ's body
can not be true in plain spech. And therefore S. Ambrose in the same place,
where he calls it the body and blood of Christ, he says it is a figure of
his body and blood. For these be his words, Quod ex figura corporis and
sanguinis domini nostri Jesus Christ's,

And as for the word (consecration) I have declared the signification

And for the writing of Melancthon to Decolampadius, you remain A sacramental
change.
taking Myconius for Decolampadius. And yet the change of bread and wine in
this sacrament (which Melancthon speaks

And the change is in the use, and not in the elements kept and reserved,
wherein is not the perfection of a sacrament. Therefore as water in the font
or vessel, has not the reason and nature of a sacrament, but when it is put
to the use of christening, and then it is changed into the proper nature and
kind of a sacrament, to signifye the wonderful change which almighty God by
his omnipotency works really in them that be baptized therewith, such is the
change of the bread and wine in the Lords supper. And therefore the bread is
called Christ's body after consecration (as S. Ambrose says) and yet it is
not so really but sacramentally. For it is neither Christ's mystical body (for
that is the congregation of the faithful dispersed abroad in the world) nor
his natural body (for that is in heaven) but it is the sacrament both of his
true natural body, and also of his mystical body, and for that consideration
has the name of his body, as a sacrament or sign may bear ye name of the
very thing that is signified and represented thereby.

de sacramentis, and de misterijs iniciandis were none of his, I should say but
as I think, and as they do think that be men of most excellent learning and
judgment, as I declared in my second book, which speaks of
transubstantiation. And so does judge not only Erasmus, but also Melancthon
(whom you allege for authority when he makes for your purpose) suspecteth
the same. And yet I plainly deny not these books to be his (for your pleasure
to give you as much advantage, as you can ask) and yet it avails you nothing
at all.

Holy bread.
when they be put to an holy use, not that they have any holiness in them, or be
partakers of any holiness or godliness. I would feign learn of Smith and you,
when the bread and wine be holy. For before they be holowed or consecrated they
be not holy by your teaching, but be common bakers bread, and wine of the
tavern. And after the consecration, there is neither bread nor wine (as you
teach,) at what time then should the bread and wine be holy? But the creatures
of bread and wine be much bound unto you, and can no less do, then take you
for their savior. For if you can make them holy and godly, then shall you
glorify them, and so bring them to eternal bliss. And then may you as well
save the true laboring bullocks and innocent sheep and lambs, and so
understand the prophet, Homines and iumenta saluabis domine. Psalm. 39.


But to admonish the reader (say you) how the bread and wine have no holiness,
this fortune of spech not understand of the people, engenders some scruple
that needs not. By which your saying I cannot tell what ye people may
understand, but that you have a great scruple that you have lost your holy
bread. And yet S. Paul speaks not of your holy bread as you imagine being
utterly ignorant (as appears) in the scripture, but he speaks generally of
all manner of meats, which christian people receive with thanks giving unto
God, whether it be bread wine or water, fish, flesh, white meat, herbs, or
what manner of meat and drinck so ever it be.

And the sanctified bread, which S. Augustine writes, August. de peccatorum
meritis and remiss. 26. li. 2 cap. 26.
to be given to them that be catechized, was not holy in it self, but was
called holy for ye use and signification.

Cyprianus.
as the spirit of God is said to be in the water of baptism, when it is
truly ministered, or in his word when it is syncerely preached, with the holy
spirit working mightily in the hearts of the hearers. And yet the water in it
self is but a visible element, nor the preachers word of it self is but a
sound in the air, which as soon as it is hard, vanishes away, and has in it
self no holiness at all, although for the use and ministry thereof, it may be
called holy. And so likewise may be said of the sacraments, which (as S.
Augustine says) be as it were Gods visible word.

Holy bread.
And whereas you rehearse out of my words in an other place, that as

But was there ever any man so ouersene (say you) as this author is? Who sees
not S. Ambrose in these three latter speeches to speak as plainly as in the
first? Was there ever any man so destitute of reason (say I) but that he
understands this, that when bread is balled bread, it is called by the proper
name as it is in deed: Bread is bread, is a plain speech.
and when bread is called the body of Christ, it takes the name of a thing,
which it is not in deed, but is so called by a figurative spech. Bread is
Christ's body, is a figurative speech.
And calling, say you, in the words of Christ, signifies making, which if it
signifies when bread is called bread, then were calling of bread, a making of
bread. And thus is answered your demand, why this word (call) in the one
signifies the truth, and in the other not, because that the one is a plain
speech and the other a figurative. For else by our reasoning out of reason, when
the cup which Christ used in his last supper, was called a cup, and when it was
called Christ's blood, all was one calling, and was of like truth without
figure: so that the cup was Christ's blood in deed.

And likewise the stone that flowed out water was called a stone, Number. 20.
and when it was called Christ, 1. Cor. 10.
and the arc also when it was called the arc, and when it was called god, 1.
Reg 4.
all these must be one spech and of like truth, if it be true which you here
say. But as the arc was an arc, the stone a stone, and bread very bread, and
the cup a cup, plainly without figurative spech, so when they be called God,
Christ the body and blood of Christ this can not be alike calling, but must
needs be understand by a figurative spech. Ihon. 1. Apoc. per totum Genesis 49.
Apoc. 5. Iho. 10. 14. Ihon. 12.
For as Christ in the scripture is called a lamb for his innocence and
meeknes, a Lion for his might and power, a door and way, whereby we enter into
his fathers house, wheat and corn for ye property of dying before they rise up
and bring increase, so is he called bread and bread is called his body, and
wine his blood, for the property of feedyng and nourishing. So yt these and al
like speches (where as one substance is called by the name of an other
substance diverse and distinct in nature) must needs be understand fyguratiuely
by some similitude or propriety of one substance unto an other, and can in no
wise be understand properly and plainly without a figure. And therefore when
Christ is called the son of God, or bread is called bread, it is a most
plain and proper spech, but when Christ is called bread, or bread is called
Christ, these can in no wise be formal and proper speches (the substa^ces and
natures of them being so diverse) but must needs have an understanding in
figure, signification or similitude (as the very nature of all sacraments
require) as al ye old writers do plainly teach. And therefore the bread after
consecration is not called Christ his body, because it is so in deed, for then
it were no figurative speech, as all the old authors say it is.



Now let us examine S. John Chrysostom, Corporal. The answer to Chrisostom^.
who in sound of words makes most for the adversaries of the truth, but they
that be familiar and acquanted with Chrisostomes manner of speaking, (how in
all his writings he is full of allusions, schemes, tropes, and figures) shall
soon perceive, that he helps nothing their purposes, as it shall well
appear by the discussing of those places, which the Papists do allege of
him, which be spicially two. One is in Sermon de Eucharistia in Encaenijs. And
the other is De proditione Iudae.

And as touching the first, no man can speak more plainly against them, then
S. John Chrysostom speaks in that sermon. Wherefore it is to be wondered, why
they should allege him for their party, unless they be so blind in their
opinion, that they can se nothing, nor discern what makes for them, nor what
against the^. For there he has these words. When you come to these mysteries
(speaking of the Lords board and holy communion) do not think that you
receive by a man the body of God, In sermon de Eucharastia in E^c. unije.
meaning of Christ. These be S. John Chrysostom his own words in that place.

Than if we receive not the body of Christ at the hands of a man, Ergo, the
body of Christ is not really, corporally and naturally in the Sacrament, and so
given to us by the Priest. And then it follows, that all the Papists be
liars, because they feign and teach the contrary.

But in this place of Chrysostom is touched before more at length in answering
to the Papists Transubstantiation.

Wherefore now shall be answered the other place which they allege of
Chrysostom in these words, Here he is present in the sacrament and does
consecrate, De proditione Ind^.
which garnished the table at the maundy or last supper. For it is not man,
which makes of the bread and wine, being set forth to be consecrated, the body
and blood of Christ, but it is Christ himself: (which for us is crucified)
that makes himself to be there present. The words are uttered and pronounced
by the mouth of the priest, but the consecration is by the virtue, might and
grace of God himself. And as this saying of God (Increase, be multiplied, and
fill the earth Genes. 1.
(once spoken by God, took always effect toward generation, even so the
saying of Christ. This is my body being but once spoken, Mat. 26 Marc. 14. Luc.
22.
does throughout all churches to this present, and shall to his last coming,
give force and strength to this sacrifice.

Thus far they rehearse of Chrisostomes words. Which words although they
sound much for the purpose, yet if they be thoroughly considered and conferred
with other places of the same author, it shall well appear that he meant nothing
less, the^ that Christ's body should be corporally and naturally present in
the bread and wine, but that in such sort he is in heaven only, and in our
minds by faith we ascend up into heaven, to eat him there, although
sacrame^tally as in a sign and figure, he be in the bread and wine (and so is
he also in the water of Baptism) and in them that rightly receive the bread
and wine he is in a much more perfection then corporally (which should avail
them nothing) but in them he is spiritually with his divine power, giving them
eternal life.

And as in the first creation of the world, all living creatures had their
first life by gods only word. (for God only spoke his word, and all things
were created by and by accordingly) and after their creation he spoke these
words: Increase and multiply, and by the virtue of those words, all things
have gendred Genes. 1. Math. 6.1 Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
even so after that Christ said: Eat, this is my body, and drink, this is my
blood. Do this hereafter in remembrance of me, by virtue of these words, and
not by virtue of any man, the bread and wine be so consecrated, that whosoever
with a lively faith does eat that bread and drink that wine, does spiritually
eat, drink and feed upon Christ sitting in heaven with his Father. And this
is the whole meaning of S. Chrysostom.

And therefore does he so often say that we receive Christ in baptism. And when
he has spoken of the receiving of him in the holy communion, by and by he
speaks of the receiving of him in baptism, without declaring any diversity
of his presence in the one, from his presence in the other.

Ad populam Antiochenum ho. ^ 1. and in Ihoa^nem ho. 45.
He says also in many places, that We ascend into heaven, and do eat Christ
sitting there above. And where S. Chrysostom and other Authors do speak of the
wonderful operation of God in his sacraments, passing all man's wit, senses,
and reason, they mean not of the working of God in the water, bread and wine
but of the maruaylous working of God in the hearts of them that receive the
sacraments, secretly, inwardly, and spiritually transforming them, renewing,
feding, comforting and nourishing them with his flesh and blood, through his
most holy spirit, the same flesh and blood still remaining in heaven.

Thus is this place of Chrysostom sufficiently answered unto. And if any man
require any more, the^ let him look what is recited of the same author before
in the matter of Transubstantiation?

Winchester.
This author notes in Chrysostom two places, Chrisostom.
and brings them forth: and in handling the first place, declares himself
to trifle in so great a matter, evidently to his own reprofe. For where in the
second book of his work, entreating transubstantiation, he would the same
words of Chrysostom by this form of spech in the negative should not deny
precisely. And when Chrysostom says, Do not think that you by man receive the
body of God, but that we should not consider man in the receiving of it. Here
this author does allege these words, and reasons of them as though they
were terms of mere denial. But I would ask of this author this question, If
Chrysostomes faith had been that we receive not the body of God in the
Sacrament verily, why should he use words idly to entreat, of whom we
received the body of God, which after this authors doctrine we receive not at
all but in figure? and no body at all which is of Christ's humanity being
Christ, as this author teaches spiritually, that is, by his divine nature in
him only that worthily receaueth, and in the very Sacrament as he concludes
in this book only fyguratiuely. Turn back reader to the 36. leaf in the
authors book and read it with this, and so consider upon what principle here
is made an (Ergo.) I will answer that place when I speak of
Transubstantiation, which shall be after answered to the third and fourth
book, as the natural order of the matter requires.

The second place of Chrysostom that this author brings forth, he grants
it sounds much against him, and favors his adversaries, but with conferring
and considering, he trusts to alter it from the true understanding. And not
to expound, but confound the matter, be joins in spech the sacrament of
baptism with this sacrament (which shift this author used untruly in Hylary)
and would now bear in hand that the presence of Christ were none otherwise in
this sacrament then in baptism which is not so, for in this sacrament Christ's
humanity and godhead is really present, and in baptism his godhead with the
effectual virtue of his blood, in which we be washed, not requiring by
scripture any real presence thereof for dispensatio^ of that mystery, as I have
before touched discussing the answer to Emissen, where as Chrysostom
speaking of this sacrament, whereof I have before spoken, and Melancthon
alleging it to Decolampadius says thus: The great miracle and great
benevolence of Christ is, that he sits above with his father, Chrisost. de
Sacer. lib. 3.
and is the same hour in our hands here to be embrased of us. And therefore
where this author would note the wonder of Gods work in the Sacrament to be
wonerfull for the work and effect in man, this is one piece of truth, but in
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the old Fathers wonder at the
work in the Sacrament how bread is changed into the body of Christ, how
Christ sitting in heaven God and man, is also man and God in the Sacrament, and
being worthily received, dwells in such carnally and naturally, as Hylary
says, and corporally as Cyrill says. How this can be, no man can tell, no
faithful man should ask, and yet it is the true catholic faith to be truly
so wrought. For as Cinistene says: An issue.
that the old fathers speaking of the wonderful operation of God in this
Sacrament, refer it not only to the virtue and effect of this Sacrament, nor
to the virtue specially, but chiefly to the operation of God in the substance
of this Sacrament, In Joan, tractae. 26.
and the Sacrament self, for such a difference S. Augustine makes, saying:
Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud virtus sacramenti, The Sacrament is one, the
virtue of the Sacrament is an other. Finally in aunswering to Chrysostom, this
author does nothing but spend words in vain, to the more plain declaration
of his own ignorance, or worse.

Caunterbury.
AS concerning Chrysostom, you have spent so many taunting and scornful
words in waste, without cause, that I need to wast no words here at all to
make you answer: but refer the reader to my book the 25. leaf and 36.
leaf, and to the 32.33. and 34. leaf, where the reader shall find all that
is here spoken fully answered unto.

Christ is verily and truly present and received.
But always you be like your self, proceeding in amplification of an argument
against me, which you have forged yourselfe, and Uerile.
so gross, and so dull, in the perceauing of this mystery, that you think a
man can not receive the body of Christ verily, unless he take him corporally in
his corporal mouth, flesh, blood, and bones, as he was borne of the virgin
Mary. But it is certain, that Chrysostom meant not, that we receive Christ's
body verily after such a sort, when he says, Do not think that you receive
by a man the body of God. And yet because I deny only this gross
understanding, you misreport my doctrine, that I should say we receive not
Christ at all, but in a figure, and no body at all: wherein you untruly and
sclaundrously report me, as my whole book and doctrine can witness against
you. For my doctrine is, that the very body of Christ which was borne of the
virgin Mary, and suffered for our sins, giving us life by his death, the
same Jesus as concerning his corporal presence, is taken from us, and sits
at the right hand of his father, and yet is he by faith spiritually present
with us, and is our spirirituall food and nourishment, and sits in the
mids of all them that-be gathered together in his name. And this feding is a
spiritual feedyng and an heavenly feeding, far passing all corporal and
carnal feeding, and therefore there is a true presence and a true feding
indeed, and not in a figure only, or not at all, as you most untruly report
my saying to be. This is the true understanding of ye true presence, receiving
and feding upon the body and blood of our Savior Christ, and not as you deprave
the meaning and true sense thereof, that the receiving of Christ truly and
verily, is ye receiving corporally with the mouth corporal, or yt the
spiritual receiving is to receive Christ only by his divine nature, which
thing I never said nor me^t. Turn I pray thee gentle reader to the 36 leaf of
my book, and note these words there, which I allege out of Chrysostom. Do
not think (says he) that you receive by a man the body of God. Then turn
over the leaf, and in the xx, line note again my saying that in the holy
communion, Christ himself is spiritually eaten and drunken, and nourishes the
right beleuers. Then compare those sayings with this place of this ignorant
lawier, and thou shall evidently perceive, that either he will not, or can not,
or at the least he does not understand what is meant in the book of common
prayer, and in my book also, by the receiving and feding upon Christ
spiritually.

But it is no marvel, that Nicodemus and the Capernaites understand not
Christ, before they be borne a new, and forsaking their papisticall leaven,
have learned an other lesson of the spirit of God, then flesh and blood can
teach them. Much talk the Papists make about this belefe, that we must believe
and have a steadfast faith, that Christ's body is corporally there, where ye
visible forms of bread and wine be: of which belefe is no mention made in the
whole scripture, which teaches us to believe and profess, that Christ (as
concerning his bodily presence) has forsaken the world, and is ascended into
heaven, and shall not come again until the restitution of all things that be
spoken of by Prophets. But whereas in the feeding upon Christ's body and
drinking of his blood, there is no mouth and teeth can serve, but only the
inward and spiritual mouth of faith, there the Papists keep silence like
monks, and speak very little. And the cause why, is flesh and blood which so
blinds all the Nichodemes and Caparnaites, that they can not understand what
is spiritual nativity, spiritual circumcition, spiritual honger and thirst,
and spiritual eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of our Savior
Christ: but they hang all together so in the letter, that they cannot enter
into the kingdom of the spirit, which knowledge, if that you had, you should
soon perceive upon what principle my Ergo were made. And where you pervert the
order of the books, The order of the book.
setting the carte before the horse, that is to say the iii and iiii book
before the second, saying that the natural order of ye matter so requires,
here the reader may note an evident mark of all subtle Papists, which is
under the pretense and color of order, to break that order whereby the
falsehead of their doctrine should best be detected and the truth brought to
light. For when they perceive a window open, whereby the light may shine in, and
the truth appear, then they busily go about to shut that window, and to draw
the reader from that place to some mystical and obscure matter where more
darkness is, and les light can be seen. And when besides the darkness of the
matter, they have by their subtle sophistry cast such a mist over the readers
eyes, that he is become blind: the^ dare they make him judge, be the matter
never so untrue. And no meruail, for he is now beco^e so blindfeld, and subject
unto them, yt he must say what so ever they bid him, be it never so much
repugnant to ye evident truth. In such sort it is in ye matter of yt sacrament.
For the papists perceauing that their error should easily be espied, if the
matter of transubstantiation were first determined, that plain words of the
scripture, the consent of ancient writers, the articles of our faith, the
nature of a sacrament, reason and all senses making so evidently against it,
therefore none of the subtle Papists will be glad to talk of
transubstantiation, but they will always bear men in hand, that other matters
must first be examined, as the late Bishop does here in this place.

Now in the second place of Chrysostom, where you say, that in this sacrament
Christ's humanity and godhead is really present, and in baptism his godhead
with the effectual virtue of his blood in which we be washed, not requiring by
scripture any real presence thereof for the dispensation of that mystery, n
this matter I have joined an issue with you before in the answer unto Drigen,
which shall suffice for answer here also.

Chrisostomus.
And where S. John Chrisostom speaks of the great miracle of christ that he
sits above with his father, and is the same hour here with us ad Dardanum,
August. ad. dard.
saying: Cauendum est ne it a diuinitatem astruamus hominis, vt veritatem
corporis auferamus, We must foresee that we do not so affirm the deuinitie of
him that is man, that we should thereby take away the truth of his body. And
forasmuch as it is against the nature and truth of a natural body, to be in
two places at one time, therefore you seem to speak against the truth of
Christ's natural body, when you teach that his body is in heaven naturally,
and also naturally in the sacrament. For who so ever affirms that Christ's
body is in sundry places as his godhead is, seems to defy Christ's body by S.
Augustines rule. August ad. dard.
But like as it is not to be thought, that Quicquid est in deo, est putandum
vbique vt dens, that whatsoever is in god, is every where as God is, so must we
not think that his body may be at one time every where, where his godhead is.
But Christ is (says S. Augustine) Vbique per id quod est deus, in coelo autem
per id quod est homo: Every where in that he is God, but in heaven, in that he
is man. Wherefore his presence here of his body must be a sacramental presence,
and the presence of his divinity, of his grace, of his truth, of his majesty
and power, is real and effectual in many places, according to his word.

Wherein is the miracle.
Now as concerning your issue, I refuse it not, but say, that the great miracle
whereat the Jews wondered, and which our savior Christ meant, and the old
fathers speak of, is of the eating of Christ's flesh and drincking of his
blood, and how by flesh and blood we have everlasting life. Now if you can
bring good testimony for you, that the sacrament eats Christ's flesh and
drincketh his blood, and that it shall live for ever (which never had life) and
that Gods operation and work is more in domme creatures then in man, then I
must needs and will confess the issue to pass with you. And when I hear
your testimonies, I shall make answer, but before I here them, I should do
nothing else but spend words in vain, and beat the wind to no purpose. Now
hear what I have answered to Theophilus Alexandrinus.

Yet furthermore they bring for them Theophilus Alexandrinus, who (as they
allege) says thus. The answer to Theophilus in Mar. 14. Iho. 6.
Christ giving thanks, did break (which also we do) adding thereto prayer.
And he gave unto them, saying: Take, this is my body, this that I do now give,
and that which ye now do take. For the bread is not a figure only of Christ's
body, but it is changed into the very body of Christ. For Christ says: The
bread which I will give you, is my flesh. Nevertheless the flesh of Christ is
not seen for our weakness, but bread and wine are familiar unto us. And surely
if we should visibly see flesh and blood, we could not abide it. And therefore
our lord bearing with our weakness, does retayn and keep the form and
apparaunce of bread and wine, but he does turn the very bread and wine into
the very flesh and blood of Christ.

These be the words which the papists do cite out of Theophilus upon the
gospel of S. Mark But by this one place it appears evidently, either how
negligent the Papists be, in searching out and examining the sayings of the
authors which they allege for their purpose, on else how false and deceitful
they be, which willingly and wittingly have made in this one place, and as it
were with one breath, two loud and shameful lies.

The first is, that because they would give the more authority to the words
by them alleged, they (like false poticaries that fell quid pro quo) falsefy
the authors name, fathering such sayings upon Theophilus Alexandrinus, an old
and ancient author, which were in deed none of his words, but were the words
of Theophilactus, who was many years after Theophilus Alexandrinus. But such
has ever been the Papisticall subtelties, to set forth their own inventions,
dreams and lies, under the name of antiquity and ancient authors.

The second lie or falsehod is, that they falsely the authors words and
meaning, subuerting the truth of his doctrine. For where Theophilactus
(according to the catholic doctrine of ancient authors) says: that almighty
God (condescending to our infirmity) reserueth the kind of bread and wine, and
yet turns them into the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood: They say, that he
reserueth the forms and apparaunces of bread and wine, and turns them into
the verity of his flesh and blood, so turning and altering kinds into forms
and apparaunces, and virtue into verity, that of the virtue of the flesh and
blood, they make the verity of his flesh and blood. And thus they have
falsefied as well the name as the words of Theophilactus, turning verity into
plain and flat falsitie.

But to set forth plainly the meaning of Theophilactus in this matter. As hot
and burning iron is iron still, and yet has the force of fire: and as the
flesh of Christ still remaining flesh, gives life as the flesh of him that is
good so the sacramental bread and wine remain still in their proper kinds,
and yet to them that worthily eat and drink them, they be turned not into the
corporal presence, but into the virtue of Christ's flesh and blood.

And although Theophilactus spoke of the eating of the very body of Christ, and
the drinking of his very blood (and not only of the figures of them) and of
the conversion of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, yet he
means not of a gross, carnal, corporal and sensible conversion of the
bread and wine, nor of a like eating and drinking of his flesh and blood (for
so not only our stomachs would yern and our hearts abhor to eat his flesh
and to drink his blood, but also such eating and drinking could nothing
profit or avail us) but he spoke of the celestial and spiritual eating of
Christ, and of a sacramental conversion of the bread, calling the bread not
only a figure, but also the body of Christ, giving us by these words to
understand, that in the sacrament we do not only eat corporally the bread
(which is a sacrament and figure of Christ's body) but spiritually we eat also
his very body, and drink his very blood. And this doctrine of Theophilactus is
both true, godly and comfortable.

Winchester.
Now follows (as it is entitled) Theophilact being the words in deed not of
Theophilact as he writes upon Mark, Theophilact.
and therefore they were not alleged as his words, but as the words of
Theophilus Alexandrinus, wherein this author trauerseth a falshod on thallegers
part to wrong name the author. In which allegacion I say if therbe a fault as
I know none, it is no lie but a probable error, for a man to believe an other
better learned then him self, and as I found it alleged. I reported it
again, so as having mine author learned whom I followed, I am discharged of
malice Bernardus non vidit omnia) and therefore there may be a theophilus
Alexandrinus, having these words alleged in their form, for any
demonstratiou this author can make to the contrary. Whither therbe or no any
such to be showed, it is not material, being so many testimonies besides. In
issue.
As for Theophilacts words, I grant they be not, for he wrote his mind more
plainly in an other place of his works, as I shall hereafter show, and by the
way make an issue with this author, that no catholic writer among the greeks
Theophilact translated by Oecomlampadius.
he translated out of Greek into Latin, ye works of the said Theophilact,
and gave the Latin church thereby some weapon wherewith to destroy his wicked
folly afterward not unlike the chance in this author, translating into
inglish, two years bye past, the Cathechisme of Germany, And as Oecolampadius
has since his folly or madness against the sacrament confessed (as appears)
that

Theophilactes words.
Take heed that the bread which is eaten of us in the mysteries, is not only a
certain figuration of the flesh of our Lord, but the flesh it self of our
Lord, for he said not, The bread which I shall give is the figure of my flesh,
but it is my flesh. For that bread by the mystical benedictio^, is transformed
by the mystical words and presence of the holy ghost into the flesh of our
lord. And it should trouble no man, that the bread is to be believed flesh, for
whilst our lord walked in flesh and recaued nourishment of bread, that bread
he did eat was changed into his body, and was made like to his holy Speciem
quide panis and vim seruat, in vertutem autem carnis and sanguinis
transelementat (incorupting of which words this author makes a great matter,
when they were not alleged for his, but as they be his ( seruare speciem) may
be well translate (form and aparance) because upon S. John before alleged,
he says of the bread (it appears.) And as for thor says he did) why should
Theophilact, both upon S. Mark, and also upon S. John, ask this question,
why does not the flesh appear? if him self by, those words should teach
there were only present the virtue of his flesh, who, and he had meant so,
would not have asked the question, or if he had, would have answered it th^s
accordingly a dextris vertutis Dei) so in the Acts in the same sentence a
dextris Dei) both out of one pen: and ( a dextris virtutis Dei) is no more to
say, then ( a dextris Dei) and so is ( virtutem carnis and sanguinis) no more
to say, but ( in carnem and sanguinem) which sentence (the same Theophilact
with upon S. John before alleged, in this saying: The bread is changed into
flesh, an^^ Mark in this phrase, into the virtue of flesh, being like these
speeches, ( a dextris Dei) and ( a dextris virtutis Dei.) Which and if had
liked this author to have considered, he should have taken Theophilactes speech
as Theophilact understands himself, and said the words alleged in the name
of Theophilus Alexandrinus, were not Theophilactes Carnally: Naturally
corporally,
under standing the words of the truth of that is present Christ's very bydy
and flesh, and not of the manner of the presence, which is only spiritual,
supernatural, and above man's capacity. And therefore a high mystery a, great
miracle, Manner, only Spiritually.
a wonderful work, which it is wholesome to believe simply with a sincere
faith, and dangerous to search and examine with a curious imagination, such as
idleness and arogancy would tempt a man unto and by diuising of a figure or
metaphore, bring it within the compas^e of our busy reason.

Caunterbury.
cathena aurea cites the words by you alleged in these letters: Thomas in
cathena aurea.
Theoph. which letters be indiferent as well to Theophilus, as to Theophilactes,
so that you might have christened the child whether you would by the name of
Theophilus or of Theophilactus. And because Theophilus was a more ancient
author, and of more learning and estimation then was Theophilact, therefore the
name pleased you better, to give more credit to your sayings and so of Theoph
you made the whole name Theophilus. And because one Theophilus was a bishop of
Alexandry, you added as it were his sir name, calling him Theophilus
Alexand^inus. And if Thomas was not the author which you followed in this
matter, peradventure it might be doctor Fisher sometime bishop of Rochester,
Fisher Rosseu^.
who writing in the same matter that you do, was or would be deceived as you
be. But what author so ever you followed, you shall not honestly shake of this
matter, except you tell his name. For else I will say that you be feign to bring
in for you feigned authors whispered in corners. And yet that Theophilus wrote
not that words alleged upon Mark, this is no small proof that Theophilact
has the same sentences word by word, and that neither S. Hierom, Gennadius,
Eusebius, Tritemius, nor any other that ever wrote hitherto, made ever any
mention, that Theophilus wrote upon the gospel of S. Mark.

And as concerning your issue, thus much I grant without issue, that

And as for the Catechism of Germany by me translated into English, The
Catechism.


And as concerning the words of Theophilact upon the gospel of John,

And as concerning the bread that Christ did eat and feed upon, it was
naturally eaten (as other men eat) naturally changed, and caused a natural
nourishment, and yet the very matter of the bread remained (although in an
other form) but in them that duly receive and ^at the Lords holy supper, all
is spiritual as well the eating as the change and nourishment, which is none
impediment to the nature of bread, but that it may still remain.

species) to signify appearance, Species for appearance.
this is a wonderful kind of translation, to translat specie in appearance,
because ( apparet) is truly translated (appears:) with like reason ( aurum)
might be translated (meat) because ed^re) signifies to eat.

Meritie for virtue.
And yet to cloak your folly therein, and to cast a mist before the readers eyes
(that he should not see your untruth therein) you say that by (virtue) in that
place must be vuderstanded verite. First what soever be understand by the
word (virtue) your faith in translation is broken. For the sense being
ambiguous, yo^ ought in translation to have kept the word as it is (leaving the
sense to be expended by the indifferent reader) and not by altering the word,
to make such a sense as please you, which is so foul a fault in a translatour,
that if Decolampadius had so done, he should have been called a man faulty and
gilthy, a corruptour, a deceauour, an abuser of other men, a peruerter, a
deprauer, and a man without faith. As he might be called that would translate (
Verbum caro factum est) The second person became man. Which although it be true
in meaning, yet it is not true in translation, nor declares the faith of the
translatour.

But now as your translation is untrue, so is ye meaning also untrue, and
inexcusable. For what man is so far destitute of all his senses, that he
knows not a difference between the verity of Christ's body, and the virtue
thereof? Who can pretend ignorance in so manifest a thing? Does not all men
know, that of every thing the virtue is one, and the substance an other? Except
in God only, who is of that simplicity without multiplication of any thing in
him, or diversity, that his virtue, his power, his wisdom, his justice, and
all that is said to be in him, be neither qualites, nor accidents, but all one
thing, with his very substance. And neither the right hand of God, nor the
virtue of God (which you bring for an example, and serves to no purpose, but
to blind the ignorant reader) be any thing else, but the very substance of God
(although indiuersitie of respects and considerations, they have diversity of
names) except you will divide the most single substance of God into corporal
parts and members, following the error of the A^cropomorphites. But the like
is not in ye body of Christ, which has distinction of integrall parts, and
the virtue also and qualities distinct from the substance.

a dextris virtutis Dei) would translate ( a dextris Dei) or contrary wise. A
dextris dei. A dextris vertutis dei.
And therefore all tra^slators in those places follow ye words as they be, and
be not so arroga^t to alter one title in the^, thereby to make the^ one in
words, although ye thing in substance be one. For words had not their
signification of the substances, or of things only, but of the qualities,
manners, respects, and considerations. And so may one word signify diverse
things, and one thing be signified by diverse words. And therefore he that
should for on word take an other, because they be both referred to one
substance (as you have done in this place) should make a goodly year of work
of it, not much unlike to him that should burn his house, and say he made it,
because the making and burning was both in one matter and substance.

It is much pity, that you have not bestowed your time in translation of good
authors, that can skill so well of translation, to make specie^ to signify
appearance, and that take virtue sometime for verity, and sometime for nothing,
and a dextris virtutis Dei, to signify no more but a dextris Dei and virtutem
carnis, to signify no more but carnem, and virtutem sanguinis, sanguinem. And
why not? seeing that such words signify ad placitum, that is to say, as please
you to translate them.

And it seameth to be a strange thing, that you have so quick an eye to espy
other men's faults, and cannot see in Theophilact his plain

And yet another third error is committed in the same sentence, because one
sentence should not be without three errors at the least in your translation.
For whereas Theophilact has but one accusative case, your put thereto other two
mo of your own head. And as you once taught Barnes, so now you would make
Theophilact your scholar, to say what you would have him. But that the truth
may appear what Theophilact said, I shall rehearse his own words in Greek,
(...). which words translated into latin be these.

Condescendens nobis benignus Deus, speciem quidem panis et vini seruat, in
potestatem autemcarnis et sanguinis transelementat. And in English they be thus
much to say. The merciful God condesending to our infermitie, conserueth still
the kind of bread and wine, but turns them into the virtue of his flesh and
blou^d. To this sentence you do add of yonr own authority these words (the
bread and wine) which words Theophilact has not, which is an untrue part of
him, that pretends to be a true interpretour. And by adding those words, you
alter clearly the authors meaning. For wheare ye authors meaning was that we
should abhore to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood in their propre
form and kind, yet almighty God has ordained that in his holy supper we
should receive ye fourmes and kinds of bread and wine, and that those kinds
should be turned (unto them that worthily receive the same) into the virtue
and effect of Christ's very flesh and blood, although they remain still in
the same kind and form of bread and wine. And so by him the nature and kind
of bread and wine remain. And yet the same be turned into the virtue of flesh
and blood. So that the word, (fourmes) is the accusative case, as well to the
verb tourneth, as to the verb conserueth, but you to make Theophilact serve
your purpose, add of your own head two other accusative cases, that is to say
(bread and wine) besides Theophilactes words, wherein all men may consider how
little you regard the truth, that to maintain your untrue doctrine once
devised by your selves, care not what untruth you use besides, to corrupt all
doctors, making so many faults in translation of one sentence.



And where to excuse your error in translation, you say yt the words by you
alleged in the name of Theophilus Alexandrinus, be not Theophilactes words,
and I deny that they be Theophilus words, so then be they no bodies words,
which is no detriment to my cause at all, (because I took him for none of my
witness) but it is in a manner a clear overthrow of your cause, which take him
for your chief and principal witness saying that no catholic writer among ye
Greeks, has more plainly set forth the truth of the presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament, then Theophilactus has, and here upon you make your issue.

And yet have I a good cause to call the^ Theophilactes words, for as much as
I find them in his works printed abroad, saving one word which you have
untruly corrupted, because that word pleases you not. And yet am I not bound
to admit that your witness is named Theophilus, except you have better proofs
thereof then this, that one says, he has him in a corner, and so alleges
him. It is your part to prove your own witness, and not my part that stand
herein only at defense. And yet to every indiferent man I have showed
sufficient matter to reject him. Hear now my answer to S. Hierom.

Besides this our adversaries do allege S. Hierom upon the epistle Ad titu^,
The answer to Hieronimus. ^uper epistol. ad Titum.
that there is as great difference between the Loves called Panis
propositionis, and the body of Christ, as there is between a shadow of a body,
and the body it self, and as there is between an image and the thing itself,
and between an example of things to come, and the things that be prefigured
by them.

These words of S. Hierom truly understand, serve nothing for the intent of
the Papists. For he meant that the Show bread of the law, was but a dark shadow
of Christ to come, but the sacrament of Christ's body is a clear testimony,
that Christ is already come, and that he has performed that which was
promised, and does presently comfort and feed us spiritually with his precious
body and blood, notwithstanding that corporally he is assended into heaven.

Winchester.
Hiero nim.
This Author trauayleth to answer S. Hierom, and to make him the easier for him
to deal with, he cutteth of that follows in the same S. Hierom, which should
make the matter open and manifest, how effectually S. Hierom speaks of the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. There is (says S. Hierome) as great
difference between the loaves called Panes propositionis, and the body of
Christ, as there is between the shadow of a body and the body it self, and as
there is between an image and the true thing it self, and between an example
of things to come, and the things that be prefigured by them. Therefore as
mekenes, patience, sobriety, moderation, abstinence of gain, hospitality
also, and liberality should be chiefly in a Bishop, and among all layemen an
excellency in them: so there should be in him a special chastity, and as I
should say chastity that is priestly, that he should not only absteyne from
unclean work, but also from the cast of his eye, and his mind free from
error of thought, that should make the body of Christ. These be S. Hieroms
words in this place. By the latter part whreof appears plainly how S.
Hierome means of Christ's body in the Sacrament, of which the loaves that
were (Panes propositionis) were a shadow (as S. Hierome says) that bread being
the image, and this the truth, that the example, and this that was prefigured.
So as if Christ's body in the Sacrament should be there but figuratively (as
this author teaches) then were the bread of Proposition, figure of a figure,
and shadow of a shadow which is over great an absurdity in our religion.
Therefore there can not be a more plain proof to show, that by S. Hieromes
mind, Christ's body is verily in the Sacrament and not figuratively only, then
when he notes (Panes propositionis) to be the figure and the shadow of
Christ's body in the Sacrament. For as Tertulian says, Tertulianus aduersus
Martione^ lib. 4.
Figura non esset nisi veritatis esses corpus. The other were not to be called
a figure, if that, answered unto it, were not of truth, which is the sense of
Tertulians words. And therefore S. Hierome could with no other words have
expressed his mind so certainly and plainly, as with these to confess ye
truth of Christ's body in the Sacrament. And therefore regard not reader what
this author says: For S. Hierome affirms plainly Christ's true body to be in
the Sacrament, the consecration whereof although S. Hierom attributes to the
minister, yet we must understand him, that he takes God for the author and
worker, notwithstanding by reason of the minestry in the church, the doing is
ascribed to manne as minister, because Christ said (Hoc facite) after which
speech, salvation, remission of sin, and the work in other Sacraments is
attribute to the minister, being nevertheless the same the propre and special
works of God.

And this I add, because some be unjustly offended, to hear that man should
make the body of Christ. And this author findth fault before at the word
making, which religiousely heard and reverently spoken, should offend no man,
for man is but a minyster, wherein he should not glory. And Christ makes not
him self of the matter of bread, nor makes him self so often of bread a new
body, but sitting in heaven, does as our invisible Priest work in the mystery
of the visible pristhood of his church, and makes present by his omnipotency,
his glorified body and blood in this high mystery, by conuertion of the visible
creatures of bread and wine, as Emissen says, into the same. This author of
this book (as thou reader may perceive) applies the figure of the breades
called Panes propositionis, to the body of Christ to come, where as S. Hierome
calls them the figure of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and therefore does
fashion his argument in this sense. If those breades that were but a figure,
required so much cleanes in them that should eat them, that they might not eat
of them, which a day or two before had lain with their wives: what cleanes is
required in him that should make the body of Christ? Whereby thou may se how
this author has reserved this notable place of S. Hierom to the later end,
that thou should in the end as well as in the midst see him evidently
snarled, for the better remembrance.

Caunterbury.
TO these words of S. Hierome I have sufficiently answered in my former
book. And now to add some thing thereunto, I say that Panis Propositionis, be
figures of the sacrament, but of Christ's very body. And yet the same body is
not only in the sacrament figuratively, but it is also in the true
ministration thereof, spiritually present and spirituallye eaten, as in my book
I have plainly declared. But how is it possible that Caius Vlpian or Sceuola,
Batholus, Baldus or Curtius should have knowledge what, is meant by the
spiritual presence of Christ in the sacrament, and of the spiritual eating of
his flesh and blood, if they be void of a lively faith feeding and comforting
their souls, with their own works and not with the breaking of the body and
shedding of the blood of our Savior Christ.

The meat that the Papists live, by is indulgences and pardons, and such other
remission of sins, as comes all from the Pope, which gives no life, but
infecteth and poysoneth: but the meat that the true Christian man lives by,
is Christ him self, who is eaten only by faith, and so eaten is life and
spirit, giving that life that endures and continues for ever. God grant
that we may learn this heavenly knowledge of the spiritual presence, that we
may spiritually taste and feed of this heavenly food.

Panis propositionis, to be the figure and shadow of Christ's body in the
sacrament. For (as Tertulian says) the other were not to be called a figure,
if that which answers to it were not of truth. Here your (for) is a plain
fallax a non causa vt causa, and a wondrous subtlety is used therein. For
where Tertulian proves, that Christ had here in earth a very body (which
Martion denied because that bread was instituted to be a figure thereof, and
there can be no figure of a thing that is not, you allege Tertulians
words, as though he should say, that Christ's body is in the sacrament under
the form of bread, whereof neither Tertulian entreated in that place, nor it
is not required, that the body should be corporally where the figure is, but
rather it should be in vain to have a figure when ye thing it self is
present. And therefore you untruly report both of S. Hierome and Tertulian.
For neither of them both do say, as you would gather of their words, that
Christ's body is in the sacrament really and corporally.

Whether the body of Christ be made of the mattier of bread
either you be very ignorant in the doctrine of the sacrament (as it has been
taught these five hundred years) or else you dissemble the matter. Has not
this been the teaching of the schole divines, yea of Innocent him self, that
the matter of this Sacrament is bread of wheat, and wine of grapes? Do they not
say, that ye substance of bread is turned into the substance of Christ's
flesh? and that his flesh is made of bread? And who works this, but Christ
him self? And have you not confessed all this in your book of the Devils
sophistry? why do you then deny here that which you taught before, and which
has been the common aproued doctrine of the Papists so many years? And
because it should have the more authorite, was not this put into the mass
books, and read every year? Dognum datur christianis, quod in ca^nem transit
panis, and uinum in sanguinem? Now seeing that you have taught so many years,
that the matter and substance of bread is not consumed to nothing, but is
changed and turned into the body of Christ, so that the body of Christ is
made of it, what mean you now to deny that Christ is made of the matier of
bread? Ihon, 2. Exo. 7. Genesis 2.
When water was turned into wine, was not ye wine made of the water? And when
the rod was turned into a serpent, and water into blood, the earth into a
man, and his ribbe into a woman, Were not the woman, man, blood and serpent,
made of the matter of the ribbe, the earth, the water and the rod? And is not
every thing made of that which is turned into it? As bread is made of Corn,
wine of grapes, bear of water, hoppes and malt, and so of all things like?
And when you have confessed your selves so many years passed, that Christ is
made of bread in the sacrament, what moves you now to say, that Christ makes
not him self of ye matter of bread? except yt either you will say, yt the
priest does it and not Christ (which were an intolerable blaspheme) or that
the truth is of such a nature that even the very adversaries thereof (sometime
unawares acknowledge it, or else that force of arguments constrayneth you to
confess the truth against your will, when you see none other shift to escape?
But if you take upon you to defend the received doctrine of the Papists, you
must affirm that doctrine which they affirm, and say that bread in the
Sacrament is the matter whereof Christ's body is made, whereof must than needs
follow ex consequenti, that he has from time to time a new body, made of new
bread, besides the body which was incarnated, and never but once made, nor of
none other substance but of his mother. So that it is but a vain cauilation
(only to elude simple people, or to shift of the matter) to say (as you do)
that Christ is not made of the bread, but is made to be present there. For
than should he have said, There is my body, and not, This is my body And to be
present, requires no new making: but to be present by conversion, requires a
new making. As the wine that was bought at the marriage in the Cane of Galilee
(if there were any such) was present without conuertion, and so without new
making: but the wine that was made of water, was present by conuertion, which
could not be without new making. And so must Christ's body be newly made, if it
be present by corporal conuertion of the substance of bread, into the
substance of it. And now I refer to every indifferent reader, to judge
between us both, which of us is most snarled. Now let us examine the other
authors following in my book.

Augustinus Sedulius. Leo. Fulgentius. Cassiodorus. Gregorius,
And the same is to be answered unto all that the adversaries bring of S.
Augustine, Sedulius, Leo, Fulgentius. Cassiodorus, Gregorius, and other,
concerning the eating of Christ in the Sacrament.

Which thing can not be understood plainly as the words sound, but
figuratively and spiritually, as before is sufficiently proved, and hereafter
shall be more fully declared in the fourth part of this book.

Winchester.
Because this author who hitherto has answered none substancially, would
nevertheless be seen to answer all, he windeth up six of them in one
fardell, S. Augustine, Augustinus, Sedulius. Leo. Fulgentius. Cassiodorus,
Gregorius.
and dispatcheth them all with an (ut supra:) and among them I think he would
have knitte up all the rest of the learned men of all ages, among whom I
know none that write, as this Author does of the Sacrament, or impugneth the
Catholic faith as this author does by the envious name of Papists. Sense
Christ's time there is no memory more

But secretly, when it happened, begun by conspiration, and in the end ever
hitherto extincte and quenched. First was Bertrame, then Berengarius, then
Wicleffe, and in our time, Decolampadius, Zwinglius, and Ioachimus Uadianus. I
will not reckon Peter Martyr, Peter Martyr.
because such as know him, says he is not learned: nor this author, because he
does but as it were, translate Peter Martyr, saving he roueth at solutions, as
likes his fantasy, as I have before declared. Which matter being thus, it is
a strange title of this Book, to call it the true Catholic doctrine.

Caunterbury.


And as for your own doctrine, it is so strange, that neither it agrees with
the scripture, nor with the old catholic church, nor yet with the later
church or congregation of the Papists: but you stand post alone, after the
fall of the Papisticall doctrine, as sometime an old post stands when the
building is overthrown.

Nicholas the second. Berengarius.
that the papists the^ selves be now ashamed of it. And since that time, have
many thousands been cruelly persecuted only for the profession of the true
faith. For no maune might speak one word against the byshope of Romes
determination herein, but he was taken for an heretic, and so condemned, as
Wiclieffe, Husse, and an infinite number mo.

And as for Bertram, Bertram.
he was never before this time detected of any error that ever I read, but
only now by you. For all other that have written of him, have spoken much to
his commendation and praise. But I know what the matter is, he has written
against your mind, which is a fault and error great enough.

As for Doctor Peter Martyr, he is of age to answer for him self, but
concerning him, that told you that he was not learned, I would wish you to
leave this old rooted fault in you, to be light of credit. For I suppose,
that if his lernyng that told you that lie, and yours also, were set both
together, you should be far behind Master Peter Martyr. Marye in words, I
think that you alone would ouerlay two Peter Martyrs, Peter Martyr.
he is so sobre a man, and delights not in wasting of words in vain. And
none do say that he is not learned, but such as know him not, or be not learned
themselves, or else be so malicious or envious, yt they wittingly speak against
their own conscience. And no doubt, that man brings him self out of the
estimation of a learned man, which, has heard him reason and read, and says
that he is not learned. And whosoever misreporteth him, and has never heard
him, may not be called so well Momus as Sicophanta, whose property is to
mysreporte the^, whom thy neither see nor know. Now rests only Damascene,
of whom I write thus.

The answer to Damascenus de fide orth. lib. 4. cap 14.
But here John Damascen may in no wise be passed over, whom for is anctoritie,
the adversaries of Christ's true natural body, do reckon as a stout champion,
sufficient to defend all the whole matter alone. But neither is the authorite
of Damascene so great, that they may oppress us thereby, nor, his words so
plain for them, as they boast and untruly pretend. For he is but a young new
author in the respect of those which we have brought in for our party. And in
diverse points he varieth from the most ancient authors (if he mean as they
expound him) as when he says, that the bread and wine be not figures, which
all the old authors call figures: and that the bread and

And moreover the said Damascene was one of the Bishop of Romes chief proctours
against the Emperors, and as it were his right hand, to set abroad all
idolatrye by his own hand writing. And therefore if he lost his hand (as they
say he did) he lost it by Gods most righteous judgment, whatsoever they
feign and fable of the myraculous restitution of the same. And yet whatsoever
the said Damescen writes in other matters, surely in this place which the
adversaries do allege, he writes spiritually and godly, although the Papists
either of ignorance mistake him, or else willingly wrast him, and writh him to
their purpose, clean contrary to his meaning.

The sum of Damascene his doctrine in this matter is this. That as Christ being
both God and man has in him two natures, so has he two natiuities, one
eternal, and the other temporal. And so likewise we (being as it were double
men, or having every one of us two men in us, the new man and the old man, the
spiritual man and the carnal man) have a double nativity: One of our first
carnal father Adam (by whom as by ancient inheritance, comes unto us
maledictio^ and everlasting damnation) and the other of our heavenly Adam, that
is to say, of Christ, by whom we be made heirs of celestial benediction, and
everlasting glory and imortalitie.

And because this Adam is spiritual, therefore our generation by him must be
spiritual, and our feeding must be likewise spiritual. And our spiritual
generation by him is plainly set forth in baptism, and our spiritual meat and
food is set forth in the holy communion and supper of the Lord. And because our
sightes be so feeble that we cannot see the spiritual water wherewith we be
washed in baptism, nor the spiritual meat wherewith we be fed at the Lords
table. Therefore to help our infermities, and to make us the better to see the
same with a pure faith, our savior Christ has set forth the same, as it were
before our eyes, by sensible signs and tokens, which we be daily used and
accustomed unto.

And because the common custom of men, is to wash in water, therefore our
spiritual regeneration in Christ, or spiritual washing in his blood, is
declared unto us in baptism by water. Likewise our spiritual norishme^t and
feeding in Christ, is set before our eyes by bread and wine, because they be
meats and drinks which chiefly and usually we be fed withal^ that as they
feed the body, so does Christ with his flesh and blood spiritually feed the
soul.

And therefore the bread and wine be called examples of Christ's flesh and
blood, and also they be called his very flesh and blood, to signify unto us,
that as they feed us carnally, so do they admonish us, that Christ with his
flesh and blood does feed us spiritually, and most truly unto everlasting life.

And as almighty God by his most mighty word and his holy spirit and infinite
power, brought forth all creatures in the beginning, and ever since has
preserved them: even so by the same word and power he works in us, from time
to time, this marvelous spiritual generation and wonderful spiritual
nourishment and feeding, which is wrought only by God, and is comprehended and
received of us by faith.

And as bread and drink by natural nourishment, be changed into a man's
body, and yet the body is not changed, but is the same that it was before: so
although the bread and wine be sacrame^tally changed into Christ's body, yet
his body is the same, and in the same place that it was before, that is to say,
in heaven, without any alteration of the same.

And the bread and wine be not so changed into the flesh and blood of Christ,
that they be made one nature, but they remain still distinct in nature so that
the bread in it self is not his flesh, and the wine his blood, but unto them
that worthily ear and drink the bread and wine, to them the bread and wine
be his flesh and blood, that is to say, by things natural, and which they be
accustomed unto, they be exaulted unto things above nature. For the
sacramental bread and wine be not bare and naked figures, but so pithy and
effectuous, that who soever worthily eats them, eats spiritually Christ's
flesh and blood, and has by them everlasting life.

Wherefore, whosoever comes to the Lords table, must come with all humility,
fear, reverence, and purity of life, as to receive not only bread and wine,
but also our savior Christ, both God and man, withal his benefits, to the
relief and sustentation both of their bodies and souls.

This is briefly the sum and true meaning of Damascene, concerning this
matter.

Wherefore they that gather of him; either the natural presence of Christ's
body in the Sacraments of bread and wine, or the adoration of the outward and
visible sacrament: or that after the consecration there remains no bread, nor
wine, nor other substance, but only the substance of the body and blood of
Christ either they understand not Damascene, or else of wilful frowardnes they
will not understand him: which rather seems to be true, by such colections as
they have unjustly gathered and noted out of him.

For although he say, that Christ is the spiritual meat, yet as in baptism
the holy ghost is not in the water, but in him that is unfeignedly baptized: so
Damascene meant not, that Christ is in the bread, but in him that worthily
eats the bread.

And though he say that the bread is Christ's body and the wine his blood, yet
he meant not that the bread considered in it self, or the wine in it self,
being not received, is his flesh and blood: but to such as by unfeigned faith
worthily receive the bread and wine, to such the bread and wine, are called by
Damascene the body and blood of Christ, because that such persons, through the
working of the holy ghost, be so knitte and united spiritually to Christ's
flesh and blood, and to his divinity also, that they be fed with them unto
everlasting life.

Furthermore, Damascene says not that the sacrament should be worshipped and
adored, as the Papists term it (which is plain idolatrye) but that we must
worship Christ God and man. And yet we may not worship him in bread and wine,
but sittyng in heaven with his father, and being spiritually within our selves.

Nor he says not; that there remains no bread nor wine, nor none other
substance, but only the substance of the body and blood of Christ: but he
says plainly, that as a burning coal is not wodde only, but fire and wodde
joined together, so the bread of the Communion is not bread only, but bread
joined to the divinity. But those that say, that there is none other substance
but the substance of the body and blood of Christ, do not only deny that
there is bread and wine, but by force they must deny also, that there is either
Christ's divinity or his soul. For if the flesh and blood, the soul and
diuininitie of Christ be four substances, and in the sacrament be but two of
them, that is to say, his flesh and blood, than where is his soul and
divinity? And thus these men divide Jesus, seperating his divinity from his
humanity. Of whom S. John says: 1. John. 4.
Whosoever deuideth Jesus, is not of God, but he is Antichrist.

And moreover these men do so separate Christ's body from his members in the
sacrament, In libro de duabus in Christo voluntatibus.
that they leave him no man's body at all. For as Damascene says that the
distinction of members pertayne so much to the nature of man's body, that where
there is no such distinction, there is no perfect man's body.

But by these papists doctrine, there is no such distinction of members in the
sacrament: for either there is no head, feet, hands, arms, legs mouth,
eyes, and nose at all, or else all his head, all feet, all hands, all arms,
all legs, all mouth, all eyes, and all nose. And so they make of Christ's
body, no man's body at all.

Thus being confuted the Papists erroures, as well concerning
Transubstanciation, as the real, corporal, and natural presence of Christ in
the sacrament (which were two principal points purposed in the beginning of
this work) Now it is time some thing to speak of the third error of the
papists, which is concerning the eating of Christ's very body, and drinking of
his blood.

Winchester.
Damascene.
Last of all, the author bussieth himself with Damascene, and goes about to
answer so ever his judgment were, he writes as Melancton says, his
testimony of the faith of the Sacrament, as it was in his time. I would write
in here Damasceus words, to compare them with the sum collected by this
author, whereby to disprove his particulars plainly, but the words of Damascene
be to be read, translated already abroad.

As for the four substances, which this author by account numbreth of Christ,
might have been left vnreckened by tale, because among them that be faithful,
and understand truly where soever the substance of Christ's very body is,
there is also understood by concomitaunce to be present the substance of his
soul as very man, and also of the Godhead as very God. Concomitance.
And in the matter of the sacrament therefore, contending with him that would
have the substance of bread there, it may be said there is in the Sacrament
the only substance of Christ's body, because the word only thus placed,
excludes other strange substaunces, and not the substances which without
contention be known and confessed unite with Christ's body. And so a man may
be said to be alone in his house, when he has no strangers, although he has
a number of his own men. And Erasmus notes how the euangilest writes Christ
to have prayed alone, and yet certain of his disciples were there. And if in a
contention raised, whether the father and son were both killed in such a
field or no, I defended the father to have been only killed there, and
thereupon a wager laid, should I lose, if by proof it appeared, that not only
the father, but also three or four of the fathers servants were slain, but
the son escaped? And as in this speech the word (only) served to exclude
that was in contention, and not to reduce the number to one, no more is it in
the speech that this author would reprove, and therefore neded not to have
occupied him self in the matter, wherein I heard him once say in a good
audience, him self was satisfied. In which mind I would he had continued, and
having so sclender stuff as this is, and the truth so evident against him, not
to have resuscitate this so often reproved untruth, wherein never hitherto any
one could prevail.

Caunterbury.




Now have I answered to all your friuilous cauilations against my third book,
and fortified it so strongly, that you have spent all your shot and powder in
vain. And I trust I have either broken your pieces, or pegged them, that you
shall be able to shoot no more. Or if you shoot, the shot shall be so
faynte, that it shall not be able to perce through a paper leaf. And the life.
I trust to do, to all the munition and ordinance laid against my fourth
book.

THE CONFVTATION OF the fourth book.
THus having perused the effect of the third book, I will likewise peruse the
fourth, and then shall follow in direct course, to speak of the matter of
transubstantiacion. In this fourth Book the author entreats eating and
drinking of Christ's body and blood: And in the first part thereof trauayleth to
confirm his purpose, and in the second part, answers as he can so his
adversaries, and so takes accasion to speak of Adoration.

His chief purpose is to prove that evil men receive not ye body and blood of
Christ August. in sermon domini in moute lib. 3.
where

In the Catholic teaching, all the doctrine of eating of Christ is concluded
in two and orders us to seek his gifts of health and life there, August. de
peccat. meri. et remist. lib. 1. Cap. 24.
whereupon S. Augustine notes how Baptism among the Christian men of Aphrike
was very well called health, and the Sacrament of Christ's body called life, as
in which God gives health and life, if we worthily use them. The ordinance of
these Sacraments is Gods work, the very author of the^, who as he is in him
self uniform, as S. James says, without alteration, so as David says, his
works be true, Jacob. 1.
which is as much as uniforme, for truth and uniforme answers together. As
God is all Goodness, so all his works be good. The substance of Gods work
So Ephe. 4. Math. 13.
And the parable of the sower which Christ declared himself, shows a
diversity of the grounds where the seed did fall, but the seed was all one,
that did fall in the good ground, and yt did fall in the naughty ground, but it
fructified only in the good ground, which seed Christ calls his word.

And in the sixth of S. John says, John. 6. Augustinus In Ioh. tract. 27.
his word is spirit and life, so as by the teaching of Romans 3.
as S. Paul says which place Luther alleges to show the unity in the
substance of Baptism, whither it be ministered to good or evil. 2. Corin. 2.
But S. Paul to the Corinthians declares it notably in these words. We be
the good savor of Christ in them that be salued, and them that perish. Here S.
Paul notes the savor good and one to diverse men: but after the diversity in
men of diverse effects in them, that is to say, the savor of life, and the
savor of death, which saying of S. Paul the Greek scooles gathered by
Oecumenius, Oecumenius.
open and declare with similitudes in nature very aptly. The dove (they say)
and the beetell, shall feed both upon one ointment, and the beetell dye of it,
and the dove strengthened by it. The diversity in the effect following of the
diversity of them that eat, and not of that is eaten, which is always one.
According hereunto S. Augustine against the donatists gives for a rule the
sacraments to be one in all, although they be not one that receive and use
them. And therefore to knitte up this matter for the purpose, I intend and write
it, for we must consider the substance of the visible

Wherefore if it be more then a figure, as it is in deed, and if by Christ's
ordinance it has present under the form of those visible signs of bread and
wine, the very body and blood of Christ, as both been truly taught hitherto,
then is the substance of the Sacrament one always as the ointment was, whether
doves eat of it or beteles. And this Issue I join with this author, An Issue.
that he shall not be able by any learning to make any diversity in the
substance of this sacrament, what soever diversity follow in the effect. For
the diversity of the effect, is occasioned in them that receive, as before is
proved. And then to answer this author. I say that only good men eat and
drinck the body and blood of Christ spiritually, as I have declared, but all
good and evil receive the visible Sacrament of that substance, God has
ordained it, which in it has no variance, but is all one to good and evil.

Caunterbury.
IN this book, because you agree with me almost in the whole, I shall not need
much to travail in the answer, but leaving all your pretty tau^tes against me,
and glorious bosting of your self, which neither beseems our persons, nor
hinders the truth (nor furthereth) your part, but by pompouse words to win
a vain glory and fame of them that be unlearned, and have more regard to
words then judgment of the matter) I shall only touch, here and there such
things as we vary in, or that be necessary for the defense of the truth.

First after the su^me of my fourth book, collected as pleases you, at the
first dash you begin with an untrue report, joined to a subtell deceyte or
falax, saying that my chief purpose is to prove that evil men receive not the
body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament. And hereupon you conclude, that my
fourth book is superfluouse. But of a false antecedent, all that be learned do
know that nothing can be rightly concluded. Now mine intent and purpose in my
fourth boooke is not to prove, that evil men receive not the body and blood of
Christ in the sacrament (although that be true) but my chief purpose is to
prove, that evil men eat not Christ's flesh nor drink not his blood,
neither in the sacrament nor out of the sacrament: as on the other side good
men eat and drink them both in the sacrament: and out of the Sacrament.

And in the word (Sacrament) which is of your addition (is a subtle falax, The
word sacrament.
called double understanding. For when the Sacrament is called only a figure
(as you rehearse) wherein the body and blood of Christ be only figuratively,
there the word (Sacrament) is taken for the outward signs of bread and wine.
And after when you rehearse that the Sacrament is a visible preaching by the
tokens and signs of bread and wine, in believing and remembering Christ's
benefits, there the word (Sacrament) is taken for the whole ceremony and
ministration of the Sacrament. And so when you go about by equivocation of the
word to deceive other men, you fall into your own snare, and be deceived your
self, in that you think you convey the matter so craftily, that no man can
espy you.

But to utter the matter plainly without fallax or cauilation, I teach that no
man can eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood but spiritually, which
forasmuch as evil men do not, although they eat the sacramental bread until
their bellyes be full, and drink the wine until they be dronken, yet eat
they neither Christ's flesh, nor drink his blood, neither in the sacrament
nor without the sacrament, because they cannot be eaten and dronken but by
spirit and faith, whereof ungodly men be destitute, being nothing but world and
flesh.

This therefore is the sum of my teaching in this fourth book, that in the
true ministration of the Sacrament Christ is present spiritually, and so
spiritually eaten of them that be godly and spiritual. And as for the ungodly
and carnal, they may eat the bread, and drink the wine, but with Christ him
self they have no communion or company, 1. Cor. 6.
and therefore they neither eat his flesh nor drink his blood, which who
soever eats, Ihon. 6.
has (as Christ says him self) life by him, as Christ has life by his
father. And to eat Christ's body or drink his blood (says S. Augustine) is
to have life. August in John. tract. 26. and de verbis Apost. sermon. 2.
For whether Christ be in the Sacrament corporally (as you say) or spiritually
in them that rightly believe in him, and duly receive the Sacrament (as I say)
yet certain it is, that there he is not eaten corporally but spiritually. For
corporal eating with ye mouth, is to chaw and tear in pieces with ye teeth,
after which manner Christ's body is of no man eaten: although Nicholas the
second, Nicolaus secundus.
made such an article of the faith, and compelled Berengatius so to profess.
And therefore although Christ were corporally in the Sacrament, yet seeing that
he cannot be corporally eaten, this book comes in good place and is very
necessary, to know that Christ's body can not be eaten but spiritually, by
believing and remembering Christ's benefits, and reuoluing them in our mind,
believing that as the bread and wine feed and nourish our bodies, so Christ
feeds and nourishes our souls.

Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 10.
Is not the breakyng and eating of the bread, after such sort as Christ
ordained, a communication of Christ's body unto us? Is not the cup likewise a
communication of his blood unto us? Should not then christian people according
hereunto, in faith feed upon Christ spiritually, believing that as the bread and
wine feed and nourish their bodies, so both Christ their souls with his own
flesh and blood? And shall any Christian man now say, that these be good
words, but such as the words in Christ's supper do not learn us?



in sermon Domini in monte, Augusti. in sermo. domini in monte. lib. 2.
the iij book. For he calls there the daily bread, which we continually pray
for, either corporal bread and meat which is our daily sustenaunce for the
body, or else the visible sacrament of bread and wine, or the invisible
sacrament of gods word and commandments, of the which sacraments gods word
is daily heard, and the other is daily seen. And if by the invisible sacrament
of gods word S. Augustine meant our norishment by Christ's flesh and blood,
than be we nourished with them as well by gods word, as by the sacrament of the
lords supper.

But yet who so ever told you that S. Augustine wrote this in the iij. book
de sermon Domini in monte, trust him not much hereafter, for he did utterly
deceive you. For S. Augustine wrote no more but.ij. books de sermon Domine in
monte, and if you can make iij. of ij. (as you do here) and one of iiij. as you
did before in the substances of Christ, you be a meruailouse auditour, and then
had all men need to beware of your accomptes, least you deceive them. And you
cannot lay the fault here in the Printer, for I have seen it written so both by
your own hand, and by the hand of your secretary.

Now when you have wrangled in this matter as much as you can, at length you
confess the truth, that who so feeds upon Christ spiritually, must needs be
a good man, (for only good men be members of Christ's mystical body) which
spiritual eating is so good a fruit, as it declares the tree necessarelye to
be good. And therefore it must be and is a certain conclusion, that only good
men do eat and drink the body and blood of Christ spiritually, that is
to say, effectually to life. This you write in conclusion, and this is ye very
doctrine that I teach, and in the same terms: marry, I add thereto, yt the
eating of Christ's body is a spiritual eating, and the drinking of his blood
is a spiritual drinkyng, and therefore no evil man can eat his flesh, nor
drink his blood, as this my forth book teaches, and is necessary to be
written. For although neither good nor evil men eat Christ's body in the
sacrament, under the visible signs, in the which he is not but sacramentally:
yet the good feed of him spiritually, being inhabiting spiritually within
them, although corporally he be absent and in heaven: but the evil men neither
feed upon him corporally, nor spiritually (from whom he is both the said ways
absent) although corporally, they eat and drink with their mouths, the
sacraments of his body and blood.

Three manner of eatings.
Now where you note here three manner of eatinges, and yet but two August in
Ioh. tract. 26.
to the condemnation of their presumption. And for this cause also S. Paul
says not, He that eats Christ's body, and drinks his blood unworthily,
shall have condemnation, and be gilty of the Lords body: but he says, he that
eats this bread, 1. Cor. 11.
and drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Lords body,
and eats and drinks his own damnation, because he estemeth not the Lords
body.

And here you commit two foul faults. One is, that you declare S. Paul to
speak of the body and blood of Christ, when he spoke of the bread and wine.
The other fault is, that you add to S. Paul's words this word (there) and so
build your work upon a foundation made by your own self.

And where you say, that if my doctrine be true, neither good men nor evil
eat but the sacramental bread, it can be none other but very frowardnes and
mere wilfulnes, that you will not understand that thing which I have spoken so
plainly, and repeted so many times. For I say, that good men eat the Lords
body spiritually to their eternal nourishment, where as evil men eat but the
bread carnally to their eternal punishment. And as you note of S. Augustine,
that baptism is very well called health, August. de peccatorum meritis and
remiss. li. 1. cap. 24.
and the sacrament of Christ's body called life, as in which God gives health
and life, if we worthily use them: so is the sacramental bread very well
called Christ's body, and ye wine his blood, as in the ministration whereof,
Christ gives us his flesh and blood, if we worthily receive them.

The works of God uniform.
in worthy and unworthy, you bring in this mystical matter here clearly
without purpose or reason, far passing the capacity of simple readers, only
to blind their eyes withal. By which kind of teaching it is all one work of
God to save and to damn, to kill and to give life, to hate and to love, to
elect and to reject, and to be short, by this kind of doctrine God and all his
works be one, without diversity either of one work from an other, or of his
works from his substance. And by this means it is all one work of God in
baptism and in the Lords supper. But all this is spoken quite besides the
matter, and serves for nothing but to cast a mist before men's eyes, as it
seems you seek nothing else through your whole book.

Spirit and life to fall upon evil men.
which doctrine I will not name what it is, for all faithful men know the name
right well and detest the same. 2 Cor. 6.
And what ignorance can be showed more in him that accoumpteth himself
learned, then to gather of Christ's words (where her says, his words be
spirit and life) that spirit and life should be in evil men because they hear
his words. John. 6.
For the words which you recyte by and by of S. Augustine, show how vain your
argument is, Aug. in John, tract. 27.
when he says, The words be spirit and life, but not to thee, that do
carnally understand them. What estimation of learning or of truth would you
have men to conceive of you, that bring such unlearned arguments whereof the
inuadilitie appears within six lines after? Which must needs declare in you
either, much untruth and insincere proceeding, or much ignorance, or at the
least all exceeding forgetfulness, to say anythyng, reproved again within six
lines after. And if the promises of God (as you say) be not disapoynted by our
infidelity, then if evil men eat the very body of Christ and drink his
blood, they must needs dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them, and
by him have everlasting life: because of these promises of Christ, Qui manducat
meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in memanet et ego in eo. Et quimanducat
meam carnem and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam aeternam, John. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life. And he
that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. And
yet the third promise. Qui manducat me, and ipse viues propter me, John. 6.
He that eats me, he shall also live by me. These be.iij. promises of God,
which if they can not be disapoynted by our infidilitie, then if evil men eat
the very body of Christ and drink his blood (as you say they do in the
sacrament) then must it needs follow, that they shall have everlasting life,
and that they dwell in Christ and Christ in them, because our infidilitie (say
you) can not disappoynt Gods promises.

The promises of God under condition.
And how agrees this your saying with that doctrine which you were wont
earnestly to teach both by mouth and pen, that all the promises of God to us
be made under condition, if our infidilitie can not disappoynt Gods promises?
For then the promises of God must needs have place, whether we observe the
condition or not.

But here you have fetched a great compass and circuit utterly in vain, One
substance to good and bad.
but ever affirmed, which is, That the substance of the visible sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, (which I say is bread and wine in the sacrament,
as water is in baptism) is all one substance to good and to badde, and to both
a figure. But that under the form of bread and wine, is corporally present by
Christ's ordinance his very body and blood, either to good or to ill, that you
neither have nor can prove, and yet thereupo^ would you bring in your
conclusion here, wherein you commit that folly in reasoning, which is caled
Petitio principij.

The issue.
What need you to make herein any issue, when we agree in ye matter? For in the
substance I make no diversity, but I say that the substance of Christ's body
and blood is corporally present, neither in the good eater, nor in the evil.
And as for the substance of bread and wine, I say they be all one, whether the
good or evil eat and drink them. As the water of Baptism is all one, 2.
Cor. 2.
whether Simon Peter, or Simon Magus, be christened therein, and it is one word
that to the evil is a sauoure of death and to the good is a sauoure of life.
And as it is one Son that shines upon the good and the badde, Math. 5.
that melts butter, and makes the earth hard: one flower whereof the be
sucketh honey, and the spyder poison, and one ointment, (as Decumenius says)
that kylleth the bettyll, Decumenius.
and strengthens ye dove. Nevertheless as all that be washed in the water be
not washed with the holy spirit, so all that eat the sacramental bread, eat
not the very body of Christ. And thus you see that your issue is to no purpose,
except you would fight with your own shadow.

Now forasmuch as after all this vain and frivolous consuming of words you
begin to make answer unto my profes, I shall here rehearse my profes and
arguments, to the intent that the reader seeing both my profes and your
confutations before his eyes, may the better consider and give his judgment
therein. My forth book begins thus. Chap. 1.


Whether evil men do eat and drink Christ.
THe gross error of the Papists is, Of the carnal eating and drinking of
Christ's flesh and blood with our mouths.

For they say, that whosoever eat and drink the sacraments of bread and
wine, do eat and drink also with their mouths Christ's very flesh and blood,
be they never so ungodly and wicked persons. But Christ him self taught clean
contrary in the sixth of John, that we eat not him carnally with our mouths,
but spiritually with our faith, saying: John. 6.
Verily verily I say unto you: he that believes in me, has everlasting life. I
am the bread of life. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and dyed.
This is the bread that came from heaven, The godly only eat Christ.
that who so ever shall eat thereof, shall not dye. I am the lively bread that
came from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And the
bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.

This is the most true doctrine of our savior Christ, that whosoever eats
him, shall have everlasting life. And by and by it follows in the same place
of S. John more clearly. Verily verily I say unto you, except you eat the flesh
of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. He
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, John. 6.
and I will raise him again at the last day: For my flesh is very meat, and
my blood is very drink. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. As the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father, even so he that eats me, shall live by me. This is the bread
which came down from heaven, not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead.
He that eats this bread shall live for ever.

This taught our savior Christ as well his disciples as the Jews at
Capernaum, that the eating of his flesh and drincking of his blood was not like
to the eating of Manna. For both good and bad did eat Manna, but none do eat
his flesh and drink his blood, but they have everlasting life. For as his
father dwells in him, and he in his father, and so has life by his father:
so he that eats Christ's flesh and drinks his blood, dwells in Christ
and, Christ in him, and by Christ he has eternal life.

What need we any other witness? when Christ himself does testify the matter
so plainly, that who so ever eats his flesh and drinks his blood, has
everlasting life? and that to eat his flesh and to drink his blood, is to
believe in him? And who so ever believes in him, has everlasting life, whereof
it follows necessarily, that ungodly persons (being limbs of the devil) do
not eat Christ's flesh nor drink his blood, except the Papists would say,
that such have everlasting life.

But as the devil is the food of the wicked, which he nourishes in all
iniquity, and brings up into everlasting damnation: so is Christ the very
food of all them that be the lively members of his body, and them he
nourishes, fedeth, brings up and cherishes unto everlasting life.

And every good and faithful Christian man seleth in himself, Chap. 2.
how he fedeth of Christ, eating his flesh and drincking of his blood. For he
puts the whole hope and trust of his redemption and salvation in that only
sacrifice, What is the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of his blood.
which Christ made upon the Cross, having his body there broken, and his blood
there shed for the remission of his sins. And this great benefit of
Christ, the faithful man earnestly considers in his mind, chaweth and
digesteth it with the stomach of his heart, spiritually receiving Christ wholly
into him, and giving again him self wholly unto Christ.

And this is the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of his blood, the
feeling whereof is to every man, the feling how he eats and drincketh Christ,
which none evil man nor member of the devil can do.

Chap. 3.
For as Christ is a spiritual meat, so is he spiritually eaten and digested
with the spiritual part of us, and gives us spiritual and eternal life, and
is not eaten, Christ is not eaten with teeth but with faith. Cyprian de coena
domini.
swallowed and digested with our teeth, tongues, throtes and bellies.

Therefore says S. Ciprian, he that drincketh of the holy cup, remembering this
benefit of God, is more thirsty then he was before. And lifting up his heart
unto the living God, is taken with such a singular hunger and apetite, that he
abhors all gally and bitter drinks of sin, and all savor of carnal
pleasure is to him as it were sharp and sour viniger. And the sinner being
converted, receiving the holy mysteries of the Lords supper, gives thanks
unto God, and boweth down his head, knowing that his sins be forgeuen, and
that he is made clean and perfect, and his soul (which God has sanctified) he
renders to God again as a faithful pledge, and then he glories with Paul,
and reioyseth saying: Now it is not I that live, but it is Christ that lives
within me. These things be practiced and used among faithful people and to
pure minds, the eating of his flesh is no horror but honor, and the spirit
deliteth in the drinking of the holy and sanctifiing blood. And doing this, we
whet not our teeth to bite, but with pure faith we break the holy bread. These
be the words of Ciprian.

August. de verbis domini ser. 33.
And according unto the same, S. Augustine says: Prepare not thy jaws, but thy
heart. And in an other place he says, why do thou prepare thy belly and thy
teeth? Believe, and thou have eaten. But of this matter is sufficiently spoken
before, In Joan. tractat. 25.
where it is proved, that to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, be
figurative speeches.

Chap. 4. The good only eat Christ.
And now to return to our purpose, that only the lively members of Christ do
eat his flesh and drink his blood, I shall bring forth many other places of
ancient authors before not mentioned.

Origines in Math. cap. 15.
First Origin writes plainly after this manner. The word was made flesh and very
meat, which who so eats, shall surly live for ever, which no evil man can
eat. For if it could be, that he that continues evil might eat the word made
flesh, seeing that he is the word and bread of life, it should not have been
written: Who so ever eats this bread, shall live for ever. These words be so
plain, that I need say nothing for the more clear declaration of them.
Wherefore you shall hear how Ciprian agrees with him.

Ciprianus in sermo. de coena domini.
Cyprian in his sermon, ascribed unto him, of the Lords supper, says: The
author of this tradition said, that except we eat his flesh and drink his
blood, we should have no life in us, instructing us with a spiritual lesson,
and opening to us a way to understand so privy a thing, that we should know,
that the eating is our dwelling in him, and our drincking is as it were an
incorporation in him, being subject unto him in obedience, joined unto him in
our wills, and united in our affections. The eating therefore of this flesh, is
a certain hunger and desire to dwell in him.

Thus writes Cyprian of the eating and drinking of Christ'. And a little after
he says, that none do eat of this lamb, but such as be true Israelites, that
is to say, pure christian men without color or dissimulation.

Athanasius de peccato in spirium sanctum.
And Athanasius speaking of the eating of Christ's flesh and drincking of his
blood, says that for this cause he made mention of his ascentio^ into heaven,
to pluck them from corporal phantasy, that they might learn hereafter that
his flesh was called the celestial meat that came from above, and a
spiritual food, which he would give. For those things that I speak to you
(says he) be spirit and life. Which is as much to say, as that thing which you
se, shall be slain and given for the nourishment of the world, that it may be
distributed to every body spiritually, and be to all men a conservation unto
the resurrection of eternal life.

In these words Athanasius declares the cause why Christ made mention of his
ascension into heaven, when he spoke of the eating and drincking of his flesh
and blood. The cause after Athanasius mind was this, that his hearers should
not think of any carnal eating of his body with their mouths (for as
concerning the presence of his body) he should be taken from them, and ascend
into heaven, but that they should understand him to be a spiritual meat, and
spiritually to be eaten, and by that refreshing to give eternal life, which he
does to none, but to such as be his lively members.

And of this eating speaks also Basilius, Basilius epistol. 141.
that we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, being made by his
incarnation and sensible life, partakers of his word and wisdom. For his
flesh and blood he calls all his mystical conversation here in his flesh and
his doctrine, consisting of his whole life, pertaining both to his humanity
and divinity, whereby the soul is nourished and brought to the contemplation
of things eternal.

Thus teaches Basilius how we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood" which
pertayneth only to the true and faithful members of Christ.

S. Hierom also says: All that love pleasure more then God, eat not the flesh
of Jesus, nor drink his blood. Hieronimus in E^aiam. cap. 66.
Of the which himself says: He that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood,
has everlasting life."

And in an other place S. Hierom says, that heritikes do not eat and drink
the body and blood of the Lord. In Hieremian.


And more over he says, that heretics eat not the flesh of Jesus, In Oseam cap.
8.
whose flesh is the meat of faithful men.

Thus agrees S. Hierom with the other before rehearsed, that heretics and such
as follow worldly pleasures eat not Christ's flesh nor drink his blood,
because that Christ said, He that eats my flesh, and drincketh my blood, has
everlasting life.

And S. Ambrose says, that Jesus is the bread which is the meat of saints
and that he that takes this bread, dies not a sinners death. For this bread
is the remission of sins. Ambrosius de benedictione patriarcharu^ cap. 9. De
his qui miste rus initiantur. De sacramentis li. cap. 5.
And in other book to him entitled, he writes thus. This bread of life which
came down from heaven, does minister everlasting life, and who soever eats
this bread, shall not dye for ever, and is the body of Christ. And yet in an
other book set forth in his name, he says on this wise: He that did eat
Manne dyed, but he that eats this body, shall have remission of his sins,
and shall not dye for ever. Lib. 5. cap. 3.
And again he says: As often as thou drinckest thou have remission of thy
sins.

These sentences of S. Ambrose be so plain in this matter, that there needs
no more, but only the rehersall of them.

But S. Augustine in many places plainly discussing this matter, says: He that
agrees not with Christ, does neither eat his body, nor drink his blood,
Augustinus in sente^tiis exprospero decerptis cap. 339.
although to the condemnation of his presumption, he receive every day the
sacrament of so high a matter.

And moreover S. Augustine most plainly resolves this matter in his book De
ciuitate Dei, De ciuitate Dei lib. 21. Cap. 25.
disputing against two kinds of heretics: Whereof the one said, that as many
as were Christened, and received the sacrament of Christ's body and blood,
should be saved, how so ever they lived or believed, because that Christ said:
This is the bread that came from heaven, that who so ever shall eat thereof,
shall not dye. I am the bread of life, which came from heaven, who so ever
shall eat of this bread, shall live for ever.

Therefore (said these heretics) all such men must needs be delivered from
eternal death, and at length be brought to eternal life. The other said, that
heretics and scismatikes might eat the sacrament of Christ's body, but not
his very body, because they be no members of his body.

And therefore they promised not everlasting life to all that received Christ's
baptism and the sacrament of his body, but to all such as professed a true
faith, although they lived never so ungodly. For such (said they) do eat the
body of Christ, not only in a sacrament, but also in deed, because they be
members of Christ's body.

But S. Augustine answering to both these heresies, says: That neither
heretics, nor such as profess a true faith in their mouths, and in their
living show the contrary, have either a true faith (which works by charity,
and does none evil) or are to be counted among the members of Christ. For they
can not be both members of Christ and members of the devil. Therefore (says
he) it may not be said, that any of them eat the body of Christ. For when
Christ says, he that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him: He shows what it is (not sacramentally, but indeed) to eat his
body and drink his blood: which is, when a man dwells so in Christ, that
Christ dwells in him. For Christ spoke those words as if he should say, He
that dwells not in me, and in whom I dwell not let him not say or think,
that he eats my body, or drincketh my blood.

These be the plain words of S. Augustine, that such as live ungodly,
although they may seem to eat Christ's body (because they eat the sacrament
of his body) yet in deed they neither be members of his body, nor do eat his
body.

Also upon the gospel of S. John he says, that he that does not eat his
flesh and drink his blood, has not in him everlasting life. And he that
eats his flesh and drincketh his blood, In Ihon. tractat. 26.
has everlasting life. But it is not so in those meats, which we take to
sustain our bodies. For although without them we cannot live, yet it is not
necessary, that who so ever receaueth them, shall live, for they may dye by
age, sickness or other chances.

But in this meat and drink of the body and blood of our Lord, it is
otherwise. For both they that eat and drink them not, have not everlasting
life: And contrariwyse who so ever eat and drink them, have everlasting life.

Note and ponder well these words of S. Augustine, that the bread and wine and
other meats and drinckes (which nourish the body) a man may eat, and
nevertheless dye: but the very body and blood of Christ no man eats, but
that has everlasting life. So that wicked men can not eat nor drink them,
for then they must needs have by them everlasting life.

And in the same place S. Augustine says further. The sacrament of the unity
of Christ's body and blood is taken in the Lords table, of some men to life:
and of some me^ to death, but the thing it self (whereof it is a sacrament) is
taken of all men to life, and of no man to death. And more over he says: This
is to eat that meat and drink that drink, to dwell in Christ, and to have
Christ dwelling in him. And for that cause he that dwells not in Christ, and
in whom Christ dwells not, without doubt he eats not spiritually his flesh
nor drincketh his blood, although carnally and visibly with his teeth, he byte
the Sacrament of his body and blood.

Thus writes S. Augustine in the xxvj. homely of S. John. And in the next
homely following, he says thus. In John. tractat. 27.
This day our sermon is of the body of the Lord, which he said he would give to
eat for eternal life. And he declared the manner of his gift and distribution,
how he would give his flesh to eat, saying: He that eats my flesh and
drincketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. This therefore is a token or
knowledge, that a man has eaten and drunken, that is to say, if he dwell in
Christ, and have Christ dwelling in him. If he cleave so to Christ, that he is
not severed from him. This therefore Christ taught and admonished by these
mystical or figurative words, that we should be in his body under him our
head among his members, eating his flesh, nor forsaking his unity.

And in his book De doctrina Christiana. S. Augustine says, De doctrina
christiana. lib. 3. Cap. 14.
(as before is at length declared) that to eat Christ's flesh, and to drink
his blood, is a figurative speech signifying the participation of his passion,
and the delectable remembrance to our benefit and profit, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us.

And in an other sermon also De verbis Apostoli he expounds what is the
eating of Christ's body and the drincking of his blood, De verbis Apostoli.
sermo. 2.
saying, The eating is to be refreshed, and the drincking what is but to live?
Eat life, drink life: And that shall be, when that which is taken visibly in
the sacrament, is in very deed eaten spiritually and dronken spiritually.

By all these sentences of S. Augustine it is evident and manifest, that all
men, good and evil, may with their mouths visibly and sensibly eat the
sacrament of Christ's body and blood, but the very body and blood them selves
be not eaten but spiritually, and that of the spiritual members of Christ,
which dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them, by whom they be
refreshed and have everlasting life.

And therefore says S. Augustine, In Ioh Tract. 59
that when the other Apostles did eat bread that was the Lord, yet Judas did
eat but the bread of the Lord, and not the bread that was the Lord. So that
the other Apostles with the sacramental bread did eat also Christ him self,
whom Judas did not eat. And a great number of places more has S. Augustine
for this purpose, which for eschewing of tediousnes, I let pas for this time,
and will speak some thing of S. Cirill. Cyrill upon S. John in his Gospel
says, that those which eat Manna, dyed, Cirillus in Ioh. li. 4. cap. 10.
because they received thereby no strength to live ever: (for it gave no life,
but only put away bodily hunger) but they that receive the bread of life,
shall be made immortal, and shall eschew all the evils that pertayne to
death, living with Christ for ever. And in an other place he sayth^ Cap. 12.
For as much as the flesh of Christ does naturally give life, therefore it
makes them to live that be partakers of it. For it puts death away from
them, and utterly drives destruction out of them.

And he concludes the matter shortly in an other place in few words, Cap. 14.
saying, that when we eat the flesh of our savior, than have we life in us.
For if things that were corrupt, were restored by only touching of his
clothes, how can it be, that we shall not live that eat his flesh? And further
he says, that as two waxes that be molten together, do run every part into
other: Cap. 17.
so he that receaueth Christ's flesh and blood, must needs be joined so with
him, that Christ must be in him, and he in Christ.

Here S. Cyrill declares the dignity of Christ's flesh, being inseparably
annexed unto his divinity, saying, that it is of such force and power, that it
gives everlasting life. And what soever occasion of death it finds, or let
of eternal life, it puts out and drives clean away all the same, from
them that eat that meat and receive that medicine. Other medicines or
playsters sometime heal, and sometime heal not, but this medicine is of that
effect and strength, that it eats away all rotten and dead flesh and
perfectly heals all wounds and sores that it is laid unto.

This is the dignity and excellency of Christ's flesh and blood, joined to his
divinity, of the which dignite, Christ's adversaries the Papists, deprive and
rob him, when they affirm, that such men do eat his flesh and receive this
plaster, as remain still sick and sore, and be not helped thereby.

Thus have thou heard (gentle reader) the grounds and profes which moved me to
write the matter of this iiii. book, that good men only eat Christ's flesh
and drink his blood. Now shall thou here ye late byshopes confutation of the
same.

Winchester.
And as for the Scriptures and doctors which this author alleges to prove
that only good men receive the body and blood of Christ, I grant it without
contention (Non dijudicans corpus domini) not esteming our Lords body. And to
all

As for S. Augustine which this author alleges De ciuitate dei, the same S.
Augustine

Caunterbury.
IF you grant without contention that which I do prove, then you





That may be said not done yt is not well don.
that evil men may be said not to eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood,
because they do it not frutefully, as they ought to do. And that may be called
a not eating, as they may be said not to hear gods word, that hear it not
profitably: and a thing not well done, may be in speech called not done, in the
respect of the good effect. I grant such speeches be sometime used, but very
rarely and when the very truth comes in discussion, then such Paradoxes are
not to be used. As if it come in question whether a house be builded, that is
not well builded, then the diffinition of the matter must not be, that it is
not builded, although the carpenters and other workmen have failed in their
covenant and bargayne, and not builded the house in such sort as they ought to
have done. So our savior Christ teaches that all heard the word, Li^. 8.
whether the seed fell in the high way, or upon the stones, or among the
thorns, or in the good ground. Wherefore when this matter comes in discussion
among the old writers, whether evil men eat Christ's body or no, if the
truth had been that evil men eat it, the old writers would not so precisely
have defined the contrary, that they eat not, but would have said they eat
it, but not effectually, not frutefully, not profitably. But now the authors
which I have alleged, define plainly and absolutely, that evil men eat not
Christ's body, without any other addition. But after this sort that you do use,
it shall be an easy matter for every man to say what likes him, and to defend
it well enough, if he may add to the scriptures and doctors words at his
pleasure, and make the sense after his own phantasye. The scriptures and
Doctoures which I allege, do say in plain words (as I do say) that evil
men do not eat the body of Christ nor drink his blood, but only they that
have life thereby.

Now come you in with your addition and gloss, made of your own head, putting
thereto this word (effectually.) If I should say that Christ was never conceived
nor borne, could not I avoid all the scriptures that you can bring to the
contrary, by adding this word (apparently) and defend my saying stoutly? And
might not the Ualentinians, Marcianistes and other that said that Christ dyed
not for us, defend their error with addition (as they did,) of this word
(putatiue) to all the scriptures that were brought against them? And wat
herisie can be reproved, if the heretics may have ye liberty that you do use,
to add of their own heads to the words of scripture? Deu. 12.
contrary unto Gods word directly, who commands us to add nothing to his
word, nor to take any thing away.

And yet more over, the authorities which I have brought to approve my
doctrine, do clearly cast away your addition, adding the cause why evil men
can not eat Christ's flesh nor drink his blood. And you have taught almost
in the beginning of your book, that Christ's body is but a spiritual body,
and after a spiritual manner eaten by faith. And now you have confessed, that
who so fedeth upon Christ spiritually, must needs be a good man. How can you
than defend now, that evil men eat the body of Christ? except you will now
deny that which you granted in the beginning (and now have forgotten it) that
Christ's body cannot be eaten but after a spiritual manner by faith? Wherein it
is marvel, that you having so good a memory, should forgette the common
proverb, Mendacem memorem esse oportet.

And it had been more convenient for you to have answered fully to Cyprian,
Athanasius, Basyll, Hierom and Ambrose, then when you cannot answer, to wipe
your hands of them with this slender answer, saying that you have answered.
And whether you have or no, I refer to the judgment of the reader.

August de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap.
And as concerning S. Augustine De ciuitate Dei, he says, that evil men
receive the sacrament of Christ's body, although it avails them not. But yet
he says in plain words, that we ought not to say, that any man eats the
body of Christ that is not in the body. And if the reader ever saw any meare
cauilation in all his life time, let him read the chapter of S. Augustine and
compare it to your answer, and I dare say he never saw the like.

And as for the other places of S. Augustine by me alleged, with Origin and
Cirill, for the more ease you pass them over with silence, and dare eat no
such meat it is so hard for you to digest. And thus have you with post have
run over all my scriptures and doctors, as it were playing at the post, with
still passing and giving over every game. And yet shall you never be able for
your part to bring any scripture that serves for your purpose, except you may
be suffered to add thereto such words as you please. Than come you to my
questions wherein I write thus.

And now for corroboration of Cyrils saying, Chap. 5.
I would thus reason with the Papists, and demand of them: When an
unrepentant sinner receaueth the sacrament, whether he have Christ's body
within him or no?

If they say no, than have I my purpose, that evil men although they receive
the sacrament of Christ's body, yet receive they not his very body. If they say
yea, Than I would ask them further, Whether they have Christ's spirit within
them or no?

If they say nay, than do they separate Christ's body from his spirit, and his
humanity from his divinity, and be condemned by the Scripture as very
Antichrists, that divide Christ.

And if they say yea, that a wicked man has Christ's spirit in him, then the
scripture also condemns them, Romans 8.
saying: that as he which has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, so he
that has Christ in him, lives because he is justified: And if his spirit
that raised Jesus from death, dwell in you, he that raised Jesus from death,
shall give life to your mortal bodies, for his spirits sake, which dwells
in you.

Thus on every side the scripture condemns the adversaries of gods word.

And this wickedness of the Papists is to be wondered at, that they affirm
Christ's flesh, blood, soul, holy spirit, and his deity to be in a man, that
is subject to sin and a lim of the devil, They be wonderful iuglers and
coniurers, that with certain words can make God and the devil to dwell
together in one man, and make him both the temple of God, and the temple of the
Devil. It appears that they be so blind that they cannot see the light from
darkness: Beliall from Christ, nor the table of the Lord from the table of
devils. Thus is confuted this third intolerable error and heresy of the
Papists, That they which be the limbs of the dyuell, do eat the very body of
Christ, and drink his blood, manifestly and directly contrary to the words of
Christ him self, who says: Who soever eats my flesh and drincketh my blood,
has everlasting life.

Winchester.
But to encounter directly with this author, where he opposes by interogation,
and would be answered, whether an unrepentant sinner that receaueth the
sacrament, (ergo) he has him in him, for the vessel being not meet, he
departed from him, because he was a sinner, in whom he dwells not. And where
this author now become a questionist, makes two questions, of Christ's body,
and his spirit, as though Christ's body might be divided from his spirit, he
supposes other to be as ignorant as him self. For the learned man will
answer, that an evil man by force of Gods ordinance, in the substance of the
sacrament received in deed Christ's very body there present, whole Christ God
and man, but he tarried not, nor dwelled not, nor fructified not in him, nor
Christ's spirit entered not into that man's soul because of the malice and
unworthiness of him that received. For Christ will not dwell with Beliall nor
abide with sinners. And what has this author won now by his forked question?
wherein he seems to glory as though he had imbrased an absurdity that he
hunted for, wherein he shows only his ignorance, who puts no difference
between the entering of Christ into an evil man by Gods ordinance in the
sacrament, and the dwelling of Christ's spirit in an evil man, which by
scripture can not be, ne is by any catholic man affirmed. For S. Paul says:
In him that receaueth unworthily remains

Caunterbury.
HEre the reader shall evidently see your accustomed manner, that when

Moreover I make my question of the being of Christ's body in an unpenitent
Whether a sinner have Christ within him.
has not Christ's body within him, and then may I say that he eats not
Christ's body, except he eat it without him. And although divided from his
spirit (as you say also) how this evil man receiving Christ's spirit, should
be an evil man, for the time that he has Christ's spirit within him? Or how
can he receive Christ's body and spirit (according to your saying) and have
them not in him for the time he receaueth them? Or how can Christ enter into an
evil man (as you confess) and be not in him, into whom he enters at that
present time? These be matters of your knowledge (as you pretend) which if you
can teach me, I must confess mine ignorance. And if you cannot, for so much
as you have spoken them, you must confess the ignorance to be upon your own
part.

1. Cor. 12.
remains judgment and condemnation, but that he eats and drincketh
condemnation. And where you say, that S. Paul's words plainly import, that
those did eat the very body of Christ, which did eat unworthily, ever still
you take for a supposition the thing which you should prove. For S. Paul
speaks plainly of the eating of the bread and drincking of the cup, and not
one word of eating of the body and drincking of the blood of Christ. And let
any indifferent reader look upon my questions, and he shall see, that there is
not one word answered here directly unto them, except mocking and scorning be
taken for answer.



2. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 11.
it is no small contumely and injury to S. Paul, to asscribe your feigned and
untrue gloss unto him, that taught nothing but ye truth, as he learned the same
of Christ. For he makes mention of the eating and drincking of the bread and
cup, but not one word of ye eating and drincking of Christ's body and blood.
Now follows in my book my answer to the Papists in this wise.

But least they should seem to have nothing to say for them selves, they
allege S. Paul in the eleventh to the Corinth. where he says: Chap. 6. The
answer to the Papists. 2. Cor. 11.
He that eats and drincketh unworthily, eats and drincketh his own
damnation, not discerning the Lords body.

But S. Paul in that place speaks of the eating of the bread and drinking of
the wine, and not of the corporal eating of Christ's flesh and blood, as it is
manifest to every man that will read the text. For these be the words of S.
Paul: Let a man examine him self, and so eat of the bread and drink of the
cup, for he that eats and drincketh unworthily, eats and drincketh his own
damnation, not discerning the Lords body.

In these words S. Paul's mind is, that for as much as the bread and wine in
the Lords supper, do represent unto us the very body and blood of our savior
Christ, by his own institution and ordinance, therefore although he sit in
heaven at his fathers right hand, yet should we come to this mystical bread
and wine with faith, reverence, purite and fear, as we would do, if we should
come to see and receive Christ him self sensibly present. For unto the
faithful Christ is at his own holy table present, with his mighty spirit and
grace and is of them more fruitfully received, then if corporally they should
receive him bodily present. and therefore they that shall worthily com to this
Gods board, must after due trial of them selves, consider first who ordained
this table, also what meat and drink they shall have that come thereto, and
how they ought to behave them selves thereat. He that prepared the table, is
Christ him self: The meat and drink wherewith he fedeth them that come thereto
as they ought to do, is his own body, flesh and blood. They that com thereto,
must occupy their minds in considering how his body was broken for them, and
his blood shed for their redemption, and so ought they to approach to this
heavenly table with all humblenes of heart, and godlynes of mind, as to the
table wherein Christ him self is given. And they that come otherwise to this
holy table, they come unworthily, and do not eat and drink Christ's flesh and
blood, but eat and drink their own damnation; because they do not duly
consider Christ's very flesh and blood, which be offered there spiritually to be
eaten and drinken, but dispising Christ's most holy supper, do come thereto as
it were to other common meats and drinckes, without regard of the Lords
body, which is the spiritual meat of that table.

Winchester.
In the.97. leaf and the second column, the Author begins to trauerse ye
words (...)
was no gift of Christ's body. Erasmus notes these words of S. Paul to be
gylty of our Lords body, to prove the presence of Christ's body there, who
compares such an offender to the Jews, that did shed Christ's blood
maliciously, as those do profane it unprofitably, in which sense the Grke
commentaries do also expound it. And where this author brings in the words
of S. Paul as it were to point out the matter, Let a man examine him self,
and so eat of the bread To eat.
for he that eats unworthily, etc. these words of examining and so eating,
declare the thing to be ordered to be eaten, and all the care to be used on our
side, to eat worthily, or else S. Paul had not said (and so eat.) And when S.
Paul says, Eat judgment, and this Author well remember him self, he must
call Judgment, the effect of that is eaten, and not the thing eaten, for
judgment is neither spiritual meat nor corporal, but the effect of the eating
of Christ in evil men, who is salvation to good, and judgment to evil. And
therefore as good men, eating Christ have salvation, so evil men eating Christ
have condemnation, and so for the diversity of the eaters of Christ's body,
follows as they be worthy and unworthy, the effect of condemnation or life.
Christ's sacrament and his work also in the substance of that sacrament bring
always one. And what so ever this author talks otherwise in this matter, is
mere trifles.

Caunterbury.
AS touching mine answer here to the words of S. Paul, you would feign have
them hid with darkness of speech, that no man should see what I mean. John.
3.
For as Christ said, Qui male agit, odit lucem, and therefore that which I have
spoken in plain speech, you darken so with your obscure terms, that my
meaning can not be understand. For I speak in such plain terms, as all men
understand, that when S. Paul said (he that eats and drinks unworthily, 1.
Cor. 2.
eats and drinks his own damnation) in that place he spoke of the eating
of the bread and

Unworthy eating.
why it should be a fault in the unworthy, not to esteem the Lords body, when
it is not there at all?

There is in my book a full and plain answer unto your question already made,
as there is also to your whole book. So that in making of my book, I did
foresee all things that you could object against it: In so much that here is
not one thing in all your book, but I can show you a sufficient answer thereto,
in one place or other of my former book. And in this your question here moved.
I refer the reader to the words of my book in the same place.

And where you say, that if the bread be but a figure, it is like Manna: Manna.
as concerning the material bread, truly it is like Manna, but as concerning
Christ him self, he said of him self, Not as your fathers did eat Manna and
are dead, He that eats this bread shall live for ever. And as concerning
Erasmus, and the greek commentaries, neither of Ihon. 6.
as you allege them to say. And what soever it pleases you to gather of these
words (examining and so eating) yet S. Paul's words be very plain, that he
spoke not of the eating of the very body of Christ, but of the eating of the
material bread in the sacrament, which is all one, whether the good or evil
eat of it. And all the care is on our side, to take heed that we eat not
that bread unworthily. For as the eating of the bread unworthily, not of Christ
him self (who can not be eaten unworthily) has the effect of judgment and
damnacion, so eating of the same bread worthily, has the effect of Christ's
death and salvation. And as he that eats the bread worthily may be well said
to eat Christ and life: So he that eats it unworthily may be said to eat
the devil and death, as Judas did, into whom with the bread entered Satan. For
unto such it may be called mensa daemoni orum, non mensa Domini, not Gods
bourd, but the devils. And so in the eaters of the bread worthily or
unworthily, follows the effect of everlasting life or everlasting death. But
in the eating of Christ himself is no diversity, but whosoever eats him,
John 6.
has everlasting life. For as much as the eating of him, can be to none
dampnation but salvation, because he is life it self. And what so ever you
babble to the contrary, John 14.
is but meare fables, devised without gods word or any sufficient ground. Now
follows mine answer unto such authors as ye Papists wrast to their purpose.

Cha. 7.
But here may not be passed over the answer unto certain places of ancient
authors, which at the first show, seem to make for the Papists purpose, The
answer to the Papists authors.
that evil men do eat and drink the very flesh and blood of Christ. But if
those places be truly and throughely wayed, it shall appear, that not one of
them makes for their error, that evil men do eat Christ's very body.

Augustinus contra Cresconium li. 1. cap. 25.
The first place is of S. Augustine Contra Cresconium Grammaticum, where he
says, that although Christ him self say: He that eats not my flesh and
drinks not my blood shall not have life in him, yet does not his Apostels
teach, that the same is pernicious to them which use it not well: for he says:
Whosoever eats the bread and drincketh the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
gilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

"In which words S. Augustine seems to conclude, that as well the evil as the
good do eat the body and blood of Christ, although the evil have no benefit
but hurt thereby.

But consider the place of S. Augustine diligently, and then it shall evidently
appear, that he meant not of the eating of Christ's body, but of the Sacrament
thereof. For the intent of S. Augustine there, is to prove that good things
avail not to such persons as do evil use them, and that many things which of
them selves be good, and be good to some, yet to other some they be not good.
As that light is good for whole eyes, and hurts sore eyes: that meat which
is good for some, is evil for other some: One medecin heals some, and
makes other sick. One harnes does arm one, and combreth another: one coat
is meet for one, and to straight for an other. And after other examples, at
the last S. Augustine shows the same to be true in the Sacraments both of
Baptism and the Lords body, which he says do profit only them, that
receive the same worthily.

And the words of S. Paul which S. Augustine cites, do speak of the
Sacramental bread and cup, and not of the body and blood. And yet S. Augustine
called the bread and the cup, the flesh and blood, not that they be so in deed,
but that they signify, as he says in an other place co^tra Maximinum.

Contra Maximinum li. 3. cap. 22.
In Sacraments (says he) is to be considered, not what they be, but what they
show. For they be signs of other things, being one thing and signifiing
another.

Therefore as in baptism, those that come faynedly, and those that come
unfeignedly, both be washed with the sacrame^tal water, but both be not washed
with the holy ghost, and clothed with Christ: so in the Lords supper both eat
and drink the sacramental bread and wine, but both eat not Christ him
self, and be fed with his flesh and blood, but those only which worthily
receive the Sacrament.

And this answer will serve to another place of S. Augustine against the
Donatistes, De bap. contra Donatis. lib. 5. Cap. 8.
where he says, that Judas received the body and blood of the Lord. For as S.
Augustine in that place speaks of the Sacrament of Baptism, so does he
speak of the Sacrament of the body and blood, which nevertheless he calls
the body and blood, because they signify and represent unto us the very body,
flesh and blood.

Winchester.
And yet he goes about because he will make all thing clear, to answer such
authors as the papists (he says) bring for their purpose. Augustinus.
And first he begins with S. Augustine who writes as plainly against this
authors mind, as I would have devised it. If I had no conscience of truth more
then I see some have, and might with a secret (...)
And therefore here I make a plain Issue with this author, that in the
searching of S. Augustine he has trusted his man or his friend over
negligently in so great a matter, or he has willingly gone about to deceive
the reader. For in the place of S. Augustine against the Donatistes alleged
here by this author, which he would with ye rest assoyle, S. Augustine has
these format words Corpus dominum and sanguis domini nihilominus erat etiam
illis quibus dicebat Apostolus; August. de Bap. lib. 5. Cap. 8.
Qui manducat indigne, indicium sibi manducat and bibit. Which words be
thusmuch in English: It was nevertheless the body of our Lord and the blood of
our Lord also unto them to whom the Apostles said. He that eats unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to him self. These be S. Augustines words, who
writes notably and evidently, that is was nevertheless the body and blood of
Christ to them that received unworthily, The body of Christ to them yt receive
unworthily.
declaring that their unworthiness does not alter the substance of that
sacrament, August. de ver domi. Sermo. 11.
Illud etiam, quod ait, Qui manducat carnem meam and bibit sanguinem meum The
English of these words is this. That same that he also says. Who eats my
flesh and drincketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him, how shall we
understand it. May we understand also them of whom the Apostle speak that they
did eat to themselves, and drink judgment, when they did eat the same flesh
and drink the same blood, the flesh it self, the blood it self? Did not
Judas the wicked seller and betrayer of his master when he did eat and drink
(as Lucas the Euangilest declares) the first Sacrament of the flesh and blood
of Christ made with his own hands, dwell in Christ, and Christ in him?
Finally many that with a feigned heart eat that flesh and drink the blood, or
when they have eaten and dronken become aposratates, do not they dwell in
Christ, or Christ in them? But undoubtedly there is a certain manner of eating
that flesh and drincking that blood after which manner whosoever eats and
drincketh, dwells in Christ and Christ in him. Therefore, not in whatsoever
manner any man eats the flesh of Christ and drincketh the blood of Christ, he
dwells in Christ and Christ in him, but after a certain manner, which manner he
saw when he said these words. This is the sense of S. Augustines saying in
Latin whereby appears the faith of S. Augustine to be, in the sacrament to be
eaten and dro^ken the very body and blood of Christ, which for the substance
of the sacrament evil men receive as good men do, that is to say, as S.
Augustine does point it out by his words, the same flesh and the same blood of
Christ, with such an expression of speech, as he would exclude all difference
that devise of figure might imagine, and therefore says Ipsam carnem, ipsum
sanguinem, which signify the self same in deed, not by name only as the
author of the book would have S. Augustine understood: and when that
appears as it is most manifest, that Judas received the same being wicked
that good men do, how the same is before the recept by gods omnipotency
present in the visible sacrament, and so not received by the only instrument
of faith, which in evil men is not lively, but by the instrument of the mouth,
wherein it enters with the visible element, and yet as S. Augustine says
dwells not in him, that so unworthily receives, because the effect of
dwelling of Christ is not in him that receaueth by such a manner of eating as
wicked men use. Whereby S. Augustine teaches the diverse effect to ensue of the
diversity of the eating, and not of any diversity of that which is eaten,
whether the good man or evil man receive the sacrament. If I would here
encombre the reader, I could bring forth many mo places of S. Augustine to the
confusion and reprofe of this Authors purpose, and yet notwithstanding to take
away that he might say of me, that I way not S. Augustine: I think good to
allege and bring forth the judgment of Martyn Bucer touching S. Augustine,
Bucerus.
who understands S. Augustine Quoties scribit etiam Iudam ipsum corpus and
sanguinem domini sumsisse? Nemo itaque auctoritate S. patrum dicet Christum in
sacra Coena absentem esse: Bucerus.
The sense in English is this. How often writes he (speaking of S. Augustine)
Judas also to have received the self body and blood of our Lord? No man
thefore by the authority of the fathers can say Christ to be absent in the
holy supper. Thus says Bucer who understands S. Augustine as I have before
alleged him, and gathers thereof a conclusion, that no man can by the
fathers sayings prove Christ to be absent in the holy supper, And therefore by
Bucers judgment, the doctrine of this Author can be in no wise catholic, as
dissenting from that has been before taught and believed, whether Bucer will
still continue in that he has so solemnly published to the world and by me
here alleged, I cannot tell, and whether he do or no, it makes no matter,
but thus he has taught in his latter judgment with a great protestation, that
he speaks without respect other then to the truth wherein because he seemed to
dissent from his friends he says: (...). which words have an imitation of an
elder saying, and be thus much to say: Socrates is my friend, truth is my best
beloved, and the church most regarded. And with this Bucer closes his doctrine
of the sacrament, after he knew all that Zuinglius and Decolampadius could say
in the matter. And here I will leave to speak of Bucer, and bring forth
Theodoretus a man most extolled by Theodoretus in epi. 1. Cor. 11.
who says plainly in his commentaries upon S. Paul, how Christ delivered to
Judas his precious body and blood, and declares further therewith in that
sacrament to be the truth. So as this author can have no foundation upon either
to maintain his figurative speech, or the matter of this fourth book, which
his words plainly impugn. S. Hierom in his commentaries upon the prophet
Malachie has first this Polluimus panem, id est corpus Christi, quando indigne
accedimus ad altar, and sordidi, mundum sanguinem bibimus, Hieronimus.
We defile the bread that is to say, the body of Christ; when we com unworthy
to the altar and being filthy drink the clean blood: Thus says S. Hierome,
who says, men filthy drink the clean blood: and in an other place after the
same S. Hierom says: Polluit Christi misteria indigne accipiens Corpus eius
and sanguinem, He that unworthily receaueth the body and blood of Christ,
defiles, the mysteries. Can any words be more manifest and evident to declare
S. Hieroms mind how in the visible sacrament men receive unworthily, which be
evil men, the body and blood of Christ?

Caunterbury.
IN this point I will join a plain issue with you, An issue.
that I neither willingly go about to deceive the reader in the serching of S.
Augustine (as you use to do in every place,) nor I have not trusted my man or
friend herein, (as it seems you have done overmuch) but I have diligently
expended and wayed the matter my self. For although in such weighty matters
of scripture and ancient authors you must needs trust your men, (without whom
I know you can do very little, being brought up from your tender age in other
kinds of study (yet I having exercised my self in the study of scripture, and
diuinitye from my youth (whereof I give most hearty lauds and thanks to God)
have learned now to go alone, and do examine, judge, and write all such
weighty matters my self, although (I thank God). I am neither so arrogant nor
so wilful, that I will refuse the good advise, counsailie, and admonition of
any man, be he man or master, friend or foe.

But as concerning ye place alleged by you out of S. Augustine, let the
Augustine de Bapti. con. Dona. li. 5. cap. 8.
and he shall (I trust) be fully satisfied. For S. Augustine in his book De
baptismo contra Donatistas (as I have declared in my book) speaks of the
morsel of bread and sacrament (which Judas also did eat as S. Augustine
says? And in this speech he considered (as he writes Contra Maximinu^) not
what it is, but what it signifies, and therefore he expresses ye matter by
Judas more plainly in an other place saying: that he did eat ye bread of the
Lord, August. In John tract. 19.
not the bread being the Lord (as the other Apostles did) signifying thereby
that the evil eat the bread, but not the Lord himself. As S. Paul says
that they eat and drink Panem and calicem Domini, the bread and the cup of
the Lord, and not that they eat the Lord himself. ad Bonifacium.

And I have not so far ouershot my self or been ouersene, that I would of
truth hid still under the bushel, then openly to be set abroad that all men
may see it. And I think that it so little greueth M. Peter Martyr, that his
book is in english, that he would wish it to be translated likewise

August. de verbis Domini ser. 11.
Now where you gather of the words of S. Augustine, De verbis Domini, The self
same flesh yt was crucified and is sensible, is eaten of Christian people.
excluding all difference that devise of figure might imagine, to this I
answer, that although you express the body of Christ, with what terms you
can devise, calling it (as you do in deed) the flesh yt was borne of the
virgin Mary, the same flesh, the flesh it self, yet I confess that it is
eaten in the sacrament. And to express it yet more plainly then paraduenture
you would have me, I say, that the same visible and palpable flesh that was for
us crucified and appeared after his resurrection, and was seen, felt, and
groped, and ascended into heaven, and there sits at his fathers right hand,
and at the last day shall come to judge the quick and the dead, that self same
body, having all the parts of a man's body, in good order and proportion, and
being visible and tangible, I say is eaten of christen people at his holy
supper, what will you now require more of me, concerning the truth of the body?
I suppose you be sorry that I grant you so much, and yet what does this help
you? For the diversity is not in the body, but in the eating thereof, no man
eating it carnally, but the good eating it both sacramentally and spiritually,
and the evil only sacramentally, that is to say, figuratively. And therefore
has S. Augustine these words ( Certo quodam modo, after a certain manner)
because that the evil eat the sacrament, which after a certain manner, is
called the very body of Christ: which manner S. Augustine himself declares
most truly and plainly in a pistle ad Bonifacium, August. ad Bonifacium
episto. 23.
saying: If sacraments had not some similitude or likeness of those things
whereof they be sacraments, they could in no wise be sacraments. And for their
similitude and likeness, they have commonly the name of the things whereof they
be sacraments. Therefore after a certain manner the sacrament of Christ's body
is. Christ's body the sacrament of Christ's blood is Christ's blood. This
epistle is set out in my book the 64. leaf, which I pray the reader to look
upon for a more full answer unto this place. And after that manner Judas and
such like did eat ye morsel of the lords bread, but not the bread that is the
Lord, but a sacrament thereof which is called the Lord, as S. Augustine says.
So that with the bread entered not Christ with his spirit into Judas, (as you
say he does into the wicked,) but Satan entered into him, as the gospel
testifies. And if Christ entered than into Judas with the bread (as you write)
then the devil and Christ entered into Judas both at once. Ioh. 13.


Master Bucer.
As concerning M. Bucer, what mean you to use his authority, you alleged, he
di^^enteth in nothing from Ecolampadius and Zuinglius. Wherefore it seems to me
somewhat strange, that you should allege him for the confirmation of your
untrue doctrine, being so clearly repugnant unto his doctrine.

The words of Theodoretus (if they were his) be so far from your report,
Theodoretus.


And as concerning S. Hierome, Hieronimus.
he calls the mysteries or mystical Non comedunt carnem Jesus (says he upon
Esai) neque, bibunt sanguinem eius, de quo ipse loquitur: Qui comedit carnem
meam and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam aternam. Hieroni. in Esaiam cap. 66.
And yet he that comes defiled unto the visible sacraments, defiles not only
the sacraments, but the contumely thereof pertayneth also unto Christ him self
who is the author of the sacraments. And as the same S. Hierom says: Dum
sacramenta violantur, ipse cuius sunt sacramenta violatur, Hieron. in Malachiam
cap. 1.
When the sacraments (says he) be violated, then is he violated also to whom
the sacraments apertayne. Now hear what follows in the order of my book.

And (as before is at length declared) a figure has the name of the thing that
is signified thereby. Chap. 8.
As a man's image is called a man, a Lions image, a Lion: a birds image a byrd:
and an image of a tree and herb, is called a tree or herb. Figures be called
by ye names of the things which they signify.
So were we wont to say: Our lady of Walsingham: Our Lady of Ipswich: Our Lady
of Grace: Our Lady of pity: S. Peter of Millan: S. Ihon of Amyas, and such
like, not meaning the things them selves, but calling their images by the name
of the things by them represented. And likewise we were wont to say, Great S.
Christopher of York or Lyncoln: Our Lady smileth, or rocketh her child: Let us
go in pylgrimage to S. Peter at Rome, and S. James in Compostella. And a
thousand like speeches, which were not understand of the very things, but only
of the images of them.

So does S. Ihon Chrisostom say, that we see Christ with our eyes, touch him,
feel him, and grope him with our hands, fix our teeth in his flesh, taste
it, break it, eat it, and digest it, make read our tongues and dye them with
his blood, and swallow it, and drink it.

And in a Catechism by me translated and set forth, I used like manner of
speech, saying, that with our bodily mouths we receive the body and blood of
Christ. Which my saying diverse ignorant persons (not used to read old
ancient authors, nor acquanted with their phra^^ and manner of speech) did
carpe and reprehend, for lack of good understanding.

For this speech, and other before rehearsed of Chrisostom, and all other like,
be not understand of the very flesh and blood of our savior Christ (which in
very deed we neither feel nor see) but that which we do to the bread and
wine by a figurative speech, is spoken to be done to the flesh and blood,

And yet as with our corporal eyes, corporal hands, and mouths we do
corporally see, feel, taste and eat the bread, and drink the wine (being the
sign and sacraments of Christ's body) even so with our spiritual eyes,
hands, and mouths, we do spiritually see, feel, taste and eat his very
flesh, and drink his very blood.

Eusebius Emissenus in sermo. de Eucharistia.
As Eusebus Emissenus says: When thou come to the reverend altar to be
filled with spiritual meats, with thy faith look upon the body and blood of
him that is thy God, honor him, touch him with thy mind, take him with the hand
of thy heart, and drink him with the draught of thine inward man. And these
spiritual things require no corporal presence of Christ himself, who
sits continually in heaven at the right hand of his Father.

And as this is most true, so is it full and sufficient to answer all things
that the Papists can bring in this matter, that has any appara^ce for their
party.

Winchester.
And yet these plain places of authority dissembled of purpose, or by
ignorance passed over, this author, as though all things were by him clearly
discussed to his intent, would by many conceptes furnish and further his
matters, and therefore plays with

Emissenus.
Emissene to stire up men's devotion coming to receive this sacrament, requires
the root and foundation thereof in the mind of man as it ought to be, and
therefore exhorts Emissene allude to the hand of the heart, and draught of the
inward man, if the hand of the body, and draught of the outward man had none
office there? All this were vain eloquence, and a mere abuse and illusion, if
the sacramental tokens were only a figure. And if there were no presence but in
figure, why should not Emissen rather have followed the plain speech of the
angel to the women that sought Christ, Iesum queritis, non est hic, Ye seek
Jesus, he is not here, and say as this author does, this is only a figure, do
no worship here, go up to heaven: and down with the altar, for fear of
illusion,

Caunterbury.


And as concerning the Catechism, The Catechism.
I have sufficiently answered in my

Emesserie.
that he speaks not of any receiving of Christ's body and blood with our
mouths, but only with our hearts. And where you say, that you have entreated
before, how the invisible priest with his secret power does convert the visible
creatures into the substance of his body and blood. I have in that same place
made answer to those words of Emissene, but most plainly of all in my former
book the xxv. leaf. And Emissene says not, that Christ is corporally present
in the sacrament, and thereof you be not ignorant, although you do pretend the
contrary, which is somewhat worse then ignorance.

Corporal.
I am not ignorant, Mary what you mean by corporal I know not, and the
opening thereof shall discuss the whole matter. Tell therefore plainly without
dissimulation or colored words, what manner of body it is that Christ has in
the Sacrament? Whether it be a very and perfect man's body, with all the members
thereof, distinct one from an other or no? For that understand I to be a man's
corporal body, that has all such parts, without which may be a body, but no
perfect man's body. So that the lack of a finger makes a lack in the
perfection of a man's body. Mary if you will make Christ such a body as bread
and cheese is (wherein every part is bread and cheese without form and
distinction of one part from an other) I confess mine ignorance, that I know
no such body to be a man's body. Now have I showed mine ignorance, declare now
your wit and learning. For sure I am, that Christ has all those parts in
heaven, and if he lack them in the Sacrament, then lacks he not a little of
his perfection. And then it can not be one body, that has parts and has no
parts.

Reverend altar.
And as concerning the words of Emissen, calling the altar I reverend
Hieronimus in Malachia^ ca. 1.
yet (as S. Hierome says) if the Sacraments be violated, then is he violated
whose Sacraments they be. Now follows after in my book, the manner of
adoration in the Sacranent.

Chap 9.
Now it is requisite, to speak some thing of the manner and form of worshipping
of Christ, by them that receive this sacrament, least that in the stead of
Christ himself be worshipped the sacrament. The adoration in the sacrament.
For as his humanity, joined to his divinity, and exalted to the right hand of
his father, is to be worshipped of all creatures, in heaven, earth, and under
the earth: De adoratione lege Rossen. and Occol. lib. 3. ca. 4. and 5.
even so if in the stead thereof, we worship the signs and sacraments, we
commit as great idolatry as ever was, or shall to the worlds end.

The simple people be deceived.
And yet have the very Antichrists (the subtilest enemies that Christ has) by
their fine inventions and crafty scolasticall divinity, deluded many simple
souls, and brought them to this horrible idolatry, to worship things visible,
and made with their own hands, persuading them, that creatures were their
Creator, their God and their maker.

For else what made the people to run from their seats to the altar, and
from altar to altar, and from sakering (as they called it) to sakering,
peeping, tooting, and gasing at that thing which the priest held up in his
hands, if they thought not to honor that thing which they saw? What moved the
priests to lift up the sacrament so hye over their heads? or the people to
cry to the priest, Hold up, hold up: and one man to say to an other, Stoop
down before, or to say: This day have I seen my maker. And, I cannot be
quiet, except I see my maker once a day? What was the cause of all these, and
that as well the priest as the people so devoutly did knock and kneel at
every sight of the sacrament? but that they worshipped that visible thing, which
they saw with their eyes, and took it for very God? For if they worshipped in
spirit only Christ, sitting in heaven with his father, what neded they to
remove out of their seats to toote and gase? as the Apostles did after Christ,
when he was gone up into heaven? If they worshipped nothing that they saw, why
did they rise up to see? Doubtless many of the simple people worshipped that
thing which they saw with their eyes.

And although the subtle Papists do color and cloak the matter never so
finely, saying that they worship not the sacraments which they see with their
eyes, but that thing which they believe with their faith to be really and
corporally in the sacraments, yet why do they then run from place to place,
to gase at the things which they see, if they worship them not? giving thereby
occasion to them that be ignorant, to worship that which they see. Why do they
not rather quietly sit still in their seats, and move the people to do the
like, worshipping God in heart and in spirit, than to gadde about from place to
place, to see that thing, which they confess them selves, is not to be
worshipped.

And yet to eschew one inconvenience (that is to say, the worshipping of the
sacrament) they fall into an other as evil, and worship nothing there at all.
For they worship that thing (as they say) which is really and corporally, and
yet inuisibly present under the kinds of bread and wine, which (as before is
expressed and proved) is utterly nothing. And so they give unto the ignorant
occasion, to worship bread and wine, and they them selves worship nothing there
at all.

Winchester.
As touching the adoration of Christ's flesh in the sacrament, which adoration
is a true confession of the whole man soul and body, Adoration. What true
adoration is.
if there be opportunity of the truth of God in his work, is in my judgment
well set forth in the book of Common prayer, where the priest is ordered to
knele and make a prayer in his own, and the name of all that shall
communicate, confessing therein that is prepared there, at which time
nevertheless, that is not adored that the bodily eye sees, but that which
faith knows to be there inuisibly present, which and there be nothing, as
this author now teaches,

Caunterbury.
WHere as I have showed what idolatry was committed by means of the
Papisticall doctrine, concerning adoration of the sacrament, because that
answer to my reasons you can not, and confess the truth you will not,
therefore you run to your usual shift, passing it over with a toy and scoff,
saying, that you will not answer mine eloquence but the matter, and yet indede
you answer neither of both, but under pretense of mine eloquence, you shift of
the matter also. And yet other eloquence I used not, but the accustomed speech
of the homely people, as such a matter requires.

And where you say, that it were not well to worship Christ in the Sacrament,
if nothing be there, (as you say I teach) if you mean, that

August. in psalm. 98.
But the Papists (for their own commodity to keep the people still in
idolatry) do often allege a certain place of S. Augustine upon the Psalms
where he says, that no man does eat the flesh of Christ, except he first
worship it, and that we do not offend in worshipping thereof, but we should,
offend if we should not worship it.

That is true, which S. Augustine says in this place. For who is he that
professes Christ, and spiritually fed and nourished with his flesh and
blood, but he will honor and worship him, sitting at the right hand of his
father, and render unto him from the botome of his heart, all laud, praise and
thanks, for his merciful redemption?

And as this is most true, which S. Augustine says, so is that most false,
which the Papists would persuade upon S. Augustines words, that the
Sacramental bread and wine, or any visible thing is to be worshipped in the
Sacrament. For S. Augustines mind was so far from any such thought, that he
forbids utterly to worship Christ's own flesh and blood alone, but in
consideration, and as they be annexed and joined to his divinity. How much
less then could he think or allow, that we should worship the Sacramental
bread and wine, or any outward or visible Sacrament, which be shadows,
figures, and representations of Christ's flesh and blood?

And S. Augustine was afraid, least in worshipping Christ's very body, we should
offend, therefore he bids us, when we worship Christ, that we should not
tarry and fix our minds upon his flesh (which of it self avails nothing)
but that we should lift up our minds from the flesh to ye spirit, which
gives life: and yet the Papists be not afraid by crafty means to induce us,
to worship those things, which be signs and sacraments of Christ's body.

But what will not the shameless Papists allege for their purpose, when
they be not ashamed to maintain the adoration of the Sacrament by these words
of S. Augustine? Wherein he speaks not one word of the adoration of the
sacrament, but only of Christ him self?

And although he say, that Christ gave his flesh to be eaten of us, yet he meant
not, that his flesh is here corporally present, and corporally eaten, but only
spiritually. As his word declare plainly, which follow in the same place, where
S. Augustine as it were in the person of Christ, speaks these words.

It is the spirit that gives life, but the flesh profits nothing. The
words which I have spoken unto you, be spirit and life. That which I have
spoken, understand you spiritually. You shall not eat this body which you see,
and drink that blood which they shall shed, that shall crucify me. I have
commended unto you a sacrament, understand it spiritually, and it shall give
you life. And although it must be visibly ministered, yet it must be inuisibly
understand.

These words of S. Augustine with the other before recited, do express his
mind plainly, that Christ is not otherwise to be eaten, than spiritually,
(which spiritual eating requires no corporal presence) and that he intended
not to teach here any adoration, either of the visible sacraments, or of any
thing that is corporally in them. For in deed there is nothing really and
corporally in the bread to be worshipped, although the Papists say that Christ
is in every consecrated bread.

Winchester.
Augustinus.
who speaking of the adoration of Christ's flesh, given to be eaten, does so
fashion his speech, as it can not with any violence be drawn to such an
understanding, as though S. Augustine should mean of the adoring of Christ's
flesh in heaven, as this author would have it. S. Augustine speaks of the

Caunterbury.
AS concerning the words of S. Augustine (which you say I do wrong report) let
every indefere^t reader judge, who makes a wrong report of S. Augustine,
August. in psalm. 98.
you or I. For I have reported his words as they be, and so have not you. For
S. Augustine says not, that Christ's

And where you say, that if S. Augustine had meant as I do, he would in this
place have declared a figure, and have said, that here is but a figure, ad
Bonifacium, ad Dardanum, ad Ianuarium, De doctrina Christiana, De catechisandis
rudibus, in quest super leuit, De ciuitate Dei, Contra Adamatium, contra
aduersarium legis and prophetarum, In epistolam and Euangelium Iohannis, In
sermon ad infantes, and De verbis apostoli. The flesh of Christ is a true
flesh, and was borne of a woman, dyed, rose again, ascended into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of his father, but yet is he eaten of us spiritually,
and in the manner of the eating, there is the mystery and secret, and yet the
true work of God.

And where you understand the invisible mystery (which S. Augustine John. 6.
you shall not have life in you,) he meant of spiritual and not carnal eating
of his body. For if he had intended to have described the diversity of the
manner of Christ's body visible and invisible, he would not have said (this body
which you see) but this body in such manner as you see it, or in such like
terms, you shall not eat. But to eat Christ's flesh (says S. Augustine) is
fructifully to remember that the same flesh was crucified for us. August. de
doctri. christiana. li. 3. cap. 4.
And this is spiritually to eat his flesh and drink his blood.

Winchester.
And because S. Hierome who was of S. Augustines time, writes in his
commentaries upon S. Paul, ad Ephesios that may serve for the better opening
hereof, I will write it in here. Hieroni. ad Ephesios.
The words, be these. The blood and flesh of Christ is two ways understood,
either the spiritual and godly, of which him self said: My flesh is verily
meat, and my blood is verily drink. And unless ye eat my flesh and drink
my blood, ye shall not have everlasting life. Or the flesh which was crucified
and the blood which was shed with the spear. According to this division, the
diversity of flesh and blood is taken in Christ's saints, that there is one
flesh that shall see the salvation of God, an other flesh and blood that cannot
possese the kingdom of heaven. There be S. Hieromes words. In which, thou
reader see a denial of that flesh of Christ to be given, to be eaten, that
was crucified, but the flesh given to be eaten to be a godly and spiritual
flesh, and a distinction made between them, as is in our flesh, of which it may
be said, that the flesh we walk in here, shall not see God, that is to say, as
it is corruptible according to the text of S. Paul, flesh and blood shall not
possess heaven, 1. Cor. 16.
and yet we must believe and hope with Iobe truly: that the same our flesh shall
see God in heaven

Caunterbury.
TO what purpose you should bring in here this place of S. Hierome (making much
against you and nothing for you) I cannot conceive. For he declares no more in
this place, but that as all men in this world have passible bodies, subject to
much filthynes, corruption and death, Spiritual body.
and yet after our resurrection we shall be delivered from corruption, vileness,
weakness and death, and be made incorruptible, glorious, mighty and spiritual:
so Christ's body in earth was subject unto our infirmities, his flesh being
crucified, and his blood being shed with a spear, which now (as you truly say)
is glorified, impassible, incorruptible and a spiritual body, but yet not so
spiritual, that his humanity is turned into his divinity, and his body into
his soul (as some heretics phantasy) nor that the diversity of his members be
taken away, and so left without arms and legs, head and feet, eyes and
ears, and turned into the form and fashion of a bowl, as the Papists
imagine. The sun and the moon, the fire and the air be bodies, but no man's
bodies, because they lack heart and lungues, head and feet, flesh and blood,
veins and sinews to knit them together. Mat. 17.
When Christ was transfigured, his face shyned like the sun, and with his
mouth he spoke to Moses and Helias. And after his resurrection we read of his
flesh and bones, Luc. 14. Ioh. 20.
his hands and feet, his side and wounds, visible and palpable, and with
mouth, tongue and teeth, Ioh. 20.
he did eat and speak, and so like a man he was in all proportions and
members of man, that Mary Magdalene could not discern him from a gardener. And
take away flesh and skin, sinews and bones, blood and veins, and then
remains no man's body. For take away distinction and diversity of parts and
members, how shall Peter be Peter, and Paul be Paul? How shall a man be a
man, and a woman a woman? And how shall we see with our eyes, and hear with
our ears, grope with our hands, and go with our feet? For either we shall do
no such things at all, or see with every part of our bodies, and likewise
hear, speak and go, if there be no diversity of members. This I have spoken
for this purpose, to declare that S. Hierome speaking of Christ's 1. Cor. 10.
and his apostles and disciples whiles he lived with us here in earth as we do
now when he is glorified. But what avails all this to your purpose, except
you could prove, that to a spiritual eating is required a corporal presence?

And where you say, that S. Hierome and S. Augustine use both one Luc. 22..1
Cor. 10
who the night before he was crucified, declared to his desciples, that he gave
them the same body, that should suffer death for them. And the Apostles
received ye body of Christ, yet passible and mortal, which the next day was
crucified, and if we receive not in the sacrament the body that was crucified,
then receive we not the same body that the Apostles did. And here in your idle
talk you draw by force S. Hieroms words to the sacrament, when S. Hierom
speaks not one word of the sacrament in that place: let the reader judge.

And here for the conclusion of the matter, you fantasy and imagine and now you
say we receive him not as he sits in heaven and is glorified, and so must
you needs grant, that we receive him not at all.

Winchester.
But to return to S. Augustine touching adoration, if the very flesh of Christ
were not in the sacrament truly present, which is as much to say, as in
substance present, if it were not in deed present, that is to say really
present, if it were not corporally present Truly. Really. Corporally.
the very body of Christ there present God and man. If these truths consenting
in one were not there, S. Augustine would never have spoken of adoration there.
No more he does says this author there, but in heaven: let S. Augustines
words quoth I be judge, which be these, No man eats that flesh but he first
worshippeth it. It is found out how such a footestoole of the Lords foot
should be worshipped, and not only that we do not sin in worshipping, but we
do sin in not worshipping it. These be S. Augustines words, which I said
before, can not be drawn to an understanding For as S. Paul says, Christ is
so exalted that every tongue should confess, that our savior Christ is in the
glory of his father. So as the worshipping of Christ there in the estate of his
glory where he

Caunterbury.
that if he were not there present, substancially, really, and corporally, S.
Augustine would never have spoken of adoration there: in this word (there) you
use a great doublenes and fallax, ^he^^.
for it may be referred indiferently either to the adoration, or to the
presence. If it be referred Genes. 28,
as before I have declared: for so did Jacob worship Christ before he was
borne, and all faithful christen people do worship him in all places where
soever they be, although he carnally and corporally be far distant from them.
As they daily honor the father and pray unto him, Math. 6.
and yet say, Qui es in coelis, confessing him to be in heaven. And therefore to
avoid all the ambiguitie, and fallax of your speech, I say, that we being here,
do worship here Christ, being not corporally here, but with his father in
heaven.

And although all christen men ought of duty continually to worship Christ
being in heaven, yet because we be negligent to do our duties therein, his word
and sacraments be ordained to provoke us thereunto. So that although otherwise
we forgot our duties, yet when we come to any of his sacraments, 1. Cor 11.
we should be put in remembrance thereof. And therefore said Christ (as S. Paul
writes) As often as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup, show forth
the lords death, until he come. And do this (said Christ) in remembrance of
me. Luc. 22.
And the worshipping of Christ in his glory, should be ever continual without
either before or after. Nevertheless forasmuch as by reason of our infirmity,
ingratitude, malice and wickedness, we go far from our offices and duties
herein, the sacraments call us home again, to do that thing, which before we
did omit, that at the least we may do at some time, that which we should do at
all times.

Humiliation.
And where you speak of the humiliatio^ of Christ in the sacrament, you speak
without the book. For the scripture terms not the matter in that sort, but
calls his humiliation only his incarnation and conversation with us here in
earth, being obedient even unto death, and for that humiliation, he is now from
that time forward exalted for ever in glory. And you would pluck him down
from his glory, Phil. 2.
to humiliation again. And thus is Christ entreated, when he comes to the
handling of ignorant lawyers, blind sophisters, and popish divines, but the
true worshippers of Christ, worship him in spirit, sitting in his high glory
and Majesty, and pluck him not down from thence, corporally to eat him with
their teeth, but spiritually in heart ascend up (as S. Chrisosto^ says) and
feed upon him where he sits in his high throne of glory with his father. To
which spiritual feding is required no bodily presence, nor also mouth nor
teeth, and yet they that receive any sacrament, must adore Christ (both before
and after) sitting in heaven in the glory of his father. And this is neither
(as you say it is) a cold nor gross teaching of S. Augustine in this place, to
worship the flesh and humanity of Christ in heaven: nor your teaching is not so
far from all doubts, but that you seem so afraid your self to stand to it,
that when you have said, that Christ is to be worshipped in his humanity, as
it were to excuse the matter again, you say, you speak not properly.

And this doctrine of S. Augustine was very necessary for ij. considerations.
One is for the exposition of the Psalm, Saint Augustines doctrine is
necessary. Psalm. 99.
which he took in hand to declare, where in one verse is commanded to worship
the earth, being gods fotestole, and this he says may be understand in the
flesh of Christ which flesh being earth, and the food of faithful christen
people, is to be worshipped of all that feed and live by him. For
notwithstanding that his flesh is earth of earth, and a creature, and that
nothing ought to be worshipped but God alone, yet is found out in Christ the
explication of this great doubt and mystery, how flesh, earth, and a creature,
both may and ought to be worshipped, That is to say, when earth and flesh being
united to the godhead in one person, is one perfect Jesus Christ both God

The other cause, why it is necessary both to teach and to exhort men to honor
Chistes flesh in heaven, is this, that some know it not, and some do it not.
For some heretics have taught, that Christ was but a man, and so not to be
honored. And some have said, that although he be both God and man, yet his
divinity is to be honored, and not his humanity. For extirpation of which
errors, it is no gross nor cold saying, that Christ's flesh in heaven is to be
honored. And some know right well, ye whole Heb. 10.
do not according to their knowledge, but treading the son of God under their
feet, Heb. 6.
and despising the blood, whereby they were sanctified, crucify again the
son of God, and make him a mocking stock to all the wicked. And many
professing Christ yet having vain cogitatio^s and pha^tasies in their heads,
do worship and serve Antichrist, and thinking them selves wise, become very
fools in deed. And count you it then a cold and a gross saying, that Christ
in heaven is to be honored? wherein so many old authors have trauayled

And this will serve to answer also the place here following of S. Ambrose,

Winchester.
And for the more manifest confirmation that S. Augustine ought thus to be
understood, I shall bring in S. Ambrose saying, of whom it is probable, S.
Augustine to have learned that he writes in this matter.

Saint Ambrose words in his book De spiritu sancto li. 3. cap. 12. be these:
Ambrosius de spiritu sancto li. 3. cap. 12.
Non mediocris igitur, quaestio, and ideo diligentius consideremus quid sit
scabellum. Legimus enim alibi. Coelum ucihi thronus, terra autem scabellum
pedum meorum. Sed nec terra adoranda nobis, quia creatura est dei. Videamus
tamen ne terram illam dicat adorandam Propheta, quam Dominus Jesus in carnis
assumptione suscepit. Itaque per scabellum terrae intelligitur, per terram
antem caro christi, quam hodie quoque in misterys adoramus, and quam Apostoli
in Domino Jesus (ut supra diximus) adorarunt: neque enim diuisus Christus, sed
vnus. Which words may be englished thus. It is therefore no mean question and
therefore we should more diligently consider, what is the foot stool. For we
read in an other place, heaven is my throne, and the earth the foot stool of
my feet. But yet the earth is not to be worshipped of us, because it is a
creature of God. And yet let us see though least the prophet means that earth
to be worshipped, which our Lord Jesus took in the taking of flesh. So then by
the footestoole let the earth be understood, and then by the earth the flesh
of Christ, which we do now worship also in the mysteries, and which the
Apostles, as we have before And S. Ambrose expressly notes our adoration in
the mysteries where we worship Christ's flesh inuisibly present, as the
Apostles did, when Christ was visibly present with them. And thus with these so
plain words of S. Ambrose consonant to those of S. Augustine, and the opening
of S. Augustines words as before, I trust I have made manifest, how this
Author trauayleth against the stream,

Caunterbury.
HEre apeareth your sincerity in proceeding in this matter. For you Si negant
quia in Christo etiam incarnationis adoranda misteria sunt. etc. If they deny
(says he) that the mysteries of ye incarnation in Christ be to be honored etc.
And a little after Qua ratione ad incarnationis dominicae sacramentum spectare
videatur, quod ait Propheta, Adorate scabellum pedum eius, consideremus. Let us
consider, by what means this saying of the prophet (worship his foot stool)
may be seen to pertayne to the sacrament of Christ's incarnation. And after
the words by you rehearsed, follows by and by, Cum igitur incarnationis
adorandum sit Sacramentum. etc. Seeing then that the Sacrament of the
incarnation is to be honored. In these words shows S. Ambrose plainly that
the worshipping of Christ's flesh is understand of the mystery of his
incarnation. So that S. Ambrose meant not only that men should worship Christ,
when they receive the Sacrament, but that all creatures, at all times, should
worship him. And therefore he expresses there by name, how the Angels did
worship him, and also Mary Magdalene and the Apostles after his resurrection,
Math. 28.
when they received not the Sacrament. Luc. 2. Math. 2.
And so did also the shepherds and the wise men worship him, yet being in his
infancy, and the prophet (after the mind of S. Augustine and S. Ambrose)
commanded to honor him before his incarnation, and we likewise honor him
sitting now in heaven after his ascentio^. For so far is faith able to reach,
without either tentering or stretching.



But our savior Christ himself has given us warning before hand, that such
false Christians and false teachers should come, and has bydde us to beware of
them, saying: Math. 24.
If any man tell you that Christ is here, or Christ is there, believe him not.
For there shall rise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show many
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, the very elect should be
brought into error. Take heed, I have told you before hand.

Thus our Savior Christ (like a most loving pastor and savior of our souls)
has given us warning before hand of the perilles and dangers that were to
come, and to be wise and ware, that we should not give credit unto such
teachers, as would persuade us to worship a piece of bread, to kneel to it, to
knock to it, to creep to it, to follow it in procession, to lift up our Math.
24.
But our Savior Christ calls them false Prophets, and says: Take heed, I
tell you before: Believe them not, If they say to you: behold Christ is a broad,
or in the wilderness, go not out. And if they say, that he is kept in close
places, believe them not.

And if you will ask me the question, Chap. 10. They be the papists that have
deceived the people.
who be these false prophets and seducers of the people, the answer is soon
made: The Romish Antichrists and their adherents, the authors of all error,
ignorance, blindness, superstition, hypocrisy, and idolatry.

For Innocentius the third (one of the most wicked men that ever was in the sea
of Rome) did ordain and decree, Innocentius tertius.
that the host should be diligently kept under lock and key.

And Honorius the third, not only confirmed the same, Honorius tertius.
but commanded also, that the priests would diligently teach the people from
time to time, that when they lifted up the bread, called the host, the people
should then reverently bow down, and that likewise they should do when the
priest carries the host unto sick folks. These be the statutes and
ordinances of Rome, under pretense of holiness, to lead the people unto all
error and idolatry: not bringing them by bread unto Christ, but from Christ
unto bread.

Cap. 11. An exhortation to the ^rew honoring of Christ in the Sacrament.
But all that love and believe Christ himself, let them not think that Christ
is corporally in the bread, but let them lift up their hearts unto heaven, and
worshipping him, sitting there at the right hand of his father. Let them
worship him in them selves, whose temples they be, in whom he dwells and
lives spiritually: but in no wise let them worship him, as being corporally in
the bread. For he is not in it neither spiritually (as he is in man) nor
corporally (as he is in heaven) but only Sacramentally, as a thing may be said
to be in the figure, whereby it is signified. Thus is sufficiently reproved the
third principal error of the Papists, concerning the Lords supper which is,
That wicked members of the devil, do eat Christ's very body, and drink his
blood.

Thus ends the fourth book.
The Confutation of the second book.
Having declared how much against all truth this author would bear in hand,
that the real presence, the corporal presence, and substanciall presence of
Christ's most precious body and blood in the sacrament, is not the true
catholic doctrine, but a devise of the Papists, which is a term wherewith
this author both uncharitably Zuinglius.
One is that Zuinglius himself, who was no Papist as is well known, nor good
christen man as some said neither, says plainly writing to Luther in the
matter of the Sacrament, it must needs be true, that if the body of Christ be
really in the Sacrament, there is of necessity Transubstantiation also.
Wherefore seeing by Luthers travail, who favored not the Bishops of Rome
neither, and also by evidence of the truth most certain and manifest it
appears, that according to the true catholqiue says Christ is really present
in the sacrament, it is now by Zuinglius judgment a necessary consequence of
that truth to say there is Transubstantiation also, which shall be one mean of
purgation, that I defend not Transubstantiation as depending of the Bishop of
Romes determination, which was not his absolutely, but of a necessity of the
truth, howsoever it likes Duns or Gabriell to write in it, whose sayings this
author

I will pass over the vnreuerent handling of Christ's words (This is my body)

Caunterbury.
IN this book (which answers to my second book rather with taunting words
then with matter) I will answer the chief points of your intent, and not
contend with you in scolding, but will give you place therein.

First I charge none with the name of papists, but that be well worthy thereof.
Papists were the Authors of Transubstantiation.
For I charge not the hearers but the teachers, not the learners, but the
inuenters of the untrue doctrine of Transubstantiation, not the kings
faithful subjects, but the Popes darlinges, whose faith and belefe hangs of
his only mouth. And I call it their doctrine, not only because they teach it,
but because they made it, and were the first fynders of it.

And as in the third book, concerning the real presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament, you have not showed mine ignorance or wilfulnes, but
your own: so do you now much more in the matter of Transubstantiation: Which
word (say you) albeit the same was first spoken of in the general counsel,
where the Bishop of Rome was present, yet the true matter signified by that
word was older. Here at the first brunt you confess, that the name of
Transubstantiation was given at the counsel. So that either the matter was not
before (as it was not in deed) or at the least it was before a namelesse child
(as you do grant) until the holy father Innocent the third, which begat it,
assembled a company of his friends as godfathers to name the child. And by what
authority the counsel defined the matter of Transubstantiation, it may easily
appear. For authority of scripture have they none, nor none they do allege.
And what the authority of the Pope was there, all men may see, being present in
the same no less then.800. Abbottes and Priours, who were all the Popes own
children, of him created and begotten.

And as for the confession of all the clergy of this Realm in an open
counsel, The counsel in England.
the authority of Rome ceasing, you speak here a manifest untruth wittingly
against your conscience. For you know very well (and if you will deny it,
there be enough yet alive can testify) that diverse of the clergy, being of most
godly living, learning, and judgment, never consented to the articles, which
you speak of. And what marvel was it, that those articles (notwithstanding
diverse learned men repugning) passed by the most voices of the Parliament?
seeing that although the authority of Rome was then newely ceased, yet the
darkness and blindness of errors and ignoraunte that came from Rome, still
remained and ouershadowed so this Realm, that a great number of the Parliament
had not yet their eyes opened to see the truth. And yet how that matter was
enforced by some persons, they know right well that were then present. But
after, when it pleased almighty God, more clearly to shine unto us by the light
of this word, our eyes by his goodness were opened, darkness discussed, and that
which was done in ignorance and darkness, was by knowledge and light in
public Counsel rehearsed and taken away, as well concerning the doctrine as
the hardness of the law. For if the doctrine had been true and godly, there is
no christen hearted man, but he would have desired the establishment and
continuance thereof. But the doctrine being false and such as came only from
Rome, they be not worthy to be likened to those truths, which came from God,
and were uttered by Balaam and Cayphas, but to be numbered among those lies,
which came from his vicar, John. 6.
who when he speaks lies, ex proprijs loquitur, he speaks properly of
himself.

And the Bishop of Rome was not clean gone out of England, as soon as the
laws were made against his authority, but remained still by his corrupt
doctrine, as I fear me he does yet in some men's hertes, who were the chief
procurers and setters forthward of the foresaid law. But yet is all together to
be imputed to the Bishop of Rome, forasmuch as from thens came all the foresaid
errors, ignorance and corruption into these parties.

Now where you take upon you here, to purge your self of Papistry by

And where as in fortification of your matter of Transubstantiation, you make
your argument thus, That forasmuch as the body of Christ is really in the
sacrament, there is of necessity Transubstantiation also. Real presence
proves no Transubstantiation.
This your argument has two great faults in it. The first is, that your
antecedent is false, and then you can not conclude thereof a true consequent.
The second fault is, that although the autecedent were granted unto you, that
the body of Christ is really in the sacrament, yet the consequent can not be
inferred thereof, that there is of necessity Transubstantiation. For Christ can
make his body to be present in the Sacrament, as well with the substance of the
bread, as without it, and rather with the substance of bread then with the
accidents: forasmuch as neither Christ's body there occupies any place, (as
you say yourselfe) nor no more does the substance of bread by it self, but by
means of the accidents, as you say also.

I erred once in this matter.
I knowledge that not many years passed, I was yet in darkness concerning this
matter, being brought up in scholasticall and Romish doctrine, whereunto I gave
to much credit. And therefore I grant, that you have heard me stand and defend
the untruth, which I then took for the truth, and so did I hear you at the
same time. But praise be to the everliving God, who has wiped away those
Saulish scales from mine eyes, and I pray unto his divine majesty with all my
heart, that he will likewise do once the same to you. Act.^.
Thy will be fulfillid O Lord.

But forasmuch as you pass over my handling of Christ's words (as you use
commonly to pass in post, when you have no direct answer to make) I shall here
repete my words again, to the intent that the indifferent reader may
presently see how I have handled them, and then judge whether you ought so
slenderly to pas them over as you do.

My words be these

The second book
THus have you heard declared four things, Chap. 1. The confutation of the
error of Transubsta^tiation.
wherein chiefly the Papisticall doctrine varieth from the true word of God, and
from the old catholic Christian faith in this matter of the Lords supper.

Now (least any man should think that I feign any thing of mine own head
without any other ground or authority) you shall hear by Gods grace as well
the errors of the Papists conf^ted, as the catholic truth defended, both by
gods most certain word, and also by the most old approved authors and Martirs
of Christ's Church.

And first, that bread and wine remain after the words of consecration, Chap.
2. The papistiente doctrine is contrary to Gods word.
and be eaten and drunken in the Lords supper, is most manifest by the plain
words of Christ himself, when he ministered the same supper unto his
desciples. For as the Euangilistes write, Christ took bread, and brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body. Math. 16.
Marc. 14. Luc. 22.


Here the Papists triumph of these words, when Christ said: This is my body,
which they call the words of Consecration. For (say they) as soon as these
words be fully ended, there is no bread left, nor none other substance, but
only Christ's body. When Christ said (this) the bread (say they) remained. And
when he said (is) yet the bread remained. Also when he added (my) the bread
remained still. And when he said (bo) yet the bread was there still. But when
he had finished the whole sentence: This is my body, then (say they) the bread
was gone, and there remained no substance but Christ's body, as though the
bread could not remain, when it is made a Sacrament. But this negative, that
there is no bread, they make of their own brains, by their unwritten
verities, which they most highly esteem.

Oh good Lord, how would they have bragged if Christ had said: This is no
bread? but Christ spoke not that negative, This is no bread, but said
affirmingly, This is my body not denying the bread, but affirming that his body
was eaten, (meaning spiritually) as the bread was eaten corporally.

1. Cor. 10.
And that this was the meaning of Christ, appears plainly by S. Paul, in the
tenth chap. to the Corinth. the first epistle, where he (speaking of the same
matter) says: Is not the bread which we break, the communion of the body of
Christ? Who understood the mind of Christ better then S. Paul, to whom Christ
showed his most secret counsels? And S. Paul is not afraid, for our better
understanding of Christ's words, somewhat to alter the same, least we might
stand stiffely in the letters and sillables, and err in mistaking the sense
and meaning. For where as our Savior Christ brake the bread, and said, This is
my body: S. Paul says, that the bread which we break, is the communion of
Christ's body. Christ said, His body: and S. Paul said, the communion of his
body: meaning nevertheless both one thing, that they which eat the bread
worthily, do eat spiritually Christ's very body. And so Christ calls the
bread his body (as the old authors report) because it represents his body,
and signifies unto them which eat that bread according to Christ's ordinance,
that they do spiritually eat his body, and be spiritually fed and nourished by
him, and yet the bread remains still there as a Sacrament to signify the
same. But of these words of Consecration shall be spoken hereafter more at
large.

Therefore to return to the purpose; that the bread remains, and is eaten in
this Sacrament, appears by the words of Christ, which he spoke before the
consecration. Math 16.
For that Christ took bread, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and
said: Take, eat. All this was done and spoken before the words of
Consecration. Wherefore they must needs be understood of the very bread, that
Christ took bread, brake bread, gave bread to his disciples, commanding them
to take bread, and eat bread. But the same is more plain and evident of the
wine that it remains, and is drunken at the Lords supper, as well by the
words that go before as by the words that follow after the consecration. For
before the words of consecration, Christ took the cup of wine, and gave it
unto his disciples, and said: Drink ye all of this. Math. 16. Marc. 14.
And after the words of consecration follows, They drank all of it.

Now I ask all the Papists, what thing it was, that Christ commanded his
disciples to drink, when he said, Drink ye all of this. The blood of Christ
was not yet there by their own confession, for these words were spoken before
the consecration: Therefore it could be nothing else but wine that he commanded
them to drink.

Then ask the Papists once again, whether the disciples drank wine or not?
If they say yea, then let them recant their error, that there was no wine
remaining after the consecration. If they say nay, then they condemn the
Apostles of disobedience to Christ's commandment, which drank not wine as he
commanded them, Or rather they reprove Christ as a Iuggler, which commanded
his Apostles to drink wine, and when they came to the drincking thereof, he
himself had conuayed it away. Moreover, before Christ delivered the cup of
wine to his disciples, he said unto them: Divide this among you. Luc. 11.


Here I would ask the Papists an other question, what thing it was that
Christ commanded his disciples to divide among them? I am sure they will not
say, it was the Cup, except they be disposed to make men laugh at them. Nor I
think they will not say, it was the blood of Christ, as well because the
words were spoken before the consecration, as because the blood of Christ is
not divided, but spiritually given whole in the sacrament. Then could it be
understand of nothing else but of wine, which they should divide among them, and
drink all together.

Also when the Communion was ended, Christ said unto his Apostles: Verily I say
unto you, that I will drink no more henceforth of this fruit of the vine,
Math. 16. Marc. 14.
until that day, that I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom.

By these words it is clear, that it was very wine that the Apostles drank
at that godly supper. For the blood of Christ is not the fruit of the vine, nor
the accidents of wine, nor none other thing is the fruit of the vine, but the
very wine only.

How could Christ have expressed more plainly, that bread and wine remain,
then by taking the bread in his hands, and breaking it him self, and giving
it unto his disciples, commanding them to eat it? And by taking the cup of
wine in his hands, and delivering it unto them, commanding them to divide it
among them, and to drink it, and calling it the fruit of the vine? These
words of Christ be so plain, that if an angel of heaven would tell us the
contrary, he ought not to be believed. And then much less may we believe the
subtle lying Papists.

If Christ would have had us to believe (as a necessary article of our faith)
that there remains neither bread nor wine, would he have spoken after this
sort, using all such terms and circumstau^ces, as should make us believe, that
still there remains bread and wine?

What manner of teacher make they of Christ, that say he meant one thing, when
his words be clean contrary? What christen heart can patiently suffer this
contumely of Christ?

But what crafty teachers be these Papists, who devise fantasies of their
own heads, directly contrary to Christ's teaching, and then set the same
abroad to christen people, to be most assuredly believed as Gods own most holy
word? S. Paul did not so, but followed herein the manner of Christ's speaking,
in calling of bread, bread, and wine, wine, and never altering Christ's words
herin. 1. Cor. 10.
The bread which we break (says he) is it not the Communion of Christ's body?

Now I ask again of the Papists, whether he spoke this of the bread
consecrated or not consecrated? They can not say that he spoke it of the bread
unconsecrated, for that is not the communion of Christ's body by their own
doctrine. And if S. Paul spoke it of bread consecrated, then they must needs
confess that after consecration, such bread remains, as is broken bread,
which can be none other, then very true material bread. 1. Cor. 10.
And straight ways after, S. Paul says in the same place, that we be
partakers of one bread and one cup. And in the next chapter, speaking more
fully of the same matter, four times he names the bread and the cup, never
making mention of any Transubstantiation, or remaining of accidents without
any substance, which things he would have made some mention of, if it had been
a necessary article of our faith, to believe that there remains no bread nor
wine. Thus it is evident and plain, by the words of scripture, that after
consecration remains bread and wine, and that the Papisticall doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is directly contrary to gods word.

Winchester.
But to the purpose, the simplicity of faith in a christen man's breast, does not
so precisely (Fiat at (fi) was nothing, and then at (at) was yet nothing (at
lu) was nothing but a little little pearing, put an (x) to it, and it was
suddenly Lux, and then the light. What christen man would handle either place
thus? and therefore reader let this entry of the matter serve for an argument
with what spirit this matter is handled, but to answer that this author
notes with an exclamation: Oh good Lord how would they have bragged: if Christ
had said, This is no bread. Here I would question with this author, to believe
inwardly. Now our belief is grounded upon gods word, which is this; This is my
body: in which words Hylary testifies that is inwardly believed is a truth,
and the figure is in that is seen outwardly. I take Hylary here as this author
alleges him, whereby I ask the Reader, is not this author overthrown, that
Christ's speech is not figurative but true and proper being inwardly true that
we believe? Ye will say unto me, What is this to transubstantiation, to the
reprofe whereof it was brought in? because he says bread and wine is seen.
First I say that it overthrows this author for truth of the presence of
Christ's body, and every overthrow therein overthrows this author in
Transubstantiation, not by authority of the church of Rome, but by consequence
in truth as Zuinglius says, who shall serve me to avoid papistry. If one ask
me, what say ye then to Hilary that bread and wine is seen? I say they be in
deed seen, for they appear

The arguments this author uses in the 19. and 20. leaf of the order of
Christ's De doctrina Christiana, where he gives a rule of recapitulation as he
calls it, when that is told after, that was done before, and therefore we may
not argue so firmly upon the order of the tellyng in the speech. S. Augustine
brings an example that by order of tellyng. Augustine lib. 3 cap. 36.
Adam was in Paradise or any tree was brought forth for feedyng, with diverse
other, wherewith I will not encomber the Reader. The Evangelist rehearses what
it: And yet not content to use this fond reasonyng, this author calls
Papists to witness that they might laugh at it, because the Evangelist tells
the story so as Christ said, (drink) and then told after what it was, this
author phantasieth that the Apostles

Caunterbury.
WHere you say that the simplicity of faith in a Christen man's breast, (Hoc est
Corpus meum) there is bread, and after those words be fully ended, there is no
more bread, but only Christ himself. And the same simplicity do you declare
by and by to be in your self, when you say that Gods work is in one instance,
howsoever speech, Hoc est corpus meum.

The creation of the world.
And it is no direct answer, but a mere cauillation and illusion, to (fiat
lux) to be a like matter unto transubstantiation. For Gods speech requires no
succession of time, as the speech of the Priest does. Therefore this is but a
playeng, to show your subtle wit and crafty Rhetorike, whereby your spirit
may be judged, whether you go about clearly to set forth the truth, or by
dark colors and unlike examples to hide and cover it.

This is no bread.
I shall make an other argument of the same form, which shall show how strong
your argument is. S. John is not the sone of ye virgin Mary. Christ said to
her, This is thy son, Ergo he said: This is not John. John. 19.
The first part I am sure you will affirm in effect. The second part is
Christ's words, and as the second part in my argument is a figurative speech,
so is it in yours, so that in every point the arguments be like. And therefore
as mine argument is naught, so is yours also; and all that you bring in to
follow thereof. And if I list to dalye (as you do) in such a matter, I could
conclude directly against you, that in the Sacrament is not Christ's body;
thus: Christ's body is not material bread: S. Paul said it is bread: Ergo he
said it is not Christ's body. 1. Cor. 10. and. 11.
The first part you affirm, the second part S. Paul affirms. And therefore
to avoid this conclusion, the only way is, to say that Christ's speech was a
figurative speech, when he said, This is my body. For else by the Catholic
doctrine S. Paul, saying that it is bread, says in effect it is not the body
of Christ. Thus may you see what avails your Sophistication, when I am
constrained Sophisticari cum Sophista, vt ars deludatur art.

Yea and nay.
when you say every yea contains a nay in it naturally. Therefore Christ,
saying it is his body, says it is no bread. If this form of Argument were
infallible, then I may turn the same to you again, and overthrow you with
your own weapon thus. S. Paul said it is bread, Ergo it is not Christ's body:
if the affirmation of the one be a negation of the other. And by such
Sophistication you may turn up all the truth quite and clean, and say that
Christ was neither God nor man, because he said he was a vine and bread. And
every yea (say you) contains a nay in it naturally.

2. Re. 17.
But the old English Proverb is here true, that it is good beating of a proud
man: for when he is all to beaten back and bone, yet will he boast of his
victory, and brag what a valiant man he is.



Hilary.
that there is both a figure and a truth of that figure, for answer hereunto
the truth is, that your matter here is gathered of an untruth, that I would
have only a figure, where as I say plainly as Hylarie says, that in the true
ministration of the Sacrament is both a figure and a truth: the figure
outwardly, and the truth inwardly. For bread and wine be sensible signs and
Sacraments, to teach us outwardly, what feeds us inwardly. Outwardly we see
and feel bread and wine with our outward senses, but inwardly by faith we see
and feed upon Christ's true body and blood. But this is a spiritual feedyng
by faith, which requires no corporal presence. And here I ask you two
questions, One is this, whither Hylarie say that the body of Christ is under
the forms of bread and wine, and that corporally? If he say not so (as the
Reader shall soon judge, looking upon his words) then stand I upright without
any fall or foil: for Hylarie says not as you do. The other question is,
whither Hylarie do not say that there is a figure: let the Reader judge also,
and see whither you be not quite overthrown with your own crook, in saying
that Christ's speech is not figurative. And yet the third question I may add
also, why S. Hylarie should say, that bread and wine be figures, if there be no
bread nor wine there at all, but be taken clean away by transubstantiation?
And where as for answer hereto you take the example

1. Cor. 10.
And where you deny that these words of S. Paul (is not the bread

And this is notable which you say, that these words (the bread which Breaking
signifies the whole use of the supper.
but also blessing, thankesgeuing, dispensing, receauyng and eating, and that
bread in this place signifies common bread taken to be consecrated. In which
saying it is a world to see the fantasies of men's devises, how uncertain they
be in matters perteining to God. How agrees this your saying with your
doctrine of transubstantiation? For if S. Paul, when he said (the bread which
we break, is it not the communion of Christ's body) meant by bread common
bread, and by breaking meant also the blessing, thankesgeuing, receiving and
eating, then is common bread broken, blessed, received and eaten. And then
where becomes your transubstantiation, if common bread be eaten in the
Sacrament? And when is the bread turned into the body of Christ, if it remain
common bread until it be eaten? Yet now you seem to begin some thing to
savor of the truth, that the bread remains still in his proper nature,
enduring the whole use of the Supper.

Romans 4.
And as touching this place of S. Paul, that God calls things that be not, as
they were, if it perteine unto Sacrament, where Christ called bread his body,
what could you have alleged more against yourself? For if in this place Christ
call that which is not, as it were, then Christ called bread as it were his
body, and yet it is not his body in deed.

Whether all the Evangelists told the history of the supper out of order.
brought in by me out of the very words of the Evangelists, is such a
shameless arrogancy and boldness showed, as abhors all Christian ears
for to hear, which is, that three Eua^gelistes telling the manner of Christ's
holy Supper, not one of them all do tell the tale in right order, but subvert
the order of Christ's doings and sayings, and that in such a necessary matter
of our Religion, that the diffinition of the whole truth stands in the order.
The Evangelists (say you) rehearse what Christ said and did, simply and
truly. But is this a simple and true rehearsal of Christ's words and deeds,
to tell them out of order otherwise then Christ did and said them? And S. Paul
also (if it be as you say) speaking of ye same matter, commits ye like
error. And yet never no ancient author expounding the Evangelists or S.
Paul could spy out this fault, and in their Commentaries give us warning De
doctrina Christiana, where he says, that sometimes in Scripture a thing is
told after, that was done before. But S. Augustine says not that it is so in
this matter, nor I am not so presumptuous to say that all the three
Evangelists, with S. Paul also, disordered the truth of the story in a matter
wherein the truth can not be known but by the order. S. Augustine De consensu
Euangelistarum says, August. de consensu Euangelistarum lib. 3.
That that which Luke rehearses of the chalice, before the giving of the
bread, was spoken by Christ after the distribution of the bread, as the other
two Evangelists report the same. And if these words (Hoc est corpus meum)
had been put out of the right place in all the three Evangelists, and also in
S. Paul, would not S. Augustine have given warning thereof, as well as of the
other? Luc. 22. Math. 26. Marc. 14.
And would all other authors expounding that place, have passed over the matter
in silence, and have spoken not one word thereof? specially being a matter of
such weight, that the Catholic faith and our salvation (as you say) hangs
thereof? Do not all the profes that you have, hang of these words (Hoc est
corpus meum,) This is my body? And shall you say now, that they be put out of
their place? And then you must needs confess, that you have nothing to defend
your self, but only one sentence, and that put out of order, and from his
right place, as you say your self, where in deed the Evangelists and
Apostles (being true rehearsers of the story in this matter) did put those
words in the right place. But you (having none other shift to defend your
error) do remove the words, both out of the right place and the right sense.
And can any man that loves the truth, give his ears to hear you, that turn
up side down, both the order and sense of Christ's words, contrary to the
true narration of the Evangelists, contrary to the interpretation of all the
old authors, and the approved faith of Christ's Church, even from the
beginning, only to maintain your wilful assertions and Papisticall opinions?
So long as the Scripture was in the interpretation of learned Divines, it had
the right sense, but when it came to the handling of ignorant Lawyers and
Sophistical Papists, such godly men as were well exercised in holy Scripture,
and old Catholic writers, might declare and defend the truth at their perils:
but the Papisticall Sophisters and Lawyers, would ever define and determine all
matters as pleased them.

The variance of the papists in consecration.
But all truths agree to the truth, and falsehode agrees not with it self, so
it is a plain declaration of untruth, that the Papists vary so among
themselves. For some say that Christ consecrated by his own secret power
without sign or words: some say that his benediction was his consecration:
some say, that he did consecrate with these words, Hoc est corpus meum, and
yet those vary among themselves: for some say that he spoke these words twice,
once immediately after benediction, at what time they say he consecrated, and
again after when he commanded them to eat it, appointyng than to his
Apostles the form of consecration. And lately came new Papists with their v.
eggs, and say that the consecration is made only with these. v. words Hoc
est enim corpus meum. And last of all come you and Smith with yet your newer
devises, Smith.
saying that Christ spoke those words before he gave the bread and immediately
after the breakyng, manifestly contrary to the order of the text (as all the
Evangelists report) and contrary to all old authors of the Catholic Church
(which all with one consent say, that Christ gave bread to his Apostles) and
contrary to the book of Common prayer by you allowed, which rehearses the
words of the Evangelists thus, that Christ took bread, and when he had
blessed and given thanks, he brake it and gave it to his disciples, where all
the relation is made to the bread. Is this your faithful handling of Gods
word, for your pleasure to turn the words as you list? Is it not a thing much
to be lamented, that such as should be the true setters fourth of Christ's
Gospel, do trifle with Christ's words after this sort, to alter the order of
the gospel after their own fantasy? Can there be any trifling with Christ's
words, if this be not? And shall any christen man give credit to such
corrupters of holy scripture? Have you put upon you harlots faces, that you be
past all shame, thus to abuse gods word to your own vanity?

And be you not ashamed likewise so manifestly to belly me, that I phansy

Christ's body made of bread.
And where you say, that Christ gave that he had consecrated, and that

1. Cor. 10.
And where you say that S. Paul speaks not of material bread, but that is
broken, whereof every man takes part, which is not Christ's body, except
you will say that we eat Christ's body divided in peaces as the gross
Capernaites imagined. And S. Augustine with other old authors do write, that
Paul spoke of such bread as is made of a great multitude of graynes of corn
gathered together, and united into one material lofe, as the multitude of the
spiritual members of Christ be joined to gither into one mystical body of
Christ.

Chrysostom. Theodorete.
they say as plainly as can be spoken, that the bread remains after
consecration, although we call it by a more excellent name of dignity, that is
to say, by the name of Christ's body. But what estimation of wisdom or
learning so ever you have of yourselfe, surely there appears neither in you
in this place, whereupon the alteration of the name of bread, Alteration of
names unto dignity.
you would gather the alteration of the substance or Transubstantiation. Be
not kings and Emperors very men, although they be ever called by the names of
there royal and imperial dignites? Psalm. 81.
Or are they therefore gods, because the Prophet calls them so? And who ever
called you a man, since you were a bishop? and yet that dignity took not
from you the nature of a man. And the Pope is a man, although he be called
Julius, or Pater sanctissimus, or Hipocrita impiissimus. So is bread still
bread, although it represent the body of Christ, and be called in yt respect
(as a figure) the very body of Christ.

Bread after the sanctification.
and not after, Saint Paul's own words reprove this your saying most
manifestly. For he calls it bread when it is the communion of Christ's body,
and when it is eaten, saying: 1. Cor. 10.
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of Christ's body? And, as
often as you eat this bread and drink this cup: 2. Cor. 11.
and who soever eats the bread and drincketh the cup of the lord unworthily:
and, let a man try himself, and so eat of that bread and drink of the cup:
and, he that eats and drincketh unworthily. etc. Now these sayings cannot be
understood before the sanctification, except you will grant that the bread
was Christ's body, and that it was eaten before it was sanctified. Wherefore let
every reader that knows any thing, judge whether you seek any truth in this
matter, or whether you study to search out vain cauilations, and yet the same
being clean contrary to the manifest words of holy scripture, and to all
approved writers. Wherefore gentle reader way S. Paul's words, whether he call
it bread after the sanctification, or only before, and as thou find Saint
Paul make with this man's saying (that trifeleth away ye truth) so thou may
believe him in all other things. Hitherto is discussed how the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is against gods word, now follows in my book, how the
same is against nature, Whereof I write thus.

Let us now consider also, how the same is against natural reason, Chap. 3.
The papisticall doctrine is against reason.
and natural operation, which although they prevail not against Gods word, yet
when they be joined with Gods word, they be of great moment to confirm any
truth. Natural reason abhors vacuum, that is to say, that there should be
any empty place, wherein no substance should be. But if there remain no bread
nor wine, the place where they were before, and where their accidents be, is
filled with no substance, but remains vacuum, clean contrary to the order of
nature.

We see also that the wine, though it be consecrated, yet will it turn to
vinegar, and the bread will mowle: which then be nothing else but sower wine and
mowled bread, which could not wax sower nor mowly, if there were no bread nor
wine there at all.

And if the sacraments were now brent (as in the old church they burned all
that remained uneaten) let the Papists tell what is brent. They must needs
say, that it is either bread or the body of Christ. But bread (say they) is
none there: then must they needs burn the body of Christ, and be called Christ
burners (as heretofore they have burned many of his members) except they will
say, that accidents burn alone without any substance, contrary to all the
course of nature.

The sacramental bread and wine also will nourish, which nourishment naturally
comes to the substance of the meats and drinks, and not of the accidents.

The wine also will poison, (as diverse bishops of Rome have had experiences,
both in poisoning of other, and being poisoned them selves) which poisoning
they can not ascribe to the most wholesome blood of our Savior Christ, but only
to the poisoned wine.

And most of all, it is against the nature of accidents, to be in nothing. For
that definition of accidents, is to be in some substance, so that if they be,
they must needs be in some thing. And if they be in nothing, than they be not.
And a thousand things more, of like foolishnes do the Papists affirm by their
transubstantiation, contrary to all nature and reason. As that two bodies be in
one place, and one body in many places at one time, and that substances be
gendred of accidents only, and accidents converted into substances, and a body
to be in a place, and occupy no room, and generation to be without corruption,
and corruption without generation, and that substances be made of nothing, and
turned into nothing, with many such like things, against all order and
principles of nature and reason.

Winchester.
In the third chapter written in the xxi. leaf it troubles this author that
ye doctrine of Transubstantiation is in his judgment against natural reason
and natural operation: in the entry of which matter he grants wisely that
they should not prevail against gods word, and yet he says, when they be
joined with gods word, they be of vacuum) declares a vacuum, that nature
abhors body,) then reason yelding to that truth, will not strive with
Transubstantiation, but plainly affirm that by his judgment, if it be the
body of Christ, it is not bread. For Conclusions of reason.
and therefore reason has these conclusions thoroughly, whatsoever is bread is
no wine whatsoever is wine, is no milk, and so forth.

And therefore being once believed this to be the body of Christ, reason says by
and by, it is not bread by the rule aforesaid, whereby appears how reason does
not strive with Transubstantiation, being once conquered with says of the true
presence of Christ's body, which is most evident, and no whit darkened by any
thing this Author Reode Smith fol. 64.
In venditionibus, de contrahenda emptione, in the Pandeas, that of wine and
viniger there is ( prope eadem (...)) in manner one substance, wherein he
shows him self far against this Authors skill, which I put for an example
to show that natural operations have had in natural men's judgments diverse
considerations, one sometime repugnant to an other, and yet the Authors of both
opinions called Philosophers all. Among which some thought (for example) they
spoke wisely, that esteemed all thing to alter as swiftly as the water runs
in the streme, and thought therefore no man could utter a word, being the same
man in the end of the word that he was when he began to speak, and used a
similitude. Like as a man standing in one place can not touch the same one
water twice in a running stream, no more can a man be touched the same man
twice, but he alters as swiftely as both the stream. These were laughed to
skorne, yet they thought themselves wise in natural speculation, Aristotle
(that is much esteemed and worthily) fansied a first matter in all things to be
one, in which consideration he seems to be as extreme in a stay, as the other
fond Philosophers were in moving. By which two extremeties I condemn not
natural speculation, wherewith I think God pleased for man to marvel in
contemplation of his inferior works, and to tame his rash wit in the
inexplicable variety of it, but to use it so, as to make it Manna in desert,
the people saw many meruayles in it, besides the common operation of nature,
and yet they never troubled them selves with (howes). And as one very well
writes, it is consonant that as there is a great miracle in the work of God
to make there present the substance of the body of Christ, to likewise to
knowledge the miracle in the absence of the substance of bread, and both the
heavenly and earthly part of the sacrament to be miraculous, and so many
miracles to be joined together in one, agrees with the excelency of the
Sacrament. As for the objections this Author makes in this matter, be such as
he finds in those scholasticall writers, that discuss as they may or labor
thereaboute wherewith to satisfy idle imaginations, and to make learned men
prompt

Caunterbury.
HEre in the beginning of this chapter, it is a strange thing to me, that Act.
10.
confirm the true faith of his incarnation? And did not his eating with the
Apostles confirm and stablish their faith of his resurrection? John 20. Luc.
24. John. 20. Luc. 24.
Did not the sight of Christ and feeling of his wounds induce Thomas to believe
that Christ was risen? When neither the report of the devout woman, nor yet of
the Apostles which did see him, could cause him to believe Christ's
resurrection? And when they took our Savior Christ for a spirit, did not he
cause them by their sight and feeling of his flesh and bones, to believe that he
was very man, and no spirit, as they phantasied? Which sensible profes were so
far from derogation of faith that they were a sure establishment thereof.
Wherefore if your understanding can not reach this doctrine, it is indede very
slender in godly things.

And as for my reason of vacuum, you have not yet answered thereto, for res
vacua) yet by the doctrine of Transubstantiation joined unto nature, there
should remain utterly nothing in deed: for substance remains none, by your
doctrine of Transubstantiation, and without substance can be no accidents by
the rules of nature. Therefore comparing your doctrine and nature together,
either you must recant your doctrine of Transubstantiation, or confess that
nothing remains, or at the least grant that your teaching repugneth to the
order of nature, which suffiseth for me in this place, where my purpose is
only to show, how the doctrine of Transubstantiation is against nature and
reason.

Now where you so often speak of the visible form of bread remaining by this
word (form) you swetely deceive your self, The word Form.
thinking that it does much auaunce your faith of Transubstantiation,
understanding by that word the accidences, similitudes, and likeness without
substance remaining, misunderstanding both holy scripture and the ancient
doctors. S. Paul speaking of Christ's incarnation says, Philip. 2.
that he being in form of God, did humble him self, taking upon him the form
of man. By which words S. Paul meant not, that Christ was like unto god, and
not God indede, nor yet that he was like unto man, and not very man in deed,
but that he was and is very God and very man, having.ii. substances, one of his
Godhead, and the other of his manhod, united together in one person. And the
ancient doctors writing of this sacrament, when they speak of the forms of
bread and wine, do use this vocable (form) (as S. Paul uses it) to signify
very bread and very wine, or the substances of bread and wine, and not the
similitude or likeness of bread and wine without the substances, as you fantasy,
and imagine.



Impanation.
But whether I defended any such fond opinion or no, or whether I have herein
sufficiently answered the Papists, I refer to the judgment of all wise and
learned men (that be any thing indifferent) which have read my book.

And as concerning natural reason, where you say it will agree with the
doctrine of Transubstantiation well enough, if the faith of the true presence
of Christ's very body be true. For answer hereto I say, that if your
fantastical belefe of the real presence of Christ's natural body in the
sacrament were as true as the gospel (as none opinion can be more erroneous
and fond) yet would both faith and reason judge, that there were still bread.
Faith, because holy scripture manifestly says so: Reason, because it is so,
not only to all our senses, but also in all the effects and opperations of
bread. And reason can not discern, but that Christ's body may be as well
present with the substance of bread, as with the accidents, and that rather
also, forasmuch as you confess your self, that after the rules of nature,
quantity fills the place rather then substance. And so may reason judge the
body of Christ, to be the body of Christ, and yet the bread to be the bread
still, and wine to be wine and no bread, nor none other confusion of natures to
be there against reason.

And as touching natural operation, in the handling thereof, you show

Ulpian.
And I marvel that you can not see how much Ulpian whom you allege, makes
against your self, and with my saying, that both in wine and viniger remains
substance, which is changed from sweet to sower, so that ye sweet of it self
is not made sower, but that substance which before was sweet, is after sower.
And therefore what great skill you have in citing of Ulpian, to prove that the
accidents of wine without substance do sower and wax viniger, let the wise
reader judge.

But Ulpian seems to me to have an other sense then all men can perceive, but
I will not discuss the mind of Ulpian, because I am no lawyer, least you
should cast the proverb in my teeth, Ne suitor vltra crepidam.

But to what purpose you should bring in the diversity of judgments in
natural operations, and the extreme fondnes of philosophers, some in moving,
some in staying, I can not devise, except it be the permission of God, that as
some of the philosophers by their fond opinions in nature, made themselves
laughing stocks to all men, of reason so should ye Papists do. And yet so much
more is the Papisticall opinion of Transubstantiation to be laughed to scorn
of all men, as it passes the fondnes of all the philosophers, and that so
far, that the fondest of the philosophers would have laughed at it, and have
clapped it out of their schools with one consent, as an opinion more mete for
frantike and mad men, then for men of natural reason. And as fond opinions as
some philosophers had, yet was there none that so far erred in reason, to say
that accidences might stand without any substance, but all with one uniform
consent agreed, that accidences had none other being or remaining, but in their
substances. And yet if the faith of our religion taught us the contrary, then
reason must yield to faith. But your doctrine of Transubstantiation is as
directly contrary to the plain words of scripture, as it is against the order
of natural reason.

And where you say that the doctrine of Transubstantiation does not other
accidence it is, that all men may understand what thing it is which (as you
say) is the same in greatness, thicknes, weight, savor, and other properties.

Emissen.
this conversion (as Emissene says, and as I have declared before) is like to
our conversion in baptism, where outwardly is no alteration of substance (for
no sacramental alteration makes alteration of the substance) but the
meruaylous and secret alteration is inwardly in our souls. And as the water in
baptism is not changed, but sacramentally (that is to say, made a sacrament of
spiritual regeneration, which before was none) so in the lords supper,
neither the substance nor accidences of bread and wine be changed, but
sacramentally: but the alteration is inwardly in the souls of them that
spiritually be refreshed and nourished with Christ's flesh and blood. And this
our faith teaches us, and natural reason does good service to faith herein
against your imagined Transubstantiation. So that you have not gotten reasons,
good will, nor consent to your vain doctrine of Transubstantiation, although
you had proved your real presence. Which hitherto you have not don, but have
taken great pain to shoot away all your boltes in vain, missing quite and
clean both the prick and the whole butte.

1. Pet. 3. Tit. 1.
and S. Paul requires in a christen Bishop, that he should be able to exhort
by wholesome doctrine, and to convince the gaynsayers, and not to require other
men to give faith unto him without asking of (how or why) only because he says
so himself. The old catholic Authors tell, wherefore Christ called bread his
body, and how christen people fed of his body. And the blessed virgin Mary
asked how she should conceive a child, never having company with man. Luc. 1.
And you tell yourselfe how Christ is in heaven, how in us, and how in the
sacrament, declaring all to be but after a spiritual manner. And what manner of
men be you, that we may not ask you (how) to render a reason of your
Transubstantiation, being a matter by you only devised, clearly without Gods
word.

But at length when you have swette well fauoredly in answering to mine
arguments of natural reason and natural operation, Miracles.
you be feign to confess a great part to be true, and to turn altogether into
miracles, and that into such kind of miracles, as the old catholic writers
never knowledged nor touched in none of their works. For besides the chief
miracle, which you say is in the conuertio^ of the substance of bread into the
substance of Christ's body, and of the wine into his blood, there be other
miracles when the forms of wine tourue into viniger, and when bread mouldeth,
or a man does vomit it, or the mouse eats it, or the fire burns it, or
worms breed in it, and in all like chances, God still works miracles, yea
even in poisoning with the consecrated wine. And the multitude of such miracles
(as you do judge) pertayneth to the excellency of the Sacrament, where as among
the school authors this is a common received proposition, non esse ponenda
miracula sine necessitate.

And where you say that I make my principal foundation upon the arguments

Chap. 4. The papisticall doctrine is also against, all our senses.
The Papisticall doctrine is also against all our outward senses, called our
five wits. For our eyes say, they see there bread and wine: our noses smell
bread and wine: our mouths taste, and our hands feel bread and wine. And
although the articles of our faith be above all our outward senses, so that we
believe things which we can neither see, feel, hear, smell nor taste, yet they
be not contrary to our senses, at the least so contrary, that in such things,
which we from time to time do see, smell, feel, hear and taste, we shall not
trust our fenses, but believe clean contray. Christ never made no such article
of our faith. Our faith teaches us to believe things that we see not, but it
does not bid us, that we shall not believe that we see daily with our eyes, and
hear with our ears, and grope with our hands. For although our senses can
not reach so far as our faith does, yet so far as the compass of our
senses does usually reach, our faith is not contrary to the same, but rather
our senses do confirm our faith. Ihon. 20.
Or else what auayled it to S. Thomas, for the confirmation of Christ's
resurrection, that he did put his hand into Christ's side, and felt his
wounds, if he might not trust his senses, nor give no credit thereto?

And what a wide door is here opened to Valentinianus, Martion, and other
heretics, which said, that Christ was not crucified, but that Simon Cireneus
was crucified for him, although to the sight of the people, it seemed that
Christ was crucified, Or to such heretics as said, that Christ was no man,
although to men's sightes he appeared in the form of man, and seemed to be
hungry, dry, weary, to weep, sleep, eat, drink, yea and to dye like as
other men do. For if we once admit this doctrine, that no credit is to be
given to our senses, we open a large field, and give a great occasion unto an
innumerable rablement of most heinous heresies.

And if there be no trust to be given to our senses in this matter of the
sacrament, why then do the Papists so stoutly affirm, that the accidents
remain after the consecration, which can not be judged but by the senses? For
the scripture speaks no word of the accidents of bread and wine but of the
bread and wine themselves. And it is against the nature and diffinitio^ of
accide^tes, to be alone without any substance. Wherefore if we may not trust our
senses in this matter of the sacrament, than if the substance of the bread and
wine be gone, why may we not then say, that the accide^ts be gone also? And if
we must needs believe our senses, as conserning the accide^ts of bread and wine,
why may we not do the like of the substance, and that rather than of the
accidents: forasmuch as after the consecration, the Scripture says in no place
that there is no substance of bread nor of wine, but calls them still by such
names as signify the substances, and not the accidents?

And finally, if our senses be daily deceived in this matter, than is the
sensible sacrament nothing else, but an elution of our senses. And so we make
much for their purpose, that said that Christ was a crafty iugglar, that made
things to appear to men's sightes, that in deed were no such things, but
forms only, figures, and apparances of them.

But to conclude in few words this process of our senses, let all the Papists
lay their heads together, and they shall never be able to show one article of
our faith, so directly contrary to our senses that all our senses by daily
experience shall affirm a thing to be, and yet our faith shall teach us the
contrary thereunto.

Winchester.
Contrarium habetur in libro vocato. The deuiles sophistry fol. 6.10.11.
12.15.21.
And therefore to a question this Author asks in the end of the second column
in the 22. leaf which is this. If we believe our senses in the accidents, why
may we not do the like of the substance? I answer thus, that the senses can no
skill of substance as learned men speak of substance, nor this author neither,
if a man should judge him by this question. For and a sensual man one that
follows his rude senses would say, Come hither master scholar, I here much
talking in this world of substance and accidence, and if he were of a merry
nature, would say his little boy had learned his accidence, but him self woreth
not perfectly what substance means, as clerks term it, and bringing forth a
piece of bread, an other of chese, and a pot of ale, would desire the scoller
to learn him the substance of them, and show it with his finger, and show him
also what difference and in the speech of such as for the purpose speak after
the common capacity, the word substance is used to signify that is seen or
felt, and so ye may say ye see the substance or feel the substance of bread,
and yet ye do in deed see but the color, and by it the largenes, and feel the
heat or coldness, moisture or drines, weight or lightness, hardness or softnes,
thiknes, and thinnes. If ye will learn what substance is ye must leave your
outward se^ces, and consider in your understanding how in every thing that is,
there is a stay, which we call a substance, being the principal part of every
thing, which failing, we say that special thing not to be. As where the
substance of bread is not, there ye special thing bread is not, because bread
is as every other natural visible thing is of two parts substance and
accidents: now if the one part, that is to say substance be not there, which
can be but by miracle, then is no bread properly there, because the one and
chief part is not there, and yet I say not nothing is there, for the other part
remaining has a being as Gods visible creature, and may be called the visible
part of bread: and therefore the outward kind and form of bread and the
appara^ce of bread and a true sensible part of bread, and therefore be called
also by the name of bread, not that it is so properly, but after the common
speech and capacity of men, and may be called the nature of bread, signifying
the property and the matter of bread signifiing the grossenes. The rude man I
think would hereat say, Here is sophistry in deed, for here is substance, and
no substance, matter of bread and no bread, appearance of bread and no bread,
called bread and no bread, this is plain iugling where it happens. Wherein this
rude man for want of true understanding of the words and perfect consideration
of the matter speaks thus fondly, who if he should thereupon require the
scholar to show him some difference of the very substance between bread,
cheese, and ale, what could the learned scholar answer here, but even frankly
declare his ignorance, and say I know none, which is as much to say, as I know
there is a difference, but I wot not what it is. Whereunto I trow the rude man
would say to the scholar. Then art thou with all thy lerning as very a fool
as I, to speak of a difference and can not tell what it is. Now if the
scholar should utter even the extremity of his learning in proper terms, and
say, I know bread is no cheese, and chese is no ale, and of their accidental
parts I can indede show differences, but of the very substance none. The rude
man if his nature were not over dull, would laugh roundly to hear a scholar
utter for a point of learning that bread is no cheese, and cheese is no ale,
which who so knows not, is a very fool, and merely to knit up the matter
would keep the accidents of his bread chese and all for him self, and give the
substance to the scholar if he can divide it, as a reward for his cunning to
his better nurture. And this I write after this gross sort, to show that this
matter of substance is not commonly understood as senses exercised in
learning perceive it, and how man's outward senses can not as this author would
have it, be judges of the inward nature of substance, which reason persuades
to be, using the service of the senses for induction of the knowledge, in which
judgment upon their report happens many times much deceit. Coena Calcidensi,
hospitis. Liu^us in 5. de bello Macedonico.
Titus Liuius speaks of a great number of diverse dishes of meat made in a
solemn supper, whereat the gestes woundred to see such a variety at that time
of the year, and when they demanded of it, answer was made the substance was
but one, all hogs flesh, so as the alteration in the accidents deceived
their judgments. That stone, which among many thought to have some skill, has
been taken for a precious quid pro quo) among the poticaries and learned also
in things strange, whereof they have but accidental marks. Wherefore upon
consideration of the premises it may easily appear how the question of this
author, why the senses be not believed in knowledge of substance, as in
knowledge of accidents, may be resonably answered. And then if the judgment of
reason in the estimation of Gods natural works and denying this or that
substance, when by accidents it should seem otherwise, reason does stay
sensuallity, and when men of experience, knowledge, and credit, have
determined such a certain stone to be a very true diamond, other ignorant will
be ashamed to say the contrary. And if a man fearing himself deceived to have
bought one kind of drugges for an other, and yet mistrusting wisely his own
judgment, having caused it to be vewed by men of knowledge, good faith and
honesty, if they affirm it to be the very thing, this man will then condemn
his own imagination, and upon credit call it so, and take it so to be:
wherefore if in these things I say, reason does in a man stay sensuality, and
if knowledge with honesty rules the judgment of rude understanding, and
finally, if credit among men be so much regarded, how much more convenient is
it, that faith in Godds word (wherein can be no deceit Homel. 26.
then either visible or palpable: but therein Christ condescended to man's
infirmity, and as he was truth it self, left that a true testimony to such as
humbly were disposed by grace to receive it, not to convince heretics, who
can devise wayward answers to the external acts of Christ, as now a days
they delude the miraculous entering of Christ to his disciples, the doors being
shut. Our faith of the true visible fourmes of bread and wine be not illuded,
but have their proper obiectes in those accidents and reason in carnal
understanding brought and subdued in obsequie to faith, does in the estimation
of the host consecrate yield to faith, according whereunto we confess truly
the same to be the body of Christ.

Where this Author would all the Papists to lay all their headers together etc
I know

Caunterbury.
AS in your answer to the iii. chapter of my book you have done The rude
man and learned scholar.
wherein the matter is so learnedly handeled that the simple rude man shows
himself to have more knowledge, then both you and your learned scholar. And
why you should bring in this matter I know not, except it be to show your
ignorance, to be as great in logike and philosophy, Absurdityes.
as it is in divinity. For what an ignorance is this, to say that a man can
know no difference between one substance and an other, and that substances be
not judged by any senses? And that all natural things be of these.ii. parts,
of substances and accidents: and that their accidents be part of their
substances, and be called their substances, their natures, and matters? Was
there ever any such learning uttered before this time? May not all men now
evidently perceive, unto what a straight your error has driven you, that you
have none other defense, but to fly to such absurdities, as be against the
judgment of the whole world? Would you make men believe, that they know not the
substance of the bread from drink, nor of chalk from chese? Would you lead
the world into this error, that Christ was never indede seen, heard nor felt,
when he walked here with his apostles? Did he not prove the truth of his very
flesh and bones by sight? saying, A spirit has not flesh and bones as you see
me have? Luc. vit.
And although substances be not seen and known to our senses, but by their
accidents, yet be they indede known, and properly known, and truly known by
their accidents, and more properly seen then their accidents be. For the
accidents be rather the means to know the substance by, then the things that
be known. Is not wine known from bear by the taste, and mustard from sugar?
Is not one man known by his voice from another? And a shalme from a drum?
And is not a man discerned from a beast, and one from an other by sight? But
when you turn up all speeches, all reason, and all manner of knowledge, it is
less to be meruayled that you turn up divinity also, wherein you can less
skill then in the rest.

And where you say, that the senses can no skill of substances, because they
m^^be deceived therein, so may they also be in the accidents. For do not the
sun and moon sometime look read by means of the vapors between us and
them? And does not spectacles make althinges look of the same color that they
be of? And if you hold up your finger directly between your eyes and a candell,
looking full at the candell, your finger shall seem two, and if you look full
at your finger, the candell shall seem two. And an age we makes sweet things
seem bitter, and yt is sweet to one, is bitter to an other. And if a man
having very hot hands, and an other very cold, if they handle both one
thing, the one shall think it hot, and the other cold. So that the senses
may err as well in the accidents as in the substances, and can not err in the
substances, except they err also in the accidents.

Substance.
as never was, nor never shall be, phantasiyng substance by your imagination, to
be a thing in it self, separated from all accidents, and so confounding the
substances of all things, and mixting heaven and earth together, you make all
substances but one substance without any difference. And where almighty God
has taught by his word, 1. Cor. 15.
that there be heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies, and that every seed has
his own proper body, and

But as you speak of substances and accidents against scripture,

And moreover this is a meruaylous teaching of you, to say that the accidents
of bread be one part of bread, and be called the outward kind of bread,
Accidents.
the sensible part of bread, the nature and matter of bread, and very bread.
Was there ever any such learning taught before this day, that accidents should
be called parts of substances, the nature of substances; and the matter of
substances, and the very substa^ces themselves? If ever any man so wrotte, tell
who it is, or else knowledge the truth, that all these matters be invented by
your own imagination whereof the rude man may right well say: Here is sophistry
in deed and plain iuggling. But you convey not your iuggling so craftily, but
that you be taken, (as the Greeks term it) (...), even with ye manner.

A Lapidarie.
Now as concerning your expert lapidarie, if his senses be deceived,

Put out his eyes, and is not a white sapphire, a diamond, and a glass all one in
his judgment? Mary if he be a man of clear sight, of true knowledge and
experience in the judgment of stones, and be therewithal a man of good faith
and honesty (as you tell the tale) they that be ignorant will be ashamed to
control his judgment. But if he be blind, or be a man neither of faith nor
honesty, but his experience has been ever exercised to deceive all that trust
him, and to sell them white saphirs for diamondes, then no man that wise is,
will take a glass or sapphire at his hands of trust, although he say it be a
true diamond. Even so likewise the Papists (being so accustomed with these
marchandises of glistering glasses and counterfayte drugges, to deceive the
world) what wise men will trust them with their feigned Transubstantiation,
being so manifestly against the plain words of scripture, against all reason,
sense, and ancient writers? And although you have taken never so great labor
and pains in this place to answer mine arguments (wherein you do nothing else
but show your ignorance in philosophy and logike) yet all is in vain, except
you could prove Transubstantiation to be a matter of our faith, which being not
proved, all that you have spoken here, serves to no purpose, nor concludes
nothing. For you are not so ignorant in sophistry, but you know well though,
that of a false Antecedent, can no Consequent directly follow.

And as concerning these words of Christ (This is my body) by your

And where you say, that although the substance of bread and wine be

But other shift have you none to defend your Transubstantiation, but to devise
such monstrous kinds of speeches, as never was heard of before. For you say,
that the nature, matter and substance of bread and wine remain not, but be
changed into the body and blood of Christ: the old writers say directly
contrary, that the nature, matter and substance remain. Christ (says
Theodoret) called bread and wine his body and blood, Theodoretus.
and yet changed not their natures. And again he says, The bread and wine
after the consecration lose not their proper nature, but keep their former
substance, form and figure which they had before. And Origene says that the
matter of bread avails nothing, Origene.
but as concerning the material part thereof, it goes down into the bealy,
and is avoided downward. And Gelasius says, Gelasius.
that the nature and substance of bread and wine cease not to be. Now seeing
that your doctrine (who teach that ye nature matter and substance of bread and
wine be changed and remain not) is as clean contrary to these old writers,
with many other, as black is contrary to white, and light to darkness, You have
no remedy to defend your error and wilful opinion, but to imagine such
portentuous and wonderful kinds of speeches to be spoken by these authors, as
never were uttered before by no man, that is to say, that the outward aparance
and accidences of any thing, should be called the nature, matter and substance
thereof. But such monsters had you rather bring forth, then you would in one
jot relent in your error once by you uttered, and undertaken by you defended.
And yet bring you nothing for the proof of your saying, but that if the authors
words should be understand as they be spoken, this should follow thereof, that
bread and wine should be seen and felt, which as no man doubts of, but all
men take it for a most certain truth, so you take it for a great
inconvenience and absurdity. So far be you forced in this matter to vary in
speech and judgment from the sentence and opinion of all men.

Thomas.
although he believed certainly that Christ was a man, yet he believed not that
Christ was risen, and appeared to the Apostles, but thought rather that the
Apostles were deceived by some vision or spirit, which appeared to them in
likeness of Christ, which he thought was not he indede. And so thought the
Apostles themselves until Christ said: Videte manus meas and pedes, quia ego
ipse sum: Palpate and videte, quia spiritus carnem and ossa non habent, sicut
me videtis habere. Luc. vit.
See my hands and my feet, for I am even he: Grope and see, for a spirit
has no flesh and bones, as you see that I have. And so thought also S. Thomas,
Ioh. 20.
until such time as he put his hands into Christ's side and felt his wounds,
and by his sense of feeling perceived that it was Christ's very body, and no
spirit nor phantasy, as before he believed. And so in S. Thomas the truth of
feeling depended not upon the true belefe of Christ's resurrection, but the
feeling of his senses brought him from misbelefe, unto the right and true faith
of that matter. And as for S. Gregory, Gregorius homel. 16.
he speaks no such things as you report, that the glorified body of Christ
was of the own nature neither visible nor palpable, but he says clean
contrary, that Christ showed his glorified body to S. Thomas palpable, to
declare that it was of the same nature, that it was of before his resurrection,
whereby it is plain after S. Gregory's mind, that if it were not palpable, it
were not of the same nature. And S. Gregory says further in the same homely.
Egit miro modo superna clementia, vt discipulus ille dubitans, dum in magistro
suo vulnera palparet carnis, in nobis vulnera sanaret infidelitatis. Plus enim
nobis Thomae infidelitas ad fidem, quam fides credentium discipulcrum profuit:
quia dum ille ad fidem palpando reducitur, nostra men's omni dubitatione
postposita in fide solidatur. The supernall clemency wrought meruaylously, that
the disciple which doubted by groping the wounds of flesh in his master,
should heal in us the wounds of infidelity. For the lack of faith in Thomas
profited more to our faith then did the faith of the disciples that believed.
For when he is brought to faith by groping, our mind is stablished in faith
without all doubting. And why should S. Gregory write thus, if our senses
auayled nothing unto our faith, nor could nothing judge of substances? And do
not all the old catholic authors prove the true humanity of Christ, by his
visible conversation with us here in earth: that he was heard preach, seen
eating, and drincking, laboring and sweatting? Do they not also prove his
resurrection by seeing, hearing and groping of him? which if it were no proof,
those arguments were made in vain against such Heretics that denied his true
incarnation. And shall you now take away the strength of their arguments to the
maintenance of those old condemned heresies, by your subtle sophistications?
The touching and feeling of Christ's hands, feet and wounds was a proof of
his resurrection, not as you say, to them that believed, but as S Gregory says,
to them that doubted.

And if all things that Christ did and spoke to our outward senses, Verbum
caro factumest. But if they would say again, that he was called a man and
flesh, because he took upon him the form of a man and flesh, and would say
that S. Paul so declares it, Phil. 2.
saying: Forinam serui accipiens, and would then say further, that form is the
accidence of a thing, and yet has the name of substance, but is not the
substance indeed, what would you then say unto them? if you deny that the
forms and accidences be called substances, then go you from your own saying.
And if you grant it, then will they avoid all the scriptures that you can
bring to prove Christ a man, by this cauilation, that the apparances, forms
and accidences of a man, may be called a man, as well as you say that the forms
and accidences of bread, be called bread. And so prepare you certain
propositions and grounds for heretics to build their errors upon, which
after when you would; you shall never be able to overthrow.

And where you say, yt Thomas touched truly Christ's body glorified, how could
yt be, when touching (as you say) is not of y^ substance but of the accidents
only? and also Christ's body glorified (as you say) is neither visible nor
palpable? And where as indeed you make Christ's acts illusio^s, Plautus in
Amphitrione.
when a thing apeareth to our se^ces, which is not ye same thing indeed? When
Jupiter and Mercury (as the comedy tells) apeared to Alcumena in ye
similitude of Amphitrio and Sosia, was not Alcumena deceived thereby? And
Poticaries yt sell Ieniper buries for pepper, being no pepper indeed, deceive
they not the biers by illusion of their senses? Why then is not in the
ministration of the holy communion an illusion of our senses, if our senses
take for bread and wine that which is not so indeed.

Finally where as I required earnestly, all the Papists to lay their heads
together, and to show one article of our faith so directly contrary to our
senses, that all our senses by daily experience, shall affirm a thing to be,
and yet our faith shall teach us the contrary thereunto, where I say I required
this so earnestly of you, and with such circumstances, and you have yet showed
none, I may boldly conclude, that you can show none. For sure I am, if you
could (being so earnestly provoked thereunto) you would not have failed to show
it in this place. As for the article of our resurrection, and of the feeding of
angels serve nothing for this purpose. For my saying is of the daily experience
of our senses, and when they affirm a thing to be, but the resurrection of our
flesh, and the feeding of angels, be neither in daily experience of our senses,
nor our senses affirm them not so to be. Now after the matter of our senses
follows in my book the authorities of ancient writers in this wise.

Now for as much as it is declared, how this Papisticall opinion of
Transubstantiation is against the word of God, Chap. 5. The Papisticall
doctrine is contrary to the faith of the old authors of christ's church.
against nature, against reason, and against all our senses, we shall show
furthermore, that it is against the faith and doctrine of the old authors of
Christ's church, beginning at those authors, which were nearest unto Christ's
time, and therefore might best know the truth herein.

First Justinius, a great learned man, Justinius martyr,
and an holy martyr, the oldest author that this day is known to write any
treaty upon the sacraments, and wrote not much after one hundred years after
Christ's Ascension.

He writes in his second Apology, that the bread, water, and wine, in this
Sacrament, are not to be taken as other common meats and drinckes be, but they
be meats ordained purposely to give thanks to God and therefore be called
Eucharistia, and be called also the body and blood of Christ. And that it is
lawful for none to eat or drink of them, but that profess Christ, and live
according to the same. And yet the same meat and drink (says he) is changed
into our flesh and blood and nourishes our bodies.

By which saying it is evident, that Justinius thought, that the bread and wine
remained still, for else it could not have been turned into our flesh and blood
to nourish our bodies.

Winchester.
I will spend no mo words herein, Justinius.
but having avoided this authors reasoning against Transubstantiation. Now let
us examine his authorities. First he begins with Iustine the Martyr, Whose
words be not truly by this author here reported, which Eucharistia) whereof it
is lawful for no man to be partaker, except he be persuaded those things to
be true that be taught us, and be baptized in the water of regeneration in
remission of sins, and ordreth his life after the manner which Christ has
taught. For we do not take these for common bread or drink, but like as Jesus
Christ our savior incarnate by the word of God, had flesh and blood for our
salvation, even so we be taught by the prayer of his word, to be the flesh and
blood of the same Jesus incarnate. An issue.
And here I make an issue with this author, that he wittingly corrupts
Iustine Eucharistia, nor has not these words, They be called the body and
blood of Christ: but has in plain words, that we be taught, this food
consecrate by gods word, to be the flesh and blood of Christ, as Christ in his
incarnation took flesh and blood: nor has not this form of words placed to
have that understanding, how the same meat and drink is changed into our
flesh and blood. For the words in Iustine speaking of alteration of the food,
have an understanding of the food, as it is before the consecration, showing
how Christ used those creatures in this mystery, which by alteration nourish
our flesh and blood.

For the body of Christ, which is the very celestial substance of the host
consecrate, is not changed, but without all alteration spiritually nourishes
the bodies and souls of them that worthily receive the same to immortality,
whereby appears this authors conclusion, (that bread and wine remain still,
which is turned into our flesh and blood) is not deduced upon Iustines words
truly understood, but is a gloss invented by this author and a perverting of
Iustines words, and their true meaning. Whereupon I may say, and conclude even
as this author erreth in his reasoning of mother wit against
Transubstantiation, even so erreth he in the first allegation of his
authorities by plain misreporting: let it be further named or thought one as
the thing deserves.

Caunterbury.
IN this holy Martire Justinius, I do not go about to be a translator Mine
Issue.
not willingly to corrupt Iustine (as you maliciously deprave, and thereupon will
I join with you in your issue) but I do it to recite to the reader Iustines
mind shortly and plainly, where as you professing to observe scrupulously the
words, observe in deed neither the words, nor the sentence of Iustine. But
this is your fashion when you lack good matter to answer, then (to find
something to fill up your book) you turn the matter into trifling and
cauilation in words.

You say that Iustine has not this speech (the bread, water and wine in this
Sacrameut, are meats ordained purposely to give thanks to God) and yet by
your own translation he has the same thing in effect, and yet in deed the
words be neither as you nor as I say, and as they be in greek, they cannot be
expressed in English but by a paraphrasis: The words be these in greek, (...),
and in our tongue as nere as may be englished, signify thus, The bread and wine
and water of thanks giving, or (as Ireneus says, In which thanks be given).
And neither has Iustine this word Sacrameut (as I say) nor this word
Consecrated, as you say. May not all men therefore evidently see, that your
chief study is to make cauilations and daylying in wordes^ And all the rest of
my sayings, which you deny to be in Iustine, be there very plainly in sense,
as I will be judged by the indifferent reader.

And what need I willingly to corrupt Iustine, when his words after your
allegation, serve more for my purpose against your feigned transubstantiation,
Eucharistia, nourishes our flesh and blood by alteration, which they could not
do, if no bread, wine nor water were there at all.

But here is not to be passed over one exceeding great craft and untruth in
your translation, that to cast a mist before the readers eyes, you alter the
order of Iustines words in that place, where the pith of the matter stands:
For where Iustine says of the food of bread, wine and water after the
consecration, that they nourish our flesh and blood by alteration, the
nourishment which Iustine puts after consecration, you untruly put it before
the consecration, and so wilfully and craftily alter the order of Justinius
words, to deceive the reader, Mine Issue.
and in this point will I join an issue with you. Is such craft and untruth to
be used of Bishops? and then in matters of faith and religion, whereof they
pretend and ought to be true professors? But I marvel not so much at your
sleights in this place seeing that in the whole book through out you seek
nothing less, then the truth. And yet all your sleightes will not serve you,
for how can the food (called Eucharistia) nourish before the consecration,
seeing it is not eaten until after the consecration?

The next author in my book is Irene, whom I allege thus.

Next him was Irenaeus, Irenaeus contra Valentinum. li. 4. cap. 34.
above 150. years after Christ, who (as it is supposed) could not be deceived
in the necessary points of our faith, for he was a disciple of Policarpus,
which was disciple to S. Ihon the Evangelist.

This Irenaeus follows the sense of Justinius wholly in this matter, and almost
also his words, saying, that the bread wherein we give thanks unto God,
although it be of the earth, yet when the name of God is called upon it, it is
not than common bread, but the bread of thanks giving, having two things in
it, one earthly, and the other heavenly. What meant he by the heavenly thing,
but the sanctification which comes by the invocation of the name of God? And
what by the earthly thing: but the very bread which (as he said before) is of
the earth: and which also (he says) does nourish our bodies as other bread
does which we do use?

Winchester.
Next Iustine is Irene, in the allegation of whom, this author makes also an
untrue report, how has not this for me^ of words in the forth book contra
Valentinum, that the bread wherein we give thanks unto God, although it be of
the earth, yet when the name of god is called upon, it is not thru common
bread, but the bread of thanks giving, having two things in it, one earthly
and the other heavenly. This is Irene alleged by this author, who I say
writes not in such form of words. For his words be these. Like as the bread
which is of the earth, receiving the calling of God, is now no common bread,
but Eucharistia, consisting of two things, earthly and heavenly, so our bodies
receiving Eucharistian, be no more corruptible. These be Irenes Eucharistia,
and in this Eucharistia, he shows how that, that he calls the heavenly
things, is the body and blood of Christ, and therefore says in his fifth book,
When the chalice mixed, and the bread broken, receive the word of God, it is
made Eucharistia, of the body and blood of Christ, of which the substance of
our flesh is stayed and increased. And how say they that our flesh is not able
to receive gods gift. who is eternal life which flesh is nourished with the
body and blood of Christ? These be also Irenes words, whereby appears, what
he meant by the heavenly thing in Eucharistia, which is the very presence of
Christ's body and blood. And for the plain testimony of this faith, this Irene
has been commonly alleged, and specially of Melancton to Decolampadius, as
one most ancient and most plainly testifying the same. So as his very words
truly alleged, overthrow this author in the impugnation of Christ's real
presence in the Sacrament, and therefore can nothing help this authors purpose
against Transubstantiation. Is not this a goodly and godly enter of this
Author, in the first two authorities that he brings in, to corrupt them both?

Caunterbury.
WHo sees not, that as you did before in Iustine, so again in Irene you seek
nothing else, but meare cauilations and wrangling in words? Is not Eucharistia
called in english, thanks giving? If it be not, Panes in qup gratiae actae
sunt, that is so say, bread wherein thanks be given, what have I offended then
in englishing Eucharistiam; thanks giving? Do not I write to English men,
which understand not what this greek word Eucharistia, means: what great
offense is it then in me to put it into English, that English men may
vnderstaud what is said Should I do as you do, put greek for English and
write so obscurely, that English men should not know the authors meaning?

And do you not see, how much the words of Ireneus by you aleadged, make
against your self? These be his words after your citation: When the chalice
mixed, and the bread broken, receive the word of God, it is made Eucharistia of
the body and blood of Christ, of which the substance of our flesh is stayed and
increased. Does not Irene say here plainly, that the chalice mixed, and the
bread broken, after the word of God (which you call, the words of
consecration) is made Eucharistia of the body and blood of Christ, and not the
body and blood of Christ? And says he not further, that they stay and increase
the substance of our bodies? But how can those things stay and increase our
bodies, which be transubstantiated and gone before we receive them? And have
you forgotten now in Irene, what you said in the next leaf before in Iustine,
that the alteration and nourishment by the food of bread and wine was
understand before the consecration? which you confess now to be after the
consecration? And when you thus obscure the authors words, perverting and
corrupting both the words and senses, yet shall you conclude your untrue
dealing with these words concerning me? Is not this a goodly and godly entres
of this author in the first two authorities that he brings in to corrupt them
both? Now follows Origene next in my book.

Shortly after Ireneus, was Origene, Origenes in Math. Cap. 15. Origene.
about 200. years after Christ's ascension. Who also affirms, that the
material bread remains, saying that the matter of the bread avails
nothing, but goes down into the bealy, and is avoided dounward, but the word
of God spoken upon the bread, is it that avails.

Winchester.
Origene.
it may be granted, but yet he terms it not as this author does, to call it
material bread. When God formed Adam of clay, the matter of the clay remained
in Adam and yet the material clay remained not: for it was altered into an
other substance, which I speak not to compare equally the forming of Adam to
the

Caunterbury.
WHat should I tarry much in Origene, seeing that you confess that he says,
the matter of bread remains, and Origene says, that the meat which is
sanctified, iuxta id quod habet materiale in ventrem abit, that is to say, as
concerning the material part thereof, goes into the belly. So that by Origens
teaching both the bread and the material part of bread remain. So that your
example of cley, releueth you nothing in this your

But when you see that this shift will not serve, then you fly to an other,
and say that the accidents of bread be called the matter of bread, which is so
shameful a shift, as all that have any manner of knowledge, may plainly see
your manifest impudency. But many such shifts you use in this matter, not
withstanding the importance of it. Now let us come to Ciprian, Ciprian ad
Cecili. li. 2. epist. 3.
of whom I write in this manner.

After Origene came Ciprian the holy martyr about the year of our Lord 250.
who writes against them that ministered this Sacrament with water only, and
without wine. For as much (says he) as Christ said: I am a true vine, therefore
the blood of Christ is not water, but wine, nor it can not be thought that his
blood (whereby we be redeemed and have life) is in the cup, when wine is not in
the cup, whereby the blood of Christ is showed.

What words could Ciprian have spoken more plainly, to show that the wine does
remain, than to say thus: If there be no wine, there is no blood of Christ?

And yet he speaks shortly after, as plainly in the same Epistle. Math. ^^
Christ says he) taking the cup, blessed it, and gave it to his disciples,
saying: Drink you all of this, for this is the blood of the new testament,
which shall be shed for many, for the remission of sins. I say unto you, that
from hence forth I will not drink of this creature of the vine, until I shall
drink with you new wine in the kingdom of my father. By these words of
Christ (says S. Ciprian) we perceive, that the cup which the Lord offered,
was not only water, but also wine, And that it was wine that Christ called his
blood, whereby it is clear that Christ's blood is not offered if, there be no
wine in the Chalice. And after it follows: How shall we drink with Christ
new wine of the creature of the vine if in the sacrifice of God the father and
of Christ we do not offer wine.

In these words of S. Ciprian appears most manifestly, that in this
sacrament is not only offered very wine, that is made of grapes, that come of
the vine, but also that we drink the same. And yet the same gives us to
understand, that if we drink that wine worthily, we drink also spiritually
the very blood of Christ, which was shed for our sins.

Winchester.
Ciprian.
S. Ciprians words do not impugn Transubstantiation, for they tend only to

Caunterbury.
CIprians words tend not only to show, that wine is the creature It cannot be
thought, that Christ's blood is in the cup, when wine is not in the cup, whereby
the blood of Christ is showed. And again he says: It was wine that Christ
called his blood, and that it is clear, that Christ's blood is not offered, if
there be no wine in the chalice. And further he says: How shall we drink
with Christ new wine of the creature of the vine, if in the sacrifice of God
the father and of Christ, we do not offer wine? In these words Ciprian says
not, that Christ is the wine which we drink, but that with Christ we drink
wine, that comes of the vine tree, and yt Christ's blood is not there, when
wine is not there. And where is now your Transubstantiation, that takes away
the wine? For take away the wine, and take away by Ciprians mind, the blood of
Christ also.

But least any man should stomble at Ciprians words, where he seems to say
that the blood of Christ should be really in the cup, he says nor means no
such thing, but that it is there sacramentally or figuratively. And his meaning
needs none other gathering, but of his own words, that follow next after in
the same sentence, that by the wine the blood of Christ is showed. And shortly
after he says, that the cup which the Lord offered, was wine, and that it was
wine that Christ called his blood. Now come we to Emissen, your principal stay
in whom is your chief glory. Of him thus I write.

Eusebius Emissenus, Eusebus Emissenus.
a man of singular fame in learning, about CCC. years after Christ's
ascension, did in few words set out this matter so plainly, (both how the
bread and wine be converted into the body and blood of Christ, and yet remain
still in the nature: and also how besides the outward receiving of bread and
wine, Christ is inwardly by faith received in our hearts) all this (I say) he
does so plainly set out, that more playnnesse can not be reasonably desired in
this matter. For he says, that the conversion of the visible creatures of
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, is like unto our conversion
in baptism, where outwardly nothing is changed, but remains the same that
was before: but all the alteration is inwardly and spiritually.

If thou will know (says he) how it ought not to seem to thee a new thing and
impossible, De conscer. Distinction 2. quia
that earthly and corruptible things be turned into the substance of Christ,
look upon thy self, which art made new in baptism: when thou wast far from
life, and banished as a stranger from mercy, and from the way of salvation, and
inwardly wast dead, yet suddenly thou beganst an other life in Christ, and wast
made new by wholesome mysteries, and wast turned into the body of the church, not
by seeing, but by believing: and of the child of damnation, by a secret pureness,
thou wast made the chosen son of God. Thou visibly did remain in the
same measure, that thou had before, but inuisibly thou wast made greater,
without any increase of thy body. Thou wast the self same person, and yet by
the increase of faith, thou wast made an other man. Outwardly nothing was
added, but all the change was inwardly. And so was man made the son of
Christ, and Christ fourmed in the mind of man. Therefore as thou (putting away
thy former vileness) did receive a new dignite, not feeling any change in
thy body, and as the curing of thy disease, the putting away of thine
infection, the wiping away of thy filthiness, be not seen with thine eyes, but
are believed in thy mind: so likewise when thou do go up to the reverend
altar, to feed upon spiritual meat, in thy faith look upon the body and
blood of him that is thy God, honor him, touch him with thy mind, take him in
the hand of thy heart, and chiefly drink him with the draught of thy inward
man.

Hitherto have I rehearsed the sayings of Eusebius, which be so plain, that no
man can wish more plainly to be declared, that this mutation of the bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ, is a sacramental mutation, and that
outwardly nothing is changed. But as outwardly we eat the bread, and drink
the wine with our mouths, so inwardly by faith, we spiritually eat the very
flesh, and drink the very blood of Christ.

Winchester.
As touching Emissene by whose words is expressly testified the truth of the
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Emissene.
and also the sense of the doctrine of Transubstantiation, An Issue.
that Emissene has not that word of turning in that place, and man to be
turned into the body of the church is no convenient speech, to signify a
change in him that is regenerat by baptism. He in deed that is thrust out of
the chauncell for his misdemeanour in seruise time, may be said turned into the
body of the church. But Emissene speaks not so here, but because the same
Emissene declaring body of the church. And it may be commonly observed in this
author, when he alleges any authority of others, he brings forth the same
in such form of words as he would have them, and not as they be, for the most
part or very often, and once of purpose were over often in so high a matter as
this is. And yet in this Emissens authority, after all the pain taken to
reforge him, Emissens doctrine plainly confounds this Authors teaching. This
author makes a note, that there is in man baptized nothing changed outwardly,
and therefore in the Sacrament neither, and it must be granted. For the
doctrine of transubstantiation teaches not in the Sacrament any outward
change. For the substance of the bread and wine is an inward nature, and so is
substance of one defined.

For now the author must say the change in man's soul by Baptism, to be there
made the son of God, is but in figure and signification, not true and real
in deed, or else grant the true catholic doctrine of the turn of the
visible creatures into the body and blood of Christ, to be likewise not in
figure and signification, but truly, really, and indeed: And for the thing
changed as the soul of man, man's inward nature is changed: so the inward
nature of the bread is changed.

And then is that evasion taken away, which this author uses in an other place
of Sacramental change, which should be in the outward part of the visible
creatures to the use of signification. This author notes the age of Emissene,
and I note with all how plainly he writes for confirmation of the Catholic
teaching, who indeed because of his ancient and plain writing for
declaration of the matter in form of teaching without contention, is one,
whose authority the church has much in allegation used to the conviction of
such as have impugned the Sacrament either in the truth of the presence of
Christ's very body, or Transubstantiation, for the speaking of the inward
change, does point as it were the change of the substance of bread, with
resembling thereunto the soul of man changed in Baptism. This one author not
being of any reproved and of so many approved, and by this in the allegation,
after this manner corrupt, might suffice for to conclude all brabling against
the Sacrament.

Caunterbury.
Turning.
from the congregation of the wicked unto the congregation of Christ (which he
calls the body of the church) and from the child of death unto the child of
God, this must be made a matter of scoffing, to turn light fellows out of the
chancell into the body of the church. Such trifling now a days becomes gayly
well godly Bishops, what if in the steed of (turning) I had said (skipt
over) as the word transilisti signifies, which (although peradventure the
books be false and should be transisti) I have translated (turning) should I
have so escaped a mock trow you? You would then have said, he that so does,
goes not out at the chancell door into the body of the church, but skippeth
over the stalles. But that Emissene meant of turning, is clear, as well by the
words that go before, as those which go after, which I refer to the
judgment of the indifferent reader.

But forasmuch as you would persuade men, that this author makes so much for
your purpose, I shall set forth his mind plainly, that it may appear how much
you be deceived. Emissenes mind is this, Emissenus mind.
that although our savior Christ has taken his body hence from our bodily
sight, Yet we see him by faith, and by grace he is here present with us, so
that by him we be made new creatures, regenerated by him, and fed and
nourished by him, which generation and nutrition in us, is spiritual without
any mutation appearing outwardly, but wrought within us inuisibly by the
omnipotent power of God. And this alteration in us, is so wonderful, that we
be made new creatures in Christ, grafted into his body, and of the same receive
our nourishment and increasing. And yet visibly with our bodily eyes we see not
these things, but they be manifest unto our faith by gods word and
sacraments. And Emissene declares none other real presence of Christ in the
sacrament of his body and blood, then in the Sacrament of baptism, but
spiritually by faith to be present in both.

Conversion.
he speaks that as well of baptism, as of the lords supper, as his own
words plainly declare. If thou will know (says he) how it ought not to seem
to thee a new thing and impossible, that earthly and corruptible things be
turned into the substance of Christ look upon thy self, which art made new
in baptism. And yet he meant not, that the water of baptism in it self is
really turned into the substance of Christ, nor likewise bread and wine in the
Lords supper, but that in the action, water, wine and bread, as sacraments, be
sacramentally converted (unto him that duly receaueth them) into the very
substance of Christ. So that the sacramental conversion is in the Sacraments,
and the real conuertion is in him that receaueth the sacraments, which real
conuertion is inward, invisible and spiritual. For the outward corporal
substances, as well of the name as of the water, remain the same that they were
before. And therefore says Emissene. Thou visibly did remain in the same
measure that thou had before, but inuisibly thou wast made greater without
any increase of thy body, thou wast the self same person, and yet by the
increase of faith thou wast made an other man. Outwardly nothing was added, but
all the change was inwardly. In these words has Emissene plainly declared,
that the conversion in the sacraments (whereof he spoke when he said, that
earthly and corruptible things be turned into the substance of Christ) is to
be understand in the receauours by their faith, and that in the said conversion
the outward substance remains the self same that was before. And that
Emissene meant this, as well in the sacrament of the lords supper, as in the
sacrament of baptism, his own words plainly declare. So that the substance of
Christ, as well in baptism as the Lords supper, is seen: not with our eyes,
but with our faith: and touched not with our bodies, but with our minds: and
received not with our hands, but with our hearts: eaten and drunken not with
our outward mouths, but with our inward man.

And where Emissene says, that Christ has taken his body from our sight into
heaven, and yet in the sacrament of his holy supper he is present with his
grace through faith, he does us to understand, that he is not present in the
forms of bread and wine out of the ministration (except you will say, that
faith and grace be in the bread, when it is kept and hanged up) but when the
bread and wine be eaten and drunken according to Christ's institution, then to
them that so eat and drink, the bread and wine is the body and blood of
Christ, according to Christ's words, The book of common prayer.
Edite, hoc est corpus meum. Bibite, hic est calix senguinis mei. And therefore
in the book of the holy communion, we do not pray that the creatures of bread
and wine may be the body and blood of Christ, but that they may be to us the
body and blood of Christ, that is to say, that we may so eat them, and drink
them, that we may be partakers of his body crucified, and of his blood shed for
our redemption.

Thus have I declared the truth of Emissenes mind, which is agreeable to Gods
word, Absurdities.
and the old catholic Church. But now what illusions and dreams you fantasy
of Emissenes words, it is a wonder to hear. First that the substance of bread
and wine is an inward nature, and that

And you appoint at your pleasure both terminum a quo, terminum ad quem, and
the changes, and the things that be changed, altogether otherwise terminus a
quo, is the son of perdition, and terminus ad quem, is the son of God. And
in nutrition terminus a quo, is the hunger and thirst of the man, and terminus
ad quem, is the feeding and satisfying of his hunger and thirst. But you
appoint the changes to be Transubsta^tiatio^ and regeneration, and the things
that be changed in Transubstantiation, you say is the substance of bread and
wine, and the same to be terminum a quo, and the flesh and blood of Christ (say
you) is terminus ad quem. And in regeneration you assign terminum a quo, to be
the soul of man only, and terminum ad quem, to be regenerated the son of
God. And so being viii. things in these ii. mutations, in each of them the
change, the thing that is changed, the thing from whence it is changed, and the
thing whereunto it is changed, you have mist the butte clearly in all, saving
ii. that is to say, regeneration and the thing whereunto regeneration is made,
and in all other vi. you missed the quishion quite. And yet if the change were
in the substance of bread and wine, proportionably to the change of the soul
(being the substance of man as you say) if you should make the proportions
agree, then as the soul, being the man's substance, remains without
Transubstantiation, so must the bread and wine remain without
transubstantiation. And if the substance of the bread and wine be not the
visible sign in the lords supper (because substance) as you say (is a thing
invisible,) then is not the substance of water the visible sign in baptism
bring no more visible the substance of the one, then the substance of the
other. Now of Hilary I write thus.

Hilarious also in few words says the same. Hilarious.
There is a figure (says he) for bread and wine be outwardly seen. And there
is also a truth of that figure, for the body and blood of Christ be of a truth
inwardly believed. And this Hilarious was within less then 350. years after
Christ.

Winchester.
But I will examine more particularieties. I have before answered to Hilary,
Hilarious.
so whom nevertheless I would aptly have said somewhat now to note, how he
distincteth outwardly and inwardly by belief and corporal sight. For
outwardly as Emissene says, we see no change, and therefore we see after
Consecration, as before, which we may therefore call bread, but we believe that
inwardly is, which as Emissene says, is the substance of the body of Christ,
whereunto the change is made of the inward nature of bread, as by the comparison
of Emissene does appear.

Caunterbury.
YOur distinction made here of outwardly and inwardly, is a plain confusion of
Hilarious mind, and contrary to that which you wrote before in Emissene. For
there you said, that the visible creatures be changed (meaning by the visible
creatures, the substances of bread and wine) and now when Hilary says, that
bread and wine be seen, you say that their substances be not seen, but the
outward forms only, which you say, be called bread and wine. But here
appears into how narrow a straight you be driven, that be feign for a shift
to say, that the accidents of bread without the substance, be called bread.



And Epiphanius shortly after the same time, says, that the bread is meat, but
the virtue that is in it, Epiphanius co^tra haereses lib. 3. to. 2. et in
Anacephaleosi.
is it that gives life. But if there were no bread at all, how could it be
meat?

Winchester.
These words of Epiphanius do plainly ouerturne this authors doctrine of a
figurative

These sayings be sought out by this author only to wrangle, not taken out,
where

Caunterbury.
Epiphanius speaking of the bread in ye Lords supper, and the water in tanquam
signatum in signo. And where you be feign to say, that accidents be meat
without substance, all Ex eisdem sunt, and nutriuntur omnia. Oh what
absurdities you be driven unto, for the defense of your Papisticall inventions?
Now comes S. John Chrysostom, of whom in my book is thus written.

Chrisosto. in Math. ca. 27. Ho. 83.
About the same time of shortly after, about the year of our Lord 400. S. John
Chrisostom writes thus, against them that used only water in the Sacrament.
Christ (says he) minding to pluck up that heresy by the roots, used wine, as
well before his resurrection, when he gave the mysteries, as after at his table
without mysteries. For the says of the fruit of the vine, which surely
brings forth no water but wine.

These words of Chrysostom declare plainly, that Christ in his holy table,
both drancke wine and gave wine to drink, which had not been true, if no wine
had remained after the consecration, as the Papists feign. And yet more
plainly S. Chrysostom declares this matter in an other place, saying: Ad
Cesarium Monachum.
The bread before it be sanctified, is called bread, but when it is sanctified
by the means of the priest, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is
exalted to the name of the Lords body, although the nature of bread does
still remain.

The nature of bread (says he) does still remain, to the utter and manifest
confutation of the Papists, which say that the accidents of bread do remain,
but not the nature and substance.

Winchester.
Christostome speaks in this place of wine, Chrisost^m.
as Ciprian did before against those that The word Nature has two
significations.
and also propriety of the nature. The substance therefore after Ciprian by the
word of God is changed, but yet the proper effect is not changed, but in the
accidences remain without illusion, by which diverse signification and
acception of the word nature, both the sayings of S. Ciprian and S. Chrysostom
(if this be his saying) may be accorded, and notwithstanding the contrariete in
letter, agree nevertheless in sense between themself, and agree with the true
doctrine of Transubstantiation. Add to this how the words of Chrysostom next
following this sentence, alleged by this author, and as it seems of purpose
left her out, do both confound this authors enterprise, and

Caunterbury.


he says the nature of bread does still remain) nor that it may not be called
by the name of bread, but it is so delivered, that commonly it is called by the
higher name of the Lords body, Changing of names.
which to us it represents. As you and I were delivered from our surnames,
when we were consecrated bishops, since which time we have so commonly been
used of all men to be called bishops (you of Winchester and I of Caunterbury)
that the most part of the people know not that your name is Gardyner, and mine
Cranmer. And I pray God that we being called to the name of Lords, have not
forgotten our own baser estates, that once we were simple squiers. And yet
should he have done neither of us wrong, that should

And where you allege Ciprian, Ciprian.
to avoid thereby the saying of Chrysostom The word Nature.
that the word (nature) signifies both the substance and also the propriety.
For in Ciprian it is not taken for the substance (as you would feign have it)
but for the property. For the substance of bread still remaining in them that
duly receive the same, the property of carnal nourishment is changed into a
spiritual nourishment, as more largely in mine answer to you in that place
shall be declared.

And where you would somewhat releue your self by certain words

Now come we to S. Ambrose.

Ambrosius.
At the same time was S. Ambrose, who declares the alteration of bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ, not to be such, that the nature and
substance of bread and wine be gone, but that thorough grace, there is a
spiritual mutation by the mighty power of God, so that he that worthily eats
of that bread, does spiritually eat Christ, and dwells in Christ, and Christ
in him.

For (says S. Ambrose, De ijs `qui misterijs initiantur. cap. vlt. and de
sacramentis li. 4. cap. 4.
speaking of this change of bread into the body of Christ) if the word of God
be of that force that it can make things of naught, and those things to be,
which never were before, much more it can make things that were before, still
to be, and also to be changed into other things.

And he brings for example here of the change of us in baptism, wherein a man
is so changed (as is before declared in the words of Eusebius) that he is made
a new creature, and yet his substance remains the same that was before.

Winchester.
Saint Ambrose does not (as this Author would have it) impugn
Transubstantiation, Ambrosius.


Caunterbury.
And S. Ambrose brings forth to good purpose the creation of Cor mundum crea
in me Deus, Psalm. 50.
O God create in me a new heart. And as for any further answer here unto Ambrose
needs not, but because you refer you here to Emissene, they which be
indifferent, may read what I have answered unto Emissene a little before, and
so judge.

Now let us examine S. Augustine.

Augustinus in sermon ad infantes.
And S. Augustine about the same time, wrote thus: That which you see in the
alter, is the bread and the cup, which also your eyes do show you. But faith
shows further, that bread is the body of Christ, and the cupper his blood,
Here he declares two things: that in the sacrament remains, bread and wine
which we may discern with our eyes: and that the bread and wine be called the
body and blood of Christ.

In lib. sententiarum Prosperi.
And the same thing he declares also as plainly in an other place, saying: The
sacrifice of the Church consists of two things, of the visible kind of the
element, and of the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, both of
the sacrament, and of the thing signified by the sacrament. Even as the person
of Christ consists of God and man, forasmuch as he is very God and very man.
For every thing co^teineth in it, the very nature of those things, whereof it
consists. Now the sacrifice of the church consists of two things, of the
sacrament, and of the thing thereby signified, that is to say, the body of
Christ. Therefore there is both the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament,
which is Christ's body.

What can be devised to be spoken more plainly against the error of the
Papists, which say that no bread nor wine remains in the sacrament? For as
the person of Christ consists of two natures, that is to say, of his manhod,
and of his godhead, (and therefore both those natures remain in Christ,) even
so (says S. Augustine) the sacrament consists of two natures, of the
elements of bread and wine, and of the body and blood of Christ, and therefore
both these natures must needs remain in the sacrament.

For the more plain understanding hereof, it is to be noted, that there were
certain heretics, as Simon, Menander, Martion, Valentinus, Basilides, Cerdon,
Manes, Eutiches, Manichaeus, Apolinaris, and Diverse other of like sorts, which
said, that Christ was very God, but not a very man, although in eating,
drinking, sleeping, and all other operations of man, to men's judgments he
appeared like unto a man.

Other there were, as Artemon, Theodorus, Sabellius, Paulus Samasathenus,
Marcellus, Photinus, Nestorius, and many other of the same sects, which said,
that he was a very natural man, but not very God, although in giving the blind
their sight, the dumb their speech, the deaf their hearing, in healing
suddenly with his word all diseases, in raising to life them that were dead, and
in all other works of God, he showed himself as he had been God.

Yet other there were, which seeing the scripture so plain in those two
matters, confessed that he was both God and man, but not both at one time. For
before his incarnation (said they) he was God only, and not man, and after his
incarnation, he ceased from his Godhead, and became a man only, and not God,
until his resurrection or ascension, and then (say they) he left his manhod,
and was only God again, as he was before his incarnation. So that when he was
manne, he was not God: and when he was God, he was not man.

But against these vain heresies, the Catholic faith, by the express word of
God holds and believes, that Christ after his incarnation left not his divine
nature', but remained still God, as he was before, being together at one time,
(as he is still) both perfect God and perfect man.

And for a plain declaration hereof, the old ancient authors give two
examples: one is of man, which is made of two parts, of a soul and of a body,
and each of these two parts remain in man at one time. So that when the soul,
by the almighty power of god, is put in to the body, neither the body nor soul
perishes thereby, but thereof is made a perfect man, having a perfect soul and
a perfect body, remaining in him both at one time. The other example, which the
old authors bring in for this purpose, is of the holy Snpper of our Lord,
which consists (say they) of two parts, of the sacrament or visible element
of bread and wine, and of the body and blood of Christ. And as in them that
duly receive the sacrament, the very natures of bread and wine cease not to
be there, but remain there still, and be eaten and drunken corporally, as the
body and blood of Christ be eaten and drunken spiritually: so likewise does the
divine nature of Christ remain still with his humanity.

Let now the Papists auaunt them selves of their Transubstantiation, that
there remains no bread nor wine in the ministration of the Sacrament, if they
will defend the wicked heresies before rehearsed, that Christ is not God and man
both together. But to prove that this was the mind of the old authors, beside
the saying of S. Augustine here recited, I shall also rehearse diverse other.

Winchester.
In the 26. leaf this author brings forth two sayings of S. Augustine,
Augustinus.
which when this author wrote, it is like he neither thought of the third or
first book of this work. For these two sayings declare most evidently the
real presence of Christ's body under the kinds of bread and wine which we see,
we honor things invisible, that is to say, the flesh and blood of Christ, nor
we do not likewise esteem these two kinds as we did before Out of the master
of the sentenses and decrees.
for we must faithfully confess before the consecration to be bread and wine
that nature formed, and after consecration, the flesh and blood of Christ,
which the benediction has consecrate. Thus says S. Augustine as he is
alleged out of the book, The book of S. Augustine de suis prosperi is not
commonly, had.
which in deed I have not, but he has the like sense in other places, and for
honoring of the invisible heavenly things there, which declare the side and
real presence, S. Augustine has the like in his book De Cat^chisandis
rudibus, and in the 98. psalm, where he speaks of adoration. This may be
notable to the reader, how this author concludes himself in the faith of the
real presence of Christ's body, by his own collection of S. Augustine mind,
which is as he confesses in his own words, noting S. Augustine, that as the
person of Christ consists of two natures, so

Likewise where he says the nature of the body and blood of Christ remain in
the Sacrament, the word (remain) being of such signification, as it betokens
not only to be there, but to tarry there, and so there is declared the
sacrifice of the church, which mystery of sacrifice is perfited before the
perception, and so it must be evident how the

It will be said here, how soever this author does overthrow him self in the
real presence of Christ's very body, yet he has pulled down
Transubstantiation, and done of each part by it self, but only have respect
to the end wherefore the resemblance is made. In the person of Christ be joined
two whole perfect natures inseperably unite, which faith the Nestorians
impugned, and yet unite without confusion of them, which confussion the
Eutichians in consequence of their error affirmed, and so arguments be brought
of the sacrament, wherewith to convince both, as I shall show answering to
Gelasius. But in this place S. Augustine uses the truth most certain of the
two natures in Christ's person, whereby to declare his belief in the Sacrament,
which belief as Hilary before is by this author alleged to say, is of that
is inwardly. For that is outwardly of the visible creature, we see (he says)
with our bodily eye, and therefore therein is no point of faith that should need
such a declaration, as S. Augustine makes. And yet making the comparison, he
reherseth both the truths on both sides, saying: As the person of Christ
consists of God and man, so ye sacrifice of ye church consists of two
things, the visible kind of ye element, and the invisible flesh and blood,
finishing ye conclusion of ye similitude, yt therefore, There, is in ye
Sacrifice of ye church, both the Sacrament and ye thing of ye Sacrament,
Christ's body, that which is invisible, and therefore required declaration, yt
is by S. Augustine opened in ye comparison, yt is to say, ye body of Christ to
be there truly and therewith, that needed no declaration, that is to say, the
visible kind of the element is spoken of also as being true, but not as a thing
which was intended to be proved, for it neded not any proof as the other part
did. And therefore it is not necessary to press both parts of the resemblance
so, as because in the nature of Christ's humanity, there was no substance
converted in Christ, which had been contrary to the order of that mystery,
which was to join the whole nature of man to the godhead in the person of
Christ, that therefore in this mystery of the Sacrament, in which by the rules
of our faith, Christ's body is not Impanate, the conversion of the substance of
the visible elements should not therefore be. If truth answers to truth for
proportion of the truth in the mystery that is sufficient. For else the natures
be not so unite in one hipostasy The master of the sentences has these words
of S. Augustine.
out of whose quiver this author has pulled out his bolt, and as it is out of
his bow sent, turns back and hitteth himself on the forehead, and yet after
his fashion, by wrong and untrue translation he sharpened it somewhat, not
without some punishment of God, evidently by the way by his own words to
overthrow him self.

In the second column of the 27. leaf and the first of the 28. leaf, this
author makes a process in declaration of heresies in the person of Christ,
for conviction whereof, this author says the old fathers used arguments of two
examples, in either of which examples were two natures together, the one not
perishing ne confounding the other. One example is in the body and soul of
man. An other example of the Sacrament, in which be two natures, an inward
heavenly, and an outward earthly, as in man there is a body and a soul.

I leave out this authors own judgment in that place, and of thee (O reader)
require the soul is in man's body, that argument of the Sacrament had not two
things present, so as the argument of the body and soul had, whereby to show
how two things may be together without confusion of either, each remaining in
his nature: for if the teaching of this author in other parts of this book
were true, than were the Sacrament

Caunterbury.
WHen you wrote this, it is like that you had not considered my third book,
wherein is a plain and direct answer to all that you have brought in this
place, or else where, concerning the real presence of Christ's body and blood
in the Sacrament. And how slender proofs you make in this place, to prove the
real presence, because of the Sacrifice, every man may judge, being neither
your argument good, nor your antecedent true. For S. Augustine says not, that
the body and blood of Christ is the sacrifice of the church, and if he had so
said, it infers not

How bread is Christ's body.
And although S. Augustine says, that bread is Christ's body, yet if you had
well marked the 64.65. 66. leaves of my book, you should Ciprianus de unction
chrismatis.
as S. Ciprian manifestly teaches. For in plain speech without figure, bread
is not the body of Christ by your own confession, who do say, that the
affirmation of one substance is the negation of an other. And if the bread were
made the body of Christ (as you say it is) then must you needs confess, that
the body of Christ is made of bread, which before you said was so foolish a
saying, as were not tolerable by a scoffer to be devised in a play, to supply
when his fellow had forgotten his part. And seeing that the bread is not
adnihilate and consumed into nothing (as the school authors teach) then must
it needs follow, that the body of Christ is made of the matter of bread, for
that it is made of the form of bread, I suppose you will not grant.

And as touching the second place of S. Augustine, he says not that the body
and blood of Christ be really in the Sacrament, but that in the is not
exhibited, nor is not in it, (but as in a figure) but that it is there in the
true ministration of the Sacrament, present to the spirit and faith of the
true believing man, and exhibited truly and indeed, and yet spiritually not
corporally.

And what need any more evident proofs of S. Augustines mind in this matter,
how bread is called Christ's body then S. Augustines own words cited in the
same place, De consecrat. di. 2. Hoc est.
where the other is de consecratione did. 2. Hoc est quod dicimus? These be S.
Augustines words there cited. Sicut coelestis panis, qui Christi caro est, suo
modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum re uera sit sacramentum corporis Christi,
illius videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, mortale, in cruce positum est,
vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis (quae sacerdotis manibus fit) Christi passio,
mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed significanti misterio: sic Sacramentum
fidei, (quod baptismus intelligitur) fides est. As the heavenly bread (which is
Christ's flesh) after a manner is called the body of Christ, where in very
deed it is a sacrament of Christ's body, that is to say, of that body which
being visible, palpable, mortal, was put upon the cross: And as that
offering of the flesh which is done by the priests hands, is called the
passion, the death the crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in
a signifying mystery so is ye Sacrament of faith (which is Baptism) faith.
These words be so plain and manifest, that the expositour (being a very
Papist) yet could not avoid the matter, but wrote thus upon the said words.
Immolatio quae fit a praesbitero, improprie appellatur Christi passio, velmors,
vel crucifixio, non quod sit illa, sed quia illam significat. And after he
says: Coeleste Sacrame^tu^, quod vere repraese^tat Christi carnem, dicitur
corpus Christi, sed improprie. Vnde dicitur, suo modo, sed non rei veritate,
sed significanti misterio, vt sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, id est,
significat.

The offering which the priest makes, is called improperly the passion, death,
or crucifying of Christ, not that it is that, but that it signifies it. And
the heavenly Sacrament (which truly represe^teth Christ's flesh) is called
Christ's body, but improperly. And therefore is said (after a manner, but not in
the truth of the thing, but in the signifying mystery.) So that the sense is
this, it is called the body of Christ, that is to say, signifies. Now the
words of S. Augustine being so plain, that none can be more, and following
the other words within ten lines (so that you can allege no ignorance, but
you must needs see them) it can be none other but a wilful blindness, that you
will not see, and also a wilful concealing and hiding of the truth from other
men, that they should not see neither.

And this one place is sufficient at full to answer what so ever you can bring
of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of bread and wine. For after
consecration, the body and blood of Christ be in them but as in figures,
although in the godly receauors, he is really present by his omnipotent power,
which is as great a miracle in our daily nurrishing, as is wrought before in
our regeneration. And therefore is Christ no less to be honored of them that
feed of him in his holy supper, then of them that be grafted in him by
regeneration.

you should not say, that I nipt him. For S. Augustine says not, that the
sacrament consists of two natures, and therefore both these natures must
needs remain in the Sacrament, but he says that the Sacrifice consists of
two things, which he calls also natures, and thereof it follows, that those
two things must be in the sacrifice, which is to be understand, in the
ministration not in the bread and wine reserved. And very true it is (as S
Augustine says) that the sacrifice of the church consists of two things, of
the Sacrament, and of the thing thereby signified, which is Christ's body, as
the person of Christ consists of god and man.

But yet this resemblance is not altogether like (as you say truly for so

Similitudes may not be pressed in at points, but in the purpose wherefore they
be brought Luc. 16.
But if Christ's similitudes should be so narrowly pressed, as you press here
the similitude of the two natures of Christ in the sacrament, collecting that
because the body and blood of Christ be truly present in the due
administration of the Sacrament, therefore they must be there naturally present,
as the two natures of the humanity and divinity be in Christ, many wicked
errors should be established by them. As if the similitude of the wicked
steward were strayned as you strain and force this similitude, men might
gather, that it is lawful for Christen men to begile their lords and masters
whiles they be in office, to help them selves when they be out of office,
because the Lord praised the wicked steward. Yet you know the similitude was
not taught of our Savior Christ for that purpose (for God is no favorer of
falsehod and untruth.) So you do wrong both to the holy Doctoures and to me, to
gather of our similitude any other doctrine, than we mean by the said
similitude. Nor any reasonable man can say, that I am forced by confessing two
natures in Christ's person really, naturally and substantially, to confess
also the nature of the body and blood of Christ to be likewise in the
Sacrament, except he could prove that the holy Doctoures, and I following their
doctrine, do teach and affirm, that the natures of bread and wine are joined
in the Sacrament with the natural body and blood of Christ in unity of person,
as the natures of God and man be joined in our Savior Christ, which we do not
teach, because we find no such doctrine taught by Christ, by his Apostles, nor
Euangilistes.

Therefore take your own collection to your self, and make your self answer
to such absurdities and inconvenience, as you do infer, by abusing and
forcing of the Doctors similitude to an other end than they did use it.

The faith of the real presence in the forms is unprofitable and
uncomfortable.
And it is not necessary for our eternal salvation, nor yet profitable for our
comfort in this life, to believe that the natural body and blood of Christ is
really, substancially, and naturally present in the Sacrament. For if it were
necessary or comfortable for us, it is without doubt, that our savior Christ,
his Apostles, and Evangelists, would not have omitted to teach this doctrine,
distinctly and plainly. Yea our Savior would not have said, John. 6.
Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro non prodest quitquam, The spirit gives
life, the flesh avails nothing.

But this doctrine which the holy doctors do teach, The profit and comfort of
the true doctrine.
is agreeable to holy scripture, necessary for all christen persons to believe
for their everlasting salvation, and profitable for their spiritual comfort in
this present life, that is to say, that the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood in the natures and substances of bread and wine, is distributed unto all
men, both good and evil which receive it, and yet that only faithful persons
do receive spiritually by faith, the very body and blood of our Savior Christ.
So that Christ's natural body is not in the Sacrament really, substancially,
and corporally, but only by representation and signification, and in his
lively members by spiritual and effectual operation.

But it appears that you be foul deceived in judgment of the doctrine set
out in my book. And if you were not either utterly ignorant in holy scriptures
and doctors, or not obstinately bent to pervert the true doctrine of this holy
Sacrament, you would never have uttered this sentence.



or spiritual? If they be spiritual, then be they souls, devils, or angels.
And if they be corporal substances, either they have life or no life. I trust
you will say at the least, that bread has life, because you said but even now
almost, that the substance of bread is the soul of it. Such absurdities they
fall into, that maintain errors.

But at length when the similitude of the two natures in Christ, remaining

Two examples of the two natures in Christ, one in a man, the other in the
Sacrament.
For the old catholic Authors, to declare that two natures remain in Christ
together (that is to say, his humanity and his divinity) without corruption or
wasting of any of the said two natures, do give two examples thereof, one is of
the body and soul, which both be in a man together, and the presence of the
one puts not away the other.

The other example is of the Lords Supper or ministration of the Sacrament,
where is also together the substance and nature of bread and wine with the
body and blood of Christ, and the presence of the one puts not away the
other, no more then the presence of Christ's humanity puts away his
divinity. And as the presence of the soul drives not away the body, nor the
presence of the flesh and blood of Christ drives not away the bread and wine,
so does not the presence of Christ's humanity, expel his divinity, but his
divinity remains still with his humanity, as the soul does with the body,
and the body of Christ with the bread. And then if there remain not the nature
and substance of bread, it must follow also, that there remains not the
divine nature of Christ, with his humanity, or else the similitude is clearly
dissolved.

But yet say you, we may not press all parts of the resemblance with a
through equality, but only have respect to the end, wherefore the resemblance
is made. And do you not see, how this your saying takes away your own
argument of the real presence in the sacrament? and nevertheless sets you
no whitte more at liberty concerning Transubstantiation, but masteth you faster
in the net, and makes it more stronger to hold you. For the old Authors
make this resemblance, only to declare the remaining of two natures, not the
manner and form of remaining, which is far diverse in the person of Christ,
from the union in the Sacrament. For the two natures of Christ be joined
together in unity of person, which unity is not between the Sacrament and the
body of Christ. But in that point wherein the resemblance is made, there must
needs be an equality by your own saying. And for as much as the resemblance
was made only for the remaining of two natures, therefore as the perfect
natures of Christ's manhod and godhead, do both remain, and the perfect nature
of the soul and the body both also remain so must the perfect nature of
Christ's body and blood, and of bread and wine also remain. But for as much as
the similitude was not made for the manner of remaining, nor for the place,
therefore the resemblance requires not, that the body and blood of Christ
should be united to the bread and wine in person or in place, but only that
the natures should remain every one in his kind. And so be you clean
overthrown with your transubstantiation, except you will join your self with
those Heretics, which denied Christ's humanity and divinity to remain both
togithers.

And it seems that your doctrine varieth very little from Ualentine and
Martion (if it vary any thing at all) when you say that Christ's Spiritual
flesh.
For when S. Paul speaking of Christ's body, said (we be members of his body,
of his flesh and of his bones) he meant not of a spiritual body (as Ireneus
says) for a spirit has no flesh nor bones, Iraeneus contra Vale^tinia. lib.
5.
but of a very man's body, that is made of flesh, sinews and bones, And so with
striving to get out of the net you roll your self faster in it.

Interrogatus de alijs, respondet de caepis. when you be asked of garlic, you
answer of onions.

And this is one pretty sleight of sophistry, A slight.
or of a subtle warrier, when he sees him self ouermatched, and not able to
resist, then by some policy quite to put of, or at the least to delay the
conflict, and so do you commonly in this book of Transubstantiation. For when
you be sore pressed therein, than you turn the matter to the real presence.
But I shall so straytly

But it is not required, that the thing signified should be really and
corporally present in the sign and figure, as the soul is in the body
(because there is no such union of person) nor it is not required in the soul
and body that they should be ever together, for Christ's body and soul
remained both, without either corruption or Transubstantiation, when the soul
was gone down into hell, and the body rested in the sepulcher. And yet was he
than a perfect man, although his soul was not than really present with the
body. And it is not so great a marvel that his body should be in heaven, and
the sacrament of it here, as it is that his body should be here, and his soul
in hell.

And if the Sacrament were a man, and the body of Christ the soul of

And where you think that my second book against Transubstantiation

And what avails it you so often to affirm this untruth, that the body of
Christ is present in the Sacrament, as the soul of man is present in the body,
except you be like to them that tell a lie so often, that with often repeating
they think men believe it, and sometime by often telling they believe it them
selves. But the authors bring not this similitude of the body and soul of man,
to prove thereby the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, but to prove
the two natures of the godhead and the manhood in the person of Christ. Let
us now discuss the mind of Chrysostom in this matter, whom I bring thus in
my book.

Chrisostom. ad Caesarium Monachum.
S. John Chrisostom writes against the pestilent error of Apolinaris, which
affirmed that the Godhead and manhod in Christ, were so mixed and confounded
together, that they both made but one nature. Against whom S. John Chrysostom
writes thus.

When thou speak of God, thou must consider a thing that in nature is single
without composition, without conversion that is invisible, immortal,
incircumscriptible, incomprehensible with such like. And when thou speak of
man thou meanest a nature that is weak, subject to hunger, thirst, weeping,
fear, sweating, and such like passions, which can not be in the divine nature.
And when thou speak of Christ, thou ioynest two natures together in one
person, who is both passible and impassible: Passible as concerning his flesh,
and impassible in his deite.

And after he concludes saying: Wherefore Christ is both God and man: God by
his impassible nature, and man because he suffered. He himself being one
person, one son, one Lord, has the dominion and power of two natures joined
together, which be not of one substance, but each of them has his properties
distinct from the other. And therefore remains there two natures, distinct,
and not confounded. For as before the consecration of the bread, we call it
bread, but when Gods grace has sanctified it by the priest, it is delivered
from the name of bread, and is exalted to the name of the body of the Lord
although the nature of the bread remain still in it, and it is not called two
bodies, but one body of Gods son: so likewise here, the divine nature rests
in the body of Christ, and these two make one son, and one person.

These words of S. Chrysostom declare, and that not in obscure terms, but in
plain words, that after the consecration, the nature of bread remains
still, although it have an higher name, and be called the body of Christ: to
signify unto the godly eaters of that bread, that they spiritually eat the
supernatural bread of the body of Christ, who spiritually is there present,
and dwells in them, and they in him, although corporally he sits in heaven
at the right hand of his father.

Winchester.
S. Chrisostomes words in deed, Chrisostomus.
if this author had had them either truly translated unto him, or had taken
the pains to have truly translated them himself, which as Peter Martyr says,
be not in print but were found in Florence a copy whereof remains in the
archdeacon or Archbishop of Caunterburies hands, or else if this author had
reported the words as they be translated into English out of Peter Martyrs
book, wherein some point the translator in English, seems to have attained by
guess the sense more perfectly than Peter Martyr utters it himself, if
either of this had been done, the matter should have seemed for so much the
more plain. But what is this to make foundation of an argument upon a secret
copy of an epistle uttered at one time in diverse senses? I shall touch one
special point, Peter Martyr says in Latin, whom the translator in English
therein follows, that the bread is reputed worthy the name of the Lords body.
This author Englishing the same place, terms it (exalted to the name of the
Lords body) which words of exalting come nearer to the purpose of this author

Thou reader may compare the books that be abroad of Peter Martyr in Latin,
of Peter Martyr in English and this authors book, with that I write, and so
deem

Caunterbury.
WHere you like not my translation of Chrisostomes words, I trow you would
have me to learn of you to translate, you use such sincerity and playnnes in
your translation. Let the learned reader be judge. I did translate the words
my self out of the copye of Florence, more truly than it seems you would
have done. But when you see the words of Chrysostom so manifest and clear
against your feigned Transubstantiation (for he says, that the nature of bread
remains still) you craftily for a shift, fall to the carping of the
translation, because you cannot answer to the matter. And yet the words of
Chrysostom cyted by master Peter Martyr in latin out of Florence copy, and my
translation, and the translation of master Peter's book in English, do agree
fully here in sense, although the words be not all one, which neither is
required nor lightly found in any two translators, so that all your wrangling
in the diversity of the translations, is but a fleight and common practice of
you, when you cannot answer the matter, to seek faults in the translation,
where none is.

And for the special point, wherein you do note a meruaylous diversity Panis
dignus habitus est dominici corporis appellatione. The translator of M. Peter
Martyrs book says. The bread is reputed worthy the name of the Lords body.
My translation has, The bread is exalted to the name of the body of the Lord.
When a man is made a Lord or Knight, if one say of him, that he is reputed
worthy, the name of a Lord or Knight, and an other say, that he is exalted to
the name of a Lord or Knight, what difference is between these two sayings? Is
not this a wonderful diversity? I pray thee judge indifferently good reader.

A figure requires not the presence of the thing that is signified.
But (say you) a figure can never be counted worthy the name of the

And who heard ever such a doctrine as you here make, that the thing, must be
really and corporally present, where the figure is? For so must every man be
corporally buried in deed, Romans 6.
when he is Baptized, which is a figure of our burial. And when we receive the
Sacrament of Christ's body, then is accomplished the resurrection of our
bodies, for that Sacrament you affirm to be the figure thereof. But your
doctrine herein is clean contrary to the judgment of Lactantius, Lactantius
institu. lib. 2. Capi. 1.
and other old writers, who teach that figures be in vain, and serve to no
purpose, when the things by them signified be present.

And where you think it strange, to say that the divine nature is or Ihon. 1.
Did you never hear tell at the least, that the word was incarnated? or Verbum
caro factum est? And what signifies this word Incarnate: but God to be made
man, and his divine nature to be in flesh? Does not S. John bid us beware, 1.
John. 4.
that we believe not every spirit: for there be many false prophets, and every
spirit says he, that confesses not Jesus Christ to have come in flesh, is
not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist? Is this then a strange speech to
you, that the divine nature rests in the flesh, that is to say, in the body
of Christ? which if you deny, you know whose spirit yon have. But your trust
is altogether in obscure speeches, wherewith you trust so to darken the matter,
that no man shall understand it, least that if they understand it, they must
needs perceive

But when you promise to come to the purpose, (as to say the truth, all that
you said before is clearly without purpose) but when you promise (I say) now at
length to come to the purpose, your answer is nothing to the purpose of S.
Chrisostoms mind: for he made not his resemblance (as you say he did) only to
show the remaining of the accidents (which you call the properties) but to show
the remaining of the substances, with all the natural properties thereof. That
as Christ had here in earth his divinity and humanity, remaining every of them
with his natural properties, the substance of his godhead, being a nature
single without composition, without conversion invisible, immortal,
incircumscriptible, incomprehensible, and such like, (for these be Chrisostomes
own words) and the substance of his humanity, being a feeble nature, subject
to hunger, thyrst, weeping, fear, sweating, and such passions, so is it in the
bread and Christ's body, that the bread after sanctification or consecration
(as you call it) remains in his substance that it had before: and likewise
does the body of Christ remain still in heaven in his very true substance,
whereof the bread is a Sacrament and figure. For else, if the substance of the
bread remained not, how could Chrysostom bring it for a resemblance, to prove
that the substance of Christ's humanity remains with his divinity? Mary this
that you say, had been a gay lesson for the Manichees, to say that there
appears bread by all the accidents thereof, and yet is none in deed, that
then by this similitude they might say likewise, that Christ appeared a man by
all the accidences and properties of a man, and yet he was none in deed. And
to make an end of this author, your vain comment will not serve you, to call
the accidents of bread, the nature of bread, except you will allow the same in
the Manichees, that the nature of Christ's body, is nothing else but the
accidences thereof.

Now follows Gelasius of the same matter.

Hereunto accords also Gelasius, writing against Eutiches and Nestorius,
Gelasius contra Eutichen and Nestorium.
of whom the one said, that Christ was a perfect man, but not God: and the
other affirmed clean contrary, that he was very God but not man. But against
these two heinous heresies, Gelasius proves by most manifest scriptures, that
Christ is both God and man, and that after his Incarnation remains in him as
well the nature of his Godhead, as the nature of his manhod, so that he has in
him two natures with their natural properties, and yet is he but one Christ.

And for the more evident declaration hereof, he brings two examples, the one
is of man, who being but one, yet he is made of two parts, and has in him two
natures remaining both together in him, that is to say, the body and the soul
with their natural properties.

The other example is of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which
(says he) is a godly thing, and yet the substance or nature of bread and wine,
do not cease to be there still.

Note well these words against all the Papists of our time, that Gelasius
(which was Bishop of Rome more then a thousand years passed) writes of this
Sacrament, that the bread and wine cease not to be there still, as Christ
ceased not to be God after his incarnation, but remained still perfect god, as
he was before.

Winchester.
Gelasius.
Now follows to answer to Gelasius, who abhorring both the hereses of
Eutiches and Nestorius, in his treatise against the Eutichians forgets not
to compare with their error in extremity in the one side, the extreme error
of the Nestorians on the other side, but yet principally entendeth the
confusion of the Eutichians, with whom he was specially troubled. These two
heresies, were not so gross as the author of this (Inter Nestorij ergo quondam
Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae non testoris, se dissipatoris, non pastoris, sed
praedatoris, sacrilegum dogma and Eutichetis ne foriam and detestabilem sectam,
ita serpentinae grassationis sese calliditas temperauit, vt vtrumque sine
vtriusque periculo, plerique vitare non possint, dum si quis Nestorij per
fidiam damnat, Eutichetis puratur errori succumbere: rursum dum Eutichianae
haeresis impietatem destruit, Nestorij arguitur dogma erigere.) These be
Uigilius words in his first book, which be thus much in English. Between the
abominable teaching of Nestorius, sometime not ruler but waster, not pastor,
but pray searcher, of the church of Constantinople, and the wicked and
detestable sect of Eutiches, the craft of the devils spoiling so facioned it
self, that men could not avoid any of the secrets without danger of the other:
So as whiles any man condemns the falsenes of Nestorian, he may be thought
fallen to the error of the Eutichian, and whiles he destroys the wickedness
of the Eutichian, and whiles be destroys the wickedness of the Eutichians
heresy, he may be challenged to relieve the teaching of the Nestorian. This is
the sentence of Uigilius, by which appears how these heresies were both
subtle conveyed, without so plain contradiction, as this author either by
ignorance or of purpose fayneth, as though the Nestorian should say, that
Christ was a perfect man, but not God, and the Eutichian clean contrary, very
God, but not man. For if the heresies had been such, Uigilius had had no cause
to speak of any such ambiguity, as he notes yt a man should hardly speak
against the one, but he might be suspected to favor the other. And yet I grant
that the Nestorians saying might imply Christ not to be God, because they would
two distinct different natures, to make also two distinct persons, and so as it
were two Christ's, the one only man, and the other only God, so as by their
teaching God was neither incarnate, nor as Gregory Nazianzene says, man
deitate, for so he is termed to say.

The Eutichians as S. Augustine says reasoning against the Nestorians, became
heretics themselves, and because we confess truly by faith but one Christ
the son of God very God: The Eutichians say, although there were in the
virgins womb before (aliud,) and (aliud,) which signifies different, and yet
in that not to be (alius,) and (alius,) in person, which alius and alius in
person, the Eutichians of two natures would have two persons, and because those
Nestorians fansied the person deipara, gods mother, which the Nestorians
deluded by an exposition, granting she might so be called, because her son
they said was afterward God, and so she might be called gods mother, as an
other woman may be called a bishops mother, if her son be made a bishop
afterward, although he departed no bishop from her.

Nature.
signifiing the whole of any one constitution, which more properly the word
person does express. Person.
The Eutichians would by that word after gather that he favored their part, so
taking the word at a vantage.

And because the same Cyrillus used the word subsistence to signify substance,
Subsistence.
and therefore said in Christ there were two subsistences, meaning the divine
substance and humayne substance, Substance.
forasmuch as the word subsistence is used to express the person, that as to
say hipostasie: There were that of that word frowardly understood, would
gather he should say, that there were two persons in Christ, which was the
Nestorians heresy that he impugned. Such captiousnes was there in words, when
arrogant men

An other special service is to declare how the author of this book, either
does not know the state of the matter in these heresies he speaks of, or else
misreporteth them of purpose. And the arguing of Gelasius in this matter well
opened, shall give light of the truth of the mystery of the Sacrament, who
against the Eutichians uses two arguments of examples, one of the two
different natures to remain in one person of man, and yet the Eutichians
defamed that conjunction, with remain of two different natures, and called it
(...), double nature, and Gelasius to enconter that term says, they will with
their (...) one nature reserve not one Christ and whole Christ. And if two
different natures, that is to say, soul and body make but one man, why not so
in Christ? For where scripture speaks of the outward man and inward man, that
is to show (Gelasius says) two diverse qualities in the same man, and not to
divide the same into two men, and so intends to show there ought to be no
scruple to grant two different natures to remain in their propriety, for
fear that every diverse nature should make a diverse person, and so in Christ
divide the unity concluding that the integrity of Christ can not be but both
the natures different remaining in their property Carnal imagination troubled
the Eutichians to have one person of two such differente natures remaining in
their property, which the Nestorians releued with devise of two persons, and
the Eutichians by confusion of the humayne nature.

Then comes Gelasius to the argument of example from the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, and notes the person of Christ to be a principal
mystery, and the Sacrament an image and similitude of that mystery, which sense
his words must needs have, because he calls Christ the principal mystery,
and as in one place he says the image and similitude of the body and blood of
Christ, so by and by he calls the Sacrament the image of Christ. And here the
words image and similitude, express As bread and wine go into the divine
substance, the

In these words of Gelasius where he says, the bread and wine go into the
divine substance, is plainly declared the presence of the divine substance,
and this divine substance can signify none other substance, but of the body
and blood of Christ, of which heavenly nature, and earthly nature of the bread
and wine, consists this Sacrament the Image of the principal mystery of
Christ's person.

And therefore as in the Image be two diverse natures, and different remaining
in their property: So likewise in the person of Christ, which is the
conclusion of Gelasius argument, should remain two natures. And here were a
great danger

In the Sacrament, the visible matter of the earthly creature in his propriety
of nature, for the use of signification is necessarily required, and also
according to the truth of Christ his words, his very body and blood to be
inuisibly with integrity present, which Gelasius calls the divine substance.
And I think it worthy to be noted, that Gelasius ConiraAcephalos. And Gelasius
in opening the mystery of the Sacrament, speaks of transition of the bread
and wine into the godly substance, which word transition, is meet to express
Transubstantiation, and therefore S. Thomas expressed Transubstantiation with
the same word transire, writing: Dogma datur Christianis, quod in carnem
transit panis and venu^ in sanguinem. But in the mystery of Christ's person,
there is no tra^sition of the Deity into the humanity, or humanity into the
Deity, but only Assumptio^ of the humanity with the adunation of those two
perfect natures so different, one person and one Christ, who is God incarnate,
and man Deitate, as Gregory Nazianzene says, without mutation, conversion,
transition, transelementation or transubsta^tiation, which words be proper and
special to express how Eucharistia is constitute of two different natures, an
heavenly and earthly nature, a mystery institute after the example of the
principal mystery, wherewith to feed us with the substance of the same
glorious body that has redeemed us. And because in the constitution of this
mystery of the Sacrament, there is a transition, of the earthly creature into
the divine substance, as Gelasius and S. Thomas term it, and mutation as
Cypria^ and Ambrose teach it, which Theophilactus expresses by the word
transelementation, Emissen by the word conversion, and all their words reduced
into their own proper sense expressed in one word of transubstantiation: it
can not be convenient where the manner of constitution of the two mysteries be
so different, there to require a like remainyng of the two natures, whereof the
mysteries be. In the mystery of Christ's person, because there was not of any
of the two different natures either mutation, transition, conversion, or
transelementation, but only assumption of the humanity, and adunation in the
virgins womb, we can not say the Godhead to have suffered in that mystery,
which were an absurdity, but to have wrought the assumption and adunation of
man's nature with it, nor man's nature by that assumption and adunation
diminished, and therefore profess truly Christ to be whole God and whole man,
and God in that mystery to be made man, and man God, where as in the Sacrament
because of tra^sition, mutation, and conversion of their earthly creatures,
wrought by the holy ghost, which declares those earthly creatures to suffer in
this conversion, mutation and transition: we knowledge no assumptio^ of those
creatures or adunation with the heavenly nature, and therefore say not as we do
in the principal mystery, that each nature is wholly the other, and as we
profess God incarnate, so the body of Christ breaded, and as man is Deitate,
so the bread is corporate, which we should say, if the rules of our faith could
permit the constitution of each mystery to be taught a like, which the truth of
Gods word Symbolo Athanasij of all received. For Christ is one person of two
perfect natures, whereof the one was before the other, in perfection and
creation of the other, the one impassible, and the other passible. Man is of
the soul and body one, two different natures, but such as for their perfection
required that unity, whereof none was before other perfect, of Christ we say,
he is consubstantiall to his Father, by the substance of his Godhead, and
consubstantiall to man, by the substance of his manhood, but we may not say,
man is consubstantiall by his soul to Angels, and consubstantiall in his body
to beasts, because then we should deduce also Christ by mean of us to be
consubstantiall beasts. And thus I write to show that we may not press the
example in every part of it, as the author of this book notes upon Gelasius,
who ouerturneth his doctrine of the figure.

Caunterbury.
I Pity you, to see how ye swinke and sweat, to confound this author
Gelasius. And yet his words be so plain against your Papisticall
Transubstantiation, that you have clearly lost all your pains, labors, and
costs. For these be his words, spoken of the Sacrament, Esse non desinit
substantia vel natura panis and vini, the substance or nature of bread and
wine ceasseth not to be. But to avoid and dalye away these words, that be so
clear and plain, must needs be laid on load of words, the wit must be
stretched out to the utmost, all fetches must brought in that ca^ be devised,
all colors of Rethorike must be sought out, all the air must be cast over
with clouds, all the water darkened with the cuttyls ynke, and if it could be
(at the least as much as may be) all men's eyes also must be put out, that they
should not see. But I would wish that you stood not so much in your own
conceit, trusted not so much in your inventions and devise of wit, in
eloquence, and in craftines of speech, and multitude of words, looking that no
man should dare encounter you, but that all men should think you speak well,
because you speak much, and that you should be had in great reputation among
the multitude of them that be ignorant, and can not discern perfectly those
that follow the right way of truth, from other that would lead them out of the
way into error and blindness. This standing in your conceit, is nothing else
but to stand in your own light.

But where you say, that these heresies of Nestorius and Eutiches were August,
contra hereses.
has these words of Nestorius, Dogmatizare ausus est, Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum hominem tantum, he presumed to teach (says S. Augustine) that our
Lord Jesus Christ was but man only. And of Eutiches he says, Humanitatis in
Christo denegauit veritatem, he denied the truth of Christ's manhood. And
Gelasius writes also thus. Eutichiani dicunt vnam esse naturam, id est
diuinam, ac Nestorius nihilominus memerat singularem, Gelasius aduersus
Eutychen and Nestorium.
The Eutichians say, that there is but one nature in Christ, that is to say,
the Godhead: and also Nestorius says, there is but one nature, meaning the
manhood. By which words of S. Augustine and Gelasius, appears as plainly as
can be spoken, the plain contradiction between, the Nestorians and the
Eutichians, that the one denied the humanity of Christ, and the other his
divinity (as I have written in my book) so that neither of ignorance nor of
purpose have I feigned any thing, but you, either of malice, or of your
accustomed manner to calumniate and find fault with every thing that misliketh
you (be it never so well) seek occasion likewise hereto carpe and reprehend
where no fault is: being like unto Momus, which when he could find no fault
with Uenus person, yet he picked a quarrel to her slipper. And not in this
place only, but throughout your whole book you use this fashion, that when
you ca^ not answer to the principal matter, the^ you find fault with some
bye matter, whereby it seems you intend so to occupy the Readers mind, that
he should not see how craftily you co^uey your self, from direct au^sweryng of
the chief point of the Argument, which when you come unto, you pass it over
slenderly, au^sweryng either nothing, or very little, and nothing to the purpose.

But yet this bye matter (which you bring in of the grossenes of these two
errors) helps little your intent, but rather helps to fortify my saying
against your doctrine of transubsta^tiation, that your doctrine herein makes a
plain way for the Nestorians and the Eutichians to defend their errors. For
if the bread and the body of Christ before the consecration in the Sacrament be
two natures, and after the consecration in that mystery is but one nature, and
that is the body of Christ, into which the nature of bread in your fantasy is
transformed and confounded, and if also this mystery be an example of the
mystery of Christ's incarnation (as the old authors report) why may not then
the Eutichians say, that before the adunation in the virgins womb, the Godhead
and manhood were two natures, and yet after the adunation in that mystery of
Christ's incarnation, there was but one nature, and that to be the nature of
God, into which the nature of man was after their fantasy transfused and
confounded? And thus have you made by your transubstantiation a goodly pattern
and example for the Eutichians to follow in maintenance of their error.

And yet although the Eutichians said, that the nature of God and of man,
before their uniting were two, yet I read not that they said, that they were
two in the virgins womb (as you report of the^) which is no great matter, but
to declare how ignorant you be in the thing, whereof you make so great boast,
or how little you regard the truth, that wittingly will tell an untruth. But to
say my mind frankely, what I think of your declaration of these two heresies,
I think a great part thereof you dreamed in your sleep, or imagined being in
some trance or rapt with some Sophistical vision, and part of your dream
agrees neither with approved Authors and histories, nor with it self. For
first as touching the Eutichians, Gelasius writes as well against Nestorius as
Eutiches.
where you say that Gelasius directs his Arguments of the two natures in
man, and of the two natures in ye Sacrament: chiefly against ye Eutichians, to
prove the nature of man to remain in Christ after the adunation, whosoever
reads Gelasius, shall find otherwise, that he directed his Arguments
indifferently, as well against Nestorius, as against Eutiches, alius and alius,
Alius.
(although some gathered so of their words) then did the Nestorians, which
words signify diversity of person, as aliud and aliud signify diversity of
nature: Aliud.
So as the body and soul in one man be aliud and aliud by reason of diversity
of natures, and yet be they not alius and alius, because that both together
make but one person. By means of which difference between alius and alius, we
say, Alius pater, alius filius, alius spiritus sanctus, and not Aliud pater,
aliud filius, aliud spiritus sanctus, for as much as they be three in persons,
and but one in nature and substance. And because Christ is two in nature, that
is to say, of his deity and humanity, and but one in person, therefore we
say, Aliud and aliud est diuinitas and humanitas, but not Alius, sed vnus est
Christus.

And although Nestorius granted two natures in Christ, yet not (as alium and
alium: after which sort the Godhead is also in other godly men, whom by grace
he makes partakers of his godly nature, although by their natural generation
they be but me^, without the divine nature united in person, but after obtained
by adoption and grace. As by your example, a man is made Bishop, which by
natural generation is borne but a man.

And that this was Nestorius opinion, that Christ from his Nativity was but
man only, and had his godhead after by adoption or accession, is evident of
your own words, when you say, that the Nestoria^s denied Christ conceived God,
or borne God, and that the Godhead was an accessio^ to Christ afterward by
merit, and that he was conceived but only man, although shortly after you go
from the same, saying that both the Godhead and manhood were always in Christ:
such co^sta^cie is in your dreamed pha^tasies.

And where you have written thus much (as you say) because it should

And in the said heresies (as you say) was some appeara^ce of the truth, every
one having Scripture, which in sound of words seemed to approve their
errors, whereby they deceived many. But as for your feigned doctrine of
Transubsta^tiation, it has no pretense nor appearance of truth by Gods word,
for you have not one Scripture that makes mention thereof, where as I hane many
plain and manifest Scriptures, that speaks in plain terms, that bread is
eaten, and wine is dronken. And this Author Gelasius, with diverse other learned
men, as well Greeks as Latins, of the old Catholic Church, affirm in no
doubtful words, that the bread and wine be not gone, but remain still. From
which Scriptures and Doctors who soever dissenteth, declares him self at the
least to be ignorant, whereby yet he may excuse him self of a greater blot and
infamy.

And this matter being so clear, neither your fine disguising, nor your
painted colors, nor your gay Rhetorike, nor witty inventions, can so hyde and
cover the truth, that it shall not appear, but the more you labor to strive
against the stream, the more faint shall you wax, and at length the truth
has such a violence, that you shall be borne clean down with the stream
thereof.

A comparison of Nestorius and Cyrill,
which comparison if it be thoroughly considered, has no small resemblance,
although there be no little diversity also. Nestorius (say you) was a great
archbishop, and so (say I) was Ciril also. Nestorius (say you) as apeareth had
much learning, but cloked his heresy craftily. But the Histories of his time
(who should know him best) describe him in this sort, that he was a man of no
great learning, but of an excellent natural wit and eloquence, and full of
craft and subtlety, by means whereof, he was so proud and glorious, that he
contemned all men in respect of him self, and disdained the old writers,
thinkyng him self more wise then they all. Now let the indifferent Reader
Judge, whom he thinks in this your illusion should most resemble the
qualities and conditions of Nestorius.

And all this that you have brought in here of these two heresies, although it
be to no purpose in the principal matter, yet it serves me to this purpose,
that men may conjecture whose nature and wit is most like unto the
description of Nestorius, and also how loath you be to come to the matter, and
to make a direct answer to Gelasius words, who says in plain terms, that
substance or nature of bread and wine remains. Eue^ as glad you be to come
to this, as a Bear is to come to the stake, seeking to run out at this
corner or that corner, if it were possible. But all will not help, for you be
so fast tied in chains, yt (will you, nill you) at length you must come to the
stake, although you be never so loath. And Gelasius byteth so sore, and has
catched so hard hold of you, that you ca^ never escape, although you attempt
all manner of ways, by tooth and by nail, to shake him of.

must in the Sacrament also, the nature of bread and wine remain without
Transubstantiation, or corruption of any of the natures, according to the said
words of Gelasius, Esse non desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini, the
substance or nature of the bread and wine ceasseth not to be.

And Gelasius brings not this Image and similitude to that purpose Presence
by faith requires no corporal presence.
For by faith is Christ present in Baptism, and by faith Abraham saw him, and
the holy Fathers did eat his flesh and drink his blood, before he was borne.
And Christ humbling him self to take upon him our mortal nature, Gala. 3.
Ihon. 8. 1. Cor. 10,
has exalted us to the nature of his deity, making us to reign with him in
his immortal glory, as it were Gods. And this (says Gelasius) God works in
us by his Sacraments per quae diuinae efficimur consortes naturae, and tamen
esse non desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini, that is to say, by the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood we be associate unto the divine nature,
and yet ceasseth not the substance or nature of bread and wine to be. So that
the Sacrament not being altered in substance, we be altered and go into the
divine nature or substance (as Gelasius terms it,) being made partakers of
Gods eternity.

And therefore when he speaks of the going of the Sacraments into of the
sacraments remain, for he makes his argument altogether of the remaining of
the natures, by the verb ( permanere) and the participle ( permanens) then as
you say that the integrity of Christ can not be, except both his natures
different remain in their properties, so can not the integrity of the
sacrament be, except the two natures of bread and wine remain in their
properties. For else, seeing that the remaining of the natures is in the
Sacrament as it is in Christ, (as Gelasius says) then if in the Sacraments
remain but the accidents and apearance of bread and wine, and not the
substances of them, how could Gelasius by the resemblance of the two sacraments
of bread and wine, prove the two substances and natures of Christ to remain.
Might it not rather be gathered, that only the appearance of Christ's humanity
remains in accidents, and not the substance of it self (as Martion says,
and as you say it is in ye sacrament) or else that Christ's humanity is
absorpted up by his divinity, and confounded therewith, as the Eutichians say,
that the bread and wine is by ye body and blood of Christ? But the catholic
faith has taught from the beginning, according to holy scripture, that as the
image or sacrament be two diverse natures and different, remaining in their
properties (that is to say bread and wine) so likewise in the person of Christ
remain two natures, his divinity and his humanity.



And the two natures in the Sacrament (which Gelasius takes for the image and
similitude of the two natures in Christ) be bread and wine, which as they
remain, and that truly in their natures and substances, so do the two natures
in Christ. And yet be the bread and wine Sacraments of the terrestrial nature
of Christ, that is to say, of his body and blood, but not of his celestial and
divine nature, as you imagine. And they be called Sacraments, because they be
figures, which if they were no figures, they were no Sacraments. But it is not
required, that the thing represented by the figure, should be really and
corporally present in the figure when ye figures ordained to represent a thing
corporally abse^t, and ye figure were in vain, as Lactansius says, Lactantius
institut. lib. 2. c. 1.
if the thing were present.

And at the least wise in this place Gelasius uses the natures and substances
of bread and wine (which be Sacraments of Christ's flesh and blood) to be
images and similitudes in this point, not of his flesh and blood, but of his
divine and humayne nature, that as the bread and wine in the Sacrament remain
still in their proper kinds, without violation, adnihilation, confusion,
commixtion or Transubstantiation, so is it in the two natures of Christ's
manhood and his godhead. So that Gelasius uses this similitude for the
incarnation of Christ, not for the consecration of the sacrament, as you would
pervert his meaning.

And because you would have all your things strange (as it were one that had
come out of a strange cuntry, where he had learned a strange fashion of speech,
never heard of before, or rather devised it himself) you call the colors of
bread and wine, the matter of bread and wine, because ab opposito consequentis,
ad oppositum antecedentis, as colors feed not our bodies, so Christ feeds
not our souls. This is the conclusion of your goodly new devised divinity.

And to like effect comes your other saying in the same sentence, (because

This is a goodly hearing for the Eutichians, who say, that in Christ is no more
natures but his divine substance, which by your interpretation must be true.
For if his godhead be a divine substance, and his body and blood also a divine
substance, why should Eutiches be reprehended for denying in Christ to be any
other than divine substance? And so shall we bring to pass, that either
Christ has but one substance, or two divine substaunces (although not of like
sort) and so not one human substance. And is it like, that Gelasius, (who
so long conte^ded against Eutiches for two distinct substau^ces in Christ,
human and divine) would in the conclusion of his disputation so much yield
unto the heretic, to grant that Christ's human substance should be a
divine substance?

Substance or nature.
And it is worthy to be noted, and double noted, how you wra^gle with Nature for
property.
which you call accidents. And so you make Gelasius a goodly teacher, that
should so ambiguously speak of two things, when he means but of one. For
when he says, that the substance or nature remains, you say, he means
that only the nature remains. And were this tolerable in a learned man,
when he means the nature to remain, and not the substance, to express it
by these terms, The substance or nature remains? And if Gelasius mean that
the substance of bread and wine remains not, but the natures, and then if by
nature he understood the accidents (as you untruly surmise of him) and make
them the Image and similitude, to prove Christ's two natures, the^ they prove
no more, but that the accidents of Christ's natures remain, and not the
substance, which saying, whether it be a fauouryng of the Eutichians,
Nestorians, Ualentinia^s, Martionistes, Apolinaristes, and other of that sort,
let the learned be judge.

And although it be not necessary the examples to be in all parts equal (as
you allege of Rusticus Diaconus) yet they must needs be like in yt point, for
examples of Christ's two natures, for this intent, to prove that the two
natures of Christ remain in their substance, it must needs be so in the
bread and wine or else they served nothing to that purpose.

And the transition that Gelasius meant of, is in the persons that receive the
Sacraments, which be transformed into the divine nature, (as Gelasius says)
by efficacy and virtue represented by the Sacraments, but the transition is
not in the bread and wine (as you and your Thomas imagine of transition) which
remain in the Sacrament without substa^ciall mutatio^, conversion, transitio^,
transelementatio^, or tra^substantiatio^. For if in the mystery of the
Sacrament were transition, mutation, conversion, and transelementation of the
substance of bread and wine, how could that mystery be an example of the
principal mystery of Christ's incarnation, to prove thereby that there is no
transition, mutation, conversion, or transelementation, of the two substaunces
of Christ in his incarnation? Does not the remainyng of substance in the
Sacrament, prove the remainyng of substance in the Incarnation? For how can
the not remainyng of substance, be an example, image, and similitude to prove
the remainyng of the substance? But here appears what it is to wrestle
against the truth, and to defend an evil cause, and what absurdities wit and
eloquence be driven unto, when they strive against God and his word.



If you may purge your self in handling of this author by confession of your
ignorance, you must obtain it by great favor of them that will so accept it.
For else in this one author is affirmed by you many great errors, with wilful
deprauation of the authors mind, to give weapons to them that be enemies to the
truth, and to the subversion of the catholic faith. And no les have you done
in Theodoretus next following, because you would handle them both indifferently,
and do no more Injury to the one than to the other. And as for Ciprian,
Ambrose, Theophilact and Emissene, I have answered to them before. It is time
now to hear Theodoret.

Theodoretus in dialogis.
Theodoretus also affirms the same, both in his first and in his second
dialoge. In the first he says thus: He that called his natural body, wheat
and bread, and also called himself a vine, the self same called bread and
wine his body and blood, and yet changed not their natures.

And in his second dialogue he says more plainly. For (says he) as the bread
and wine after the consecration lose not their proper nature, but keep their
former substance, form, and figure, which they had before, even so the body of
Christ, after his ascension, was changed into the godly substance.

Now let the Papists choose, which of these two they will grant (for one of
them they must needs grant) either that the nature and substance of bread and
wine remain still in the Sacrament after the consecration, (and than must they
recant their doctrine of Transubstantiation) or else that they be of the error
of Nestorius, and other, which did say, that the nature of the Godhead, or of
the manhod remained not in Christ after his incarnation or ascension. For all
these old authors agree, that it is in the one, as it is in the other.

Winchester.
Theodorete.
And if that I have here said be well considered, there may appear the great
ignorance of this author in the alleging of Theodoret, the applying of him
and the speaking of Nestorius in the end. For as the Eutichians reasoning (as
S. Augustine says) to confound the Nestorians, fell into an absurdity in the
confusion of their two natures in Christ: so Theodoretus reasoning against the
Eutichians, fell in a vehement suspicion to be a Nestorian, like as S.
Augustine reasoning against the Maniches for defense of free will, seemed to
speak that the Pelagians would allow, and reasoning against Pelagians, seemed
to say that the Manichees would allow, such a danger it is to reduce
extremities to the mean, wherein S. Augustine was better purged then Theodoret
was, although Theodoret was reconciled. But for example of yt I have said,

This author of the book for the name of Nestorius, should have put Eutiches,
and then said for conclusion. The nature of manhod remained not in Christ. And
although in Theodoret the substance of bread is spoken of to remain, yet
because he does after

Caunterbury
Confusion of natures.
And then your ignorance therein: must needs declare that you be utterly
ignorant of all their whole discourse, which tends only to prove that the two
natures in Christ, his divinity and his humanity be not confounded. And for
ignorance of confusion, you confound all together. Gelasius and Theodorete
prove, that the two natures in Christ be not confounded, because they remain

So that if one nature remain not, the same is confounded. And if there be
more natures that lose their substance, they be all confounded, except there be
an utter consumption or adnihilation of the thing that loses his substance,
and therefore the argument which all the old ecclesiastical authors use, to
save the confusion of the two natures in Christ, is to prove, that they both
remain. And if we may learn that, by the similitude of the sacrament (as
Gelasius and Theodoret teach, and you here confess the same) then must needs
the substance of bread and wine remain, or else is there none example nor
similitude of the remaining of two natures in Christ, but of their confusion,
as by your feigned doctrine the substance of bread is confounded with the body
of Christ, neither being adnihilate, nor remaining, but transubstantiated,
confounded and converted into the substance of Christ's body. And thus with
your well understanding of the matter, you confound all together, where as I
with my ignorance, not blaspheming that holy union and mystery of Christ's
incarnation, do save all the natures whole, without mixtion, confusion or
Transubstantiation, either of the divine and humayne nature in Christ or of the
soul and body in man, or of the bread and wine in the Sacrament, but all ye
substance and natures be saved and remain clearly with their natural
properties and conditions, that the proportion in yt point may be like, and one
to be the true Image and similitude of the other. But surely more gross
ignorance or wilful impiety then you have showed in this matter, has not
lightly been seen or red of.

And where you say, that I by oversight, or the Printer by negligence, have
left out a (not, Not.
) if I should have put in that (not) of mine own

And as for my forked dilemma, you shall never be able to answer there to, but
the more you travail therein, the more you shall entangle your self. For
either you must grant (as unwilling as you be) that the nature and substance
of bread and wine remain after the consecration, or else that the nature and
substance of Christ's humanity and divinity remain not after his incarnation,
wherein erred not only Eutiches (whom you say I should have put for
Nestorius) but also Martion, Ebion, Ualentinus, Nestorius, and other as in my
book I have declared.

And one thing is principally to be noted in your answer to Theodoret
swallowed up of the body and blood of Christ, then likewise in the principal
mystery, either the deity must be swallowed up of the humanity, or the humanity
of the deity. The contrary whereof is not only against the Eutichians, but also
against the Nestorians, Martionistes, and all other that denied any of his two
natures to remain perfectly in Christ.

And where as you with all the route of the Papists, both privately and openly
report me to be unlearned and ignorant, because you would thereby impair my
credit in this weighty matter of our faith, my knowledge is not any whit the
less, because the Papists say it is nothing, nor yours any deal the more,
because the Papists do say, that you only be learned, whom for any thing
that ever I could perceive in you, I have found more full of words and talk
then of learning. And yet the note of ignorance, I nothing pass of, if thereby
the truth and Gods glory should not be hindered.

Now after the reproof of your doctrine of Transubstantiation, by all the old
writers of Christ's church, I write in my book after this manner.

Now forasmuch as it is proved sufficiently (as well by the holy Scripture,
Chap. 6. Transubstantiation came from Rome.
as by natural operation, by natural reason, by all our senses, and by the
most old and best learned authors, and holy martirs of Christ's church,) that
the substance of bread and wine do remain, and be received of faithful people
in the blessed Sacrament, or supper of the Lord: It is a thing worthy to be
considered and well wayed, what moved the School authors of late years to
defend the contrary opinion, not only so far from all experience of our
senses, and so far from all reason, but also clean contrary to the old
church of Christ, and to Gods most holy word. Surely nothing moved them thereto
so much, as did the vain faith which they had in the church and sea of Rome.

For Ioannes Scotus, Scotus super 4. sen. distinct. 11.
otherwise called Duns, (the subtillest of all the school authors) entreating
of this matter of Transubstantiation, shows plainly the cause thereof. For
(says he) the words of the Scripture might be expounded more easily, and more
plainly without Transubstantiation, but the church did choose this sense,
(which is more hard, being moved thereto (as it seems) chiefly, because that
of the Sacraments men ought to hold, as the holy churh of Rome holds: But it
holds, that bread is transubstantiate or turned into the body, and wine into
the blood, as it is showed De summa Trinitate and fide Catholicae. Firmiter
credimus.

And Gabriell also (who of all other wrote most largely upon the Canon of the
Mass) says thus. Gabriel. super Canone missae lect. 40.
It is to be noted, that although it be taught in the scripture, that the body
of Christ is truly contained and received of christen people under the kinds
of bread and wine, yet how the body of Christ is there, whether by conversion
of any thing into it, or without conversion the body is there with the bread,
both the substance and accidence of bread remaining there still, it is not
found expressed in the Bible. Yet forasmuch as of the sacraments men must hold
as the holy church of Rome holds, as it is written De haereticis, Ad
abolendum. And that church holds and has determined, that the bread is
tra^substantiated into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood,
Therefore is this opinion received of all them that be catholic, that the
substance of bread remains not, but really and truly is turned,
transubstantiated and changed into the substance of the body of Christ.

Chap. 7.
Thus you have heard the cause, wherefore this opinion of Transubstantiation at
this present is holden and defended among christen people, that is to say,
because the church of Rome has so determined, although the contrary, by the
Papists own confession, appear to be more easy, more true, and more
according to the Scripture.

But because our english papists (who speak more grossly herein then the
Pope himself, affirming that the natural body of Christ is naturally in the

Chap. 8. The first reason of the Papists to prove their Transubtantiation.
Math. 26. Mar. 14. Lue. 22. The answer.
The greatest reason and of most importance, and of such strength (as they
think) or at the least as they pretend, that all the world can not answer
thereto, is this: Our savior Christ, taking the bread, brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, saying: This is my body. Now (say they) as soon as Christ had
spoken these words, the bread was straight way altered and changed, and the
substance

But what christen ears can patiently hear this doctrine, that Christ is
every day made a new, and made of an other substance, than he was made of in
his mothers womb? For where as at his incarnation he was made of the nature
and substance of his blessed mother, now (by these papists opinion) he is made
every day of the nature and substance of bread and wine, which (as they say) be
turned into the substance, of his body and blood. O what a meruaylous
Metamorphosis and abominable heresy is this? to say, that Christ is daily
made a new, and of a new matter? whereof it follows necessarely, that they
make us every day a new Christ, and not the same that was borne of the virgin
Mary, nor that was crucified upon the cross, and that it was not the same
Christ that was eaten in the supper, which was borne and crucified, as it shall
be plainly proved by these arguments following.

First thus: If Christ's body that was crucified was not made of bread, but the
body that was eaten in the supper was made of bread, (as the papists say) than
Christ's body that was eaten in the supper was not the same that was crucified.
For if they were all one body, than it must needs follow, that either Christ's
body that was eaten was not made of bread, or else that his body that was
crucified was made of bread.

And in like manner it follows: If the body of Christ in the Sacrament, be
made of the substance of bread and wine, and the same body was conceived in the
Virgins womb, than the body of Christ in the Virgins womb was made of bread
and wine.

Or else turn the argument thus: The body of Christ in the Virgins womb was
not made of bread and wine, but this body of Christ in the Sacrament is made of
bread and wine, than this body of Christ is not the same that was conceived in
the virgins womb.

An other argument. Christ that was borne in the Virgins womb, as concerning
his body, was made of none other substance, but of the substance of his blessed
mother, but Christ in the Sacrament is made of an other substance, and so it
follows, that he is an other Christ.

And so the Antichrist of Rome, the chief author of all idolatry, would bring
faithful christen people from the true worshipping of Christ that was made and
borne of the blessed virgin Mary, through the operation of the holy ghost, and
suffered for us upon the cross, to worship an other Christ made of bread and
wine through the consecration of Popish priests, which make themselves the
makers of God. For (say they) the priest by the words of consecration makes
that thing which is eaten and dronken in the Lords supper, and that (say they)
is Christ himself both God and man, and so they take upon them to make both
God and man.

But let all true worshipers worship one God, one Christ, once corporally made,
of one only corporal substance, that is to say, of the blessed virgin Mary,
that once dyed, and rose once again, once assended into heaven, and there
sits and shall sit at the right hand of his father evermore, although
spiritually he be every day amongst us, and who so ever come together in his
name, he is in the midst among them. And he is the spiritual pasture and
food of our souls, as meat and drink is of our bodies, which he signifies
unto us by the institution of his most holy supper in the bread and wine,
declaring that as the bread and wine corporally comfort and feed our bodies, so
does he with his flesh and blood spiritually comfort and feed our souls.

And now may be easily answered the Papists argument whereof they do so much
boast, The answer more directly.
For brag they never so much of their conversion of bread and wine into the
body and blood of Christ, yet that conversion is spiritual, and puts not
away the corporal presence of the material bread and wine. But for as much as
the same is a most holy sacrament of our spiritual norishment (which we have
by the body and blood of our savior Christ) there must needs remain the
sensible element, that is to say, bread and wine, without the which there can
be no sacrament.

As in our spiritual regeneration there can be no sacrament of baptism, if
there be no water. For as baptism is no perfect sacrament of spiritual
regeneration, without there be as well the element of water, as the holy ghost,
spiritually regenerating the person that is baptized (which is signified by the
said water) even so the supper of the Lord can be no perfect Sacrament of
spiritual food, except there be as well bread and wine, as the body and blood
of our savior Christ, spiritually feeding us, which by the said bread and wine
is signified.

And how so ever the body and blood of our Savior Christ be there present,
they may as well be present there with the substance of bread and wine, as with
the accidents of the same, as the scholeauthors, do confess them selves, and
it shall be well proved if the adversaries will deny it. Thus you see the
strongest argument of the Papists answered unto, and the chief foundation
whereupon they buyld their error of Transubstantiation, utterly subverted and
overthrown.

Winchester.
Wherein this author not seeing how little he has done, concludes yet as
constantly as though he had thrown all down before him, entending to show that
the doctrine of Transubstantiation depends only of authority, which is not
so, using the sayings of Duns and Gabriell (as he reports them) for his
purpose, because they (as he says)

Read Smith. fol 91. etc.
First he finds himself mirth in divissing as he calls them the Papists,
to say yt Christ is made a new, which fancy if it were so, is against the
real presence as well as transubstantiation. In which words because every
wise reader may see how this author plays: I will say no more but this,
Christ is not made a new, nor made of the

Caunterbury.
WHen I have proved most evidently, as well by the testimony of the scripture,
as by the consent of the old authors of Christ's church both greeks and
Latins, from the beginning continually from time to time, that
transubstantiation is against gods most holy word, against the old church of
Christ, against all experience of our senses, against all reason, and against
the doctrine of all ages (until the Bishops of Rome devised the contrary)
therefore. I conclude that the said doctrine of Transubstantiation may justly
be called the Romish or papisticall doctrine. And where I have showed further,
that the chief pillars of the papisticall doctrine, as Duns, Gabriell, Durand,
with other do acknowledge, that if it had not been for the determination of the
church of Rome, they would have thought otherwise (which is a most certain
argument, that this doctrine of Transubstantiation came from Rome, and therefore
is worthily called a papisticall doctrine) all this must be answered with these
words (as this author reports) and Duns and Gabriell boast

But here you put me in remembrance of an ignorant reader, whose scholar I was
in Cambridge almost forty years passed, who when he came to any hard chapter,
which he well understood not, he would find some preaty toy to shift it of,
and to scip over unto an other chapter which he could better skill of. The
same is a common practice of you through out your whole book, that when any
thing in my book presses you so sore that you cannot answer it, then finely
with some merry jest, or unseemly taunt you pass it over, and go to some other
thing, that you persuade yourselfe, you can better answer, which slight you
use here in ii. matters together, the one is where I prove the doctrine of
Transubstantiation to come from Rome, the other is, that of your said doctrine
of Transubstantiation it follows, that Christ every day is made a new and of
a new matter. In which ii. matters you craftily slide away from mine arguments,
and answer not to one of them. Wherefore I refer to the judgment of the
indifferent reader, whither you ought not to be taken for convinced in these
ii. points, until such time as you have made a full answer to my profes and
arguments.



An other reason have they of like strength. Chap. 9. The second argument for
tra^substantiation.
If the bread should remain (say they) than should follow many absurdities,
and chiefly, that Christ has taken the nature of bread, as he took the nature
of man, and so joined it to his substance. And than as we have God verily
incarnate for our redemption, so should we have him Impanate.

Thou may consider good reader, that the rest of their reasons be very weak
and feeble, The answer.
when these be the chief and strongest. Truth it is in deed, that Christ
should have been impanate, if he had joined the bread unto his substance in
unity of person, that is to say, if he had joined the bread unto him in such
sort, that he had made the bread one person with himself. But for as much as
he is joined to the bread but sacramentally, there follows no Impanation
thereof, no more than the holy Ghost is Inaquate, that is to say, made water,
being sacramentally joined to the water in baptism. Math. 3. Mark. 1. Luc. 3.
Nor he was not made a dove, when he took upon him the form of a dove, to
signify that he, whom S. Ihon did baptize, was very Christ.

But rather of the error of the Papists them selves (as one error draws an
other after it) should follow the great absurdite which they speak upon, that
is to say, that Christ should be Impanate and Inuinate. For if Christ do use
the bread in such wise, that he does not adnihilate and make nothing of it (as
the Papists say) but makes of it his own body, than is the bread joined to
his body in a greater unity, than is his humanity to his Godhead. For his
Godhead is adjoined unto his humanity in unity of person, and not of nature.
But our Savior Christ by their saying adioyneth bread unto his body in untie
both of nature and person. So that the bread and the body of Christ be but one
thing, both in nature and person. And so is there a more entier union between
Christ and bread, than between his Godhead and manhod, or between his soul and
his body. And thus these arguments of the Papists, return (like riuited
nails) upon their own heads.

Winchester.
The solution to the second reason is almost as fondly handled, alluding from
Impanation to Inaquation, although it was never said in scripture, This water
is the holy ghost, but in baptism to be water and the holy Ghost also. And of
the dove is not conversion (as in the better) without adnihilation, which is a
changing by miracle. And when this Author knows this, or should have known
it, or has forgotten it, he writes like one that were ignorant, and had read
nothing in the matter, as it were to make himself popular, to join himself
in ignorance with the rude unlearned people.

Caunterbury.
AS for my solution to the second reason it is able to stand against your
confutation thereof, and to overthrow it quite. For no more is Christ in the
bread and wine, in the Lords supper, then the holy Ghost is in the water of
baptism. And therefore if the holy Ghost be not inaquate, no more is Christ
impanate. And when the scripture says, Upon whom Ihon. 1.
I saw the holy Ghost come down like a dove: did he see any thing but the
dove? And yet that which he saw, the scripture there, as well by the voice of
God, as by the words of S. Ihon, calls the holy Ghost. Wherefore the
scripture calls the dove the holy Ghost. For the speech was as much to say,
as this which I see come down, is the holy Ghost. and yet was that ye dove,
which he saw. And that the dove which he saw was the holy ghost, was as true a
speech, as we, looking upon the bread which we see, do say, This is the body of
Christ. And yet as that speech means not that the holy Ghost is made a dove,
so this speech means not that the body of Christ is impanate, No more then
these words of Christ spoken unto his mother Mary, Ihon. 19.
and to S. Ihon, lo thy son. And lo thy mother, mean not that Ihon was
made Christ, nor that Mary his mother, was made Ihons natural mother.

But of your saying it follows, that the bread is humanate or incarnate.
Ihon. 1.
This is my body, mean as you say, that bread is made Christ's flesh, then as
Verbum caro factum est, The word was made flesh, concludes, that Christ was
incarnate: So Panis caro factus est. The bread is made flesh, concludes that
the bread is incarnate, seeing (as you say) it is not adnihilate.

But of adnihilation you write so strangely, Adnihilation.
that it seems you have written what you dreamed in your sleep, rather then
what you learned of any author catholic or infidele. For who ever heard that
adnihilation could be wrought but by the only power of God? For the gentill
philosophers write according to the nature, that Sicut exnihilo nihil sit, Ita
nihil in nihilum redigitur. Asnothing can be made of naught, so nothing can be
turned into naught: So that as it is the work of God only, to make of
naught, so it can be but only his work also, to turn things into naught.
And what man being never so rude or popular, having any discretion at all,
would define adnihilation (as you do) that a defection of a creature from God,
should be adnihilatio^ and tourning into nothing? For so should all the angels
that fell from God be adnihilate, and so should likewise all apostatase, and
all other that by sin relinquishe the army of God, and follow his adversary
the devil, Math. 26.
and all Papists, that abandoning Christ (as Judas did) run to Antechrist,
to whom it were better to be adnihilate, or never to be borne, then eternally
to remain in gods indignation. Now follows the last reason.

Chap. 10.
Yet a third reason they have, which they gather out of the sixth of Ihon, where
Christ says: The third reason. John. 6.
I am lively bread, which came from heaven: If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world.

Then reason they after this fashion. If the bread which Christ gave, be his
flesh, than it can not also be material bread, and so it must needs follow,
that the material bread is gone, and that none other substance remains, but
the flesh of Christ only.

To this is soon made answer, The answer.
that Christ in that place of Ihon, spoke not of the material and sacramental
bread, nor of the sacramental eating (for that was spoken two or three years
before the sacrament was first ordained) but he spoke of spiritual bread (many
times repeating, John. 6.
I am the bread of life, which came from heaven) and of spiritual eating by
faith, after which sort, he was at the same present time eaten of as many as
believed on him, although the sacrament was not at that time made and
instituted. And therefore he said: Your fathers did eat Manna in the desert,
and dyed, but he that eats this bread shall live for ever. John. 6.
Therefore this place of S. Ihon can in no wise be understand of the
sacramental bread, which neither came from heaven, neither gives life to all
that eat. Nor of such bread Christ could have then presently said, This is my
flesh, except they will say, that Christ did than consecrate so many years
before the institution of his holy Supper.

Winchester.


Caunterbury.


And as for Cirill is clearly against you, Cyrill. Ihon. 6.
who declares that when Christ said, I will give my flesh for the life of the
world, he fulfilled not that promise in his supper, but in the cross. For if
Christ had given to us life in his supper, what should he have needed after to
dye for the same purpose? The words of Cirill be these upon the words of
Christ Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est quam ego dabo pro mundi vita. Morior
(inquit) pro omnibus, vt permeip sum omnes viuificem, and caro mea omnium
redemptio fiat, morietur euim mors morte mea. Which words mean thus much in
English. I will dye for all, that by my death I may give life to all, and that
my flesh may be the redemption of all, for death shall dye by my death. Thus
expounds Cirill the words of Christ, that when he said: I will give, he did
not fulfill that promise in his spuper, but in the cross, giving us life by
his death not by eating and drinking of him in his supper, as you most
ignorantly say. And yet all men may judge, how much I bear with you, when I
call it but ignorance. Now follows mine answer to the authors wrested by the
papists.

Cap 11. Authors wrested by the Papists for their transubstantiation.
Now that I have made a full direct and plain answer to the vain reasons and
cauilations of the Papists, order requires to make likewise answer unto their
sophistical allegations and wresting of authors unto their fantastical
purposes. There be chiefly three places, which at the first show, seem much
to make for their intent, but when they shallbe thoroughly wayed, they make
nothing for them at all.

Cyprianns de coena nomini.
The first is a place of Ciprian, in his sermon of the Lords supper, where he
says, as is alleged in the Detection of the devils Sophistry.

This bread which our Lord gave to his disciples, changed in Nature but not in
outward form, is by the omnipotency of gods word, made flesh.

Here the Papists stick tooth and nail to these words, Changed in nature,
Ergo say they, The aunswerr.
the nature of the bread is changed. Here is one chief point of the devils
sophistry used, who in the allegation of Scripture uses ever either to add
thereto, or to take away from it, or to alter the sense thereof. And so have they
in this author left out those words, which would open plainly all the whole
matter. For next the words, which be here before of them recited, do follow
these words. As in the person of Christ the humanity was seen, and the
divinity was hid, even so did the divinity ineffably put it self into the
visible sacrament. Which words of Ciprian do manifestly show, that the
sacrament does still remain with the divinity: and that sacramentally the
divinity is poured into the bread and wine, the same bread and wine still
remaining: like as the same divinity by unity of person was in the humanity of
Christ, the same humanity still remaining with the divinity.

And yet the bread is changed, not in shape nor substance, but in nature, (as
Ciprian truly says) not meaning that the natural substance of bread is clean
gone, but that by Gods word, there is added thereto an other higher property,
nature and condition, far passing the nature and condition of common bread,
that is to say, that the bread does show unto us, (as the same Ciprian says)
that we be partaker of the spirit of God, and most purely joined unto Christ,
and spiritually fead with his flesh and blood, so that now the said mystical
bread is both a corporal food for the body, and a spiritual food for the
soul.

And likewise is the nature of the water changed in baptism, for as much as
beside his common nature (which is to wash and make clean the body) it
declares unto us that our souls be also washed and made clean by the holy
ghost: And thus is answered the chief authority of the doctors, which the
Papists take for the principal defense of their error. But for further
declaration of S. Ciprians mind herein, read the place of him before recited,
fol. 320.

Winchester.
Cyprianus.
First in Ciprian who speaks plainly in the matter, this author finds a
fault, that he is not wholly alleged whereupon this author brought in the
sentence following

The first words of Ciprian be these, This bread which our Lord gave to his
disciples changed in nature, but not in outward form, is by the omnipotencye
of gods word made flesh. These be Ciprians words, and then follow these, As in
the person of Christ the humanity was seen and the divinity hidden, even so
the divinity ineffably (Infudit) by (Latin English) not liking the English word
shed, because in our English tongue it resembles spilling and euacuation of
the whole, and much less I can agree to use the word pouring, although
(Iufundo) in Latin, may in the (Infundit) in Latin, by which word the motion
of the divine nature is spoken of in scriptures, not because it is a liquidde
substance to be poured, as the author of this book englisheth it signifying a
successiue operation; but rather as a word if we should scan it as this author
would, signifying the continuance of the term from whence, to the term
whereunto, without leaving the one, by motion to the other: for there is in the
godly nature no local motion, and therefore we say, Christ not leaving his
father, descended from heaven, and being in earth was also in heaven, which
infution in some part resembles, but man's words can not express of talk to
wind out of that matter that can not be answered, and as evil debtors shake
of their creditours with a bye communication, so this author conueyeth himself
away at a back door by water, not doing first as he promised to answer, so as
he would avoid Ciprian directly by land.

Caunterbury.
WHere in my former book I found a fault in the allegation of Ciprian it was
in deed no little fault, to allege those words that speak

And the words following do not once touch the real and corporal presence of
Christ's flesh in the bread, so far it is from the overthrowing of the true
catholic faith by me taught. But Ciprian in that place quite and clean
overthrows, as well your real presence, as your imagined transubstantiation,
as hereafter by Gods grace shall be declared. But first it seems to me a
strange thing, that such a learned man as you take your Infundo, where as every
Gramarian can tell the signification of Fundo, Effundo, and Infundo. But it
seems you have so deinty a stomach,that you can brook no meat, but of your
own dressing, though it be never so well dressed of other, yea you had rather
eat it raw, then to take it of an other man's dressing. And so much misliketh
you all things that other men do, that you be ready to vomit at it.

Infudir. Smyth uses the word pouring.
No English can please you to this word (Infundo) but Latin English (as you
call it) and that is such English as no English man can understand, nor Latin
man neither, but only in that sense that I have englished it. And I pray thee
gentill reader, consider the great weighty cause, why no English can please in
this place, and thou shall find it nothing else but ignorance, Pouring.
either of the speech or of God. Pouring (says he) makes a successiue
working, So does infusion say I, and therefore in

And yet if you had well considered the matter, you should not have for the
great abundance of it, we use in common speech to say, it pours down, So
that this word (pouring) is a very apt word to express the multitude of Gods
mercies and the plentifulnes of his grace poured into them, whom he loved,
declared and exhibited by his words and sacraments. And howsoever you be
disposed by jesting and scoffing to mock out all things (as your disposition
has been ever given to reprehend things that were well) yet the indifferent
reader may judge by this one place, among many other, that you seek rather an
occasion to brable without cause, and with idle words to draw your book out
at length, then to seek or teach any truth.

And if I should play and scoff in such a matter (as you do) I might dally
with the word of Infusion, Infusion.
as you do with ye word pouring. For as you reject my word of pouring, because
some fond reader might fantasy yt bread in the sacrament to be like a soppe,
wherein licour were powered, by like reason may I reject your English Latin of
(infuding) because such a reader might fantasy thereby, the bread to be like
water, wherein the divinity is stieped or infuded. As infused rubarbe is called,
when it is stieped certain hours in stilled water or wine without seething,
and so be roses and violets likewise infused, when they be stieped in warm
water to make inlep thereof. But as poticaries, physicians, surgions and
Alcumists use words of Greek, Arabike and other strange langwages, purposely
thereby to hide their sciences from the knowledge of others (so far as they
can) so do you in many parts of your book devise many strange terms, and
strange phrases of speech, to obscure and darken thereby the matter of the
sacrament, and to make the same meet for the capacities of very few, which
Christ ordained to be understood and exercised of all men.



And to set out Ciprians mind in few words, Ciprians meaning.
he speaks of the eating and not of the keeping of the bread, which when it
is used in the Lords holy supper, it is not only a corporal meat to norish
the body, but an heavenly meat to nourish the souls of the worthy receauors,
the divine majesty inuisibly being present, and by a spiritual transition and
change, uniting us unto Christ, feeding us spiritually with his flesh and blood
unto eternal life, as the bread being converted into the nature of our bodies
fedeth the same in this mortal life.

And that this is the mind of S. Ciprian, is evident as well by the words that
go before, as by the words following, the sentence by you alleged. For a
little before Ciprian writes thus. There is given to us the food of immortal
life differing from common meats, which reteineth the form of corporal
substance, and yet proves Gods power to be present by invisible effect. And
again after he says, This common bread after it is changed into flesh and
blood, procures life and increase to our bodies. And therefore the weakness of
our faith, being holped by the customable effect of things is taught by a
sensible argument, that in the invisible sacraments is the effect of
everlasting life, and that we be made one by a Transition or change, not so
much corporal as spiritual. For he is made both bread, flesh and blood,
meat, substance, and life, to his church (which he calls his body) making it
to be partaker of him. Note well these words (good reader) and thou shall well
perceive, that Ciprian speaks not of the bread kept and reserved, but as it
is a spiritual nourishment received in the Lords supper, and as it is
frutefully broken and eaten in the remembrance of Christ's death, and to them
that so eat it, Ciprian calls it the food of immortal life. And therefore
when he says that in the invisible sacrament is the effect of everlasting
life, he understands of them that worthily receive the sacrament: for to the
bread and wine pertayneth not eternal life. Nevertheless the visible sacrament
teaches us, that by a spiritual change we be united to Christ's flesh and
blood, (who is the meat and sustenance of his church) and that we be made
partakers of the life everlasting by the power of God, who by his effectual
working is present with us, and works with his Sacraments.

And here is again to be noted, that Ciprian in this place speaks of no real
presence of Christ's humanity, but of an effectual presence of his divine
majesty, and yet the bread (says he) is a food and nourishment of the body.
And thus Ciprian proves nothing against my sayings, neither of the real
presence of Christ's flesh and blood, nor of Transubstantiation of bread and
wine.

Spiritual.
And where you be offended with this word (spiritual) it is not my devise

Chap. 22.
An other authority they have of S. Ihon Chrysostom, which they boast also to
be invincible. Chrisostomus.
Chrysostom (say they) writes thus in a certain homily De Eucharistia. Do
thou see bread? Do thou see wine? Do they avoid beneth, as other meats do?
God forbid, think not so. For as wax (if it be put into the fire) it is made
like the fire no substance remains, nothing is left here: so also think
thou that the mysteries be consumed by the substance of the body.

At these words of Chrysostom the Papists do triumph, as though they had won
the field. Lo (say they) does not Chrisostomus the great clerk say most
plainly, that we see neither bread nor wine? but that (as wax in the fire)
they be consumed to nothing, The answer.
so that no substance remains? But if they had rehearsed no more, but the very
next sentence that follows in Chrysostom (which craftily and maliciously
they leave out) the meaning of S. Ihon Chrysostom would easily have appeared,
and yet will make them blush, if they be not utterly past shame. For after the
foresaid words of Chrysostom, immediately follow these words.

Wherefore (says he) when ye come to these mysteries, do not think, that you
receive by a man, the body of God, but that with tongues, you receive fire by
the angels Seraphin. And straight after it follows thus.

Think that the blood of Salvation flows out of the pure and godly side of
Christ, and so coming to it, receive it with pure lips. Wherefore brethren,
I pray you and beseech you, let us not be from the church, nor let us not be
occupied there with vain communication, but let us stand fearful and
trembling, casting down our eyes, lifting up our minds, mourning privily
without speech, and rejoicing in our hearts.

These words of Chrisostom do follow immediately, after the other words, which
the Papists before rehearsed. Therefore if the Papists will gather of the
words by them recited, that there is neither bread nor wine in the sacrament,
I may as well gather of the words that follow, that there is neither priest nor
Christ's body.

For as in the former sentence, Chrysostom says, that we may not think what
we see bread wine: so in the second sentence he says, that we may not think
that we receive the body of Christ of the priests hands. Wherefore if upon the
second sentence (as the Papists them selves will say) it cannot be truly
gathered, that in the holy communion there is not the body of Christ ministered
by the priest: then must they confess also, that it cannot be well and truly
gathered upon the first sentence, that there is no bread nor wine.

But there be all these things together in the holy communion, Christ himself
spiritually eaten and drunken, and nourishing the right beleuers: the bread and
wine as a sacrament declaring the same: and the priest as a minister thereof.
Wherefore S. Ihon Chrysostom meant not absolutely, to deny that there is bread
and wine or to deny utterly the priest and the body of Christ to be there, but
he uses a speech which is no pure Negative, but a Negative by comparison.
Negatiues by comparison.


Which fashion of speech is commonly used, not only in the Scripture, and
among all good authors, but also in all manner of languages. For when two
things be compared together, in the extolling of the more excellent, or
abasing of the more vile, is many times used a Negative by comparison, which
nevertheless is no pure Negative, but only in the respect of the more
excellent, or the more base.

As by example. When the people rejecting the prophet Samuel, 1. Reg. ^.
desired to have a king, almighty God said to Samuel: They have not rejected
thee, but me. Not meaning by this negative absolutely, that they had not
rejected Samuel (in whose place they desired to have a king) but by that one
negative by comparison he understood two affirmatiues, that is to say, that
they had rejected Samuel, and not him alone, but also that they had chiefly
rejected God.

And when the Prophet David said in the person of Christ: I am a worm and not
a man: by this negative he denied not utterly, that Christ was a man, but the
more vehemently to express the great humiliation of Christ, he said that he
was not abased only to the nature of man, but was brought so low, that he
might rather be called a worm, then a man.

This manner of speech was familiar and usual to S. Paul, as when he said: It
is not I that do it, but it is the sin that dwells in me. And in an other
place he says: 1. Cor. 1.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel. And again he says:
1. Cor. 1.
My speech and preaching was not in words of man's persuasion, but in manifest
declaration of the spirit and power. And he says also: 1. Cor. 3.
Neither he that grafteth, nor he that waters, is any thing, but God that
gives the increase. And he says moreover: It is not I that live, but Christ
lives within me. Gala. 2. Gala. 6.
And, God forbid, that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And further, We do not wrestle against flesh and blood, Ephe.
6.
but against the spirits of darkness.

In all these sentences, and many other like, although they be negatiues,
nevertheless S. Paul meant not, clearly to deny that he did that evil whereof he
spoke, 1. Cor. 1.
or utterly to say, that he was not sent to baptize (who in deed did baptize
at certain times, and was sent to do all things that pertayned to salvation)
or that in his office of setting forth of Gods word he used no witty
persuasions (which in deed he used most discretely) or that the grafter and
waterer be nothing, (which be Gods creatures, made to his similitude, and
without whose work there should be no increase) or to say, that he was not
alive (who both lived, Romans 15.
and ran from country to country, to set forth Gods glory) or clearly to
affirm, that he gloried and reioysed in no other thing, than in Christ's
cross (who rejoiced with all men that were in joy, and sorowed with all that
were in sorrow) or to deny utterly, 1. Cor. 11.
that we wrestle against flesh and blood: (which cease not daily to wrestle and
war against our enemies, the world, the flesh, and the diuill.) In all these
sentences S. Paul (as I said) meant not clearly to deny these things, which
undoubtedly were all true, but he meant that in comparison of other greater
things, these smaller were not much to be esteemed, but that the greater
things were the chief things to be considered. As that sin committed by his
infirmity, was rather to be imputed to original sin or corruption of
nature, which lay lurking within him, than to his own will and consent. And
that although he was sent to bapise yet he was chiefly sent to preach Gods word.

And that although he used wise and discret persuasions therein, yet the
success thereof came principally of the power of God, and of the working of the
holy spirit. And that although the grafter and waterer of the gardeyn be some
things, and do not a little in their offices, yet it is God chiefly that
gives the increase. And that although he lived in this world, yet his chief
life, concerning God, was by Christ, whom he had living within him. And that
although he gloried in many other things, ye in his own infirmities, yet his
greatest joy was in the redemption by the cross of Christ. And that although
our spirit daily fights against our flesh, yet our chief and principal
fight is against our ghostly enemies, 2. Cor. 11. and. 12. Gal. 5.
the subtle and puisant wicked spirits and devils.

1. Pet. 3.
The same manner of speech used also S. Peter in his first epistle, saying, That
the apparaile of women should not be outwardly with brayded here, and setting
on of gold, nor in putting on of gorgious apparayle, but that the inward man of
the heart should be without corruption.

In which manner of speech he intended not utterly to forbid all broyding of
here, all gold and costly apparel to all women, (for every one must be
apparayled according to their condition, state and degree) but he meant hereby
clearly to condemn all pride and excess in apparayle, and to move all women
that they should study to deck their souls inwardly with all virtues, and not
to be curious, outwardly to deck and adourne their bodies with sumptuous
apparayle. And our savior Christ himself was full of such manner of speeches.
Gather not unto you (says he) treasure upon earth, Math. 6.
willing thereby," rather to set our minds upon heavenly treasure, which ever
indureth, than upon earthly treasure, which by many sundry occasions perishes
and is taken away from us. And yet worldly treasure must needs be had and
possessed of some men, as the person, time, and occasion does serve.

Likewise he said: When you be brought before kings and princes, think not
what and how you shall answer. Math. 10.
Not willing us by this negative, that we should negligently and unadvisedly
answer we care not what, but that we should depend of our heavenly father,
trusting that by his holy spirit, he will sufficiently instruct us of answer,
rather then to trust of any answer to be devised by our own wit and study.

And in the same manner he spoke, when he said: It is not you that speak but it
is the spirit of God that speaks within you. Math. 10.
For the spirit of God is he that principally puts godly words into our
mouths, and yet nevertheless we do speak according to his moving.

And to be short, in all these sentences following, Math. 23.
that is to say: Math. 23.
Call no man your father upon earth: Math. 10.
Let no man call you lord or master: Math. 10.
Fear not them that kill the body. Math. 10.
I came not to send peace upon earth. John. 4.
It is not in me to set you at my right hand or left hand. John. 5.
You shall not worship the father neither in this mountnor in Jerusalem. John.
7.
I take no witness at no man. John. 8.
My doctrine is not mine. I seek not my glory.

In all these negatiues, our savior Christ spoke not precisely and utterly to
deny all the foresaid things, but in comparison of them to prefer other
things, as to prefer our father and Lord in heaven, above any worldly father,
lord or master in earth, and his fear above the fear of any creature, and his
word and gospel above all worldly peace. Also to prefer spiritual and inward
honoring of God in pure heart and mind, above local, corporal and outward
honor, and that Christ preferred his fathers glory above his own.

Now for as much as I have declared at length, the nature and kind of these
negative speeches (which be no pure negatiues but by comparison) it is easy
hereby to make answer to S. John Chrisostom, who used this phrase of speech
most of any author. For his meaning in his foresaid Homily, was not that in the
celebration of the Lords supper is neither bread nor wine, neither priest nor
the body of Christ, (which the Papists themselves must needs confess) but
his intent was to draw our minds upward to heaven, that we should not consider
so much the bread, wine, and priest, as we should consider his divinity and
holy spirit given unto us to our eternal salvation.

And therefore in the same place he uses so many times these words Think and
think not, willing us by these words, that we should not fix our thoughts
and minds upon the bread, wine, priest, nor Christ's body: but to lift up our
hearts higher unto his spirit and divinity, without the which his body
avails nothing, as he says himself: It is the spirit that gives life, the
flesh avails nothing. John. 5.


And as the same Chrysostom in many places moves us, not to consider the
water in baptism, but rather to have respect to the holy ghost, received in
baptism, and represented by the water: even so does he in this homily of the
holy communion, move us to lift up our minds from all visible and corporal
things to things invisible and spiritual.

In so much that although Christ was but once crucified, yet would Chrisost.
have us to think, that we see him daily whipped and scourged before our eyes,
and his body hanging upon the Cross, and the spear thrust into his side,
Gala. 3.
and the most holy blood to flow out of his side into our mouths. After which
manner S. Paul wrote to the Galathians, that Christ was painted and crucified
before their eyes.

Chrysostomus.
Therefore faith Chrysostom in the same homily a little before the place
rehearsed: What do thou O man? did not thou promise to the prist which
said: Lift up your minds and hearts, and thou did answer: We lift them up
unto the Lord? Art not thou ashamed and afraid being at that same hour found a
liar? A wonderful thing. The table is set forth, furnished with Gods
mysteries, the Lamb of God is offered for thee, the priest is careful for
thee, spiritual fire comes out of that heavenly table, the angels Seraphin be
there present, covering their faces with vi. wings. All the angelical power
with the priest be means and intercestors for thee, a spiritual fire comes
down from heaven, blood in the cup is druncke out of the most pure side unto
thy purification. And art not thou ashamed, afraid and abashed, not endeavoring
thy self to purchase Gods mercy? O man, does not thine own conscience
condemn thee? There be in the week 168. hours, and God asks but one of
them to be given wholly unto him and thou consumest that in worldly business, in
trifling and talking, with what boldness then shall thou come to these holy
mysteries? O corrupt conscience.

Hitherto I have rehearsed S. John Chrisostomes words, which do show how our
minds should be occupied at this holy table of our Lord, that is to say,
withdrawn from the consideration of sensible things, unto the contemplation
of most heavenly and godly things. And thus is answered this place of
Chrisostom, which the Papists took for an insoluble, and a place that no man
was able to answer. But for further declaration of Chrisostoms mind in this
matter read the place of him before rehearsed, fol. 327. and 343,

Winchester.
Chrisostomus.
Answering to Chrysostom this author complayneth as he did in Ciprian, of
malicious of that mystery, which be words of godly and good meditation
convenient for so high a matter to adorn it accordingly, which because they be
wholesome, and meet allegories, wherewith to draw and lift up our minds to
celestial thoughts, we may not thereby esteem the substance of that mystery
to be but in allegory. Here in steed of a solution the author fills three
whole leaves with proof of that is not necessary, how a denial by comparison
is not utterly a denial, which is in deed true. And as one was answered at
Cambridge when he pressed the responsall, What say ye to mine argument, which
was not in deed of his making. The responsall left his Latin, and told the
opponent before all his country friends in plain English: It is a good
argument sir (quoth he,) but nothing to the purpose. And so is the entreating
of this matter of denial by comparison good, but nothing to the purpose here,
and it is an observation that requires good judgment, or else may thereby be
induced many absurdities. Chrisostom as I said before speaking to the Christen
man, seems to ask whither he uses his faith or no. For if he sees bread,
he sees not with faith, which sees the body of Christ there present, and so
no bread. If the christen man think of passage through him of the celestial
food, he has therein no spiritual thought such as faith engenders, and
therefore says Chrysostom ( absit.) here in these words of Chrisostom is no
denial with comparison, and therefore this author might have spared his
treatise in these three leaves. For in those words, when Chrysostom says,
Think not thou receauest the body of Christ by a man. There this author
neglects his own rule, as in his third book he makes a solemn argument
that by those S. Chrisostoms words we receive not the body of Christ at all,
seeing Chrysostom says, we may not think we receive it by man. So little
substantially is this matter handled, as a man might say here were many
accidental words without a substance or miracle, how strange soever the same
seem to this author otherwise.

Caunterbury.


clean, both of transubstantiation, and of the real presence.

But to make the mind of Chrysostom somewhat more plain, he teaches them
that come to that holy mystery, with what things their minds should be chiefly
occupied, not about earthly and visible things but about things celestial
and invisible, and not to consider so much what we see with our eyes, as what
we believe in our hearts, not so much what we receive bodily, as what we
receive spiritually. And he teaches not only what we should think we
receive, but also of whom we should think to receive it, saying, When you
come to the mysteries, do not think that you receive by a man the body of God,
but that you receive fire by the Angel Seraphin. The thing that we receive
(says he) is not the body of God, and the person of whom we receive is not a
man, like as before immediately he said, that the thing which we see is not
bread. Now if it be not bread in deed that is seen, then it is not the body of
Christ indeed that is received, nor he is not a priest indeed, of whom we
receive it: And on the other side, if it be the very body of Christ that is
received, and a very man of whom it is received, then it is very bread in deed
that is seen. And where becomes then your Transubstantiation?

But to declare brieflye and playnelye the very truth according to the mind
of Chrysostom, as we see with our eyes, and eat with our mouths very bread,
and see also and drink very wine, so we lift up our hearts unto heaven, and
with our faith we see Christ crucified with our spiritual eyes, and eat his
flesh, thrust through with a spear, and drink his blood springing out of his
side with our spiritual mouths of our faith. And as Emissene said, when we go
to the reverend altar to feed upon spiritual meat, with our faith we look
upon him that is both God and man, we honor him, we touch him with our minds,
we take him with the hands of our hearts, and drink him with the draught of
our inward man. So that although we see, and eat sensibly very bread and drink
very wine, and spiritually eat and drink Christ's very flesh and blood, yet
may we not rest there, but lift up our minds to his deity, without the which
his flesh avails nothing, as he says himself. Further answer needs not
to any thing that you have here spoken. For every learned reader may see at the
first show that all that you have spoken is nothing else but very triflyng in
words.

Now follows S. Ambrose.

Chap. 13. Ambros. de ijs qui misterijs initiantur.
Yet there is an other place of S. Ambrose, which the Papists think makes much
for their purpose, but after due examination, it shall plainly appear how
much they be deceived. They allege these words of S. Ambrose in a book
entitled De ijs qui initiantur misterijs, Let us prove that there is not that
thing which nature formed: but which benediction did consecrate, and that
benedictio^ is of more strength then nature. For by the blessing, nature it
self is also changed. Exodus 7.
Moses held a rod, he cast it from him, and it was made a serpent. Again he
took the serpent by the tail, and it was turned again into the nature of a
rod. Wherefore thou see, that by the grace of the prophet, the nature of
the serpent and rod was twice thaunged. Exodus 7.
The floods of Egypt ran pure water, and suddenly blood began to brust out of
the veins of the springes, so that men could not drink of the flood: but at
the prayer of the Prophet, the blood of the flood went away, and the nature of
water came again. The people of the Hebrews were compassed about, Exo. 14.
on the one side with the Egyptians, and on the other side with the sea. Moses
lifted up his rod, the water divided it self, and stood up like a wall, and
between the waters was left a way for them to pass on foot. And Jordan against
nature turned back to the head of his spring. Does it not appear now, that
the nature of the Sea floods, or of the course of fresh water was changed? The
people was dry, Moses touched a stone, and water came out of the stone. Did
not grace her work above nature, to make the stone to bring forth the water,
Exo. 17.
which it had not of nature? Marath was a most bitter flood, so that the people
being dry, could not drink thereof. Moses put wood into the water, Exo. 15.
and the nature of the water lost his bitterness, which grace infused, did
suddenly moderate. In the time of Heliseus the prophet, 4. Reg. 6.
an axe head fell from one of the Prophets servants into the water, he that
lost the iron, desired the prophet Heliseus help, who put the helue into the
water, and the iron swam above. Which thing we know was done above nature, for
iron is heuier then the liquor of water. Thus we perceive that grace is of more
force then nature, and yet hitherto we have rehearsed but the grace of the
blessing of the prophets. Now if the blessing of a man be of such value, that
it may change nature, what do we say of the consecration of God? wherein is
the operation of the words of our savior Christ? For this Sacrament which
thou receiuest is done by the word of Christ. Then if the word of Helias was of
such power, that it could bring fire down from heaven, shall not the word of
Christ be of that power, to change the kinds of the elements? Psalm. 148^
Of the making of the whole world, thou have red that God spoke, and the
things were done, he commanded and they were created: The word then of
Christ, that could of no things, make things that were not, can it not change
those things that be, into that thing, which before they were not? For it is
no les matter to give to things new nature, then to alter natures.

Thus far have I rehearsed the wo^^es of S. Ambrose, if the said book be his
(which they that be of greatest learning and judgment do not think) by which
words the Papists would prove, that in the supper of the Lord after the words
of Consecration (as they be commonly called) there remains neither bread nor
wine, because that S. Ambrose says in this place, that the nature of the bread
and wine is changed.

But to satisfy their minds, let us grant for their pleasure, The answer.
that the foresaid book was S. Ambrose own work, yet the same book makes
nothing for their purpose, but quite against them. For he says not, that the
substance of bread and wine is gone, but he says, that their nature is
changed, that is to say, that in the holy communion we ought not to receive
the bread and wine, as other common meats and drinks, but as things clean
changed into a higher estate, nature and condition, to be taken as holy meats
and drinks, whereby we receive spiritual feeding, and supernatural
nourishment from heaven, of the very true body and blood of our savior Christ,
through the omnipotent power of God, and the wonderful working of the holy
ghost. Which so well agrees with the substance of bread and wine still
remaining, that if they were gone away, and not there, this our spiritual
feeding could be taught unto us by them.

And therefore in the most part of the examples, which S. Ambrose alleges
for the wonderful alteration of natures, the substances did still remain,
after the nature and properties were changed. As when the water of Iordane
(contrary to his nature) stood still like a wale, or flowed against the stream
toward the head and spring, yet the substance of the water remained the same
that it was before. Likewise the stone, that above his nature and kind flowed
water, was the self same stone that it was before. And the flood of Marath,
that changed his nature of bitterness, changed for all that no part of his
substance. No more did that iron, which contrary to his nature, swam upon the
water, lose thereby any part of the substance thereof. Therefore as in these
alterations of natures, the substances nevertheless remained the same, that they
were before the alterations, even so does the substance of bread and wine
remain in the Lords supper, and be naturally received and disgested into the
body, notwithstanding the sacramental mutation of the same, into the body and
blood of Christ. Which sacramental mutation declares the supernatural,
spiritual and explicable eating and drinking, feeding and disgesting of the
body and blood of Christ, in all them, that godly and according to their duty
do receive the sacramental bread and wine.

And that S. Ambrose thus meant, that the substance of bread and wine remain
still after the consecration, it is most clear by three other examples of the
same matter, following in the same chapter. One is of them that be regenerated,
in whom after their regeneration does still remayn their former natural
substance. An other is of the incarnation of our savior Christ, in the which
perished no substance, but remained as well the substance of his godhead, as
the substance which he took of the blessed virgin Mary. The third example is
of the water in baptism, where the water still remains water, although the
holy ghost come upon the water, or rather upon him that is baptized therein.

Lib. 4. de sacramentis. cap. 4.
And although the same S. Ambrose in an other book entitled de sacrame^tis,
does say, that the bread is bread before the words of consecration, but when
the consecration is done, of bread is made the body of Christ: Yet in the same
book, and in the same chapter, he tells in what m^^ner and form the same is
done by the words of Christ, not by taking away the substance of the bread,
but adding to the bread the grace of Christ's body, and so calling it the body
of Christ.

And hereof he brings four examples. The first of the regeneration of a man:
the second is of the standing of the water of the red sea: the third is of the
bitter water of Marath: and the fourth is of the iron that swam above the
water. In every of the which examples, the former substance remained still,
not withstanding alteration of the natures. And he concludes the whole matter
in these few words.

If there be so much strength in the words of the Lord Jesus, that things had
their beginning, which never were before, how much more be they able to work,
that those things that were before, should remain, and also be changed into
other things? Which words do show manifestly, that notwithstanding this
wonderful sacramental and spiritual changing of the bread into the body of
Christ, yet the substance of the bread remains the same that it was before.

Thus is a sufficient answer made unto iij. principal authorities, which the
Papists use to allege, to stablish their error of transubstantiation. The
first of Cyprian, the second of S. John Chrysostom, and the third of S.
Ambrose. Other authorities and reasons some of them do bring for the same
purpose, but forasmuch as they be of small moment and weight, and easy to be
answered unto, I will pass the^ over at this time, and not trouble the reader
with them, but leave them to be wayed by his discretion.

Winchester.
Now let us hear what this author will say to S. Ambrose. He reherseth him of
good length, Ambrosius.
but translateth him for aduau^tage. As among other, in one place where S.

But then this author adds to be taken as holy meats and drinks, wherein if
he and to repress the arrogance of reason, presuming to search such knowledge
in Gods secret works, whereof if there might be a reason given, it needed no
faith. And where there is a like, there is no singularity, as this miracle in
the sacrament is notably singular, and therefore none other found like unto it.
The Sacramental mutation, which this author newly so terms, is a mere shift
to avoid among such as be not learned

Caunterbury.
OH what a capital crime is here committed, that I have englished (conficere)
to do, whose proper signification is to accomplish or make an end of a thing,
which being once brought to pass, we use in common spech to say, I have done:
as I have done my house, I have done my book, I have done my work, I have
done my days journey, that is to say, I have perfectly done and finished. And
is not this fully as much in spech, as to say, I have made my days journey, or
I have made my house or my book? But some fault you must find, where none is,
partly to keep in use your old custom of calumniatio^, and partly to satisfy a
new toy that you have in your head, that making is in the substance of the
sacrament, and doing is in the effect. But whether it be translate, making or
doing, S. Ambrose spoke of the wonderful effectual working of God in the use
and ministration of the sacraments, and that as well in baptism, as in the
Lords supper, and not of his working in the substaunces of the elements
reserved. As for the authority of the book, I stand not in it, so that all
your words therein be more then needs, but to length your book, and

And where you confess, that S. Ambrose says not in words, that the yet
bring it in purposely to deceive some simple reader, or your ignorance is more
then I would have thought, that of this word (change) would argue change in
substance, as though there could be no change, but it must be in substance.
But if you had well considered the examples of S. Ambrose by me alleged
(which he brings forth for the proofs and similitudes of the change of
bread and wine in the sacrament) you should have found that in all the said
examples remain the substaunces, Chaunges of things the substances remaining.
notwithstanding the change. As in the water of Iordane staying to runue after
the natural course, in the dry stone that contrary to his nature flowed out
water, in the bitter water of Marath that was turned into sweetness, in the
iron that contrary to nature swame above the water, in the spiritual
generation of man above all natural operation, in the sacrame^tall mutation of
the water of baptism, and in the incarnation of our savior Christ, which all
being brought by S. Ambrose for example of the change in bread and wine, as in
them the substaunces remained, notwithstanding the chaunges, so is it in the
bread and wine, whereof other were brought for examples.



Holy bread.
that neither bread, wine nor water, have any capacity of holiness, but
holiness is only in the receauers, and by the bread, water and wine is
sacramentally signified. And therefore the marvelous alteration to an hyer
estate, nature and condition, is chiefly and principally in the persons, and in
the sacramental signs it is none otherwise but sacramentally and in
signification. And whether this be matter of truth or a thing devised only
for a shift, let the reader judge.

Uisible matter Forms.
the visible matter of the bread outwardly remains, it seems you have not
well marked the words of S. Ambrose, who says that the words of Christ
changes species elementorum. And then if species (as you have said before in
many places) signify the visible matter, then the visible matter remains not
(as you say) but is changed as S. Ambrose says. And so S. Ambrose words, that
species elementorum mutantur, be clean contrary to your words, that the
visible matter remains. I will pass over here how you call accidents of
bread the matter of bread, against all order of speech, because I have touched
that matter sufficiently before.

And yet this is not to be passed over, but to be noted by the way, how plainly
S. Ambrose speaks against the Papists, which say, that the body and blood of
Christ remain sub speciebus panis and vini, under ye forms of bread and wine.
And S. Ambrose says, that species elementorum mut antur, the forms of bread
and wine be changed.

And where you say, that in the examples of mutation brought in by

And where a sacramental mutatio^ is to you a new term, it declares

Calling. Making.
And where you say that calling bread the body of Christ, is making it your own
authors not only to overthrow your building, but to dig up your foundation
clean from the botome, and nothing is left yon, but arrogance of mind, and
bosting of words (as men say that you still phansye with your self, and brag
that you be bishop of Winchester) even as a captain that glories in his
folly, when he has lost his castle with ordinance and all that he had.

And at length you be driven to your church, which you call the consent of
christendom universal, when it is no more but the Papisticall church, that
defends your transubstantiation. Now declares my book the absurdities that
follow the error of Transubstantiation.

And now I will rehearse diverse difficulties, absurdities and inconveniences,
Chap. 14. Absurdities that follow of Transubstantiation.
which must needs follow upon this error of Transubstantiation, whereof not
one does follow of the true and right faith, which is according to Gods word.

First if the Papists be demanded, what thing it is that is broken what is
eaten,

Winchester.
In the second volume of the 43. leaf, the author goes about to note 6.
absurdities in the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which I entend also to
peruse. The first is this.

First if the Papists be demanded. etc.

This is accounted by this author the first absurdity and inconvenience which
is by him rhetorically set forth with lips, and mouth, and chawing, not
substanciall terms Basilius hom. 1. exhameron.
And herin (as Basil says) if we should go about by separation of all the
accidents to discern the substance by it self alone, we should in the
experience fail of our purpose and end in nothing indeed. There is a
natural consideration of the abstract be divided, we say nevertheless the same
to be in substance very bread, and for want of convenient quantity bread
indivisible: and thus I write to show that such an answer to say the
accidents be broken, has no such clear absurdity, as this author would have it
seem. But leaving of the matter of Philosophy to the schools. I will grant
that accidents The book of Common prayer.
According whereunto it is in the book of

Caunterbury.
HEre may the reader perceive how much you sweat and labor, so that it pittieth
me to see what travail you take (babbling many things, no thing to the purpose)
to answer my first absurditye. And yet at the end, you be enforced to affirm
all that I charge you withal, that is to say, that accidents be broken,
eaten, drunken, chawed and swallowed without any

Substa^ces can not be without accidents.
that Basil speaks. For if he that goes about to separate accidents from
their substance, fail of his purpose, and end in nothing indeed, then you
separating the accidents of bread from their substance, and the substance of
Christ's body from the accidents, by your own saying alleged of Basil, you
must fail of your purpose, and in the end bring both the bread and body of
Christ to nothing in deed. For the abstraction of accidents from their proper
substaunces and of substances from their proper accidents (as you truly say
in that point) can not be practiced in experience, but is a corruption or
adnihilatio^ of both.



1. Cor. 10. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke. 22.
The bread which we break (says S. Paul.) And Christ took bread and brake
it, say the three Evangelists. But there is no bread (say you) nor no
substance of bread is broken. And this probable matter have you for your
self, if men will believe your self alone, better then the Apostle and the
Evangelists.



substaunces, is not only against the common course of natural things, but
also against the very nature of accidents (which have none other being, but in
substaunces as they be defyned, accidentis esse, estinesse) and is also against
all philosophy, reason and working of god since the world began. For God
never created nor made (with miracle nor without miracle) substaunces without
accidents, nor accidents without substaunces, as some vaynely phantasy de
materia prima. It is against also the doctrine of the old catholic authors,
for never none wrote that accidents were without substaunces, until the
Bishop of Rome with his Monks and Friars defyned the contrary.

But note well here good reader the end of wit, when it is not stayed by

Note also good reader how well this author agrees with himself, which within
a little compass denies so many things, and affirms the same again. For
first he says, that to separate substaunces from the accidents, is to bring
it to nothing, and yet he seperateth from their accidents as well the
substaunces of bread and wine, as of the body of Christ. Before he said, yt
nothing was broken, but the accide^ts, now he denies it. Before he says, the
body of Christ is not broken, and shortly after he says that which is broken
is no bread, but the body of Christ. And here it appears how falsehood neither
agrees with truth nor with it self.

The book of common prayer.
And where you allege, that in the book of Common prayer it is set

But yet will you say peradventure, that although this make against
Transubstantiation, yet it proves the real presence of Christ's body, seeing
that it is whole in every part of the bread. It is whole in deed in every part
of the bread divided, as it is in the whole bread undivided, which is
sacramentally, not really, corporally, carnally, and naturally, as you feign
and imagine, and would co^strayn other to believe. And faith denies not the

Distin. 40. Si Papa.
which seek nothing else but the aduau^cement of their Pope, whom they say no
man can find fault withal. For though he neither care for his own souls
health, nor of his christen brother, but draw innumerable people captive with
him into hell, yet (say the Papists) no man may reprehe^d him, nor ask the
question why he so does.

School authors.
And where you speak of the soberness and devotion of the school authors
(whom before you noted for boasters) what soberness and devotion was in them
(being all in manner monks and friars) they that be exercised in them do know,
whereof you be none. For the devotion that they had, was to their God that
created them (which was their Pope) by contention, sophistication, and all
subtle means they could devise by their wit or learning, to confirm and
establish whatsoever oracle came out of their Gods mouth. They set up their
Antichrist directly against Christ, and yet under pretense of Christ, made him
his vicar general, giving him power in heaven, earth and in hell. And is not
then the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and of the real and sensual presence
of Christ in the sacrament, to be believed (trow you) seeing that it came out of
such a gods mouth, and was set abroad by so many of his Angels?

And is not this a simple and plain doctrine (I pray you) that visible forms
and substances be transubstantiated, Simple and plain doctrine.
and yet accidents remayn? A plain doctrine (be you assured) which you
confess your self, that the simple and plain people understand not, nor your
self, with the help of all the Papists is not able to defend it, where the
true doctrine of the first catholic christian faith is most plain, clear and
comfortable, without any difficulty, scruple or doubt, that is to say, that our
Savior Christ, although he be sitting in heaven in equality with his father,
is our life, stre^gth^ food, and sustenaunce, who by his death delivered us
from death, and daily nourishes and increases us to eternal life. And in
toke^ hereof he has prepared bread to be eaten and wine to be drunken of us in
his holy supper to put us in remembrance of his said death, and of the
celestial feeding, nourishing, increasing, and of all the benefits, which we
have thereby, which benefits through faith and the holy ghost are exhibited
and given unto all that worthily receive the said holy supper. This the
husbandman at his plough, the weauer at his loume, and the wife at her rock
can remember and give thanks unto God for the same. This is the very doctrine
of the Gospel, with the consent wholly of al ye old ecclesiastial doctors
howsoever the Papists for their pastime put vysers upon the said doctors, and
disguise them in other coats, making a play and mocking of them. Now follows
the second absurdity.

Secondly, these Transubstantiatours do say (contrary to all learning) that the
accidents of bread and wine do hang alone in the air without any substance,
wherein they may be stayed. And what can be said more foolishly?.

Winchester.
The Master of the sentences showing diverse men's sayings in discussion (as
they Fiat lux) in creation of the world, where the light

Caunterbury.
THe doctrine that even now was so simple and plain is now again

Thirdly, that the substance of Christ's body is there really, corporally, and
naturally present, without any accidents of the same. And so the Papists make
accidents to be without substances, and substances to be without accidents.

Winchester.
How Christ's body is in circumstance present, no man can define, but that it
is truly present, and therefore really present, corporally also, and naturally,
Really corporally, naturally.
with relation to the truth of the body present, and not to the manner of
presence which is spiritual,

Caunterbury.
I Suspect not the judgment of the indifferent reader so much, but that he can
perceive how indirectly you answer to this third absurdity, and be loath as it
seems to answer any thing at all.

Smyth.
You dare neither add them, nor draw them away, being vncertayue whether they
be there or no, and being also uncertain whether in the

And it is not my terming without the book and at my pleasure, to

And where you allege the disagreing of me with my self, if you would have
taken the pain to read some of ye schole authors, you should have learned,
that there is no disagrement in my sayings at all. For they say, that the body
of Christ that is in the sacrament has his proper forms and quantities (as I
said in the 47. leaf) But yet those accidents (say they) be in heaven, and not
in the sacrament, as I say in this place, not varying one mite from mine other
saying. But ignorance in you, thinks a difference where none is at all.

Now follows the fourth absurdity.

Fourthly, they say, that the place where the accidents of bread and wine be,
has no substance there to fill that place, and so must they needs grant
vacuum, which nature utterly abhors.

Winchester.
This author goes about to find so many absurdities, that he speaks he
wotteth not what, and where he sees and feels quantity, accompteth the place
void for want of substance, as though in consideration of common natural
things severally as they be in nature, it were the substance that filled the
place and not rather quantity, although in the natural order of things there
is no quantity without substance, and is in this Sacrament only by miracle.
There wanted a substance in consideration of this absurdity, and was such a
vacuum, as nature plainly endures.

Caunterbury.
A Lithe authors that write what vacuum is, account a place that is not filled
with a substance which has quantity in it, to be void and emty. So that my
saying is not grounded upon ignorance; but upon the mind of all that write in
that matter. Where as your saying, that quantity alone fills place, without
substance, has no ground at all, but the Papists bare imagination. And if
quantity in the sacrament be without substance by miracle, it is marvel that
no ancient writer in no place of their books made any mention of such a
miracle. But your self grant enough for my purpose in this place, that it is
an absurdity in nature, and wrought only by miracle that quantity occupies a
place alone without substance. Which absurdity follows not of the true and
right faith, but only of your error of transubstantiation. Now to the fifth
absurdity.

Fifthly, they are not ashamed to say, that substance is made of accidents,
when the bread mouleth or is turned into worms, or when the wine sowreth.

Winchester.
True believing men are not ashamed to confess the truth of their faith,
whatsoever arguments might be brought of experience in nature to the contrary.
For Christ's works we know to be true by a most certain faith, what mouldeth
in bread, or sowreth in wine, we be not so assured, or whereon worms inge^der,
it is not so fully agreed on among men. The learned lawyer Vlpian writes (as I
have before alleged) that wine and vinegar have in manner one substance, so
as when wine sowreth and is vinegar, in manner the same substance remains,
in whom it is thought no absurdity to say by that means that the accidents
only sower. And if we agree with the Philosophers that there is Materia prima,
which in all things is one and alters not, but as a new form comes,
takes a new name, fansying that as one wave in the water thrusts away an
other, so does one form an other. It should seem by this conclusion all
alteration to be in accidents, and the corruption of accidents to be the
generation of new accidents, the same Materia prima, being as it were
substantia, that alters not. And this I write that may be said as it were to
make a title to this authors certainety, which is not so sure as he makes it.
Among men have been maruailous fancies in consideration of natural things,
and it is to me a very great absurdity of that secret, and therefore to our
certain faith. But to come nerer to the purpose, it is wrong borne in hand,
that we affirm worms to be engendered of accidents, but when the worms be
engendered, we grant the worms to be, and will rather say, whereof they be we
cannot tell, then to say that substance is made of accidents, and that
doctrine is not annexed to the faith of transubstantiation, and such as entreat
those chances and accidents do not induce that conclusion, but do reasonably
avoid it. And yet by the way in moulding and sowring it should me seems be
properly said that the accidents mould, and the accidents sower, because we
call mould bread, bread: sower wine, wine, and in wine as I said before,

Caunterbury.
I know not to what purpose you have written all this fond matter, except it
be, that you would the world should know how ignorant you be in materia prima,
which never was no such thing in deed, but by imagination.

But because you bear me in hand, that I bear the papists wrong in hand,
that they affirm worms to be engendered of accidents, I shall Ex speciebus
sacramentalibus (say they) generantur vermes, siputre fiant. Of the
sacramental forms, if they be rotten, be gendred worms. But it is no point
of true meaning men, now to deny that ever they said any such things, as they
have taught in their schools these four or five hundred years, as their own
books do plainly testefy. And be these Papists to be credited, which have
taught untruly so many years, and now when they be pressed with all, go
clean from it, and say they never said so, but he wrong borne in hand.

And because Smith denies here the same that you do, that worms be engendered
of the accidents in the sacrament, let him help you to answer this matter.
And for as much as he says that when the host reserved begins to moule and
to putrify, Smith.
and should engender worms, then an other substance succeeds it, of which
such things are made, let him tell what substance that is which succedeth,
and whereof that substance is made.

But to return to you again, such philosophy as you make here, learned I
never in Aristotle, Plato, nor Pliny, nor I trow none such to be found in any
that ever wrote. But as you delight all in singularity, and have made strange
divinity, so must you inue^t as strange philosophy. For who ever heard the
Terminus a quo is changed, or Terminus ad quem? And whatsoever seems to you
(as commonly it seems to you that seems to no man else) yet it seems to no
man else that ever was learned, that accide^ts be properly changed, but that the
substaunces or subjects be changed from accidence to accidence.

And it is the simplest reason that ever was made, that the accidents Vlpian

Sixthly, that substance is norished without substance, by accidents only, if
it chance any Catte, Mouse, Dog, or other thing, to eat the Sacramental
bread.

These inconveniences and absurdities do follow of the fond papistical
transubstantiation, with a number of other errors, as evil or worsse then
these, whereunto they be never able to answer, as many of them have confessed
themselves.

And it is wonder to see, how in many of the foresaid things, they vary among
themselves. Where as the other doctrine of the scripture and of the old
catholic church, but not of the lately corrupted Romish church is plain and
easy, as well to be understood, as to answer to all the aforesaid
questions, without any absurdity or inconvenience following thereof, so that
every answer shall agree with gods word, with the old church, and also with
all reason and true philosophy.

For as touching the first point, what is broken, what is eaten, what drunke^
and what chawen in this sacrament, it is easy to answer. The bread and wine,
as S. Paul says: The bread which we break.

And as concerning the second and third points, neither is the substance of
bread and wine without their proper accidents, nor their accidents hang alone
in the air without any substance, but according to all learning, the
substance of the bread and wine reserve their own accidents and the accidents
do rest in their own substaunces.

And also as concerning the fourth point, there is no place left void after
consecration (as the Papists dream) but bread and wine fulfill their place as
they did before.

And as touching the fifth point (whereof the worms or mouling is engendered,
and whereof the vinegar comes) the answer is easy to make (according to all
learning and experience) that they come according to the course of nature, of
the substance of the bread and wine, to long kept, and not of the accidents
alone, as the Papists do fondly phantasy.

And likewise the substances of bread and wine, do feed and nourish the body of
them that eat the same, and not only the accidents.

In these answers is no absurdity nor inconvenience, nothing spoken either
contrary to holy scripture, or to natural reason, Philosophy, or experience,
or against any old ancient author, or the primitive or catholic church, but
only against the malignant and Papisticall church of Rome. Where as on the
other side, that cursed synagog of Antichrist, has defyned and determined in
this matter, many things contrary to Christ's words, contrary to the old
catholic church, and the holy martirs and doctors of the same, and contrary to
all natural reason, learning, and philosophy.

And the final end of all this Antichrists doctrine is none other, but by
subtilty and craft, to bring christen people from the true honoring of Christ,
unto the greatest idolatry, that ever was in this world devise: as by Gods
grace shall be plainly set forth hereafter.

Winchester.


Caunterbury.
of Philosophy. Of which this is one, that nutrition is a conuertion of
substance into substance, that is to say, of the meat into the substance of
the thing that is fed. An other is thus Ex eisdem sunt and nutriuntur omnia.
All things be nourished of things like themselves. And so I grant you, that
a man made of sauoures, and a man made of the virtue of gold and precious
stones, may be nourished by the same, because he is made of the same. And yet
it may be, that some certain savor or the virtue of some precious stone, may
increase or continue some humor, whereof a man may be nourished, as we read of
some men or certain people that have lived no small time by the sauonr of
apples.

But still in your book you cry faith, faith, and catholic faith, when
Petitio principij, taking that thing which is chiefly in controversy, to be a
principle to induce your conclusion: Faith, faith say you: where is no faith,
but your bare faining. I have disproued your faith by gods word, by the
universal consent of all Christendom a M. years together, and you cry out
still, faith faith, which is not the faith of Christ, but of Antichrist. Let
christen men now judge, who should yield to other. If you had proved your
doctrine by faith, founded upon Gods word, I would condescend unto you that it
is no absurdity that accidents remain when the substance is gone. But gods
word is clearly against you, not only in your doctrine of transubstantiation,
but also in the doctrine of the real presence, of the eating and drinking, and
of the sacrifices of Christ's flesh and blood.

Winchester.
The best plaster and medicine that could now be devised, were to leave a part
questions both together. For by forbidding of the name of bread, according to
Theodorets teaching we dissemble and hide that it is by this authors teaching,
and by using the name of our Lords body, according to Theodorets teaching, we
feign it to be that it is not by this authors teaching, which says, there is
only a figure, and by this means in so high a mystery we should use untruths
on both sides, in simulation and dissimulation, which is a meruaylous teaching.

I deny not but things signifying may have the name of that they signify by a
figure

Caunterbury.
self, to lay apart all questions and idle talk, when all these questions and
idle talk needed not, if the papists of their idle brains had not devised
their transubstantiation, and thereupon moved this idle talk themselves, which
has been occasion not only of much dissension in all Christian realms, but
of the effusion also of much innocent blood.

But when the Papists, like unto Lucifer, have ascended into heaven,

But to answer the absurdityes laid unto the Papists charge, you recompense
me again with ^^ great huge absurdities. One is that Christ is really but in
heaven only, the other is that bread is still bread. Here thou may judge
(gentle reader) what errors I defend, that am by force driven to such two
absurdities, that I am feign to say as I have written in my book, and as the
Apostles and Evangelists said. But beware I would advise thee, that thou say
not as Gods word teaches, for if thou do, thou may be sure to be taken of
the Papists for an heretic.

Bread and no bread.
Finally you come to your contradictions of bread and no bread, the body and not
the body, simulation and dissimulation, wherein when you have well practiced
your self in all your book through, at the last you make as it were a play in
a dialogue between Chrysostom, Theodoret and me. But Chrysostom, Theodoret
and I shall agree well enough, Theodoretus. Chrisostomus.
for they tell Why the names of ye sacraments be changed.
and be called by the names of the more high and excellent things which they
signify. And both Chrysostom and Theodoret show a cause thereof which is this,
that we should not rest in the sight of the sacraments and figures, but lift
up our minds to the things that be thereby represented. And yet in the
sacraments is neither simulation nor dissimulation, except you will call all
figurative speeches, simulation, and say that Christ simuled, when he said, he
was a vine, a door, a herdman, the light of the world, and such like speeches.
But it pleases you for refreshing of your wit (being now so sore travailed
with impugning of the truth) to devise a pretty merry dialog of Quoth he and
quoth he. And if I were disposed to dally and trifle, I could make a like
dialogue of simulation or dissimulation, of quoth he and quoth you, even
between you and Christ.

But (as I have declared before,) all things which be exalted to an hier
dignity, be called by the names of their dignity (So much the many times their
former names be forgotten,) and yet nevertheless they be the same things that
they were before, although they be not usually so called, As the surnames of
Kings and Emperors, to how many be they known? or how many do call them
thereby? but every man calls them by their royal and imperial dignities.
And in like manner is it of fygures and sacraments, saving that their
exaltation is in a figure, and the dignities royal and imperial be real and
indeed. And yet he should not offend that should call the princes by their
original names, so that he did it not in contempt of their estates. And no more
should he offend that did call a figure by the name of the thing that it is
indeed, so that he did it not in contempt of the thing that is signified. And
therefore Theodoret says not, that the bread in the sacrament may not be
called bread, and that he offends that so calls it, for he calls it bread
himself, but with this addition of dignity, calling it the bread of life,
which it signifies. As the cap of maintenance is not called barely and simply
a cap, but with addition of maintenance. And in like manner we use not in
common speech to call bread, wine and water in the sacraments, simple and
common water, bread and wine: but according to that they represent unto us, we
call them the water of baptism, the water of life, sacramental water,
sacramental and celestial bread and wine, the bread of life, the drink that
quenches our thirst for ever. And the cause Theodoret shows, why they be so
called, that we hearing those names should lift up our minds unto the things
that they be called, and comfort our selves therewithal. And yet neither in
the sacraments, iu the cap of maintenance, nor in the imperial or royal
majesty's is any simulation or dissimulation, but all be plain speeches in
common usage, which every man understands.

Our Savior without doubt changed the names and gave to his body the name of
the sign, and to the sign the name of his body, and yet (says he) they kept
their former substance, fashion, and figure. And the cause wherefore Christ
does vouchsafe to call the sacramental bread by the name of his body, and to
dignify so earthly a thing by so heavenly a name, Theodoret shows to be this,
that the godly receivers of the Sacrament, when they hear the heavenly names,
should lift up their minds from earth unto heaven, and not to have respect
unto the bread outwardly only, but principally to look upon Christ, who with
his heavenly grace and omnipotent power feeds them inwardly.

But there was never such untruth used, as you use in this author, to

And all these cantelless and false interpretations, altering of the words, and
corrupting of the sense both of all authors and also of scripture, is nothing
else but shameless shifts to deceive simple people, and to draw them from the
old Catholic faith of Christ's Church, unto your new Romish errors,
devised by Antichrist, not above four or five hundred years passed.

And where you say, that in the sacrament, in every part both in the heavenly

And as concerning your unjust gathering of mine own words upon

And where you have set out the answer of the carnal and spiritual

Our thing one substance.
And where you say, that one thing is but one substance, saving only in the
person of Christ, your teaching is untrue, not only in the person of Christ,
but also in every man, who is made of ij. substaunces, the body and soul. And
if you had been learned in philosophy, you would have found your saying false
also in every corporal thing, which consists of ij. substaunces, of the
matter, and of the form. And Gelasius shows the same likewise in this matter
of the sacrament. So untrue it is that you most vainly boast here, that your
doctrine has been taught in all ages, and been the catholic faith, which was
never the catholic, but only the Papisticall faith, as I have euidentlye
proved by holy scripture and the old catholic authors, wherein truly and
directly you have not answered to one.

Winchester.


Hylary reasonyng of the natural conjunction between us and Christ by mean of
this Sacrament, expresses the same to come to pass by the receiuyng truly
the very flesh of our Lord in our Lords meat, and thereupon argues against
the Arrians, which Arrians if it had not been so really in deed, would have
answered, but all was spiritually, so as there was no such natural and
corporal Communion in deed as Hylary supposed, but (as this author teaches)
a figure; and it had been the Catholic doctrine: so that argument of Hylary
had been of no force. Saint Chrysostom, Gelasius and the visible creatures
converted into the body and blood of Christ. And this I write to prevent such
cauillations as some would search for. But to return to our matter, all these
arguments were vain, if there were not in the Sacrament the true presence of
Christ's very body, as the celestial part of the Sacrament, being the visible
forms therthly thing. Which earthly thing remains in the former propriety
with the very presence of the celestial thing. And this suffiseth concerning
the first mark.

Caunterbury.
AS for your four marks and tokens (if you mark them well) you shall

Irenaeus.
And to begin with your first mark, Irenee in deed proved the resurrection

The meaning of Irene and other.
Irenee therefore means not of the being of Christ in the bread and wine, but
of the eating of him. And yet he means not of corporal eating (for so Christ
says him self, John. 6.
that his flesh avails nothing) but spiritual eating by faith. Nor he
speaks not of spiritual eating in receauyng of the Sacrament only, for then
our life should not be eternal, nor endure no longer then we be eating of the
sacrament: for our spiritual life continues no longer the^ our spiritual
feedyng. And then could none have life, but that receive the Sacrament, and all
should have perished that dyed before Christ's Supper and institution of the
Sacrament, or that dye under age before they receive the Sacrament.

But the true meaning of Irenee, Hilary, Cyprian, Cyrill, and other that
treated of this matter was this, that as Christ was truly made man and
crucified for us, and shed his blood upon the Cross for our redemption, and
now reigns for ever in heaven, so as many as have a true faith and belefe in
him, chawyng their cuddes, and perfectly remembryng the same death and passion
(which is the spiritual eating of his flesh and drinkyng of his blood) they
shall reign in everlasting life with him. For they spiritually and truly by
faith eat his flesh and drink his blood, whether they were before the
institution of the Sacrament or after. And the being or not being of Christ's
body and blood really and corporally in the Sacrament under the forms of bread
and wine, neither makes nor marreth, nor is to no purpose in this matter. But
for confirmation of this our faith in Christ's death and passion, and for a
perpetual memory of the same, has Christ ordained this holy Sacrament, not to
be kept, but to be ministered among us, to our singular comfort, that as
outwardly and corporally we eat the very bread and drink the very wine, and
call them the body and blood of Christ, so inwardly and spiritually we eat and
drink the very body and blood of Christ. And yet carnally and corporally he is
in heaven, and shall be until the last Judgment, when he shall come to Judge
both the quick and the dead. And in the Sacrament, (that is to say, in the due
ministration of the Sacrament) Christ is not only figuratively, but
effectually unto everlasting life.

And this teaching impugneth the heresies of the Ualentinians, Arrians, and
other heretics, and so does not your feigned doctrine of Transubstantiation,
of the real presence of Christ's flesh and blood in the Sacrament, under the
forms of bread and wine: and that ungodly and wicked men eat and drink the
same, which shall be cast away from the eternal life, and perish for ever. And
for further answer to Hilary, I refer the Reader to mine other answer
made to him before.



in hell, so is his body now in heaven. And as it is not required, that where
so ever Christ's divinity is, there should be really and corporally his
manhood: so it is not required, that where the bread and wine be, there should
be corporally his flesh and blood.

But as you frame the Argument against the heretics, it serves so little
against them, that they may with the same frame and engine, overthrow the whole
Catholic Church. For thus you frame the Argument: As the presence of Christ's
body in this mystery does not alter the propriety of the visible natures, no
more does the Godhead in the person of Christ extinguish his humanity. Mark
well now good Reader what follows hereof. As the presence of Christ's body in
this mystery, does not alter (say you) the propriety of ye visible natures,
no more does the Godhead in the person of Christ extinguish his humanity. But
the presence of Christ's body in this mystery does so alter the visible natures
(as the Papists say) that the substaunces of bread and wine be extinguished,
and there remains no substance but of the body of Christ, Ergo likewise in
the mystery of Christ's incarnation the humanity is extinguished by the
presence of his Godhead, and so there remains no more but the substance of
his divinity, as the Eutichians said.

And thus the similitude of Chrysostom, Gelasius, and Theodorete joined to the
saying of the Papists, frames a good Argument for the heretics. But those
Authors framed their Argument clean contrary, on this wise: that the bread
and wine be not transubstantiate or extinguished, but continue still in their
own substaunces, figures, fashion, and all natural proprieties, and therefore
does the humanity of Christ likewise endure and remain in proper substance
with his natural proprieties, without extinction or transubstantiation. For
those Authors take no bread and wine for the visible proprieties only of
bread and wine, but for very true bread and wine, with all their natural
qualities and conditions.

And the heretics shall soon find out your cauillation, where (to avoid

Winchester.
An other certain token is the wondryng and great marueling that the old
authors make, how the substance of this Sacrament is wrought by Gods
omnipotency. Baptism speaks it with ease (I think) he speaks it so
often, of a presence by signification (if it may so be called) every man may
speak and tell how, but of the very presence in deed, and therefore the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, no creature can tell

Caunterbury.


So that as well in the Lords Supper as in Baptism, the marvelous workyng of
God (passing the comprehension of all man's wit) is in the spiritual receivers,
not in the bread, wine and water, nor in the carnal and ungodly receauers. For
what should it avail the lively members of Christ that God works in his dead
and insensible creatures? But in his members he is present, not figuratively,
but effectually, and effectually and ineffably works in them, nourishyng and
feedyng them so wonderfully, that it passes all wits and toungues to
express.

Os ex ossibus eius, and caro ex carne eius: Ephe. 5.
Bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh.

The wonder in the Sacraments.
Cyprian wondreth as much at Gods work in Baptism, as in the Lords Supper,
Chrysostom wondreth as much, Emissene wondreth as much, Cyrill wondreth as
much, all Catholic writers wonder as much, as well how God does spiritually
regenerate us to a new life, as how he does spiritually feed and nourish us to
everlasting life. And although these things be outwardly signified unto us by
the Sacramental bread, wine and water, yet they be effectually wrought in us
by the omnipotent power of God. Therefore you had need to seek out some other
mark or token for your purpose, for this serves nothing at all. For by his
wonderful workyng Christ is no more declared to be present in the bread and
wine, then in the water of Baptism.

Winchester.
A third token there is by declaration of figures, as for example S. Hierome
when he declares upon the Epistle Ad Titum, so advisedly at length how Panes
propositionis were the figure of the body of Christ in the Sacrament: that
process declares the mind of the author to be, that in the Sacrament is
present the very truth of Christ's body not in a figure again to join one
shadow to an other, but even the very truth to answer the figure, and
therefore no particular words in S. Hierome can have any understanding contrary
to his mind declared in this process.

Caunterbury.
TO S. Hierome I have answered sufficiently before to your confutation of my
third book, almost in the end, which should be in vain to repeat her again,
therefore I will go to your last mark.

Winchester.
Fourthly an other certain mark is, where the old authors write of the
adoration De Catechisandis rudibus, how the invisible things be honored in
this Sacrament, meaning the body and blood of Christ, and in the 98. Psalm
speaks of adoration. Theodoretus also speaking specially of adoration of this
Sacrament. These authors by this mark that is most certain, take away all
such ambiguitie as men might by suspicious divination gather sometime of their
several words, and declare by this mark of adoration plainly their faith to
have been, and also their doctrine understood as they meant of the real
presence of Christ's very body and blood in the Sacrament, and Christ him self
God and man to be there present, to whose divine nature, and the humanity
unite thereunto, adoration may only be directed of us. And so to conclude up
this matter, for as much as one of these four marks and notes maybe found
testified and apparaunt in the ancient writers, with other words and
sentences conformable to the same, this should suffice to exclude all
arguments of any by sentences and ambiguous speeches, and to uphold the
certainty of the true Catholic faith in deed, which this author by a wrong
name of the Catholic faith impugneth, to the great slander of the truth, and
his own reproach.

Caunterbury.
YOur fourth mark also of adoration proves no more that Christ is present
Gal. ^.
the^ of him that receaueth the holy Communion. And no less ought he that is
Baptized to believe, that in Baptism he does presently in deed and in truth
put Christ upon him, and apparel him with Christ, then he that receaueth the
holy Communion ought to believe, that he does presently feed upon Christ,
eating his flesh and drinkyng his blood: which thing the Scripture does plainly
declare, and the old authors in many places do teach. And moreover the form
of Baptism does so manifestly declare Christ to be honored, that it
commands the Devil therein to honor him by these words: Da honorem Deo:
Da gloriam Jesus Christo. With many other words declaryng Christ to be honored
in Baptism. And although our Savior Christ is specially to be adored and
honored, when he by his holy word and Sacraments does assure us of his present
grace and benefits, yet not only then, but always in all our acts and deeds,
we should lift up our hearts to heaven, and there glorify Christ with his
celestial father and coeternall spirit. So untrue it is, that you say, that
adoration can not be done to Christ, but if he be really present. The Papists
teach us to have in honor and reverence the forms and accidents of bread and
wine (if they be vomited up) after the body and blood of Christ be gone away,
and say, that they must be had in great reverence, because the body and blood
of Christ had been there. And not only the forms of bread and wine (say they)
must be kept with great reverence, but also the ashes of them (for they
command them to be burned into ashes) must be kept with like reverence. And
shall you than forbid any man to worship Christ him self, when he does
spiritually and effectually eat his very flesh and drink his very blood, when
you will have such honor and reverence done to the ashes, which come not of
the body and blood of Christ, but only (as you teach) of the accidents of
bread and wine? Thus have I confuted your confutation of my second book,
concerning Transubsta^tiation, wherein you be so far from the co^futation of my
book (as you promised) that you have done nothing else but confounded your
self, studying to seek out such shifts and cauillations, as before your time
were never devised, and yet constrained to grant such errors and monstrous
speeches as to Christen ears be intolerable. So that my former book as well
concerning the real presence of Christ's flesh and blood, as the eating and
drinkyng of the same and also transubstantiation, stands fast and sure, not
once moved or shaken with all your ordinance shot against it. But is now much
stronger then it was before, being so mured and bulwarked, that it never need
hereafter to fear any assault of the enemies. And now let us examine your
confutation of the last part of my book, conteinyng the oblation and sacrifice
of our Sauiuiour Christ.

The end of the second book.
THE CONFVTATION OF THE FIFTE BOOK.


This is agreed and by the Scriptures plainly taught, The sacrifice of our
savior christ was never taught to be reiterate, but to be often remembered.
that the oblation and sacrifice of our Savior Christ was, and is a perfect
work once consummate in perfection with out necessity of reiteration, as it
was never taught to be reiterate, but a mere blasphemy to presuppose it. It is
also in the Catholic teaching, grounded upon the Scripture, agreed, that the
same sacrifice ones consummate, was ordained by Christ's institution in his
most holy Supper to be in the Church often remembered and showed forth in such
sort of showing, as to the faithful is seen present the most precious body and
blood of our Savior Christ, under the forms of bread and wine, which body and
blood the The body and blood of Christ is the only sacrifice propritiatory for
all the sins of the world.
to eat and feed of it according to Christ's commandment, as of a most
precious and acceptable sacrifice, acknowledgyng the same precious body and
blood, to be the sacrifice propitiatory for all the sins of the world,
Christ's body is the christen man's sacrifice.
And this manner of showing Christ's death and keepyng the memory of it, is
grounded upon the Scriptures, written by the Evangelists and S. Paul, and
according thereunto Preached, believed, used, and frequented in the Church of
Christ universally and from the beginning. This author vtteryng many words at
large besides Scripture, and against Scripture to deprave the Catholic An
issue.
consist in these two points. One in that the author allows the Judgment
of Petrus Lombardus, touching the oblation and sacrifice of the Church. An
other in that the author confesses the Council of Nice to be holy Council,
as it has been in deed confessed of all good Christen men. Upon these two
confessions I will declare the whole enterprise of this fifth book to be
overthrown.

Caunterbury.
De sacrificio lege. Roffen. and Oecol. lib. 3. cap. 2. and 3.
MY fifth book has so fully and so plainly set out this matter of the
sacrifice, that for answer to all that you have here brought to the
co^futation thereof, the reader need to do no more, but to look over my book
again, and he shall see you fully answered before hand. Yet will I here and
there add some notes, that your ignorance and craft may the better appear.

This far you agree to the truth, that the sacrifice

The sacrifice propitiatory, not christ's very body, but his death in that same
body.
An other is, that you cast the most precious body and blood of Christ,

Now before I join with you in your issue, I shall rehearse the words of my
book, which when the indifferent Reader sees, he shall be the more able to
judge truly between us. My book contains thus.

The fifth Book.
THe greatest blasphemy and injury that can be against Christ, Chap. 1. The
sacrifice of the Mass.
and yet universally used through the Popish kingdom, is this, that the
Priests make their Mass a sacrifice propitiatory, to remit the sins as
well of them selves, as of other both quick and dead, to whom they list to
apply the same. Thus under pretense of holiness, the Papistical priests have
taken upon them to be Christ's successors, and to make such an oblation and
sacrifice, as never creature made but Christ alone, neither he made the same
any more times then once, and that was by his death upon the Cross.

For as S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews witnesses, Chap. 2. Heb. 9. The
difference between the sacrifice of Christ and of the priests of the old law.
Although the high priests of the old law offered many times (at the least
every year once) yet Christ offered not him self many times, for then he
should many times have dyed. But now he offered him self but once, to take
away sin, by that offering of him self. And as men must dye once, so was
Christ offered once, to take away the sins of many.

And furthermore S. Paul says, Heb. 10.
That the sacrifices of the old law, although they were continually offered
from year to year, yet could they not take away sin, nor make men perfect.
For if they could once have quieted men's consciences, by taking away sin,
they should have ceased, and no more have been offered. But Christ with once
offering, has made perfect for ever, them that be sanctified: puttyng their
sins clean out of Gods remembrance. And where remission of sins is, there
is no more offering for sin.

And yet further he says, Heb. 7.
concerning the old Testament, that it was disanulled and taken away, because
of the feebleness and unprofitableness thereof, for it brought nothing to
perfection. And the priests of that law were many, because they lived not
long, and so the priesthode went from one to an other: but Christ lives ever,
and has an everlasting priesthode, that passes not from him to any man else.
Wherefore he is able perfectly to save them that come to God by him, for as much
as he lives ever to make intercession for us. For it was meet for us to have
such an high priest, that is holy, innocent, with out spot, separated from
sinners, and exalted up above heaven: who needs not daily to offer up
sacrifice (as Aarons priests did:) first for his own sins, and then for the
people. For that he did once, when he offered up him self. Here in his Epistle
to the Hebrews S. Paul has plainly and fully described unto us, the
difference between the priesthode and sacrifices of the old Testament, and the
most high and worthy priesthode of Christ, his most perfect and necessary
sacrifice, and the benefit that comes to us thereby.

For Christ offered not the blood of calves, sheep, and goats (as the priests
of the old law have used to do) but he offered his own blood upon the Cross.
And he went not into an holy place made by man's hand, (as Aaron did) but he
ascended up into heaven, where his eternal Father dwells, and before him he
makes continual supplication for the sins of the whole world, presentyng
his own body, which was torn for us, and his precious blood, which of his
most gracious and liberal charity, he shed for us upon the Cross.

And that sacrifice was of such force, that it was no need to renew it every
year, as the Bishops did of the old Testament (whose sacrifices were many
times offered, and yet were of no great effect or profit, because they were
sinners them selves that offered them, and offered not their own blood, but
the blood of brute beasts) but Christ's sacrifice ones offered, was sufficient
for evermore.

Chap. 3.Two kinds of sacrifices.
And that all men may the better understand this sacrifice of Christ (which he
made for the great benefit of all men) it is necessary to know the distinction
and diversity of sacrifices.

One kind of sacrifice there is, which is called a Propitiatory or merciful
sacrifice, that is to say, such a sacrifice as pacifieth Gods wrath and
indignation, and obteineth mercy and forgiveness for all our sins, and is the
raunsom for our redemption from everlasting damnation.

The sacrifice of Christ.
And although in the old testament there were certain sacrifices called by
that name, yet in very deed there is but one such sacrifice, whereby our sins
be pardoned, and Gods mercy and favor obtained, (which is the death of the
son of God our Lord Jesus Christ) nor never was any other sacrifice
propitiatory at any time, nor never shall be.

This is the honor and glory of this our high priest, wherein he admits
neither partener nor successor. For by his own oblation he satisfied his
father for all men's sins, and reconciled mankind unto his grace and favor.
And whosoever depryue him of his honor, and go about to take it to themselves,
they be very Antichrists, and most arrogant blasphemers against God, and
against his son Jesus Christ, whom he has sent.

The sacrifices of the Church.
And other kind of sacrifice there is, which does not reconcile us to God, but
is made of them that be reconciled by Christ, to testify our duties unto God,
and to show ourselves thankful unto him. And therefore they be called
sacrifices of laud, praise, and thanksgeuing.

The first kind of sacrifice Christ offered to God for us: the second kind we
our selves offer to God by Christ.

And by the first kind of sacrifice Christ offered also us unto his Father:
and by the Second we offer ourselves and all that we have unto him and his
Father.

And this sacrifice generally is our whole obedience unto God, in keeping his
laws and commandments. Of which manner of sacrifice speaks the prophet
David, Psalm. 50. 1. Pet. 2.
saying: A sacrifice to God, is a contrite heart. And S. Peter says of all
christen people, that they be an holy priesthood to offer spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Heb. 13.
And S Paul says, That always we offer unto God a sacrifice of laud and praise
by Jesus Christ.

Chap. 4.A more plain declaration of the sacrifice of Christ.
But now to speak somewhat more largely of the priesthood and sacrifice of
Christ, he was such an hie bishop, that he once offering himself, was
sufficient, by once effusion of his blood, to abolish sin unto the worlds
end. He was so perfect a priest, that by one oblation he purged an infinite
heap of sins, leaving an easy and a ready remedy for all sinners, that his
one sacrifice should suffice for many years, unto all men that would not show
themselves unworthy. And he took unto himself, not only their sins that
many years before were dead, and put their trust in him, but also the sins of
those that until his coming again, should truly believe in his gospel. So
that now we may look for none other priest nor sacrifice, to take away our
sins, but only him and his sacrifice. And as he dying once, was offered for
all, so as much as pertayned to him, he took all men's sins unto himself. So
that now there remains no more sacrifices for sin, but extreme judgment at
the last day, when he shall appear to us again; not as a man to be punished
again, and to be made a sacrifice for our sins (as he was before) but he
shall come in his glory without sin, Heb. 8.
to the great joy and comfort of them, which be purified and made clean by his
death, and continue in godly and innocent living, and to the great terror and
dread of them that be wicked and ungodly.

Thus the scripture teaches; that if Christ had made any oblation for sin
more then once; he should have dyed more then once: forasmuch as there is none
oblation and sacrifice for sin, but only his death. And now there is no more
oblation for sin, seeing that by him our sins be remitted, and our
consciences quieted.

And although in the old Testament, Chap. 5.The sacrifice of the old law.
there were certain sacrifices, called Sacrifices for sin, yet they were no
such sacrifices, that could take away our sins in the sight of God, but they
were ceremonies ordained to this intent, that they should be as it were
shadows and figures, to signify before hand the excellent sacrifice of Christ
that was to come, which should be the very true and perfect sacrifice for the
sins of the whole world.

And for this signification they had the name of a sacrifice propitiatory, and
were called sacrifices for sins, not because they indeed took away our
sins, but because they were images, shadows, and figures, whereby godly men
were admonished of the true sacrifice of Christ then to come, which should
truly abolish sin and everlasting death.

And that those sacrifices, which were made by the priests in the old law,
could not be able to purchase our pardon; and deserve the remission of our
sins, S. Paul does clearly affirm in his said Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb.
9.
where he says: It is impossible that our sins should be taken away by the
blood of oxen and goats. Wherefore all godly men, although they did use those
sacrifices ordained of God, yet they did not take them as things of that value
and estimation, that thereby they should be able to obtain remission of their
sins before God.

But they took them partly for figures and tokens ordained of God, by the
which he declared, that he would send that seed, which he promised to be the
very true sacrifice for sin, and that he would receive the^ that trusted in
that promise, and remit their sins for the sacrifice after to come.

And partly they used them as certain ceremonies, whereby such persons as had
offended against the law of Moses, and were cast out of the congregation, were
received again among the people, and declared to be absolved.

As for like purposes we use in the church of Christ, sacraments by him
instituted. And this outward casting out from the people of God, and receiving
in again, was according to the law and knowledge of man, but the true
reco^ciliation and forgeuenes of sin before God, neither the fathers of the old
law had, nor we yet have, but only by the sacrifice of Christ, made in the
mount of Caluary. And the sacrifices of the old law were prognosticatio^s and
figures of the same then to come, as our sacraments be figures and
demonstrations of the same now passed.

Now by these foresaid things may every man easily perceive, Chap. 6.The Mass
is not a sacrifice propitiatory.
that the offering of the priest in the Mass, or the appoynting of his
ministratio^ at his pleasure, to them that be quick or dead, can not merit
and deserve, neither to him self, not to the^ for who^ he sings or says the
remission of their sins: but that such Popish doctrine is contrary to the
doctrine of the Gospel, and injurious to the sacrifice of Christ. For if only
the death of Christ be the oblation, sacrifice and price wherefore our sins be
pardoned, the^ the act or ministratio^ of the priest ca^ not have the same
office. Wherefore it is an abominable blasphemy, to give that office or
dignity to a priest; which pertains only to Christ: or to affirm that the
Church has need of any such sacrifice: as who should say: that Christ's
sacrifice were not sufficient for the remission of our sins: or else that his
sacrifice should hang upon the sacrifice of a priest.

But all such priests, as pretend to be Christ's successors in making a
Sacrifice of him, they be his most heinous and horrible adversaries. For never
no person made a sacrifice of Christ, but he him self only. And therefore
Saint Paul says, Heb. 7.
that Christ's priesthood cannot pass from him to an other. For what needs
any more Sacrifices; if Christ's Sacrifice be perfect and sufficient? And as
Saint Paul says, that if the sacrifices and ministration of Aaron, Heb. 8.
and other priests of that time, had lacked nothing, but had been perfect and
sufficient, then should not the sacrifice of Christ have been required (for it
had been but in vain, to add any thing to that, which of it self was
perfect) so likewise if Christ's Sacrifice which he made him self be
sufficient, what need we every day to have more and more Sacrifices. Wherefore
all Popish priests that presume to make every day a Sacrifice of Christ,
either must they needs make Christ's Sacrifice vain, imperfect and
insufficient, or else is their sacrifice in vain, which is added to the
Sacrifice, which is already of it self sufficient and perfect.

But it is a wondrous thing to see what shifts and cautels the Popish
Antichrists devise, to color and cloak their wicked errors: And as a chain
is so joined together, that one link draws an other after it, so be vices
and errors knit together, that every one draws his fellow with him. And so
does it here in this matter.

Chap. 7.A confutatio^ of the Papists cauillation.
For the Papists (to excuse them selves) do say, that they make no new
Sacrifice, nor none other Sacrifice then Christ made (for they be not so blind,
but they see, that then they should add an other Sacrifice to Christ's
Sacrifice, and so make his Sacrifice imperfect) but they say, that they make
the self same Sacrifice for sin, that Christ him self made.

Chap. 8.The true sacrifice of all Christen people.
And here they run headlonges into the foulest and most heinous error that
ever was imagined. For if they make every day the same oblation and Sacrifice
for sin, that Christ him self made, and the oblation that he made was his
death, and the effusion of his most precious blood upon the Cross, for our
redemption and price of our sins: then follows it of necessity, that they
every day slay Christ, and shed his blood, and so be they worse then the
wicked Jews and Phariseis, which slew him, and shed his blood but once.

Almighty God the father of light and truth, banish all such darkness and error
out of his Church, with the authors and teachers thereof, or else convert their
hearts unto him, and give this light of faith to every man, that he may trust
to have remission of his sins, and be delivered from eternal death and hell,
by the merit only of the death and blood of Christ: and that by his own
faith, every man may apply the same unto him self, and not take it at the
appointment of Popish priests, by the merit of sacrifices and oblations.

If we be in deed (as we profess) Christian men, we may ascribe this honor
and glory to no man, but to Christ alone. Wherefore let us give the whole
laud and praise hereof unto him, let us fly only to him for succor, let us
hold him fast and ha^g upon him, and give our selves wholly to him. And for
as much as he has given him self to death for us, to be an oblation and
sacrifice to his father for our sins, let us give our selves again unto him,
making unto him an oblatio^, not of goats, sheep, kine and other beasts that
have no reason (as was accustomed before Christ's coming) but of a creature
that has reason, that is to say, of our selves, not killyng our own bodies,
but mortifiyng the beastly and unreasonable affections, that would gladly rule
and reign in us. So long as the law did reign, God suffered du^be beasts to
be offered unto him, but now that we be spiritual, we must offer spiritual
oblatio^s. In the place of calves, sheep, goats and doves: we must kill
deuilish pride, furious anger, insatiable covetousness, filthy lucre, stinkyng
lechery, deadly hatred and malice, foxy wiliness, woluish rauenyng and
deuouryng, and all other unreasonable lusts and desires of the flesh. Galath.
5.
And as many as belong to Christ, must crucify and kill these for Christ's
sake, as Christ crucified him self for their sakes.

These be the sacrifices of Christian men, these hosts and oblations be
acceptable to Christ. And as Christ offered him self for us, so is it our
duties after this sort to offer our selves to him again. And so shall we not
have the name of Christian me^ in vain, but as we pretend to belong to Christ
in word and profession, so shall we in deed be his in life and inward
affection. So that within and without, we shall be altogether his, clean from
all hypocrisy or dissimulation. And if we refuse to offer our selves after
this wise unto him, by crucifying our own wills, and committyng us wholly to
the will of God, we be most unkind people, superstitious hupocrites, or rather
unreasonable beasts, worthy to be excluded utterly from all the benefits of
Christ's oblations.

And if we put the oblation of the priest in the steed of the oblation of
Christ, Chap. 5.The Popish Mass is detestable idolatry, utterly to be vanished
from all christen congregations.
refusing to receive the Sacrament of his body and blood our selves (as he
ordained) and trustyng to have remission of our sins by the Sacrifice of the
priest in the Mass, and thereby also to obtain release of the pains in
Purgatory, we do not only injury to Christ, but also commit most detestable
Idolatry. For these be but false doctrines, without shame devised, and feigned
by wicked Popish priests, Idolaters, Monks and Friars, which for lucre have
altered and corrupted the most holy Supper of the Lord, and turned it into
manifest Idolatry. Wherefore all godly men ought with all their heart to refuse
and abhor all such blasphemy against the son of God.

And for as much as in such Masses is manifest wickedness and Idolatry,
(wherein the priest alone makes oblation satisfactory, and applies the same
for the quick and the dead at his will and pleasure,) all such Popish Masses
are to be clearly taken away out of Christian Churches, and the true use of
the Lords Supper is to be restored again, wherein godly people assembled
together, may receive the Sacrament every man for him self, to declare that he
remembers, what benefit he has received by the death of Christ, and to
testify that he is a member of Christ's body, fed with his flesh, and drinkyng
his blood spiritually.

Christ did not ordeyne his Sacraments to this use, Cap. 10.Every manne ought
to receive the sacrament himself, and not one for an other.
that one should receive them for another, or the priest for all the lay
people, but he ordained them for this intent, that every man should receive
them for him self, to ratify, confirm and stablishe his own faith and
everlasting salvation. Therefore as one man may not be Baptized for an other
(and if he be, it avails nothing) so ought not one to receive the holy
Communion for an other. For if a man be dry or hungry, he is never a whit
eased, if an other man drink or eat for him: or if a man be all befiled, it
helps him nothing, an other man to bewashed Acc. 2. Math. 26.
Let every man be Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. And our Savior Christ
said to the multitude? Take, and care. And further he said: Drink you all of
this. Whosoever therefore will be spiritually regenerated

And briefly to conclude, He that thinks to come to the kingdom of Christ
him self, must also come to his Sacraments him self, and keep his
Commandments him self, and do all things that pertayne to a Christian man,
and to his vocation him self, least if he refer these things to an other

Cap. 11.The difference between the priest and the lay man.
Therefore Christ made no such difference between the priest and the lay man,
that the priest should make oblation and sacrifice of Christ for the lay man,
and eat the Lords Supper from him all alone, and distribute and apply it as
him likes. Christ made no such difference, but the difference that is between
the priest and the lay man in this matter, is only in the ministration: that
the priest (as a common minister of the Church) does minister and distribute
the Lords Supper unto other, and other receive it at his hands. But the very
Supper it self, was by Christ instituted and given to the whole Church, not to
be offered and eaten of the priest for other men, but by him to be delivered to
all that would duly ask it.

As in a princes house the officers and ministers prepare the Table, and yet
other (as well as they) eat the meat, and drink the drink: so do the priests
and ministers prepare the Lords Supper, read the Gospel, and rehearse
Christ's words, but all the people say thereto: Amen. All remember Christ's
death, all give thanks to God, all repent and offer them selves an oblation to
Christ, all take him for their Lord and Savior, and spiritually feed upon
him, and in token

And this nothing diminishes the estimation and dignity of priesthode and
other ministers of the Church, but aduaunceth and highly commends their
ministration. For if they are much to be loved, honored and esteemed,

Chap. 12.The answer to the Papists,
Now for as much, as I trust, that I have plainly enough set forth the
propitiatory sacrifice of our Savior Jesus Christ, to the capacity and comfort
of all men that have any understanding of Christ, and have declared also the
heinous abomination and Idolatry of the Popish Mass (wherein the priests
have taken upon them the office of Christ, to make a propitiatory sacrifice for
the sins of the people) and I have also told what manner of sacrifice Christen
people ought to make, it is now necessary to make answer to the subtle
persuasions and Sophistical cauillations of the Papists, whereby they have
deceived many a simple man, both learned and unlearned.

The place of S. Paul unto the Hebrews (which they do cite for their purpose)
makes quite and clean against them. Heb. 5.
For where S. Paul says, that every high priest is ordained to offer gifts
and sacrifices for sins, he spoke not that of the priests of the new
Testament, but of the old, which (as he says) offered Calves and Goats. And
yet they were not such priests that by their offerynges and sacrifices they
could take away the peoples sins, but they were shadows and figures of
Christ our everlasting priest, which only by one oblation of him self takes
away the sins of the world. Wherefore the Popish priests that apply this text
unto themselves, do directly contrary to the meaning of S. Paul, to the great
injury and prejudice of Christ, by whom only S. Paul says, that the
sacrifice and oblation for the sin of the whole world was accomplished and
fulfilled.

And as little serves for the Papists purpose the text of the Prophet
Malachie, Malac. 1.
that every where should be offered unto God a pure sacrifice and oblation. For
the Prophet in that place spoke no word of the Mass, nor of any oblation
propitiatory to be made by the priests, but he spoke of the oblation of all
faithful people (in what place so ever they be) which offer unto God, with
pure hearts and minds, sacrifices of laud and praise: prophesying of the
vocation of the Gentiles, that God would extend his mercy unto them, and not
be the God only of the Jews, but of all nations, from East to West, that with
pure faith call upon him, and glorify his name.

But the adversaries of Christ, gather together a great heap of Authors,
Chap. 13.An answer to the Authors.
which (as they say) call the Mass or holy Communion a Sacrifice. But all
those Authors be answered unto in this one sentence, that they called it not
a sacrifice for sin, because that it takes away our sin, (which is taken
away only by the death of Christ) but because the holy Communion was ordained
of Christ, to put us in remembrance of the sacrifice made by him upon the
cross, for that cause it bears the name of that sacrifice, as S. Augustine
declares plainly in his Epistle ad Bonifacium, Augustinus ad Bonifa. De
Ciuita. Lib. 10. cap. 5.
before rehearsed in this book page 141. And in his book De fide ad Petrum
Diaconu^, And in his book De Ciuitate Dei, he says, That which men call a
sacrifice, is a sign or representation of the true sacrifice.

And the Master of the Sentence (of whom all the School Authors take their
occasion to write) judged truly in this point, Lombardus Lib. 4. Did. 12.
saying: That which is offered and consecrated of the priest, Is called a
sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memory and representation of the true
Sacrifice and holy oblation, made in the altar of the Cross.

And S. John Chrysostom, after he has said that Christ is our Bishop,
Chrisostom. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
which offered that Sacrifice that made us clean, and that we offer the same
now, least any man might be deceived by his manner of speaking, he opens his
meaning more plainly, saying: That which we do, is done for a remembrance of
that which was done by Christ: For Christ says: Do this in remembrance of
me: Also Chrysostom declaryng at length, that the priests of the old law
offered ever new Sacrifices, and changed them from time to time, and that
Christian people do not so, but offer ever one Sacrifice of Christ: yet by and
by (least some might be offended with this speech) he makes as it were a
correction of his words, saying: But rather we make a remembrance of Christ's
sacrifice." As though he should say: Although in a certain kind of speech we
may say that every day we make a sacrifice of Christ, yet in very deed, to
speak properly, we make no sacrifice of him, but only a commemoration and
remembrance of that sacrifice, which he alone made, and never none but he. Nor
Christ never gave this honor to any creature, that he should make a sacrifice
of him, nor did not ordain the Sacrament of his holy Supper, to the intent
that either the priest or the people should sacrifice Christ again, or that
the priests should make a sacrifice of him for the people: but his holy Supper
was ordained for this purpose, that every man, eating and drinkyng thereof,
should remember that Christ dyed for him, and so should exercise his faith, and
comfort him self by the remembrance of Christ's benefits, and so give unto
Christ most hearty thanks, and give him self also clearly unto him.

Wherefore the ordinance of Christ ought to be followed: the priest to minister
the Sacrament to the people, and they to use it to their consolation. And in
this eating, drinkyng and using of the Lords Supper, we make not of Christ a
new sacrifice propitiatory for remission of sin.

Chap. 14.The lay persons make a sacrifice as well as the Priest.
But the humble confession of all penitent hearts, their knowledgyng of Christ's
benefits, their thanks giuyng for the same, their faith and consolation in
Christ, their humble submission and obedience to Gods will and commandments,
is a sacrifice of laud and praise, accepted and allowed of God no less then
the sacrifice of the priest. For almighty God without respect of person,
accepts the oblation and sacrifice of priest and lay person, of king and
subject, of master and servant, of man and woman, of young and old, yea of
English, French, Scot, Greek, Latin, Jew, and Gentile, of every man according
to his faithful and obedient heart unto him, and that through the sacrifice
propitiatory of Jesus Christ.

Chap. 15.The Papisticall Mass is neither a sacrifice propitiatory, nor of
thanks geuyng. Luke. 16.
And as for the saying or singyng of the Mass by the priest, as it was in time
passed used, it is neither a sacrifice propitiatory, nor yet a sacrifice of
laud and praise, nor in any wise allowed before God, but abominable and
detestable: and thereof may well be verified the saying of Christ: That thing
which seems an high thing before men, is an abomination before God.

They therefore which gather of the Doctors, that the Mass is a sacrifice for
remission of sin, and that it is applied by the priest to them, for whom he
says or sings: they which so gather of the Doctors, do to them most grievous
injury and wrong, most falsely belyeng them.

Chap. 16.There was no Papisticall Masses in the Primitive Church.
For these monstrous things were never seen nor known of the old and primitive
Church, nor there was not then in one Church many Masses every day, but upon
certain days there was a common Table of the Lords Supper, where a number of
people did together receive the body and blood of the Lord: but there were then
no daily private Masses, where every priest received alone, like as until this
day there is none in the Greek Churches, but one common Mass in a day. Nor
the holy Fathers of the old Church would not have suffered such ungodly and
wicked abuses of the Lords Supper.

But these private Masses sprang up of late years, partly through the
ignorance and superstition of unlearned Monks and Friars (which knew not
what a sacrifice was, but made of the Mass a sacrifice propitiatory, to remit
both sin, and the pain due for the same) but chiefly they sprang of lucre
and gain, when priests found the means to sell Masses to the people, which
caused Masses so much to increase, that every day was said an infinite number,
and that no priest would receive the Communion at an other priests hand, but
every one would receive it alone: Consilium Nicenum cap. 14. Canones
Apostolorum. cap. 8.
neither regardyng the godly decree of the most famous and holy Council of
Nice (which appointed in what order priests should be placed above Deacons at
the Communion) nor yet the Canons of the Apostles, which command, that when
any Communion is ministered, all the priests together should receive the same,
or else be excommunicate. So much the old Fathers mysliked, that any priest
should receive the Sacrament alone.

Therefore when the old fathers called the Mass or Supper of the Lord, a
sacrifice, they meant that it was a sacrifice of lauds and thanks geuyng, and
so as well the people as the priest do sacrifice: or else that it was a
remembrance of the very true sacrifice propitiatory of Christ: but they meant
in no wise that it is a very true sacrifice for sin, and applicable by the
priest to the quick and dead.

For the priest may well minister Christ's words and Sacraments, to all men
both good and bad, but he can apply the benefit of Christ's passion to no man
(being of age and discretion) but only to such as by their own faith do apply
the same unto them selves. So that every man of age and discretion, takes to
him self the benefits of Christ's passion, or refuses them him self, by his
own faith, quick or dead. That is to say, by his true and lively faith (that
works by charity) he receives them, or else by his ungodliness or feigned
faith rejects them.

And this doctrine of the Scripture clearly condemns the wicked inventions
of the Papists in these latter days, which have devised a Purgatory to
torment souls after this life, and oblations of Masses said by the priests,
to deliver them from the said torments, and a great number of other
commodities do they promise to the simple ignorant people by their Masses.

Now the nature of man being ever prone to Idolatry from the beginning of the
world, Chap. 17. The caused and means how Papisticall Masses entered into the
church.
and the Papists being ready by all means and police to defend and extol the
Mass for their estimation and profit, and the people being superstitiously
enamoured and doted upon the Mass, (because they take it for a present remedy
against all manner of evils) and part of the princes being blinded by
papisticall doctrine, part loving quietness, and loath to offend their Clergy
and subjects, and all being captive and subject to the Antichrist of Rome, the
estate of the world remainyng in that case, it is no wonder that abuses grew
and increased in the Church, that superstition with Idolatry were taken for
godliness and true Religion, and that many things were brought in without the
authority of Christ.

As Purgatory, the oblation and sacrificyng of Christ by the priest alone, The
abuses of the Papisticall Masses.
the application and appointyng of the same to such persons as the priest would
sing or say Mass for, and to such abuses as they could devise, to deliver some
from Purgatory, and some from hell, (if they were not there finally by God
determined to abide, as they termed the matter) to make rain or fair wether,
to put away the plague and other sicknesses both from man and beast, to halow
and preserve them that went to Jerusalem, to Rome, to S. James in Compostella,
and other places in pilgrimage, for a preservative against tempest and thunder,
against perils and dangers of the Sea, for a remedy against moraine of
cattle, against pensiveness of the heart, against all manner affliction and
tribulations.

And finally, they extol their Masses far above Christ's passion, promising
many things thereby, which were never promised us by Christ's passion. As that
if a man hear Mass, he shall lack no bodily sustenaunce that day, nor
nothing necessary for him, nor shall be let in his journey, he shall not lose
his sight that day, nor dye no sudden death, he shall not wax old in that
time that he hears Mass, nor no wicked spirits shall have power of him, be
he never so wicked a man, so long as he looks upon the Sacrament. All these
foolish and deuilish superstitions, the Papists of their own idle brain have
devised of late years, which devises were never known in the old Church.

Chap. 18.which Church is to be followed
And yet they cry out against them that profess the Gospel, and say that they
dissent from the Church, and would have them to follow the example of their
Church. And so would they gladly do, if the Papists would follow the first
Church of the Apostles, which was most pure and incorrupt, but the Papists
have clearly varied from the usage and examples of that Church, and have
invented new devises of their own brains, and will in no wise consent to follow
the primitive Church, and yet they would have other to follow their Church,
utterly variyng and dissentyng from the first most godly Church. But thanks be
to the eternal God, the manner of the holy Communion (which is now set forth
within this Realm) is agreeable with the institution of Christ, with Saint
Paul and the old primitive and Apostolic Church, with the right faith of the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross for our redemption, and with the true
doctrine of our salvation, justification and remission of all our sins by
that only sacrifice.

A short instruction to the holy Communion.
Now rests nothing, but that all faithful subjects will gladly receive and
embrace the same, being sorry for their former ignorance, and every man
repentyng him self of his offenses against God, and amendyng the same, may
yield him self wholly to God, to serve and obey him all the days of his life,
and often to come to the holy Supper, which our Lord and Savior Christ has
prepared: And as he there corporally eats the very bread and drinks the
very wine, so spiritually he may feed of the very flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ his Savior and redeemer, remembryng his death, thankyng him for his
benefits, and lookyng for none other sacrifice at no priests hands for
remission of his sins, but only trustyng to his sacrifice, which being both
the high priest, and also the Lamb of God (prepared from the beginning to take
away the sins of the world) offered up him self once for ever, in a
sacrifice of sweet smell unto his Father, and by the same paid the ransom
for the sins of the whole world. Who is before us entered into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of his Father, as a patron, mediator and
intercessour for us. And there has prepared places for all them that be lively
members of his body, to reign with him for ever, in the glory of his father,
to whom with him, and the holy Ghost, be glory, honor, and praise for ever and
ever. Amen.

Thus having rehearsed the whole words of my last book, I shall return to
your issue, Mine Issue.
and make a ioynder or demurre with you therein. And if you can not prove your
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Priests by Petrus Lombardus and Nicene Council,
then must you confess by your own Issue, that the Uerdite must justly pass
against you, and that you have a fall in your own suite. As for the sacrifice
of lauds and thakesgeuyng, I have set it forth plainly in my book, but the
sacrifice propitiatory (devised to be made by the priest in the Mass only) is
a great abhominatio^ before God, how glorious soever it appear before men. And
it is set up only by Antichrist, and therefore worthy to be abhorred of all
that truly profess Christ.

Nicene counsel
And first as concerning Nicene counsel (because you begin with that first) I
will rehearse your words.

Winchester.
First to begin with the counsel of Nice, the same has opened the mystery of
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in this wise, that christen men
believe the Lamb (...) Iterum etiam hic in diuina mensa, ne humiliter intenti
simus ad propositum pannem and poculum, sed mente exaltata fide intilligamus,
situm esse in sacra illa mensa, illum Dei agnum, qui tollit peccata mundi,
sacrificatum a sacerdotibus, non victimarum more and mos preciosum illius
corpus, and sanguinem vere sumentes, credere haec esse resurrectionis nostrae
Symbola. Ideo enim non multum accipimus, sed parum, vt cognoscamus quoniam non
in satietatem, sed sanctificationem. These words may be englished thus: Again
in this godly table, we should not in base and low consideration direct our
understanding to the bread and cup set forth, but having our mind exalted, we
should understand by faith to be situate in that table the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world sacrificed of the priests not after the
manner of other Sacrifices, and we receiving truly the precious body and blood
of the same Lamb, to believe these to be

This holy counsel of Niece, has been believed universally in declaration of
the mystery of the Trinity and the Sacraments also. And to them that confess
that counsel to be holy, as the author here does, and to such as profes to
believe the determination of that counsel in the opening of the mystery of the
Trinity with other words then Scripture uses, although they expres such sense
as in the scriptures is contained: Why should not all such like wise believe the
same counsel in explication of the Sacraments, which to do, the author has
bound himself, granting that counsel holy. And then we must bebeleue the
very presence of Christ's body and blood on gods board, Priests sacrificers.
and that Priests do there sacrifice, and be therefore called and named
sacrificers. So as those names and terms be to be honored, and religiously
spoken of, being in an holy counsel uttered and confessed because it was so
seen to them and the holy ghost, without whose present asistance and
suggestion believed to be there, the counsel could not or ought not to be
called holy. An issue.
as may be in particularity showed, whereof I make also an issue with the
author.

Caunterbury.
FOr answer to Nicene council, it speaks of a sacrifice of lauds and

John. 1.
And although Nicene counsel call Christ the lamb that takes away De conse.
did. 2. cap. Semel: and est prosperj. Semel Immolatus c. christus in
semetipso. and tamen quotidie immolatur in sacramento. glosa ibidem. id est
eius immolatio representatur and fit memoria passionis.
And in saying, that Christ is sacrificed of the priest, not like a sacrifice,
or after the manner of a sacrifice, the counsel in these words signified a
difference between the sacrifice of the priest, and the sacrifice of Christ,
which upon the Cross offered himself to be sacrificed after the manner of a
very sacrifice (that is to say unto death) for the sins of the world. Christ
made the bloody sacrifice, which took away sin, the priest with the church
make a commemoration thereof with lauds and thanksgeuing, offering also
themselves obedient to God unto death. And yet this our sacrifice takes not
away our sins, nor is not accepted but by his sacrifice. The bleeding of him
took away our sins, not the eating of him.

And although that Counsel say, that Christ is situate in that table, yet He
that is baptized, goes down into the water, being subject to sin, and held
in the bands of corruption, but he rises up free from bondage and sin, being
made by the grace of God his son and heir, and coinheritor with Christ, and
apparelled with Christ himself as it is written: As many of you as be baptized
unto Christ, you have put Christ upon you. These words of the counsel I
rehearse only in english, Gal. 3.
because I will not let nor enco^ber the reader with the greek or latin (as
you do) which is nothing else but to rehearse one thing thrice, without need or
profit. If I had list, I could have rehearsed all the greek authors in greek,
and the latin writers in latin, but unto english men (unto whom only I
write) it were a vain

But to return to the matter, Christ is present in his holy supper (as that
holy Council says) even as he is present in Baptism, but not really,
carnally, corporally, and naturally, as you without ground imagine.



And as for Dionyse, Irenee, Tertullian, with all your other authors, I have
answered them in the thirtenth chapter of this my last book. And what need
you make an issue in this thing which is not in controversy, and which I
affirm in my whole last book? The matter in question, is of the sacrifice
propitiatory, and you make your issue of the sacrifyce generally. Now let us
see how you entreat Petrus Lombardus. Petrus Lombardus.


Winchester.
For the other point in that the author approves the judgment of Petrus
Lombardus in the matter, what should I more do, but write in the words of
Petrus Lombardus as he has them which he these in the fourth book the xii.
chapter alleged by the author Post haec quaeritur, si quod gerit sacerdos,
proprie dicatur sacrisiciu^, vel immolatio, and si Christus quotidie, vel
immoletur semel tantum immolatus sit? Ad hoc breuiter dici potest, illud quod
offertur and consecratur a sacerdote, vocari sacrificium and oblationem quia
memoria est and representatio very sacrificy and sanctae immolationis factae in
ara crucis and semel Christus mortuus in cruce est, ibique immolatus est in
semetipso, quotidie aute^ immolatur in sacrame^to, quia in sacramento
recordatio fit illius, quod factum est semel vnde Augustine. Certum habemus,
quia Christus resurgens ex mortus iam non moritur. etc. tamen ne obliniscamur,
quod semel factum est, in memoria nostra omn (...) fit, sclicet qua^do pascha
celebratur. Nunquid totiens Christus occiditur? sed tantu^ aniu^ (...)
^ecordatio representat quod olim factu^ est, and sic nos facit moueri ta^qua^
videamus Domin^ (...) ^uce: Ite^ semel immolatus est Christus in semetipso,
Immolatur. 71 ante.
and tame^ quotidie immolatur in sacram^^^^. Quod sic intilligendu^ est: quia
in manifestatione corporis and distinctione membroru^, semel tanti in cruce
pependit, offere^s se Deo patri hostia^ rede^ptionis efficacem, eoru^ scilicet,
quos praedestinauit. Item Ambrosius. In Christo semel oblata est hostia ad
salute^ potes, quid ergo nos? Nonne per singulos dies offerimus? Fae si
quotidie offeramus, ad recordationem eius mortis fit, and vna est hostia, non
multae: quomodo vna and no^ multae, quia semel immolatus est Christus. Hoc
aute^ sacrificium exemplum est illius, idipsum, and semper idipsum offertur,
proinde hoc idem est sacrificium, alioquin dicetur quoniam in multis locis
offertur, multi sunt Christi, non sed vnus vbique, est Christus, and hic plenus
existens, and illic plenus, sicut quod vbique offertur vnum est corpus, ita and
vnum sacrificium. Christus hostiam obtulit, ipsam offerimus and nu^c, sed quod
nos agimus recordatio est sacrificij: Nec causa suae infirmitatis reperitur,
quia per ficit hominem, sed nostrae, quia quotidie peccamus. Ex his colligitur
esse sacrificium and dici quod agitur in altari, and Christum semel oblatu^ and
quotidie offerri, sed aliter tunc, aliter munc^et etiam quae sit virtus huius
sacramenti ostenditur: remissio scilicet peccatorum venalium, and perfectio
virtutis. The English hereof is this. After this it is asked whether that the
Priest does, may be said properly a sacrifice or immolation: and whether Christ
be daily immolate or only once? Whereunto it may be shortly answered, that
which is offered and consecrate of the priest, is called a sacrifice and
oblation, because it is a memory and representation of the true sacrifice and
holy immolation done in the altar of the cross. And Christ was once dead on
the cross, and there was offered in himself, but he is daily immolate in the
sacrament, because in the sacrament there is made a memory of that is once
done. Whereupon S. Augustine. We are assured that christ rising from death
dies not now, etc. Yet least we should forget that is once done, in our memory
every year is done, videl, as often as the pascha, is celebrate, is Christ as
often killed? only a yearly remembrance, represents that was

Thus writes Petrus Lombardus, whose judgment because this author allows,
he must grant that the visible church has Priests in ministry, that offer
daily Christ's most precious body and blood in mystery, and then must it be
granted, that Christ

Caunterbury.
HOw is it possible, to set out more plainly the diversity of the true
sacrifice of Christ made upon the altar of the cross (which was the
propitiation of sin) from the sacrifice made in the sacrament, then Lombardus
has done in this place? For the one he calls the true sacrifice,

And although it be one Christ, The diversity of Christ's sacrifice and ours.
The sacrifice of Christ.
that died for us, and whose death we remember, yet it is not one sacrifice
that he made of himself upon the cross Heb. 7.8.
And as Christ only made this propitiatory sacrifice, so he made but one, and
but once. For the making of any other, or of the same again, should have been
(as S. Paul reasons) a reproving of the first, as imperfect and
insufficient. Heb. 7.8.
And therefore at his last supper although Christ made unto his father
sacrifices of lauds and thankesgeuing (as these words (...) and (...) do
declare) yet he made there no sacrifice propitiatory, for then either the
sacrifice upon the cross had been void, or the sacrifice at the supper
imperfect, and insufficient. And although he had at his supper made sacrifices
propitiatory, yet the priests do not so, who do not the same that Christ did at
his supper. For he ministered not the sacrament in remembrannce of his death
(which was not then brought to pass) but he ordained it to be ministered of us
in remembrance thereof. And therefore our offering after Lombardus judgment,
is but and remembrance of that true offering wherein Christ offered himself
upon the cross. And so did Christ institute it to be.

And Lombardus says not that Christ is daily offered for proportion of our
sins, The sacrifice of the church.
but because we daily sin, we daily be put in the remembrance

And now have I made it evident, that Petrus Lombardus defaceth in no point my
saying of the sacrifice, but confirms fully my doctrine, as well of the
sacrifice propitiatory made by Christ himself only, as of the sacrifice
co^memoratiue and gratulatory made by the priests and people. So that in your
issue taken upon Lombard, the verdit cannot but pass with me, by the testimony
of Lombard himself. And yet I do not fully allow Lombardes judgment in all
matters (who with Gratian his brother as it is said) were ij. chief champio^s
of the Romish sea, to spread abroad their errors and usurped authority) but I
speak of Lombard only to declare that yet in his time they had not cited so
far, to make of their was a sacrifice propitiatory. But in the end of this
process Lo^bard speaks with

Winchester.
The catholic doctrine teaches not the daily sacrifice of Christ's most
precious body

Caunterbury.
After you wilful wrangling without any cause at the last of your own swing
you come to the truth (purely and sincerely professing and setting forth the
same) except in few words here and there cast in, as it were cockle among
clean corn. The offering on the cross (say you) was which was once offered
in the Cross for sin, we learn not so plainly by these words, This is my
body, Hoc. est corpus meum, Acts. 1.
as we do by these: Hic Jesus assumptus est in coelum, and Qui descendit, ipse
est and qui ascendit suprae omnes coelos: Ephe. 4.
This Jesus was taken up into heaven, and he that descended was the same Jesus
that ascended above all the heavens.

Penance.
the truth is, that such as do fall be releued by Christ, when so ever they
return to him unfeignedly with heart and mind. And as for your words
concerning the Sacrament of penance, may have a Popish understanding in it.
But at length you return to your former error, and go about to revoke, or at
the least, evil fauoredly to expound, that which you have before well spoken.
Your words be these.

Winchester.
The Mass is a sacrifice propitiatory.
but not in that degree of propitiation: As for redemption, regeneration or
remission of deadly sin, which was once purchased, and by force thereof is in
the Sacraments ministered, but for the increase of Gods favor the mitigation
of Gods displeasure provoked by our infirmities, the subduyng of temptations
and the perfection of virtue in us. All good works, good thoughts and good
meditations may be called sacrifices, Good works sacrifices propitiatory.
and the same be called sacrifices propitiatory also, for so much as in their
degree God accepts and takes them through the effect and strength of the
very sacrifice of Christ's death, which is the reconciliation between God and
man, ministered and dispensed particularly as God has appointed, in such
measure as he knows. The Mass is a sacrifice satisfactory.
To call the daily offering a sacrifice satisfactory, must have an
understanding that signifies not the action of the Priest, but the presence of
Christ's most precious body and blood the very sacrifice of the world once
perfectly offered being propitiatory and satisfactorie for all the world, or
else the word satisfactorie must have a signification and meaning, as it has
sometime that declares the acceptance of the thing done, and not the propre
contreuaile of the action, after which sort man may satisfy God that is so
merciful as he will take in good worth for Christ's sake ma^s imperfect
endeavor, and so the daily offering may be called a sacrifice satisfactory,
because God is pleased with it, being a manner of worshyppyng of Christ's
passion according to his institution. But otherwise the daily sacrifice in
respect of the action of the Priest called satisfactorie, and it is a word in
deed that sounds not well so placed, although it might be saved by a
signification, and therefore think that word rather to be well expounded, then
by captious understanding brought in slander when it is used, and this speech
to be frequented that the only immolat^on of Christ in him self upon the
altar of the Cross is the very satisfactorie Sacrifice for reconciliation of
mankind to the favor satisfactorie, which they understood in the satisfaction
of the Priests duty, to attend he prayer the was required to make, and for a
distinction thereof they had prayer sometime required without special
limitation, and that was called to pray not satisfactorie. Finally in man by
any his action to presume to satisfy God by way of counteruaile, is a very mad
and furious blasphemy.

Caunterbury.
TO defend the Papisticall error, that the daily offering of the Priest Rome.
3. 1. John. 2. The difference between a sacrifice propitiatory and
gratificatory.
You speak according to the Papists, that the Priests in their Masses make a
sacrifice propitiatory. I call a sacrifice propitiatory (according to the
Scripture) such a sacrifice as pacifieth Gods indignation against us, obteineth
mercy and forgiveness of all our sins, and is our ransom and redemption from
everlasting damnation. And on the other side I call a sacrifice gratificatory
of the sacrifice of the Church, such a sacrifice as does not reconcile us to
God, but is made of them that be reconciled to testify their duties, and to
show them selves thankful unto him. And these sacrifices in Scripture be not
called propitiatory, but sacrifices of Justice, of laud, praise and thanks
geuyng. But you confound the words, Psalm. 49. Heb. 13.
and call one by an others name, calling that propitiatory which the Scripture
calls but of Justice, laud and thankyng. And all is nothing else but to
defend your propitiatory sacrifice of the Priests in their Masses, whereby
they may remit sin, and redeem souls out of Purgatory.

And yet all your wyles and shifts will not serve you, for by extendyng the
name of a propitiatory sacrifice unto so large a signification as you do, you
make all manner of Sacrifices propitiatory, leauyng no place for any other
sacrifice. For (say you) all good deeds and good thoughts be Sacrifices
propitiatory, and then be the good works of the lay people Sacrifices
propitiatory, as well as those of the Priest. And to what purpose then made
you in the beginning of this book a distinction between sacrifices
propitiatory and other? Thus for desire you have to defend the Papisticall
errors, you have not fallen only into imaginations contrary to the truth of
Gods word, but also contrary to your self.

But let pass away these Papisticall inventions, and let us humbly profess
ourselves with all our Sacrifices, not worthy to approach unto God, nor to have
any access unto him, but by that only propitiatory sacrifice, which Christ
only made upon the Cross. And yet let us with all devotion, with whole heart
and mind, and with all obedience to Gods will, come unto the heavenly Supper
of Christ, thankyng him only for propitiation of our sins. In which holy
Communion the act of the Minister and other be all of one sort, none
propitiatory, but all of lauds and thanks geuyng. And such sacrifices be
pleasant and acceptable to God (as S. Paul says) done of them that be good,
Romans 3. and. 5. Acts. 4.
but they win not his

And where you say, that to call the daily offering a sacrifice satisfactorie,
now you said, that the act of the Priests must needs be a Sacrifice
propitiatory, and now to have an understanding for the same; you be driven to
so shameful a shift, that you say either clean contrary that it is not the
action of the Priest but the presence of Christ, or else that the action of the
Priest is none otherwise satisfactorie then all other Christen men's works be.
For otherwise (say you) the daily Sacrifice in respect of the action of the
Priest, can not be called satisfactorie. Wherefore at length, knowledgyng your
Popish doctrine to sound evil fauoredly, you confess again the true
Catholic teaching, that this speech is to be frequented and used, that the
only immolation of Christ in him self upon the altar of the Cross, is the
very satisfactorie Sacrifice for reconciliation of mankind to the favor of
God.



Satisfactory Masses.
as much as you may, by subtle and crafty interpretations. For by such
exposition as you make of the satisfactory singyng of the Priest, in doing his
duty in that he was required to do, by this exposition he sings as well
satisfactory in saying of Mattens as in saying of Mass (for in both he does
his duty that he required unto) and so might it be defended that the Player
upon the Orgaines plays satisfactory, when he does his duty, in playing as
he is required. And all the singyng men in the Church that have wages thereto,
sing satisfactory as well as the Priests, when they sing according to that they
be hyered unto. And then as one singyng man or player on the Orgaines,
receauyng a stipende of many men to play or sing at a certain time if he do
his duty, satisfies them all at once, so might a priest sing satisfactory for
many persons at one time, which the teachers of satisfactory Masses utterly
condemn. But if you had read Duns, you would have written more Clerkely in
these matters, then you now do. Now let us hear what you say further.

Winchester.
Priests in the Mas offer that is, showed forth Christ's death.
that is to say, with the very presence by Gods omnipotency wrought of the
most precious body and blood of our Savior Christ, showing forth Christ's
death, and celebratyng the memory of his Supper and death according to Christ's
institution, so with daily oblation and sacrifice of the self same Sacrifice,
to kindle in us a thankeful remembrance

Caunterbury.
Heb. 7.
Where you find your self grieved with my citing of S. Paul that Christ's
priesthood cannot pass from him to another, which is quod in alium transire
non potest. And so does (...) signify quod successione caret. That is to say, a
thing that has no succession nor passes to none other. And because Christ is
a perpetual and everlasting priest (that by one oblation made a full sacrifice
of sin for ever) therefore his priesthood, neither needs nor can pass to any
other: wherefore the ministers of Christ's church, be not now appointed priests
to make a new sacrifice for sin (as tho Christ had not done that at once
sufficiently for ever,) but to preach abroad Christ's sacrifice, and to be
ministers of his words and sacraments. And where but a little before you had
truly taught, that the only Immolation of Christ by himself upon the alter
of the cross, is the very satisfactory sacrifice for our reconciliation to
God, now in the end (like a Cow that casts down her milk with her own
feet) you overthrow all again in few words, saying that priests make daily
the self same sacrifice that Christ made, which is so foul an error

Winchester.
And where the author would avoid all the testimony of the fathers by pretense
it should be but a manner of speech, the Canon of the Council of Nice before
rehearsed and the words of it, where mysteries be spoken of in proper terms
for doctrine, auoydeth all that shift, and it has no absurdity to confess
that Christ in his supper did institute for a remembrance of the only
sacrifice the presence of the same most precious substance Christ is offered
really not his sacrifice remembered or represented only.
to be the pure sacrifice of the Church there offered for the effect of
increase of life in us, as it was offered on the Cross to atcheue life unto
us. And S. Cyril who for his doctrine was

Caunterbury.
FOr answer hereto, read the xiij. chapter of my fifte book, The effect of
Christ's sacrifice is both to give life and to continue the same.
and that which I have written here a little before of Nicene council. And
where you say that the effect of the sacrifice of Christ's body, made by the
Priests, is to increase life in us: as the effect of the sacrifice of the
same body made by himself upon the cross is to give life unto us, this is
not only an absurdity, but also an intolerable blasphemy against Christ. For
the sacrifice made upon the cross does both give us life, and also increase
and continue the same, and the priests oblation does neither of both. For our
redemption and eternal salvation stands not only in giving us life, but in
continuing the same for ever. Ihon. 10.
As Christ said that he came not only to give us life, but also to make us
increase and abound therein. And S. Paul said: Gala. 2.
The life which I now live in flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God,
who loved me and gave himself for me. And therefore if we have the one by the
oblation of Christ, and the other by the oblation of the priest, then divide we
our salvation between Christ and the priest. And because it is no less gift to
continue life for ever, then to give it us, by this your mad and furious
blasphemy, we have our salvation and redemption as much by the sacrifice made by
the priest, as we have by sacrifice made by Christ himself. And thus you make
Christ to be like an unkind and unnatural mother who when she has brought
forth her child, puts it to an other to nurse, and makes her self but half
the mother of it. And thus you teach christen people to halte on both sides,
partly worshipping God, and partly Baall, partly attributing our salvation to
Christ the true perfect eternal priest, and partly to Antichrist and his
priests.

Cyril in Ephesine counsel.
he speaks not of a sacrifice propitiatory in that place, as I have more
plainly declared in mine answer to Doctor Smithes prologue.

What is and wherein stands the sacrifice of the church.
here it were necessary (if you would not deceive simple people, but teach them
such doctrine as they may understand) that you should in plain terms set
forth and declare, what the daily offering of the priest without blood shedding
is, in what words, deeds, crosses, signs, or gestures it stands, and
whether it be made before the consecration or after and before the distribution
of the sacrament or after, and wherein chiefly rests the very pith and
substance of it. And when you have thus done, I will say you mean franckly,
and walk not colourably in cloaked words not understood, and then also shall
you be more fully answered, when

Winchester.
And where the author says the old fathers calling the supper of our Lord a
sacrifice, meant a Sacrifice of laud and thanksgeuing. Hippinus of Hamborugh no
Papist, in his The sacrifice of the church gives life.
as it is noted by Cyril the sacrifice of the church to do, when he says it is
( vinificum)

Amen.
Caunterbury.
HIpinus says, that the old fathers called the Supper of our Lord a sacrifice:
Hipinus so said, until you appoint me both the book and place, where he so
says. For the effect of his book is clean contrary, which he wrote to
reprove the propitiatory sacrifice, which the Papists feign to be in the
Mass. Thus in deed Hipinus writes in one place: Veteres Eucharistiam propter
corporis and sanguinis Christipraesentiam, primo vocauerunt sacrificium, deinde
propter oblationes and munera quae in ipsa Eucharistia Deo consecrabantur and
conferebantur ad sacraministeria, and ad necessitatem credentium. In which
words Hipinus declares, that the old Fathers called the Supper of our Lord a
sacrifice for two consideratio^s, one was for the present of Christ's flesh and
blood, the other was for the offerynges which the people gave there of their
devotion to the holy ministratio^ and relief of the poor. But Hipinus
speaks here not one word of corporal presence, nor of propitiatory
Sacrifice, but generally of presence and sacrifice, which makes nothing for
your purpose, nor against me, that grant both a presence and a sacrifice. But
when you shall show me the place, where Hipinus says, that the old Fathers
called the Lords Supper a propitiatory sacrifice, I shall trust you the
better, and him the worse.

Cyrill.
if you will say of his head, that the Sacrifice of the Church gives life, how
agrees this with your late saying, that the sacrifice of the Church increases
life, as the sacrifice on the Cross gives life? And if the Sacrifice made by
the Priest both give life and increase life, then is the Priest both the mother
and nurse, and Christ has nothing to do with us at all, but as a stranger.

Mala. 1.
is the sacrifice laud and thanks, which all devout Christian people give
unto God, whether it be in the Lords Supper, in their private Prayers, or in
any work they do at any time or place to the glory of God, all which
Sacrifices, not of the Priests only, but of all faithful people, be accepted
of God through the sacrifice of Christ, by whose blood, all their filthy and
vnpurenes is clean sponged away.

But in this last book, Inconstancy.
it seems you were so astonished and amassed, that you were at your wits end,
and wist not where to become. For now the Priest makes a Sacrifice
propitiatory, now he does not: now he gives life, now he gives none: now is
Christ the full Savior and satisfaction, now the Priest has half part with
him: now the Priest does all. And thus you are so inconstant in your self, as
one that had been netteled, and could rest in no place, or rather as one that
had received such a stroke upon his head, that he staggered with all, and
reeled here and there, and could not tell where to become.

And your doctrine has such ambiguities, such perplexities, such absurdities,
and such impieties in it, and is so uncertain, so uncomfortable, so contrary
to Gods word and the old Catholic Church, so contrary to it self, that it
declares from whose spirit it comes, which can be none other but Antichrist
him self.

Where as on the other side the very true doctrine of Christ and his pure
Church from the beginning, is plain, certain, without wrynkels, without any
inconvenience or absurdity, so cheerful and comfortable to all Christen
people, that it must needs come from the spirit of God, the spirit of truth
and all consolation. For what ought to be more certain and known to all
Christen people, then that Christ dyed once and but once, for the redemption of
the world? And what can be more true, then that his only death is our life?
And what can be more comfortable to a penitent sinner that is sorry for his
sin, and returns to God in his heart and whole mind, then to know that
Christ discharges him of the heavy lode of his sin, and takes the burden
upon his own back? And if we shall join the Priest herein to Christ in any
part, and give a portion hereof to his sacrifice (as you in your doctrine give
to the priest the one half at the least) what a discourage is this to the
penitent sinner, that he may not hang wholly upon Christ? what perplexities and
doubts rise hereof in the sinners conscience? And what an obscuryng and
darkenyng is this of the benefit of Christ? Yea what injury and contumely is
it to him?

And furthermore when we hear Christ speak unto us with his own mouth, and
show him self to be seen with our eyes (in such sort as is convenient for him
of us in this mortal life to be heard and seen:) what comfort can we have
more? The Minister of the Church speaks unto us Gods own words, which we
must take as spoken from Gods own mouth, because that from his mouth it came,
and his word it is, and not the Ministers. Likewise when he ministers to our
sightes Christ's holy Sacraments, we must think Christ crucified and
presented before our eyes, because the Sacraments so represent him, and be his
Sacraments and not the Priests. As in Baptism we must think, that as the
Priest puts his hand to the child outwardly, and washes him with water, so
must we think that God puts to his hand inwardly and washes the infant
with his holy spirit, and moreover that Christ him self comes down upon
the child, and apparelleth him with his own self. And as at the Lords holy
Table the Priest distributeth wine and bread to feed the body, so we must
think that inwardly by faith, we see Christ feedyng both body and soul to
eternal life. What comfort can be devised any more in this world for a
Christian man? And on the other side, what discomfort is in your papisticall
doctrine? what doubts? what perplexities? what absurdities? what iniquities?
what avails it us that there is no bread, nor wine? or that Christ is really
under the forms and figures of bread and wine, and not in us? or if he be in
us, yet he is but in the lips or the stomach, and tarieth not with us. Or
what benefit is it to a wicked man to eat Christ, and to receive death by him
that is life? From this your obscure, perplex, uncertain, uncomfortable,
deuilish, and Papisticall doctrine, Christ defend all his, and grant that we
may come often and worthily to Christ's holy Table, to comfort our feeble and
weak faith, by remembrance of his death, who only is the satisfaction and
propitiation of our sins, and our meat, drink and food of everlasting
life. Amen.

Here ends the Answer of the most Reverend Father in God Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury etc. unto the crafty and Sophistical cauillation of Doct. Steven
Gardener, devised by him to obscure the true, sincere and godly doctrine of the
most holy Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior CHRIST.
THE Answer of Thomas Archbishop of Caunterbury etc. against the false
calumniations of doctor Richard Smith, who has taken upon him to confute the
defense of the true and catholic doctrine of the body and blood of our Savior
Christ.
I Have now obtained (gentle reader) that thing, which I have much desired,
which was, that if all men would not embrace the truth lately set forth by me,
concerning the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ, at the
least some man would vouchsafe to take pen in hand, and write against my
book, because that thereby the truth might both better be serched out and also
more certainly known to the world. And herein I heartily thank the late Bishop
of Winchester and doctor Smith, who partly have satisfied my long desire,
saving that I would have wished adversaries more substantially learned in holy
scriptures, more exercised in the old ancient ecclesiastical authors, and
having a more godly zeal to the trial out of the truth, than are these two,
both being crafty sophisters (the one by art, and the other by nature) both
also being drowned in the dregs of papistry, brought up and confirmed in the
same, the one by Duns and Dorbell, and such like Sophisters, the other by the
Popish Canon law, whereof by his degree taken in the uniuersity he is a
professor. And as concerning the late bishop of Winchester, I will declare his
craftye Sophistications in mine answer unto his book.

But doctor Smith (as it appears by the title of his preface) has craftily
devised an easy way to obtain his purpose, that the people being barred from
the serching of the truth, might be still kept in blindness and error, as well in
this as in all other matters, wherein they have been in times past deceived.

He sees full well that the more diligently, Falsehood fears the light, but
light desires to be tried.
matters be serched out and discussed, the more clearly the craft and falsehode
of the subtle Papists will appear. And therefore in the preface to the
reader, he exhorts all men to leave disputing and resoning of the fame by
learning, and to give firm credit unto the church, as the title of the said
preface declares manifestly. As who should say, the truth of any matter that
is in question, might be tried out, without debating and reasoning by the word
of God, whereby (as by the true touchstone) all men's doctrines are to be tried
and examined. But the truth is not ashamed to come to the light, and to be
tried to the uttermost. For as pure gold, the more it is tried, the more pure
it apeareth, so is all manner of truth. Where as on the other side all maskers,
counterfayters, and false deceiuors abhor the light, and refuse the trial.
If all men without right or reason would give credit unto this Papist and his
Romish church, against the most certain word of God and the old holy and
Catholic Church of Christ, the matter should be soon at an end, and out of
all controversy. But for as much as the pure word of God, and the first
church of Christ from the beginning, taught the true catholic faith, and Smith
with his church of Rome do now teach the clean contrary, the chafe can not be
tried out from the pure corn (that is to say, the untruth discerned from the
very truth) without threshing, windowing, and fanning, serching, debating and
reasoning.

Faith ought to be grounded up on Gods word, but the Papists ground their faith
upon them selves.
As for me I ground my belief upon gods word (wherein can be no error) having
also the consent of the primative church, requiring no man to believe me
further, then I hane gods word for me. But these Papists speak at their
pleasure what they lift, and would be believed without gods word, because they
bear men in hand, that they be the church. The church of Christ is not founded
upon it self, but upon Christ and his word, but the Papists build their
church upon them selves, devising new articles of the faith from time to time,
without any scripture, and founding the same upon the Pope and his clergy,
monks and friars, and by that means they be both the makers and Judges of
their faith themselves. Wherefore this Papist like a politic man, does right
wisely provide for himself and his church, in the first entry of his book,
that all men should leave searching for the truth, and stick hard and fast to
the church, meaning himself and the church of Rome. For from the true
catholic church, the Romish church (which he accomteth catholic) has varied
and dissented many years passed, as the blindest that this day do live, may
well see and perceive, if they will not purposely wink and shut up their eyes.
This I have written to answer the title of his preface.

Ephesine counsel.
NOw in the beginning of the very preface it self, when this great doctor
should recite the words of Ephesine counsel he translateth them so
unlearnedly, Cyrill the author of ye words in the counsel.
that if a young boy (that had gone to the grammar schole but three years) had
done no better, he should scant have escaped some scholemasters hands with
sixierkes. And beside that, he does it so craftily to serve his purpose, that
he cannot be excused of wilful deprauation of the words, calling celebration
an offering, and referring the participle (made) to Christ, which should be
referred to the word (partakers) and leaving out those words that should
declare, that the said counsel spoke of no propiciatory sacrifice in the
Mass, but of a sacrifice of laud and thanks, which christen people give unto
God at the holy communion, by remembrance of the death resurrection and
ascension of his son Jesus Christ, and by confessing and setting forth of the
same.

Hear by the ungodly handeling of this godly council at his first beginning,
it may appear to every man, how sincerely this Papist entendeth to proceed in
the rest of this matter.

Smith believes the counsel.
And with like sincerity he untruly belieth the said counsel, saying that it
does plainly set forth the holy sacrifice of the Mass, which does not so much
as once name the Mass, but speaks of the sacrifice of the church, which the
said council declares to be the profession of christen people in setting
forth the benefit of Christ, who only made the true sacrifice pro, piciatory
for remission of sin. And whosoever else takes upon him to make any such
sacrifice, makes himself Antichrist.

Smith belieth me twice in one place.
And than he belyeth me in two things, as he uses commonly throughout his
whole book. The one is, that I deny the sacrifice of the Mass, The first lie.
which in my book have most plainly set out ye sacrifice of christen people in
the holy communion or mass (if D. Smith will needs so term it) and yet I
have denied that it is a sacrifice propitiatory for sin, or that the priest
alone makes any sacrifice there. For it is the sacrifice of all christen
people to remember Christ's death, to laud and thank him for it, and to
publish it and show it abroad unto other, to his honor and glory.

The controversy is not, whether in the holy communion be made a sacrifice or
not (for herein both D. Smith and I agree with the foresaid council at
Ephesus) but whether it be a propitiatory sacrifice or not, and whether only
the priest make the said sacrifice, these be the points wherein we vary. And I
say so far as the council says, that there is a sacrifice, but that the same
is propitiatory for remission of sin, or that the priest alone does offer it,
neither I nor the counsel do so say, but D. Smith has added that of his own
vain head.

The other thing wherein D. Smith belyeth me is this: The second ly.
He says that I deny, that we receive in the sacrament that flesh which is
adjoined to Gods own son. I marvel not a little what eyes Doctor Smith
had, when he red over my book. It is like that he has some privy spectacles
within his head, wherewith when soever he looks, he sees but what he list. For
in my book I have written in more then an hundred places, that we receive the
self same body of Christ that was borne of the virgin Mary, that was
crucified and buried, that rose again, ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of God the father almighty. And the contention is only in the
manner and form how we receive it.

For I say (as all the old holy Fathers and Martirs used to say) that we
receive Christ spiritually by faith with our minds, eating his flesh and
drincking his blood: so that we receive Christ's own very natural body but
not naturally nor corporally. But this lying papist says, that we eat his
natural body corporally with our mouths, which neither the counsel Ephesine,
nor any other ancient council or doctor ever said or thought.

And the controversy in the council Ephesine, was not of the uniting of
Christ's flesh to the forms of bread and wine in the sacrament, but of the
uniting of his flesh to his divinity at his incarnation in unity of person.
Which thing Nestorius the heretic denied, confessing that Christ was a godly
man as other were, but not that he was very God in nature: which heresy, that
holy counsel confuting, affirms that the flesh of Christ was so joined in
person, to the dyuine nature, that it was made the proper flesh of the son of
God, and flesh that gave life: but that the said flesh was present in the
sacrament corporally, and eaten with our mouths, no mention is made thereof in
that council.

And here I require D. Smith (as proctor for the Papists) either to bring forth
some ancient council or doctor, that says as he says, that Christ's own
natural body is eaten corporally with our mouths (understanding the very body
in deed, and not the signs of the body as Chrysostom does or else let him
confess that my saying is true, and recant his false doctrine the third time,
as he has done twice already.

THan forth goes this Papist with his preface, and says, Smith says that
Christ called not bread his body.
that these words (This is my body that shall be given to death for you) no
man can truly understand of bread. And his proof thereof is this, because that
bread was not crucified for us. Luke. 12.
First here he makes a lie of Christ. For Christ said not (as this papist
alleges.) This is my body, which shall be given to death for you, but only he
says: This is my body which is given for you, which words some understand not
of the giving of the body of Christ to death, but of the breaking and giving of
bread to his apostles as S. Paul said: 1. Cor. 10.
The bread which we break. etc.

But let it be that he spoke of the giving of his body to death, and said of
the bread, This is my body, which shall be given to death for you, by what
reason can you gather hereof, that the bread was crucified for us?

If I look upon the image of king David, and say: This is he that killed
Goliath, does this speech mean, that the image of King David killed Goliath? Or
if I hold in my hand my book of S. John's gospel, and say: This is the gospel
that S. John wrote at Pathmos (which fashion of speech is commonly used) does
it follow hereof that my book was written at Pathmos? Or that S. John wrote my
book which was but newly printed at Paris by Robert Stephanus? Or if I say of
my book of S. Paul's epistles. This is Paul that was the great persecuter of
Christ: Does this manner of speech signify, that my book does persecute
Christ? Or if I show a book of the new testament, saying: This is the new
testament, which brought life unto the world, by what form of argument can you
induce hereof, that my book yt I bought but yesterday, brought life unto the
world? No man that uses thus to speak does mean of the books, but of the
very things themselves, that in the books be taught and contained. And after
the same wise, if Christ called bread his body, saying: This is my body, which
shall be given to death for you, yet he meant not, that the bread should be
given to death for us, but his body which by the bread was signified.

If this excellent clarke and doctor understand not these manner of speeches
(that be so plain) then has he does lost his senses, and forgotten his gramer
which teaches to refer the relative to the next antecedent. But of these
figurative speeches, I have spoken at large in my third book. First in the
viii. chap. proving by authority of the oldest authors in Christ's church, that
he called bread his body and wine his blood. And again in the ix. x. xi. and
xii. chapters, I have so fully entreated of such figurative speeches, that it
should be but a superfluous labor here to speak of any more: but I refer
the reader to those places.

And if M. doctor require a further answer herein, let him look upon the late
bishop of Winchesters book, called the detection of the devils sophistry,
where he writes plainly, that when Christ spoke these words, This is my body,
he made demonstration of the bread.

Setting of the cart before the Horses.
THan further in this prologue this Papist is not ashamed to say, that I set the
cart before the horses, putting reason first, and faith after: which lie is so
manifest, that it needs no further proof, but only to look upon my book,
wherein it shall evidently appear, that in all my five books I ground my
foundation upon gods word. And least the Papists should say, that I make the
expositions of the scripture my self (as they commonly use to do) I have
fortified my foundation by the authority of all the best learned and most holy
authors and martyrs, that were in the beginning of the church and many years
after, until the Antichrist of Rome rose up and corrupted altogether.

And as for natural reason, I make no mention thereof in all my v. books but
in one place only, which is in my second book speaking of Transubstantiation.
And in that place I set not reason before faith, but (as an handmayden) have
appointed her to do service unto faith, and to wait upon her. And in that
place she has done such service, that D. Smith durst not once look her in the
face, nor find any fault with her service, but has flylye and craftily stolen
away by her, as though he saw her not.

But in his own book he has so impudently set the cart before the horses in
Christ's own words, putting the words behind that go before, and the words
before that go behind, that (except a shameless Papist) no man durst be so
bold to attempt any such thing of his own head. For where the Evangelist and
S. Paul rehearse Christ's words thus: Take, eat, this is my body: Math. 26.
1. Cor. 11.
he in the confutation of my second book turns the order vpside down, and
says, This is my body, take and eat.

After this in his Preface he rehearses a great number of the wonderful
works of God, Of the wonderful works of God.
as that God made all the world of naught, that he made Adam of the earth and
Eve of his side, the bush to flame with fire and burn not, and many other
like, which be most manifestly expressed in holy scripture. And upon these he
concludes most vainly and untruly, that thing which in the scripture is
neither expressed nor understood, that Christ is corporally in heaven and in
earth, and in every place where the sacrament is.

And yet D. Smith says, that Gods word does teach this as plainly as the
other: using herein such a kind of sophistical argument, as all Logitia^s do
reprehend, which is called petitio principij, when a man takes yt thing for a
supposition and an approved truth, which is in controversy. And so does he in
this place when he says: Does not Gods word teach it thee as plainly as the
other? Here by this interrogatory he required that thing to be granted him as
a truth, which he ought to prove, and whereupon depends the whole matter that
is in question, that is to say, whether it be as plainly set out in the
scripture, that Christ's body is corporally in every place where the sacrament
is, as that God created all things of nothing, Adam of the earth, and Eve of
Adams side etc. This is it that I deny and that he should prove. But he takes
it for a supposition, saying by interrogation, does not the word of God teach
this as plainly as the other? Which I affirm to be utterly false as I have
showed in my third boobe, the xi. and twelfe chap. where I have most manifestly
proved, as well by Gods word as by ancient authors, that these words of
Christ, This is my body, and, This is my blood, be no plain speeches, but
figurative.

THen forth goes this papist unto the vi. chap. of S. Thou saying, Christ
promised his disciples, to give them such bread as should be his own very
natural flesh, John. 6.
which he would give to death for the life of the world. Can this his promise
(says M. Smith) be verified of common bread? Was that given upon the cross
for the life of the world?

Whereto I answer by his own reason. Can this his promise be verified of
sacramental bread? was that given upon the cross for the life of the world? I
marvel here not a little of M. Smithes either dulnes or maliciousnes, that
cannot or will not see, that Christ in this chap. of S. Ihon spoke not of
Sacramental bread, but of heavenly bread: nor of his flesh only, but also of
his blood and of his godhead, calling them heavenly bread that gives
everlasting life. So that he spoke of him self wholly, saying: I am the bread
of life. He that comes to me, shall not hunger: and he that believes in me,
shall not thirst for ever. And neither spoke he of common bread, nor yet of
sacramental bread. For neither of them was given upon the cross for the life
of the world.

And there can be nothing more manifest then that in this vi. chap. of Ihon
Christ spoke not of the sacrament of his flesh, but of his very flesh. And that
as well for that the sacrament was not then instituted, as also that Christ said
not in the future tense the bread which I will give, shall be my flesh, but in
the present tense, the bread which I will give, is my flesh, which sacramental
bread was neither then his flesh, nor was then instituted for a Sacrament, nor
was after given to death for the life of the world.

But as Christ, when he said unto the woman of Samaria. The water which I will
give, John. 4.
shall spring into everlasting life he meant neither of material water, nor of
the accidents of water, but of the holy ghost, which is the heavenly fountain,
that springs unto eternal life: so likewise when he said: The bread which I
will give, is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world, he meant
neither of the material bread, neither of the accidents of bread, John. 6.
but of his own flesh. Which although of it self it avails nothing, yet
(being in unity of person joined unto his divinity) it is the same heavenly
bread that he gave to death upon the cross for the life of the world.

But here M. Smith asks a question of the time, saying thus: When gave Christ
that bread which was his very flesh that he gave for us to death, if he did it
not at his last supper, when he said: This is my body, that shall be given for
you.

I answer (according to Cirils mind upon the same place) that Christ alone
suffered for us all, and by his wounds were we healed, he bearing our sins
in his body upon a tree, and being crucified for us, that by his death we might
live.

But what need I, M. Smith, to labor in answering to your question of the time,
when your question in it self contains the answer, and appoynteth the time
of Christ giving himself for the life of the world, when you say, that he gave
himself for us to death, which (as you confess skant three lines before) was
not at his supper, but upon the cross.

And if you will have none other giving of Christ for us, but at his supper (as
your reason pretends or else it is utterly naught) then surely Christ is much
bound unto you, that have delivered him from all his mocking, whipping,
scourging, crucifying, and all other pains of death which he suffered for us
upon the cross, and bring to pass that he was given only at his supper
without blood or pain, for the life of the world. But then is all the world
little beholding unto you, that by delivering of Christ from death, will suffer
all the world to remain in death, which can have no life, but by his death.

AFter the gospel of S. Ihon, M. Smith aleadgeth for his purpose S. Paul to
the corinthians, The place of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.
who bids every man to examine him self, before he receive this sacrament,
for he that eats and drinks it unworthily, is gilty of the body and blood
of Christ, eating and drinking his own damnation, because he discerns not
our lords body.

Here by the way it is to be noted, that D. Smith in reciting the words of S.
Paul, does alter them purposely, commonly putting this word sacrament, in the
steed of these words, bread and wine (which words he seems so much to
abhor, as if they were toades or serpents, because they make against his
Transubstantiation) where as S. Paul ever uses those words, and never names
this word, Sacrament.

But to the matter: What need we to examine our selves (says D. Smith) when we
shall eat but common bread and drink wine of the grape? Is a man gilty of
the body and blood of Christ which eats and drinks nothing else, but only
bare bread made of corn, and meare wine of the grape? Who says so good sir?
Do I say in my book, that those which come to the Lords table, do eat
nothing else, but bare bread made of corn, nor drink nothing but meare wine,
made of grapes? How often do I teach and repeat again and again, that as
corporally with our mouths we eat and drink the sacramental bread and
wine, so spiritually with our hearts, by faith, do we eat Christ's very flesh,
and drink his very blood, and do both feed and live spiritually by him,
although corporally he be absent from us, and sits in heaven at his fathers
right hand. And as in baptism we come not unto the water as we come to other
common waters, when we wash our hands, or bath our bodies, but we know that
it is a mystical water, admonishing us of the great and manifold mercies of
God toward us, of the league and promise made between him and us, and of his
wonderful working and operation in us. Wherefore we come to that water with
such fear, reverence and humility, as we would come to the presence of the
father, the son and the holy ghost, and of Jesus Christ himself both God and
man: although he be not corporally in the water, but in heaven above. And who
soever comes to that water (being of the age of discretion) must examine
himself duly, least if he come unworthily (none otherwise then he would
come unto other common waters) he be not renewed in Christ: but in steed of
salvation receive his damnation.

Even so it is of the bread and wine in the Lords holy supper. Wherefore every
man (as S. Paul says) must examine himself, when he shall aproche to that
holy table, and not come to gods board, as he would do to common feasts and
bankets, but must consider, that it is a mystical table, where the bread is
mystical, and the wine also mystical, wherein we be taught that we spiritually
feed upon Christ, eating him and drincking him, and as it were sucking out of
his side the blood of our redemption and food of eternal salvation, although
he be in heaven at his fathers right hand. And whosoever comes unto this
heavenly table, not having regard to Christ's flesh and blood (who should be
there our spiritual food) but comes thereto without faith, fear, humility
and reverence (as it were but to carnal feeding) he does not there feed upon
Christ, but the devil does feed upon him, and deuoureth him, as he did Judas.

And now may every man perceive, how fondly and falsely M. Smith concludes of
these words of S. Paul, that our Savior Christ's body and blood is really
and corporally in the sacrament.

Master Peter Martyr.
AFter this he falls to railing, lying and sclaundering of M. Peter Martyr, a
man of that excellent learning and godly living, that he passes D. Smith as
far, as the sun in his clear light passes the moon being in the Eclipse.

Peter Martyr (says he) at his first coming to Oxford when he was but a
Lutherian in this matter, taught as D. Smith now does. But when he came once to
the Court, and saw that doctrine misliked them, that might do him hurt in his
living, he anon after turned his tippet, and sang an other song.

Of M. Peter Martyr his opinion and judgment in this matter no man can better
testify than I. For as much as he lodged within my house long before he came
to Oxford, and I had with him many conferences in that matter, and know that he
was then of the same mind that he is now, and as he defended after openly in
Oxford, and has written in his book. And if D. Smith understood him otherwise
in his Lectures at the beginning, it was for lack of knowledge, for that then
D. Smith understood not the matter, nor yet does not, as it appears by this
folish and unlearned book which he has now set out.

No more than he understood my book of the Cathechisme, and therefore reports
untruly of me, that I in that book did set forth the real presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament. Unto which false report I have answered in my
fourth book the eight chapter.

But this I confess of my self, that not long before I wrote the said
Cathechisme, I was in that error of the real presence, as I was many years
past in diverse other errors as of Transubstantiation, of the sacrifice
propitiatory of the priests in the Mass, of pilgrimages, purgatory, pardons,
and many other superstitions and errors that came from Rome being brought up
from youth in them, and nouseled therein for lack of good instruction from my
youth, the outrageous fluds of Papisticall errors at that time ouerflowing the
world. For the which and other mine offenses in youth, I do daily pray unto God
for mercy and pardon, saying. Delicta inuentutis meae and ignorantias meas, ne
memineris Domine. Good Lord remember not mine ignorances and offenses of my
youth.

But after it had pleased God to show unto me by his holy word a more perfect
knowledge of his son Jesus Christ, from time to time as I grew in knowledge
of him, by little and little I put away my former ignorance. And as God of his
mercy gave me light, so through his grace I opened mine eyes to receive it, and
did not wilfully repugne unto God and remain in darkness. And I trust in gods
mercy and pardon for my former errors, because I erred but of frailnes and
ignorance. And now I may say of my self as S. Paul said: When I was like a
babe or child in the knowledge of Christ, I spoke like a child and understood
like a child: But now that I come to man's estate and growing in Christ through
his grace and mercy, 1. Cor. 13.
I have put away that childishnes.

Now after that D. Smith has thus untruly belyed both me and master Peter
Martyr, he falls into his exclamations, saying: O Lord what man is so mad to
believe such mutable teachers, which change their doctrine at men's pleasure, as
they see advantage and profit? They turn and will turn as the wind turns.

Do you not remember M. Smith the fable how the old crab rebuked her young,
that they went not straight forth: and the common experience, that those that
look a squint, sometimes find fault with them yt look right? You have turned
twice, and retracted your errors, and the third time promised, and breaking
your promise ran away. And find you fault with me and M. Peter Martyr, as
though we for men's pleasures turn like the wind, as we see advantage? Shall
the wethercocke of Paul's that turns about with every wind, lay the fault in
the church, and say yt it turns?

I will not here answer for my self, but leave the judgment to God (who
sees the bottom of all men's hearts, and at whose only judgment I shall
stand or fall) saving that this I will say before God (who is every where
present, and knows all things that be done) that as for seeking to please
men in this matter, I think my conscience clear, that I never sought herein
but only the pleasure and glory of God. And yet will I not judge my self
herein, nor take D. Smith for my judge, but will refer the judgment to him
that is the rightful judge of all men. But as for D. Peter Martyr, has he
sought to please men for advantage? who having a great yearly revenue in his
own country, forsook all for Christ's sake, and for the truth and glory of
God came into strange countries, where he had neither land nor friends, but as
God of his goodness (who never forsakes them that put their trust in him)
provided for him.

BUt after this exclamation, this papist returns to the matter, saying: The
Argument of the door and Sepulcher.
Tell me, why may not Christ's body be as well in the sacrament and in heaven
both at once, as that his body was in one proper place, with ye body of the
stone, that lay still upon his grave, when he rose from death to life? and as
his body was in one proper place at once with ye body of the door or gate,
when the same being shut, he entered into the house where ye Apostles were?

Make you these two things all one, M. Smith, diverse bodies to be in one
place, and one body to be in diverse places? If Christ's body had been in one
place with the substance of the stone or door, and at the same time, the^ you
might well have proved thereby, that his body may as well be in one place, with
the substance of bread and wine. But what avails this to prove, that his body
may be in diverse places at one time? which is nothing like to the other, but
rather clean contrary. Marry when Christ arose out of the sepulcher, or came
into the house when the doors were shut, if you can prove that at the same time
he was in heaven, then were that to some purpose, to prove that this dodye may
be corporally in heaven and earth both at one time.

And yet the controversy here in this matter, is not what may be, but what is,
God can do many things, which he neither does nor will do. And to us his will
(in things that appear not to our senses) is not known but by his word:
Christ's body may be as well in the bread and wine, as in in the door and stone,
and yet it may be also in the door and stone, and not in the bread and wine.

But if we will stretch out our faith no further the^ Gods word does lead us,
neither is Christ's body corporally present in one proper place with the bread
and wine, nor was also with the stone or door. For the Scripture says in no
place, Math. 28.
that the body of Christ was in the door, or in the stone that covered the
Sepulcher, but it says plainly, that an Angel came down from heaven, and
removed away the stone from the Sepulcher, and the women that came to see the
Sepulcher, Mar. 16. John. 20.
found the stone removed away. And although the Gospel say, that Christ came
into the house when the door was shut, yet it says not that Christ's body was
within the door, so that the door and it occupied both but one place.

But peradventure M. Smith will ask me this question. How could Christ come
into the house, the door being shut, except he came through the door, and
that his body must be in ye door? To your wise question M. Smith I will
answer by an other question: Could not Christ come as well into the house when
the door was shut, as ye Apostles could go out of prison, the door being
shut? Acts. 5.
Could not God work this thing, except the Apostles must go through the door,
and occuyy the same place that the door did? Or could not Christ do so much
for his own self, as he did for his Apostles?

But M. Smith is so blind in his own fantasies, that he sees not how much
his own examples make against him self. For if it be like in the Sacrament,
as it was in the stone and door, and Christ's body was in one propre place,
with the body and substance of the stone and door, then must Christ's body in
the Sacrament be in one propre place, with the body and substance of bread and
wine. And so he must then confess, that there is no Transubstantiation.

The appearyng of Christ in his Ascension.
THen from the door and sepulcher, Doct. Smith comes to the Revelations of
Peter and Paul, which saw Christ (as he says) bodily upon earth after his
Ascension. Which declares, that although Christ departed hence at the time of
his Ascension into heaven, and there sits at the right hand of his father,
yet he may be also here in the blessed Sacrament of the altar. I am not so
ignorant, but I know that Christ appeared to S. Paul, and said to him: Saul
Saul, why do thou persecute me? Acts. 13. S. Augustine.
But S. Augustine says that Christ at his Ascension spoke the last words, that
ever he speak upon earth. And yet we find that Christ speaks (says he) but
in heaven and from heaven, and not upon earth. For he spoke to Paul from
above, saying: Saul Saul why do thou persecute me? The head was in heaven,
and yet he said: why do thou persecute me? because he persecuted his members
upon earth.

And if this please not Master Smith, let him blame S. Augustine and not me,
for I feign not this my self, but only allege S. Augustine.

And as the father spoke from heaven, when he said: This is my beloved son,
Math. 3. and. 17.
in whom I am pleased, and also S. Stephen saw Christ sittyng in heaven at his
fathers right hand: even so meant S. Augustine, that S. Paul and all other that
have seen and heard Christ speak since his Ascension, Acts. 7.
have seen and heard him from heaven.

The Church.
NOw when this Papist going forward with his works, sees his building so
feeble and weak, that it is not able to stand, he returns to his chief
foundation, the Church and Councels general, willing all men to stay
thereupon, and to leave disputyng and reasonyng. And chiefly he shoareth up his
house with the Council Lateranence, whereat (says he) were xiij. hundred
Fathers and xv. But he tells not that viij. hundred of them were Monks,
Friars, and Chanons, the Bishop of Romes own dear deare-lynges, and chief
champions, called together in his name and not in Christ's. From which brood
of vypers and Serpents, what thing can be thought to come, but that did
proceed from the spirit of their most holy father, that first begat them,
that is to say, from the spirit of Antichrist.

And yet I know this to be true, that Christ is present with his holy Church
(which is his holy elected people) and shall be with them to the worlds end,
leadyng and gouernyng them with his holy spirit, and teaching them all truth
necessary for their salvation. And when so ever any such be gathered together
in his name, there is he among them, and he shall not suffer the gates of hell
to prevail against them. For although he may suffer them by their own
frailenes for a time to err, fall, and to dye, yet finally, neither satan,
hell, sin, nor eternal death, shall prevail against them.

But it is not so of the Church and sea of Rome, which accompteth it self to
be the holy Catholic Church, and the Bishop thereof to be most holy of all
other. For many years ago Satan has so prevailed against that stinkyng whore
of Babylon, that her abominations be known to the whole world, the name of
God is by her blasphemed and of the cup of her dronkennes and poison, have all
nations tasted.

AFter this comes Smith to Bere^garius, Almericus, Carolostadius,
Oecolampadius and Zuinglius, The true faith was in the Church from the
beginning, and was not taught first by Berengarius.
affirmyng that the Church ever since Christ's times a thousand five hundredth
years and more, has believed that Christ is bodily in the Sacrament, and never
taught otherwise until Berengarius came, about a thousand years after Christ,
whom the other followed.

But in my book I have proved by Gods word and the old ancient Authors, that
Christ is not in the sacrament corporally, but is bodily and corporally
ascended into heaven, and there shall remain unto the worlds end.

And so the true Church of Christ ever believed from the beginning with out
repugnaunce, until Satan was let louse, and Antichrist came with his
Papists, which feigned a new and false doctrine contrary to Gods word, and the
true Catholic doctrine.

And this true faith God preserves in his holy church still, and will do unto
the worlds end, maugre the wicked Antichrist and all the gates of hell. And
almighty God from time to time has stre^gthened many holy Martirs, for this
faith to suffer death by Antichrist, and the great harlot Babylon, who has
embrewed her hands, and is made drunken with the blood of Martyrs. Whose blood
God will revenge at length, although in ye mean time he suffer the patience
and faith of his holy Saints to be tried.

ALl the rest of his Preface contains nothing else, What Church it is that
ca^ not err.
but the authority of the Church, which (Smith says) cannot wholly err: and he
so sets forth and extolleth the same, that he prefers it above Gods word,
affirming not only that it is the pillar of truth, and no less to be believed
then holy scripture, but also that we should not believe holy scripture but for
it. So that he makes the word of men equal or above the word of God.

And truth it is in deed, that the church does never wholly err, for ever in
most darcknes God shines unto his elect, and in the midst of all iniquity he
governs them so with his holy word and spirit, that the gates of hell
prevail not against them. And these be known to him although the world many
times know them not, but has them in derision and hatred, as it had Christ and
his Apostles. Nevertheless at the last day they shall be known to all the whole
world, when the wicked shall wonder at their felicity, and say: These be they
whom we sometime had in verision and mocked. We fools thought their lives very
madness, S^p. 5.
and their end to be without honor. But now lo, how they be accounted among
the children of God, and their portion is among the saints. Therefore we have
erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousness has not shined unto
us, we have wearyed our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction.

But this holy church is so unknown to the world, that no man can discern it,
Psalm. 7. 2. Ti. 2.
but God alone, who only searches the hearts of all men, and knows his true
children, from other that be but bastardes.

This church is the pillar of truth, because it rests upon Gods word, which
is the true and sure foundation, ^. Tim. 3.
and will not suffer it to err and fall. But as for the open known church, and
the outward face thereof, it is not the pillar of truth, otherwise the^ that it
is (as it were) a register or treasory to keep the books of Gods holy will
and testament, and to rest only thereupon, as S. Augustine and Tertullian
mean, in the place by M. Smith alleged.

And as the register keeps all men's wills, and yet has none authority to
add, change, or take away any thing, nor yet to expound the wills further then
the very words of the will extend unto, (so that he has no power over the
will, but by the will,) even so has the church no further power over the holy
scripture (which conteyneth the will and testament of god) but only to keep
it, and to see it observed and kept. For if the Church proceed further, to
make any new Articles of the faith, besides the Scripture, or contrary to the
Scripture, or direct not the form of life according to the same, then it is
not the pillar of truth, nor the Church of Christ, but the sinagogue of Satan,
and the temple of Antichrist, which both erreth it self, and brings into
error as many as do follow it.

And the holy Church of Christ is but a small herd or flock, in comparison to
the great multitude of them that follow Satan and Antichrist, as Christ him
self says, Luke. 12.
and the word of God, and the course of the world from the beginning until
this day has declared.

For from the creation of the world until Noes flood, what was then ye open
face of the Church? How many godly men were in those thousand and six hundred
years and more? Gene. 7.
Did not iniquity begin at Cain to rule the world, and so increased more and
more, that at the length God could no longer suffer, but drowned all the world
for sin, except viij. persons, which only were left upon the whole earth?

And after the world was purged by the flood, fell it not by and by to the
former iniquity again? Gene. 12.
so that within few years after, Abraham could find no place, where he might
be suffered to worship the true living God, but that God appointed him a
strange country, almost clearly desolate and uninhabited: where he and a few
other, (contrary to the usage of the world) honored one God.

And after the great benefits of God, showed unto his people of Israel, and
the law also given unto them (whereby they were taught to know him, and honor
him) yet how many times did they fall from him? Did they not from time to time
make them new Gods, and worship them? Was not the open face of the Church so
miserably deformed, not only in the wilderness, and in the time of the
Judges, but also in time of the kings, that after the division of the
kingdom, Eccle. 49.
amongst all the kings of Judah, there was but only three, in whose times the
true Religion was restored, and among all the kings of Israel not so much as
one. Were not all that time the true Priests of God, a few in number? Did not
all the rest maintain Idolatry and all abhominatio^s in groves and mountains,
worshippyng Baal and other false Gods? And did they not murder and slay all
the true Prophets, that taught them to worship the true God? In so much that
Helias the Prophet, knowing no mo of all the whole people that followed the
right trade, but him self alone, made his complaint unto almighty God,
saying: O Lord, they have slain thy Prophets, and overthrown thine aultars,
3. Reg. 19.
and there is no mo left but I alone, and yet they lie in wait to flea me
also. So that although almighty God suffered the^ in their captivity at
Babylon no more but lxx. years, yet he suffered them in their Idolatry
(following their own ways and inventions) many hundred years, Iere. 25. and.
29
the mercy of God being so great, that their punishment was short and small,
Act. 14.
in respect of their long and grievous offenses. And at the time of Christ's
coming the high Priests came to their offices by such fraud, simony, murder
and poysonyng, that the like has not been often read nor heard of, except
only at Rome.

And when Christ was come, what godly religion found he? What Annasses and
Cayphasses? what hypocrisy, superstition and abomination before God, although
to men's eyes things appeared holy and godly? Was not then Christ alone and his
Apostles, with other that believed his doctrine, the holy and true Church?
Although they were not so taken, but for heretics, seditious persons, and
blasphemers of God, and were extremely persecuted and put to vilanous death, by
such as accounted them selves, and were taken for the Church, which fulfilled
the measure of their fathers that persecuted the Prophets. Math. 13.
Upon who^ came all the righteous blood, that was shed upon the earth from the
blood of just Abell, unto the blood of Zachary, the son of Barachie, whom
they slew between the Temple and the altar?

And how many persons remained constantly in the true lively faith, at the time
of Christ's passion? I think M. Smith will say but a very few, seeing that
Peter denied Christ his Master three times, Math. 26. Mar. 24.
and all his Apostles fled away, and one for have without his clothes.

What wonder is it then, that the open church is now of late years fallen into
many errors and corruption, and the holy church of Christ is secret and
unknown? seeing that Satan these 500. years has been let lose, and
Antichrist reigns, spoiling and devouring the simple flock of Christ. But as
almighty God said unto Helias: I have reserved and kept for mine ownne self
seven thousand, 3. Reg. 19.
which never bowed their knee to Baall, so it is at this present. For although
almighty God has suffered these four or five hundred years, the open face of
his church to be vggely deformed, and shamefullye defiled by the sects of the
Papists (which is so manifest that now all the world knows it) yet has God
of his manifold mercy, ever preserved a good number (secret to himself) in his
true religion, although Antichrist has bathed himself in the blood of no
small number of them.

And although the Papists have led innumerable people out of the right way,
yet the church is to be followed, but the Church of Christ, not of Antichrist:
the church that concerning the faith contains it self with in gods word, not
that deuiseth daily new artcles contrary to gods word. The church that by the
true interpretation of scripture, and good example gathers people unto
Christ, not that by wrasting of the scripture and evil example of corrupt
living, draws them away from Christ. And now forasmuch as the wicked church
of Rome (counterfayting the church of Christ) has in this matter of the
sacrament of the blessed body and blood of our savior Christ, varied from the
pure and holy Church in the Apostles time, and many hundred years after (as in
my book I have plainly declared, and manifestly proved) it is an easy matter
to discern, which church is to be followed. And I cannot but marvel, that
Smith alleges for for him, Vincentius Lirenensis, who (contrary to D. Smith)
teaches plainly that the canon of the Bible is perfect and fufficient of it
self, for the truth of the Catholic faith: and that the whole church cannot
make one article of the faith, although it may be taken as a necessary witness,
for the receiving and establishing of the same with these three conditions,
that the thing which we would establish thereby, has been believed in all
places, ever and of al men. Which the Papistical doctrine in this matter has
not been, but came from Rome sins Beringarius time by Nicolas the ii.
Innocentius the third, and other of their sort: where as the doctrine which I
have set forth, came from Christ and his Apostles, and was of all men every
where with one consent taught and believed (as my book shows plainly) until
the Papists did transform and transubstantiate the chief articles of our
christen faith.

Thus is an answer made unto the false calumniations of Smith in the preface
of his book, or rather unto his whole book, which is so full of bragging,
boasting, slaundering, misreporting, wrangling, wrasting, false construing, and
lying, that those taken out of the book, there is nothing worthy in the whole
book to be answered. Nevertheless in answering to the late bishop of
Winchesters book. I shall fully answer also D. Smith in all points that
require answer. And so with one answer shall I dispatch them both. And in
some places where one of the^ varieth from an other (as they do in many great
matters, and in the chief and principal points) I shall set them together
Bithum cum Bachio. and Esernium cum Pacidiano, to try which of them is more
stout and valiant to overthrow the other.

Here ends the answer unto the Preface of M. Smithes book which he wrote
against the defense of the true and catholic doctrine of the Sacrament of the
body and blood of our Savior CHRIST.
Matters wherein the Bishop of Winchester varyed from other Papists.
OTher say, That the body of Christ is made of bread. He says, that the body
of Christ is not made of bread, nor was never so taught, but is made present of
bread, page 72. lin. 14. and. page 178. lin. 10.

He says that Christ made the demonstration of the bread, and called it his
body, when he said: This is my body. page, 257. lin. 27. And in the Devils
Sophistry. fol. 27. Other say contrary. And Smith, fol. 53.

He says, that This is my body, is as much to say, as this is made my body. And
so he takes (Est) for (fit) page 295. lin. 35.

Other say, that (Est) is taken there substantive, that is to say, only for (
is,) and not for (is made.) Marcus Antonius. fol. 171. facie. 2, consideratione
6.

He says, that Christ is present in the Sacrament after the same manner that
he is in heaven, page 141. lin. 6. Other say contrary, that he is in heaven
after the manner of quantity, and that he is not so in the Sacrament.

He says that where the body of Christ is, there is whole Christ God and man,
and that when we speak of Christ is body, we must understand a true body,
which has both form and quantity, page 71. lin. 37.

Smith says, that Christ's body in the Sacrament has not his proper form and
quantity. fol. 106.

He says, we believe simply, that Christ's body is naturally and corporally in
the Sacrament, wihout drawyng away his accidences or addyng, page 353. lin. 1.

Smith says, we say that Christ's body is in the Sacrament against nature
withal his qualities and accidents. fol. 105.

He says, that Gods works be all seemelynes without confusion, although he
ca^ not locally distinct Christ's head from his foot, nor his legs from his
arms, page 70. lin. 27.

Other say, that Christ's head and foot and other parts be not in deed
loccally distinct in the Sacrament, but be so confounded, that where soever one
is, there be all the rest. They teach that the body of Christ is made of bread,
he says, it was never so taught, page 79. lin. 6. etc.

He says, that Christ's body is the Sacrament sensibly, naturally, carnally
and corporally, page 159. lin. 9. etc. Other say contrary Smith. fol. 39.

Other say, that Christ's feet in the Sacrament be there, where his head is.
He says, that who soever say so may be called mad, page 61. lin. 34.

He says that Christ's body is in the Sacrament naturally and carnally, page
156. lin. 6.

Other say that corporally Christ goes into the mouth or stomach and no
further. He says contrary, page 52. lin. 36.

He says, that Christ dwells corporally in him that receives the Sacrament
worthily, so long as he remains a member of Christ, page 53. lin. 1. page
56. lin. 31. etc.

Other say contrary, but that Christ flies up into heaven so soon as the
bread is chawed in the mouth or changed in the stomach, Smith, fol. 64. page
65. lin. 2. and. 25.

He says, that no creature can eat the body of Christ, but only man, page
66. lin. 30. Other say clean contrary.

He says, that an unrepentant sinner receauyng the Sacrament has not
Christ's body nor spirit within him. page 225. lin. 36.

Smith, says that he has Christ's body and spirit within him. fol. 136.

He says, that of the figure it may not be said, Adore it, worship it, and
that is not to be Adored, which the bodily eye sees, page 178. lin. 40. page
239, lin, 32. Marcus Antonius. fol. 176. fa. 2.

Smith, says contrary. fol. 145. fa. 2.

He says, that reason will agree with the doctrine of Transubstantiation well
enough, page 264. lin. 47.

Smith says, that Transubstantiation is against reason and natural operation.
fol. 60.

Other say: that worms in the Sacrament be gendred of accidences.

He says, that the be wrong borne in hand to say so, page 355. lin. 3.

He says, that the accidences of bread and wine, do mould sour and wax
vinegar, page 265. lin. 11. and. 355. lin. 8. And Marcus. fol. 168. fa. 1.

Smith says thus, I say that the consecrated wine turns not into vinegar,
nor the consecrated bread mouleth nor engenders worms, nor is burned, nor
receives into it any poison, as long as Christ's body and blood are under the
forms of them, which do abide there, so long as the natural qualities and
properties of bread and wine tarry there in their natural disposition and
condition (that the bread and wine might be naturally there, if they had not
been changed into Christ's body and blood) and also as long as the host and
consecrated wine are apt to be received of man, and no longer, but go and
depart thence by Gods power, as it pleases him. And then a new substance is
made of God, which turns into vinegar, engenders worms, mouleth, is burned,
feeds men and myse, receives poison, etc. fol. 64. and. 105.

He says, every yea, contains a nay in it naturally, so as who soever says,
This is bread, says it is no wine. For in the rule of common reason the grant
of one substance is the denial of an other: And therefore reason has these
conclusions thoroughly, what soever is bread, is no wine, what soever is wine,
is no milk. etc. So Christ saying, This is my body, says it no bread, page
256. lin. 38. and page 265. lin. 5.

Smith says, a boy which has only learned the Sophistry, will not dispute
so fondly. fol. 77.

Other say, that the Mass is a sacrifice satisfactory by devotion of the
Priest, and not by the thing that is offered.

He says otherwise, page 80. lin. 43.

He says, that the only immolation of Christ in him self upon the altar of
the Cross, is the very satisfactory sacrifice for the reconciliation of
mankind to the favor of God, page 437. lin. 1.2. and. 31.

Smith says, what is it to offer Christ's body and blood at Mass, to purchase
thereby everlasting life, if it be not, the Mass to be a Sacrifice to pacify
Gods wrath for sin, and to obtain his mercy Smith. fol. 24. 148. and.164.

Priests do offer for our salvation to get Heaven and to avoid Hell. fol.
eodem.

Matters wherein the Bishop varied from him self.
THe body of Christ in the Sacrament is not made of bread, but is made present
of bread, page 79. lin. 6. etc. and page 202. lin. 40. etc.

Of bread is made the body of Christ, page 344. lin. 8.

The Catholic faith has from the beginning confessed truly Christ's intent
to make bread his body, page 26. lin. 40. Christ gave that he made of bread,
page 257. lin. 50. And of many breads is made one body of Christ page 144. lin.
23. And faith shows me that bread is the body of Christ, that is to say, made
the body of Christ, page 295. lin. 30.

Christ spoke plainly (This is my body) making demonstration of the bread when
he said (This is my body) in the Devils Sophistry. fol. 27. I will pass over
the fantasies of them, who wrote the principal chief text (This is my body)
from consecration of the Sacrament, to the demonstration of Christ's body. etc,
in the deuilish devils Sophistry. fol. 70.

The demonstration (This) may be referred to the invisible substance, page
106. lin. 42. The (Is) was of his body and blood, and not of the bread and
wine, page 251. lin. 8.

Illis verbis (hoc est Corpus meum) substantia corporis significatur, nec de
pane quic quam intelligitur, quum corpus de substantia sua, no^ aliena
predicetur fol. 24. fa. 2. Mar Ant. Constant.

When Christ said (This is my body) the truth of the litterall sense has an
absurdity in carnal reason, page 138. lin. 19.

What can be more evidently spoken of the presence of Christ's natural body
and blood in the most blessed Sacrament of the altar, than is in these words,
This is my body, in the devils Sophistry. fol. 5.

Where the body of Christ is, there is whole Christ, God and man. And when we
speak of Christ's body, we must understand a true body which has both form
and quantity, page 71. lin. 47. And he is present in the Sacrament as he is in
heaven, page 141. lin. 6. etc.

We believe simply the substance of Christ's body to be in the Sacrament
without drawyng away of accidents or adding, page 353. lin. 1.

Christ is not present in the Sacrament after the manner of quantity, but under
the form and quantity of bread and wine, page 71. lin. 50. page 90. lin. 43.

In such as receive the Sacrament worthily Christ dwells in them corporally,
and naturally and carnally, page 166. lin. 19. and, page 173. lin. 54. and,
page 191. lin. 47.

The manner of Christ's being in the Sacrament is not corporal, not carnal,
not natural, not sensible, not perceptible, but only spiritual, page 159.
lin. 17. and, page 197. lin. 32.

We receive Christ in the Sacrament of his flesh and blood, if we receive him
worthily, page 167. lin. 9. and, page 174. lin. 1.

When an unrepentant sinner receives the Sacrament he has not Christ's body
within him, page 225. lin. 43.

He that eats verily the flesh of Christ, is by nature in Christ, and Christ
is naturally in him, page 17. lin. 38. etc.

An evil man in the Sacrament receives indeed Christ's very body, page eadem
lin. 7.

Evil men eat verily the flesh of Christ, page 225. lin. 47.

Christ gives us to be eaten the same flesh that he took of the virgin, page
241. lin. 27.

We receive not in the Sacrament Christ's body that was Crucified, page 243.
lin. 16.

Saint Augustines rule De doctrina Christiana pertains not to Christ's
Supper, page 117. lin. 21.

The sixth of John speaks not of any promise made to the eating of a token of
Christ's flesh, page 4. lin. 40.

S. Augustine means of the sacrament, page 119. lin. 24.

The sixth of John must needs be understand of corporal and sacrame^tall
eating, page 17. lin. 48.

Reason in place of service (as being inferior to faith) will agree with the
doctrine of Transubstantiation well enough, page 265. lin. 1. And as reason
received into faithes service, does not strive with Transubstantiation, but
agrees well with it: so man's senses be no such direct adversaries to
Transubstantiation, as a matter whereof they can no skill, for the senses can
no skill of substaunces, page 271. lin. 24. etc.

Thine eyes say, there is but bread and wine: Thy taste says the same. Thy
feelyng and smellyng agree fully with them. Hereunto is added the carnal man's
understanding, which because it takes the beginning of the senses proceeds
in reasonyng sensually in the devils sophistry. fol. 6. The Church has not
forborne to preach the truth, to the confusion of man's senses and
understanding. fol. 15.

It is called bread because of the outward visible matter, page

When it is called bread, it is meant Christ the spiritual bread, page 284.
lin. 25.

The fraction is in the outward sign, and not in the body of Christ, page 144.
lin. 39. and, page 348. lin. 21. And in the devils sophistry. fol. 17.

That which is broken is the body of Christ, page 348. lin. 18.

The inward nature of the bread is the substance, page 286. lin. 23.

Substance signifies the outward nature, page 359. lin. 22.

The substaunces of bread and wine be visible creatures, page 285. lin. 48.
and, page 286. lin. 44.

Accidents be the visible natures and visible elements, page 363. lin. 39.

Christ is our satisfaction holy and fully, and has paid our whole debt to
God the Father, for ye appeasing of his wrath against us, page 81. lin. 39.

The act of the Priest done according to Gods commandment must needs be
propitiatory and ought to be trusted on, to have a propitiatory effect, page
437. lin. 13.

Contrary in this devils sophistry. 27. 70. Contrary in the devils sophistry. 5.
The demonstration ( This) may be referred to the invisible substance, page
106. lin. 44. The ( Is) was of his body and blood, and not of the bread and
wine, page 251. lin. 8.

When Christ said, ( This is my body) the truth of ye literal sense has an
absurdity in carnal reason, page 138. lin. 19. And it is a singular miracle
of Christ understood as the plain words signify in their propre sense.
ibidem. lin. 21.

The sacrifice of our savior Christ was never reiterate, page 368. lin. 46.

Priests do sacrifice Christ, page 381. lin. 42. etc. And the Catholic
doctrine teaches the daily sacrifice to be the same in essence that was
offered on the Cross, page 436. lin. 11.

The Nestorians granted both the Godhead manhood always to be in Christ
continually, page 309. lin. 18.

The Nestorians denied Christ conceived God or borne God, but that he was
afterward God as a man that is not borne a Bishop is after made a Bishop. So
the Nestorians said that the Godhead was an accession after by merit, and that
he was conceived only man, page 309. lin. 12.

Christ uses us as familiarly as he did his Apostles. page 83. lin. 54.

Christ is not to be said conuersaunt in earth, page 101. lin. 16.

Concessa.
ON what part thou Reader, see craft, slyght, shift, obliquitie, or in any
one point an open manifestly, there thou may consider what soever pretense be
made of truth, yet the victory of truth, not to be there intended, page 12.
lin. 19.

When Christ had taught of the eating of him self being the bread descended
from heaven declaryng that eating to signify beleuyng then he entered to
speak of the geuyng of his flesh to be eaten, page 27. lin. 7.

Christ must be spiritually in a man before he receive the sacrament, or he can
not receive the sacrament worthily, page 48. lin. 46. and, page 140. lin.
vltima, and, page 172. lin. 28. and, 181. lin. 28.

How Christ is present, page 61. lin. 10. and, page 71. lin. 41. and, page 90.
lin. 44. page 57. lin. 17. and, page 197. lin. 30.

By faith we know only the being present of Christ's most precious body, not
the manner thereof, page 61. lin. 43.

What we speak of Christ's body, we must understand a true body, which has
both form and quantity, page 71. lin. 34.

Although Christ's body have all those truth of form and quantity, yet it is
not present after the manner of quantity, page 71. lin. 37.

For the worthy receiving of Christ we must come endued with Christ, and
clothed with him seemly in that garment, page 92. lin. 31.

Really, that is to say, verily, truly and in deed, not in fantasy or
imagination, page 140. lin. 21.

All the old prayers and ceremonies sound as the people did communicate with
the Priest, page 145. lin. 9.

Really and sensibly the old Authors in syllables used not, for so much as I
have read, but corporally and naturally they used speaking of this sacrament,
page 155. lin. 13.

Christ may be called sensibly present, page 155. lin. 26. and, page 159. lin.
10.

By faith Christ dwells in us spiritually, page 158. lin. 16.

Our perfect unity with Christ is to have his flesh in us and to have Christ
bodily and naturally dwelling in us by his manhood, Falsa.
page 166. lin. 30. etc. and, page 17. lin. 34.

Evil men eat the body of Christ, but sacramentally and not spiritually, page
222. lin. 47.

Christ's flesh in the sacrament is given us to eat spiritually, and therefore
there may be no such imaginations to eat Christ's body carnally after the
manner he walked here, nor drink his blood as it was shed upon the Cross, but
spiritually understood it gives life, page 241. lin. 18.

To eat only in faith is specially to remember Christ's flesh as it was
visibly Crucified, page 243. lin. 28.

Falsum.
We eat not Christ as he sits in heaven reignyng, page 243. lin. 32.

The word Transubstantiation was first spoken of by public authority in a
general Counsel, where the Bishop of Rome was present, page 250. lin. 28.

The word ( Nature) signifies both the substance and also property of the
nature, page 291. lin. 27.

Falsum.
The sensible thing after the capacity of common understanding is called
substance but the inward nature in learning is properly called substance,
page 338. lin. 31.

Falsum.
In common bread the substance is not broken at all. page 257. lin. 32.

The Catholic doctrine teaches not the daily sacrifice of Christ's most
precious body and blood, to be an iteration of the once perfected sacrifice on
the cross, but a sacrifice that represents the sacrifice and shows it also
before the faithful eyes. page 386. lin. 20.

The effect of the offering on the Cross is given and dispensed in the
Sacrament of Baptism. page 386. lin. 30.

By virtue of the same offering on the Cross such as fall be releued in the
sacrament of penance. page ead. lin. 16.

The daily sacrifice of the Church is also propitiatory but not in that degree
of propitiation, as for redemption, regeneration or remission of deadly sin
(which was once purchased and by force thereof is in the Sacraments ministered)
but for the increase of Gods favor, the mitigation of Gods displeasure
provoked by our infirmities, the subduyng of temptations and the perfection of
virtue in us. page 387. lin. 15. etc.

All good works, good thoughts and good meditations may be called sacrifices,
and sacrifices propitiatory also, for as much as in their degree, God accepts
and takes them through the effect and strength of the very sacrifice of
Christ's death. page ead. lin. 19. etc.

To call the daily offering a sacrifice satisfactory must have an understanding
that signifies not the action of the Priest, but the presence of Christ's most
precious body and blood, the very sacrifice of the world once perfectly offered
being propitiatory and satisfactory, for all the world. page eadem. lin. 43.
etc.

Or else the word satisfactory must have a signification and meaning that
declares the acception of the thing done, and not the propre counteruaile of
the action. For otherwise the daily sacrifice in respect of the action of the
Priest can not be called satisfactory, and it is a word in deed that sounds
not well so placed although it might be saved by a signification. page eadem.
lin. 46. etc.

I think this speech to be freque^ted that the only immolatio^ of Christ in
him self upon the altar of the Cross, is the very satisfactory, sacrifice
for the reconciliation of mankind to the favor of God. page ead. lin. 50.

I have not read the daily sacrifice of Christ's most precious body to be
called a sacrifice satisfactory. page, eadem. lin. 52.

But this speech has in deed been used, that the Priest should sing
satisfactory, which they understood of the satisfaction of the Priests duty
to attend the prayer he was required to make. Ibid. lin. 53.

In the sacrifice of the Church Christ's death is not iterated but a memory
daily renewed of that death, so as Christ's offering on the Cross once done
and consumate is now only remembered. page 391. lin. 5.

The same body is offered daily on the altar that was once offered upon the
Cross, but the same manner of offering is not daily that was on the altar of
the Cross. For the daily offering is without bloudshedyng and is termed so, to
signify that bloudshedyng once done to be sufficient. page eadem. lin. 8. etc.

Matters wherein the Bishop varyeth from the truth and from the old Authors of
the Church.
IF we eat not the flesh of the son of man we have not life in us, because
Christ has ordered the Sacrament. etc. page 17. lin. 12.

When Christ said, Take eat this is my body, he fulfilled that which he
promised in the vj. of John that he would give his flesh, for the life of the
world. page 27. lin. 28. Mar. Ant. fol. 168. Nota.


When Christ said the flesh profits nothing, he spoke not of his flesh as it
is united unto his divinity. page 27. lin. 53. and. page 329. lin. 24.

God in Baptism gives only the spirit of Christ, and in the Sacrament of
the altar the very body and blood of Christ. page 34. lin. 44.

Unworthy receivers of the sacrament receive Christ's body with mouth only,
Concessum.
the worthy receivers both with mouth and heart. page 54. lin. 47. etc.

We must believe Christ's works to be most perfectly true according to the
truth of the letter, Concessum.
where no absurdity in Scripture drives us from it how soever it seem
repugnaunt to reason. page 62. lin. 20.

The Fathers did eat Christ's body, and drink his blood in truth of promise,
Concessum.
not in truth of presence. page 74. lin. 23. etc.

The Fathers did eat Christ spiritually, Sacramenta in signis fuerunt diuersa,
si in re paria.
but they did not eat his body present spiritually and sacramentally, page
eadem. lin. 26.

Their Sacraments were figures of the things, but ours contain the very
things. ibid. lin. 27.

Albeit in a sense to the learned men it may be verified that the Fathers did
eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, yet there is no such form of
words in scripture: And it is more agreeable to the simplicity of scripture to
say, the Fathers before Christ's Nativity did not eat the body and drink the
blood of Christ. page 78. lin. 28.

And although S. Paul in the truth to the Corinthes be so understood of
some, that the Fathers should eat and drink the spiritual meat, and drink
that we do, yet to that understanding all do not agree. Ibidem. lin. 34. etc.

Their Sacraments contained the promise of that which in our sacraments is
given. Ibidem. lin. 36.

And although that willing obedience was ended and perfected upon the Cross
(to the which it continued from the beginning) yet as in the sacrifice of
Abraham the earnest will and offering was accoumpted for the offering in deed,
so the declaration of Christ's will in his last supper was an offering of him
self to God the Father. page 82. lin. 2. etc.

In that mystery he declared his body and blood to be the very sacrifice of the
world by the same will that he said his body should be betrayed for us.
Ibidem. lin. 12.

As Christ offered him self upon the Cross in the execution of his will, so
he offered him self in his Supper in declaration of his will. page 82. lin.
13. etc.

Christ's body in the supper or communion is represented unto us as a sacrifice
propitiatory for all the sins of the world, and it is the only sacrifice of
the Church, and the pure and clean sacrifice whereof Malachie spoke. page 84.
lin. 4. page 88. lin. vltima. etc.

As Christ declares in the supper him self an offering and sacrifice for our
sin, offering him self to his Father as our Mediator, so the Church at the
same supper, in their offering of lauds and thanks, join them selves with
their head Christ representyng and offering him. page 89. lin. 10.

The sun beams be of the same substance with the sun. page 92. lin. 5.

We have in earth the substantial presence of the sun. Ibidem. lin. 7.

When Christ said, This is my body, this word ( This) may be referred to the
invisible substance. page 106. lin. 44.

To eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood is of it self a propre speech.
page 112. lin. 35. Carnally. Ibidem. lin. 50. with teeth and mouth. page 112.
lin. 8. and, page 34. lin 38.

To eat Christ's body carnally may have a good signification. page 113. lin. 4.

Origene does not mean to destroy the truth of the letter in these words of
Christ. Except you eat the flesh of the son of man. etc. page 114. lin. 40.

S. Augustine takes the same for a figurative speech because it seems to
command in the letter carnally understood an heinous and wicked thing to
eat the flesh of a man. page 116. lin. 40.

The said words of Christ. Except you eat etc. is to the unfaithful a
figure, but to the faithful they be no figure, but spirit and life. Ibidem.
lin. 48.

The Fathers called it a figure by the name of a figure reverently to cover so
great a secrecy apt only to be understand of men beleuyng. page 117. lin. 3.

That is spiritual understanding to do as is commanded. Ibid. lin. 13.

This word ( Represent) in S. Hierome and Tertullian signifies a true real
exhibition. page 120. lin. 27. and, page 128. lin. 11.

Nota.
The word ( Eucharistia) can not be well Englished. page 161.

In Gods word, and in Baptism, we be made participant of Christ's Passion by
his spirit, but in the Lords Supper we be made participant of his Godhead by
his humanity exhibit to us for food: So as in this mystery we receive him as
man and God, and in the other by mean of his Godhead we be participant of the
effect of his Passion suffered in his manhood. In this Sacrament, we receive a
pledge of the regeneration of our flesh to be in the general resurrection
spiritual with our soul: In Baptism we have been made spiritual by
regeneration of the soul. page 158. lin. 45. etc.

Concessum etia^.
In Baptism Christ's humanity is not really present, though ye virtue and
effect of his most precious blood be there, page 159. lin. 4.

The manner of Christ's being in the sacrament is only spiritual. Ibidem. lin.
16.

To understand Christ's words spiritually is to understand them as the spirit
of God has taught the Church. Ibidem. lin. 34.

Our perfect unity with Christ is to have his flesh in us, and to have Christ
bodily and naturally dwelling in us by his manhood. page 166. lin. 32.

By Christ's flesh in the sacrament we be naturally in him and he is naturally
in us. Concessum.
Ibidem. lin. 45. etc.

Christ dwells naturally in us and we be corporally in him. Concessum.
Ibidem. lin. 35.

Christ's flesh is very spiritual and in a spiritual manner delivered unto us.
page 167. lin. 12. and, page 243. lin. 11. and, page 243. lin 28. and, page
295. lin. 33. Concessu^ etiam


Christ dwells in us naturally for the natural communication of our body and
his. page 167. lin. 19. Concessum.


When Christ united him self unto us as man (which he does geuyng his body in
the sacrament to such as worthily receive it) then he dwells in them
corporally. page 172. lin. 27.

In Baptism man's soul is regenerate in the virtue and effect of Christ's
Passion and blood Christ's Godhead present there without the real presence of
his humanity. page 181. lin. 16. etc.

In Baptism our unity with Christ is wrought without the real presence of
Christ's humanity only in the virtue and effect of Christ's blood. page 181.
lin. 2. and. 16.

In Baptism our soul is regenerate and made spiritual, but not our body in
deed, but in hope only. page 181. lin. 6.

In Baptism we be united to Christ's manhood by his divinity, but in the
Lords Supper we be in nature united to Christ as man, and by his glorified
flesh made partakers also of his divinity. page 181. lin. 8.

Christ's body and flesh, Concessum.
is a spiritual body and flesh and is present in the Sacrament after a
spiritual manner, and is spiritually received. page eadem. lin. 26. 351. lin.
19.

In this Sacrament Christ's humanity and Godhead is really present, and in
Baptism his Godhead with the effectual virtue of his blood (in which we be
washed) not requiryng any real presence thereof. page 191. lin. 35.

Spirit and life may fall upon naughty men, although for their malice it
taryeth not. page 211. lin. 17.

Christ's words were not figurative but true and proper when he said this is
my body. page 9. lin. 1. page 257. lin. 1. and. 14. Marcus Antonius. fol. 24.
fa. 1.

All the namyng of bread by Christ and S. Paul and all other, must be
understand before sanctification and not after. page 258. lin. 15.

When S. Paul said we be partakers of one bread, he speaks not of material
bread. page 258. lin. 7.

No man knows the difference between the substance of bread, cheese, and
ale, page 271. lin. 39. page 272. lin. 23. page 339. lin. 33.

The accidents of bread may be called the visible part of bread, the outward
kind and form of bread, the appearaunce of bread, a true sensible part of
bread, bread, the nature of bread, the matter of bread, the visible matter of
bread, not that it is property bread, but after the common speech and capacity
of men, page 272. lin. 16. and, page 273. lin. 25. page 283. lin. 11. and, page
289. lin. 31. and. 290. lin. 7. and. 292. lin. 16. and, page 396. lin. 43. etc.
and. 305. lin. 44. etc. and, page.243. lin. 45. page 359. lin. 22.

The accidents of bread do corrupt putrify and nourish, page 273. lin. 30.
page 290. lin. 7. and, page 296. lin. 48. and page 358. lin. 28.

The glorified body of Christ is of the own nature neither visible nor
palpable. page 273. lin. 40.

In Baptism the whole man is not regenerated, but the soul, page 286. lin. 10.

The soul only of man is the substance of man, Ibidem.

The soul only is made the son of God. page 286. lin. 23.

It is called meat because of the outward visible matter. page 290. lin. 9.

As really and as truly as the soul of man is present in the body, so really
and so truly is the body of Christ present in the sacrament. page 296. lin. 5.
and, page 396. lin. 15.

The sacrifice of the Church is perfected before the perception. page 396.
lin. 32.

In the Sacrament being a mystery ordered to feed us is the truth of the
presence of the natures earthly and celestial: The visible matter of the
earthly creature in his property and nature for the use of signification is
necessaryly required, page 310. lin. 44.48.

This saying of Gelasius: The substance or nature of bread and wine cease not
to be there still, may be verified in the last, and nature he takes for the
propriety, page 310. lin. 50.

Theodorets saying, that the substance of bread remains seems to speak of
substance after the common capacity, and not as it is truly in learning
understood an inward invisible and not palpable nature. page 321. lin. 2.

Christ in his Supper fulfilled this promise, Panis quem ego dabo. etc. page
329. lin. 25.

Accidents in common understanding be called substaunces, page 339. lin. 31.

In common bread the substance is not broken at all. Ibidem. lin. 39.

Accidents be broken without substance. page 339. lin. 6. etc.

All alteration is in accidents and the corruption of accidents in the
generation of new accidents, page 355. lin. 4.

Substance in Theodorete signifies the outward visible nature, that is to say
accidents, page 359. lin. 20.

One thing is but one substance, saving only in the person of Christ. page
359. lin. 41.

Baptism is not wondered at, how the holy Ghost is there, but the wonder in
this Sacrament is specially directed to the work of God in the visible
creatures how they be changed into the body and blood of Christ, which is
wrought before we receive the Sacrament, page 366. lin. 45.

Priests do offer daily Christ's flesh and blood. page 384. lin. 26.

Christ offered him self in his Supper, page eadem. lin. 27.

Otherwise then Christ did can not be now done. page 384. lin. 28.

The daily offering by the Priest is daily offered for sin, because we daily
fall. page eadem. lin. 30.

That is done in the altar is a sacrifice and the same that is offered once,
and daily to be the same.

Uisible Priests Ministers to our invisible Priest offer the daily sacrifice
in Christ's Church. page 392. lin. 46.

The body and blood of Christ is properly sacrificed by the Priests and is
there offered for the effect of increase of life in us, as it was offered upon
the Cross to atcheue life unto us. page 390. lin. 46. etc.

The same body is offered daily upon on the altar that was once offered upon
the Cross, but the same manner of offering is not daily that was on the altar
of the Cross, for the daily offering is without bloudshedyng, and is termed so
to signify that bloudshedyng once done to be sufficient. page 391. lin. 7. etc.

The sacrifice of the Church is propitiatory. page 391. lin. 8.

The sacrifice of the Church is a sacrifice geuyng life. Ibidem. lin. 8.

Our sacrifice of laud and thanks geuyng can not be said a pure and clean
sacrifice to fulfill the Prophecy of Malachie. Ibidem. lin. 10.

Certain godly and fruitful Letters of D. Cranmer late Archbishop of
Caunterbury.
A Letter to Queen Mary.
IT may please your Majesty to pardon my presumption, that I dare be so bold to
write to your highness, but very necessity constrayneth me, that your Majesty
may know my mind rather by mine own writing, then by other men's reports. So
it is that upon Saturday being the 7. day of this month, I was cited to
appear at Rome, the lxxx. day after, there to make answer to such matters as
should be objected against me, upon the behalf of the King and your most
excellent Majesty: which matters the Thursday following were objected against
me by Doctor Martin and Doctor Story your majesty's Proctors, before the Bishop
of Bloucester sitting in judgment by commission from Rome. The king and Queen
make themselves no better then subjects in complaining of their own subject
to an outward judge as though they had no power to punish him.
But alas, it can not but grieve the heart of any natural subject, to be accused
of the King and Queen of his own Realm, and specially before an outward
judge, or by authority coming from any person out of this Realm, where the
king and Queen, as if they were subjects within their own Realm, shall
complain and require justice at a strangers hands against their own
subject, being already condemned to death by their own laws: as though the
King and Queen could not do nor have justice within their own Realm, against
their own subjects, but they must seek it at a strangers hands in a
strange land, the like whereof (I think) was never seen. I would have wished
to have had some meaner adversaries, and I think that death shall not grieve
me much more, then to have my most dread and most gracious soueraygne Lord and
Lady (to whom under God I do owe all obedience) to be mine accusers in
judgment within their own realm before any stranger and outward power. The
first cause why he would not make answer to the Popes Commissary is to
avoid perjury.
But forasmuch as in the time of the Prince of most famous memory King Henry
the 8. your graces father, I was sworn never to consent, that the bishop of
Rome should have or exercise any authority or jurisdiction in this realm of
England, therefore least I should allow his authority contrary to mine oath, I
refused to make answer to the Bishop of Gloucester sitting here in judgment
by the Popes authority, least I should run into perjury.

The second cause is for that ye Popes laws are contrary to the crown and
laws of England.
An other cause why I refused the popes authority is this, that his authority as
he claims it, repugneth to the crown imperial of this realm and to the
laws of the same, which every true subject is bound to defend. First for that
the Pope says, that all manner of power, as well temporal as spiritual, is
given first to him of God and that the temporal power he gives unto Emperors
and Kings to use it under him, but so as it be always at his commandment
and beck. But contrary to this claim, the Emperial crown and jurisdiction
temporal of this Realm, is taken immediately from God to be used under him
only, and is subject unto none but to God alone.

The Oath of the King and Justices, and the duty of subjects.
Moreover the imperial laws and customs of this realm the king in his
Coronation, and all Justices when they receive their offices, be sworn, and
all the whole realm is bound to defend and maintain. But contrary hereunto
the pope by his authority makes void and commands to blot out of our
books, all laws and customs being repugnant to his laws, and declares
accursed all rulers and governors, all the makers, writers, and executors of
such laws or customs, as it appears by many of the Popes laws whereof one
or two I shall rehearse. In the decrees, distin. x. is written thus:
Constitutione contra canones and decreta praesulum Romanorum vel bonos mores
nullius sunt momenti. That is, the constitutions or statutes enacted against
the Canons and decrees of the Bishops of Rome or their good customs are of
none effect. Also, Extra de sententia excommunicationis, merit. Exco^municamus
omnes hareticos vtriusque sexus quocumque nomine censeantur, and fautores, and
receptatores. and defensores eorum: nec non and qui de catero sernari fecerint
statuta edita and consuetudines, contra ecclesia libertatem, nisiea de
capitularibus suis intra duos menses post huiusmodi publicationem sentencia
fecerint amoueri. Item exco^municamus statutarios, and scriptores statutorum
ipsorum, nec non potestates, consules, rectores, and consiliarios locorum, vbi
de catero huiusmodi statuta and consuetudines edita fuerint velseruatae, nec
non and illos qui secundum ea praesumpserint iudicarem, vel in publicam formam
scribere iudicata. That is to say, we excommunicate all heretics of both
sexes, what name so ever they be called by and their favorers and receptours
and defenders, and also them that shall hereafter cause to be observed,
statutes and customs made against the liberty of the Church, except they cause
the same to be put out of their books or records within two months after
the publication of this sentence. Also we excommunicate the statute makers and
writers of those statutes, and also the potestates consuls, governors and
counselors of places where such statutes and customs shall be made or kept,
and also those that shall presume to give judgment according to them or put
into public form of writing the manners so judged. Now by these laws, if the
Bishop of Romes authority which be claymeth by God, be lawful, of your graces
laws and customs of your Realm being contrary to the Popes laws be naught,
and as well your majesty as your judges, justices and all other executors of the
same, stand accursed among heretics, which God forbid. And yet this curse can
never be avoided (if the Pope have such power as he claymeth) until such times
as the laws and customs of this Realm, The Popes laws and the laws of
England are contrary.
being contrary to his laws, be taken away and blotted out of the law books.
And although there be many laws of this Realm contrary to the laws of Rome,
yet I named but a few: as to convict a Clarke before any temporal Judge of
this Realm, for debt, felony, murder or for any other crime, which Clerks by
the Popes laws be so exempt from the Kings laws, that they can be no where
sued but before their Ordinary.

Also the pope by his laws may give all byshoprickes and benefices sprituall
which by the laws of this Realm, can be given but only by the Kings and
other patrones of the same, except they fall into the lapse. By the Popes laws
ius patronatus shall be sued only before the ecclesiastical judge: but by the
laws of this realm, it shall be sued before the temporal judge, and to be
short the laws of this realm do agree with the Popes laws like fire and
water. And yet the Kings of this Realm have provided for their laws, by the
praemunire: so that if any man have let the excution of the laws of this
Realm, by any authority from the sea of Rome, he falls into the praemunire.
But to meet with this, the popes have provided for their laws by cursing. For
whosoever lets the Popes laws to have full course within this realm, by
the Popes power stands accursed: So that the popes power treads all the
laws and customs of this Realm under his feet, cursing all that execute
them, until such time as they give place unto his laws. But it may be said
that notwithstanding all the popes decrees, yet we do execute still the laws
and customs of this Realm. Nay not all quietly without interruption of the
Pope. And where we do execute them, yet we do it unjustly, if the popes power
be of force, and for the same we stand excommunicate, and shall do, until we
leave the execution of our own laws and customs. Thus we be well reconciled
to Rome, allowing such authority, whereby the Realm stands accursed before
God, if the Pope have any such authority.

These things (as I suppose) were not fully opened in the parliament house,
when the popes authority was received again within this Realm, for if they
had, I do not believe that either the King or Queens majesty or the nobles of
this Realm, or the commons of the same would ever have consented to receive
again such a forrayne authority, so injurious, hurtful and prejudicial,
as well to the crown, as to the laws and customs, and state of this realm, as
whereby they must needs acknowledge themselves to be accursed. But none could
open this matter well but the clergy, and that such of them as had read the
popes laws, whereby the pope has made himself as it were a God. These seek
to maintain the Pope, whom they desired to have their chief head, to the
intent they might have, as it were, a kingdom and laws within themselves,
distinct from the laws of the crown, and wherewith the crown may not meddle,
and so being exempted from the laws of the crown might live in this realm
like Lords and Kings, The Papists to set up a kingdom of their own,
dissemble the known truth and are false to the crown.
without daminage or fear of any man, so that they please their high and
supreme head at Rome. For this consideration I ween, some that knew the
truth, held their peace at the Parliament, whereas if they had done their
duties to the crown and whole realm, they should have opened their mouths,
declared the truth, and showed the perils an dangers that might ensue to the
crown and realm. And if I should agree to allow such authority within this
realm, whereby I must needs confess that your most gracious, highness and
also your realm should ever continue accursed until you shall cease from the
execution of your own laws and customs of your realm: I could not think my
self true, either to your highness, or to this my natural country, knowing
that I do know. Ignorance, I know may excuse other men, but he that knows
how prejudicial and injurious the power and authority which he chalengeth
every where, is to the crown, laws and customs of this Realm, and yet will
allow the same, I cannot set in any wise how he can keep his due allegeaunce,
fidelity and truth to the crown and state of this Realm.

An other cause I alleged, why I could not allow the authority of the pope,
The third cause why he could not allow the Pope.
which is this. That by his authority he subuerteth not only the laws of this
realm, but also the laws of God, so that whosoever be under his authority, he
suffers them not to be under Christ's religion purely, as Christ did
command. The Popes Religion is against Christ's Religion.
And for one example I brought forth, that whereas by Gods laws all Christian
people be boundeth diligently to learn his word, that they may know how to
believe and live accordingly, for that purpose he ordained holy days when they
ought, leaving apart all other business, to give themselves wholly to know and
serve God. Why Latin service ought not to be restored in English.


Therefore Gods will and commandment is, that when the people be gathered
together, the Ministers should use such language as the people may understand,
and take profit thereby, or else hold their peace. For as an harp or lute, if
it give no certain sound that men may know what is stricken, who can dau^ce
after it, for all the sound is in veins: So is it vain and profits nothing,
says almighty God, by the mouth of S. Paul, if the priest speak to the
people in a language which they know not, for else he may profit himself, but
profits not the people says S. Paul. But herein I was answered thus, that
S. Paul spoke only of preaching, that the preacher should speak in a tongue
which the people did know, or else his preaching avails nothing. But if the
preaching avails nothing, being spoken in a language, which the people
understand not, how should any other service avail them, being spoken in the
same language: And that yet S. Paul mean not only of preaching, it appears
plainly by his own words, for he speaks by name expressly of praying,
singing, lauding, and tha^kyng of God, and of all other things which the
priests say in the churches, whereunto the people say Amen, which they used
not in preaching, but in other divine service: that whether the Priests
rehearse the wonderful works of God, or the great benefits of God; unto
inankinde above all other creatures, or give thanks unto God, or make open
profession of their faith, or humble confession of their sins, with earnest
request of mercy and forgeuenes, or make suit or request unto God for any
thing: then all the people understanding what the Priests say, might join
their minds and voices with them and say Amen, that is to say, allow what the
Priests say, that the rehearsal of Gods universal works and benefits, the
giving of thanks the profession of faith, the confession of sins, and the
requests and petitions of the Priests and the people, might ascend up into
the ears of God altogether, and be as a sweet savor, odor, and incense in his
nose: And thus was it used many hundred years after Christ's ascension. But
the aforesaid things cannot be done, when the priests speak to the people in
a language not known, and so they, or their clarke in their name say, Amen,
but they cannot tell whereunto: where as S. Paul says, how can the people say
Amen to thy well saying, when they understand not what thou said: And thus was
S. Paul understanded of all interpretours, both the Greeks and Latins, old
and new, Scholeauthors and others, that I have red, until about xxx. years
past, at which time one Eckius with other of his sort began to devise a new
exposition, understanding S. Paul of preaching only. But when a good number
of the best learned men reputed within this realm, some favoring the old,
some the new learning, as they term to (where indeed that which they call the
old is the new and that which they call the new, is indeed the old) but when a
great number of such learned men of both forces, were gathered together at
winsor, for the reformation of the service of the Church: It was agreed by both
without controversy, (not one saying contrary) that the service of the Church
ought to be in the mother tongue and that S. Paul in the 14. chapter to the
Corinthians was so to be understood. And so is S. Paul to be understood in
the civil law more then a thousand years past, where Iustinianus a most godly
Emperor, in a synod writes on this manner. Iubenius vt omnes Episcopi pariter
and prasbyteri non tacito modo, sed clara vocequa a fidels populo exaudiantur,
sacram oblationem and preces in sacro baptismate adhibitas celebrent, quo
maiori exinde deuotione in depromendis Domini Dei laudibus audientium animi
effera^tur. Ita enim and Diuus Paulus docet in Epistola ad Corinth. Si
solu^modo, benedicat Spiritus, quomodo it qui priuati locum tenet, dicet ad
gratiarum actionem tuam, amen, quandoquidem quid dicas non videt? Tu quidem
pulchre gratias agis, alter autem non adificatur. That is to say: we command
that all Bishops and Priests celebrate the holy oblation, and prayers used in
holy baptism, not after a still and close manner, but with a clear loud voice,
that they may be plainly, heard of the faithful people, so as the hearers
minds may be lifted up thereby with the greater devotion; in uttering the
praises of the Lord God. For so Paul teaches also in the Epistle to the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 14.
If the spirit do only bless or say well, how shall he that occupies the
place of a private person, say Amen to thy thanksgeuing, for he perceives not
what thou says? Thou do give thanks well, but the other is not edifie^.
And not only the civil law, and all other writers a thousand and five hundred
years continually together have expounded S. Paul not of preaching only, but
of other Service said in the church: but reason also gives the same, that if
men be commanded to hear any thing, it must be spoken in a language which the
hearers understand, The Pope commands both against God and natural reason.
The Sacrament ought to be received in both kinds of all Christians.
or else as S. Paul says what avails it to hear? So that the pope giving a
contrary commandment, that the people coming to the church shall hear they
were not what, and answer they know not whereto, takes upon him to command
not only against reason: but also directly against God.

And again I said, whereas one savior Christ ordained the Sacrament of his
most precious body and blood, to be received of all Christian people, under
the forms both of bread and wine, and said of the cup, drink ye all of this:
the Pope gives a clean contrary commandment, that no lay man shall drink
of the cup of their salvation: as though the cup of Salvation by the blood of
Christ, pertayneth not to lay men. And wherefore as Theophilus Alexandrinus,
(whose works S. Hierome did translate about eleue^ hundred years passed) says
that if Christ had been crucified for the Devils, his cup should not be denied
them: yet the Pope denies the cup of Christ to christen people, for whom
Christ was crucified: so that if I should obey the Pope, in these things I
must needs disobay my savior Christ. But I was au^swered hereto (as commonly
the Papists do answer,) that under the form of bread, is whole Christ's
flesh and blood, so that whosoever receives the form of bread, receives
as well christ's blood as his flesh. Let it be so: yet in the form of bread
only, Christ's blood is not drunken but eaten, nor received in the cup under
form of wine as Christ commanded, but eaten with the flesh under form of
bread, and moreover the bread is not the sacrament of his blood, but of his
flesh only, nor the cup is not the sacrament of his flesh, but of his blood
only, and so the pope keeps from all lay persons, the sacrament of their
redemption by Christ's blood, which Christ commanded to give unto the^. And
furthermore Christ ordained the sacrament in two kinds, the one separated from
the other, to be a representation of his death, where his blood was separated
from his flesh, which is not represented in one kind alone: so that lay people
receive not the whole sacrament, whereby Christ's death is represented as he
commanded.

Moreover as the pope takes upon him to give the temporal sword, or royal
and imperial power to kings and princes: so does he likewise take upon him to
depose them from their imperial states, if they be disobedient to him, and
commands the subjects to disobay their princes, assoyling the subjects
as well of their obedience, as of their lawful oaths made unto their true
Kings and princes directly contrary to Gods commandment, who commands all
subjects to obey their kings or other rulers under them. One John Patriarche
of Constantinople in the time of S. Gregory, claymed superiority above all
other bishops, to whom S. Gregory writes, that therein he did injury to his
iii. brethren which were equal with him, that is to say, the bishop of Rome,
of Alexandria, and of Antiochia, which iii. were Patriarchall seas, as well as
Constantinople, and were brethren one to an other. But says S. Gregory, if any
one shall exalt himself above all the rest to be the universal Bishop, the
same passes in pride: but now the bishop of Rome exalts himself not only
above all Bishops, but also above all Kings and Emperors, and above the whole
world, taking upon him to give and take away, to set up and put down, as he
shall think good. And as the devil having no such authority, yet took upon
him to give unto Christ all the kingdoms of the world, The devil and the Pope
are like.
if he would fall down and worship him, in like manner the Pope takes upon him
to give Empyres and Kingdoms being none of his, to such as will fall down and
worship him and kiss his feet. And moreover his Lawyers and glosers so
flatter him, that they say he may command Emperors and Kings to hold his
stirrup, when he lights upon his horse and to be his footmen, and that if
any Emperor or King give him any thing, they give him nothing but that is his
own, and that he may dispense against Gods word, against the old and new
Testament, against S. Paul's Epistles and against the Gospel.

And furthermore whatsouer he does, although he draw innumerable people by
heaps with himself into hell: yet may no mortal man reprove him, because he
being judge of all men, may be judged of no man, and thus he sits in the
temple of God, as he were a God and names himself Gods Uicar, and yet be
dispenses against God. The Pope is Antichrist, that is Christ's enemy.
If this be not to play Antichrists part, I cannot tell what is Antichrist,
which is no more to say, but Christ's enemy and adversary, who shall sit in the
temple of God, aduauncyng himself above all other, yet by hipocrisy and feigned
Religion, shall subvert the true Religion of Christ, and under pretense and
color of Christian religion, shall work against Christ and therefore has the
name of Antichrist. Wherefore the Pope is Antichrist.


Now if any man lift him self higher then the Pope has done, who lifts him
self above all the world, or can be more adversary to Christ then to dispense
against Gods laws, and where Christ has given any commandment, to command
directly the contrary that man must needs be taken for Antichrist. But until
the time that such a person may be found, men may easly conjecture where to
find Antichrist. wherefore seeing the Pope thus, to overthrow both Gods laws
and man's laws, takes upon him to make Emperors and Kings to be vassals and
subjects unto him, specially the crown of this Realm, with the laws and
customs of the same. I see no mean how I may consent to admit this usurped
power within this Realm, contrary to mine oath, mine obedience to Gods law,
mine allegeaunce and duty to your Majesty, and my love and affection, to
this Realm.

This that I have spoken against the power and authority of the Pope, I have
not spoken, (I take God to record and judge) for any malice I owe to the Popes
person, whom I know not, but I shall pray to God to give him grace, that he may
seek above all things to promote Gods honor and glory, and not to follow the
trade of his predecessors in these latter days, nor I have not spoken it for
fear of punishment and to avoid the same, thinkyng it rather an occasion to
aggrauate, then to diminish my trouble: but I have spoken it for my most
bounden duty to the crown, liberties, laws, and customs of this Realm,
but most especially to discharge my conscience in uttering the truth to Gods
glory, castyng away all fear, by the comfort which I have in Christ's words,
who says: Luke. 12.
Fear not them that kill the body and can not kill the Soul, but fear him
that can cast both body and soul into hell. He that for fear to lose this
life will forsake the truth, shall lose the everlasting life: and he that for
the truths sake will spend his life, shall find everlasting life. Math. 10.
And Christ promises to stand fast with them, before his Father, which will
stand fast with him here: which comfort is so great, that whosoever has his
eyes fixed upon Christ, can not greatly pass of this life, knowing that he may
be sure to have Christ stand by him, in the presence of his Father in heaven.

As touching the Sacrament, I said that forasmuch as the whole matter stands
in ye understanding of these words of Christ: The Sacraments have the names of
those things whereof they are Samentes.
This is my body, This is my blood, I say that Christ in these words made
demo^stration of the bread and wine, and speak figuratively, calling bread his
body, and wine his blood, because he ordained them to be the Sacraments of his
body and blood. And where the Papists say in these two points contrary unto
me, that Christ called not bread his body, but a substance uncertain, nor
spoke figuratively, herein I said I would be judged by the old Church, and
which doctrine could be proved the elder, that I would stand unto. And
forasmuch as I have alleged in my book many old Authors both Greeks and
Latins, which about a M. years after Christ continually taught as I do, if
they could bring forth but one old Author that says in these two points as
they say, I offered vj. or vij. years ago, and do offer yet still, that I will
give place to them. But when I bring forth any Author that says in most plain
terms as I do, yet says the other part, that the Authors meant not so: as who
should say, that the Authors spoke one thing and meant clean contrary. And
upon the other part, when they ca^ not find any one Author that says in
words as they say, yet say they that the Authors meant as they say.

Now whether they or I speak more to the purpose herein, I refer it to the
judgment of all indifferent hearers. Yea the old Church of Rome about a
thousand years together, neither believed nor used the Sacrament as the Church
of Rome has done of late years. For in the beginning the Church of Rome
taught a pure and a sound doctrine of the Sacrament, but that after the Church
of Rome fell into a new doctrine of Tra^substantiation, and with the doctrine
they changed the use of the Sacrament, contrary to that Christ commanded, and
the old Church of Rome used above a M. years. And yet to deface the old they
say that the new is the old: wherein for my part I am content to the trial to
stand: But their doctrine is so fond and uncomfortable, that I marvel that
any man would allow it, if he knew what it is, and what soever they bear the
people in hand, that which they write in their books has neither truth nor
comfort. For by their doctrine, of one body of Christ is made two bodies: The
Papists make Christ two bodies.
one natural having distance of members with form and proportion of a man's
perfect body, and this body is in heaven, but the body of Christ in the
Sacrament by their own doctrine, must needs be a monstrous body, having
neither distance of members nor form, fashion or proportion of a man's natural
body, and such a body is in the Sacrament (teach they) and goes into the mouth
with the form of bread, and enters no farther then the form of bread goes,
nor tarieth no longer then the form of bread is by natural heat in
digestyng, so that when the form of bread is digested, that body of Christ is
gone.

And for as much as evil men be as long in digestyng as good men, the body of
Christ (by their doctrine) enters as far, and tarieth as long in wicked as
in godly men. And what comfort can be herein to any Christian man, to receive
Christ's unshapen body, and it to enter no farther than the stomach, and to
depart by and by, as soon as the bread is consumed? It seems to me a more
sound and comfortable doctrine, that Christ has but one body, and that has
form and fashion of a man's true body, which body spiritually enters into the
whole man body and soul, and though the Sacrament be consumed, yet whole
Christ remains and feeds the receauer unto eternal life, if he continue in
godlynes and never depart, until the receauer forsake him. And as for the
wicked, they have not Christ within them at all, who can not be where Belial
is. And this is my faith, and as me seems a sound doctrine according to Gods
word, and sufficient for a Christian to believe in that matter. And if it can be
showed unto me, that the Popes authority is not prejudicial to the things
before mentioned, or that my doctrine in the Sacrament is erroneous (which I
think ca^ not be showed) then I was never nor will be so perverse, to stand
wilfully in mine own opinion, but I shall (with all humility) submit my self
unto the Pope not only to kiss his feet, but an other part also.

An other cause why I refused to take the Bishop of Gloucester for my Judge,
was the respect of his own person, being more then once perjured. First, for
that he being diverse times sworn, never to consent that the G. of Rome should
have any jurisdiction within this Realm, but to take the king and his
successors for supreme heads of this Realm, as by Gods laws they be:
contrary to this lawful oath the said B. sat then in judgment by authority
from Rome, wherein he was perjured, and not worthy to sit as a Judge.

The second perjury was, that he took his Byshopricke both of the Queens
Majesty and of the Pope, making to each of them a solemn oath: which oaths be
so contrary, that in the one he must needs be perjured. And furthermore in
swearyng to the Pope to maintain his laws, decrees, constitutions,
ordinances, reseruations, and provisions, he declares him self an enemy to
the Imperial crown and to the Laws and state of this Realm, whereby he
declared him self not worthy to sit as a Judge within this Realm, and for
these considerations I refused to take him for my Judge.

This was written in an other Letter to the Queen.
I Learned by Doct. Martin, that at the day of your Majesty's Coronation, you
took an oath of obedience to the Pope of Rome, and the same time you took an
other oath to this Realm to maintain the laws, liberties and customs of the
same. And if your Majesty did make an oath to the Pope; I think it was
according to the other oaths, which he uses to minister to Princes, which is
to be obedient to him, to defend his person, to maintain his authority,
honor, laws, lands, and privileges. And if it be so, then I beseech your
Majesty to look upon your oath made to the crown and the Realm, and to
expe^d and way the two oaths together, to see how they agree, and then to do as
your graces conscience shall give you, for I am surely persuaded that willyngly
your Majesty will not offend, nor do against your conscience for nothing. But
I fear me there be contradiction in your oaths, and that those which should
have informed your grace thoroughly, did not their duties therein. And if your
Majesty ponder the two oaths diligently. I think you shall perceive that you
were deceived, and then your highness may use the matter as God shall put in
your heart. Furthermore I am kept here from company of learned men, from books,
from counsel, from pen and incke, saving at this time to write to your
Majesty, which all were necessary for a man in my case. Wherefore I beseech
your Majesty that I may have such of these as may stand with your Majesty's
pleasure. And as for mine appearaunce at Rome, if your Majesty will give me
leave I will appear there, and I trust that God shall put in my mouth to
defend his truth there, as well as here, but I refer it wholly to your
Majesty's pleasure.

Your poor Orator, T. C.

To the Lords of the Counsel.
IN most humble wise sueth unto your right honorable Lordshyps, Thomas Cranmer
late Archb. of Cant. beseechyng the same to be a means for me unto the Queens
highness for her mercy and pardon. Some of you know by what means I was
brought and trained unto the will of our late sovereign Lord king Edward the
vi. and what I spoke against the same: wherein I refer me to the reports of
your honors. Furthermore this is to signify unto your Lordshyps that upon
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednisday, last past were open disputations here in Oxford
against me, They put to him three questions but they suffered him not to
answer fully in one.
M. Ridley, and M. Latymer in three matters concerning the Sacrament. First of
the real presence, secondly of Tra^substantiation, and thyrdly concerning the
Sacrifice of the Mass. How the other two were used I can not tell, for we were
separated, so that none of us knew what the other said, nor how they were
ordered. But as concerning my self I can report, that I never knew nor heard
of a more confused disputation in all my life. For albeit there was one
appointed to dispute against me, yet every man spoke his mind and brought
forth what him lyked without order, and such have was made, that no answer
could be suffered to be given fully to any argument, and in such weighty and
large matters there was no remedy, but the disputations must needs be ended in
one day, which can scantly well be ended in three months. And when we had
answered them, then they would not appoint us one day to bring forth our
proofs, that they might answer us again, being required of me thereunto,
whereas I my self have more to say then can be well discussed in.xx days. The
means to resolve the truth, had been to have suffered us to answer fully to
all that they could say, and then they again to answer to all that we could
say. But why they would not answer us, what other cause can there be, but
that either they feared the matter that they were not able to answer us, or
else (as by their have might well appear) they came, not to speak the truth,
but to condemn us in post have, Behold Satan sleeps not.
before the truth might be thoroughly tried and heard, for in all have we were
all three condemned of heresy upon Friday.

This much I thought good to signify unto your Lordshyppes, that you may know
the indifferent handlyng of matters, Their cruel desire to revenge could abide
no delay.
leauyng the judgment thereof unto your wisdoms, and I beseech your
Lordshyppes to remember me a poor prisoner unto the Queens Majesty, and I
shall pray, as I do daily, to God for the long preservation of your good
Lordshyppes in all godliness and felicity.

A Letter wherein he reproves and condemns the false and sclaunderous
reports of the Papists, which said that he had set up Mass again at
Canterbury.
AS the devil Christ's ancient adversary is a liar, and the father of lying:
Eue^ so has he sturred up his servant and members, to persecute Christ and
his true word and Religion with lying, which he ceasseth not to do most
earnestly at this present. For whereas the Prince of famous memory king Henry
the eight seeing the great abuses of the Latin Mass, reformed some thing
therein in his time, and also our late sovereign Lord king Edward the vj.
took the same whole away for the manifold errors and abuses thereof, and
restored in the place thereof Christ's holy Supper according to Christ's own
institution and as the Apostles in the primative Church used the same: the
devil goes about by lying to overthrow the Lords holy Supper and to restore
his Latin satisfactory Mass, a thing of his own invention and devise: and to
bring the same more easily to pass, some have abused the name of me Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, brutyng abroad that I have set up the Mass at
Canterbury and that I offered to say Mass at the burial of our late sovereign
Prince king Edward the vj. and also that I offered to say Mass, before the
Queens highness and at Paul's Church, and I wot not where. And although I have
been well exercised these xx. years to suffer and bear evil reports and
lies, and have been much grieved thereat, but have borne all things quietly:
yet when untrue reports and lies turn to the hinderaunce of Gods truth, they
be in no wise to be suffered.

Wherefore these be to signify unto the world, that it was a false, flatteryng,
lying and dissemblyng Monk which caused Mass to be set up there, without mine
advise or counsel, Reddat illi Dominus in die illo. This was D. Thornton,
afterward a cruel murderer of Gods Saints: of whose horrible end, read in the
book of Martyrs in the last Edition. Fol. 1990. Col. 1.
And as for offering my self to say Mass before the Queens highness, or in
any other place, I never did it, as her grace well knows. But if her grace
give me leave, I shall be ready to prove against all that will say the contrary,
that all that is said in the holy Communion, set out by the most innocent and
godly Prince king Edward the vj. in his high Court of Parliament, is
conformable to the order which our sovereign Christ did both observe and
commanded to be observed, and which his Apostles and primative Church used
many years: whereas the Mass in many things not only has no foundation of
Christ, his Apostles nor the primative Church, but is manifestly contrary to
the same, and contains many horrible abuses in it. And although many
unlearned and malicious do report, that M. Peter Martyr is unlearned, yet if
the Queens highness will grant thereunto, I with the said M. Peter Martyr,
and other iiij. or v. which I shall chose, will (by Gods grace) take upon us,
to defend not only the common prayers of the Church, the ministration of the
Sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, but also all the doctrine and
Religion set out by our sovereign Lord king Edward the vi. to be more pure and
according to Gods word, then any other that has been used in England this M.
years: so that Gods word may be the Judge, and that the reasons and profes
upon both parties may be set out in writing, to the intent as well that all the
world may examine and Judge thereon, as that no man shall start back from his
writing. And where they boast of the faith that has been in the Church this M.
and v. hundredth years, we will join with them in this point, and that the
doctrine and usage is to be followed which was in the Church a M. and v.
hundredth years past: and we shall prove that the order of the Church set out
at this present in this Realm by Act of Parliament, is the same that was used
in Church.1500. years past, and so shall they be never able to prove theirs.

An Epistle to a certain Lawyer for his advise and counsel touching his
Appeal.
THe law of nature requires of all me^, that so farforth as it may be done
without offense to God, every one should seek to defend and preserve his own
life. Which thing, when I about three days ago bethought my self of, and
there withal remembered how that Martin Luther appealed in his time from Pope
Leo the tenth, to a general Council (least I should seem rashly and
unadvisedly to cast away my self) I determined to Appeal in like sort to some
lawful and free general Counsel. But seeing the order and form of an Appeal
pertains to the Lawyers, whereof I my self am ignorant, and seeing that
Luthers Appeal comes not to my hand: I purposed to break my mind in this
matter to some faithful friend and skillful in the law, whose help I might use
in this behalf, and you only among other came to me remembrance as a man
most meet, in this University for that purpose. But this is a matter that
requires great silence, so that no man know of it, before it be done. It is
so, that I am summoned to make mine answer at Rome, the xvi. day of this
month, before the which day I think it good after sentence pronounced to make
mine Appeal. But whether I should first Appeal from the Judge delegate to the
pope, and so afterward to the general Council, or else leauyng, the Pope, I
should Appeal immediately to the Council: herein I stand in need of your
counsel. Many causes there be for the which I think good to Appeal.

First, because I am by an Oath bound never to consent to the receiuyng of the
Bishop of Romes authority into this Realm. Besides this, whereas I utterly
refused to make answer to the Articles objected unto me, by the Bishop of
Gloucester appointed by the Pope to be my Judge, yet I was content to answer
Martin and Story, with this Protestation, that mine answer should not be
taken as made before a Judge, nor yet in place of Judgment, but as pertainyng
nothing to Judgment at all: and moreover after I had made mine answer I
required to have a Copy of the same, that I might, either by addyng thereunto,
by alteryng or taking from it; correct and amend it, as I thought good. The
which though both the Bishop of Gloucester and also the king and Queens
proctors promised me, yet have they altogether broken promise with me, and have
not permitted me to correct my said aunsweres according to my request, and yet
notwithstanding have (as I understand) Registered the same as acts formally
done in place of judgment.

Finally, forasmuch as all this my trouble comes upon my departing from the
Bishop of Rome, and from the popish Religion, so that now the quarrel is
betwixt the Pope him self and me, and no man can be a lawful and indifferent
Judge in his own cause: it seems (me think) good reason that I should be
suffered to Appeal to some general Council in this matter: specially seeing
the law of nature (as they say) denies no man, the remedy of Appeal in such
cases. Now, since it is very requisite that this matter should be kept as close
as may be, if perhaps for lack of perfect skill herein, you shall have need
of further advise: then I beseech you, even for the fidelity and love you bear
to me in Christ, that you will open to no creature alive whose the case is. And
for as much as the time is now at hand, and the matter requires great
expedition, let me obtain this much of you, I beseech you, that laying aside
all other your studies and business for the time, you will apply this my
matter only till you have brought it to pass.

The chiefest cause in very deed (to tell you the truth) of this mine Appeal
is, that I might gain time (if it shall so please God) to live until I have
finished mine answer against Marcus Antonius Constantius, This Consta^tius
was Stephen Gardener as constant in deed as a wethercocke, who thus named him
self writing against this good Father.
which I have now in hand. But if the adversaries of the truth will not admit
mine Appeal (as I fear they will not) Gods will be done: I pass not upon it,
so that God may therein be glorified, be it by my life or by my death. For it
is much better for me to dye in Christ's quarrel and to reign with him, then
here to be shut up and kept in the prison of this body; unless it were to
continue yet still a while, in this warrefare for the commodity and profit of
my brethren, and to the further aduauncyng of Gods glory, to whom be all glory
for evermore. Amen.

There is also yet an other cause why I think good to Appeal, that whereas I
am cited to go to Rome to answer there for my self, I am notwithstanding
kept here fast in prison, that I can not there appear at the time appointed.
And moreover for as much as the state I stand in, is a matter of life and death,
so that I have great need of learned counsel for my defense in this behalf:
yet when I made my earnest request for the same, all manner of counsel and
help of proctors, advocates, and lawyers was utterly denied me.

Your loving friend. T. C.

To maistres Wilkinson a godly matrone, exhortyng her to fly in the time of
persecution and to seek her dwelling, where she might serve God according to
his word.
THe true co^forter in all distress is only God, through his son Jesus
Christ, and who soever has him, has company enough although he were in a
wilderness all alone, and he that has xx. thousand in his company, if God be
absent, is in a miserable wilderness and desolation. In him is all comfort,
and without him is none. Wherefore I beseech you seek your dwelling there, as
you may truly and rightly serve God and dwell in him, and have him ever
dwelling in you. What can be so heavy a burden as an unquiet conscience, to be
in such a place as a man can not be suffered to serve God in Christ's true
Religion? I lie be loath to depart from your kin and friends, remember that
Christ calls them his mother sisters and brethren that do his Fathers will.
Math. 3.
Where we find therefore God truly honored according to his will, there we
can lack neither friend nor kin. If you be loath to depart for slaunderyng of
Gods word, remember that Christ when his hour was not yet come, departed out
of his country into Samaria, John. 4. Math. 5.
to avoid the malice of the Scribes and Phariseis, and commanded his Apostles
that if they were pursued in one place, they should fly to an other. And was
not Paul let down by a basket out at a window, to avoid the persecution of
Areta? 1. Cor. 2.
And what wisdom and policy he used from time to time to escape the malice
of his enemies, the Acts of the Apostles do declare. And after the same sort
did the other Apostles: albeit when it came to such a point, that they could no
longer escape danger of the persecutours of Gods true Religion, than they
showed them selves, that their flyeng before came not of fear, but of godly
wisdom to do more good, and that they would not rashly without urgent
necessity offer them selves to death, which had been but a temptation of God.
Yea when they were apprehended and could no longer avoid, then they stood
boldly to the profession of Christ, then they showed how little they passed of
death, how much they feared God more then men, how much they loved and
preferred the eternal life to come, above this short and miserable life.
Wherefore I exhort you, as well by Christ's commandment, as by the example of
him and his Apostles, to withdraw your self from the malice of your and Gods
enemies, into some place where God is most purely served, which is no
slau^dering of the truth, but a preseruyng of your self to God and the truth,
and to the society and comfort of Christ's little flock. And that you will
do, do it with speed, least by your own folly you fall into the
persecutours hands, and the Lord send his holy spirit to lead and guide you,
where soever you go, and all that be godly will say.

Amen.
T. C.
A short Table or Index, after the order Alphabeticall, notyng the place or
page of every principal matters, comprised in this Book.
A.
Abraham's will is called a sacrifice. 85 Accidents removed, there is no
difference of substance. 275 Adoration confuted.2. 238 Aduerbes in lie. 161
AEpinus. 3^9 15 Articles six, not consented unto, by diverse learned men. 252
Authors for doctrine, how to be read. 127
B.
Baptism injured by the Papists. 9. 20. 30. why ordained in water.38. the
water how changed therein. 330 Berengarius. 6. 7 Bertram his book. 6.77 Body
of Christ: whether a beast or byrd may eat it. 66. whether ill men eat it.68.
215. his eaten three manner of ways.70. whether it has proper forms and
quantities in the Sacrament.72. whether it be made of bread.79. ( look Bread)
is not the sacrifice.87. to eat it is a figurative speech.111. ( look eating)
how it is carnal.183. whether it be made of the matter of bread.203. what
manner of body it is.238. is not the substance of the visible Sacrament. 260
This is my Body, how expounded. 104. 121 Look Sacraments, and the word,
Christ. Our Bodies, how they shall be spiritual is the resurrection. 183
Bonauentura. 53 Bread, in the Sacrament is not holy, but an holy
token.3.186.156. yet is no bare token.4.10.92.207. but is delivered from his
bare name.291. to who^ it is but a bare token.10. how it is a changed in the
Sacrament.330. 341. the conversion thereof into Christ's body is spiritual.325.
how it is Christ's body.292. and flesh.20. why called Christ's flesh.133. why
it is Christ's body to the receauer.208. what food it is to the worthy
receauer.333. it remains but bread after sanctification.263. it being broken
how Christ may be said to be whole in every part thereof. 350 Breakyng
signifies the whole use of the Supper. 260 Bucer. 15
C.
Calling is not making. 346.107 Change of things remoueth not substaunces.
345 Christ, how present in the Sacrament.4.5.8.49. 124. how eaten in the
Sacrament.8.10.18.20. 22. how he is verily given in it.19. what it is to dwell
in him.23. he called the material bread his body.24. evil men eat him
not.25. he meant not to make the bread his body.25. his ambiguous speeches not
always opened in the Eua^gelistes.33. be excels all corporal food.37. he
is not corporally on earth.43. but in heaven.49. 95. 142. Papists say he
goes no further then the stomach.53. he is not received with the mouth.55.
how long he taryeth with the receiver.57. Papists say he is whole in every
part of bread.63. but once offered.87. the dedication of his will to dye was
not a propitiatory sacrifice.85. his intercession is no sacrifice for sin.89.
he is in his Supper, as in his assembly.93. how he is with us and also gone
from us.102. his calling is not making.246.107. his glorified body has his
form and qua^tities.129. he uses figurative speeches.136. how he is in our
hands.456. how he dwells in us naturally.168. 169. how united unto us.166.
192. 175. he is verily and truly present in the Sacrament.192. how we eat his
sensible flesh that was Crucified.234. to be honored in heaven and not in the
Sacrament.245. 239. his humanity proved by visible conversation.278. his
substance in Baptism, and the Supper how.289. he is joined to the bread, as
the holy Ghost is joined to the water.327. his words change the kinds of
elements.341. his sacrifice propitiatory what it is.370.372. and the effect of
his sacrifice. 391 Look the word Sacrament, and Sacrifice. Church of God how
it daily offers Christ. 89.90 Church which is to be followed.380. and which
Church can not err. 405 Church of Rome a stepmother.12. 13. the mother of
Transubstantiation.15. ( look Transubstantiation.). Clemens Epistles feigned.
146 Communion a short introduction thereunto. 380 Confusion of Natures what it
is. 321 Consecration what it is.184. the Papists vary in it. 262. Conversion
two ways. 107 Conversion of earthly creatures into Christ's substance how.
187 Corporal things have two Natures. 363 Cuttill the nature thereof. 19
D.
DOctrine wantyng general success is not therefore untrue. 7
E.
Eating signifies beleuyng. 31 Eating spiritual how it is. 40.218 Eating of
Christ's body three manner of ways. 70.214 Eating of Christ's body is a
spiritual speech. 113. 118 Eating of Christ's flesh what it is. 163.217 Evil
men eat not Christ's body. 68. 215. 216
F.
Faith Catholic what, as Winchester says.4. how grounded by the Papists.
396 Faith true, was in the Church from the beginning. 405 Falsehode fears
light. 395 Fathers in the old law received the same Sacrament as we. 58.75
Figure, or signification, found in Scripture. 10.11 Figures have the names of
the things signified.124. 235. they require not the presence of the things
signified. 306 Figurative speeches especially used in Scripture concerning the
Sacraments. 135 Form what it means. 267 Form visible, what it is. 268
G.
GAmaliel his counsel. 6.7 God his omnipotency in the Sacrament. 8. 29. 30
H.
Heretics concerning Christ's two Natures. 294. Holiness in the Sacrament
wherein it stands. 156.187
I.
Jacob in that he sought by his mothers advise to resemble Esau, is not a
figure of Christ's humanity. 260 Impanation. 267 Infusion. 333 Jonas. 15 Ione
of Kent. 78
L.
LVther. 7.11
M.
MAma. 229 Mass private how fondly proved by Gardener.150. the sacrifice
thereof.371. it is not propitiatory.373.378. it is detestable.375. the Papists
arguments for it confuted.378. never used in the primative Church.378. the
abuse thereof. 379 Materia prima. 350
N.
NAmes chaungyng. 292.218 Nature of two significations. 292 Negotions by
comparison. 335 Nestorius his error. 20.176 Nicolas 2. Pope his fleshly
constitution of the Sacrament. 114
O.
ONe thing one substance. 362 Only one singular. 87
P.
PAnes propositionis, whereof they be figures. 203 Papists their four
principal error.42. they vary among them selves.73. their faith of the
Sacrament, and the true faith how they differ. 49.50.51 Powryng. 332 Presence
by faith requires no corporal presence. 316 Priest and lay men how they
differ. 376 Promises of God under condition. 216 Prosperity no note of true
doctrine. 7.8
R.
Real presence proves no Transubstantiation.253. in the forms it is
unprofitable, and vnco^fortable. 300 Really what it is. 70 Really, and sensibly
is not found in any old writers. 156 Receive how we ought. 143. 148. 208. 228
Receauer, in him is real conversion. 287 Reservation. 58 Romish Church, not
the mother of the Catholic faith. 12.13
S.
Sacraments, their true effect.10. the Papists errors therein.42. their
names why changed.360. they differ in the old and new Testament. 75
Sacrament of Christ's body the eating thereof.23. why ordained.25. 37. 39. it is
no miracle.29. 30. why ordained in bread and wine.38. the doctrine thereof how
different between Papists and Protestants.49. 50. as soon as it is eaten
Christ's body goes into heaven.53. in it remains not two natures.300. what
is to be wo^dered at thereto.65. 194. 367. it is to be reverenced, not
worshypped.134.239. the mystery and holiness thereof wherein it
stands.156.242. the true doctrine thereof simple and plain.351. the true
administration thereof.362. it must not be received of one for an other.375. it
goes into the divine substance to the worthy receauer. 316 Sacrament, the
word, is of two significations. 212 Sacramental mutation. 346 Sacrifices art
of two kinds.372. differ in the old and new law. 371 Sacrifice of Christ and
ours how they differe. 385 Sacrifice propitiatory of Christ what it is.370.
the effect thereof. 391 Sacrifice of the Church, daily, what.89. 9^. 372. 385.
it consists of two things.300. wherein it stands. 391. 397 Sacrifice of
all Christian people what.374. as well made by a lay man as a Priest. 378
Sacrifice propitiatory, and gratificatory how they differ. 388 Sacrifices
devised by Winchester. 87 Salomons judgment in the child. 94 Schole Authors
their devotion. 351 Senses may be deceived in the Accidents.275. they avail
to faith, and iudgyng of substaunces. 278 Similitudes how far they extend.
300 Sinners whether they have Christ within them. 226 Smith his book full of
railing.4. confuted.28. 42. 44. his vain distinctions.102. his novelties in
speech and doctrine.109. he belyeth Ephesius Counsel and Cranmer.396. his
argument of the door and Sepulcher. 403 Soul the hunger thereof.35. and food
thereof. 36 Stercorametae, their opinion. 52 Substaunces more properly seen then
their accidents.274. they can not do without accidents. 349 Sun how it is
present with us on earth. 92 Supper of the Lord the abuse thereof.18. it gives
not life to the receauer. 32
T.
THeodoretes Dialogue on the Sacrament. 128 Transubstantiation subuerteth
faith.40. the Authors thereof.251.323. is at large confuted. and is against
Gods word.253. against all reason.263. against all sense.171. it passes the
fondness of all Philosophers.268. it is no matter of faith.276. it is contrary
to the faith of the old fathers.279. the Papists reasons to prove it.324.
Authors wrested for it.330. absurdities that follow thereon.338. Scripture
does not enforce a man to believe it. 353
V.
Variety a token of uncertain doctrine. 106 Unity of Christ's mystical body
through the Sacrament. 39 Unity with Christ how. 166.191.175
W.
WIcklesse. 7 Winchester his book is but frowardness armed with eloquence.1.
his Sermon in defense of the Sacrament.2. why deprived of his estate and called
before the Commissioners. ibid. his subtletie and craft.2.5.46.64.101.303. his
untrue collection of Cranmers doctrine.3. his untrue report.3. 4. 9. 13. 15.
19. 31. his Catholic faith.4. but his doctrine not Catholic.5. glad to
seek aid of Luther.7. 15. his answer to these speeches. I am a door, a
vine. 9. adds to S. Augustine what he lists. 22. confuted in his erroneous
Exposition of the 6. of John. 20. confesses Christ to be in the Sacrament
after a spiritual manner.93. 94. makes two sorts of sacrifices.87. translated
verity for virtue.199. he accuses the Evangelists of disorder in the
doctrine of the Sacrament.261. he calls accidents the nature of substance.
275
FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath Saint
Martines. Anno. 1580.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio, Regiae Maiestatis.


