A SERMON OF Sanctification, Preached on the ACT Sunday at OXFORD, Iulie 12.
1607. By RICHARD CRAKANTHORP Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for Tho. Adams. 1608.

To the right Worshipful his most loving Patron Sir JOHN L^V^SON Knight, R. C.
wishes welfare and prosperity.
SIr, I willingly acknowledge that by two assured bands of love and duty, I am
obliged unto you. The former arose from that unsained affection which I ever
bare from my first acquaintance in our College toward those three Gentlemen
your sons: In whom I have always both entirely loved and honored those
excellent virtues which give an assured promise of much comfort to their
Parents, and fruit unto their Country, and of their happy succeeding in those
virtuous steps of piety and true honor, which both your self, and their most
renowned Grandfather of honorable and blessed memory, Sir Walter Mildmay have
trod before them. I am further engaged unto you by that most loving respect it
pleased you to have of me, when contrary to the corrupt custom of many
Patrones in this age, of your own accord you called me to this place, my self
being far absent, and neither knowing nor once dreaming thereof. In regard of
both which, if I present unto you these small fruits of my studies in that
place, which by your means I quietly enjoy, I nothing doubt but you will
receive them not only as an assured pledge of my love unto you, but specially
as a fit argument whereon to exercise your religious meditations and retired
thoughts amids those manifold encombrances and troubled affairs which you now
sustain: to all which wishing an happy end and issue, and to your self
increase of all Gods graces and blessings, I take my leave.

From Black Notley in Essex this first of December. 1607. Your Worships in all
duty, RICHARD CRAKANTHORP

A SERMON OF Sanctification.
1. THESSALON. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I
pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.


WHat blessing the Apostle prayed for the Thessalonians in this his conclusion
and valediction unto them, the same do I wish unto you, Reverend, and right
Worshipful, beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in this which I
intend to be my last speech in this kind and my valediction to this place, to
which with the like, and even the same Christian duty, but with far more and
more effectual bands of private affection, I am more nearly tied and linckt,
than was ever S. Paul (as I suppose) to the Church and Saints of Thessalonica.
In the Apostles prayer there are four several points to be considered: First,
the blessing which he prayed for, and that was sanctification and holiness. [
Sanctify you, and keep you blameless.] Secondly, the Author and worker of
this sanctification, and that is God, who is here described by one special
title, noting both his love unto us, and our love one toward another. [ The
very God of peace sanctify you.] Thirdly, the manner of this sanctification,
which is, that it must be total and entire, whereof two special branches are
here set down: The one internal in the spirit, that is in our mind or
understanding; and in our soul, that is in our will and affections: The other
external in our bodies and outward actions. [ Sanctify you throughout that
(...) spirit, and soul (...) body may be kept (...)*] The Fourth and last is
the time and continuance in this sanctification, and that is unto our dying day
[ Unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Of these points while according
to the str^^tnesse of this time I shall entreat, I earnestly desire once again
of our God the a^^^stance of his holy spirit: and of you your Christian and
wonted patience and attention.

San^^ifie you.] The first point is the blessing which the Apostle wishes to
them, namely, sanctifica^ion and holiness. A duty so often required of us in
holy scripture, that I may truly say of it, the whole Law, the Prophets and the
Apostles do all aim at this. In the 19. of Exodus v. 5.6.
God seue^ing his people from all other nations, makes sanctity and holiness
to be the badge of them. If ye will hear my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then shall ye be my chief treasure above all people, ye shall be
also a kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation unto me. In the 4. of Esaias
(...). 3.
the Prophet says of all Gods children, They shall be called holy, and every
one shall be written among the living in Jerusalem. And again, (...) 21.
Thy peo- shall be all righteous. And (...) 62.12.
they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord. And in another
place (...) 61.6.
telling every one of Gods children, ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord, and men shall say unto you, The ministers of our God: from hence he
exhorts and persuades them all unto sanctity and holiness. Be ca. ^2.11.
ye clean ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. The same reason does Saint
Peter use in his 1. epist. chap. 2. (...) 9.
Ye are a chosen generation, a total Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him that has called you.
What a motive and spur ought thi^ to be unto us to lead a sanctified and holy
life, that God himself does profess of a^l such, and of such only that they
are his chosen and elected children: that they are his chiefest treasure, on
which his heart is set? as himself does witness E^ay 62. (...) 4.
where speaking to every one of his children he says, Thou shall be called
Hephzabah, for the Lord delights in thee: that they are to him for their
renown as kings, for sanctity as a kingdom of Priests. That as the Priests in
the old Law Ex 28.30.
were not only to have V^im and Thummim upon their breast plate, to signify
that inward light of knowledge and perfection of piety, that should be in
their hearts, but to wear also a plate of pure gold upon their foreheads,
whereon was engraven as on a signet Holiness to the Lord. So every true
Christian and child of God being now by Christ himself, and by his spirit
appointed and anointed to be a Priest unto God, to offer up not only those
other spiritual sacrifices of prayer, praise and thanksgiving, which the
Prophet Hos. 14.3.
calls the Calves of our lips, but that which the Apostle Romans 12.1
reckons as the chief sacrifice of all other, to offer up our selves, our
souls and bodies as a living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, they
should all so shine forth in piety, and in the virtues of a godly life, as if
continually they did wear that Leuiticall plate, or had engraven in Capital
and fair letters upon their foreheads, that is, in true and real actions of
their lives and conversation, Holiness unto the Lord.

Let me then in a word exhort and beseech every one of you to embrace this
sanctity and holiness of life. Ye are the houses Heb..3 6.
yea the temples of God, now the 1 Cor. 3.16
temple of God is holy which ye are, and Psalm. 93.5.
holiness becomes the Lords house for ever: ye are the children of God, and
therefore must bear the print and image of your father which is Ephesians. 4.24.
righteousness and true holiness, that as 1. Pet. 1.15.16.
he which has called you is holy, so ye may be holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy for I am holy. Ye are fellow
Citizens Ephesians. 2.19.
with the Saints, let your conversation (as the Apostle Psalm. 3.20
says) be in heaven, that is, an holy conversation, which is in truth an
heavenly conversation, as first descending from God, and from heaven, and then
most undoubtedly making you to ascend to God, and unto heaven.

Sanctity and holiness is the very end of our election, for God Ephesians 1.4.
has chosen us, that we should be holy and without blame before him. It is
the end of our redemption, for Christ has redeemed us, that Luke 1.74.
we being delivered from our enemies should serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our lives. It is the end of our vocation that
1. These 4.4.7.
every one should possess his vessel in holiness and honor, for God has
called us not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Without this, had ye all the blessings that mortality does possess, or man's
heart can desire, yet never can they bring either true happiness, or sound
comfort unto the mind. Riches are accounted a great blessing of God, and indeed
they are even a crown of glory, when they are found in the way of
righteousness, but without sanctity all the wealth in the world is worse than
poverty. A small Psalm. 37.^6.
thing that the righteous has is better than great riches of the ungodly.
Better Prou. 15.16. and cap. 16.18.
is a little, even a morsel of bread, and a dinner of green and sour herbs,
with the sear of God, and with righteousness, than is a stalled ox, and the
revenues of iniquity. Godliness of it self is gain, yea as the Apostle 1.
Tim. ^.6.
says, it is great gain, for it ca. 4.8.
has the promise both of this life, and of the life to come, and by it we
assuredly gain Gods favor in this present life, and eternal felicity in the
life to come. And no Psalm. 84.11.
good thing shall God withhold from him that leads a godly life: but of all
other gain and advantage without this, it is most true which our Savior
says, Luke 9.25.
What aduantageth it a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
Or what can thou or any man give for the recompense of his soul unto God?

Honor and renown a great blessing of God, God himself threatening it as a
curse unto the wicked, that he will make them a reproach, Deuteronomy. 28 37 Ier. 24
9.
a proverb, and a common talk among the people, yea a detestation and hisling
as the Prophet Ier. 25 9.
speaks; but except the ground and foundation of a man's honor be sanctity
and holiness, whose praise (as the Apostle Rom 2.29.
says) is not of men, but of God; all our honor is nothing else, but an idle
bruit, and blast of the people, a vain tympany and swelling of a man's name,
whose root as the Prophet I^sa. 5.24.
says is rottenness, and the bud thereof shall vanish into dust, yea into
dung. 1. Mac. 2.62
In the 1. Chro. 4. v. 10.
It is said of Iabesh that he was more honorable than his brethren, and the
reason is set down in the next verse, for Iabesh called on the God of Israel,
that is, was a religious and holy man. On the contrary, 2. Chron. 26. 1 Maca.
2.18.
It is said of V^ziah when he had lifted up his heart against God, Thou have
transgressed, thou shall have none honor of the Lord. God makes no other
reckoning of the wicked and ungodly, be they never so glorious in the
reputation and eyes of men, but as of ignominious and vile persons. And so he
expressly calls them, Psa. 15 Verse. 4.
. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: and that wicked king Antiochus, who
was surnamed by men Epiphanes, that is, illustrious and glorious, yet even this
Epiphanes in the 11. Verse. 21
of Daniel is entitled by God himself a vile person: In his place shall stand
up a vile person. Whereas all the godly and holy servants of the Lord in the 4.
of Esaias are not only called glorious, The Verse 2.
bud of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, but even glory it self,
Upon Verse 5.
all the glory shall be a defense, that is, upon all Gods children. The reason
of all which is either that which S. Peter gives, 1. epist. 4. chap. Verse. 1.
Because the spirit of glory, which is the spirit of sanctification, does rest
on them: or else that which God himself gives, 1. Sam. 2. Verse 3.
Them that honor me, will I honor: but they that despise me they shall be
despised.

Learning and knowledge a singular and rare blessing of God, of which S. Austen
truly says, in his fourth book of Confess. and 16. chap. Scis tu Domine Deus
quod and celeritas intelligendi. and discendi acumen donum tuum est, sed non
inde tibi facrificabam. Both the sharpness of wit to apprehend, and quickness
of understanding to discern and judge, they are both thy gifts, O God, though
oftentimes for these we do not sacrifice to thee, but to our selves. But had
we all the learning that man's wit can comprehend, knew we not only five and
twenty as did Mithridates, ^ul. G^l. li. 17. cap. 17.
but all the languages and tongues of men and Angels, knew we all secrets and
all prophesies, and in a word, had we, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13 2.
all knowledge, and yet had not sanctity and holiness, which is contained in
the love of God, and of our neighbors, as S. Austen rightly expounds Lib. 15.
de trinit. ca. 18.
it, I might truly say not only with the Poet (...), all this knowledge were as
nothing, but more peremptorily with the Apostle, we our selves were nothing.
The reason whereof, S. Austen gives in his fifth book of Confess. and fourth
chapter. Infoelix homo qui s^iat illa omnia te antem nesciat: Beatus antem qui
te scit. etiamsi ^^la nesciat. Qui vero and te, and illa nouit, non propter
illa beatior* sed prepter te solum beatus est. Wretched man were he that had
learned all other things, and yet had not learned God and godliness; but he is
a happy man that learns this, though he never learn ought else but this. And
he that knows both this and other things is not more happy for knowing them,
but he is only happy for knowing thee O God.

How greatly God has in his mercy enriched with all kind of knowledge this our
most flourishing church and kingdom, and herein this and the other Sacred
fountains of learning, from which as from the 2. great rivers of Eden so many
streams of living water have been and are daily derived, that they have not
only moistened the near gardens of the Lord, but like the ouerflowings of
Jordan have abundantly watered the whole land even from Dan to Beersheba, I
suppose no man so blind as not to perceive, nor so maleuolous, as with
thanksgiving not to acknowledge. And for my own part I suppose and dare
confidently auerre, that never was this Island in any age so abundantly, I say
not furnished, but even blessed and beautified, not only with the substance, but
with the ornaments also of all learning, as in this our age, and in the two
most happy reigns of this and our late, both most renowned and incomparable
Princes, since those dark mistes of superstition and Idolatry have been
dispelled and abandoned.

Now this I pray with the Apostle, Phil. 1.9.
that ye may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment; but
my special prayer for you is the same which our Apostle here uses, that both
ye your selves, and all your learning and studies may be sanctified unto God.
That ye would join as S. Peter 2. Pet. 1.6.7.
exhorts with your knowledge temperance, with temperance patience, with
patience godliness, with godliness brotherly kindness, with brotherly
kindness love; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. Esteem all
other k^^^ledge, yea all things else whatsoever, with the Apostle, Phil 3 8.
but as loss and dung for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord,
even this practicke knowledge of which Saint John testifies 1 Ioh. 2.4.
He that says he knows him, and keeps not his commandments is a liar, and
the truth is not in him; and of which our Savior says, Ioh. 17 3.
This is eternal life, to know thee to be the only very God, and him whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ. And seeing sanctity and holiness is both the
badge and cognizance of Gods children and servants, the end of their vocation
and calling, the only means to make all other gifts of God to be true
blessings unto us, without which they are indeed blessings in themselves, but
to us they shall be turned (as the Prophet Mala. 2.2.
says) into cursings: I conclude this my exhortation unto you with those few,
but most effectual words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. And this be spoken of the first point, namely the subject of the Apostles
prayer, which is sanctification and holiness.

God sanctify you.] The second point which I proposed was the author and
worker of this sanctification, and that is here set down to be God himself,
[ God sanctify you:] for whence else can any sanctity or holiness proceed,
but only from him who is first of himself and essentially holy? yea as S.
Austen Qui^ quid de de^ dicitur, vel intel^g^tur, non secundum accide^, sed
secundu^^ substantiam di^itur. lib. 5. de trinit. cap. 3.
shows, even holiness it self, and therefore called Psalm. 78 41.
the holy one of Israel; of whom the Seraphins sing Isa. 6.3.
holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; and then is effectiuely holy, as
causing and working holiness in others, as himself does often witness, I the
Lord do sanctify you, whom the Apostle Iam. 1.17.
calls the Father of lights, that is, of all shining virtues; and the spouse
in the fourth of Canticles, the fountain of gardens, because from him alone
does spring and issue all those odoriferous graces and gifts of piety, which
are more pleasant unto God, then are all the beds of of myrrh and spices:
Exo. 31.16 Leuit. 20 8.
of whom S. Austen most truly says, Lib. 2 de lib. arb. cap. 17. and 19.
Quantacunque bona, quamuis magna, quamuis minima, esse non possunt nisi ab ^o,
Verse 15.
a quo sunt omnia bona. Every good gift and every perfect gift comes from
above, even from the father of light.

Now as God works in us this sanctity and holiness, so is he the only
worker and sole agent therein, without any help, furtherance, or cooperation
of our selves, of our free will, or of any power or faculty that is in man,
for the 1. Cor 2.14.
natural man perceiues not the things that are of God, neither can he, for
they are even foolishness unto him, and the Romans ^ ^
wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God, and of 2. (...). 3 5
our selves we are not sufficient to think any thing (that belongs to piety
and Gods service, as S. Austen ^
expounds it) but all our sufficiency is of God. And most clearly Philipp. 2.
(...) 13.
It is God that works in us both the will and the deed; to which purpose S.
Austen excellently says in his Ench^^ ^^d L^urent. 32. cap. Nolentem praeuenit
vt velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra vel^: God at the first by his
preue^^ent grace does work this in us to be willing, and after with his
subsequent grace he accompanies us, that being willing we should not will in
vain. And again in his book De great. and lib. arbitr. and 17 chap. Vt
velimus sine nobis operatur, cum autem volumus, and sic volumus vt faciamus,
nobiscum cooperatur: God without us, or any help or work of ours does make us
willing, and he does cooperate and work with us when we are made willing. It
is most sure indeed as he says, that it is we that will when we are willing,
but it is he that makes us to be willing, of who^ it is said: The will is
prepared of the Lord. Velle and currere meum est. sed ipsum meum sine dei
semper a^xilio non orit meum, says S. Jerome ad C^esiph. To will is mine, and
to work is mine, but even this that is mine without Gods special and
continual help cannot be mine. All which S. Austen fully expresses in the
place De g^. and (...) ca 17.
before alleged, Sine illo vel operante vt velimus, vel cooperante cum volumus
ad bona p^etati^ opera nihil valemus: Without Gods operation to make us
willing, and cooperation when we are willing, in the good actions of piety we
are neither able nor willing to work any thing.

This the Scripture further to declare teaches Ephesians 2 1.^.
us that the unregenerate man is dead in sin and trespasses. And most
significantly is he said to be dead in sin: for though it be most true that by
the transgression and fall of Adam, the natural faculties of man's mind are
not extinct nor abolished, yet are they so exceedingly maimed and weakened
thereby, that they which were before naturales potentiae, as the Logicians call
them, that is natural powers and abilities, are now by reason of that
original transgression of our nature, become in man natural impotencies and
debilities. And they which in the integrity of man's nature had strength and
power both to will and to perform the works of piety and grace, are now in
the infirmity and corruption of the same nature disabled wholly to the works
of grace, and retaining only an ability to the works of nature, to all and
every action of piety and grace, are, as the Apostle, and after him S. Austen I
(...), and (...). and (...); ^amp^ etc. (...). 30.
, teaches, wholly dead, and quite lost, in this state no more able to will or
move to any action of grace, then is a dead man in nature able to will or
move to any action of nature.

For which cause the Scripture calls our conversion unto God sometimes a
resurrection Reu. 20.6.
from death, sometimes a new creation Ephesians. 2.10. and G^l. 6.15.
in Christ, but most usually a new birth Ioh 3 3.7. and 1. Pet. 1.^.23.
, a quickening Ephesians. 2 5.
, or regeneration; to teach us, that as in our natural birth and first
creation, we are no agents at all to give life, will, or motion to our selves,
but all proceeds from him who breaths life into a liuelesse body; right so in
our new birth, or new creation, which is our conversion unto God, we which to
grace are wholly dead, cannot po^^iblie be any agents to give either a
spiritual life and quickening, or will or motion unto our selves, but all
proceeds only from that spirit of grace, by which being first spiritually
revived and quickened, we are then made both willing and able to perform the
works of grace. And like as iron of it self being a dead and dull metal,
has no other motion nor inclination at all, but only to the earth, and
center, yet when it is once touched with the loadstone, it then directs all his
course and motions toward the pole in heaven, nor ever can rest till it point
thereat: Even so it is in us, we of our selves, in this our depraved nature
being in all spiritual actions like iron of a very hard, and besides of a dull
and dead metal, all the motions, affections and inclinations both of our mind
and will b^nd only to the earth, and to base and earthly desires; but when
once our hearts are touched with Gods spirit as with a loadstone, and we
anointed with that sacred unction, of which the Apostle 1. ^oh 2 20
says, that it is H^lie, then by the force, and divine virtue, and vigor
thereof, both our selves, our wills and actions are converted and turned toward
God, and toward heaven, and bend to Christ Jesus, as to the only Cynosure, and
that celestial pole whereby we are directed in this our short, but very
troublesome and tempestuous pas^age, till we arrive at our last and best haven
in Gods kingdom and in heaven.

All which God most clearly expresses to be his own work, and in no part
ours. Ezekiel. 36. Verse. 26.27.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away your stony heart, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I
will cause you to walk in my statutes, to keep my judgments, and to do
them. The giving of a new spirit to quicken, of a new heart to will and desire,
the changing of our stony, and as S. De gra and lib. arb ca. 14.
Austen calls them, inflexible hearts into pliable and teachable hearts of
flesh, the making of us to walk in his statutes, and to do them, all this God
challenges wholly to himself alone, leaving nothing in this whole work for
us, but only that excellent confession of S. Cyprian, so often commended by S.
Austen Lib. de Cor. and gra. cap 7. and 9. and lib. de bono p^^s. cap. 19.
, In nullo gloriandum est, quia nihil est nostrum, we must boast our selves of
nothing, because nothing is our own, but all is the gift and work of God.

As for the manner of this working of God in our hearts, though I may not in
this straitness of time at large stay to unfold it, yet suffer me in this
place especially, though but in few words to touch the same, the rather because
hereon in my opinion depends the very point, and maine issue of the whole
controversy twixt us and them. For it is most injurious to the grace of God
which they teach, that in our conversion Gods grace is only excitans gratia,
as if by it we were only awakened out of some slumber or sleep in sin. The
efficacy of which grace consists, as they suppose, in those motions,
inducements, and suggestions, which God proposes to our understanding, that
our reason being enlightened and informed thereby, our will of it self without
any further agencie or special work of God may at his own choice freely
yield, or deny assent thereto. This Bellarmine at large declares in his first
book De gra. and lib. arbitr. and in diners chapters Cat. 2. (...). cap. 12.
igitur. and Ha^^^^o. and. ^ursus.
thereof, where in the whole scope of his treatise he shows, that God in our
conversion is no Physical ^idimus vesse n^ll^um fieri a ^^o non per Physi a^^
actionem sed per vocationem quae est mora^u^n^^natio. cap. 12. Rursus.
, but only a moral cause and agent, which works suadendo, hortando,
corsulendo, as he says, by aduising, exhorting, and proposing persuasions unto
us, as if a man should persuade his friend to some journey or voyage which he
were able to undertake, but only unwilling till he were induced thereto by
some reasons; which is Bellarmines own comparison Cap. 14. A^ vt.
. And to omit other citations in his 6. book 15. chap. and 8. proposition, he
expressly says, Gratia dei quantumuis essicax, nihil est aliud nisi suasio,
quae non determinat voluntatem, sed inclinat per modum proponentis obiecti, the
grace of God how effectual soever it be, is nothing else but a suggestion and
motion which does not determine the will, but incline it by proposing objects
unto it.

I will here omit what before out of the Scripture is declared, that Gods
grace in our conversion is not only an excitant, but a viuificant grace,
whereby we are not wakened, but revived and quickened, as the Apostle says,
from the death of sin; as also that it is not only an alluring or
persuading, but an attracting, and drawing grace, as both Christ himself
witnesses Ioh. 6.44.
, None can come to me except the father draw him, and his Church acknowledges
Cant. 1.3.
, Draw me, and we will run after thee. Of which drawing S. Jerome truly
observes, handling those words of our Savior in his 3. book aduersus
Pelagiano^, frangit superbientem arbitrij libertatem, this does overthrow the
arrogant freedom of our will: for he that is drawn comes not of his own will,
sed aut retrectans and tardus, aut inuitus adducitur, but either with struggling
or unwillingly is he brought unto Christ.

But to omit these, S. Austen is most clear and pregnant in refuting these new
Romish, but in very deed old Pelagian fancies. In his first book against
Pelag. and Celest. 10. chap. he first shows how Pelagius with these very
answers of Bellarmine, shifted off that testimony of S. Paul. It is God that
works in us to will, he works it, said Pelagius, when by revealing wisdom
in desiderium Dei stupentem sus^itat voluntatem, he awakens and stirs up our
stupid will to the desire of God, when he enflames us with proposing the
promises of future glory and rewards, and when he does suad^re omne bonu^,
advise and counsel us unto all goodness. Thus said Pelagius* Sed nos eam
gratiam nolumus, says S. Austen, but this is not that grace which the
Scripture, and which we do teach, for it is not enough that the promises be
proposed, unless they be believed, nor that wisdom be revealed, unless it
be loved, nec suadetur solum omne quod bonum est, verum and persuadetur,
neither does Gods grace in our conversion only counsel and persuade us unto
good, but it makes a man effectually to yield unto Gods motions and
persuasions: and in the 24. chap. speaking of this very work of God, which is
as he there says, inward and hidden, he adds, mirabili ac ineffabili
potestate operatur Deus in cordibus hominum, non solum veras reuelationes, sed
etiam bonas voluntates, that God by a wonderful and ineffable power, (which
must needs be more then any persuasion) does work in men's minds not only
true Revelations (which is wrought upon the reason) but good affections and
desires, which is wrought immediately upon the will. The very same does he
again teach in his 107. epist. where purposely he refutes Vitalis for saying,
that to consent to Gods calling or his Gospel was not any special gift of
God, but an act flowing from the freedom of our will, when our understanding
is enlightened by the doctrine of God. As also in his book de spir. and lit.
34. chap. where having declared how God uses these persuasions unto us,
whether external in his word preached, or internal in the ears of our hearts
(which in the Scripture Matt. 22.14. Apoc 3.20.
are fitly termed the vocation and calling, or the knocking of God at our
hearts) he truly says, that to consent or dissent is an act indeed of our
will, but this that we do consent is the gift and work of God in our hearts,
which work he elsewhere more especially declares, to consist not only in
setting those objects before our mind or will, but praebendo ^
voluntati v^res efficacissimas, in giving most effectual strength unto the
will to affect and to desire the same, and making a man not only to see the
truth, but to love it also, which arises at he says, not from the freedom
of our will, but from the spirit of God which is given unto us. And afterward
Cap. 34
he moves (as he well terms it) a profound, but a very notable question to
this purpose, how it comes to pass that when God uses the same or the like
persuasions and suggestions to two me^, vni ita suadeatur vt persuadeatur, the
one is effectually persuaded, and not the other: did man's conversion depend on
man's own will? he might most easily have answered this question, because the
one by the freedom of his will assented unto Gods motions, and the other by
the like freedom of his will dissented there from, or else because to the one,
the persuasions and suggestions were congruous and fitting, and not unto the
other. But S. Austen knowing right well, that it might justly and no doubt
would again be replied, what should work the congruitie of the ones will unto
Gods persuasions, and not of the other? which he saw could be referred to no
other cause but only to the grace of God given to the one, and not given to
the other, therefore he tells us, that he can give no other answer to that
question, but that of the Apostle, Romans 11 33.
O altitudo, O the depth of Gods judgments* who of his mercy gives his grace,
and thereby makes the one willing to turn to God, and so he is effectually
persuaded, and in his justice withholdes that grace from the other, and so he
remains still unwilling and vnperswaded. In which answer, as being most
sufficient, S. Austen so fully rests himself, that he adds this conclusion,
If any desire a better answer, quaerat doctiores, let him seek to those that
are more learned, but take heed he find not those that are more presumptuous.

Thus we see that there is a further working of Gods grace on our wills, besides
that illumination and persuasion which is wrought on our understanding: for
though it be most true which both Philosophers and the Schoolmen teach, that
the will does ever follow the last judgment and conclusion of our practike
reason, yet because (which is most specially to be observed in this point) even
this last judgment of our reason is subject to the power and arbitrament of
our will, that so having had a most pregnant and fit reason and conclusion
proposed unto it, yet of it own freedom and liberty by a certain conniuence
may auert, and turn it self from that, and ^^^nd or look only at another,
though far worse and weaker conclusion, and b^ this attendance make this to
be the last determina^ion of reason: therefore lost our will, which of it self
is ever most ready to turn away from God, and from all his perswasion^ be
they never so forcible, should at the time or instant of our conu^^^^on use
this her liberty in turning away from them, ^.
God who has the hea^^s of all men in his own hand, and who has, as S.
^^^ten at large and excellentlently she^eth (...), more power over man's will^
than (...) himself, by his divine and s^cr^t, but, as S. Austen calls it, most
omnipotent power and (...) operation of grace, does both sta^ and hold our will
that it auert not from his motions, and so bends and incline (...), and by it
own w^^lingn^sse, as S. Austen says, and therefore without all fo^ce and
violence, does even draw it to yield her consent unto his persuasions, as to
the last, and (as they are indeed) the best judgment and determination of our
practicke reason. Which work of Gods grace is so effectual in men's hearts,
that as S. Austen in his book de praedest sanct* 8. chap. truly says, a
nullo duro cor^^ re^^^u^tur. it is never rejected of any though most obdurate
and inflexible heart or will, for this grace does even (...) the heart, and
makes it will^ng to embrace, affect and will that whereunto God persuades.

But leaving these obscure, though indeed most needful subti^^^es of lea^^^ng
unto thos^ in this place, whose wits and st^d^es are more conversant and
exercised therein, then ou^s, whose endeavors are ^^plo^ed unto most plain and
vulgar persuasions, I rather desire b^^^fly to answer, and, if I can to wipe
away that one doubt and objection, which as it is most pop^l^r and plaus^^le,
so is it ever most obuious in this cause which is, that (...) we have not
liberty and free will to turn unto God and godliness, then all precepts,
exhortations, admonitions, and reproves* may seem to be in vain; for what
folly were it, say they* to exhort, or command us to do that which is not in
our power o^ libe^tie to perform? as if a man should exhort one to run which
were fast enclosed in a pit or prison, out of which he had no power nor free
liberty to come forth.

For answer whereunto, I first say the same that S. Austen does in his book de
great. and lib. arbitr. 16. chap. where setting down this very objection of the
Pelagians, magnum aliquid Pelagi^m se sc^re put^nt, quan lo dicunt, non iuberet
deu^ quod ^ciret non posse ab homine fieri; God would never (said they) command
that which he knew man could not perform: S Austen answers them, that
therefore God commands somewhat which man cannot do, that man may learn to
seek of God ability to do it. Fides enim impetrat quod lex imperat, for faith
obtaines in prayer, what God commands in his law; as he there and elsewhere
L^b e^l^m cap. 14. and (...) 117.
declares: For which cause S. Austen himself very often (...) 10 cap. 19
31.37. and (...) 11
uses that worthy prayer which Pelagius much disliked, as you may see in S.
Austens book De bon persevere. cap 20. Da Domine quod iubes. and iube quod vis,
Give me O Lord ability to do what thou command, and command me what thou will. To which purpose he again most fitly says in his book De corrept. and
great. 2. chap. speaking of precepts, reproves, and prayers, O homo in
praeceptione cognosce quid debeas habere, in correptione cognosce tuo te vitio
non habere, in oratione cognosce vnde accipias quod vis habere: O man, by Gods
commandments thou may learn what is thy duty, and what thou ought to
do; by Gods reproof thou may learn it is thy own fault that it thou
can not do; by thy own prayer to God thou may learn of whom to seek,
that it thou may be able to do.

Besides which use, rightly noted by S. Austen, to give yet further
satisfaction to this doubt; Is it indeed folly or vanity, as they collect, to
command man to do that which is no way in his free will or ability to
perform? What will then or ability had dead Lazarus to rise out of that
loathsome p^t of his grave, when Christ commanded him and said Ioh. 11.4^.
unto him, Lazarus come forth? What power again or free will to rise from
death had either Dorcas* or the other maid in the Gospel, when Christ
commanding said Luke ^ 54.
unto the one, and as Christ's messenger S. Peter said Act^ ^ 4^.
to the other, Maid arise. And to omit inti^it like examples, what power o^
freedom of will had either the i^potent and palsy man that was carried by
others to stand up; or S. Peter himself to come out of Herod's prison wherein
he was ^ast lock^, and settered with iron chains; when Christ commanded Ma^k*
2.^1.
the one to arise, and take up his bed and walk, and the Angel from Christ
commanded Act. 12 7*
the other to arise quickly, and follow him out of the prison? Indeed for a
mortal man whose words are only significat^ue, or for any creature whatsoever
by his own authority to have commanded or exhorted any of these in this sort,
had been me^re folly and madness; but for Christ Jesus and almighty God,
whose words as the Prophet Psalm 3^ 9.
shows, are not only significatiue, but operative, d^xit and fa^^a sunt. and
whose spirit effects what his words betokens, for him thus to command, is
so far from being any token of folly, that it is in truth a most undoubted
argument of his omnipotent Majesty, and of his infinite power. And this God
himself declares in that most lively type and figure of our regeneration,
Ezech. 37 (...) 4.5. etc.
. What a ridiculous matter might it seem for the Prophet to command and exhort
the dead bones to come together? yet when the Prophet at Gods commandment, and
from God prophesied unto them, and said; O dry bones hear the word of the
Lord, the bones came together bone unto bone, and as he continued prophesying,
the sinews and the flesh grew upon the bones, and the skin covered the
flesh. And when he again prophesied unto the wind and breath, saying, Come
from the four winds O breath and brea^h upon these, the breath came into
them, and they stood up, and were living men. Right so in our new birth or
regeneration, which the Apostle calls our first resurrection, though the
Prophets and messengers of God prophecy and preach Gods word unto such as are
quite dead in sin, even mere (...) like to those dead and dry bones, yet
because the word which they preach is not man's word, but Gods Lu^. 8 11.
, which like the bow and arrows of Jonathan 2. Sam. ^ 22.
never returns void Isay 55.11.
or empty unto God, though in the reprobate it take no other effect but
publish and witness unto them their duty, and so leave them without all
excuse in the sight both of God and men, yet in those whom God effectually
calls, happily at the first Sermon or exhortation, it brings bone unto bone,
and at a second Sermon or exhortation, it brings flesh and sinews upon the
bones; and as Ezechiel with others the servants of God continue their
prophesying and preaching, at last even those dead and dry bones become not
only living souls, but sanctified temples unto God.

Wherefore to end this argument, wherein by reason partly of the obscurity,
and partly of the variety of the matter, I have stood longer then I first
intended, I conclude this whole point with that short sentence of S. Austen in
his 3. book De lib. arb. 16. chap. Deus and velle praecepit, and posse prael
uit, and non impune nolle permisit: God commands all men to be willing, he
gives unto some his grace to be able, he permits others to remain unwilling,
but never withal to remain unpunished. And this be spoken of the author of
our sanctification, which is God, of whom the Apostle here desires this
sanctity when he prayed, God sanctify you.

God of peace.] The title which the Apostle gives to God is not lightly to be
ouerpassed, in that he here calls him the very God of peace. And though many
reasons might be alleged why God is so called, yet for our present purpose I
will propose but one, which is to put us all in mind of that Christian
charity, peace and concord which ought to be among all Gods children, seeing
this God, who is God and father unto us all, is the God of unity and love; and
as the Apostle here describes him, The very God of peace.

And truly whether it be to teach us the necessity of this lesson, or to
signify our dullness and frowardness in learning and practicing thereof, or
for some other reason, I cannot tell, but I verily suppose that neither any one
doctrine is more often urged in the whole Scripture, then is this doctrine of
charity, nor any one sin more often and more earnestly reproved therein,
then is the want of charity. Our Savior tells Mat 22.39.
us that of the two great commandments whereon depends the whole Law and the
Prophets, the one is this lesson of love and charity. And lest any should
imagine that himself had abrogated any part of that law, he renues Ioh. 1^ 34
this precept in a most effectual manner: A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another:
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.
Of this the Apostle Gal. 5 14
testifies, The whole law is fulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self; and Romans 1^ 8.
He that loves another has fulfilled the law, for 1 Timothy 1.5.
The end of the law is ^oue out of a pure heart. Of this S. John says, 1. Ioh.
4.20.
If any man say I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar: for how can
he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not
seen? Of this S. Peter says, 1. Pet 4 8.
Above all things have fervent love among you. And to omit other testimonies,
S. Austen often Ioh. 5. de bap. (...). and ca. 23 (...) 5. de (...) 1^.1^.
and truly says of this, that without it multa sancta haberi possunt* sed
prodesse non possunt* faith, knowledge, and many gifts and graces of God
without charity may be in a man, but without charity they can never profit a
man.

I have heretofore in my cursorie observations upon the 1. to Titus spoken
somewhat of this point in the hearing of diverse of you; and being now
occasioned by my text to handle the same point again, though it were not hard
to find variety of arguments in a matter so plentious, that I may truly say,
non copia, sed modus quarendus est, yet let it not seem grievous unto you,
which to me seems most convenient, and which the Apostle (...) 3^.
teaches to be for you a sure thing, if from that same fountain of love and
duty which I have unto this place, I recommend unto you some part of that same
exhortation from the same God of peace.

Let me first say unto you as Moses once said to Gods own people, Deuteronomy. 2^. ^
Let there not be among you any root that brings forth gall and wormwood.
Your Colleges they are seminaries of piety, nurseries of Religion and virtue,
and like the house of Bethel, or the garden of Eden, they are the very houses
of God, and pleasant gardens of the Lord, the trees of knowledge and trees of
life (which are the best, nay the only timber wherewith to build the temple
and sanctuary of God) must so successively grow in these gardens, that it may
ever truly be said of them, anul^o ^
vno non deficat alter aureus. And I pray God to bless and multiply such
blessed pla^^s in all your Colleges. But if instead hereof there should be
nourished in these places those venomous and deadly weeds, which Moses calls
the roots of gall and wormwood, which are the very bane and poison not only
of men's studies, but of men's minds and manners, what other fruit may be
expected, then that which God laid ^
as a curse upon the earth: Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth? or as
the Poet ^
expresses it, Pro molli viola, pro^purpureo narcis^o Card^^^s, and ^^^ines
surget paliurus acuris, Infoelix lolium, and steriles dominantur a^^nae. Take
heed therefore, I beseech you, there be no roots of gall or wormwood in your
hearts, or among you.

Let me again say unto you as S. James ^
does, Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show
forth his works in me^kenesse of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts, rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth: This
wisdom descends not from above, but it is earthly, sensual, and devilish,
for where is envying and strife, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
works; but the wisdom that is from above is first pure, and then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, and the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace of them that make peace.

When the strife began betwixt Abraham and Lot, the Scripture Genesis 14 ^*
notes it as a special memorandum, And there were Cananites, and Perezates at
that time in the ^and: Doubtless there are at this time also our land, and I
wish there be not among our selves, too many who carry Cananitish hearts and
minds, who would no less then the old Cananites, Rejoice and triumph in your
discord, and blaspheme the name of God and his holy religion which we profess;
saying among themselves, Aha, so would we have it. Lest any such thing be ever
heard in Gath, or spoken in the streets of Askalon, let these who have the
spirit of Abraham, learn also the speech and language of Abraham, who though
he was both in age and dignity superior to his nephew Lot, yet came and said
^bid. ^8.
unto him. I pray thee let there be no strife between thee and me, nor
between thy servants, and my servants, for we are brethren; brethren not so
much by blood, as by Religion to be linckt together, as S. Austen I^^ de mor.
(...). ca. 10.
observes.

It was a devilish precept of Machiauell Prin. ca. 20
, and most cunningly every where practiced by the Jesuits, as their own
professors Sp^r. dise. (...) 17* and Q^^d. pa 69
observe and witness, but derived first from the lowest pit of hell, Divide
and impera. Far be it from any of Christ's disciples to learn such lessons,
or from so Antichristian teachers, much rather let us oppose hereto that
undoubted maxim of our Savior Mat 12.2^.
who is truth it self, Every kingdom divided against it self shall be
brought to naught, and every city or house divided against it self shall not
stand; or that wise counsel of Caselius a Lawyer, mentioned in Macrobius Sat.
lib. 2. ca. 6.
. Who being asked by a Merchant how his partner and he should divide their
ship between them, answered, Nauem, si diuidis, perdis; nec tu illam, nec
socius habebites: ye all sail in one ship, divide and cut this ship a
sunder, you spoil it, if not with it your selves. Or if there be any that wish
or seek a rent and division thereof, let such remember, that she was not the
true and natural mother which said, 1. King. 3.2^.
Let it be neither thine nor mine, but divide it, but she only who was content
it should be whole, though it were with the certain loss of her own tender
and most dear infant. And we must suffer as S. Austen I^^. ^. de lap ca 25.
wisely observes. Infantile corpus a falsa matre nutriri potius, quam concidi:
rather the wrong mother to noise the child, then it being divided them both to
lose it.

I will end this my exhortation unto you with those words of the Prophet, Psalm.
34.12.14.
What man is he that would live and feign see good days? keep the tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile, eschew evil, and do good,
seek peace, and follow after it.

Now as charity is most acceptable, and like the ointment of Aaron Psalm. 133 2.
pleasing unto God, so do the Scriptures in infinite places witness how much
God hates and detesteth the want of charity; yet out of that maine Ocean I
will but take one drop or two. In the 1. v. 3.4.5.
of Amos God threatens to break the bars of Damascus, and send a fire into
the house of Hazael, and devour the palaces of Benhadad; and why? because they
were not satisfied with the overthrow of the Gileadites their enemies, but
further without all compassion to wreake their wrath upon them, they threshed
Gilead and that with threshing instruments of iron. Likewise in the second
chap. v. 1.2.
God threatens to destroy the Moabites, and that they shall die with shouting,
and with the sound of a trumpet, because they were not contented only to
spoil the Edomites, though they were not theirs only, but Gods enemies, but
to satisfy their rage and malice, they burnt the bones of the king of Edom
into lime. This is that which God so earnestly reprooues in the Edomites, in
the prophecy of Obadiah v. 10. ad 16.
, and threatens for this cause to cut them off for ever. Thou should not
have beholden the day of thy brother when he was made a stranger, thou
should not have reioiced in the day of their destruction, nor have spoken
proudly in the day of affliction, neither should thou have looked on their
affliction in the day of their destruction; but as thou have done, it shall be
done to thee, thy reward shall be upon thine own head.

I might add heereto a further judgment of God, mentioned in the Apostle, 1.
Ioh. 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a manslayer, and ye know that no manslayer
has eternal life abiding in him. But having spoken thus much concerning that
brotherly charity and peace which we ought to have one toward another, I
would gladly add somewhat of that peace, which we all jointly owe unto the
Church of God.

Of this peace the prophet David says Ps. 122.6.7.
, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, Peace
be within thy walls. Of this the Apostle says Romans 16.17.18.
, I beseech you mark them diligently which cause division and offenses
contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them, for they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus, for 1. Cor. 14.33.
God is not the author of division, but of peace in all churches.

Of this Dionysius that ancient Bishop excellently writ to Nonatus, when he
began his schism, as you may see in his epistle set down by Eusebius in his
6. book and 44. chap. If you Nonatus have gone unwillingly (as you pretend)
from the Church, show it by your voluntary and willing returning to the Church
again. Oportebat quidem nihil non far ne ecclesia Dei sc^nderes* you should
have borne with whatsoever, rather then have made a rent in the Church of God.
It is a more glorious martyrdom to suffer for avoiding a schism, then for
avoiding the sin of Idolatry. In the one you suffer martyrdom but for one
soul, in the other you suffer for the whole Church of God. Thus said
Dionysius. Of this Gregory Nazianzen was so studious and zealous, that when
the Church at Constantinople began to be divided, as he supposed by occasion
that he possessed that sea, he openly said, and his speech was much more
commendable then his fact, Si propter me ista tempestas, If this stir and
tempest be for my sake, take me, and cast me into the sea, that the storm may
cease, and the Church may enjoy her calm, as Ruffinus reports in his 2. book
and 9. chap. To this S. Cyprian at large persuaded in his book de vnitate
ecclesia: Let no man think, says he, that the good will depart from the
Church; Triticum non rapit ventus, sed paleas: It is not wheat but chaste
which the wind blows away. Those can never abide in God, that will not abide
in the unity of the Church of God. Though such give their bodies to be burned,
or to be devoured of wild beasts, Non est illa corona fides, sed poena
persidiae, That is no crown of their says, but a punishment for their
perfidiousnesse: Occidi talis potest, coronari non potest: A man may happily be
killed, but never crowned in a schism. Of this Martianus, though no good
bishop, most passionately said, when Sabbatius whom he had formerly ordained
Presbyter, began to make a tumult and division in the Church, Multa satius
^^^sset, It had been much better, and I wish rather I had laid my hands upon
thorns then imposed them upon the head of this troublesome Sabbatius as
Socrates relates in his 5. book and 20 chap. For preserving this peace
Polycarp and other ancient bishops were so careful, that though they di^fered
in judgment about some rites and smaller matters, yet never for that cause
would they break the unity of the Church, or make a separation one from
another, as Eusebius declares in his 5. book and 23. chap. Friuolum enim and
quidem merito indicarunt consuetudinis gratia a se mutuo segregari eos, qui in
praecipius religionis capitibus cons^ntir^nt, says Zozomen in his 7. book,
and 19. chap speaking of Polycarp and Victor, They judged it frivolous and
childish, and indeed not without cause, to disagree and make a separation for
customs and ceremonies, when they did agree in the substance and chief points
of Religion. For this S. Austen so earnestly pleads (besides many other places)
thorowout his whole 7. books, De Baptismo contra Donatistas, that I suppose
the diligent perusal of those books would easily persuade a man that is not
too much led with a partial or self conceit, to do much, and to suffer much
more for the unity and peace of the Church; of which he thus ^ib. 6. ca. 21
says, Omnia bono pacis and vnitatis esse toleranda, That all things must be
borne with for peace and unities sake; and cause him ever to shun yea detest a
rent or schism in the church: of which he again says, and proves it in his
2. book and 8. chap. That the sin of schism is more heinous, then is the
sin of Idolatry: and more peremptorily in his 1. book contra epist. Parmen. 4.
chap. sacrilegium schismatis omnia sc^lera supergreditur, there is no sin, no
sacrilege, nor robbery so great, as is this, to rob Gods Chuch of her unity
and peace.

But because I hasten to say somewhat of the other points which remain, I will
not go forward in this so large and spacious a field, but conclude this whole
point of peace, partly with those words of our Savior, Mark. 9.50.
Have salt in your selves, and have peace one toward another, partly with the
words of the Apostle 2. Cor. 13.11.
, Finally brethren fare ye well, be of one mind, and live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you. And this be spoken of the title that
is here given to God, that he is called, The very God of peace.

Sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit, and soul and body may be
kept blamelesse] The manner of our sanctification (which was the third general
point I proposed) is here set down, which is, that it must be total, and
entire, that both our understanding and reason, which is meant by the spirit;
and our will and affections, which are meant by the soul^: and our external
and outward actions, which are meant by (...), may all be holy, and so we
wholly sanctified in the sight of God. By which integrity of sanctification,
the Apostle means not any such perfection of santitie as is void of all
sin; for the Scripture every where does witness, that no such sanctity is
to be expected or hoped for, while we carry about th^se bodies of sin. The
Apostles confess plainly of themselves, and such as are most righteous in this
life, In Iam. ^ 2.
many things we sin all: And if 1. Ioh 1.8.10.
we say we have no sin, we make God a liar, and his word is not in us. This
was the prerogative of Christ alone, that he knew 2 Cor. 5.21.
no sin, and in all things Heb. 4 15.
he was tempted like us, sin^e only excepted: Of whom S. Austen says Lib. 2.
cont (...) and (...) cap 32.
, That he was therefore prefigured by the spotless lamb, to signify that he
alone should be without all spot of sin, to heal all our sins, S^lus in
hominibus* qua^ quarebatur in pecoribus: He only among men was such as they
sought among the beasts, that is, without spot and blemish. But of all other
besides him, the Scripture says Isa. 53.6.
, All we like sheep have gone astraie, and the Lord has laid upon him the
in qu^tie of us all. And again, Gal. 3.22.
the Scripture has concluded all under sin* for Romans 2.23.
all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Nemo mundusa a
^eccat^^, says S. Jerome Lib. 2.
, against Iouinian, nec si v^ius quidem dies fuerit vita eius: None is clean
from sin, no not though he live but one day upon the earth. And S. Bernard in
his 23. sermon upon the Cantic. most significantly says, Non peccare Dei
iustitia, hominis iustitia indulgentia Dei, not to sin is Gods justice, to
have pardon of sin is man's justice.

It was one heresy of the Pelagians, as S. Austen shows in his book, De
haeresibus ad quod vult. haer. 88. and in his book De bono perseu. 5. chap.
that the just in this life are void of all sin, and without spot or
wrinckle; which error of theirs S. Austen almost every where refels, but
specially in his books Contra (...) epist Pelag. in the first whereof, and 14
chap. he says, Mul^^ fideles ^unt sine crimine, sine peccato autem dix^r^m
nemi^em* Many godly and faithful men do live without crime, (so did Zacha^^e
and Elizabeth, as he elsewhere Lib 1 cont. Dei and Cel. ca 48.
declares) but without sin not any: which distinction he again repeats and
explains in his (...). ad L^u^* 64. chap. and in the third book, and 7. chap.
We call (says he) the virtues of just men perfect in such sort that there
belongs unto their perfection, Ipsius imperfectionis and in ver tate cognitio,
and in humilitate confessio, Both the knowledge and acknowledgement of our own
imperfection. And therefore in his 9 book of Confessions, and 13. chapter Vae
etiam laudabili vitae hom^^u^^i (...) misericordia discutia^ eampunc; Woe be,
says he, even to best and most praise worthy life of man if thou shall examine
it in justice, and not in mercy.

S. Jerome likewise at large and excellently refuting the same heresy of the
Pelagians, both in his epistle ad (...)* and in his three books aduers. Pelag.
truly says, ^
Haec hominibus ^ola perfectio, si imperfecto^ se esse neuerint: This is the
only perfection of men in this life to know and acknowledge their own
imperfection. And whereas the Pelagians often and insolently objected ^para
that in the Scriptures both Moses and Christ himself does exhort us to be
perfect, S. Jerome answers that they do it in this meaning, Vt secundum vires
nostras vnu^qui^que quantum valu^rit, exten^^tur: That every one should (...)
as much as they can unto perfection, and with the Apostle Psalm ^ 14.
forgetting that which is behind, endeavor themselves to that which is before,
and follow hard to the mark; but yet still the perfection of virtue which they
do, or can attain unto in this life, is only an inchoate as S. Austen (...)
ca. 115.
terms it a begun and daily increasing, but not a complete and finished
sanctification, or as S. Jerome says, (...) 3.
it is here in Vmbra and imagine, only in a shadow, and some lineaments of
perfect sanctity; but hereafter it shall be in full beauty, and complete
glory: here they have it in vta ^
and cursu*, as passengers, not as possessors, as in the way, not as in their
country, for there shall be Sine omni sorde perfectio, perfection without any
spot or admistion of sin, but here is only perfection, Secundum Lib. 1.
Psalm. 32.6.
humanae fragilitatis modulum, such as man's frailty can receive; of whom the
Prophet (...) 2.
says, For this, that is for his sin and iniquity as S. Jerome expounds it,
shall every holy man make his prayer unto thee. And in a word, there shall be as
he calls Lib. 1. Psalm. lib. 4. de (...). cap. 15 and 16. Sa^^. in ca. 5 ad Romans
D^m. So^^ lib. 1. de na^u^a and gra^^a 6.
it, a perfect perfection, but here Cuntiorum in vita iustorum imperfecta
perfectio est: All, even the most just men have but an imperfect perfection.

How near to those old Pelagians, whose heresy these worthy fathers so
learnedly confuted, the Papists and the church of Rome approach, may easily
appear not only by their particular tenants, both of the blessed virgin, whom
they teach (...) conf. (...) page 138. (...) ad literam (...)
to have been void of all, both actual and original sin, and of S.
Francis, whose life was, as they affirm, a fulfilling of the whole Gospel
according to every line and letter, of whom for that cause they sing ibid.
their solemn hymn Franciscus ^uangelicum
Nec apicem vel vnicum
transgreditur vel ^^ta.
but also by their general doctrine concerning the fulfilling of the law of
God, of which they teach, that it is not only possible, but even necessary ^
also for attaining eternal life, to keep, and fulfill the commandments of
Gods law, especially seeing And. Vega in his ^^. book and 19. chap. upon the
Trent Council, sets it down for a Catholic and Trent conclusion, that there
is no moment of time wherein a man may not singula and omnia vitare peccata,
shun and avoid all and every sin; and further, that the just and righteous
men often, yea truly ple^^nque sic esse, for the most part do so avoid all
sin indeed.

Which new Pelagianisme it were not hard to refute, but that in this
straitness of time I much rather desire to touch that which concerns our
lives then our learning. And that is one special lesson which the Apostle
here teaches, that in true sanctification we must not think it sufficient in
some one duty to perform obedience unto God, and in some other (as many do)
to take allowance and dispensation unto our selves, but we must willingly
resign, and submit our selves wholly unto God, and to his law, striving with
all our knowledge, with all our affections, and in all our actions to perform
acceptable service unto God. For of those who at their pleasure take such
allowance in any one commandment or branch of Gods law, seeing the reason and
formal cause of their obedience is not the voice of God, but their own will
and choice, of such S. James truly says, Cap. 2.10
That whosoever keeps all the rest of the law, and yet fails in one point,
he is guilty of all: not because vices and virtues are linck together, for
that both in nature is impo^^^ble, and S. Austen ^c^^tes it in his treatise on
those words, Lib. desent (...) Apost. ad H^^. cap 6.
but because such a man setting light by Gods authority and love, on which, as
both Tertullian Lib. de ^udit. (...) enim quia (...) est id (...) au^cult^^^
d^benius, sed q^ia deus p^ae (...).
and S. Austen ibid. ca. 11.
rightly teach, depends as on a foundation the true observing of every
commandment* and for which only we should yield obedience to Gods law; such
one, I say, neglecting and violating the ground of obedience, though but in one
point, is indeed guilty of all, as being then ready upon any occasion of his
own pleasure to take like allowance to himself in any part of the law, as he
has already done in that one. And therefore God in his law requires an entire
and total obedience to be given to him, Thou Deuteronomy 6 5.
shall love the Lord with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength: Thou C^^. 2.^2. ^ cap. ^^.2
shall observe and do all that I command thee: Thou (...) 28.1^.
shall not decline from any of the words which I command thee: Let 2 (...) 7 1.
v^ cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit: Cast ^
away all your transgressions and iniquities, for why will ye die O ye house
of I^rae^? And to omit S. Austens comparison, that even one wound or disease if
we neglect or refuse the cure thereof, will endanger the whole body though the
rest be ^ound, or that one ch^nke, if it be not prevented, may endanger the
whole ship; I rather propose that one, but most effectual testimony of God,
Ezech. 18. (...). 10.11 etc.
If a father beget a son, that is a thief, or a shedder of blood, (...) he
do any one of these things, though he do not all these things, but either
has eaten upon the mountains, or defiled his neighbors wife, or has
oppressed the poor and needy, or has spoiled by violence, or has lift up his
eyes unto Idols, or has given forth upon usury, or has taken increase,
shall he live? He shall not live; but in the abominations that he has done, he
shall die the death. Consecrate therefore, I beseech you, your selves wholly
unto the Lord.

Consecrate first as the Apostle here teaches your spirits and inmost
affections unto God, for God loves Psalm 51.6.
truth in the inward parts. And as he is Ioh. 4.13.
a spirit, so he looks to be served first and chiefl^ in spirit and in
truth. Be thou upright (said Genesis 1^ 1.
God to Abraham) before me, that is, not only before men, but in my sight, who
search Ier. 17.10.
the hearts and reins: without this all external and outward holiness, is
but Pha^saicall ostentation, and that outward clensing of the cups, and
painting the tombs which within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity, full of
filthiness and rottenness, against which our Savior has denounced Matt.
23.25.28.
a woe in the Gospel. Well may ye by this visor of sanctity dazell and
bleare the eyes of men, as the Poet lib. 1 epist 16.
signified, Pulchra lauerna da mihi sallere* d^^ustum (...) evider^: but never
can ye deceive the al-seeing eyes of him who says by the Prophets, lib. 27 28.
I know thy dwelling, thy going out and thy coming in; and again, Ier. 16.17.
Mine eyes are upon all thy ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is
their iniquity hid from mine eyes; of whom the Psalmist says, Psalm. 13^.1.23.
Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways, there
is not a word in my tongue but thou know it altogether, yea thou
understand my thoughts long before; and of whom the Apostle ^
says, All things are naked and open unto his eyes. Let me then here say unto
you as David ^
did unto his sin, when drawing near unto his death, he bequeathed this as a
part of his last and best legacy unto him; Thou my son, serve thou the Lord
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of thoughts, it thou (thus)
seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee
off for ever.

Consecrate next your bodies unto God, that as the Apostle here wishes, your
bodies may be kept holy, and without blame. I beseech you by the mercies of
God, says the Apostle, Rom 12.1.
that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God;
and aga^ne, (...) 6.13 1^.
Give your bodies not as servants of iniquity unto sin, but as weapons of
righteousness unto God. Know 1. Cor. ^.15.19.
ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ, and temples of the holy
Ghost? and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price, glorify
therefore God both in your spirit and in your bodies, for they both are Gods.

Consecrate lastly, your external and outward actions unto God, that ye may
show forth the virtues of him that has called you, and that your lives being
as lamps of piety unto others, may shine forth in good works, which God has
ordained, that we should walk in them. If we have only outward sanctity, we
deceive others, if we have only inward sanctity we deceive our selves: for
never is faith, charity, or holiness rooted in the heart, but it buds forth,
and shows it self in the fruits of good works, and of a godly life. If these
things, says S. Peter 2. Pet. 1.8.
, that is, godliness, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, and love be
in you, they will make you that ye shall neither be idle nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of Christ. In the 2. Corinthians. and 5. chap. v. 14.
S. Paul gives a reason why he took all that toil and labor in the Gospel,
and in gaining others unto God, and the reason is this, the love of Christ,
says he, constrains us. Doubtless where the true love of God and Christ is
in a man's heart, it will even constrain him to his duty, and to obedience unto
God, and will be like the fire in Ieremies Ier. 20 9.
bosom, which could not be shut up, but made him weary of forbearing, that he
could not stay. Amor Dei, says S. Gregory, Lib quest. 83 q^. 76.
otio^us non est, operatur magna si est, si operari renuerit, amor non est;
Where the love of God is it is not idle, but works greatly, and where it does
not work, it is not.

There were some even in the Apostles time, as S. Austen shows, who boasting
of their faith, and yet living a most dissolute and wicked life did reckon
themselves as good Christians, and as sure inheritors of Gods kingdom as the
best: Which most pernicious and pestilent heresy, being first broched by that
arch-heretike Simon Magus, as Irene declares in his first book, and 20. chap.
was afterward embraced and maintained by the Eunomians, who taught, as S.
Austen shows in his 54. heresy, Ad quod vult. that if a man did believe their
doctrine, it skilled not how he lived, neither how many sins he committed,
nor how long he perseuered therein. To which heresy when some in S. Austens
own time inclined, he purposely writ against them his book De side and
operibus; the sum and effect whereof, is the very same which S. James in his
epistle most effectually urges, What I^m ca. 2.14. etc.
avails it my brethren though a man say he has faith when he has no works?
Can such a faith save him? And the Apostle answering that such is but a dead
and even a diabolical faith, in the end he uses a most fit comparison to
express the same, that as the body (...), without breath (for so the word does
there rather signify then the soul, seeing good works do not animate or give
life to faith, but as an effect does follow it, as S. Austen Opera sunt ex
f^^e, non ex operibus fides: lib. de grae. and lib. arb. cap. 7. sequuntur
opera iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. lib. de fid. and oper. cap.
14.
truly declares) as without breath then, the body both is and thereby is
known of all to be but a dead body: so that faith which breaths not forth
in good works, both is in it self, and is thereby also evidently discerned and
known of all to be a dead faith, which can neither save, nor as the Apostle
Iam. 2.19.
teaches, justify a man in the sight of God: for a true and justifying, or as
S. Austen Ca. 14. and 16.
calls it, an Evangelical faith does ever work by charity, Galath. 5. v. 5.
. And of it S. Austen says, Lib. Qu^st. 83. qu. 76.
Iustificatus per fidem quomodo potest nisi just operari? He that by faith is
justified, cannot but work the actions of justice. And more plainly in the
23. chap. of the book before alleged; Inseparabilis est bona vita a fide, imo
vero ca ipsa est bona vita: A good life is never severed from faith, yea rather
faith is a good life it self.

It is a memorable story which Ruffinus sets down in his 2. book and 6. chap.
of one Moses an holy man in the primitive church, who being to be ordained a
Bishop, refused to have Lucius a wicked persecutor to lay his hands, or give
consecration unto him: At which Lucius disdaining, and supposing he had taken
some exception to his faith, If you be ignorant, said he, or misinformed of my
faith, I will recite and relate my belief unto you. You need not, said Moses,
recite your faith unto me, I know it well enough, so many servants of God that
you have condemned to the mines and minerals, so many bishops, presbyters, and
deacons, that you have banished, so many Christians that you have delivered,
some to the fire, and others to the fury of wild beasts, these do report and
make known your faith unto me. Nunquid verior potest esse fides quae auribus
capitur, quam quae oculis peruidetur? I will rather believe mine own eyes, and
your actions concerning your faith, then your bare words and profession. To
which purpose S. Austen says in his 3. tract upon the epistle of S. John, Non
attendamus ad linguam, sed ad facta: Let us not look to a man's words, but to
his works; he that in works denies Christ, he is an antichrist: Opera
loquuntur, and verba requirimus? His works do speak what he is, we need not
seek to his words.

I might here justly, and, would the time have permitted, I would more at
large have refelled that most shameless slander which they have devised
against us, that we prohibit and contemn good works, as Bellarmine was not
ashamed to publish in his book called Iudic. de lib. concor. and 7. lie, that
we account men free from doing of them, or observing the law of God, as he
again without al truth has affirmed in his 4. book of Iustif and 1. chap. Yea
further that we teach Licere quod lubet, that a man may live as he list, as
Dominicus Soto reports in the Preface of his book De natura and great. which
he offered to the Council of Trent.

For answer whereunto, though we do most truly teach both out of the Apostle
Romans 3.28.
that we are not justified by the works of the law, but by faith; and out of S.
Hilarie Comm in Matt can. 8.
that ^ides sola iustificat, faith only does justify; and out of S. Austen,
In psat. 88. ser 2
that Fides sola mundat; and out of S. Ambrose In cap. 4. ad Romans
that a wicked man is justified before God, Persidem solam, by faith only; and
out of S. Jerome, In^dem cap.
that God does justify a wicked man per sidem solam, by faith only; and out
of Origin, In ca. 3. ad Romans
Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem, the Apostle teaches, that
justification by faith only is sufficient, which he by diverse examples at
large declares, in those who, as he says, fide sola iustificati sunt, were
justified by faith only; and out of S. Chrysostom, H^mil. 3. in epist. ad Tit.
Why bring thou other things? Quasi fides sola iustificare non sufficiat, as
if faith only could not justify thee: why do thou put thy neck into
voluntary bondage under the yoke of the law? that is a sure argument of
distrust and want of faith: and to omit many others out of S. Basil, Sermon. 22.
de homilitate.
that this is full reioicei^g when a man knows himself to be void of justice,
sola autem sia in Christum iustificatum, But by faith only to be justified;
though this we constantly and truly teach, for which doctrine of sola ^ides,
which they call heresy, we with all these holy men are condemned this day; yet
are we so far from despising and much more from forbidding good works, as
they unjustly slander us, that we every where profess and teach of them with
S. Bernard Lib. de gra. and lib. arbitr. verb. vit.
, that they are via regni, non causa regnandi, the way that we must walk to
^eauen, though not the price to purchase heaven; that they are necessary,
necessitate praesentiae, though not necessitate efficienti^, necessary to be in
those that are justified and shall be saved, though neither to concur to the
act and work of their justification, nor to the merit and worth of their
salvation. Yea and even in ^he very article of that public confession Conf.
Aug. (...). 20.
which Bellarmine there handles, and in vain strives to confute, it is
expressly affirmed, Docent nostri quod necesse ^it bona opera facere, we teach
that it is necessary for Gods children to do good works, and to walk in them.
A very pregnant conjecture that the Jesuit could not without some check of
conscience so willingly and wittingly oppugn an evident and known truth.

With which short and undeniable answer contenting my self at this time, and
for a further refutation of that slander referring every man to all our
writings and sermons, wherein we do both more earnestly persuade unto, and
more truly magnify and prize good works then do any of their sworn Capi.
Ego. N^extr. de iur^^ur. and co^^. trid. fess. 25. de ref^r. cap. 2.
professors to the triple crown of Antichrist: For conclusion of this whole
point, I exhort and beseech you all so to live in sanctity, and abound in the
fruits of faith, that by our good works we may stop the mouths, if it be
possible, of those that so maliciously speak evil of us, as of evil doers,
and that the truth of our faith may be be^ter witnessed by our works, then by
our words, and by our godly conversation rather then by a verbal profession.
Take heed ye be not ^ike those whom the Apostle Epist ad Titum 1.16.
condemns: They profess they know God, but in their works they deny him.
Have thou faith? Show it, says S. James Ca^ 2 18.
, by thy works. Let ours (says the Apostle (...) ad Tit. 3.14
) learn to show forth good works, that they be not unfruitful; and with our
Savior Matt. 5.16.
I conclude, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. And this be spoken of the
third general point, namely the manner of our sanctification, that it must be
total and entire.

Unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.] The 4. general point, and the last
which I intend to observe, is the time or continuance which the Apostle
requires in our sanctification, namely, that we should persevere therein unto
the end of our lives, and to our dying day: for the life of a Christian is
compared to a race, wherein none receive the prize but they only that continue
and run out unto the end, So 1 Cor. 9 24.
run then that ye may obtain: It is compared to a combat 2. Tim. 4.7.
, and the garland of immortality, and crown of righteousness for which we
all do strive, has not engraven upon it certanti, but vincenti dabitur, to
him Reu. 3 7.17.26.
that overcomes, and keeps my words unto the end, will I give to eat of
the tree of life, and of the hidden Manna. Be thou v. 10.
faithful then unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life: Non
quaeruntur in Christianis initia, sed finis, says S. Jerome ad Furiam, It is
not enough to begin, but to end well is the honor of a Christian life. The
Prophet Psalm. 84 6.
sets it down as a property of the faithful, They will go from strength to
strength, until every one of them appear before God in Sion. Let us not be
weary, says S. Paul Gal. 6.9.
of weldoing, for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. He that
continues, says S. John Epist 2 v. 9.
, in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. To them
Romans 2.7
that by continuance in well-doing seek glory and honor, shall be immortality
and eternal life. Behold, says cap. ^1.22.
the same Apostle, the bountifulness and severity of God, toward them which
have fallen, severity, but toward thee bountifulness, if thou continue in his
bountifulness, or else thou also shall be cut off. And to such only as
persevere is the promise of our Savior made, Matthew. 24. (...) 13.
He that endures to the end he shall be saved.

Beloved, if any have not already entered into the course of such a sincere and
godly life, as both long since they solemnly vowed, and do now outwardly
profess, such I cannot exhort with the Apostle to continue or go forward, but
to desist from that course, and without delay even while it is called to day,
as the Apostle says, Heb 2.7.
To turn unto God: nor ever to use any of those sluggish and delatorie
answers, which S. Austen Lib. 8. cons. ca. 5.
most justly condemns, that when God calls you to arise from sin, and to be
partakers of his grace, you should reply and say unto him, Modo and ecce modo,
and sine paululum, sed modo and modo non habebant modum: Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber and rest in sin: but rather follow that worthy example of S.
Austen, ibid ca. 12.
who after a long strife and combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, at last,
as being impatient of longer delay, he brast out into that most patheticall
exclamation, Quamdiu, quamdiu, ^ra^ and ^ra^? quare non hodie? quare n^ hac
hora finis turpitudinismeae? How long shall I put off from day to day? why not
even this day, nay why not this very hour do I make an end of all my
filthiness, and embrace the love of God.

But because not only Christian charity, but my private affection to this
place makes me to judge the best of you, that you have not only begun, but
have well proceeded in the course of a godly life, my only exhortation shall
be unto you, that ye never turn back from God, nor from a Christian and a
godly life, but continue and persevere therein, as our Apostle says, even to
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: for although it be impossible (which I
have heretofore in sundry Sermons out of this place made clear) that those
who are once truly sanctified by Gods spirit, and seasoned with his grace,
should ever afterward either totally or finally relapse or fall away from God;
yet that even such by their voluntary running into some grievous
transgressions, may so far decline from God, and from many degrees of his
grace, that they may leave a grievous wound unto their conscience, and a
blemish to their profession and calling, those known examples of holy David,
S. Peter, and diverse others do more then sufficiently witness unto us, which
are purposely registered in the book of God, not so much to be a staff of
comfort to uphold those from despair which by like infirmity fall into like
sins, but specially to be a caveat and warning to all other, wisely to
prevent, and manfully to resist all the motions of sin, and even the first
suggestions of Satan, cum videant tantorum vtr^rum and cauendat tempestates and
slenda nausragia, as S. Austen observes of those very examples in his 3. book
De doctr. Christ. and 23. chap. that seeing Satan has already given the foil
to those who were so full fraught with piety, and so strong and valiant
champions in this spiritual conflict, that they were able to encounter yea to
overthrow even Goliath of the Philistims, how vigilant and watchful ought we
to be, who have neither so great strength, nor skill, to make resistance
against so mighty, so subtle, and so expert an enemy?

Wherefore let me put you in mind of the Apostles Heb. 2.12.
exhortation, Take heed lest at any time there be found in any of you an evil
heart and unfaithful to depart away from the living God: Remember the Apostles
Gal. 3.1.
reproof, O foolish Galathians, are ye so foolish that when ye have begun in
the spirit, ye will end in the flesh? Better it had been, as S. Peter says
2. Pet. 2.21.
, never to have known the way of righteousness, then after ye have known it
to turn from the holy commandments of God. O what a grief would it be unto
you, if when ye have formerly been as fair lamps in Gods Church, giving
much light and warmth unto many others, those graces of Gods spirit should
afterward be so far smothered, and almost quenched, that they could yield
neither more heat then some small sparks, and those covered also under the
finders of many sins, nor give more light then the snuff of a candle, which
is both dim and noisome? Or what a grief would it be for a Christian mind
that he should ever have just cause to complain as Milo Cit. de sen.
did, who having in his younger days been renowned and famous throughout all
Greece for his strength, afterward coming to the Olympicke games, bemoned the
want and decay thereof, and stretching out his arms said, At hi lacerti nunc
mortui sunt, ah the strength and sinews of my arms are now withered and
decayed; far greater sorrow would it bring unto a Christian heart, if in his
old age, which should be best of all, finding an impairing of his spiritual
strenth and former graces of Gods spirit, he should then have cause to lament
and say; Time was indeed when this arm of my faith did strongly lay hold on
Christ, time was, when there was pith, strength, and sinews in my zeal to
God, and love to Gods children; At hi lacerti nunc mortui sunt, but alas, all
the pith and sinews of my former piety are dead, quite decayed and gone.

Let us rather strive to be like Moses Deuteronomy* ^4 7.
the holy servant of the Lord, who being an hundred and twenty years old, yet
neither was his strength abated, nor his eye sight dim, but he was able
clearly to discern from mount Pisgah, in the land of Moab, even to the utmost
coasts of the land of Canaan: so let us all continue, yea increase in piety,
that in our latter age our spiritual strength may not be abated, not our
eie-sight dim, but then especially we may both more earnestly then ever
before desire and most clearly discern and see the blessed felicity of that
heavenly Canaan, the land of our possession and peace. And let us learn that
one precept of the Orators, who though in every part of their speech they use
great care and diligence, yet in the end and conclusion thereof, they set
forth all their Art and skill to stir up the affections and passions of
their hearers, that then they may leave as the last, so the deepest impression
of those things which they would persuade: whose wisdom in this one point let
us all learn to imitate and follow, that our whole life being nothing else, but
a continued and perswasiue oration unto our God, to be admitted into his
heavenly kingdom, in every part of our lives we may express our piety,
zeal, and godliness, which are the most oratorious and persuading reasons
with almighty God; but when we come to the last act and epilogue of our age,
then especially let us strive to show forth all our Art and skill in a
Christian and godly life, that so stirring up as it were all the affections of
God, and even the bowels of his compassion unto us, we may then leave as the
last, so the best and deepest impression of our love in Gods heart. That as the
Sun, though at all times glorious, yet of all other at his setting is most
beautiful and comfortable to behold; so we having thorowout all our lives,
even from the East of our age continued a constant course of holiness, shining
in piety, and every where spreading abroad the beams of a godly life, when
we draw near unto our western home, and to that day which shall only be our
setting, and not our dying day, we may then depart more comfortable and
glorious both in the sight of God and of men; that our setting to this world
may be unto us a rising above the heavenly horizon, and our farewell to this
world may bring unto us a happy, and most gladsome welcome of all the blessed
Angels and Saints of God, yea of Christ Jesus our God, our Savior, and our
husband, with whom we shall then rest and reign in eternity, and in eternal
felicity for evermore.

Grant this O Father for thine own sake, and thou which have said Apo. 22.2^.
I come quickly, cause us in an earnest and longing desire to answer, Amen.
Even so come Lord Jesus come quickly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all, Amen.


