AMANDA: OR, THE REFORMED WHORE.

Composed, and made by Thomas Cranley: Gent. now a Prisoner in the King's Bench,
Anno Dom. 1635.

Admiranda canunt, credenda aliquando Poetae.
Poets do tell of strange things not a few,
Yet often times those things, though strange, are true


Printed at LONDON, and are to be sold at the golden Key, over against the
middle- (...)

To the worshipful, his worthy friend, and Brother in law, THOMAS GILEOVRNE,
Esquire: All health, and happiness.
SIr, having composed this small Volume, J was resolved to Dedicate it to a
right worthy, and worshipful Gentleman, living within the walls of the City of
London: being persuaded thereunto by an intimate friend, and familiar
acquaintance of mine, which Gentleman, as he reported unto me was an especial
favourer of the Muses. But upon better consideration, well knowing, that for my
own part, J had no particular relation unto him, neither was he a man with
whom J had at any time the least acquaintance, or one whom to my knowledge I had
ever sixed my eye upon. J was doubtful left some ill construction might have
bin made of my honest, and simple meaning: and therefore unwilling to be taxed
with over bold presumption, J thought it better to reflect my eye upon a more
familiar object, and to present the dedication of these poor labors to such a
man, of whose goodness, and worth, J have had sufficient trial by the
testimony of many years acquaintance: and the more imboldned thereunto by that
conjugall affinity which has more strongly united me to anindeered, and in
violable obligation If I consider of the work it self, I may well blush at
the performance thereof, and with the Poet say, Cum relego scripsisse pudet,
quia plurima cerno,
Me quoque qui feci, judice digna lini.
For although I have had an Idaea in my mind, which has presented me with a
better form, yet my productions I must confess, are lame, and imperfect, and
come far short of the extentions of my wishes, and imaginations. Let your
better judgment rather allow of my intentions, then of my unpolisht
expressions: and what I am not able to delineate in words, let my well-meaning
endeavors be supplied out of the treasure of your more judicious apprehension.
So shall I have a further trial of your favors, and acknowledge a sacrifice
which I owe unto the graces, and you: and shall always rest,

Your most obliged, THOMAS CRANLEY.

July 1. 1635.

Perlegi hoc opusculum cui titulus (Amanda, or the Reformed Whore) quod
continet folia 52o aut circiter, in quibus nihil reperio quo minus cum
utilitate publica imprimi queant, modo supprimantur quae deleta sunt, and intra
sex menses proxime sequentes reliqua typis mandentur.

GVILIELMVS HAYVVOOD. RR.P. Arch. Cant. Cap. dom.

The Author to his Book.
Go little Book, the issue of my brain.
Begot in bondage, now at last made free:
To keep thee still in prison, 'twere in vain.
Make trial how the world will favor thee,
If none receive thee turn again to me,
I am no starter, here thou shall me sinde,
Shift for thy self, be gone, thou know my mind.
But whether shall I have thee go at first?
Unto the Cruicke? no, let him alone.
Many are bad, but he of all is worst.
I Would rather, thou should die, and go to none,
Be sure avoid his hands, of any one.
Shun Momus too, lest he at thee do carpe,
And Zoilus for his rebukes are sharp.
Avoid their sight, and then go where thou will,
Thy meaning's good, how ere it take effect,
Although with words of art thou art not guilt.
Some, thy unlearned plainness will respect,
And perchance fancy this thy Dialect.
That may please some, which will not profit all,
Although thy lines are not didacticall.
Chiefly, I send thee to the female sex,
Whom I do truly honor, and regard:
Thy ready service shall attend their becks,
Without expecting profit, or reward:
Oh that some one, would take thee to their guard.
May thou please them (as I could wish it so)
I care not if the rest be pleased, or no.
In thy first interprize, thou conquerd'st one,
And dragged her by thy force out of the mire.
Let that encourage thee, and suffer none
To shun thy strong encounter, till thou try her,
Boldly go on, and neither faint nor tire.
God knows, so happy the success may be,
To one resisting, thou may conquer three.
Thou have thy charge, and now thou may be gone.
Go to the Country, City, and the Court:
They all yield matter for to work upon.
I send in earnest go not thou in sport;
To great as well as mean do thou resort.
If so thou be esteemed of any worth,
I shall be glad that ere I sent thee forth.
Cranley

CRANLEYS Amanda. Or, The Reformed Whore.
HAving been many months a prisoner in the Fleet, and overwearyed with the
teadious length of idle time, glad of the least occasion of employment, as well
to put the thoughts of my distracted fortunes out of my head, as also to help
waste, and bring to an end the wearisome day. It was my fortune walking one day
solitarily on the Leads, being on the top of an high Tower adjoining unto my
Chamber, and looking over the battlements into the Fleete-lane, I espied in one
of the Houses right opposite against me, a young Gentlewoman, of a comely
feature, and sweet grace, apparelled very richly, and attired according to the
fashion then most in use, she was looking out at a window into the street, and
I standing on the top of the Tower, being almost two stories higher then her
chamber window, could easily discern her, without being seen my self, where
after she had looked a while into the street, she retires into her chamber, and
shuts the casement, I thinking she had been a stranger, and came to visit some
friend or kinsman in that house, took little regard of her for that time. But
afterward walking many times upon the Leads looking again into the Lane, I by
chance cast mine eye against the same window, out of the which I did first see
the Gentlewoman to look, where I might darkly perceive through the Glass (the
casement being then shut) the same Gentlewoman stand, busy about something
which I could not discern, and perceiving her to be the same woman which I had
there formerly seen, I began to think that she might perchance lodge in the
same house, and knowing her to be a stranger, and not inhabitant there, and
that it was no fit place for a Gentlewoman of her fashion (as she seemed to be)
to lodge in such a place, whereas every house almost in the Lane was filled
with prisoners, I began to enquire if she were wife of any prisoner, or if she
were a prisoner herself, because such women as are prisoners, do for the most
part lie in the Lane: upon enquiry I understood that she was neither prisoner,
nor prisoners wife, but a stranger, newly come out of the City, and that she
had no acquaintance there, but what she had gotten since her first coming
thither. To be brief, I understood that she was a woman apt to give
entertainment to any that desired her company, by reason whereof her honesty
was much suspected, and the general report about the street was, that she was
no better then a whore: having understood thus much of her, I often attended to
see what company resorted to the house, thinking thereby I should the better
conceive whether report had wronged her or not: At the last I perceived that
diverse Gentlemen, and men of great fashion and worth had daily recourse
thither, but more especially, I noted one man to resort unto her more then any
of the rest; and when that man was in the house there could be no admittance
for any other that desired to come unto her, for by one frivolous excuse or
other they would send them away without the sight of the Gentlewoman: at other
times if they came, when that Gentleman was not with her, they had free access
to her chamber, where they might stay, and be merry with her at their pleasure,
this I observed, and this made me conjecture that if she were not common unto
them all, yet at the least she was naught with one, but desirous to be
satisfied of the truth, and not to be lead either by my own conjecture, or the
report of others I determined to write unto her. Long it was before I could
resolve in what manner I should write, for considering that I was a stranger
unto her, and not known, either by person or name, and herself as little
known unto me, I was in doubt whether she would receive any such letters or
not, again I thought, if I should write unto her in the nature of a Lover, if
she should happily receive the Letters, and read the same, having no
acquaintance at all with me, she would imagine that I went about to entrap her,
and of purpose to find out the nature of her inclination, thereby to question
her manner of life. I therefore resolved to write unto her in a careless, and
bold manner, so as she might neither understand me to be one of the assaylants
of her love, nor yet a despiser of her acquaintance, therefore so near as I
could, without any insinuating flattery, or course harshnesse, I adventured to
write in this familiar manner.

LAdy though I am a stranger,
Yet because I am your neighbor,
I do hope there is no danger,
If I now do take the labor
Lonely wasting tedious times,
To salute you with my rimes.
Pardon, if I be too bold,
I intend no hurt unto you,
That which here I shall unfold
Cannot any damage do you;
Let it vanish as a vapor,
It Is but naked Ink, and Paper*
You, it may be, will condemn
Me of saucines to send it,
Yet I pray be not extreme,
If it be a fault, i will mend it.
I delight to anger no man,
And muchlesse displease a woman.
When I first did write, my pen
Fearing your displeasure fainted,
Yet at last I thought again,
Neighbors should be well acquainted.
If you had not come so nigh me,
I had kept my papers by me.
Sure, I do not know your name,
Nor your Person very well,
Once I think I saw the same,
And but once as I can tell:
And I would be much your debtor,
If you will let me know you better,
Yet I would not wrong you neither:
Be it far from my desire,
But that we may talk together,
My ambition strives no higher.
Neither should my speeches tend
To those tones that may offend.
Once I saw that face of your,
As you were at window standing;
It Was a face that would allure,
And a look that was commanding:
But you left me strayte to mourning
By your sudden back returning.
Turn again unto your place,
At the window, and be bold;
Once more let me see that face
That was made for to behold:
It is not a woman's duty
To obscure so rich a beauty.
In those looks to read the story
Of delight, is much desired:
It is beauties chiefest glory
To be gazed on, and admired,
Show it freely, and abide it,
It Was not given you to bide it.
You perchance will say I flatter,
Though your self does truly know it:
If you do, it is no matter,
Take your glass, and that will show it.
That can tell as well as I,
Neither of us both does lie.
Often I wish it were in my power
For to raise your window higher
Or else to abate this Tower,
That our lodgings might be nigher.
But alas these wishes prove not,
What I like perchance you love not.
Put away all doubtful fears,
Where no evil is intended:
Rise another pair of stairs,
And our lodgings will be mended.
Strive to equal me in height
And be you my opposite.
We will talk of what shall ease us,
And make merry with discourse:
So to spend the time, it will ease us,
Better so to do then worse.
I have Riddles to content ye,
Purposes, and Sonnets plenty.
If you will talk of other things
That your mind more fitly moves:
I can tell you tales of Kings,
And of Noble Princes loves.
Monsters of the Earth or Sea,
Best to pass the time away.
Fear not, we will lack no matter
For to talk of if we meet:
If we want where on to flatter,
We'll discourse of this our Fleet.
That will find us talking play,
Though we prattle all the day.
Let me then, this favor crave,
If you will a favor deigne,
That my lines acceptance have,
And be pleased to take the pain,
For to grace my poor induing,
Make me reader of your writing.
What, though here within this Bar,
I a thralled Prisoner be,
Though my feet restrained are,
Yet my better part is free.
He which does the body bind,
Has no power to thrall the mind.
That Is a thing that goes beyond
Any mortal creatures power,
That does scorn for to be penned
In the compass of a Tower.
Or be ti'de to others leisure,
But will freely range at pleasure.
Take your Paper then, and write
Though it be but e'ne a word,
Never study to indite,
I Will accept what you afford:
Though it be but e'ne your name,
I will gladly take the same.
Something grant me by your favor,
Whatsoever thing it be.
They say, something has some savor,
Though a crooked Pin it be.
I Will accept it in good part,
With a kind, and thankful heart.
And now pardon my presumption,
And the rudeness of my Pen,
Waste your anger by consumption,
And give leave to write again.
If such favors you repel,
Joys attend you, and farewell.
When I had written these Letters, I knew not how to have them conveyed to her
hands, neither could I direct them by superscription, because I knew not her
name, nor had any acquaintance with any person in the house; at the length
having some speeches with a friend of mine concerning her, I told him that I
had a Letter to be sent to her, and I knew not how to have it delivered,
whereupon he offered himself to be the messenger, and to use his best
endeavor to deliver it to her, and if he could not have admittance himself,
yet at the least to take such course as it should come unto her hands, hereupon
I put my name to the Letter, and sealed it, and gave it to my friend, and
withal entreated him that if it were possible he would get me an answer to
it, he vowing to do his best, took my letters, and departed, and waiting his
opportunity, when as he thought she was all alone, went to the house, and
desired that he might speak with her, he was examined presently by the Mistress
of the house, from whence he came, he told her, from a friend of the
Gentlewomans, naming such a one as he had before seen to resort to her, and
that his business was only to deliver a Letter from him into her hands, with
that she bid him follow her, and she would bring him to her Chamber, he glad
of his success followed her until she came to the Chamber door, and there
the Mistress of the house leaving of him, bid him go in, so he entering into the
Chamber found the Gentlewoman writing at her window, he saluting of her told
her that he was requested by a Gentleman to deliver a Letter unto her, and
withal gave the Letter into her hands, she never examining what the Gentleman's
name was, or where he dwelt, took the Letters, and opening of them, perceived
the same to be in verse, stood still, as it were wondering whence it should
come: at length after she had pawsed a while, she began to read, and in the
reading she would sometimes smile to her self, and sometimes set her
countenance as if she had bin angry: but having read the Letter to the end,
and perceiving a Gentleman's name thereto, whom she knew not, she asked my
friend if he knew the Gentleman that sent the Letter, he told her he did, and
that he lay in the high Tower over against her Chamber, how do you know said
she, this Letter was sent to me, for there is no direction upon it to show to
whom it should be carried, I know very well, quoth he, that you are the party
it was intended unto, because the Gentleman, though he knew not your name,
showed me the house, and in what Chamber in the house you were lodged in, well
said she it is noe great matter, to whom it was sent, it seems that he that
writ it had not much to do, and, because he shall advise better upon it, there
take it, and carry it to him again, and tell him this from me, that if he can
exercise his wit to noe better purpose I would wish him to spare his pains
hereafter, and to employ his Muse about matter of more moment, that may be more
profitable to himself, and less prejudicial to others. With that, delivering
the Letter unto him she turns toward her window, and he without further stay
or reply left her, and coming to my Chamber, told me of all that had passed
betwixt them, I was glad that she had read it, because thereby she had occasion
to take notice of my name, and although she seemed to be a little angry, yet I
knew there was nothing in the Letter that she could justly tax me for, but
only my boldness in sending, having noe acquayntance at all with her, and that
I thought she would quickly forget, when her anger was a little qualified, and
if it were not extreme, I thought it might be an occasion that I should more
often see her at her window: for women are not always angry when they seem so
to be, and indeed so it fell out, for after that time I should see her window
often times standing open, and her self showing her self thereat, and
sometimes I should perceive her look up toward the Tower, where I used to be,
which made me conjecture that she would bestow the reading of another Letter,
if I could use the means to have it conveyed cunningly unto her: whereupon
resolving with my self to make a further trial of her, and not to give her
over upon one single repulse, I determined to try her once more by writing, but
my greatest fear was how I should have it conveyed into her hands, for I
thought if I should send it by my first messenger, he should scarce have
access again unto her, or if he had, she would hardly receive any thing from
him being so much vexed at the other, at the length as I was walking late one
night on the top of the Tower, the Moon shining very bright, and looking
toward her Chamber, I espied the casement of her window to be open, and
perceiving noe light to be in the room, I thought how I might convey my Letter
in at her window, where she finding such a thing to ly, could not choose but
open the same, not suspecting but that some of the same house having continual
intercourse into her Chamber, might either forget it behind them, or leave it
for her to read over, wherefore following this opportunity, I took my Pen,
and wrote certain Verses unto her, and only folding up the paper, without any
Seal or direction upon it, with the help of a long Pole which I had in my
Chamber, I made such shift that I put the Letter in at her window, and with the
end of the Pole shut the casement lest she should suspect which way the Letter
should come, the Verses which I wrote were these.

Fairest, though my lines of late
Were not welcome to your hand,
Though they argu'de too much prate,
Do not on your niceness stand.
Read again my second Letter
See if now my phrase be better.
I am sorry to offend,
So to purchase your displeasure,
And it grieves me I did send,
And do now repent at leisure.
And I hope you will be contented.
To forgive, since it is repented.
Sure I am, I meant no ill,
Howsoever you may take it,
And I keep that meaning still,
If you doubt, your trial make it.
What I speak in words you shall,
Find my deeds agree with all,
Will you not be once persuaded
To return an answer to me,
Can your heart not be invaded
Such a courtesy to do me?
If for much you have been tried,
I must look t'had been denied.
When so poor a thing as this
Can so hardly be obtained
So as nothing comes amiss,
If from you it may be gained;
Write a line, a word, a letter,
Worst is best, when there is no better.
Do you never use to write,
But to such as you do know?
If love bids not, yet for spite,
To be rid of such a foe;
Let your nimble Pen disclose,
Whether we be friends, or foes.
I will never give you over
Till you grant me my desire,
Do you like or loathe a lover,
Be you frost, or be you fire,
I will send though you abhor it,
Till you write, or chide me for it.
Wherefore to avoid the trouble
Take the course that may prevent it,
Give a single for a double,
So exchange, and nere repent it.
For two letters send me one,
It Is a thing is quickly done.
If you think I am too bold,
Chide me for it, I will leave it,
And when once your angers cold
Write your mind, and i will receive it:
So to be advisde, it is good
Not to write in heat of blood.
Then as I do feel your mind
I Will reply, or else forbear;
If you list not to be kind,
Twill not make me shed a tear;
But continue as before,
Never writing to you more.
The casement being shut, and the Letter left in the window, I attended three
or four days to see whether I should hear from her or not, and hearing
nothing in all that time, I began to doubt whether my Letters were come to her
hands, at the length taking my usual recreation on the top of the Tower, the
room over her chamber being a place where Embroyderers did use to work, and
opposite against the Tower where I was walking, the windows of the room lay
open, I perceived her sitting at a Frame whereon was a fair Wastecote, which
she was richly Embroydering with coulored Silks, and Gold, and being very
diligent at her work, I observed whether she did at any time cast her eye up
to the Tower, supposing that she came thither, as well to give an occasion to
be seen as for the eagerness of the work, she had then in hand, because I
had never seen her in that room before: I had not stayed long, but I
perceived her many times to look up toward the Tower, with such earnestness,
as if she had been desirous to have seen some body, which made me conjecture
that her coming thither was of purpose to see the party that had so boldly
wrote unto her, therefore leaving the place where I was I stood directly
against the room where she sat at work, that if she happily looked that way
again, she should not choose but perceive me, I had not stayed there long, but
she took notice of me, and blushing exceedingly upon the first view, me
thought she looked like Niobe when she contended with Latona for the prize, I
must confess I had so long played with the bayte, that I had almost swallowed
the hook, being so surprised with the amiable prospect of so sweet a
countenance, yet unwilling to be caught by those fair allurements considering
that under the greenest Grass lies the most venomous serpent. I was sorry
that so sweet a face should be set to sale to every amorous passenger, and
where so much beauty was placed, that there should want virtue to adorn it,
and make it truly love-worthy: and having a settled determination to know of
what coin she was stamped, whether Gold or Copper, and if I should find her
to be of the worst, which I did much suspect, that then I would use the best
art, and skill I could, to have her cast in a new mould, and to purge the
dross out of her, that she might be refyned to purer metal. Willing
therefore to enter into some discourse with her, no person being in the room
but her self, I began in this manner to salute her:

Fair Lady, I have upon no acquaintance at all been bold to trouble you with
my writing, wherein I fear I have much offended, yet am glad that I have so
good an opportunity to crave pardon for my errors, which I now do, entreating
you not to conceive any wrong thereby intended, but to impute my fault rather
to want of employment, and to the present troubles that I endure, by reason of
my imprisonment, then to the least intent of distaste, that I would willingly
give to your self. Sir, said she, are you the Gentleman that wrote those
pleasant verses to me not long since, and sent them to my chamber by I know not
whom: I am the same, said I, and am sorry if either the messenger, or the
sender have displeased you; no great displeasure, said she, but I thought it
strange to receive Letters from one that I knew not, and written in such a
fashion as I was ignorant, in what sense to consture them; and now I know you
are the same that so lately conveyed another Letter written in verse likewise
into my chamber window, I have often wondered how it should come thither, pray
let me crave so much of you as to tell me truly what means you used to have
it laid there, and who brought it thither, I will tell you truly, said I, upon
this condition, first that you will pardon my boldness therein, then whether
it were delivered unto you by another, or found by your self in the window,
for the first, said she, I do freely forgive, and for the later, I confess
truly that I found it my self in the window, but knew not how it came
thither, then, said I, I will tell you, and so I acquainted her with the manner
of it as before is expressed. Here upon we entered into further discourse, and
having known each others name, and all former offenses absolutely forgiven, we
agreed to be better acquainted, and that she would come once every afternoon
into the same room of purpose to talk with me, and to spend the time in some
pleasant discourse, wherein she was many days as good as her word, where we
talked of those things which best pleased us, and one day among the rest
talking of some amorous discourse, she began thus. Sir, said she, you are one
that can make verses, and have skill in poetry, and I make no question but some
things lie by you of your own invention, either to try what your own art can
do, or to entertain such Gentlewomen withal as you shall be best affected
unto, and therefore let me entreat you to bring some of your odd papers with
you, and sit with me, either here or in my chamber, for I do like your vein
in writing so well, that I am persuaded I shall take great delight in reading
some of your own works, I make no question but though you are a prisoner, you
may come so far, because I see daily such as are prisoners pass freely into
any part of the Lane, and if you please to take that pains you shall not find
me unwilling to requite it, if it lies in my power. I was glad to hear her
say thus much, desiring nothing more then to have such an opportunity to
confer privately with her at her chamber, yet always resolved not to do or
attempt any thing but what should be fit an honest man, only I had such a
compassionate love to those sweet looks, that I thought it was pity they
should not be accompanied with a due measure of grace, and therefore I thanked
her greatly that she would show me so high a favor, and promised to attend her
at her chamber within a day or two after, and so we parted for that time. The
next day perceiving her alone at her window, I called to her, and told her,
that if she were at leisure; if it pleased her, I would come over the way to
her: she told me I should be welcome, and desired me to come. With that going
to my Study, and taking some idle pamphlets that I had there, I went unto the
house where she lay, she kindly met me at the door, and so conducted me to her
chamber, where with reading sometimes, and sometimes with talking, we spent a
good part of the afternoon, and after many questions asked her, I perceived
that a little siege would batter the fortress of her honesty, and understood
by her that her means was small, and her friends not many, and her self, as
she seemed willing to take any honest course that should suit with the credit
of a Gentlewoman, with many other speeches to that purpose, but taking leave of
her for that time she entreated me that I would be no stranger at her Chamber,
for that she should take it very kindly if I would come and sit with her at my
leisure times when I had nothing else to do, which I promised her to perform.
But afterward considering with my self, if I should often resort thither, it
might be a cause that some malignant tongue would speak worse of me then I
deserved, and thereby draw a scandal upon my self, which once gotten; would
not be easily shaken off. I did therefore forbear going to her chamber, yet
every day, she sitting in the Embroyderers room, we had conference together,
and so continued our acquayntance, where often talking with her, at length she
told me she was to go from thence, and to lie in the Town, and asked me, if I
did not go sometimes abroad in the City, I answered her, I did: and desired
that if she pleased to tell me where she lay in the Town, I would make bold to
visit her at her lodging: she told me where I should find her, who shortly
after going from the place where she then lay, sent a note in writing,
entreating me not to forget my promise to visit her at her lodging, and therein
set down the place where I should enquire for her. It was not long after but I
had occasion to go into London in company of another Gentleman, and passing
near the place where she lay, determined to go visit her, and so enquiring
for her at her lodging we were told that she lay there, but she was that day
abroad at dinner with certain Gentlemen, but where, or with whom they knew
not: whereupon we returning thence, it came in our minds to go to a Tavern
not far off, to drink a pint of Wine, and if occasion served to enquire
whether such a Gentlewoman did lie in the street, and what she was, where
coming in, we were brought into a little room sitting our company, where, as
we were drinking of our Wine, we heard music, and much mirth, in the next
room unto us, and enquiring what company was there, we understood that there
were two or three Gentlewomen, with diverse gallants in their company that dyned
there that day, but what they were, we could by no means understand, whereupon
I entreated one of the drawers to help me privately to a sight of them, for I
thought I did hear the voice of one that I knew, he presently brings me to a
secret place where I might discover the whole company, and amongst them all, I
perceived the same Gentlewoman that I came that day to visit, and noteing her
carriage with the rest of her associats, she seemed to me more jocund, merry,
and familiar than any woman respecting her honesty, and her credit would have
been, I desired the Gentleman that was with me, that we might stay, and see
the conclusion, and parting of that company, who was contented and thereupon
understanding that they intended to sup there, we resolved to sup there also,
by our selves in the little room, where we were at the first placed, by which
means we both heard and saw most of their conversation, presently after supper
they dismissed their music, and having all of them well steeped their brains
in Wine, they then began to show of what metal they were made, where after
much rude, and unseemely behavior, they discharged the house, and went their
way: my friend, and I having likewise paid our reckoning followed after them,
to see the uttermost event of this meeting: they had not gone far from the
Tavern but the company parted, and only one Gentleman conducted my
acquaintance to her lodging, where so soon as we saw them to enter the house,
we betook our selves likewise to our lodgings, having by that days work
sounded more of her disposition, then I had done in all the time of my
acquaintance before. For whereas I was till then led by report, and some
suspicion which I drew from my own conjecture, I now saw so much of her
carriage that I could not conceive that her former report had wronged her. Not
many days after, I took an occasion to write unto her, and the effect of my
Letters was this, That I had lately bin at her lodging to have seen her, but
could not be so happy as to find her within, therefore I desired, in regard
that I had not the privilege to go often abroad, that she would give me leave
to write unto her, and withal, that liberty in writing, that she would not
take any thing distastefully, but to read it over with patience, and
deliberation, and desired likewise her answer in writing. This Letter I sent
unto her, and received an answer in writing, that she was sorry that she was
not at home at the time of my being there, which if she had known of, she
would have remedyed, and desired she might see me, if I could coveniently,
otherwise if I would take the pains to write unto her, she would be so far
from taking offense at any thing that I should write of, that she would think
her self much bound unto me for the same, and did faithfully promise to read
it with patience, and due consideration, and withal desired me that I would
write unto her in verse, because it was a thing she much affected, and would be
pleasing unto her in the reading. Having understood thus much by her answer, I
determined to use the strongest arguments that I could for her reformation,
hoping that my writing might perchance work so much with her as it might bring
her into a loathing of her former life, and persuade her to such courses as
might be more profitable both to her soul, and body. Wherefore taking some
pains for her conversion, I wrote these lines following, and making them up in
a little book, sent the same unto her, the success whereof you shall
afterward hear.

To the fair Amanda.
1.
BOld of thy promise, and obliged word,
From which I do presume thou will not start:
Whereby thou did so willingly afford
Acceptance of my lines with gentle heart,
And what I write to take is in good part.
This is one ground that moves me to discover
My will to thee, then freely read it over.
2.
But look not here for pleasant tales of love,
Nor sycophanticke speech to please thy sense:
No lines encomiasticke thee to move,
Nor oily words of gilded eloquence,
My humble Muse avoyds such eminence.
I do not strive to please thee, yet well know,
I am a friend of thine, and not a foe.
3.
My purpose is, to call thee to account
How thou have wasted thy fore passed time:
Whether thy virtue does thy vice surmount,
And how thou conquer'st passion in thy prime:
I must examine it, in this my rhyme.
Nay start not back, nor throw it now away,
Thy word stands good against me, thou must stay.
4.
Thou art arrayned, and indicted here
Of many impious, and vile offenses
Use thy best policy thy self to clear,
They are not vain surmises, nor pretenses,
But direct proofs, apparent inferences.
What says thy conscience to it, dare thou plead
Not guilty, so thy doom to supersede?
5.
No, no, thou can not, it is too apparent,
The tincture that remains upon thy name,
Is rooted in the marrow, there is no warrant
Can shroud thee from an ignominious shame,
Reproach, and infamy does blast thy fame.
And such a scandal hangs upon thy head,
As wall not be by time abolished.
6.
For know (Amanda) to thy grief, even I
Have pri'd into thy secret passages,
And have observed with a watchful eye
Such as to thee come with Embassages,
And understood their private messages.
I know their suits, and whereunto they tend.
And see destruction wait upon the end.
7.
I well perceive what thy companions are,
Rough roaring roysters, young untamed fellows,
Gallants from Court, and Captains from the war,
These to thy fire of lust do blow the bellows.
Of such men I have reason to be jealous.
To thy bed chamber they have free access,
And revell there in beastly wantonness.
8.
The acquaintance that thou have, are whores, and bawds.
God dammees, drunkards, cheaters, swearers, thieves.
Young bold faced Queanes, and old fore-ridden Iades.
Such company as those thy want relieves.
These are thy mates, thou hang'st upon their sleeves.
And then besides thou always have in store
Thy Patroness a Bawd, thy Maid a Whore.
9.
Thou think thou art not bad enough, unless
Thou do invoke on God, to sink and damn thee;
Nor that thou can sufficiently transgress,
Because no wickedness at all will shame thee,
It is thy praise thou think, and none can blame thee,
To tip thy tongue with fearful three-pil'd oaths,
And that they grace thee better than thy clothes.
10.
Familiarly thou swear'st by life and death
By flesh, blood, wounds, heart, foot, and soul of God,
Three or four several times within a breath,
Careless, and almost fearelesse of his rod.
As if thy life would have no period.
It is thy grace and glory for to rore,
And use strange oaths, unheard of heretofore.
11.
Has God forbid to take his Name in vain
And thee commanded that thou shall not swear?
Do thou despair of mercy, as did Cain;
That nothing will constrain thee to forbear?
Have thou within thee neither love nor fear?
The reins that thou do give unto thy will,
Makes thee run headlong unto all that is ill.
12.
Oh that one sin should get another thus,
And thy foul lust to be the cause of all;
Thy oaths, and actions are so odious,
They daily do to Heaven for vengeance call,
Prevent it then in time before it fall*
Make peace with God, before it be too late,
Prevent his wrath thy sins abominate.
13.
I have observed the wicked course thou lead'st,
And know the places thou do use to haunt,
I see the path wherein thou daily tread'st,
I hear thee proudly honest virtue taunt,
And of thy base, and wicked actions vaunt.
I see the little fear of God thou have,
At no time sorry for thy follies past.
14.
This do I know, and see it with mine eyes,
It is not blazed unto me by report,
I see thy Minion come in a disguise,
And his kind welcome, hugging of him for it,
And whilst he stays, debarring all resort.
You, as near matched, and undistinguish't twins,
Wallow in filthy pooles of stinking sins.
15.
I see thy wanton, thy unseemely carriage,
And loose behavior unto every commer:
More bold then were thou links to them in marriage.
Spending thy youth, and vigor of thy summer,
Sometimes with common Soldiers or a Drummer.
Nay, if thy lust, but once begin to burn,
A Dray man, or a Porter serves thy turn.
16.
I see it, and it makes me tell thee thus,
Thou art unchaste (alas a word too mild)
Thou art a strumpet, and more odious
Then Furies, or Hobgoblins to a child.
Thou art too tame, by being too too wild.
Thou art a Harlot, or if it be more,
Thou art a shameless, and a bold-fac'd Whore.
17.
Did not I tempt thee minding for to try,
And sound the depth of thy too loose condition?
Remember well, did thou not answer I?
When as that answer struck in me contrition,
Sorry to see so ready a submission;
And no repulse at all, but giving fire
Unto the fuel of a hot desire.
18.
I durst not thee condemn without a trial,
Knowing the great uncertainety of fame,
I thought perchance I might have had denial:
Although I greatly did not doubt the same,
But rather feared thou were void of shame.
And now thou have confirmed my suspicion,
By manifesting thy too base condition.
19.
This was the mark at which I levelled first,
And the chief cause to satisfy my mind.
Though knowing naught, I did suspect the worst,
Conjecturing which way thou were inclinde.
And now, as I supposde, I truly find.
Here therefore I my chiefest force will bend,
And put in practice what I did intend.
20.
I thought within my self, that if I could
Work into thy acquaintance, for to know
Thy secret disposition, then I would
(Finding the same, as I imagined tho
And as I did conjecture to be so)
Use the best art, and policy I might
To make thee a reformed convertite.
21.
For when I first beheld that face of thine,
I could not but commend the works of nature
A look so pleasing, as it were divine,
Of a well fashioned, and a comely feature,
I thought thou were an admirable creature,
Adorned with such a presence, that I saw
It well deserved reverence, and awe.
22.
O Lord, thought I, what pity is it that thou,
And those sweet beauties should be put to sale?
Why should they, unto every peasant bow,
Till they are worn out or waxed stale:
And their fresh color turned into a pale?
Is It not a misery that such a woman,
Should as a thing of naught be usde in common?
23.
In pity therefore of thy wretched state,
And merely in compassion of that face,
I vowed my best, thy life to renovate,
And see if in thy breast there were a place
That would give entertainment unto grace.
For doubtless in my heart I should condole
The loss of such a body and a soul.
34.
Surely thou art not made for such a one,
As now thou do profess thy self to be.
Keep thou thy beauty unto thee alone
Rather then to be prodigally free,
And let it live alone, and die in thee,
Before thou do abuse it in this fashion,
To prostitute it with such exprobration.
25.
God which created thee of such a fashion,
As few there are with thee to parallel,
Thy friends, that added to it education,
Making that better, which before was well,
So that thou do exceed those that excel.
Of that fair Image will thou be so evil,
To make a habitation for the devil?
26.
What, is there no man living on the earth
That can deserve to have thy single love?
Cannot a true affection have a birth
Within thy breast, ill fancies to remove,
And thy unbridled lust for to reprove?
Is there no place for virtue left within thee;
Nor no means from thy wickedness to win thee?
27.
Oh what a vile and hateful thing it is
To all chaste ears for to be termed a Whore?
The very name of such a thing as this
Is most contemptible to rich, and poor*
And breeds a loathing in them evermore.
That term me thinks should thee from folly win.
If nothing else, and make thee loath the sin.
28.
The very name will doubtless thee condemn,
Of all foul crimes, such poison in it lies,
Twill make all honest people thee contemn
Thy self alone it does not scandalize,
But Parents, kindred, and thy friends likewise.
Under that word is commonly comprised
The foulest evils that may be devised.
29.
Call to remembrance wherefore thou were made,
Not to serve sin, but serve the living Lord.
How dare thou then of Whoredom make a trade;
And lead a life, that is so much abhorred:
Rejecting of his statutes, and his word?
And make those gifts of his thine own damnation
Which were ordained to further thy salvation.
30.
He first created thee to be the Temple,
And habitation of the Holy Ghost.
And made thee perfect, fit for an example,
And will thou love him least, that loved thee most,
And strive to be one of the sheep that is lost?
Have thou no power to curb thy fond desire,
But headlong runn'st into damnations fire?
31.
Consider well the way that thou art going,
And look into the steps that thou have trod.
Make not such haste unto thine own undoing:
Think with thy self, there is an all-seeing God,
That will correct thee with his scourging rod.
And has ordained a hell from the beginning,
For such as unrepentant live in sinning.
32.
What do thou only trust unto thy face,
And think thy beauty will acquire thy guilt?
Art thou grown shameless, and clean void of grace?
Running against all modesty a tilt.
Until the beauty of thy soul be spilt?
Will no persuasion, nor no council win thee,
Nor fear of God, nor moral virtue in thee?
33.
Oh! wicked, and thrice wicked wantonness,
Accursed wretch, shame to virginity.
Thy breath does blast the air, thou do digress
From all religion, stain'st divinity.
Twixt thee, and it, there is no affinity.
Poison thou drink'st, with affectation,
And spin'st the thread of condemnation.
34.
Look on thy self, and let thy inward thought
Examine well thy outward action.
Give not away that which was dearly bought,
Confound not reason with distraction,
Nor in thy senses make a fraction.
Let not thy conscience be distended so,
Nor smother virtue, where it ought to grow.
35.
Look back into thy self, and call to mind
How thou have spent the April of thy days,
Think how thou have been heretofore enclinde
And then consider of thy present ways:
And see if those or these deserves praise.
And then look forward to the times to come;
And see what Furies wait upon thy doom.
36.
Of if thou think it be too hard a task,
To call thy self to strict examination:
Then give me leave thy follies to unmaske,
And see if I can breed a detestation
Of sin in thee, and work a reformation.
I will not sooth thee in thy impious course,
But strive to make thee better, and not worse.
37.
Hear then what I shall tell thee without faining.
And read the legend of thy wicked life.
Thou art a woman from no ill abstaining,
And neither art a widow, maid, nor wife:
Dull in all virtue, but in vice most rife.
Full of deceit, and of dishonest tricks,
A shame unto thy self, and to thy sex.
38.
See how all honest women do abhor thee,
Scorn thy acquaintance, and thy base society.
Where civil meetings are, they care not for thee,
But blush to hear of thy impiety,
Offending of so high a Deity.
Thou can not fit their mirth, nor yet their moanings.
Nor art thou for their churchings or their groanings
39.
No civil Gossips feasts will thee invite,
Nor honest Bridal claim thee as a guest:
Grave modest Matrons loathe thy very sight;
And virgin-damsels do thy course detest.
Thy sensual life, more brutish then a beast:
That prostitutes thy body thus in common,
Makes thee unworthy to be called a woman.
40.
Consider how thy whoredom is attended
With many dismal, black, and fearful sins.
Whereby the high Creator is offended.
Thy drunkenness, and gluttony, two twins
To serve thee at thine elbo, straight begins.
Next these, with bloody oaths, thy fearful swearing
And execrations, hell, nor heaven fearing.
41.
And then thy scurrilous, and idle speaking;
With words obscene, and beastly language using.
Thy wilful, and continual Sabbath breaking:
Gods holy Name unreverently abusing,
And all religious, and good men accusing.
With these, dissembling, cheating, theeving, pride,
A lying tongue, and all ill else beside.
42.
This is the sinful family thou keep:
And these wait on thee at thy bed, and board.
With these thou wakest, and with these thou sleep;
Their absence at no time thou can afford.
They wait thy pleasure, and obey thy word.
And while each banquets with thee as thy guest
Thy whoredom fits as mistress of the feast.
43.
The furniture that does adorn thy chamber
Are pictures of some famous Courtezan.
Here stands a box of Bracelets, Pearl, and Amber.
There by a watchet Riband hangs thy Fan:
And next to that a brazen Warming-pan.
By these within a Band-case lies thy Ruff:
And next to that thy Brush, and then thy Muffe.
44.
Near to thy chamber window stands thy bed:
Curtains, and Vallens, hanging fair about it;
Which with a Rug, or Quilt is covered.
Sometimes within it, and sometimes without it
There do thou dance carranto's, who needs doubt it?
And daily vawting for to use thy trade,
Thou quickly spoyl'st the fashion when it is made.
45.
At windows end, are certain glasses set,
Filled with rare water, for to make thee fair.
At the other end, locked in a Cabinet,
Are dainty powders for thy hands, and haeyre.
White prick seam'd Gloves of Kid full many a pair.
With them are bags of precious sweet perfume;
And Masticke patches for to stay the rhume.
46.
At thy beds feet does stand thy Trunk below:
On which there are two letters for thy name.
Thy lace, and dressing there thou do bestow:
And in a painted box (Oh! fie for shame)
Thou put'st thy plaster, and there keep'st the same.
And in another likewise out of sight,
Thy Mallow roots to make thy teeth look white,
47.
Here likewise lies thy gorgets made of Lawne:
Hard by, upon a nail against the wall,
Does hang thy Gowns, save those that are at pawn.
With them, thy Petty-cotes, and Waste-cotes all:
Near unto them, because the roome's but small,
Wrapped in a paper, next unto thy Bever,
As light as thou thy self does hang thy Fether.
49.
Nor far from these does stand all in a row
A box with curles, and counterfeited hair,
Flaxen, brown, yellow, some as black's a Crow.
Just under these does stand thy groaning-chaire.
And close by it of Chamber pots a pair.
Then next thy bed, upon another shelfe,
There stands a Pot of painting for thy self.
49.
By that, within a glass, does stand a Potion
To clear thy stomach, and make sweet thy breath.
And then a heap of books of thy devotion
Lying upon a shelfe close underneath,
Which thou more think upon then on thy death.
They are not prayers of a grieved soul,
That with repentance does his sins condole.
50.
But amorous Pamphlets, that best likes thine eyes,
And Songs of love, and Sonets exquisit.
Among these Venus, and Adonis lies,
With Salmacis, and her Hermaphrodite:
Pigmalion's there, with his transformed delight.
And many merry Comedies, with this,
Where the Athenian Phryne acted is.
51.
Two casements to thy window always are,
One of the which stands open very wide.
Where thou present'st thy face, unmaskt, and bare:
And if by chance thou have a gallant ey'de,
Passing the street, that has not thee espi'de,
Thou have a trick, which thou will seldom spare,
To give him notice that thou stand there.
52.
For with a clap, thou pull'st the casement too,
That he may cast his eye up to the place,
With the other hand thou do the next undo,
And there again present'st to him thy face:
And looking on him with a smiling grace,
Thou let'st the gallant thereby understand,
That thou art at his service, and command.
53.
Between those casements hangs a Christ all glass,
Closde in a case Embosted fair with Gold.
Where thou do often view, and review thy face,
Spending whole hours thy picture to behold.
Setting thy looks the best way to be sold.
So turning round about, and walking then
Once through the room, come to the glass again.
54.
By this time, there is something sits awry,
One lock is bigger then the other is.
That hangs too far back, this too near thine eye,
The pin upon thy band is set amiss:
Thy lace worn so is hansomer then this.
Then thus it must be, and then thus, and thus,
That Pendent's dark, this more perspicuous.
55.
Thy swelling-brests are not displayed enough,
Pull them up higher, set thy dressing lower.
Those strippings suit far better with a Ruff,
The Other is laid aside, this used more:
Thy Crossecloth is not pinned right before.
Thus with thy tiffing, trimming, and thy mending,
Thou spend'st whole hours together without ending.
56.
The Mistress of the house where thou do lie,
Has formerly been of the selfsame trade:
One that long since has sold her honesty,
And now is turned from Whore unto a Bawd,
And of a helding is become a Jade.
She tells thee, how thou should thy self demean,
And act the part of an audacious Queen.
57.
Two servants to attend thy lawless lust,
As Ministers of thy ungodly course,
Are never wanting, by the which thou must
Fill the defects of thy decaying purse,
And make the wicked to become more worse.
With thee, and for thee, these do use to wander,
One as a Pimpe, the other as a Pander,
58.
Beside thy Pimpe, thy Pander, and thy Bawd,
To make thee a complete, and perfect whore,
As necessary members to thy trade,
To help thee at thy need, thou keep'st in store,
Some well approved Physician evermore.
As his assistants, lest thou should miscarry,
Thou have a Surgeon, and Apothecary.
59.
Thy Doctor, he to keep thy body clean
Begins at first with his preparatives,
To make of thee a sound, and wholesome queen,
And then his purgatives, and his restoratives.
And afterward with his preservatives.
Who for thy Iulips, Potions, Glisters, Pills.
To thy Apothecary sends his bills.
60.
Directed thus by thy Physician,
He must accordingly prepare them all,
And then comes to thee with his composition,
And brings thee Ielleys, with a Cordial,
And other potions diureticall.
And as he took direction how to make them
So he must now inform thee how to take them.
61.
The Surgeon too must his attendance give,
With all such instruments as fits his art.
Without his needful help thou can not live,
To thy polluted corpse he must impart
His chiefest skill to keep thee sound at heart,
His seringe, and his cerecloths, and his patches,
Must be applied to thy sores, and aches.
62.
The places thou do usually frequent,
Is to some Playhouse in an afternoon.
And for no other meaning, and intent,
But to get company to sup with soon,
More changeable, and wavering then the Moon.
And with thy wanton looks, attracting to thee,
The amorous spectators for to woo thee.
63.
Thither thou come, in several forms, and shapes,
To make thee still a stranger to the place:
And train new lovers, like young Birds to scrapes.
And by thy habit so to change thy face.
At this time plain, too morrow all in lace.
Now in the richest colors may be had,
The next day, all in mourning black, and sad.
64.
In a Stuff Wastcote, and a Peticote
Like to a chamber-mayd, thou come to day:
The next day after thou do change thy note,
Then like a conntrey wench, thou come in gray;
And sit like a stranger at the Play.
The morrow after that, thou come then
In the neat habit of a Citizen.
65.
The next time, rushing in thy Silken weeds,
Embroidered, lac't, perfumed, in glittering show.
So that thy looks an admiration breeds,
Rich like a Lady, and attended so,
As brave as any Countess do thou go.
Thus Proteus-like strange shapes thou ventrest on
And changest hue, with the Cameleon.
66.
The Play once ended, to some Tavern near,
Thou, and thy Copes-mates presently resort,
Where the best Wine and the most costly cheer
Must be provided in the neatest sort,
For thy choice pallat, else thou car'st not for it.
And when thou have it, yet thou can not eat
Without a noise of Fiddlers to thy meat.
67.
There do thou spend thy time, till almost day,
In drinking, dancing, and in beastly riot.
And never think it time to go away,
Until some quarrel makes the house unquiet.
Or a large bill affrights thee for thy diet.
The night thus spent, and mornings near approach
Sends thee home tumbling in a tottering Coach.
68.
Thy new acquaintance brings thee to the door
Of thy close lodging in some private place.
To know the house that never was there before,
And staying with thee but a little space
He takes his leave of thy so late-knowne face.
And tells thee, when the morning comes, that then
At thy beds side, he will visit thee again.
69.
To bed thou go about the hour of three,
Drunk as a beggar, else it were a wonder.
Where thou continu'st till eleven it be,
And never pul'st thine eyelids once asunder.
Nor wak'st by any stormy wind, or thunder.
Unless it comes in the Youngsters head,
To take thee napping early in thy bed.
70.
Then he comes ruffeling, ere his brains be steady,
With drinking Sack, and Claret over night.
Untrust, unbutton'd, and scarce half made ready,
Of his new Mistress for to have a sight,
Hoping in time to be thy favorite.
And needs must feel if that thy breasts are soft,
And give thee in thy bed thy mornings draft.
71.
Then thou sit'st up, to bid him welcome in,
And striking of thy locks to either side,
Display'st thy breast, to show thy milk white skin.
And if he list a journey for to ride,
Thou art a Hackney, that have often been tried.
And art not coy to grant him such a favor,
To try the courage of so young a shaver.
72.
Thus having had his pleasure as he list,
With much good mirth, to eythers sweet content.
He goes his way as soon as he has kissed,
Using some plain familiar complement,
And for his sport, perchance benificent.
No sooner gone (as it is thy daily guise)
Just about twelve thou think it time to rise.
73.
Thy coats put on, and having left thy bed,
Unto the Looking-glass thou strait do go.
Whereas two hours thou spend'st about thy head.
At two a clock, thou go to dinner tho
With thy Land lady, and her maid below.
At three unto the Playhouse back again,
To be acquainted with some other men.
74.
Thou turn'st the day into a sleepy night:
And changest night into a waking day.
To Gods appointment thou art opposite:
What he commands thee, that thou do gainsay,
And neither him nor nature do obey.
Thy wicked heart, that is only bent to evil
Does make thee for thy God, to serve the devil.
75.
Thou laugh'st indeed, and live in pleasant mirth:
And fal'st in travel strongly with delight.
But yet it does not come unto its birth.
Thou groanst at noone, but bring'st not forth till night
Of a strange issue that does loathe the light.
Cursed be those joys, that bring, with lasting sorrow
For this days mirth eternal death to morrow.
76.
Thou feed'st thy pleasures as the Pelican
Does feed her young ones, with her hearts dear blood
They likewise do conspire against thee than,
To take thy life, and like that viperous brood
Gnaw through thy bowels, for to gain their food.
Accursed crew, of all things else most vilde,
Both murderers, the mother, and the-childe.
77.
Thus do thou spend thy time, to please thy will,
As if thou were made only for to sin.
Thinking on nothing, but on what is ill,
Keeping out God, to let the devil in.
Bending thy whole endeavors for to win
A shameful pleasure, that is not worth a thought
And lose a soul that was so dearly bought.
78.
Thou do not keep one Sunday in a year.
Nor hear'st a Sermon once in two years space.
Thou carest neither for to read nor hear.
Devotion dwells not in thee, nor yet grace.
No divine thought has in thy heart a place.
Thou have no resolution or intent
Once to take comfort of the Sacrament.
79.
Thou know not what to prayer does belong,
Private, or public, nor to meditation.
Thou do not use to exercise thy tongue
In vocal sound, or silent adoration.
Nor send'st thy thoughts up by ejaculation.
Nor worship'st any Deity above
But Venus, and her son, the god of love.
80.
Who follows after fashions more then thou,
And who more rich in Jewels, Silk, and Gold?
Yet thou esteem'st them not half good enough,
For thee to wear if better may be sold.
Thy pride makes thee so impudently bold.
Thou dare compare thy self with any woman,
Though faithful she to all, thou true to no man.
81.
What honor does thy clothing purchase thee?
Or what respect attends on thy attire?
Thy Jewels are like blossoms on a tree,
That Is cutting down for fuel for the fire.
Gold worn by thee is prizde as Copper wyre.
Rich sumptuous garments, if thy body bear them
They are of no regard whilst thou do wear them.
82.
What glory have thou gotten by thy face?
Or is thy beauty honored at all?
To others such a feature were a grace.
And such a beauty were angelical.
But thou that makst such gifts mechanical.
Heinous reproach, and calumny do do them,
And take away the honor due unto them.
83.
Me thinks I hear thee pleading an excuse,
And asking me, what I would have thee do,
Thou say to work, it never was thy use,
Thy friends did never bring thee up thereto.
And therefore know not how thou should so do.
Nor left thee means enough, for to defray.
The charge of life, to feed thee once a day
84.
Unable therefore any pains to tack,
And destitute of means whereby to live,
Since all thy Friends, and Kindred thee forsak;
And no man unto thee will comfort give,
Or in thy wants, or troubles thee relieve.
These are the reasons that do thee enforce
To take so wicked, and so lewd a course.
85.
But will these reasons purge thee of thy crime,
And take away the guilt of thy offense?
Will these, to cleanse thy blot, at any time
Wipe off the scandal of thy impudence?
Or will they supersede thy indigence?
Is it more credit to be called a Whore,
Then to be counted honest though but poor?
86.
Must riches only make a woman civil,
And modesty be limited by wealth?
Will thou extract thy virtue from the devil?
Being once sick, will thou despair of health?
And reckon less of honesty then stealth?
Shall not fair virtue, thy foul vice control?
Will thou to please thy body, kill thy soul?
87.
Wherefore did the Almighty give thee hands?
For nothing but to trim, and deck thy face?
What is he bound to give thee means, and Lands
And more of thy deserts then of his grace?
Art thou not bound his Statutes to embrace?
How art thou puffed in mind to think that thou
Should live by sweating of another brow?
88.
God made thee not to live in idleness,
Nor to depend on nothing else but pleasure.
Thou ought not so to wanton in excess
But for to bound thy will within a measure,
And patiently for to attend his leisure.
If he will have thee poor, be thou content,
By honest labor earne thy aliment.
89.
Learn to prefer an honest poverty
Before a wealthy, and a wicked life.
Riches do often make us run awry,
And stirs us up to hatred, and to strife.
Then is a poor, and beauteous maid, or wife,
Nothing more comely, nor deserving praise.
She is esteemed the mirror of her days.
90.
How would thou be unfit to manage wealth
If such a blessing had betyded thee?
When as thou have not wit to guide thy self,
Nor carefully to thine own body see:
But of thy self so wastefully art free.
Such as respect not credit, nor good name,
Are to all goodness a reproach, and shame.
91.
Do thou think foul to live by honest pain,
When it is esteemed a commendable thing:
Many thereby a virtuous name do gain,
And to themselves deserved honor bring:
Yet thou delight'st so much in wantoning.
Thou leavest God, to wait upon the devil,
And art ashamed of goodness, not of evil.
92.
Be not ashamed of that deserv's no shame:
But shame to do what brings a shameful end.
Be thou ashamed with shame to stain thy name,
And shamefully thy honor to mispend,
Such shame, a shameful punishment will send.
And as thou shameless of all shame do live,
So death to thee a shameful end will give.
93.
Thou dare not publicly be seen abroad,
For fear thy clothes be plucked from off thy back.
But keep'st thy chamber with thy Pimpe, and Bawd.
For if thou walk'st the streets, thou shall not lack
Such as will make thy bravery go to wrack.
Close stools, dirt, chamber-pots shall wash thy clothes
For thy foul life, that stinkes as bad as those.
94.
One comes, and cries alowd, there goes a whore,
A Bridewell baggage, that deserves the lash,
Oh hang her queen, she makes a thousand poor,
It Is pity there should live such filthy trash:
To wear good clothes, and swagger thus in slash,
Pull off her Plush, disrobe her of her gown,
And into Kennell thrust the Strumpet down.
95.
Thus shouting, and out-crying they abuse thee,
If that thou show thy self in open Street,
And think it no dishonor to misuse thee,
And if thy best acquaintance does thee meet.
He passes by ashamed thee to greet.
Knowing it is a blemish to his name
To be seen speaking to so bace a dame.
96.
That makes thee like an Owl come forth by night,
And steal into a Tavern in the dark,
Because thou dare not to be seen by light.
And fearing then, that some thy ways do mark,
Thou tremblest, if thou hear a dog but bark.
The day to some does fly away too fast,
Thou reckon'st it the greatest foe thou have.
97.
Oh! how a Constable will make thee start,
And run into a corner for to shun him.
A Beedle puts such fear into thy heart,
That thou can make thy feet strive to out run him
As if thou had been she that had undone him.
As children love the Bears of Paris-garden,
So do thou like the sight of a Churchwarden.
98.
Bridewell expects thee for to beat some Hemp.
And Middleton does want thee for his cart,
The Compters will not yield thou art exempt
From their command, but that they claim a part
And share in thee, and ought not thence to start.
The Marshals of the City, and the Court,
Must play with thee in earnest, not in sport.
99.
Do thou not blush Amanda, tell me true,
To see thy self as in a mirror here?
I call thee by such names, as are thy due,
And speak the simple truth without all fear.
Nor can I any longer thee forbear.
Read farther yet, and look thou well unto it,
The pity I have on thee makes me do it.
100.
How many several ways will thou devise
To make that fair which is but foul deceit.
Why do thou cast such glances with thine eyes?
It Is but to draw the Fish unto the bait,
Thy golden Apples are but counterfeit.
Thy tears, thy sighs, thy smiles, thy pensive passion,
Are borrowed shows, and mere dissimulation,
101.
As a hot blast before a hasty shower:
So are thy pleasing, and enamouring smiles.
Thy voice Hiena-like, is to devour,
Thy sweet alluring songs, are Sirens wiles.
Thy tears are but the tears of Crocodiles.
Eyes of a Basiliske, a Panthers breath,
A Tigers heart, intending naught but death.
102.
Thou art a Serpent in a Crystal brook,
A poisoned Potion in a Cup of Gold.
A Magic spell within a golden book.
A painted Sepulcher of bones, and mould,
Bitter in taste, though glorious to behold.
Thy wolvish throat for guiltless Lambs does gape,
And play'st the devil in an Angels shape.
103.
Drone like, from painful Be thou suck'st the honey.
Moth like, thou cloath'st, and feed'st on others spoil.
Canker-like eating, and consuming money.
Grashopper-like, thou sing'st whilst others toil.
And like a Caterpiller liv'st the while.
Like leprosies thou art, or scabs, or tetters.
Or the black Cross, before the row of Letters.
104.
Thy glorious clothing, and thy glittering show,
Thy gorgeous dressing, and thy painted face,
Makes thee admired of them that do not know
The seeming substance of a fained grace.
But oh! within that heart there is no place
For virtues harbor, nor of sin no sense,
But balefull lust, and stinking impudence.
305.
How cunningly thy lover to deceive
Will thou feign shows of sorrow, and of passion,
For sometime in his presence thou will leave
Thy wanton tricks, and then in imitation
Of a grieved soul, thereby to gain compassion,
Sigh, and seem sad, dejecting of thy look,
As of thy life, no comfort thou had took.
106.
Then will thou tell him how thou love the man,
And that his great neglect does make thee sad.
That thou must love him still do what he can,
Though back from him no love again be had.
And that through passion thou art almost mad.
Then will thou kiss, and hug him in thine arms,
Sheding forth tears, to make those tears thy charms.
107.
When out alas, thou scarce have seen him thrice
And do not know what honest love does mean.
And then perchance forsooth thou will be nice,
And tell him, thou do scorn to be unclean.
And do abhor the very name of queen.
And by thy fained seemings so to win
My dainty gallant to a deadly sin.
108.
Thus aiming only, to be only ill,
Thou seem to hate vice, that thou may be vicious.
Willing to have unwillingly thy will,
Striving through modesty to be pernicious,
And hating whoredom, to be meretritious.
Thus thy fair glosses seem for to discover
Thy cursed disposition to thy lover.
109.
Consider how thy guilt does make thee fly
From house to house, from one Street to another.
Thou dare not in one lodging long timely,
But strive by changing place thy sin to smother,
That thy lewd courses no man may discover.
Thou know full well, that what thou do is ill,
Yet will thou lose thy soul, to gain thy will?
110.
This month, near Westminster thy lodgings are,
The next month thou remov'st to Clarkenwell.
Within a while that chamber is to far.
Then to the Strand thou back returnst to dwell,
There Is better trading, as report does tell.
From thence unto the City do thou fly,
And for a month or two thou there do lie.
111.
It is not long, but there is notice taken,
That so much company makes thee suspected:
And thereupon that place is straight forsaken.
To Shoreditch then thou go, to be protected,
But there thou art not to thy mind respected.
And therefore wisely to amend the matter,
Thou think there is better trading ore the water.
112.
At Lambeth then thou set up thy rest,
Because that place is near unto the Court.
There for one quarter thou do think it best.
To make that place the place for thy resort,
Where thou may best gain profit with thy sport.
But there is a fault too, when the term is ended,
And Court removed, then thou art unbefriended.
113.
Then for a while thy self to recreate,
Thou think it best to take the Countries air.
And with new friends, thy self exhilarate.
To Hackney therefore, thou do straight repair,
Intending there to keep an open fair.
For there thou hop'st (if fame be not belide)
That Hackney gallants will a hackney ride
114.
Thus like a wandering vagabond, thou flyest
From place to place, and at no place do tarry.
In City, Suburbs, Country, if thou lie,
Fear takes thee up, and thee from thence does carry.
So that thou liv'st like a vbiquitary.
Nor here, nor there, nor any where residing,
But one that has no home, nor no abiding.
115.
And as thy lodging thou do often change,
So art thou metamorphosde in thy name,
For using too, and fro, so much to range,
In often moving thou do lose the same.
Well knowing thereunto thou art a shame.
Sometime thy name is Mary, sometime Anna,
Within a while it is Edith, then Susanna.
116.
Then will thou take the surname of another,
And have it as thine own, by usurpation.
Forgetting that which thou had from thy mother,
And so thou passest by that appellation,
Till note is taken of thy occupation.
Then as ashamed of it, that is forsaken,
And blotted out, and so another taken.
116.
Thus in uncertaineties thou always dealest,
Constant in nothing, but committing sin.
And by thy outward carriage thou revealest,
The disposition of thy heart within.
Where had there any grace, or virtue bin,
Thou would have loathed so lewd a life as this,
Despising that, wherein no goodness is.
118.
Alas (Amanda) think upon the time,
How soon it fleets, and quickly flies away,
Now thou art young, and in thy flower, and prime.
Thou cans'st into the world but the other day,
Make a good market, for thou can not slay.
Those pleasing looks, and beauties which thou have,
Will quickly wither, long they cannot last.
119.
Let not such fading pomp, thy pleasure cherish,
Nor transitory joy, be thy delight.
Things that are good determine, and do perish,
Much more the wicked pastimes of the night,
Although thy sin does glister, and look bright,
By the continual using of thy lust,
Twill canker eat thy heart, and make it rust.
120.
Do not once think thou can continue long,
When as all pleasures, and delights, are short.
Though now thou art respected being young,
It is no supersedeas for thy sport,
As thy days wither, so declines thy port.
Time gnawes upon thee, and will thee devour,
Before thou be aware, within an hour.
121.
Four or five years will bring thee out of date,
And make thee dry, as is a withered tree,
Then all the beauty that thou had of late
Will be decayed, and found dead in thee.
And thou grown hoarse with crying woe is me.
Then will thy friends, and lovers thee forsake,
And no compassion on thy person take.
122.
Nay, ten to one if thou so long do last,
But that some foul, and loath some grief does seize thee,
Before two summers over thee have past,
Some angry rising ulcer will disease thee:
Or else some sore, as bad as that displease thee.
Thy Mercury, thy Unguents, and thy Lotions
Will eat thy flesh, and work in thee strange motions.
123.
There Is a disease that is the plague of whores,
Which rooteth in the marrow and the bones.
Within thee, and without thee full of sores:
That, that I say, will take thee all at once,
And make thee to reduplicate thy groans.
That Morbus Gallicus will fill thy veins,
And gnaw into thy bowels, and thy reins.
124.
Where are thy lovers then, and all thy friends?
What profit is there of thy gaudy clothes?
Where are the men that to thee comfort sends?
That so much vowed with many fearful oaths?
He that seemed then to love thee most, now loathes.
Thou, full of aches, groanest by the wall.
And no man sees, nor pitties thee at all.
125.
Now vengeance does begin to shower upon thee,
And every one does laugh at thy distress.
Where are thy pleasures now, that have undone thee?
This is the fruit of thy licenciousnesse.
Thy griefs are more then I can well express.
And thou forlorn, forsaken, full of woe
Lie bedridden, full of pain, and can not go.
116.
Example take, by such as heretofore
Set light by honesty, as thou have done,
And bravely lived, by playing of the Whore.
Observe their manner, when they first begun.
And how they entertained every one.
The honor they have gotten, and the glory,
And mark their ending, when thou readst the story
127.
Licaste of Sicilia, long ago,
The famous Courtesan of all her days.
Thessalian Metra, one that lived a foe
To civil modesty, and Matrons praise.
Fair Rhodopis, that shined with beauties rays.
Leoena, Flora, the Athenian Thais.
Bright Batine, and the Corinthian Lais.
128.
These were the famous creatures of their time,
Much sought too for their beauties, and admired.
And whilst they bravely flourisht in their prime
None were so much resorted, or desired,
Till with their often riding they were tired.
Princes, Philosophers, and famous men
Longed to be of their acquaintance then.
129.
In pomp they lived, and great magnificence,
Enjoying all things to their hearts content:
Clothed in robes of greatest eminence,
Feeding on dainties for their aliment,
And wanting nothing thereto congruent.
Thus they enjoyed a while delight, and pleasure,
In gorgeous clothes abounding, and in treasure.
130.
But when their beauty ceased for to shine,
And sliding time began to make them old,
Their glory then did presently decline,
And those that fed them to the full with gold,
Withdrew desire, and made affection cold,
Their Pomp decaying, and their gotten store,
Made them at length become exceeding poor.
131.
The price that was at first an hundred pounds,
To quench the fury of their burning fire,
Fell quickly down, to less then twenty Crowns.
Nay if that any were disposed to try her,
A single Crown, or half a Crown would buy he:
And rather then she would a cheapman miss,
She would be bought with half the price of this.
132.
The great ones then, when they had cast them off,
And surfeited themselves in their delight.
Those dainty faces were to them a scoff.
Nor did they once respect at all their sight.
They were abhorred, and disesteemed quite.
Then every rude, and base mechanicke slave,
Got his desire, in what he wished to have.
133.
At length forsaken of the rich, and poor,
Their beauty vanished, and their glory gone,
Despised, scoft, and scorned, from door to door,
They sadly walked, disdained of every one.
Their cries unheard, unpittied their moan.
They lay them down, distressed, and forlorn,
And die with wishing they had never been borne.
134.
Yet they are more to be excused then thou,
Because they had not knowledge of a god,
And sinned, not knowing against whom, or how,
Hearing, nor fearing of his scourging rod.
Nor did they know the way wherein thy trod.
But in blind ignorance did walk awry.
Having no notice of a Deity.
135.
But thou have with a greater care been bred,
And well acquainted with Gods holy Word.
Thou know the path, which thou do daily tread,
Leads unto hell, and that thy life's absurd.
And will damnation in the end afford.
Thy conscience tells thee that thy course is evil,
Displeasing God, and pleasing to the devil.
136.
And yet thy knowledge does not work at all,
To bring thy life to reformation:
Thou will not hear the Lord when he does call,
And suffer'st in thy heart an obduration.
And practisest recidivation.
Thy voluntary wilfulness does bend
To work thy own destruction in the end.
137.
Shall I delare unto thee in a word,
The virtue of unstained virginity?
What strange, and rare effects it does afford,
Being to grace allied by affinity:
How near it comes to divinity.
What has been acted by the influence
Of undefiled, and chaste continence.
138.
Laerthes, King of Egypt being blind,
And seeking long time cure, but finding none,
Was by Apollo's Oracle, enjoined
To get a woman's water, that had known
The use of one man, and but only one.
And with the same, his blinded eyes wash over,
He should (and did) his long lost sight recover.
139.
A vestall virgin, called Claudia,
To make it appear, that she had lived chaste,
Did draw the Image of Aritia
Up Tiber-river, where the same was placed.
Tying it only to her girdle fast.
When as the same, all other means being proved,
Could not by any force at all be moved.
140.
Another Vestall, Tuccia by name,
Being accused of fornication,
For to acquit, and free her from that shame,
And to remove that imputation,
Cleared her self (and got such commendation
As nothing else the like to her could give)
By bearing of fair water in a Sieve.
141.
Lo here Amanda, and observe it well,
The strange effects that chastity has wrought,
Such things as are incredible to tell,
By virtue thereof, has to pass been brought.
Which to our judgments would have come to naught.
At what high rates then, ought thou to have prized it?
And not in such base sort to to have despisde it.
142.
On the other side, behold the strange events,
The ruins, downfals, and the desolations,
Bloody destructions, fearful accidents,
Of Kings, of People, Countries, Kingdoms, Nations.
Their miseries, and their depopulations.
That have bin wrought, through foul concupiscence,
And by that ougly sin, Incontinence.
143.
How many Kings have lost Imperial Crowns?
Their lives, their Wives, their Children, Subjects all?
How many Cities, and renowned Towns,
Have into ashes been observed to fall,
By that one sin, that sin veneriall?
It were too long, to teadious to relate,
Twould tire thy senses to enumerate.
144.
Had Helena been true, the famous Troy
Had never suffered by the Graecians arms.
She had not tasted of that sad annoy
Which was procured by their proud alarmes,
Nor they themselves, had suffered half those harms.
Young Alexander had not lost his life.
And Menelaus had enjoyed his Wife.
145.
Hector had lived, that died so well beloved.
The stately tower of Ilion had stood,
And the Palladium had not been removed.
Old Priam, and his fifty headed brood,
Had not all by the sword poured out their blood.
The Graecians had not stoned Hecuba.
Nor had they sacrifizde Polixena.
146.
These mischiefs, and a thousand others more,
Bylust, and by concupiscences rage,
Did all accrue, that else had not been so.
The like enormities in every age
Still swell apace, and never will assuage.
And thy foul life, by playing of the Whore
Adds to the wound, and does increase the sore.
147.
Unto thy followers, thou dein'st to give,
Two liveries, nhereby they may be known:
Which they do wear so long as they do live,
For their true service unto thee alone,
Of these two liveries, the pox is one,
With this, as a companion, or a brother
Is poverty, copartner with the other.
148.
These two are never absent from thee long,
But wait upon thee, wherefoe're thou go'si.
They serve thee being old, as well as young,
And cleave unto thee whatsoever thou do.
From place to place they haunt thee like a ghost.
These show the great dependence that they have
Nor parting, till they bring thee to thy grave.
149.
How many fearful curses do attend thee,
And execrations hang upon thy life,
Praying that God, such miseries would send thee,
As amongst wretched creatures are most rife?
Thy father, mother, kindred, man, and wife,
As thou endeavour'st to grow worse, and worse,
They all heap on thee curse upon a curse.
150.
Thy father is ashamed to name thee daughter,
Thy mother blusheth for to call thee child,
Thy kindred all implore the high Creator,
That since thou shamest not to be defiled,
As is thy life, so may thy end be vild.
Thy brothers, sisters, friends, acquaintance all,
Wish that the plagues of Egypt on thee fall.
151.
Thou ruinst heirs, and make them sell their lands,
To beggary thou bring men of wealth.
Thou make good husbands for to forfeit bands,
And younger brothers for to live by stealth.
Thou make a man diseased that was in health.
And those that never intended wicked course,
Thou make them daily to grow worse, and worse.
152.
Thou make the husband leave his loving wife,
And the rich father to neglect his son:
To maidens thou dispraisest civil life,
By thy allurements masters are undone,
And servants are confounded many a one.
The fatherless, and widow, as forlorn,
Do curse the time that ever thou were borne.
153.
It Is thou, that often art the cause of murder,
Of blasphemy, of drunkenness, and theft,
Thou make the wicked man to run on further,
And spend his means on thee, till none is left.
And since thy self art of all good bereft.
Thou do so much delight in doing evil;
Thou art a painful steward for the devil.
154.
And yet me thinks, if thou conceivest aright,
The little honor, and respect is shown thee,
Of such as daily do frequent thy sight,
And of thy company that best have known thee.
How they in public places will not own thee.
That thing alone should make thee change thy mind
And be more pure, as metal new refined.
155.
Thou see daily how they do abuse thee,
And to thy face, will call thee common Whore.
Nor do regard, how basely they do use thee,
By thy rich clothes they set not any store.
But tumble, toss, and touse thee, evermore.
Pulling from thee thy Jewels, and thy Rings,
And using all thou have as common things.
156.
Think of the famous women heretofore,
Whose chastity, fidelity, and fame,
Not only in the rich, but in the poor.
Have purchased to themselves a lasting name,
Of matchless honor, and still keep't the same.
Their classicke virtues, to their endless glories.
Have volumes filled with memorable stories.
157.
Poor Baldraca, the mirror of a maid,
Though base by birth, of meanest parentage.
Thought scorn to have her honesty betrayed,
By Otho, greatest Monarch of that age,
Though he a Kingdom for it would engage.
She highly prized her honor, more then treasure,
And scorned his gifts should win her to his pleasure.
158.
Read thou the Story of Penelope.
Of Chiomara, and Timoclea.
Of Camma, and of bright Zenocrite.
Of the Egyptian fair Edesia.
Of Claudia, and of chaste Lucretia.
And many more beside, whose high-priz'd worth,
In Histories are to their praise set forth.
159.
Theano blushed, when one by accident
Espied her arm, unto the elbow bare.
Doubting she should be thouht incontinent,
And therefore as ashamed, and in fear,
Forthwith to cover it she did not spare,
Blaming her self, that let it so be seen,
As if therein, immodest she had been.
160.
Oh! were thou but of her opinion,
And near allide (...) to the rest,
So as, twixt thee, and them there were a union:
And that thou could a better course digest,
Then that which hitherto thou have expressed.
Thy meretritious life would be amended,
And thou at thine own follies much offended.
161.
But now the course that thou do undertake,
Is most abominable, rude, and base.
It makes the hearts of honest people ache,
So vile a life should spoil so fair a face.
Want of Gods fear, and of his heavenly grace,
Has overgrowne thy heart with impudence,
And filled thy veins full of concupiscence.
162.
Yet do not think (Amanda) that thou art,
The only she, nhich has this way transgrest.
Though sin has made a conquest of thy heart.
And for some years, has thereof been possessed.
Grace notwithstanding, has an interest.
On which, if wisely thou lay hold in time
It will re-enter, and evict thy crime.
163.
Commence thy sutte against the power of hell,
By writ of Melius Inquirendum brought.
And prosecute it, till thou do expel
That bold suggestor, lust: and brought to naught
Her false suggestions, that these mischiefs wrought.
Three helps thou have to make thy title fair,
Against all, claim, Repentance, Faith, and Prayer.
164.
These three conjoynd, bind fast the arms of sin.
Chain up ill thoughts, ill words, ill actions all,
Expelling vice, and letting virtue in.
They captivate, I say, and keep in thrall
The force of hell, and po^^^ sathanicall.
By these thou do ascend unto the throne
Of the almighty Godhead, three in One.
165.
Be not dismayed ( Amanda) nor despair,
Although thy sins are of an ougly shape.
Boldly approach to God by frequent prayer.
There Is yet a means, whereby thou may escape,
And stop hels mouth, though it so wide does gape.
As bad as thou, have wallowed in like sin,
Whose heart at last have let Gods spirit in.
166.
Hilaria's daughter; Aphra, borne in Creete,
A famous Bawd, as in those days did live,
For prostitution did three servants keep,
Common for any, that would money give.
She for her folly past, did so much grieve,
That by Narcissus of Jerusalem
Being converted, suffered Martyrdom.
167.
Niceta fair, and Aquilina to,
Both famous strumpets of admired feature.
Were by St. Christopher, transformed so,
That each of them, became a new made creature,
Embracing grace, and quite forsaking nature.
And after many torments, and much pain,
Under King Dagnes, both of them were slain.
168.
Another Thais, an Egyptian borne,
Grown very rich by prostitution.
Of whose vile course, Panutius often did warn:
Was won at last, by's admonition,
Unto a godly, and devout contrition,
Went from the stews, whereas she lived a Whore,
And in a Monastery died poor.
196.
Pelagia of Antioch sometime
Exceeding rich, and beautiful withal,
Immoderate in lust, and in her prime.
Her mind, that was before veneriall,
By Bishop Nonius, grew seraphicall.
Her sins bewailed, her wealth at naught she set,
Lived, and did poorly in Mount Oliver.
170.
See to thy comfort these, and many more,
Whose boundless lust had made them satan's slave*
Yet notwithstanding were converted so,
And from their sins retracted, that they have
By penitence (their wicked souls to save)
Through Christ obtained their sins to be forgiven,
And are now crowned blessed Saints in Heaven.
171.
Thus the true penitents shall mercy find,
Although their sins are of a Scarlet die.
And sure, unless thou wilfully art blind,
Thou may perceive grace offered to thine eye.
Embrace it then, I charge thee presently.
Or else I see thee so exposed to slaughter,
Earths plagues will seize thee here, and hels hereafter.
172.
I see (me thinks) a solemn Congregation
At Old-Bridevvell, of grave, and solid men,
Sitting together there in consultation,
What punishment shall be inflicted then
On thy polluted corpse, and thou again
Standing near to them in another room,
Trembling with fear, attending of thy doom.
173.
The Judges on thy penance there agreed,
For executing of their strict command.
According as they had before decreed,
A Beedle comes, and takes thee by the hand
To bring thee forth, and lets thee understand,
That thou for all thy bravery, and cost,
Must walk with him unto the whipping post.
174.
Whither he brings thee, straightwaies without slaying,
Pulls off thy robes, and locks thy hands up fast.
Then to his office, without long delaying,
Thy clothes pulled down, stark naked to thy waste,
He thereby lets thee understand the taste,
Of his smart Whipcord, where there does imprint
Each lash a seame, and every knot a dint.
175.
For flourishing with hand above his head,
And shaking of his four limbed instrument,
In the descent, so learnedly they spread
About thy shoulders, that incontinent
Thy dainty skin, is all sanguinolent,
And so he deals his lashes one by one,
Till the set number of his stripes are done,
176.
Thus being of thy silks, and Sattins stripped,
Exposde to public shame, and so disgraced.
And for thy impudent abuses whipped:
A poor blew gown upon thy back is placed,
And Canvas coyse upon thy head unlac'd.
Where in that guise thou marchest from the stock,
And then do practice Hemp, and Flaxto knock.
177.
This is the least of all that can betide thee,
If by great fortune thou diseases miss.
The lash will scourge thee, and thy friends deride thee,
And whatsoever more disgraceful is,
That will attend thy shame, as well as this.
And nothing shall be wanting, till thou have,
Plague upon plague, for all thy follies past.
178.
Thus living in dishonor, and disgrace,
A scandal to thy Kindred, and thy Friends:
Thy pleasure lasting but a little space,
Ripe in iniquity, thy glory ends,
And to a dismal sad confusion tends.
And having lost thy credit, and good name,
Conclud'st thy days in infamy, and shame.
179.
For being turned into the open street,
Unworthy of a chamber, or a bed,
Bare legged, not having shoes unto thy feet,
Nor any thing, to put upon thy head.
Scarce rags to keep thy secrets covered,
Lie unlamented, for the lice to gnaw,
And eat thy flesh upon a pad of straw.
180.
Where being full of aches, sores, and biles,
Thy beauty turned to a tawny hue,
And that consumed, which was so fair ere whiles,
Unknown of those, that thee but lately knew,
As a just vengeance to thy merits due.
Breathest thy last, beneath some open stall,
Or di'st diseased in an Hospital.
181.
There lies thy pomp, and glory in the dust,
Thy body clothed with rags, and all too torn,
Thy flesh comsum'd, and wasted by thy lust.
Loathed, condemned, disdained, and held in scorn.
Not one of all thy friends for thee will mourn.
Nor hardly think thee worthy for to have,
To hide thy stinking corpse, a simple grave.
182.
Lo here Amanda, view thy self at large,
Behold thy life, and after that thy death,
Peruse each line, and letter, I thee charge.
Let it not be forgotten in a breath,
To thy best thoughts I do the same bequeath.
Advisedly consider of the matter,
I tell thee what is true, and scorn to flatter.
183.
And if it take effect as I desire,
And breed a sorrow for thy time misspent,
If it shall cause thee from thy course retire,
And be a means to make thy heart relent,
And be reformed by my admonishment,
Assure thy self that thou have gained a friend,
That shall not fail thee till his life does end.
184.
For my sake therefore I adjure thee here,
To turn thy course, and bend another way:
For thy friends sake, to whom thou should be dear,
Come home unto thy self, and do not stay.
For thine own sake, I charge thee to obey,
And in compassion of that soul of thine,
Live not in darkness when the sun does shine.
185.
Pity thy years, that are but young, and tender.
Pity thy fathers care, thy mothers love,
For thy sad kindreds sorrow, pity render.
Let thy acquaintance some compassion move,
Look not still down, but raise thy thoughts above.
If no thing else prevail, let fear of God,
Work thy conversion, and his threatening rod.
186.
Strive to regaine the honor thou have lost.
And seek thy ruined credit to repair.
Thy conscience is benumbed with follies frost,
Let thy warm tears of sorrow thaw the air
That chils thy heart with nipping cold despair.
And so dissolve thy crusty ice of sin,
That hot repentance, may let mercy in.
187.
Redeem the time that thou have spent in vain,
And pursue honor as thou followd'st vice.
Although unwilling, yet thy self constrain,
Against thy will to virtue be not nice.
Tire not in acting goodness, twice or thrice.
But persevere from one unto another,
As happy daughter of a blessed mother.
188.
And when thou have this little Pamphlet read,
And seen the scope whereto these lines do tend;
Let them not pass an hour out of thy head,
Until thy sorrow make thy life amend,
And work a reformation in the end.
Do not, oh do not, put them from thy heart,
But to thy sickly soul some help impart.
189.
Then shall my prayers fly aloft with thine,
And my desires seek earnestly thy bliss.
Thy happiness shall be to me as mine.
Thy godly sorrow, for thy life amiss,
Shall breed such joy, as none shall be like this.
The comfort that thy soul shall thereby taste,
Shall be a Crown of glory at the last.
190.
In hope therefore of this my good success,
And of a happy welcome to these lines,
Wishing thou may thy wicked lusts suppress,
I leave thee unto him, whose grace refines,
Praying his blessing unto these designs.
Heavens grant thee that which none on earth can give,
A life prepared to die, a death to live.
When I had written these lines, I made them up in a little book, and by a
friend which I had, sent them unto her lodging, with a letter likewise to be
delivered unto her, both which my friend presented to her own hands, and she
receiving of them thankfully, read over the letter presently in his sight, and
told him, that so soon as she had perused the book, which should not be long,
she would send her answer unto me: and so my friend taking a courteous
farewell, left her, and returned telling me of the kind welcome both of the
letter, and the book, which I was glad to hear of, and therefore hoped in a
short time to receive her answer, which I did wish might be according as I both
expected, and desired. I waited for her answer about ten days, and not hearing
from her, well knowing in that time she might at her leisure have read it over,
I began to wonder what the reason should be, imagining, that either she was
loath to bestow so much pains as to read it, or else having read it, she was
offended at it, and being willing to be satisfied herein, yet unwilling that
she should take any notice of my desire, I sent another friend, not to her
lodging, but near unto it, to the end that I might be assured whether she
still continued there, or whether she were removed to any other place: my
friend taking occasion secretly to enquire of her, understood by one of the
neighbors, that she kept her old lodging, and that she had lately been very
sick, and was not then recovered. Of which her sickness, when I understood, I
was in some hope that she had considered seriously on the contents of the
book, and that it had wrought so far with her, that she had laid the same to
her heart, and was thereby drawn to a strict examination of her own life,
which might be the means of troubling her conscience, so far, as that it
might breed a distemper in her body, and so be the cause of impayring her
health: desirous therefore to understand how she digested it, and whether there
were any other cause of her disease, I sent my friend to her lodging to see how
she did, not taking any notice that I had known of her sickness, and withal,
to excuse my not coming unto her all that time: whither when he came, he was
willingly conducted into her chamber, where she then lay in her bed, and
delivering his message unto her, she told him that she had been very ill, and
wonderful desirous to see me, and entreated him to signify so much unto me,
and that she was minded to send a messenger unto me, but that by reason of her
sickness she knew not how conveniently to do it (not speaking one word unto
him concerning the book.) My friend not staying long with her, and promisig to
acquaint me with her desire, departed: and telling me what her request was, and
in what case he found her, I resolved within fevv days to visit her, and
accordingly within a day or two after, I came unto her chamber, where being
entered, I found her sitting in her chair by the fire, and weeping exceedingly.
I coming in so suddenly, and she turning her head espying of me, presently
leapt out of her chair, and coming toward me, took me by the hand, and
looking earnestly in my face, she began to speak to me to this effect, the
substance whereof for memory sake I have set down in verse, as follows, viz.

The penitential answer of the reformed Amanda.
1.
OH thou that art the only man alive,
Which with these eyes I did desire to see.
Thou, thou, for whom my heart shall always strive
To gratulate the kindness shown by thee,
Welcome a thousand, thousand times to me.
With that, the tears gusht from her eyes apace,
And silence staid her tongue a little space.
2.
Then breaking forth in words again, she said,
Come dearest friend, and sit thee down by me.
Thy presence makes me joy, and well appaid.
I have great matters to reveal to thee,
Such as till now I thought would never be.
Then rising from her seat, she locked the door,
And came, and sat down by me as before.
3.
And fixing earnestly her eye upon me,
In a still silent manner she looked on me,
And say as if she had been in a trance.
At length her milk white hand she did advance.
And then the same within my hand she laid,
Whilst with a ruthful voice these words she said.
4.
I have perused each letter in thy Book,
And carefully considered every line.
I did advisedly the same overlooke,
Applying of it to this heart of mine:
Which is awakened by those words of thine,
And thereby do I understand aright,
My much lamented state, and wretched plight.
5.
I see the scope whereto thy thoughts do tend,
And understand the mark at which thou aim'st,
I find thou art unto my soul a friend,
And through thy love thereto such right thou claim'st,
That thou would save it, though my life thou blam'st.
Oh such a friend how can I truly prize?
With that the tears down trickled from her eyes.
6.
But do not think, quoth she that thou have wrought
On a remorselesse stone, or senseless stock:
Let it not enter once into thy thought,
That thou have beat an Adamantine rock,
But unto me have been as Peter's Cock.
Checking my sinful life, that I might know,
The path was ill which I had traced so.
7.
Thou have depainted here unto the life,
The miserablest creature ever breathed.
A female wretch, unfit to make a wife,
Shame to the sex, one of all good bereaved.
That has all mischief in her heart conceav'd.
That naught but ougly sins about her bears,
A foul offense unto all modest ears.
8.
Thou have before me laid what ever is ill,
Murder, lust, thiefdome, drunkenness, and pride.
All these with free consent, and willing will,
I have embraced, and none of them denied.
With many other fearful sins beside.
Thou plainly have discovered unto me,
And made me see what erst I could not see.
9.
How blind was I, that knew not this before,
And yet I know, I knew it too too well.
But wanted that true knowledge evermore,
That should unto my seared conscience tell,
That I was running down the hall to hell.
Thou have wide open set my hood-winkt eyes,
And made me see the devils fallacies.
10.
Thou have made known to me the short content
And fleeting comfort of a fading pleasure.
The miseries that wait on merriment,
Though they look Gold-like, yet they are not treasure,
A sudden joy that brings forth grief at leisure.
A gilded Pill, where poison lies under,
A lightning flash before a clap of thunder.
11.
Nor have thou lost the labor that thou took'st,
But brought thy pains unto a perfect end.
Thou have obtained the thing for which thou look
And as thou have expressed thy self a friend,
Beyond all friendship, and thy love does tend
To so much good, as for to save a soul,
Teach me at full, my follies to condole.
12.
For lo my heart is like to break with sorrow,
For my lost time, and for my life misled.
Well could I wish to die before too morrow,
And happy should I be if I were dead.
Since all true comfort from my heart is fled.
But that my conscience tells me presently
I am not yet prepared for to die.
13.
For my sad soul that is of sable hue
Stained with the spots of millions of sin
Must with a flood of tears be washed anew:
My hardened heart to melt must first begin,
And let a true repentance enter in,
Before I can expect, or hope to have,
Comfort from him that di'd my soul to save.
14.
Oh leave me not in this my great distress,
For fear I yield to desperation;
My sinful heart does feel such heaviness,
And in it self such perturbation,
That I am void of consolation;
Ready to sink into the deep abisse,
Of hels black gulf, where naught but horror is.
15.
Put forth thy helping hand to save me then,
And keep me from the hazard I am in:
Thou brought me down, now raise me up again.
And heal the sore that festred is by sin,
Cure a sick soul by wholesome medicine.
Purge the malignant humors which do feed
The swelling vice that in my heart does breed.
16.
I must confess I swim'd in lawless pleasure,
And gave large reins unto my boundless lust.
I drank all vices in an equal measure,
And let religion in my heart to rust,
And suffered on my conscience such a crust,
That no remorse or sorrow for my sin,
Could have admittance, or once enter in.
17.
A Tavern was the Temple I did use,
A Stage the market where I bought, and sold,
The Cloister that I lived in was a stews.
My Chamber the Exchange, my trade t'uphold.
There did I trafique, and contract for gold.
My ghostly father was a Galenist,
My Clarke a Pimpe, a Pander was my Priest.
18.
I offered Holocausts on Venus Altar,
And burned Incense to the god of Love.
My Prayer book Astianassa's Psalter,
My Mattins were to Aphrodite above,
My Vespers would not Amarusia move,
Nor actions for a chaste Zenocrite,
But sitter for a wanton Chione.
19.
It Was I that drank iniquity like water,
And with the sow did wallow in the mire.
I sported, like Adultus wanton daughter,
And let my self for money out to hire:
I was a bargain fit for any buyer.
For Silver to mechanickes I was sold,
But with the Nobler sort I dealt for gold.
20.
I caused the usurer to empt his bags,
And made those fools that were esteemed wise,
I shifted gallants from their robes to rags,
And changed their plush into a Country frize,
And by my cunning crafty policies.
I did allure the modest, and the chaste,
Of Cytheraean dainties for to taste.
21.
All sorts, all ages, all degrees of men,
I could apply my self to please their pallet.
To Lords, to Gentry, to the Citizen,
I could prepare my self a dainty sallet:
Or to the beggar that does bear the wallet.
And like unto Theramines his shoe,
That fitted each man's foot, so could I do.
22.
Let a new lover take what shape he would,
As Neptune to Bisaltis like a Ram.
As Jove to Danae in a shower of Gold.
Or to Aegina, in a fiery flame,
Or like a Swan, as he to Leda came,
Or to Europa, in a Bulls true shape,
He hardly could my wily snares escape.
23.
As Rhodope the Thracian Curtezan
Did make Caraxus spend his whole estate,
And so through want of means turn Pirate than,
Whereby he aid incur a mortal hate,
And on himself a lasting scandal brought.
So has my luxury consumed to nothing
Rich heirs, and made them steal for meat, and clothing.
24.
How many men have perished by my fault:
And how am I made guilty of their sin?
Can I be ever sound that thus do halt,
And by my winding plots, and cunning ginne,
Intrap't the simple, and ensnared them in.
Can I a ransom pay for this offense,
Or ever be able to make recompense?
25.
Oh noe, I cannot, for beside my own,
Other men's guilt lies heavy on my soul,
I have not been content to sin alone,
But caused others to make mine more foul,
And in their filihinesse did likewise roll.
Their follies with mine own I did conjoine,
And by commixtion made their vices mine.
26.
I was as common as the Proetides,
Receiving all that came with joy, and mirth,
I thought on nothing but my own delights.
Thinking there was no other heaven but earth,
(Ah wicked wretch as ever received birth)
My spotted life has made me satan's den,
Fuller of fiends then Mary Magdalene.
27.
Her sins I do commit, but want her sorrow,
Of all the ill she had I am possessed,
I get the bad, the good I cannot borrow:
I have her vices all, but want the rest.
Her worst acts I embrace, but leave the best.
My Saviors feet I wash not with my tears,
Nor (with her) do I wipe them with my hairs.
28.
I want the gifts of grace that she had given,
And her repentance, my hard heart to move.
I cannot apprehend the joies of heaven,
Nor love my Savior with her ardent love,
My hearts desire with hers flies not above.
I feel no spiritual comfort in my soul,
Nor can I thoroughly my state condole.
29.
All will be ready to report my shame,
And blaze my infamy in every ear.
But none will plead my cause, to quit my blame,
Or for my sorrow that will shed a tear.
Or else excuse my fault when they it hear.
Indeed they cannot, for my foul abuse
Is far beyond the reach of an excuse.
30.
How then shall I find comfort in my grief,
Or drive sad desperation from my heart?
My self unto my self yields no relief.
And other men no comfort will impart,
But rather add more torment to my smart.
If thou should leave me too, in my distress,
Then must I die in all my wickedness.
31.
Oh teach me truly to lament my sin,
And humble my proud heart by low submission:
Rowse me out of the sleep that I am in,
That of my state I may have true cognition,
And make my peace with God by my contrition.
Instruct me in the perfect way of prayer,
Lest I fall headlong into deep despair.
32.
Help me to pray to God, that he would shower
Into my heart the graces of his Spirit.
That through his mercy, and his saving power
I may escape the guerdon of my merit,
And after life his heavenly bless inherit.
Teach me to pray, teach me sweet friend, I say,
For I have almost quite forgot to pray.
33.
My heart is willing, oh my heart is willing,
I feel my conscience terrified by sin,
Oh by my tears by these my tears down trilling,
Lift up thy heart with mine, come, come, begin,
Lord open my breast, that grace may enter in.
Rowse my dead heart, out of his drowsy den,
Pardon my faults, sweet Jesus say Amen.
34.
Then from her eyes the tears did gush apace,
And down she fell upon her bended knees,
Wringing her hands, she did lament her case,
With sighs expressing her souls miseries.
In forcible, and strong Hiperbolees.
My sins, my sins she cries, with heav'd-up-hands,
Are more in number then the Stars, or Sands.
35.
Then beating of her breast in woeful wise
With high swollen sobs, and heavy heart-sicke groans,
Now, woe is me, now woe is me she cries,
My stinking sins lie boiling in my bones,
And kills my soul, as Bees are starved by drones.
And whilst like furies round about they hem me,
As a just Judge my conscience does condemn me.
36.
Listen, oh listen to my sad complaint,
I have no friend to moan to, but to thee,
I need not with my follies thee acquaint,
Thou know my steps, how retrograde they be;
And how my vices have overwhelmed me.
Pity my case, and my sad state condole,
And add some comfort to my sicke-growne soul.
37.
Be thou my Pharos to direct me home
Unto the harbor of my heavenly rest,
Without a help to guide me, I shall roame,
And get a curse in seeking to be blessed,
Good counsel to a soul that is distressed
Comes in fit season, and does comfort bring,
To a sad heart, that is full of sorrowing.
38.
My Parents have forsook me long ago,
Detesting the vile course that I have led.
Brothers, and sisters neither will me know,
My near alliance wish that I were dead.
My friends that sometime were, from me are fled.
My Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Kindred, Friends,
My very name their modest ears offends.
39.
All have forsaken me, to let me perish,
And sink my soul into the Stygian deep.
Denying any comfort me to cherish,
But in sins cradle suffering me to sleep,
That thence I have no heart at all to peep.
But snorting in a dead security,
I want the sense of my impuritie,
40.
Nor have I hoarded treasure for my issue,
But braved it out in Jewels, and in Gold,
In rich Embroidered Silks, and cloth of Tissue.
And when it was bought, it was not long unsold,
I thought not how to live when I was old.
But changed, and pawned, for to maintain my pride
And for the present only did provide.
41.
For all the money that I have obtained,
And golden fees by playing of the Whore,
Unto my self no riches have I gained,
But all is quite consumed, and I left poor,
Only my wearing clothes, and nothing more.
"Sins golden gains I see long will not last,
"Suddenly got, as suddenly do wast.
42.
For as a Mill that is set upon a river
Purposelie' built t'indure both wind, and wether,
By force of a strong current for to drive her,
Receives all Corn to grind that is brought thither,
And all the Country near is served with her.
Some bringing to her, others sent abroad,
And all of them deliver there their load.
43.
She shifts her work, and serves the turns of all,
And every one paies tribute for her pain,
Some giving single, and some double toll,
Herself thereby not only does maintain,
And keep her in repare by such her gain;
But to the Miller that does keep the Mill,
Supplies his wants, and does releeve him still.
44.
The like did I, for by my commontrade,
From every one that came I had a share.
And by that custom a rich living made,
And therewith kept my self in good repare.
And so maintained my clothing, and my fare.
And what beside I did lay up in store,
My friends that kept me had it evermore.
45.
For many came themselves, and brought their fee,
Whereby I had great trafique, and great gain:
A nurse I had to fetch some home to me.
They likewise would well pay me for my pain.
If one suffiz'd not, I could send forth twain.
And what I got from many one by one,
I spent upon my secret friend alone.
46.
Him did I feed with money, and with diet:
With all thing needful, that he wanted nothing.
My Luxury maintained his beastly riot,
Pawning my own to buy him change of clothing:
To cure his wants, no filthy actions loathing.
What ever by sin I got, to him I sent it,
And he no sooner had it, but he spent it.
47.
Thus did I always gain to keep me poor,
Still living bad to make another ill;
And to maintain a knave, I plaide the whore,
And suffered want, that he might have his fill.
Killing my self another for to kill.
Sin in my self, sin fostered in another,
A wicked issue of a wicked mother.
48.
Since then (my dearest friend) I did expose
My self to infamy, and foul excess,
Yet thereby nothing got, but still did lose,
And heap up sins, not feeling my distress,
Till thou have made me know my wretchedness.
Lo I accuse, mislike, condole, repent,
My self, my fault, my state, my life misspent.
49.
Here, take my clothes, and sell them all away,
They are not for my wearing any more,
My Silks, and Sattins change for simple say,
Rich costly garments suit not with a Whore.
A proud-swolne heart becomes not the poor.
Those Jewels that I have, and rings of gold,
Receive them here, and let them all be sold.
50.
What shall I do with rich Tuftafaties,
Wrought Velvets, Damaskes, Grogerams, and Plush,
Set forth with Lace, and rare Embroyderies?
My Purples, and my Scarlets make me blush,
My Musfes, and Fannes, I do not wey a rush.
My fine Bonelaces, and my dainty Purles,
My Needle-workes, my Bracelets, and my Curles.
51.
Take them sweet friend, and set them all to sale,
My Earings, Pendents, and my chains of Pearls.
My Rubies, Saphires, and my Diamonds all,
They are for Ladies, and for wives of Earls.
Not sit for Strumpets, and for light heel'd girls.
My dainty Linen, Cambrickes, and my Lawnes,
Sell them away, and put them off for Pawnes.
52.
Riste my Chests, my Boxes, and my Trunkes,
Seize all the goods within them, thou shall find,
Such things as those are far unmeete for Punkes,
They suite not any longer with my mind.
Let them to better uses be assigned.
Rich Jewels, gorgeous clothes, and garments fine,
Pit not a body so defiled as mine.
73.
Take them away, remove them from my sight,
And put them off to any that will buy.
Then to the poor distribute every mite:
They do deserve it better far then I,
To them I do bequeath it willingly.
Riches unjustly got from other men,
Distribute them to strangers back again.
54.
And laying all these costly robes aside,
Procure for me some discontented black.
A plain sad Gown my nakedness to hide,
That their appear not lightness on my back.
That gidly vanity may go to wrack.
Or as a fitter habit for my sin,
A frocke of hair to clothe my carcass in.
55.
And let me henceforth take my leave of mirth,
As the unfittest subject of my mind.
Let not rejoicing in my heart have birth,
Until a spiritual gladness I do find,
And heavenly light of grace in me has shined.
Let sollies hatred, and sins discontent
Add to my soul a ghostly merrimem.
56.
Help me oh help me to some holy book,
To stir my heart up to devotion.
Get me a Bible I therein may look,
That Gods good Spirit in me may have motion,
And of his holy Word I may have notion.
And by the apprehending of the Deity,
Be stirred to the practice of true piety.
57.
Bring me acquainted with some good divine,
That may direct me in the path to heaven.
And search this dull, and unsound heart of mine,
Lest I let all things go at six, and seven.
And backward fall, sowr'd with dissembling Leaven.
One that will well inform me in the right,
And try me, lest I play the Hypocrite.
58.
Conduct me to the Temple of the Lord,
Where I some powerful Minister may hear,
That may unfold to me his sacred Word,
And thunder out his threatenings to mine ear,
And make his judgments unto me appear.
And bringing me to see my wicked error.
Gods mercy may embrace me after terror.
59.
Get me a lodging in some private place,
Where I may harbor with some modest wife.
That my acquaintance may not see my face,
Where I may lead a quiet civil life,
Void of all anger, infamy, and strife.
That by contemning whatsoever is evil,
I may avoid the allurements of the devil.
60.
Or else direct me to some Countriie grange,
The City is too full of base temptation*
That I may both my heart, and habit change,
And in a lonely private habitation,
Pursue with constancy this alteration.
And weyning of my self from worldly pleasure,
By sudden leaving sin, grow good at leisure.
61.
Look to my steps, and let thy watchful eye,
Have a regard unto my future course:
I dare not trust my self, lest presently
The power of sin do conquer me by force,
And by backesliding make me worse, and worse.
Let thy especial care for my souls good,
Be still applying to me heavenly food.
62.
For though I now resolve with constant heart,
Never to take that wicked course again,
And that the sense of sin does breed a smart,
In my sad soul, now thinking to refrain
From the black die, that will my conscience stain.
Yet still I fear, and fear it most of all,
Lest I again into those follies fall.
63.
I know the devil has a thousand baits,
To catch me in the compass of his Net.
I know he deals by counterfeits, and sleights,
And for my soul, fair seeming shows does set,
Till me entangled in his snares he get.
I know his art, and cunning policies,
And that does make me fear his fallacies.
64.
Thou have begun to manifest thy love,
In striving to reclame me from my folly.
Let it not die, but whilst I live, and move
Pursue therein, and let thy care be wholly
To guide me in the path of virtue soly.
Help to confirm me in my weak desires,
That my small sparks of zeal may grow to fires.
65.
Help me to pray to God, to grant me grace,
To persevere in this my reformation,
That I may now repent, whilst I have space,
Craving his spirit of regeneration,
And of my sins beginning retractation.
A willing heart I have to turn to heaven,
Pray for me then, that grace to me be given.
66.
And I will pray uncessantly that God
Would power into my heart his holy Spirit;
That sin in me may have a period,
And I his heavenly Kingdom may inherit.
And so receive his mercy not my merit.
Lord hear my prayer, cleanse me from my sin,
Open my heart, that grace may enter in.
67.
This said, she held her tongue, and spoke no more,
Wiping her eyes, and bending down her head,
And sitting at my feet upon the stoare,
Which with her tears she had bewatered.
Then reaching forth her hand, to me she sed,
(Oh my sweet friend) on thee my comfort lies,
Blessed be the time that ever I saw thine eyes.
68.
As by the hand thou raisest me from ground,
(With that she rose, and looked in my face).
And sounding of my heart that was unsound,
Did by thy means, assisted with Gods grace,
Awaken me, and let me know my case.
So fall not back, but let thy constant love,
Rowse up my thoughts to raise them up above.
69.
Speak, will thou tell me what thou do intend,
Thou know my purpose, let me now know thine.
Will thou continue unto me a friend?
Thou seem to tender this poor soul of mine,
Do thou unto my future good incline?
Boldly go on, leave not the work undone,
Finish the thing, thou have so well begun.
70.
This said, she paused again, and stopped her voice,
Earnestly looking when I would reply:
Her sweet sad looks did make my heart rejoice,
Seeing her sorrow was so heavenly,
And from a heart void of all fallacy;
And noteing thus how her desire was bent.
I made this answer, without complement.
71.
I see Amanda, what I joy to see,
And what I did desire I might behold.
I hope thou do not mean to flatter me,
And seem to make that hot which is but cold.
And so make Brass to shine like perfect Gold.
I doubt not, but thy manners are refined,
And being melted will be better coined.
72
I trust thy sorrow is a real sadness,
By thy foul life, and mortal sins procured,
And then that sorrow breeds in me such gladness,
To think that grace is in that heart immured
Which has so many unto vice allured.
That all the powers I have, with free consent
Shall be applied to further thy intent.
73.
By a free gift (unmerited) from any,
Had I received a thousand pounds in Gold,
Titles of honor, privileges many,
And faithful friends, as I am minutes old,
With other blessings, more than may be told,
They could not more rejoice this heart of mine,
Then this long-wisht conversion of thine.
74.
For I Will assure thee, I such pleasure take
In this thy dolor for thy follies past;
That since thy sin does cause thy heart to ache,
This bitter is so sweet unto my taste,
That if thy sorrow with thy life does last,
And thou repentest of thy wickedness,
As now to me thou seem to do no less.
75.
Here take my hand, and with my hand my heart,
And what I say believe it to be true.
These eyes of mine out of mine head shall start.
The day that is past shall be begun anew,
And things consumed shall come again to view.
Before I fail unto my utmost power,
To add unto thee comfort every hour.
76,
Take thou no thought for clothing, or for food.
Nor any thing that may procure content.
My care shall be so much to do thee good,
Both for thy souls, and bodies aliment:
That thou shall want nothing convenient.
Reform thy life, conform thy will to mine,
I will inform thee in the path divine.
77.
Such things as are not for thy wearing fit,
Thy gorgeous clothes, thy jewels, and the rest
Leave them to me, I will dispose of it,
And change them for thy good, as I think best*
Unto thy rank thou shall be neately dressed.
In civil manner, but for gay attire,
It must not suite at all with thy desire.
78.
Thy goods disposed of, I will thee provide,
Of all things fit for a reformed mind.
A Bible, and some holy books beside,
Wherein thou may a heavenly comfort find,
I will procure thee, as thou have enjoined,
Set forms of prayer, for a contrite sinner,
Thou shall not want fit for a young beginner.
79.
I have a mother virtuously disposed,
An ancient matron, pious, and devout:
To whom I have this my intent disclosed,
And what herein at first I went about,
Whilst I of thy conversion was in doubt.
She shall receive thee with the greatest care,
Providing for thy lodging, and thy fare.
80.
I have a sister much about thy years,
A hopeful maid, religious, and chaste,
And such a one as the Almighty fears.
That all uncivil actions does distaste.
And is with many spiritual blessings graced.
She shall yield comforts to thee many a one,
And be thy loving kind companion.
81.
If thou will hear, I Will read to thee each day,
Precepts for prayer, rules for meditation.
If thou will pray, I Will join with thee to pray.
In private Votes, or public congregation,
And lead thee in the path to thy salvation.
And if thy pleasure thereunto inclines.
I will acquaint thee, with profound Divines.
82.
I Will lead thee forth to Sermons every week,
And unto common Service twice a day,
The most approved Preachers I will seek.
That through thy ear shall to thy heart convey
Such heavenly comforts, that when thou do pray*
Thou shall be rapt with a divine delight,
Of the Almighties mercy, and his might.
83.
If that the City does content thee best,
Live in the City to thy hearts content,
Or if the Country yield thee better rest,
Unto the Countriey life I give consent.
All places are alike for to repent.
If that the heart desires the Almighties grace,
God does accept the person, not the place.
84.
Make thou thy peace with God, by thy contrission,
I with thy friends will labor for thy peace.
Appease Gods wrath by hearty true submission:
I doubt not but thy Parents wrath shall cease,
And their fresh love shall mightily increase.
That aged couple, all thy friends beside,
Will joy, that in thy sins thou ha'dst not di'd.
85.
Be of good cheer, and walk along with me,
This is no fitting place for thee to stay:
My mother, sister, and my self for thee,
Will make provision, as is fit straightway.
We will all take thee to our charge this day.
For nothing but thy soul do thou take thought,
We will provide, thy body shall want naught.
86.
Tell me, quoth I, art thou well pleased with this?
And do thou freely thereunto assent?
I am, quoth she, and think the greatest bliss
Waits on me now, that ever to me was sent:
Thy pleasure I Will attend incontinent,
Dispose of me as thou think best to day,
Unto thy will, I willingly obey.
87.
With that I called a Porter to the door,
And bid him take her Boxes, and her Chest,
Her Trunkes, her Bed, her Goods, and all her store,
And bring them to my house where they should rest.
And to be ordered then, as I thought best.
To which command of mine he did consent,
And so convei'd them thence incontinent.
88.
Then did I take Amanda by the hand,
Whilst with my tongue I made her this reply:
Since thou have vowed to be at my command,
Yielding thy self into my custody,
Accepting of my offer courteously,
Be of good courage, come along with me,
I Will be thy safeguard, none shall injure thee.
89.
This said, we both together left the room,
And I conducted her along the street,
Until I brought her to my Mothers home,
Whereas at door my Sister did her meet,
And then my Mother did her kindly greet:
And entertained her in most courteous wise,
As either of them could in heart devise.
90.
Then did Amanda live, and spend her time,
In holy duties, reading, and in prayer,
With grief lamenting her fore-passed crime,
Till she was even brought unto the staire,
(Through horror of her sin*) of black despair.
But of Gods special grace, he did impart
The joy of his good Spirit to her heart.
91.
For many good Divines did flock unto her,
Applying godly comforts to her soul,
And greatly striving their best good to do her,
Taught her so well her follies to condole,
And mortify her sins erewhile so foul,
That they at length by daily information,
Wrought in her a good hope of her salvation.
92.
Then with more comfort would she pray, and talk,
Yet pensive still, of sin she would complain,
Forth of the house she seldom times would walk,
Unless it were to Church, and back again.
If she were well, she would not thence abstain.
Sermons, and Service she did often frequent,
And to no place as Church, so gladly went.
93.
There would she listen with her best attention,
And pray as earnestly as any prayed,
Avoiding sin by diligent prevention,
And works with faith to couple she assai'd,
Desires of pleasure were in her decai'd.
The only path in which she strived to trace,
Was to repent for sin, and pray for grace.
94.
Oh how she loathed the very name of whore,
And all that led a wicked wanton life,
Their sinful courses she did much deplore.
The unmarried wench, the widow, and the wife,
As she knew many in those actions rise.
So she endeavored moving them by letter,
For to reclaim them, and to make them better.
95.
No roaring youngster came within her sight,
Nor lustful Prodigal did see her face.
Her secret friend, that was her sole delight,
Was now forsaken, and quite out of grace:
Whereas she lay, he must not know the place.
Nor he, nor any now must look upon her,
That had before attempted her dishonor.
96.
Thus did she lead her life unto her death,
Dying to sin, and living unto grace,
To goodness wholly she did her bequeath:
She took no pleasure in her comely face,
Nor any evil motion did embrace.
But spent her time in holy contemplation,
To beat down sin, and shame the worlds temptation
97.
Two years she lived in sound, and perfect health,
The most reformed creature on the earth:
She had not much, and yet desired no wealth,
Humble she was, as one of meanest birth.
And more inclined to sadness then to mirth.
Vain prattling, and much talking she despises,
Delighting most in pious exercises.
98.
She did no company at all admit,
But modest virtuous, and of good report.
To talk of Plays she would not hear of it,
She took no joy in any kind of sport,
Meetings at Tavernes, now she cared not fort.
She did not seek for to augment her store,
And what she had to give, she gave the poor.
99.
She did abandon every earthly pleasure,
Delighting only in religious books.
Her godly zeal did make the heavens her treasure,
From thence alone she for her comfort looks,
Her study was to shun the devils hooks:
And all her hopes on which she did depend,
Was on Christ's merits, at her latter end.
100.
After two years that she had lived thus,
She fell through grief into a heckticke fever,
The which at length did grow so dangerous,
That of all hopes of health it did bereave her,
And never left her, till her life did leave her.
Weaker, and weaker still she pined away,
And saw how nature in her did decay.
101.
She knew her thread of life was almost spun,
And with great patience took her visitation.
She did rejoice her life so near was done,
Being acquainted long with tribulation.
And now her heart with heavenly consolation
Was so replenisht, and with such delight,
She would not longer live, if that she might.
102.
Her grief grew stronger still, as she grew weak,
Hasting apace to bring her to her end.
At length she did desire, with me to speak,
Where at her bed I straight way did attend,
Then reaching me her hand, she said, my friend,
My only friend, thy love through heavens grace,
Hath-sav'd the sinfull'st soul that ever was.
103.
The book thou sent'st, that little Paper book,
Wherein thou did unmask my foul offense;
Behold, and see what true effect it took,
That book, I say did work in me the sense
Of my own folly, and my impudence.
I bless the time, for this thy blessed favor,
And bless the Lord, that blessed thy good endeavor.
104.
And here my latest thanks to thee I give.
And with these thanks of mine, this little Ring.
My hour is come, I can no longer live,
Wear't for my sake, although a worthless thing,
I cannot recompense thy meriting.
My tongue does fail, go toule, the passing bell,
A thousand times sweet friend farewell, farewell.
105.
This said, she drew her hand into the bed,
The time approaching of her latest (...)
Then turning up her eyes to heaven; she sed,
Lord to thy hands I do my spirit commend.
Then to the wall her body did she bend.
And with a feeble voice again she cried,
Jesus receive my soul, and so she did.
106.
And so she did, and so she di'd to live
And living as she did, she sweetly di'd,
Her death to her, a lasting life did give,
Her life before her death was mortisi'd,
And at her death, her life beatifi'd.
Death vanquished life, concluding of her pain,
She lived, to die, and di'd to live again.
FINIS.
A Meditation upon Death.
NOthing more wished then wealth, yet that must leave us
Nothing more sweet then love, Nothing
that lasts not ever.
Nothing more kind then friends, yet theyl deceive us.
Nothing more fast then wedlock, yet they sever.
The world must end, all things away must fly,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
More honors may be got, but they will away.
More beauty may be had, More
but twill not last.
More wealth may be obtained, but twill decay.
More joys may follow, but those soon are past.
For long continuance it is in vain to try,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
Sure love must die though rooted in the heart.
Sure it is, Sure
that all things earthly are unstable.
Sure friends, are pure friends, yet such friends must part
Sure it is, that all things here are variable.
Nor two, nor one may escape, nor thou, nor I,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
Then let the rich, no longer covet wealth.
Then let the proud, Then
veil his ambitious thought.
Then let the sound not glory in his health.
Then let all die, since all must come to naught.
The elder sish, as well as younger fry,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
Death took away King Herod in his pride.
Death spared not Hercules for all his strength. Death

Death struck great Alexander, that he did.
Death long spared Adam, yet he di'd at length.
The beggar, and the King, the low, the high,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
For Scepters, Crowns, Imperial Diadems,
For all the beauties that on Earth do live, For

For pleasures, treasures, jewels, costly jems,
For all the glories that the world can give.
She will not spare her dart, but still reply.
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
All from the highest to the low'st degree.
All Nations, All
People, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands,
All in the Earth, or Air, or Sea, that be,
All, all must yield to her all conquering hands.
She wounds them all, with an impartial eye,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
Must all then die, then all expect their death.
Must' all things vanish, Must
Sun, and Moon, and Stars?
Must every living creature yield his breath?
Must all things end, our joys, delights, and cares?
Yes all with an united voice do cry,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
Die let us then, but let us die in peace,
Die to our sins, Die.
that dying we may live:
Die to the world, that grace may more increase:
Die here to live with him that life does give.
Die we must needs, let wealth, and pleasure ly,
Nothing more sure then death, for all must die.
FINIS.

