A SERMON AT THE SOLEMNIZING OF THE HAPPY Inauguration of our most gracious
and Religious Sovereign KING JAMES. Wherein is manifestly proved, that the
Sovereignty of Kings is immediately from God, and second to no authority on
Earth whatsoever.

Preached at Paul's Cross, the 24. of March last. 1608. By RICHARD
CRAKANTHORPE, Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by W. Iaggard for Tho: Adams, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the blew Bell. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, THOMAS Lord Bishop of LONDON, my
Honorable good Lord: all Grace, Prosperity, and Happiness.
THE manifold and weighty Ecclesiastical affairs, wherein your Lordshippe is
daily employed, and many times wearied; partly in advancing the sincere
profession of Gods holy truth, and partly in maintaining the happy tranquillity
of this most renowned Church, have often occasioned me to remember the words,
and complaint of that learned father S. Augustine. Though besides those
Innumerabiles Ecclesiasticas curas. Aug. lib. de oper. Monac. ca. 29.
innumerable Ecclesiastical cares which he sustained, and of which he said,
that almost none would believe them, but such as had experience of them, he was
daily encumbered also with the judicial hearing of very many secular causes,
for which as he says, Non de auro non de argento, non de fundis and (...), pro
quibus quotidie sub^ isto capite salu^amur. vt dissen^iones hominum terminemus.
Aug Epist. 147.
he was daily with all reverence attended and saluted by the people; yet some in
that age most unjustly blamed both him and other Bishops, as being desidious,
and like the Pharisees, tying heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, which
themselves would not touch with their little fingers (and who can possibly
escape that censure, if the indefatigable industry and toil of S. Augustine
could not quit him thereof?) He then with a most serious and solemn
protestation answered, Aug l. de oper Monac. cap. 29.
I call Jesus Christ to witness upon my soul, that I had much rather give my
self to reading, praying, and other spiritual exercises, yea to daily
handy-workes, then endure the most tumultuous perplexities of other men's causes
about their secular businesses, either ( Vel i^dicando dirimendis, vel
interueniendo praecidendis. ibid.
) iudicially to end them or by persuasion to prevent them.

The cogitation hereof, had almost persuaded me not to withdraw your
Lordshippe, so much as to the view of these my slender labors, but that the
several bands of duty which I owe unto your Lordship, ouer-swayed with me
herein at the last. For having not only been called (as from little Zoar to
Jerusalem) by that message which to me was no other then the voice of God,
though some younger Samuels, may perhaps mistake it to be Elias voice; but
further also in that straitness of time, extraordinarily encouraged by your
Lordship to this service; the fruit of my labors therein (if it be any) I
judged it my duty to present to him, by whose Authority and appointment they
were first undertaken.

Again, seeing my hearty and sincere desire herein, was to testify my
unfeigned love, first to Gods truth, and then to the peace of our Jerusalem, in
both which, I expect no less then the seuerest censures of two, in themselves
opposite, and both of them very rigorous adversaries, who contrary to the
Apostles Ephesians. 4, 15.
rule, either follow not the truth, or follow it not in love: I was emboldened
in both these to entreat protection under your Lordships name, as one who
living under your Lordships, both public and Domestical government, have,
and do daily see many assured experiments of your Lordships zeal to the one,
and prudence joined with great moderation in the other.

Besides, I must and do with thankefulnes acknowledge, which I have often
heretofore gladly recounted, a good part of that light with which God has in
mercy vouchsafed unto me, to have bin received from that fair burning lamp,
which many years in our University, your L. very often and happily held
forth unto us: then especially, when in the last years of our late
Sovereign, and in those, as some thought, declining days; wherein the
children of Babylon, upon some vainly conceived hopes, I know not what, began
somewhat insolently to insult. At which most needful time it cannot be
forgotten, how the religious, constant and godly zeal of your L. being one most
eminent in that place, did animate and encourage many others, my self among
the rest, who then sat at the feet of Gamaliel, and who by those words uttered
in fittest time, by the tongue of the learned, found in our selves, how truly
the Wiseman said, Eccles. 12, 11
The words of the wise are like goads, and like nails fastened by the masters
of the assemblies.

If in these respects I present this small pledge of my duty, to your
Lordshippe, and with a willing heart offer this mite unto the Lords Treasury,
let me in excuse of the slenderness thereof, use those fit words of S. Ierom.
Hier. Apol 2. aduers. Ru^in.
Every man offers in Gods Tabernacle according to his ability; some offer Gold,
and Silver, and precious stones, others bring Silk, and Purple, and Scarlet,
and fine linen, Nobiscum been agitur si obtulerimus pelles and caprarum pilos.
Howsoever it be, I gladly submit it to your Lordships grave wisdom, and to
the Church of God, even in those most submissiue words and manner, which I long
since learned of the most learned S. Austen, and which (being here expressed)
in all my speeches and writings, I earnestly desire to be understood; Domine (
Aug lib, 15. de Trinit. cap. vlt.
) Deus, Quaecunque dixi de tuo, agnoscant and tui, Si qua de meo, and tu
ignosce and tui. Black Notley in Essex. May, 15. 1609.

Your Lordships Chaplain in all duty, most humbly to be commanded, RICHARD
CRAKANTHORPE.

2. CHRON. CHAP. 9.
Verse 5. ANd she said to the King, It was a true word, which I heard in my
own Land of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom. 6. Howbeit, I believed not their
report, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and behold, the one half of
thy great wisdom was not told me, for thou exceedest the Fame that I heard.
7. Happy are thy men, and happy are thy Servants, which stand before thee
always, and hear thy wisdom. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved
thee, to set thee on his throne, as King, in stead of the Lord thy God:
because thy God loucth Israel, to establish it for ever, therefore has he
made thee King over them, to execute Judgment and Justice. 9. Then she gave
the King six score Talents of Gold, and of sweet Odours exceeding much, and
precious stones.
THe solemnity of this most joyful day, and happy opportunity which God has
given us to celebrate the same, to the glory of his holy name, to the honor of
our most Religious Sovereign, to the comfort of us and all his loyal
Subjects, but to the confusion of those sons of Beliall, who having evil
will at Sion, repine and pine away, to see the peace and prosperity of this
most flourishing church and kingdom, and to hear of the mirth and melody in
our streets this day, has moved me to make choice of these words of the
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon; wherein every one may see both a fit
correspondence to our Solomon, and a worthy example of that love we all owe
to him, and thanksgiving unto God, for this so great, and so incstimable a
blessing.

In the words themselves, not to seek any curious division (which in an
History you will not expect) observe I pray you with me, four several
points, which concern four several parties.

The first, concerns King Solomon; wherein is set down a singular
commendation of his wisdom, which exceeded all reports. [ Behold the one
half, etc.]

The second, concerns the people and Subjects of King Solomon; wherein is
declared their blessed and happy estate, who had Solomon a wise King to rule
^uer them. [ Happy are thy servants.]

The third, concerns Almighty God, wherein is expressed a most Religious
thanksgiving unto him, for placing Solomon, a wise King over his people. [
Bl^ssed be the Lord thy God.]

In which third point, besides many other, two particular branches are
especially to be considered: the former, from whom Solomon had or held his
kingdom, and that was immediately from God, who made him King over Israel, and
placed him in his own throne, and in his own stead. [ To set thee on his
throne.]

The latter, what moved or induced God, to grant his people so wise a King; no
merrits nor deserts, either of King or people, but only his own favor and
free love to Israel. [ Because thy God loves Israel.]

The fourth and last point, concerns the Queen of Sheba; wherein is set
forth, a manifest and outward testification of the honor and honorable
respect she bare toward King Solomon, in token whereof, s^e bestowed on him
such royal and magnificent presents: six score talents of Gold, sweet Odours,
and Precious stones. [ Then she gave the King.]

Of these several points, by the most gracious and helpefull assistance of
Gods holy spirit, and by your Honorable and wonted patience and attention, we
are at this time (God willing) to entreat.

The first point, concerns the admirable, and (indeed) inexplicable wisdom
of King Solomon, whereof God himself is a most sufficient witness. Wisdom
and knowledge is granted unto thee, so that there has not bin the like among
the Kings which were before thee, neither after thee shall th^re be the like.
2. Chron. 1, 12. And again, God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, He was wiser then any (...) 2 Chronicles. 9. 22.
man, and a he excelled all the Kings of the earth in wisdom, 1. Kings, 4.
verse 29, 31. To go no further then my Text, So famous was he for wisdom
among all Nations, that there 1. Kings. 4. 34.
came of all people unto him, and all 2. Chron. 9, 23.
Kings of the earth sought to hear the wisdom of Solomon, which God had put
into his heart. And though Fame be not only a swift messenger, but usually an
amplifier and multiplier of that which it does report, as Saint Hiero^ says,
Hier. ^om. (...). Epis^. ad Furia^.
ijdem authors, and exaggeratores, yet in this it was quite contrary. The
report of this wisdom was such, that it seemed incredible; and therefore this
Queen confesses she believed it not: but when she had heard it her self, and
bin an eye and eare-witnesse of all, as one amazed and astonished thereat, she
breaks into this admiration thereof, set down in my Text. Behold, the one
half of thy great wisdom was not told me, thou exceedest the Fame that I
heard.

Having spoken this of the wisdom of King Solomon, may I now presume to
speak a word or two of the sacred Majesty of my dread Sovereign? It is not my
purpose to make any parallel to Solomon, of whom God himself has said, that
none should be like unto him: nor take upon me to set forth unto you, any
portraiture of that wisdom, which no Zeuxes nor Apelles can otherwise
express, but only, by drawing over it the veil or Curtain of Timanthu^, to
import, it cannot be expressed. The wisdom of a man, much more of a King, is
compared by Gods spirit, Prou. 18* 4.
to deep waters, and to a flowing river: who am I, to diue into that
bottomless depth, or with my span to measure the depth and breadth of the
maine Ocean?

Yet with all loyal submission, let me thus much say, and say much less then
I do conceive: Neither can this present age, nor all the Chronicles (I say) not
of great Britain only, but of all Europe, present unto us a King, endued
with such admirable gifts of Learning, Judgment, and Memory; adorned with so
many princely and Heroical Virtues, Justice, Clemency, and Wisdom;
especially, with that Divine and Heavenly wisdom, which is the Fountain and
foundation of all the rest; with Religion, Piety, Zeal, and constant
Magnanimity to profess, maintain, and uphold the truth of God, and of his
Gospel.

Which report of mine, if any suppose to be too lavish, and with this Queen of
Sheba believe it not, let him well consider, those many, and most Religiously
wise speeches, uttered in a manner in the hearing of the whole Realm:
Conferences, Disputations, free Monarchies, but specially, that most learned
Apology, for the Oath of Allegiance against the Popes two Breues, and that
kingly gift, fit only for a peerless King, to give to a peerless Prince;
all which are but some few sparks of that euerburning Lamp, or but small
streams, of that ever and ouer-flowing spring, and then he will be forced
even with admiration, to profess and say with this Queen, as after the
hearing and reading of diverse of them, my self with many others, have often
said, It was a true word indeed which I h^ard of thy sayings, and of thy
wisdom; howbeit I believed it not, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it:
and behold, the one half of thy great wisdom was not told me, for thou
exceedest the fame that I heard. With which true Testimony of the wisedoms of
both these Salomons, I end this first point, which concerns the King, and the
admiration of his great wisdom.

The second point concerns the people and subjects of King Solomon, of whom
the Queen here says, that they were blessed and happy, who had Solomon a
wise king, to rule over them. Happy are thy people, and happy are thy Servants.

Nor can there in truth be a greater comfort to any people, or greater safety
to any kingdom, then to be governed by a wise and prudent King: By a man of
understanding and knowledge, a Realm indureth long. Prou. 28, 2. A wise man
(much more a wise King) is as a fortress and strong pillar, to support even an
whole Realm: And better is wisdom, then weapons of war. Eccles. 9, 28.
Nay, a wise King, is not only a safety, but even an happiness (as the Queen
here says) to a kingdom, for so God himself does witness. Eccl. 10, 17.
Blessed art thou, o Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, that is by the
Hebrew Filij sapientiae i. sapientes. Mat. 11. 19, Filij hominum, i. homines.
Mar. 3, 28. sic (...) Achinos vocat Homerus.
phrase, truly Noble, endued with Virtue, Piety and Wisdom, wherein alone
consists true Nobility.

On the contrary, a foolish or childish king, is one of those heavy Judgments
and curses, which God in his wrath threatens to bring upon a land. I will
appoint children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. Isay 3,
4. And again: Woe unto thee (o Land) whose King is a child, a child in
knowledge, in wisdom, in understanding. Ecclesiastes. 10, 16.

The reason of both which, is very evident. A Wise King, gouernes with Justice
and Equity, and the Kings Throne is established by righteousness. Proverbs
25, 5. And the King that judges in Truth, his Throne shall be established for
ever. Prou. 29, 14.

Again, a prudent and wise King, as he maintains Justice, so his principal
and chief care is, to maintain and advance piety and godliness, the true and
sincere worship of God throughout all his kingdoms. So did holy David, of whom
it is said, Psalm. 78. 72.
that he ruled thy people prudently with all his power. And wherein did his
prudence appear? he was no sooner set upon the throne, but he assembled all
the congregation of Israel, and they brought again the Ark of the Lord, with
singing and dancing; with Vyols, with Cimbals, and with Trumpets, 1. Chron.
13, verse 2, and 8. The like did that most religious and wise King Josiah, He
made a Covenant before all the people, to walk after the Lord, and to keep
his Commandments; and be caused all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin
to stand to that covenant, and he compelled all that were found in Israel, to
serve the Lord. Whereupon it followed, that all the days of Josiah, the people
turned not back from the Lord. 2. Chron. 34, ver. 31, 32, 33. Such a blessing
the Church and the whole kingdom has, of a Prudent, Religious, and wise King.

On the other side, an irreligious, a wicked and unwise King or Governor, by
suppressing Justice and equity, and making his Lust a Law; impiously saying
with the Donatists, August. lib. 2. cont. Epist. Parme^. cap. 12
Quod volumus sanctum est: or as Iulia did to Ae^i. Spart. in vit. Anton.
Caracal. in fine.
Caracalla, Si libet, licet; what I list, that's a Law: Such an one is even a
trouble to the whole land, and to his own people, as Eliah said to King Ahab,
1. Kings 18, 18. Thou and thy fathers house trouble Israel, in that you have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord: Nor only trouble Israel by violent and
tyranicall intrusion into the Vineyards and lands of Naboth, but chiefly, by
causing the people to forsake the Lord and his worship, and to follow Baal, or
the Calves, as did Jeroboam, of whom it is therefore said, that he did evil
above all that were before him; and why? For he did not only sin himself,
but he did sin, and he caused Israel to sin, 1. Kings 14, verse 9. and 16.

You see now what an heavy judgment and curse an unwise King is unto the Land
and people: but that Kingdom is happy, that people, and those Subjects are
happy, over whom Solomon a wise and prudent King is placed by the Lord.

I may truly here say unto you, your selves also being witness, and say it
to the immortell praise of Gods name, to the honor of our Sovereign, and to
the joy and comfort of all his people, that in this happiness, this renowned
Kingdom, among all, and above all Nations of the earth is blessed this day.
Happy O King are thy people, and ^appie are thy Subjects or Servants. It is
not my meaning, nor is it fit, to make a panegericall Oration in this place at
large, therein to recount and amplify also those manifold blessings, which by
the means of our SOLOMON, we do now enjoy. Yet the more to stir us up to
magnify and bless Gods glorious name, and if it be possible, more also, to
love and honor that Sacred Majesty whom God has chosen to be his royal
Instrument, whereby so many and great blessings are derived unto us; I may not
omit to mention some few which are most eminent, commending the rest to your
private and Religious consideration.

The first is our long tranquillity and happy peace, with all the blessings and
blessed fruits of peace. A blessing which God began to bestow on this land, at
the joyful entrance of our late Sovereign QVEENE ELIZABETH, whose Sacred
spirit does now rest and reign with the Lord, but her memory shall be
blessed and eternized in the world for ever; when all those venomous Pars in
his answer to the Apol.
and Viperous tongues (set on fire by hell) which now in vain bark against
her, and seek to stain her spotless honor, shall rot, and be even as the
dung upon the earth. Having enjoyed long and happy peace, under her long and
happy reign, it was expected by the Agents and vassals of Antichrist, that the
day which ended her life, should have ended all our comforts, and been to us a
dismal day, a day of murders and massacres, a day of wars, of tumult, and
of utter desolation; one of their own false Prophets West, de trip. homin.
^ffic. lib. 3. page 435.
with a lying spirit in his mouth, foretelling of that day, Catholici quidem
dimicabunt, at that day they will fight it out indeed.

Behold, he that sits in heaven laughed them to scorn, the Lord had them in
derision. Himself placed in his own Throne, after David, Saloman; A 1. Chron.
22. 9.
man of rest and peace, sor God has given him, and in him to us, rest and
peace from all his, and our Enemies, round about. And lo, this is now more
then the fiftieth year, wherein the people of this land, in abundance of
peac^ sat (as the Prophet Mich. 4. 4.
says) Every man under his own Vine, and under his own figtree without
danger. Such, so long, and so happy peace, never did our Fathers nor Ancestors
see before us in this Land; nor have any of all the Nations and
neighbourkingdomes enjoyed the like, who in the mean time have been wearied
and wasted, either with foreign or with intestine war. Yea, and this very
day which they had cruelly designed to weeping, mourning and lamentation, God
by the happy means of our SOLOMON, has turned it (as we all now see) to a day
of mirth and melody; a day offeasting, singing, and rejoicing; a day of praise
and thanksgiving to his blessed name, which be therefore magnified and
praised, and blessed for evermore.

A second blessing, which under our SOLOMON this whole Empire enjoys, is the
sincere profession of Gods holy truth, the blessed continuance, yea the
establishment also ther^of among us.

The extinguishing of this most glorious light, has bin often wished, by most
malicious and devilish devises attempted, and at the change of our late
Sovereign, was undoubtedly expected. But the wisdom of our SOLOMON, knowing
that Piety and Religion is the surest prop to a kingdom, (like Constantine
Euse^. lib. 2. de vit. Constable. cap. 25. and seq. and cap. 44.
the great) made it his first care, by his most Religious Edicts and Laws,
Stat. Iam. an. 1. cap. 4. and an. 3. cap. 4, 5.
to establish Gods truth, and true worship in the land. Assuring further, and
protesting his ardent zeal for ever to uphold and maintain the same: and that
so often, in so many Honorable and public Assemblies, with such vehemence of
speech, in so many Learned and Divine writings, published to the view of the
world, with so Religious and royal promises, nor this only for himself, but
in assured hope also of the most happy branches of that most happy Vine: that
now, Blessed be God, that cursing Balaam, and his cursed Priests of Baal,
which ere this, hoped, and vaunted in their hopes, to have seen Baal, or
Moloch, or the Queen of heaven, and the whole host thereof; Nay, the very
abomination of desolation set up in our Temples, do now gnash their teeth at
this our felicity, and their hearts do even languish, and faint, and pine
away, to see the truth o^ God so sincerely professed, so constantly maintained,
both by King and people, so assuredly settled, and as we may justly hope, and do
heartily pray, even for ever established in this Land.

The greatness and indeed the happiness of this blessing, my tongue cannot
possibly express unto you, nor can our s^allow hearts sufficiently conceive
thereof. We never saw those Marian and bloody days, wherein for the people of
God to have been acquainted with the Vid. Regist. Ioh. Lo^gland. Epis. Lincol.
apud Fox. fo. 822. and seq.
Gospel and word of God, was Haeresie, not to have fallen down before the
Calfe, and adored the Beast, was no less then fire and Faggot, and what else
the rage and fury of that beast could add unto it.

We never felt nor knew those Antechristian, and more then barbarous
Inquisitions, Vid. Reginal. Gonsal. lib. de Sanct. Inquis. Hispa. crtibus and
Emaen. Metar. hist. Belg. lib. 234.
to the tyranny and inexpressible torments whereof, the Bull of Phalar^s, the
Alter of Busiris, and those primitive persecutions under Heathen Tyrants, were
almost but Ludus and iocus; Death it self, even a pleasure to the rage of that
beast, which needs not learn of Caligula, Sueton. in vit. Calig. cap. 30.
I^a feri vt sentiat se mori, torment them so, that they may sensibly feel
death, and yet not die.

And yet all this is as nothing to their spiritual bondage. They may not buy,
Ap. 13, 16 17
nor sell, nor live, nor breath, unless they receive the mark of the beast.
They may not teach Trid. sinod s^ss. 25. de resor. cap. 2
ought, they may not believe Non alij in numero fidelium habentur, nisi qui per
verbum Apostolorum. 1. ecclesiae, magistrorum qui ipsis successerunt,
crediderint. Stapi l. 8. doctrine. prin^ cap. 10. pa. 287.
ought, no not so much as the Scriptures Scripturae traditio, and omnia plane
dogmata, a testimo^io ecclesiae pendent. Bellar lib. de Eccles. milit. cap.
10.. Adh^c. and Ecclesiam interpretantur Papam. Non abnno. Gretz. Defens.
Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 10. pa. 1451. et Mentitur Caluinista. Per ecclesiam enim
(quando dicimus Ecclesiam esse omniu^ controuersiarum fidei. iudicem)
intelligimus Pontisicem Romam^m, qui pr^ tempore prasens ecclesiam gubernat.
ibid. pa* 1450.
to be the word of God: no, not that there is a God, unless the Beast say so,
and what soever the Beast says, that without all scruple must be received as
an Oracle Papa cum totam ecclesiam docet in his quae ad fidem pertinent nulio
casu ^rrare potest. Dellar. lib. 4. de pontif. Romans cap. 3.
of God, and an undoubted Article of their Faith.

Consider but in one point what themselves do teach and profess, concerning
Rome, which is the Sea of that Beast. They cannot endure Bell. lib. 3. de P^nt.
To. ca. 13
to hear it called the seat of Antichrist, but yet they willingly profess,
and foundly prove Rome to be that Babylon, Io^annes in A^ocalipsi pass^m Roman
^cat Bab^io (...). Bell. l^b. 2. de p^ntif. Romans cap. 2.. praeterea et Johannes
Apoc. 17. dicit december (...) habitu ro^ pu^puratam (...), id est, (...) Bellar.
lib. 3. de (...) Romans (...). 1. Secun (...). Ego non (...) argument. (...), vt
(...), c^nseci (...) noms ne Roman iudic^ri in Epist. Petri, and in (...).
R^bera (...) com meant. in cap. 14. Apoc. pa. 374.
whereof S. John prophesies; that very Babylon I say, which is the Apoc. 17. 5.
Mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, which Apoc. 18* 3.
has made all Nations drink of the wine of her fornications, and her self is
drunk Apoc. 17, 6.
with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, whose destruction and utter
desolation is fore-shewed by the Apostle. Apoc. cap. 14, 8. et ^ap. ^8, 2.
Thus much themselves profess and prove concerning Rome.

Now, though some of Dici potest et melius, per meretri^em intell^gi Roman, sed
Romam Eth^icam, (...). Idola colentem, and C^ristianos persequentem, non autem
Roman Christianam. Bella^* li^. 3. de pont. Romans ca. ^3, Secundo, and by
Babylon is signified, partly the whole societ^ of the wicked, partly the City
of Rome, only in respect of the Terrene and Hea^ S^ate of them that persecuted
the Church. The. Test. annot. in cap. 17. Apoc. 5.
them, very childishly indeed, have supposed only the old and Heathnish Rome,
to be meant thereby; yet who fo pleases to read Ribera the Jesuit, in his
Commentary upon the 14. of the Revelation, shall see him by many evident and
undeniable demonstrations, declare and prove; first, Rome to be that very
Babylon (...) quae casara praedicitur mat^r fornicationum* Rome quidem est,
Riber ^bid pa. 377.
where of Saint John speaks; and secondly, even that Rome Babylon est illa
Roma, superstitionum et imp^etatu^ author et conseruatrix, idolatriae princeps,
scelerum omnium sentina C^ristiani nominis hostis teterrima, sanctoru^
persequutrix atque interfectrix, qualis sub ethnicis Imperatoribus olim fa^t,
and qualis in fine saeculis futurae est. Riber. ibid. pa. 378.
to be Babylon, which shall remain near unto the end of the world. Of his
large Treatise, let me allege some few words of his. Quoniam dubium non est;
because (says he) Rib. ibid. pa. 382.
there is no doubt, but that Babylon is the very shop and Storehouse of al
Idolatry, and of all wickedness: If we have already proved (as before he had)
Rome to be Babylon, dubitari non potest, quin Roma prope finem saeculi haec
omnia habitura sit, it cannot be doubted, but that Rome toward the end of the
world, shall leave all these; to wit, all Idolatries, and all abominations.
And again, that Rome shall be Rib. ib. p. 381
burned and consumed with a mighty fire, not only for her old sins, when it
was Heathnish, but for those also, which in Extremis illis temporibus
co^missura est.
the last times it shall commit, Ad^o perspicue cognoscimus. We know it (says
he) so evidently by the words of this Reu^lation, Vi ne stultis^imus quidem
negare possit, that the veriest fool cannot deny it. And yet their great
Cardinal Bellarmine and the Rhemistes, blush not to deny it; whose sentence
and doom, their own Jesuit has (as you see) pronounced. And then citing the
words of the Apostle, Apoc. 18. 2.
Babylon the great City is fallen, which has made all Nations drink of her
fornications; he adds, Rib. page 381.
Haec qui leget, who so reads these things, may think them to be spoken of
those, who lived before S. Ioha, or in his time; and this is true: but they are
also spoken of those, qui extremo mundi tempore (...), and cum ea
fornicabuntur, who shall live (at Rome) in the last time of the world, and
commit fornication with her. Whereof he gives a clear proof out of the
Apostle, Apoc. 18. 19
The Merchants and lovers of Babylon (that is, of Rome) shall weep and wail,
and say; Alas, alas, the great City in one hour is made desolate, Vtrum illi
lugebunt; whether (says Ribera) Rib. ibid. vt supra.
shall they lament thus, which are dead a thousand years since and more, An qui
tunc viuent et videbunt fumum incendij eius? Or they, who shall then live,
(when Rome is consumed) and shall see the smoke of her fire? Ex quo manifest
p^rspicitur, by which it is manifestly perspicuous, that the sins which Rome
shall perpetrate in the last times, shall be altogether like those, which it
committed under the Heathen Emp^rors; that is, as himself Rib. pa. 383.
expounds it, there shall be then in Rome, Summa Idolatriae omnis, and
omnium peccatorum licentia, the greatest license or allowance of all Idolatry,
and of all sins, and so turned In nefarioru^ scelerum sentinam conuertetur.
Rib. p. 182.
into a very sink of nefarious mischiefs. Thus writes their own Jesuit
Ribera.

Seeing then it is not Rome Heathnish, which many hundreds of years since is
out of date, but that Rome which as yet is to fall, and to be burned with fire,
and which shall remain near to the end of the world, as Ribera truly does
demonstrate, which the spirit of God calls Babylon, and whose eternal
destruction is foreshewed by the Lord: Seeing again, as Bellarmine Bell. lib.
4. de pont. Romans ca. 4.
of purpose proves, and says, (...). Quod.
that it is Pia et probabilissima sententia, a pious and most probable
sentence, that Peter's chair cannot be separated or removed from Idem probari
potest ex eo, quod Deus ipse iussit Romae figi Apostolicam Petrisedem: quae
aute^ iubet Deus, mittari ab hominibus non possunt. Bellar. ibid.. secundo.
Rome, and that therefore the Roman Church, even the particular Church of Rome
absolute, Non possit (...) nec deficere, absolutely cannot err, not fail, nor
cease, but Rome shall continue Christian, yea Popish, professing their present
Popish Faith, unto the very end Neque obstat quod tempore Antichristi To ma
desolanda and cremanda videatur, vt d^ducitur ex cap. 17. Apoc. nam hoc non
fiet nisi iu ^ine (...). Bell. ibid.. accedit.
and destruction thereof: which by the calculation of this worthy
Prognosticator, must precisely fall out within three Antichristus non
apparebit, neque regnare incipiet nisi tribus annis cum dimidio ante finem
mundi. Bell lib. 3. de Pont. Romans ca. 9. Denique* and Antichristus odio habebit
Roman and cum ea pugnabit, eam^ de solabit and ince^det. ibid. cap. 13 Tertio.
years and an half of the end of the world: It is hence evidently and
ineuitably consequent, that the present Popish Rome, professing their present
Popish Faith, from which, as the Cardinal says, it shall never fail nor fall
away, is that very same Babylon, which is the mother of Idolatries and all
abominations, and which shall most undoubtedly receive those judgments of
desolation and eternal condemnation from the Lord.

What a woeful and miserable thing is it then, to be a Papist, a member of the
Church of Rome, or (which is all one) of Babylon? Especially, seeing God
himself has foretold, Apocalipse 18, 4. that they who partake of her sins,
shall receive also of her plagues. And again, Apocalipse 14, 9, 10. If any
receive the mark of the Beast, (that is subjection unto him) the same, unless
he repent Apoc. 18, 14
and go out of Babylon, shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, and be
tormented in fire and Brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.

Think now with your selves, what a blessing and happiness we do all enjoy,
who under the most Religious reign of our Sovereign, are freed and secured
from that Iron, and more then Babylonish Captivity: who in abundance of peace
and tranquillity, live to serve God in Bethel, and at JERUSALEM, in the house of
God and City of peace, not in BETH-AVEN, not in BABYLON, in the house of
vanity, of confusion and utter desolation.

Let me say yet one thing more: whereas the Spirit of God has foretold,
Apoc. 17, 16*
that sundry Kings and Kingdoms loathing and detesting the abominations and
Idolatries of Babylon, which is confessed to be Rome, shall not only forsake
the Whore, but hate her, and make her desolate and naked, and burn her with
fire; which Prophecy is in part begun ^reui occupa^ (Lutheri (...)) non
solu^ multa reg na in partibus septent^ionalibus, sed etiam vs^ ad Indos
excurrere ausa est B^l l^b. 3 de Pont Romans cap. 23. simili^udo. and Nostris
semporibu^ Romana seeds magnam Germaniae partem amis^t, Suetia^, Gothiam,
Norwegiam, Dania vntuersam bona^ Angliae, Galliae, Hei^etiae, Poloniae,
Bohemiae, ac (...) partem. Bell lib. od. cap. 21.. At postea.
to be fulfilled, but in due time shall be fully accomplished. Though I am no
Prophet, nor son of a Prophet, that I can divine, yet as one of those who
expect and pray for the performance of Gods promise, and full deliverance of
all his people, from that miserable thraldom, Apoc 6, 10.
crying; How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge our blood. It may
well I say be hoped, considering the piety, Zeal, and magnanimity of our most
Religious Sovereign, that either himself, or some of his most happy and
Religious offspring, shall be the very General, the first and chief Leaders
of the Armies of the Lord of Hoastes against Babylon, and so not only give
cause to all the people of God, with endless joy to sing that triumphant song
for the ruin thereof foretold by the Apostle. Apoc. 18, 20. O heaven rejoice
of her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets rejoice, for God has given your
judgment of the Whore; but purchase also to themselves, that blessing and
happiness, which God has promised, d and will undoubtedly perform to the
ruinaters and destroyers thereof. O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery,
happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have served us, Blessed shall he
be which takes thy children, and dasheth them against the stones.

To this blessing of Piety and Religion, let me adioyne another of nearest
affinity, and which is also a special means to continue the former happiness
unto us; to wit, the peaceable and happy settling of the Ecclesiastical
government and affairs of our Church.

Would to God that tumult in the Church, might never be remembered, but buried
in eternal oblivion, which the new Donatists of this age have made: who In hoc
tota est controuersia quod putent null lamibi esse ecclesiam vbi haec politia
non est c^nstituta, aut non eo quo decet modo exercetur: nec illic homini
Christians licere caenam recipere, eoque praetextu sese ab eccle^ijs segregant
in quibus verbum Dei pure annunciatur, volentes and inquiunt eius pollutionis
participes esse, qua commaculantur ij, qui flagitiosos and sceleratos non
relegant. Cal^in. Institut. aduers. Anabap. Artic. 2. pa. 576. and duae fuerunt
haereticorum sectae, alteri Cathaeci, id est Puri, alteri Donatistae, vtrique
in eode^ errore fuerunt, quo isti somniatores, Eccl^siam quaerentes in qua
nihil possit desiderari. ibid. p. 581. For So Much as these assemblies stand in a
false constitution, even in Apostasy, it is as clear as the Sun, that all
men ought upon pain of damnation without delay, to depart out of them. Franc.
John's. Treatise of the Minist. of England, whether it be to be separated from
or no. page 62. None may have any spiritual communion therewith. Ibid. page
105. Their Church Assemblies are not congregations of faithful men, but a
confusion o^ all manner of people (though never so wicked and profane) holds
of all soul spirits. Fr. (...). ans. to H. Iac. Except. 1. pa. 6. They are not
to be judged true Christians, nor ^rue constituted Churches of Christ. ibid.
pa. 23. And that name of Conuenticles is to light and contemptuous for those
meetings (of them of the Separation) for therein is to be considered for what
cause they departed which was, through the mislike of that which Antichrist had
brought in. T. C. Reply 2. to B. Whitg. page 38. and the government,
ministry, offices, and ceremonies in England, are contrary to Gods word:
simply evil. Hen. lac lib. 4. assertion, dedicated to King James, An. 1604 pa.
1. and 4. and seq. and Whet^al pa. 66. 67. ^8.
like those Insinuabo secundum Apostolum, quod ecclesia mea rugas and maculas
sola non habeat, ait Fulgentius August. lib contra Fulg. Donatist. art. 15.
in Saint Austens time can abide no spot nor wrinckle in the Church: who cry
unto others; Depart, Isa. 52. 11. Ille non intelligens illa verba Isaiae ad sui
erroris sententia^ detorqueri conatur, Recedite, reced^te, etc. August lib 3.
cont. ep. parm. cap 4. Every one must be an hee-Goat before the rest to lead
them out. Fr. John. treat of the Minist. pa. 66.
depart ye, go out from thence, and touch no unclean thing, or stand Isay. 65 5.
apart, and come not near us, we are holier then you; and who glorying, as S.
Austen Aust. lib. 3. cont. epist. tarm. cap. 1.
shows in these words of the Apostle. I Cor. 5. 13.
Take away evil from among you, Ad sacrilegium scismatis, and occasionem
praecisionis vsurpant: They abuse those Apostolical words, to make a Scisme,
which is Sacrilege, and for an occasion of Praecision, of cutting off, and
seperating themselves from the true Church of God, which by a late learned man
Tametsi vitae plusquam angelicae speciem prae nobis feramus, tamen si tali
audacia nos sepa^mus a Christiano caetu, fimus Diaboli. Call. Inst. aduer. Anab.
art. 2. page 582.
is condemned for Diabolical, though otherwise a man live an Angelical life.

But alas, it is too apparent to the world, and the church which has felt the
smart thereof, has grieved and groned to see her own children, whom she has
nourished, and tenderly brought up, to rebel against her, and with Corah,
Dathan and Abyram, to go apart, and make a faction against Moses and Aaron, and
with disdainefull insolency to say Number. 16, 3.
unto them, Moses and Aaron, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
congregation is holy, wherefore lift ye up your selves above the congregation
of the Lord.

Nay though the Church out of the tenderness of a mothers compassion, would
willingly cover and conceal all these wrongs, yet are they too well known in
Gath, and published in the streets of Askalon; and the uncircumcised Philistims
by these men's occasion, have and do daily blaspheme the name of God, and his
glorious truth and Gospel, which we do profess: who rejoicing in our
discordes, and saying among themselves; There, there, so would we have it, do
even laugh and triumph, to see how those who should have turned their edge
against Amalecke and Babylon, the enemies of the Lord, have bin most sharply
whetted, and seditiously backed also, to wound their own mother; and those,
who in the church are like Eliah, 2. King. ^, 11
the very Chariots and Horsemen of Israel.

It is not my purpose at this time to entreat, either of the dignity, or of the
Divine and Sacred authority of those most reverend Fathers of the Church,
which in another very learned and Academicall assembly, I have some years
Praelect. I. in epist. ad Tit. Oxon. I. Iul. 1605.
since at large demonstrated, to have an assured and undeniable warrant, not
only from all antiquity and the renowned practice of the whole Primitive
Church, but even from the Apostles themselves, and from the divine institution
and ordinance of the Lord.

Nor is it my purpose at this time, to make evident unto you, how that
Imperious, nay rather Imperial, presbiteriall Consistory, which those new
builders had fancied; besides that, it wants all ground of Scripture and of
Antiquity, is in truth, and in experience would prove, a very Seminary of
sedition, and a Sanctuary to every turbulent and seditious Gracchus, both in
Church and kingdom. Nor was it possible, that a fancy so repugnant to
Scriptures, Fathers, and all Antiquity, so contrary to the peace and
Tranquillity both of Church and kingdom, could ever have found like
entertainment, if the maintainers and abetters thereof had not bin guided, nay
blinded with two most dangerous affections both for Church and Commonwealth,
affectation of Singularity, and of Popularity.

That which I would only mention at this time, is the great blessing, which by
the happy means of our Solomon we now enjoy; who seeing, and grieuing to see a
rent in Gods Church, himself like Psalm. 106, 30
Phinees, stood in the gap, and with more then Princely Clemency and
Moderation, made up the breach, appeased those affairs, and removed that shame
and reproach from Israel, which the unquietness of contentious spirits, had
brought upon it. Who being wise as the Angel of the Lord, according to the
abundance of that admirable and Divine wisdom, wherewith God has
extraordinarily filled his Royal heart, has firmly settled and established
the Ark of the Lord upon those holy Mountains of Sion, on which, even from
the most pure and primitive days of the Church, and from the Apostles
themselves it had ever rested. Which if their fancy might have prevailed, had
long since not only been removed from Sion, but placed also as did the
Philistims place it. 1. Sam. 6, 11. most basely and totteringly, and
disgracefully even set upon a Cart.

In the happy establishing whereof, though some few as the Eckronites 1. Sath.
5* 10, 12.
have bin justly smitten of the Lord, because they neither had right, nor bare
sincere love to the Ark of God, whose cure also has been sought, and that
with most tender and fatherly care and compassion: but such is the zeal of
opposition, and predominancy of Popularity and contentious humors, that by no
demonstrations of reason will they be persuaded, no, not when they are indeed
persuaded; by no authority will they be mo^ed, no, not by that Sacred and
Sovereign, which God himself has appointed in many of those affairs, to be
the very Canon and rule of right: though some few of these, I say, may repine
heereat, yet shall it ever be the honor, yea, the felicity and safety also of
our Sovereign, to have those holy Aarons to support his Princely hands: and
this shall ever be reckoned as a special, and as it is in truth, even a rare
blessing of God upon this Church and Kingdom, by all those, whosoever not in
show, but in sincerity and truth, wish to see peace in Sion, and prosperity in
Jerusalem.

I must in silence pass by many other and great blessings, which by the means
of our SOLOMON, are heaped upon us. But let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I forget that one most memorable happiness, which we all received
by him on that fifth of November. That one day shall be for ever a most
glorious. Tro* haeum, and everlasting Monument, both of his most blessed and
unspeakable Wisdom, and of the infinite blessings which by him we have all
received. By it, we enjoy not only our Goods, our Lands, our Livings, our
Liberty, our Religion; but even this, that we live and breath this day, we owe
it to him, and to his wisdom.

It was not the Love nor Loyalty of his, though most loving and Loyal
Subjects, which prevented that sudden and secret blow, that should at once have
dispatched and blown up all. It was not the Prudence and vigilancie of those
thrice-Noble woorthies of King David; the Golden pillars of Israel, though a
most wise, and a most Honorable Senate. All may, and all willingly do
disclaim the praise of that day. The whole honor of that most wonderful, and
withal, most happy deliverance, must be given first to thee, O most glorious,
and most gracious God, and next after thee to thine anointed alone. Thou did
fill his heart, as thou did sometime the heart of thy holy Prophet Daniel, with
wisdom from above to Dan. I. 21. 22
Discover the deep and secret things, and to know what is in darkness. And
he being full of thy Spirit, to the endless comfort of this Empire, and of all
his loiall subjects, discovered indeed that dark and secret speech, that
dark and secret Vaut, that dark, secret, and hellish treason, and so kept off
that imminent blow, which would have proved fatal to him, to us, and to all
his kingdoms.

The happiness of that day, and of thy wisdom (O gracious King) our
Histories and Chronicles shall commend, our Laws and Statutes shall record to
all eternity. Every City, Town, and Village, every Church in this Land, every
degree of thy people, from the tallest Caeder, to the very Shrubbe, shall sing
and sound forth thy Noble praise. And as the Israelites did Zach. 12, 12, 13.
in honor of Josiah, every Tribe and family shall praise thee apart, and their
Wives apart: The royal and princely Tribe of Judah shall praise thee apart, and
the holy Tribe of Levy shall praise thee apart: The Nobility shall praise thee
apart: the Gentry and Commons shall praise thee apart: The Students of
a^professions shall praise thee apart: the Men of War, and the Men of Peace
shall praise thee apart: yea, every House, and every Family throughout all
Israel shall praise thee apart.

We in this age will speak of thy praise to our Children, and our Children, to
their Childrens Children, unto all generations. And if it were possible that we
or our posterity could be silent herein, yet the Magnificent and princely
buildings and Monumentes, in these two famous and renowned Cities, the very
wood and walls of these houses, and stones in these streets, even with their
dumb eloquence, would sing aloud, and sound forth thy Noble praise: all which
in their kinds are pertakers of that happiness, which under thee, and by thee,
we then all received.

Judge now with your selves, if besides many and great blessings which I have
purposely omitted, for these so great and indeed inualuable blessings which by
the happy means of our SOLOMON we do enjoy, we may not all most justly say to
him, as did the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon: [ Happy O King are thy people,
and happy are thy Servants.]

Shall I further here add, whereof this Queen is silent in that King of
Israel, that the wisdom of our SOLOMON is an happiness, not only to his own
people and Subjects, but even to strangers also? The gracious beams there of
like those of the Sun, spreading themselves to far and foreign Countries;
yea, to the utmost Coasts of this and the other world.

To omit many other and evident proofs hereof, even that which being the
chief, if time would suffer ought not to be omitted, that with such constancy
and zeal, himself holds forth a glorious Lamp of Piety, and true Religion
unto all Christian Kings and kingdoms, performing herein that which Gods
spirit has noted Eccle. 12. 9.
as the greatest part of wisdom, the more wise the King was, the more he
taught them knowledge, and caused them to hear: But omitting these, let the
honorable expedition now happily intended for Virginea be a witness:
enterprised, I say not auspicijs, but by the most wise and religious direction
and protection of our chiefest Pilot, seconded by so many honorable and worthy
personages in this State and kingdom, that it may justly give encouragement
with alacrity and cheerfulness for some to undertake, for others to further
so noble and so religious an attempt. I may not stay in this straightnes of
time, to mention, much less set forth unto you, the great and manifold
benefits which may redound to this our so populous a Nation, by planting an
English Colony in a Territory as large and spacious almost as is England, and
in a soil so rich, fertile, and fruitful, as that besides the sufficiencyes
it naturally yealds for it self, may with best conuenience, supply some of the
greatest wantes and necessities of these Kingdoms. Of these and such like
particulars I will not now entreat, though I could commend them by more then
ordinary and vulgar report unto you.

But that happiness which I mentioned, is an happy and glorious work
indeed, of planting among those poor and savage, and to be pitied
Virginians, not only humanity, instead of brutish inciuility, but Religion
also, Piety, the true knowledge and sincere worship of GOD, where his name is
not heard off: and reducing those to Faith and salvation by Christ* who as yet
in the blindness of their Infidelity and superstition, do offer Sacrifice,
yea, even themselves unto the Devil.

This being the Religious and honorable intendment of this enterprise, what
glory shall hereby redound unto God? What Honor to our Sovereign? What
comfort to those his Subjects, who shall be the means or furtherers of so
happy a work, not only to see a new BRITAIN in another world, but to hear
also those, as yet Heathen, Barbarous, and Brutish people, together with our
English, to learn the speech and language of Canaan: and next after their
Hymns and Alleluia^es unto God, to sound forth the honor and happiness of
our Sovereign; not only saying with this Queen of Sheba, Happy are thy
people, and thy Subjects, but happy are we and others, that were strangers to
you; yea strangers and aliants to God, happy are we by thee, and by thy
wisdom.

And this be spoken of the second general point, which concerns the people
and their happiness, by having Solomon a wise and prudent King to rule over
them.

The third general point concerns almighty God, and contains a thanksgiving
to him, for setting Solomon a wise King to rule over his people. Blessed be
the Lord thy God which set thee on his Throne.

The acknowledgement in this Queen, of the true God of Israel, of his Divine
providence, and omnipotent power in placing Solomon in his own Throne; of his
goodness and love to Israel, whom he would establish for ever; of his
righteousness, in that he would have his people governed by Justice and
Judgment; specially this her Religious thanksgiving unto God, for this
blessing bestowed on his people; all these are so many evident demonstrations
of her true knowledge of God, of her love to God, and Gods Children, of her
sincere Piety, and Religious serving of God; and that though by Nature she was
a Gentile, and aliant from God, yet was she by his special grace one of those
Primitiae gentium, which were ingrafted into the true Olive, and made pertakers
of the fatness thereof, and of those heavenly blessings stored up in Jesus
Christ.

But I purposely omit all these particulers. The only point which I would now
commend unto you is, what a motive and provocation this ought to be for us
all, to laud and magnify the Lord, for placing so wise and Religious a King
over us and all these kingdoms.

King Solomon was but a stranger to this Queen, who yet as you see is so
thankful to God: He so far from being a stranger to us, that we may say as
did the Tribes of Israel to King David. 2. Sam. 5, 1. We are thy bones, and thy
flesh.

She being but a soiourner for a very short time in that kingdom, could not
long partake the benefit of his instructions, nor of peace and protection by
his Justice and Judgment: But we from our SOLOMON, receive continual
influence of his Divine both Sacred and Political Wisdom, continual
protection under his sacred shield, continual tranqu^lity under his most just,
equal, and wholesome Laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil: How much more then
should our mouths be filled with praises and blessings unto the Lord our God?
And how Religiously should we say as she did; Blessed be the Lord thy GOD,
which loved thee, to set thee on his Throne.

I doubt not, but for these blessings of the Lord, often times in your private
houses and Chambers, ye sing Hymns and Psalms with a grace in your hearts
unto the Lord. But because for these public and extraordinary blessings, GOD
looks for public and extraordinary praises at our hands; because we are now
assembled in this place, as at the Temple of Jerusalem, of purpose to offer the
sweet Sacrifice and Incense of our lips unto God, and this day both before
men and Angels, to testify our thanksgiving unto God, our love and* loyalty
to our Sovereign. Let every one of you provoke and stir up another, and
suffer me as one of the Trumpeters of the Lord to excite us all, and stir up
your prepared hearts, and Religious affections, for all and every of these
blessings, to laud and magnify the glorious name of God, and if it be
possible, by some extraordinary strain of our united thanks, to pierce the
very skies, and give an echo to those Celestial Quires, singing Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, honor, and praise, and glory, be unto God, and to the Lamb for
evermore.

First, for that abundance of our continued and happy peace, let us say with
the Prophet, Psa. 147, 12, 13.
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Sion, for he has made fast
the bars of thy gates, and blessed thy children within thee: He makes peace
in thy borders, and fills thee with the flower of Wheat.

For establishing together with this peace, his holy Temple and Sanctuary among
us, and in it the true and sincere worship of his holy name, O that we could
express the like joy, as did the Israelites for their Temple which Solomon
built and established among them! All the congregation assembled therein, the
Levites and singers of all sorts, of Asaph, Heman, and Ieduthun, being clad in
fine Linen, stood with Cimbals, with Vyols, and with Harpes, at the East end
of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twenty Priests blowing with
Trumpets, and they were all but as one man, and made but one sound to be heard
in praising the Lord. 2. Chron. 5, 12, 13. But because the pomp and beauty of
the second Temple, is even as nothing to the first, let us yet with the best
Trumpets of our hearts and tongues, and with all our most solemn Instruments
of music, sing that Psalm of Thanksgiving, which they then did unto God;
Praise the Lord, for he is good, and his mercy indureth for ever. Praise the
Lord.

Like joy and thanksgiving let us all show for the Ark of the Lord, which by
the means of our SOLOMON, according to Gods own ordinance is established on
those holy Mountains of Sion, of which the Lord has said, Here will I
dwell, for I have a delight therein.

Yea, let us for these blessings, not only sing and rejoice, but with the
Kingly Prophet, 2 Samuel 6. 14. 15.
even shoute, and dance with all our might before the Lord. For which,
howsoever some Michols of Babylon, or of the house of Saul, shall scoff and
scorn, and tauntingly say unto us. O how glorious are you for the Temple, and
for the Arc this day! yet this is our comfort, and shall for ever be our
honor, that in uprightness of heart, we can truly say with that man of God:
It is before the Lord, who has chosen us, and not your Fathers house, and who
has commanded us to rule over the people of God: and therefore will we sing,
and play, and dance; yea, and be more vile also then thus before the Lord.
And even of those maide-seruants of Israel, of whom you spoke, that is, of the
holy Church of God, shall we be had in honor. But for those scoffing Michols of
the rejected house of Saul, and those blaspheming Rabsekaes of Assyria, they
shall be as chafe scattered before the Wind, and as dung swept away from the
presence of the Lord, and from the face of the earth.

But what can we render unto God, or say unto him for that most rare and
wonderful deliverance? Let us say with the Israelites, after the like
delivery from the Jaws of Pharaoh and the red sea. Exodus 15, ver. 1, 2, 11. We
will sing unto the lord, for he has triumphed gloriously. Who is like unto
thee O Lord; glorious in holiness, fearful in praises and doing wonders: the
lord is my strength and praise, and is become my salvation: he is my God, and I
will praise him* he is my fathers God, and I will exalt him. Or let us sing
that Psalm Psalm. 124.
of the whole Church. If the Lord himself had not been on our side, may
Israel now say. They had swallowed us up quick when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us. The Waters; nay, the raging Fires had devoured us, the flames
had gone over our soul. Praised be the Lord, which has not given us over for
a prey unto their teeth.

Lastly, for all these, and for all other the blessings of the Lord;
specially, for his Sacred Majesty, under whom, and by whom we live, and live
to enjoy them all; let us with one heart and mind sing that last Psalm of the
Prophet: O praise God in his holiness, praise him in the firmament of his
power; praise him in his Noble acts, praise him according to his excellent
greatness: Praise him in the sound of the Trumpet, praise him upon the Lute
and Harp, praise him in the Cimbals and Daunces, praise him upon the strings
and Pipe: praise him upon the well-tuned Cimbals, praise him upon the loud
Cimbals. Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord.

And this be spoken of the thanksgiving to God, for placing Solomon a wise
King over his people.

In this Thanksgiving, we before observed two particular Branches. The former
was, from whom King Solomon had and held his kingdom. Of which it is here
showed, that he had it neither from the Priest, nor from the people, but
immediately from God; and therefore, it is expressly here said, [ God made
thee King over Israel and He set thee on the Throne] not the Priest, not the
people, but God made him King, and God set him on the Throne. For further
evidence whereof, it is here added that Solomon was set in the Throne, neither
of the Priest, nor of the people, but he was set in Gods own Throne, as King,
and set there in Gods steed, as one immediately represeuting Gods own person
among them, and being his immediate Vicegerent, or Lieutenant over all Israel.

To this purpose, the Scriptures, not only in general call Kings the
Ministers or Lieutenants of God, Romans 13, 4. and says, that God sets up Kings
and gives kingdoms, Daniel 2. 21. 37. but particularly also notes this
immediate designment of God in many of them: as of David, The Lord chose him to
be King, and delighted in him to make him King over all Israel. 1. Chron. 28,
4. Of Saul, The Lord has anointed thee to be Governor over his inheritance,
1. Sam. 10. 1. Of Hasael and Iehu, God said unto the Prophet, anoint Hasael
King over Aram, and Iehu shall thou anoint King over Israel, 1. King. 19, 15.
and to omit others of Solomon, whom our Text mentions: God chose Solomon to
sit upon the Throne, and he said of Solomon; I will stablish his Kingdom for
ever. 1. Chron. 28, 5, 7.

The describer Author libelli, cui inscripti^: Breuis n^rratio quomodo Henricus
4. Fra^* ^c Nauar. Rex apud Clem. 8. humiliter per legatos egerit, ac s^pius
s^pplex factus, tandem h^reseos, absolutionem obtinuerit. Anno. 1596.
of the victory and glorious tryumphe, as he Ide^ Author, pa. 3. De authoritate
and potentia Romans Pontificis, victoriaque Clementis 8. de Henrico 4. Gloriose
triumpl^a^tis.
calls it, which Pope Clement 8. got over Henry 4. The present French King, at
his unhappy revolt and subjection to the Man of sin, among other Pageants of
that triumph tells us, that whereas some curious French Politicians (as he Quod
nugantur huius aetatis plus satis curiosi Politici Galli. Ibid.
terms them) do maintain, the King to Suum imperium immediate a Deo
obt^nere, ibid.
hold his Kingdom immediately from God, that this H^beatur res maxim ridicula
Romae: Is at Rome accounted a ridiculous, Nay, a most ridiculous matter.

Indeed it is no news nor marvel, that the sacred truth of God should be
blasphemed, and made a very jest and laughing-stocke at Rome, which is the
Mother of abominations, as themselves Babylon quae casura praedicitur, Babylon
meretrix purpurata, Babylon matter fornicationu^ et abhominationu^ terrae, Roma
quide^ est. Riber. Jesuit. in ca. 14. Apoc. pa. 377
profess, and which has a Name of Blasphemy Apoc. 17. 5. In front
me^etricis scriptum est nomen *bl^spbemiae, id est, Romae aeternae Hierom. ad
Algas. quest 11. As for his behavior who now raig^eth, I have seen him and
considered, of him. having upon his head a triple Crown where is written upon
his forehead in precions stones the word Mystery. A Christian Declaration of
Fran. Breton, a Monk of the Celestines, publicly made at Vendosm Ianu. 28.
1601.
in her forehead, and has enlarged her mouth to blaspheme God and his
Tabernacle. Where if any Doctrine distaste the Beast, or want his allowance, not
this only, and such like sacred truths, but even the sacred Scriptures
themselves shall be made a jest, and no better esteemed then are Aesops
Fables, as you may perceive both by Car linall Hosius, Scripturas valere
quantum A^sopi fabulas, si (...) authoritate Ecclesiae: potuit illud pio sensu
di^i, etc. Etiam quae pie dict^ esse scis in sensu n impium deto^ques. Hosius
de author sacr. scrip. lib. 3. co^tr. B^ent. Proleg. sol. 148.
and by Gretzer, Quod quidem Wo^fangus Hermanus dixit, Scripturas tantum
valerequa^tum valent Aesop^ sabulae nisi accedat ecclesiae testim ^iam ^o^ a
leo absurd dictum est vt mereatu^ stigmati illo muri. O impium and blasphemum
os. Loquitur enim etc. Iaco^. Gretz. Append. 2. ad lib. 1. Bellar. pa. 396.
the late defender of Bellarmine, the most scurrile Writer that this or the
former Age has seen; who shames not to excuse that very speech and
comparison, from falsity, from impiety, and from blasphemy.

But howsoever this Doctrine be by the Romanists Be^lar. lib. de laicis. ca. 5.
and Rhemist. Tes^a^. annot in 1. Pet. 2. 13.
condemned, and in these days counted at Rome most ridiculous, yet both in it
self it is most sacred, being grounded as you have seen upon the word of
God, and as most sacred has it been esteemed in the primative Church, among
the ancient Fathers, and godly Writers of all Ages.

It was most sacred in the days of Tertullian, who lived in the next age to
the Apostles. In his Book Ad Scapulam, ca. 2. Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a
Deo secundum, et quicquid est a Deo consequutum, and solo Deo minorem* We
Christians (says he) do honor the Emperor as a Man, next or immediate unto
God, inferior to none but God, and whatsoever he has (in respect of his
Imperial authority) he has it from God. And again, most excellently in his
Apologeticall against the Gentiles, Cap. 30. Christians (says he) do know,
who it is that gives the Empire unto Caesar's; even God alone: In cuius solius
potestate su^t, under whose only power and authoriry they are: a quo sunt
secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes and supra omnes Deos, atque Super omnes
Deos. quidem? cum super omnes homines, qui vtique viu^nt et mortuis antistant.
homines: From which God, Emperors are the second, after whom they are the
first; before all, and above all other, both Gods and living men. Inde est
Imperaetor, vnde est and homo antequam Imperator, inde potestas illi vnde et
spiritus: He makes him Emperor, who made him a man before he was Emperor; from
him he has his Scepter, from whom he has his Soul. What could be spoken
more divinely? What more eloquently? What more effectually for the imperial
authority of Kings, immediately and only derived from God, immediately
depending of God, and of (...) Sentiunt eum Deum esse solu^.
God alone? And all this was spoken in those ancient and primitive days of the
Gospel, not in the person of Tertullian only, but as the judgment and just
defense of all the Christians, and of the Church, as at that time; yea, even of
the whole Church of R^me it self, then Catholic and Apostolical, where
Tertullian lived and writ this, though the very same Doctrine in the present
Apostaticall, Antichristian, and Babylonish Rome be made a very jest, and
accounted as you have heard a most ridiculous matter.

It was sacred to Optatus, Bishop of Meliuis, who in his 3. Book Page 85.
against Permenian, most divinely says: Super Imperatore^ non est nisi Deus
solus, qui s^cit Impera^ore^: there is none at all above the Emperor, but God
only who made the Emperor.

Sacred to S. Chrysostom, who speaking of Theodosius the great, in his 2.
Homily, ad Pop. Antioch says of him: Parem non habet vllum super terram,
summitas and caput omnium super terra^ hominu^: The Emperor has not his Peer
or equal upon earth, he is the highest, and head of al men upon earth.

Sacred to Saint Ambrose, who in his Apology of David Nullis legibus tenebatur
humanis. ca. 4. Rex. vtique era^ nullis ipse legibus tenebatur qui^ liberi sunt
Reges a vincul^s delictorum. ibid. ca 10.
says; that Kings are not subject, nor obnoxious to any human Laws, Tuti
Imperij potestate, being freed by the highness of their Imperial authority,
but yet they are subject to God, unto whom King David said: To thee only have I
sinned.

Sacred to S. Austen, who often says, August. lib. 4. de ciuit. d^i. ca. 33
that it is God who gives earthly Kingdoms, whether to good or bad: and when
kings command that which is good, Per illos non iubet nisi Christus, none
commands by them, but only Christ. Epist. 166. and yet had Kings depended on
any superior power, their commands should have been both Christ's, and his
also to whom they had been subject.

Sacred to their own Pope Gregory the first; great I confess for learning,
but in acknowledgement of this truth, which is now at Rome so ridiculous, far
greater. In his 2. Book of Epist. ca. 100. He thus writes of Mauritius the
Emperor. Potestas super omnes homines, dominorum meorum pietati caelitus data
est. First, he calls the Emperor his Lord, then he faith, power and authority is
given unto him, but from whom? Caelitus, even from GOD, and from Heaven. I, but
perhaps with a subordination or mediation of some other. No (says Pope
Gregory) it is given him above, and over all other persons whatsoever; and
therefore without any dependence of men, who are all inferiors to him, and so
immediately depending and derived from God, who alone (as this Pope truly
says) is above the Emperor.

Omitting the succession of other ages, let me adioyn to these, two other most
memorable examples, and of far later times: the one in the Roman, which is
elective; the other, in our English, which is an hereditary Kingdom.

About 300. years since, when some depressed the imperial authority, as
depending on some other besides God. Jews of Bauare then Emperor, not only by
his edict declared and proved, that the Empire was held a solo Imperator non
habet imperium a Papa s^d a solo Deo. Et concludit quod potestas imperialu est
immeditate a Deo Decret. Lud: Caesar* aduer. pont. buila^ apud Na^cler. an.
1338.
Deo, et immeditate a Deo; From God alone, and immediately from God, which out
of their own Canon Imperator habet priuilegia sua potestatis quae diuinit^s
co^sequutus est. Dict. 96. ca. Si Imperator. vbi glossa sic. ait. Diuinitus,
non ergo a Papa, nam imperium a solo Deo est. V^ 20. q. 3. ca quaesitum.
Law he further proves, as may be seen in the history of Nauclerus, upon the
year 1338. But further, Legem sanciuit, the Emperor made and published a law,
and that most deliberately; Omni ambiguitate per sacra^um literarum Antistites
mature solerterque discussa: all doubts and ambiguities being leisurably and
soundly discussed: some part of which imperial law being worthy not the reading
only or hearing, but ingrauing in golden letters upon the walls of our houses,
and posts of our doors, I have thought requisite to recite unto you.

De consi^io et consensu, By the counsel and consent of the Electors and other
Princes we declare: Imperialem dignitate^ et potestatem a solo D^o pendere,
That the Imperial dignity and authority depends only of God. And whosoever
shall presume to affirm, or consent to others, affirming ought against this
decree, we deprive them, and hereby do decree them iure et facto, both in
right, and indeed to be deprived of al their freeholds Omnibus feudi^.
or farms, and of all their privileges which they hold of the Empire, Et
insuper eos crim^n laesa Mai^statis incurrisse: And further we decree and
declare, such to have incurred the crime of high Treason, and to be subject to
all those punishments which are infflicted upon traitors.

These are the very words of that imperial Law, as you may see them set down,
and much more to this purpose. In Hieron* Balbus, one of their own Popish
Bishops, in his Book De Coronatione, dedicated unto Charles the fifth, the
Emperor. Page 39. and 40. of that Book.

The other Testimony is an Authentical record also of no less moment, and
somewhat of a later time. A statute made in the 16. year of King Richard 2.
Cap. 5. of purpose to keep sacred and inviolable the Soueraignety and Regality
of this Kingdom. It was therein declared, that the Crown of England has
been so free at all times (not then only, but which is specially to be
remembered at all times) that it has been in subjection to no Realm, but
Immediately subject to GOD, and to none other, in all things touching the
Regalty of the same. These are the words in that statute, besides diverse other
tending hereunto, In defense of which statute they in the Parliament then
assembled, promised to live and die, as it is there noted.

By all which it is evident, that this doctrine which now at Rome is counted
most ridiculous, is in it self most sacred, as being grounded on the scriptures
of God; and as most sacred has bin embraced by all the Christians in the
primitive Church; taught and maintained with a general consent by the ancient
and godly fathers in their several ages and successions: constantly defended
by whole kingdoms and Empires, and that under pain of high Treason to the
gainesayers thereof, even in those later times also, when superstition had
dimd, I confess, but not quite extinguished and put out the truth, and (which
is far worse) the love of the truth, as it may justly be feared, it has done
at this day in Rome, and in those of their sect, who to error and heresy have
added not only obstinacy, but blasphemy, like new Lucians scoffing the sacred
truth of God, accounting it a most a ridiculous matter.

May I with your patience proceed a little further in this argument, to consider
(which is in truth worthy your consideration; seeing these men will not allow
Kings and Emperors to hold immediately from God, which being the most
Honorable, is most fit to be a Regal Tenure) to whom else they would have
them be beholden, and to do homage and fealty for their Crowns and Kingdoms.

And to whom else think you but to the utter enemy of God, to that man of
sin, and son of perdition, who exalts himself indeed, as the Apostle 2.
These. 2. 4.
says, and whom they also have exalted above all: Exalting him first from a
Christian Bishop, to an Antichristian Pope, and then from a Pope or Pastor, to
a Temporal King and supreme Monarch of all, whose Sovereignty must be over al
Kings and people, and his Dominion over all Lands, goods, and possessions in
the whole world. Even of this man of sin, must all Kings hold their Crowns
and Kingdoms, and that in the most base and servile tenure that can be
devised, holding the^ as Tenants at will, Ex Pontificis mero fauore and gratia,
by the mere favor and good will of the Pope; as the vain Triumpher Breuis
narrat. victor. Clem. 8. de Hen. 4. gloriose triumpha^tis.
affirms of the Kingdom of France.

These to be their resolved positions, you may clearly perceive by Franciscus
Bozius, who professedly sets down, and undertakes, by the help of God and
Saint Peter, to prove thus much, Fr. Boz. lib. 1 de tempor. ecclesiae
Monarchiae ca. 3. p. 52.
Supremam iurisdictione^ temporalem esse penes Petri. successores ita vt idem
sit Hierarcha, et Monarcha in omnibus, that the supreme temporal jurisdiction
belongs to the Pope, so that he is both an Hierarch, and a Monarch x ibid.
cap. 20. pa. 210.
in all things: affirming Fr. Boz. lib. 1 de tempor. ecclesiae Monarchiae ca.
3. p. 52.
again his Arguments, to show that to the Pope belonges indeed the Supreme
temporal Monarchy, for which he entitles his Book, De Temporali Ecclesiae
Monarchio: By Rodulphus Cupers, who Cup. ^o^. ad ca. oportebat dinct. 79. pa.
43. nu. 39. merito censeatur, reque ipsa existat.
says, that the Pope is deservedly esteemed, and is indeed, Rex regum and
Dominus Dominantium, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and that Ibid. pa.
257 nu. 62.
the direct Dominion of the Empire belongs to God, and consequently to the
Pope, as being Gods Vicar, who permits (as he says) the power of the sword,
Cui libeat, to whom he lists. By Aug. Steuchus, lib. de donat. Constable.
who not only challenges Sovereignty Haec Romana sacro-sancta ecclesia
supremia^ absolutumque habet principatum ac potestatem. lib. 2. sol. 236.
and Dominion in many Kingdoms, as in right belonging to the Pope,
particularly ^u. Steu. lib. 2. fol. 237. and seq.
of Spain, Arragon, Portugal, England, France, Italy, Denmark, Hungaria,
Croatia, Dalmatia, Russia, Bohemia, Su^tia, Norwegia, and in a word, of ( Quid
superest in occidente sp. ape* te non sit sedis apost^licae?
) all the Western Kingdoms and Countries: but as if all this were too small a
Patrimony for the Pope, he adds; that this Quid plura prosequar vt comprobitur
retustissima^, ac fere omnipote^tem, ecclesiae To manae super omni bus regnis
ac regibus potestatem. Sten. ibid. fol. 238.
(as he calls it) most ancient, and almost Omnipotent power, is extended over
all Kings and Kingdoms, and that the Pope rules Totum orbem terrarum Imperij^
moderabantur habenas omni^m terrarum tenentes. ibid.
the whole world, and holds the reigns of al kingdoms, Steu. ibid. fol 238.
suffering other Kings and Emperors to reign, Modo Dominam ac reginam agnoscant
and fateantur, but with this condition, that they acknowledge and confess an
higher power or Sovereignty to be in the Pope. By the Romish Th^asonicall
Triumpher ( Brev. Nar. de Hen. 4 and Clem. 8.
before mentioned, who bragges that all Non est regnum in terra quod non est
obligatum huic sedi Apostolicae.
Kingdoms in the world are beholden to the Pope, because all do, or ought to
swear to defend his Sea. And to omit others, you may see this most largely in
Alexander Carerius, the late Nullo quidem labor sacilique negotio Bellarmini
ratio* ibus possimus satisfacere. Car. lib. 2. cap. 6.. Nullo. and Tertium
Corellarium a Bellarmino adiectum, iam fuit explosum, and infra dissusius
explodemus. ibid ca. 8.. Tertium.
controuler of Cardinal Bellarmine, in the second of those his Books, De
Potestate Romani pontificis, entitled by him against impious Polliticians and
Haeretickes of this time, but of purpose, and at large refuting, and that not
without scorn their own great Cardinal, his position and Reasons.

Carerius there tells us, that as Lib. 2. ca. 5.. Nec in.
God, so the Pope may be called a Temporal Lord and Monarch of the world, that
the Negatur quod Papa, vt papa non sit princeps. Car. lib. 2. ca. 8.. Assertio.
Ideo falsum est, quod papa vt Papa, lege, ciuiles condere, and Caesareas
immutare ac corrigere nequeat. ibidem.
Pope, as Pope, is such a Prince, in whom is the top of Temporal Authority,
and therefore that as Pope, he may make civil laws, and may change and
correct thy Imperial laws. Further, out of Saucius one of their Bishops, he
Car. lib. 2. ca. 9.. Sequitur.
affirms, that this is cum recta side tenendum, to be held as an Article of
the right faith, Principa^um Romani pontificis esse verum, and vnicum
immediatum principatum totius orbis, nedum quoad spiritualia, sed quoad
temporalia, that the kingdom of the Pope, is the true, and the only immediate
principality or kingdom of the whole world, and that not only in Spiritual,
but in Temporal causes. In regard whereof, he somewhat pleasantly calls the
Pope Ibid. cae. 15, Argumentum.
Orbis viru^, the husband or good man of the world, which you may well think,
is indeed a fit wife for his holiness.

As for Kings and Emperors they teach, that their Authority is but Pro exacta
huius rei notitia, obseruandum est, quod Potestas est Immediata, and in
Ministerium data. Prima est in solo Papa, vt uniuersalis iurisdictio omnium
spiritualium and temporalium. Altera est i^ imperatore, Regibus and principibus
saecularibus qui iurisdictionem super talia adeo mediante Papa accipiunt.
Carrer. lib. 2. cap. 14.. Hinc.
Ministerial derived from the Pope, and dependant Variae sunt hominum
potestates, a Deo datae diuersaeque authoritates, quae omnes a summa potestate
(P^ntificis) pendent, ab illaque lumen recipient, vt sidera a sole. Carrer. lib
2. cap 12.. Secundo. Docet diltus Thomas pendere alia dominia, a dominia
Pontificis sicut corpus ab anima quod recipit ab illa esse, virtutem et omnem
operationem. Boz. lib. 1. ca. 2. pa. 32.
of him, as the light of the stars depends of the Sun, or as the body depends
of the soul, which receives being, virtue, and all operation from it: and out
of Saucius he affirms it to be, Adiussum ( Sanc. lib. de orig. ac differ.
principatus, apud Carrer. lib. 2. ca. 9.. Sequitur.
) princip^tus Papalis nobile^, reuocabilem, corrigilem, et punibilem, the
Kingly and Imperial authority to be at the Popes pleasure and command,
moveable, reuocable, corrigible, and punishable: they further to this purpose
teach, that Kings and Emperors are but the Popes ( Cum Imperator sit papae
minist. Car. li. 2. ca. 18.. Ec dum.
) Ministers, the Popes Dicimus quod papa temporale iudicium imperatori
committit, ab eoque illud recognoscere debet. Car. l. 2. ca. 16.. Dicimus.
Commissioners, or Deputies; yea, the Popes men Rex venit ante fores, iurans
^riu. vrbis honores, post homo fit Papae, sunt quo dante coronam. sic de
Imperatere scribi mandauit Innocentius 2 Car. Sigon. lib. 11. de regn. Ital.
an. 1 133.
or vassals, swearing fealty to him, as the Pope Authoritate Apostolica
declaramus, illa iuramenta praedicta fidelitatis existere et censer^ deberi.
ait. Clemens. 5. lib. 2. Clement. tit. 9. ca. Romany.
himself has defined, receiving Antiqua scilicet monumenta prodiderunt regaa
occidentalia velut genitorem authoremque suum recognouisse regnum ecclesiae, ab
eoque confirmationem accipere, propte^ea quod ab Ecclesia regibus illis
fuissent a principio donata. Sieu. lib. 1. de Dona^i. Constable. cont. Laurent.
val. fol. 211.
Crowns, and holding their kingdoms from him, and by his donation and being,
to use their Temporal sword and Authority, Ad nutum Pontificis, at the Popes
pleasure and sufferance, as not only Bozius, Caeteri doctores Canonistae idem
docent, asserentes vtrumque gladiu^ esse penes Pontificem, sed vnum immediate
per ipsum exercendum, alterum in quibusdam casibus, aut certe ad nutu^
pontificis per alios. Boz. lib. ^. ca. 2. pa. 31.
but Pope Vterque ergo est in potestate Ecclesiae, spiritualis scilicet gladius
et materialis. Ille sacerdotis, is manu regum et mi litum, sed ad nutum et
patientiam sacerd^tis. Bon. 8. ca. vnam sanctam. Extr. de mayor. and obedient.
Boniface the eight, before him affirms. In a word, that other powers and
Authorities Car. l. 2. ca. 7. Haec.
a prima summi pontificis regia potestate pendent, do depend of that first
Kingly Authority of the Popes.

But tell us I pray you: Is the Pope Lord only over the persons, or is he not
Lord also of the goods and posessions in the whole world? Yes, the Pope he is
Lord of al. As the Dominion of the whole world was in Christ, Ita and in Papa
idem esse fatendnm est, so must it be confessed, that the same Dominion is in
the Pope (says Carerius.) Lib. 2. ca. 5. Praeterea.
And again, seeing Idem. ca. 21. Respondebite.
the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, Et per consequens Papae sui
vica^ij, by consequent also this belongs unto the Popes, who is Gods Vicar; and
so the earth is the Popes, and all that is therein. The same teaches Bozius,
Boz. lib: 1. ca. 2. page 31.
seeing in Christ, according to his humain nature, by the Doctrine of Saint
Thomas, there was an absolute power of all things, Erit itaque Pontifex omnium
regionum iure and potestate Dominus, seu mauis dicere totius orbis, therefore
the Pope shall be the Lord both in right and in power of all Countries, or if
ye will rather say so, of the whole world.

Whereupon it follows, that neither Constantine, Constantinus de suo nihil
dedit, sed donando reddidit. Carerius lib. 2. ca. 21. Respondebite, and illa
donatio redditio censetur ibid.
nor any other did, neither can any man possible give ought unto the Pope, for
all is his own already, but they may restore unto him, what they unjustly do
withhold, and so did Constantine Constantinus potius restituit, quod imuste
detinebat. Car. l. 2. ca. 16 Falsumque 7. and Principatum mundi quem habebat
Constantinus, licet antea non haberet Siluester de sacto, de iure debitus erat
Boz. lib. 1. ca. 2. pa. 31.
the great.

From this Sovereignty of Dominion, and as the Triumpher truly calls Pontifex
suam potentiam vindicauit ab omni limite. Brev. Narrat. de vict. Clem. 8. and
Authoritas aut potestas pontificia non limitatur aut circumscribitur vllis
terminis, sed patet quacunque tellus and aequor, sese attollit supra
firmamentum, in caelos vsque and discendis in abyssum, claudit patentes hiatus
Erebi. ibid.
it, unlimited power, for so it is indeed, by his description thereof, as
extending it self above the heavens, and as low again as is hell: from hence,
I say, proceeds that absolute and uncontrollable Authority, which he
claims, to give, to take away, not only smaller quillets, but as the Pope
Gregor. 7. In Execratione co^tra Henr. cuius exemplar citatur a Platina in vita
Greg. 7 vt omnes intelligant in terra, Imperia, regna, principatus, and
quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre and dare nos posse.
himself expressly affirms, Empyres and Kingdoms, Et quicquid habere
mortales possu^t, and whatsoever mortal men can possess or have; yea, take
kingdoms away from some, Quamuis nihil omnino demereantur, as says Carerius,
Car. lib. 2. ca. 19. Denique.
though they commit no fault at all, and give them to those who have no right
unto them. So did Pope Gregory the tenth, with the Empire of the East, Abstulit
Car. ibidem.
Baluino vero domino, and dedit Michaeli, qui nihil iuris habebat; he took it
from Balwin the second, who was the true owner thereof, and gave it to Michael
Pal^ologus, who had no right at all unto it.

But tell us further by what right and Title has the Pope so large and fair a
Patrimony, as is the Monarchy and Sovereignty over the whole world, and in all
both civil and Ecclesiastical causes? He has it (say they) Summus pontifex
iure diuino habet plenissimam potestatemin vniuersum orbem terrarum tum in
rebus ecclesiasticis, tum in po liti^s. Car lib. 2 ca. 9. Tertia and, Diuino
reuelato, and naturali iure, His potissimum titulis convenire ecclesiae, M
onarchiam oste^demus. Boz. lib. 1. ca. 2. pa. 38.
even Iure diuino, by the very Law of God.

I, but perhaps this is but your private opinion only, no sentenced and
decreed Doctrine among you. Yes (says Carerius Probatur co^mmuni maximorum
Theologorum authoritate. Car. tit. ca. 9. Ex his apparet hanc esse communem
Theologorum sententiam. ib.. Extis.
) it is the common judgment of our Deuines, yea, of our greatest deuines,
whereof he there expressly names 26. It is further the common judgment of the
Canonists, Probatur communi Canonistaru^ testimonio, qui sic adhaeserunt huic
decreto, vt infinitum sit illos enumerare. Carer. lib. 2. ca. 10. tit. ca. 10.
and Doctores, and Boz. l. 1. ca. 3. pa. 31.
some of them boldly avouching Hinc factum est vt audacter dixerit Banelus,
maturi vir iudici^j, opinionem contrariam esse haereticam. Car. lib. 2. cap.
10.. Doctores.
the contrary opinion to be Haereticall. More then so, it is Iurisperitorum
princeps Bartolus dicit esse sententiam S. Matris Ecclesiae. Boz. lib. 1. cap.
2. pa. 31.
(says Bartolus) the sentence or judgment of their holy Mother the Church.
And lastly, which is all in all, it is approved by the Decrees and
determinations of the Popes Es^ plurium Patrum, Theologorum, Canonistrarum and
Pontificum sententia, Boz. lib. 3. cap. 6. pa. 4^6.
themselves, by name, of Innocentius Innocentius ca. licet de foro competenti,
express ^ult, vice christi successisse in regm and sacerdotio Petru^ and eius
successores. Boz. lib. 1. cap. 2. pa. 30.
the third, cap. Ex quibus colligite, Primo in summo Pontifice apicem vtriusque
potestatis reperiri. Sec. Papam in toto orb Christiano habere temporale
dominiu^. Carl. lib. 2. cap. 11. vt.
per venerabilem, and cap. Ex ijs veritas dicti cap. So litae intacta manet,
Imperialem scilicet potestate^, a pontificali potestate, sicut lumen lunae a
lumine Solis, quoad temporaliu^ administrationem proficisci. Car. lib. 2. cap.
12. Respondetur.
Solitae, de Maioritate and obedie^tia: to whom may be added Innocentius the
fourth, who Inno. 4. com. in cap. Ego N. Extra. de Iureiurando.
thus defines the Popedom, Papatus est principatus tam in temporalibus quam in
spiritualibus. The Popedom (says he) is a Prince-hood or Sovereignty, as well
in temporal, as in spiritual matters. Boniface the eight, who Paral. Abb.
vrspec, in an. 1294.
in token of his right to both the swords, at the solemnity of the Iubile, by
him first instituted, Solenniter ostentauit, with great pomp and ostentation,
showed himself the first day in his Pontificalibus, like a Pope, and the next
day in his Imperial Robes like a temporal Monarch, and causing a naked sword
to be carried before him, proclaimed unto al, Ecce duo gladij hic: behold the
two swords are here: who further made Hic Papa constitutionem fecerat in qua
se Dominum spiritualem and temporale^ in vniuerso mundo asserebat. Mart. Polo.
Chron. in An. 1301. and, in tantam arrogantiam erexit seipsum, vt Dominum
totius mundi se diceret, tam in temporalibus, quam in spiritualibus, Wern. in
fasc. temp. an. 1294.
a Decree or constitution wherein he affirmed, that the Pope is Dominus in
spiritualibus and temporalibus in vniuerso mundo, the Lord both in spiritual
and temporal causes, and that in the whole world, judging it Haereticall, as
says Martinus, to speak; nay, Sentire contrariu^, to think the contrary, and
that he might subject all others to this Soucraignty, definitiuely determining
Porro subesse Romano pontifici, omni humanae creaturae, declaramus, dicimus,
definimus and pronunciamus esse de necessitate salutis. Bon. 8. cap vnam
sanctam. extra. de ^aior. and obed.
it as a needful thing to salvation for every human creature to be subject
to the Pope: John the 22. who expressly also affirms John 22. cap. Si
sratrum, Extra. Nesede vacant.
that to the Pope, Terreni simul and caelestis Imperij iura Deus ipse commisit,
God himself has given the right both of the earthly and of the heavenly
kingdom, that is, both the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Monarchy. And to omit
other particulars, lastly, may be added the general consent of all later
Popes, who Sacrar. Cere^. san. Romans eccles lib. 1. sect. 7, pa: 85*
yearly on the night of Christ's Nativity, bestows an hallowed sword of some
great Prince, whom it pleases him, the Mystery of which gift, as the Pope
himself explaines it, is to betoken thereby, Potestatem summam temporalem a
Christi pontifici collatum, that the supreme Temporal power is given to the
Pope by Christ, according to those scriptures (which most blasphemously the
Popes apply to themselves) all power is given to me in heaven, and in earth.
And again, he shall rule from the one Sea to the other, and from the floude
unto the worlds end.

Thus teach Carerius, Bozius; together with their Popes and Popish
Confederates, whose very words, in so important a cause, I have now more at
large, and expressly alleged.

You do now evidently perceive, that these men who thought it a most ridiculous
matter, for Kings to hold their Crowns immediately from God, do teach and
define it to be a matter of Religion, of Piety, of Conscience; yea, of
salvation, to hold the same immediately from the Beast, that is in truth, from
the very Devil; for of the Beast, (the Apostle says) Apocalipse 13, 1. that
the Draggon, which is the Devil, gave the Beast his power, and his Throne, and
his great Authority.

These are the fruits of Popish Religion, and this the very HELENA for which
they so earnestly fight and contend. Of which Positions, (though I might justly
say as did Saint HIEROME Hier. epist. ad Ctesiph. aduer. Pelag. to. 2, pa. 260.
in another cause, Sententias vestras prodidisse, superesse* est, patet prima
fionte blasphemia. To have recited your assertions, is enough to refute them,
they are stamped with Blasphemy in the very fore-heade; yet as you have
willingly heard the just defense of Regal Sovereignty, so suffer me to speak
somewhat also at this time against him, who shows himself in his colors, to
be Hostem humani generis, the enemy not of one or two Kingdoms, or some
people and sort of men, but the enemy of all mankind: who most violently
intrudes himself into the rightes and regalities of all Kings, Christian and
Heathen, and like a wild Boar inuades the lands, goods, and possessions of all
men in the world; yea, most sacrilegiously challenges unto himself that which
is the peculiar prerogative (and as I may say*) one of the Royalties of God,
Domini est terra, The Earth is the Lords, and all that is therein. Psalm. 24, 1.

I shall not need to prove that this priestly Monarchy was not known in the
time of the old Testament: of which not only Aquina: In veteri testamento
regnum praeeminebat sacerdotio, Ideoibi regnu^, hic sacerdotiu^ in substan tiuo
ponuntur, eo quod ibi ex reg no, hic ex sacerdotio quasi subsista: religio
Aqui. com. in 1. Pet 1.
and Stapleton, Stap. doct. princ. lib. 5, ca, 22.
but Carerius himself expressly confesses, In* veteri Testamento Rex super
sacordotes potestatem habebat, cosque pro crimine occidere, multo magis
officijs et dignitatibus spiritualibus eos private poterat. Carer. l. 2. ca.
18* Respondeo.
that the King had then power over the Priests, and might for their offenses,
not only have deprived them of their spiritual offices, but have killed the^
also: that in the time of the old Testament Hinc in lege veteri Regnum erat
substantiuum* et lacerdotium adiectiuum. Car. l. 2. ca. 1.. Hinc.
the Kingdom was the Substantive or superior, and the Priesthood was the^ but
an Adjective, as depending in good congruity upon the other, though the Pope
since has altered that most congraeous Gra^mer rule, that seeing in the Old
Testament the promises were only temporal, but in the New are eternal, Mirum
Car. l. 2. ca. 18.. Secundo.
minime videri debet, si in veteri testamento su^ ma potestas fuerit
Temporalis: It must not seem strange as he says, that the temporal power in
the time of the Old Testament, was the Supreme. So then, though they pretend
Ecclefiasticam potestatem, naturali iure esse omnino super saecularem, etc.
Boz. lib. 1. pa. 7. et cap. 2. page 38.
for this Sovereignty the Law of Nature, yet by this express confession, and
clear words of Aquinas and Carerius, it is evident, that this priestly
Monarchy was not heard of, for the first Ad passionem Christi vigebat. Lex.
passio incidit in an. mundi 3996. Funct.
four thousand years almost of the world.

In the New Testament what in duty ought first to be performed by the Apostles
and their successors, let the holy Apostle, or the Spirit of God by his mouth
speak* and determine. Let every soul (says Romans 13. 1.
he) be subject to the higher powers: which himself in that place expounds to
be those seculare Kings and Princes, who bear Ib. V. 4. 6, 7. Ter repetit
prin cipes saeculares quibus tribuca redduntur esse ministros dei. Bell. lib.
de laic: ca. 3.. Praeterea. Vt absurd detorqueathaec verba, ad praesules
Ecclesiasticos lib. 2. de pont. Romans ca. 29.. Respon* deo tam.
the Sword, and to whom tribute is due. Now this precept was directed and given
to the whole Omnibus qui Romaesu^t, delectis dei. Rom 1, 7.
Church of Rome, even at that time also when Saint Peter by their Doctrine Bell
l* 2. de pont. To. ca* 2 and 5.
was Bishop of Rome: and therefore the spirit of GOD commanding every Soul
(particularly in that Church) to be subject to the secular powers and Princes,
without all doubt inioynes obedience and subjection, even to S. Peter himself,
and to all his successors; yea, much rather unto them, who were to be
Ensamples 1 Timothy 4. 12
to the rest, both in word and in conversation.

A truth so clear, that Claudius Espenseus, Comment. in ca. 3. Epist. ad Tit.
dig^ 10
one of their own and a learned Bishop, not only confesses thus much, but
confirms it further out of Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and others;
specially out of Saint Chrysostom, who expressly Chrysostom. in cap 13. ad* Romans
mentions the Apostles themselves, to be included in that precept. Etiam si
Apostolus sis, though you be an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a
Prophet, (and which I think will reach to the Pope) Etiam si quiuis alius
fueris, or what else soever you be, every Soul must be subject to those
higher and secular powers.

Or if any notwithstanding this evidence of truth and such a Cloud of
witnesses, will yet exempt either the Pope, or any other from this duty, it may
most justly be replied unto him, with the words of Saint Barnard, in his 42.
Epist. Si omnis anima, et vestra: If every Soul be subject, then must yours,
Who has exempted you from this universality? Si quis tentat excipere, conatur
decipere. If any go about to exempt you, he goes about to deceive and tempt
you. And again, do ye despice seculare powers? Seculiarior nemo Pilato, none
was more secular then Pilot, before who^ Christ himself stood to be Judged,
and of whom he confessed: Potestatem super sefuisse caelitus ordinatam: That
Pilate had power over him, and that given from God.

What in duty then ought to be done for the whole time of the New Testament,
by this example of Christ, and precept of Gods Spirit, is most evident. And as
subjection is commanded by God, so was it practiced and performed by the
Apostles, by the primitive Bishops; yea, even by the Popes themselves, for many
hundreths of years together.

For the first three hundredth years after Christ, while Kings and Emperors
were Paganes and Persequutors of the Church, it is confessed both by Bellarmine
Quo tempore principes erant Ethnici, no^ erat Pontifex iudex illorum, sed e
contrario illis subiectus erat in omnibus ciuilibus causis non minus quam
caeteri homines. Bell lib. 2. de pontif. Romans cap 29.. Respo^deo, primo.
and Carerius, Carer. eadem verba habet quae Bell. lib 2 ca 23,. Respondetur.
that for all that time, the Apostles and Bishops of Rome were subject to^
Emperors, as all other Christians were: and this subjection was Bell. ibid..
Quod Carer* loc. citat.
both De iure, and de facto, both indeed performed, and in right to be
performed.

What? And shall we think (which they without all shame would persuade) that
their conversion to the faith, was the overthrow and aeuersion of their
temporal dominions? And that the gain of Christ, was the loss of all their
Crowns and Kingdoms? Nor only so, but that of Sovereigns they became
subjects even, to those, who before while they were Paganes, were de iure and
facto, subject unto them?

I will not say what an effectual dissuasion this might have been unto them,
and others also, never to have embraced the Faith: What a motive it may yet be
to turn Heathen and Paganes again. I will not enforce that true Maxim,
approved both ( Bell. et Car. loc. citat
by Bellarmine and Carerius: Lex Christiana neminem suo iure et dominio private:
Christianity c At vero cum principes facti lunt Christiani, continuose ta^quam
oues pastori, et membia capiti, eccle siasticae hierachiae Praesidi (i. Papae)
subiecerunt, et proinde ad illo iudicari, non illum deinceps iudicare debent.
Bell. et Carer locis citatis
depriues no man of his right, nor of his dominion: as is confessed in that
Hymn of Se^lius, Non cripit mortalia, qui regna dat caelestia: O wicked King
Herod, why art thou afraid of Christ! He gives an heavenly Kingdom, he takes
not away an earthly, he Christus non venit destruere ea quae been se habebant,
sed perficere: ergo quando Rex fit Christianus, non perdit regnum terrenum, sed
acquirit nouum ius ad regnum aeternum, Alioqui obesset regibus Christi
beneficium, et gratia naturam destraeret. Bel^, l, 5, de pont. Romans ca. 3.,
Iann.
perfects us in that want, he depriues us not of that we had.

Consider of many but some few examples, and those even of the Popes
themselves, who have testified and recorded their subjection to Christian
Emperors. With what lowliness and humility did Pope Leo the first, four Leo
caepit. an. 443, prosp.
hundredth and odd years after Christ, sue Leo cpist. 9. et 24.
unto the Emperor Theodosius the younger, that he would call a general
counsel in Italy, and yet prevailed not. How submissiuely did he again
entreat the like of Marcianus the Emperor? I h Leo Epist* 43
beseech our Lord Jesus: Qui regni vestri est author and rector: Who is the
Author and Ruler of your kingdom, that ye would not suffer the ancient Faith:
Quasi dubiam retractari: To be called into doubt and question again, Illudque
potius iubeatis, and that ye would rather command the decrees of the Nicene
Counsel to be kept. How religiously does he profess his subjection and
obedience to the same Emperor? I have willingly (says the Pope) Leo Epist. 59.
added my consent or sentence: Quia omnibus modis obediendum est pietati
vestrae religiosissimaeque voluntati: Because by all means we must obey your
sacred and religious will.

Pope Gregory the great is even admirable in this point. Who am I that speak
to my Lord, but Dust and Ashes? said he Greg. lib. 2. Epist. ca* 100.
to the Emperor Mauritius. It Greg. l. 4. Epist. ca. 78.
well beseemes a religious Prince Vt ista sacerdotibus praeciperet, to command
Bishops in such matters: And that particular was an Ecclesiastical cause also,
betwixt Pope Gregory himself, and John Bishop of Constantinople, in which the
Pope confesses, that it well beseemed a Christian Prince to command, not only
other Bishops, but even the Bishop of Rome himself. And as it was fit for the
Emperor to command, so the same Pope judged it his duty, and fit for him to
obey. Vobis Greg. l. 4. Epist. ca* 76.
obedientiam praebere desidero, I am desirous to yeald obedience unto you, I am
Ego iussioni subiectus lib. 2 ca, 100.
subject to your command. Ego Lib. 4, Epist, ca. 76. Imperatori obedientiam
praebin* lib. ^, ca. 100.
dominorum iussionibus obedientiam praebens: I am obedient to the commands of
my Lord, and of the Emperor. How often and usually does he give the Emperor
those Titles which are witnesses of his loyalty and subjection unto him, My
Lord, my gracious Lord, my sacred Lord, and the like? And such were Popes six
hundereth years after Christ, at which time Greg prim us obijt an. 604. Palm.
in supplem, Eu^eb.
this Pope Gregory lived.

To these I will adioyne but one more, Leo the fourth, who lived Leo 4. caepit
an. 847, Palm.
above eight hundredth years after Christ. Whose loyal subjection to two
Emperors, Lotharius and Jews his Son, their own Canon Law has for ever
recorded. First, to the Father De capitulis et praeceptis* im periabbus
i^refragabiliter custodiendis, quanto valuimus, et valemus, nunc et in aeuum
nos co^seruatuios modis omnibus profitemur. Leo 4. Lothar. August. Distinct 10.
ca. d^ capitulie.
Lotharius, this Pope most solemnly promised, that as much as in him lay, he
would for ever and every way be obedient to his, and his predecessors Imperial
praecepts. Afterward, when complaint was made to Jews the son, of some
disorders in the Popes government, this Leo the fourth writ unto cau. 2, q. 7.
cae^ Nos si incompetenter.
him in this manner. If we have done ought amiss toward those that are under
us: Vestro admissorum nostrorum cuncta volumus emendare iudicio, We will amend
all our faults, not by your advice or admonition, but Vestro iudicio, by your
Judgment: beseeching the clemency of your highness, to send such as may
narrowly sift all things, and that not only these, but all matters, Sieve
minora, sieve etiam maiora, both greater and smaller, that all may be judged and
ended Sint de nobis iudicata negotia.
by them. Thus were Popes in all matters, greater and smaller, yea even in
Ecclesiastical causes, as by these you do perceive, how much more in civil,
subject to the Emperors, as to their Lords, to their Judges, to their
Sovereigns, almost for nine Leo 4. obij^ an. 853 Palm* in supp. Euf.
hundredth years after Christ.

As yet was not known, this new found Monarchy and Soueraignety over all Kings
and Kingdoms; as yet had never bin seen his authority in deposing Kings, and
disposing their Kingdoms and Empires. Nor long after this, until about two
hundereth years after Leo the fourth, Pope Hildebrand, the very firebrand of
Christendom (though they have Sainted him in their Calendare) first of all
took upon him to put in practice that transcendent, and most extrauagant
authority, deposing the Emperor Henricum rege^ imperatori^ administratio ne
regiaque deijci, and Christianos omnes imperio subiectosiuramento illo absoluo,
quo fidem ve* ris regibus pr^ stare consueueru^t. Form. Abrog. Pontif. apud
Plat. in vita. Greg. 7. et Henrico regia^potestatem adimo* interdicoque
Christianis omnibus, ne Henrico vlla in re obtemperent, Rodulphum in rege^
suscipian^ Execc. Greg, 7. apud Plat. Saxones rebellant instinctu Hildebrandi
papa. Imperatorem abiurant, Rodulphum rege^ statuunt corona et a Papa missa,
cui erat inscriptu^, Petrae dedit* Petro, Petrus deadem* Rodulpho. Sigebert in
an. 1077.
Henry the 4. and giving his Empire to Duke Rodulph: Of which act of his, Otho
Frisingensis, a worthy Historian near to those times, thus writes. Oath. Fris.
Chron. lib* 6. ca* 35.
Lego et relego: I read, and read over again the acts of the Romain Kings and
Emperors, and I no where find any of them to have been excommunicated or
deprived of his kingdom by the Pope, before this Henry.

This was the first Hactenus sanctissimi patres quemadmodum Christus et
legatieius feceru^t et alios docutrunt, Caesaresin terris a Deo sec^ndos,
anteom nes mortales, pri mos. i supremo numine dat^s, diuinitus constitutos
renerabantur, Hildebrandus vtra^que persona^ sibi impositam a Christo, omnem
potestatem in se transfer: Caesares, reges, Augustos, et precario regnantes
flocci sacere* etc Auent. Annal. li. 5. p. 446. 447
time, and that was more then a thousand years after Christ, when the Popes
Bulls began to push at Kings and Kingdoms. But with such unhappy success both
to the giver and receiver, as might justly have affrayed all others, either to
give or take the like again.

Hildebrand the unjust Doner of the Empire, by a general Hildebrandum papam
vnanimiter abdicarunt. Abb. Vesperg. in an. 1083 et Sigeb. in an. 1084.
Hildebrandus tanquam lupus fur ac latro relat^ persidus transfuga, o^ium
desertor, gregi^ proditor, charitatis os^r* ommu^ consens^ abdicatur, Auent.
an* lib. 5. pa* 462.
consent, being put from the Popedom, died in Sige. et Abb. ves. in an. 1085.
banishment at Sal^ in Normandy: and at his death (as Sigebert relates)
confessed to God and the whole Church, that he had grievously offended in his
pastoral Office, Et suadente diabolo, contra human^m genus, odium et iram
con^* asset: and that by the persuasion of the devil, he had stirred up strife
and hatred against mankind: and withal sent his confessor to the Church and to
the Emperor, vt optaret ei iudulge^ia^, to ask forgiveness in his behalf.
This was the end of the Pope Hildebrand: In que^ clamat sanguis Ecclesiae,
against whom (says Cardinal Benno) the blood of the church cries unto God for
vengeance.

Rodulph the unjust receiver of the Empire, some three years after* he had got
the same, in a battle against the deposed Emperor, had his right hand cut off,
and at his death gave a memorable warning, reported in Abbas Abb. ves. in an.
1080.
Vespergensis, to all violators of their oaths and alleigiance, and to all
usurpers of Kingdoms, upon any such Title, for being in Extremts at the point
of death, looking upon the stump of his maimed arm, and fetching a deep sigh,
This (quoth he) is the hand wherewith I swear alleigiance to my Lord the
Emperor Henry, and behold I now leave both his kingdom, and with it my own
life.

Thus you see how Satan, who as the Apostle foretold, Apoc. 20. 2. was chained
and bound for a thousand years, as soon as he got loose, at the end H^ mill
amisi inchoentur a morte Christi i. ab an. 35. vt sine dubio inchoandos esse
ait Ribera (com. in Apoc. ^0. v. ^. incidunt direct in te^pora Hildebrands, ac
fere in ipsius pontificatu^: quem ingressus est an. 1074. Palm in sup. Eusebius.
of those years, began shortly after in Pope Hildebrand to bestirre himself,
and prepare a way: for this papal Monarchy. And indeed he only made way unto
it, laying as it were the foundation thereof, though I confess he laid that
low enough, even as low as is the pit of Hell. But for the stately building d
Ben. apud Abbvesp. in an 1077
of his Monarchy, it was not erected diverse hundereths of years after
Hildebrand. In the days* of Pope Eugenu^s the third, almost an Circa an.
1150. Palm.
hundredth years after Hildebrand, when some were exceeding busy in this
building, Saint Barnard with great courage and constancy opposed himself unto
them, and oppugned this papal Monarchy. Disce sarculo tibi opus esse non
sceptro, said he to Barn. lib. 2. de consid* ad Euge.
Pope Eugenius. A Shepherds staff is fit for you, not a Kings Scepter* S.
Peter could not give you Dominion or Soueraignety, he had it not, Quod habuit
hoc dedit, That which he had he gave you, solicitude and care over the Church,
not Dominion. Nay, this is the very form and order of the Apostle, Dominatio
interdicitur, indicitur i Bar. l 3: de c^sid. ad Eug.
ministratio, Domination and Soueraignety is forbidden, ministration and
service is enjoined. And again, Dispensation is committed unto you, not the
possession of the world: Si pergis vsurpare and hanc, contradicit tibi, qui
dicit* Meus est orbis. If you go forward to vsurp or claim this dominion of
the world, God himself will control you, The earth is mine, and all that is
therein. Thus and much more to this end, writ Saint Barnard in those days,
above eleauen hundredth years after Christ.

In the days of Jews the 4. Duke of Bauare the Emperor, who lived almost
three Obijt Lud. u 4 an. 1346. Palm
hundred years after Hildebrand, it was adjudged high Treason by the Imperial
Laws, as before I declared, and little less in this our Kingdom, in the
days of King Richard the second, either to affirm, or to assent to others,
affirming either of these imperial kingdoms to be held of Quia nonnulli in
assertiones detest^biles prorumpant, asserentes failaciter Imperiale^
potestatem esse a Papa, Coast. Lu ^u. 4. apud Balb. Episc. Gurc. lib. de coron.
ad Carol. 5. pa. 39. Contra nos, et Imperialem authoritate^ dignitatem,
potestatem, et ius Imperij allegatur, quod potestas et authoritas imperialis
est a papa. Decr Lud. 4. apud Naucl. in ann. 1338.
the Pope, which were then declared to be immediately held of God, and of none
other, which part of those imperial Laws being in truth most sacred and
divine, when, by whom, and by what i^st authority it was ever repealed or
adnulled, will be very hard, I suppose, to declare: and this was about
fourteen Rich. 2. regnare desijt ann. 1399. Stow.
hundredth years after Christ. Let me now descend but one step lower, even to
our own times, and to these days, wherein though the workmen and master
builders of Babylon, incessantly labor night and day to raze this Papal
Monarchy like the Tower Genesis 11. 7.
of Babylon, that the top thereof may reach unto Heaven, yet to this day is it
not erected: God by his unsearchable wisdom and goodness, so infatuates and
confounds the builders thereof, as he did Ib. r. 7. 9.
of old* that what some of them by their craft and great cunning erect and set
up, others of their own sect, with might and maine do pull down the same:
diverse Citati a^ ud Bell. lib. 5. de p^utif. R^m. ca. 1.. Tertia. and by Gear.
Blackwell in his large Examine. an. 1607.
of their chief men, among whom is Cardinal Bellarmine, with many evident
demonstrations confirming, that Bellar. lib. 5. de pont. To. ca. 2 Pas am non
esse dominum totius mundi.
the Pope is neither the Lord of the whole world, neither so much as Lord of
the Christian world; yea further, Bell. ibid. ca. 4. and Pontifice^ vt
pontifice^ no^ habere direct et immeditate vllam temporalem potestatem ibid.
ca.. Tertia.
direct or iure diuino non habere vllam temporalem iurisdictione^, that
directly, or by the Law of God, the Pope has no temporal jurisdiction of any
place in the world. So that notwithstanding the common judgment of their
greatest Divines: the consent of their Canonists; the sentence of their holy
Mother the Church; the decrees and determinations of the Popes, in which Bozius
and Carerius triumph, as if the field were won: notwithstanding, all this I
say, even to this day as you see, that is, more then sixteen hundredth years
after Christ, r Papam non esse Dominum totius orbis Christiani. Bell, ib. cap.
3.
this Papal Monarchy is not erected.

Did I say, it is not erected? I say more, This Tower of Babylon neither can,
nor ever shall be erected. Not so much because by gods* just judgment, the
tongues and trowels of those builders are most strangely confounded, but
because they build it in pride to Genesis 11, 4.
get the^selus a name, and that they may say as did old Babylon in the Prophet,
I say 47, 7, 8. Apoc. 18. 7.
I sit as a Queen, I shallbe a Lady for ever, I am and none else; now this is
Gods honor and decree, Isa. 23. 9. to stain the pride of all glory, and bring
to contempt al them that be glorious in the earth: And chiefly because they
built it, as we have now declared, against the will and the eternal word of
God, whose truth shall stand firm for ever: nay, which is worst of all, they
build it even in contempt and despite of the Lord, who has said, Apoc. 18.
2. Babylon shall fall, yea, for Praeterito vti tur profuturo vt certissimum
esse sciamus quod dicit. Riber. in ca. 14. Apoc. pa. 373.
certainety thereof, Babylon is fallen: and therefore howsoever for ruinating
thereof, the means in man's eye be most weak and unlikely; howsoever again for
upholding and erecting thereof, all crafts, devises, and means be used, which
in man's judgment are most strong and unconquerable, yet shall Babylon fall,
because true is the God who has said it, and Apoc. 18. 8.
strong is the Lord of hosts who will effect it: and there is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. Pro. 21. 30. My conclusion of this
whole point, is that, which if the time had permitted, I purposed more at large
to have handeled. Though these men strive, and like a Cadmean or* Midianitish
Judge. 7. 22.
generation, fight among themselves, and sheath their swords in their own
fellows bowels, quarrelling about the nicetie of that our poor distinction,
Direct and Indirecte, whereof, whether soever be said, to us, and for the
truth it skilleth not: yet seeing they all Carer. et quos ille citat. l. 2, ca.
9. Bellar. et quos ille citat. lib. 5 de pont. Romans co. 1. et ca. 6* 7. 8.
jointly profess, and resolutely defend such a sovereignty in the Pope, as
that his Judgment, and his command, must be the last and most certain rule,
both of faith, and of al obedience: As there can be no true: faith in them*
seeing they rely on so fallible and sandy a foundation, as is the Judgment of
man; yea, of one man, and him even the man of Sin: So cannot that possibly
be true loyalty, nor sincere obedience, which ever attending to an-higher
command* includes in it, as in a Trojan. Horse* that condition of ( Petatur
interpretatio Bullae pij. 5 contra Eliz. vt obliget Catholico, nullo modo rebus
sic stantibus, sed tum demum quando publica eiusdem Bulla exe cutio fieri
poterit. Ha^ pradictas gra tias concepit sumus Pontisex patri Rob. Parsonio,
and Edmundo Campiano, in Angliam profecturis, die. 14. April prasente patre
Oliuerio Manario assistente, Facult. comc. Parso. and Camp.
Rebus sie stantibus; durante beneplacito, or the like, which must ever stand
or fall at the Popes beck and pleasure; and out of which if ( Si principes
conentur averter^ populum a side, omnium consensu, possunt and debent priuari
suo dominio: and tenentur Christiani no^ pati super se talem Regem. Quod si
Christiani oli^ non deposueru^ Neronem Dioclesia^m valentem Arrianum and
similes; id suerat quia de^* vires temporales Christiauis* Bellar. lib 5. de
pont. Romans cap. 7. 6. probatur. and. Quods
strength* and opportunity might serve (as I pray and hope in God that it shall
never) or if Rebus sic stantibus, were once changed into Rebus cadentibus;
those Romishi Sinons, can easily and with a ready ginne, let out whole Armies
and troops of armed me^, suddenly to surprise both church and kingdom.

True Loyalty (which I doubt not but you do perform, and to the constant and
continual performance whereof, I earnestly exhort you all this day) is to
look at our Sovereign, as at one placed immediately by God, placed in Gods
own Throne, placed in the steed of God himself among us: And then to love,
honor, and obey him, not for other respects, but for that Love, Religious
duty and conscience, which we owe unto God, who placed him in his own throne,
and in his own stead to govern us.

To honor and obey him for fear, is seruility and baseness; to obey for gain
or profit, is self-love; to obey with that employed condition, is Implicit,
Rebellion, and Antichristian; to love and honor him (as we all ought) for his
own Piety, Virtue, and goodness, is Christian Charity; but to love and obey
him for Gods own cause, who set him in his own Throne, to rule in his own
steed, is true and Christian Loyalty, true and most loyal Subjection. And this
be spoken of the first particular branch proposed; Namely, from whom the King
had or held his kingdom, even immediately from God, who made him King, who set
him in his Throne, and in his steed over the people.

The other particular; Namely, what moved or induced God to place Solomon over
his people, which was no desert of theirs, either King or people, but his own
favor and free love unto them, I purposely omit, and in that short remainder
of the allowed time, intend to speak a little of the last point, and then
commend you all to the grace of God.

She gave the King six score Talents of Gold, and of sweet Odours exceeding
much, and precious stones] These great, magnificent, and princely gifts
bestowed by this Queen on King Solomon, as the like also from other Princes
sent unto him. 1. Kin. 10, 25. was not for any want or necessity at all, for
Silver was nothing esteemed in Salomons days. 1. King. 10. 21. he gave Silver
as stones, verse 27. and exceeded all the Kings of the earth in riches, ver. 23.
But they were outward and evident testimonies of that reverence and love, and
of that loving and honorable respect, which both she and they had to King
Solomon.

The like customs of giving presents, has bin usual from subjects also,
thereby to testify, not only their love, as did strangers, but their loyalty
also to their Sovereigns. Suetonius In vir. Aug. cap. 57. 58.
reports, that the Romans by their Strenae or annual presents, testified
their love to Augustus, whom they honored as Patrem patriae. Of King
Iehosaphat it is said. 2. Chron. 17, 5. that in token of their love and loyal
affections, All Judah brought presents to Iehosophat. On the contrary, it is
said of those wicked men, sons of Belial, and undutiful Subjects of King
Saul, the wicked men despised him, and brought him no presents 1. Sam. 10. 27.

It is not my purpose to speak of this particular unto you, though I might
truly compare the willingness and readiness of the subjects of our SOLOMON,
to those of Constantius Clorus, father unto Constantine the Great. Of whom
Eusebius says, Abiecta omni cu^ctatione, mature, auro, argento and alijs opum
generibus aeraria eius complete laborant. Studio quodam and ardore inter se,
quo alius alium in largiendo superaret, vehementer conte^dunt. Eusebius. in vit.
Constable. lib. 1. cap. 10.
that they did strive, and vehemently contend among themselves to fill the
Emperors Treasury, rejoicing greatly, that now they had that long wished for
opportunity, to witness their beneuolous hearts and minds unto the Emperor.
Whereupon he truly and excellently said, That the love of the people is the
richest and safest Treasury of the Prince.

But for the generality, which is the outward testifying of love and loyalty,
In *ust needs say thus much, that it is the honor of our Religion, and the
honor of so religious a people, and no doubt, it is also the joy and comfort
of our Sovereign, to have ^eeretofore so often seen, and daily, especially on
this day, to ^ehold every where so many, so manifest and public, so solemn and
^o religious testifications, both of the love and loyalty of his people unto
him.

At his happy Inauguration, whereof this day is but a resembla^ce and a
rememberance unto us, how did not only all the people throughout the land, of
all sorts, sexe^, and degrees, rejoice in that blessing of the Lord, but (as
this day also) even our Temples, our houses, our streets, did witness and
proclaim that public joy: No otherwise then did the people of Israel, at the
Inauguration of their Solomon, 1. Kings. 1, 39* 40. All the people ran after
him, ^iping with Pipes, blowing Trumpets, and rejoicing with so great ^ joy,
that the earth rang with the sound thereof; and crying with all their might,
God save King Solomon.

The people to testify their love, used to celebrate some festiual days in
honor of their Emperor. Sometimes Natalem ortus, the day of the Emperors
birth, as the Romans in Suetonius Natalem eius sponte, biduo semper
celebrarunt. Suet. in. vit. Aug. cap. 57.
of their own ^ccord, observed two days every year for the birth of Augustus:
Sometimes Natalem Imperij, the day of their Inauguration, when they first came
to the Empire, as did the people in Aelius Natale^ Imperij statuit celebrandum.
Spart. in vit. Adrian.
Spartiatus, in honor of Adrian. their Emperor. Sometimes Natalem salutis, ^he
day of the Emperors preservation or deliverance from some great and imminent
danger. So did the Romans, when they heard of the safety and recovery of
Germanicus, whom they expected to succeed Tiberius; they were so admirably (
S^et. in vit. Calig. cap. 6.
) affected with joy thereat, that even in the night time they ra^ with Lamps
and Sacrifices to the Capitol, Ac pene reuu^sae templi fores, and for have
they had almost burst assunder* the gates of the Temple, every where with
shouts and joyful exclamations, singing and crying, Salua Roma, salua patria,
saluus est Germanicus, the City, the country, and all is safe in the safety of
Germanicus.

I may truly say, that as we have far greater cause, so have we and the whole
people of this land expressed far greater joy, both for the most happy birth,
the most happy Inauguration, and those two most strange and most happy
deliverances of our most gracious Sovereign. Those festival days observed as
a statute* in Israel, and even this day, shall witness to the whole world, and
to all succeeding Ages, that as no people is more blessed of the Lord, so is
none more thankful unto God, none more loving or loyal unto their Sovereign;
In whose happiness and safety, we most justly may sing on this, and all our
festival days, Salua Britanni^, the Empire of great Britain is safe and
happy, nay the Church of God is safe and happy, we and all the people of these
kingdoms are safe and happy, in the safety and happiness of KING JAMES. For
whose continual safety and felicity, we will pray as did good Nehemiah, Nehe.
2, 3.
God save the King for ever.

I have now according to my slender ability, handled those four ^euerall
points, which in the beginning I proposed. The success of al which, I
earnestly commend to the grace of God, not doubting but that he, whose word 2.
Sam. 1, 21. Isa. 55, 16, 11.
like the Bow and Arrows of Jonathan, never returns empty, will grant some
(...) of his blessings upon them. Howsoever, this shall be my comfort, that God
has first, though very unexpectedly called, and thus far as you see has now
enabled me, on this so joyful and solemn a day, in this so frequent and
honorable an assembly, to perform some service unto God, in testifying unto
you that truth wherein ye now constantly stand: In offering this day at his
Temple, not any (...), but the sweet smelling sacrifice of many hundredth, ye^
many thousand religious and thankful hearts unto God, in testifying my love and
duty to Sion, and to the peace of (...): and lastly, in expressing, as ye have
al done with me this day, an humble and most loiall affection to our most
gracious Sovereign, the anointed of the Lord.

And now for conclusion of all, let us once again and continually pray, in
those few, but most fervent and affectionate words of Nehemiah: God save the
King for ever, and let all the people say, Amen.

Laus Deo, vni, trino, in s^cula.

