THE Triumph of a Christian, Containing three excellent and heavenly Treatises.

1 Jacobs wrestling with God. 2 The Conduit of Comfort. 3 A Preparatiue for the
Lords supper.
Full of sweet consolations for all that desire the comfortable sweetness of
Jesus Christ, and necessary for those who are troubled in Conscience.

Written by that worthy man Master William Couper, Minister of Gods word.

Commit thy way unto God, and he shall bring it to pass.

LONDON:

Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at the great South door of Paul's
Church* 1608.

TO THE VERY GODLY and right Noble Lady, my Lady Mary Stewart, Countess of
Mar.
RIght noble Lady: The Church of God is compared by Solomon to a terrible army,
wherein are bands of strong men, and valiant Israelits, expert in the war, and
that can handle the sword. And every Book of sacred Scripture we may call, a
several Armour-house, furnished better then that house of Lebanon, which
Solomon stored with shields and Targets of Gold. In it are weapons of war, both
invasiue, and defensive, armor convenient for every state of life, and meet
for every kind of battle, wherewith our adversaries are able to assault us.
But as David's Woorthies were not all of one valor, for Abishai chief of the
second three, yet di^ not attain unto the first three: So have not all the
Warriors of Christ a lik^ strongth, and skill to fight the Lords battles And
therefore we who are but nouices in the spiritual warfare, as we should be
careful every day to put on the complete armor of God, that we may stand, so
should we diligently take heed to other valiant Wrestlers, who through Faith
and Patience have inherited the promises before us, that we may learn of
them, how to weild our weapon in the spiritual warfare, Among many, whose
battles are registered in the book of God for our instruction, I have here
brought in worthy Jacob, a wrestler from the womb, even to the day of his
death, who in this his singular, and most rare wrestling with God, let us see
an Image of Gods wrestling with his Children, the variety of tentations,
whereby he proves us, and the means by which we stand. Sundry others before
me, have written learnedly and largely of this subject, but I have labored as
far as I could, to eschew coincident doctrine, and have principally
endeavored my self, to search out such observations, as through experience, by
the grace of God, I have found most comfortable for such as are exercised in
conscience. And these (right Noble Lady) I have been bold to Dedicate unto
your Honor, as unto one who having obtained mercy of God, is through his
grace, daily exercised in the spiritual warfare. Accept it therefore as a
testimony of that love and reverence that I bear to that grace of God, which
is manifest in you: for the increase whereof I daily pray unto God, that he
would confirm you to the end, and bring forward his own work in you to
perfection.

Your Ladyships in our common Savior, the Lord Jesus. WILLIAM COVVPER.

GENESIS Cap. 32. Ver. 24. 24 NOw when Jacob was left himself alone, there
wrestled a man with him unto the breaking of the day. 25 And he saw that he
could not prevail against him, therefore he touched the hollow of his thigh,
and the hollow of Jacobs thigh was loosed, as h^ wrestled with him. 26 And he
said, let me go. For the morning appears, who answered, I will not let thee
go, except thou bless me. 27 Then said he, what is thy name, and he said,
Jacob. 28 Then said he, thy name shall be called Jacob no more, but Israel,
because thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail with men. 29
Then Jacob demanded, tell me thy name, I pray thee, and he answered wherefore
now do thou ask my name? and he blessed him there. 30 And Jacob called the
name of that place Peniel, for said he, I have seen God face to face, and my
life is preserved. 31 And the Sun rose to him, as he passed Peniell, and he
halted upon his thigh.
CHAP. I. A privilege of the Godly, that say God is with them, none can be
against them, to hurt them. My help is in the name of the Lord.
IT is a comfortable saying for the Godly, that is set down by the Apostle, If
God be with us, who can be against us? This sentence does not deny, but that
good men even in a good course may have enemies: but it does import this
comfort, that the opposition which is made unto them, cannot hurt them; we may
be cast down, but we cannot perish: Our enemies may trouble us, but cannot
overcome us. Ius. Mar. Apol. 2. ad Anton. Imp.
Yea, capitis poena nos possunt afficere, nocere non possunt, they may take the
head from us, but cannot hurt us. It is not for this life they fight, who have
laid hold on eternal life; our joy and our crown none are able to take from
us. Uere enim tuta pro Christo, and cu^ Christo Bern.
pugna, in qua nec vulneratus, nec occisus, fraudabiris victoria. There is no
danger in that battle wherein we fight for Christ, and with Christ, for we are
sure, that whether we be wounded, or slain, we shall not be defrauded of Yet
good men may be crossed in a good course.
the victory. Jacob here a good man, is in a good course, for he is travailing
at the Lords command from Padan Ara^ unto Canaan, yet is he troubled with
enemies: for Laban pursues him behind, and Esau comes against him before;
but both of them labor in vain, because God is with him.

The Lord does in such sort bridle 2 King. 9. 20. But God shall either bridle,
or change, or confound their enemies.
the rage of Laban, that albeit he marched after Jacob more furiously then Iehu
the son of Nimshi marched after Iehoram, thinking to satisfy his
discontented mind, by reducing Jacob to a greater slavery then he was in
before: yet the Lord puts inhibition to the conclusions of his heart, and makes
him feign to sue for Jacobs friendship, and to enter into a covenant of peace
with him.

Yea, which is more comfortable, the Lord makes Laban himself a preacher of
Gods providence, in mercy watching over Jacob. Thus the Lord bridleth Laban,
and sends him back again to his own harm, without doing harm to Jacob, or
any of his. And as to Esau the Lord in like manner changes his cruel Heart,
and makes him favorable to Jacob, so that the same hands wherewith once he
thought to have slain him, embraces him, and with the same mouth that once
vowed to have his life, he kisses him: so sure are they unto whom the Lord is a
protector. For when the ways of a man please the Lord he can make his enemies
his friends.

If ye will mark and consider this As the sufferings of Christ abounds in us,
so his consolations abounds. 2 Cor. 1. 5. Verse 2.
History, that the Lord so carefully way^es upon his servant Jacob, that for
every trouble which arises to him, he acquaints him ever with some new and
singular Consolation. In the beginning of this Chapter, the Angels of the Lord
appeared unto Jacob, to comfort him, they brought him in effect this message
from the Lord: Fear not, O Jacob, the power and malice of thy brother Esau,
for here are we, the host of the living God to go with thee, and assist
thee, according to the promise of protection in thy journey, that God made to
thee in Bethel, wherein thou saw the Angels ascending and descending upon the
Ladder: we are now sent to wait upon the; as we conveyed thee in thy coming,
so are we now safely to convey thee in thy returning, in dispite of all that
will oppose themselves against thee.

This vision no doubt did confirm the heart of Jacob for a while, and
encouraged him to the journey: yet soon after he is troubled with a new fear.
^he report of his Messengers, who told him that Esau was coming against him
with four hundred men, does in such sort disquiet his mind, that he forgets
his former comforts, and he becomes exceedingly afraid.

And in this each one of us, may An image of our weakness.
see an image of our own weakness. Jacob had many proofs and experiences of
Gods mercy, it is not long since he got joyful deliverance, from Laban, and
since the Lord as I have said, comforted him by the ministry of his Angels: and
yet now behold how small a thing discourages him: certainly such is the
weakness of the dearest Children of God, that it is not one confirmation, yea
not many experiences of mercy, that will sustain us, but we have need
continually and hourly We have need that the Lord should every day renew his
mercies toward us.
to be strengthened with new grace of corroboration. Plants that are set in the
earth, require watering when they are young, and corn that grows in the
field, without the first and latter rain, comes not to maturitie and
perfection: so we, unless that every hour the rain of heavenly grace descend
upon us from God, or at the least his dew distill into our hearts, by a secret
and unperceived manner, cannot possibly stand; no, not one moment, in the state
of grace. Every spiritual desertion manifests our weakness, the voice of a
Damsel shall shake us, as it did Peter; the rumor of a trouble shall affray
us, as here it affrayes Jacob: it is the Lords countenance which makes us to
live* Cause thy face O Lord to shine Psalm. 80.
upon us, and we shall be safe.

Abraham in Aegipt got a notable Not once, but often do the godly fall, and
that many times in one and the self same sin.
proof of the Lords provident mercy waiting over him, preserving Sarah
inviolate, when he had exponed her chastity to the concupiscence of an
Ethnike, king Pharaoh: but was this experience of God his mercy sufficient to
confirm him, and make him strong against the like tentation in time to come?
No surely, for shortly thereafter in Gerah, among the Philistines, he falls into
the same sin of fearful distrust; so that again the second time he seeks
the preservation of his life, by hazarding the chastity of Sarah: And that
worthy Prophet Samuel, albeit he found many a time the Lords presence with
him, assisting him in such sort, that he suffered none of his words to fall to
the ground, yet when God commanded him go, and annoint David, he refused at
the first, and why? because he feared least Saul should slay him. Who would
think that such weakness had bin in the man of God, that having the word of
the Lord for his warrant, he should yet be afraid of the countenance of man?
Thus now and We have our spiritual faintings and sownings, warning us of our
own weakness. Acts.
then has the Lord given to the best of his children, a proof of their own
weakness, that we looking unto them, might be humbled within our selves,
knowing that we are nothing without the Lord. As Eutichus fell from his seat in
the window, wherein he sat hearing Paul preach: so have we our own sownings,
whereby many times we fall from the seat of our devotion, from the full
assurance of faith, which causes confidence, from the sense of mercy and
spiritual joy rising thereof, into horrible distrust, and fearful
perturbations; so that we become almost dead, heartlesse, comfortless, and
without feeling: But blessed be the Lord, who even at those times, does keep
our souls in life, and lifts us again into his Psalm.
arms, more lovingly then Paul did Eutichus he sets us again on our feet, he
renues his mercyes, and restores his former joys unto us. Let it therefore
And that God is the strength of our life.
never go out of our minds, that God is the strength of our life, without
whose grace we have no standing, that so our eyes and our hearts may be
continually advanced toward him, desiring the Lord to be with us, and at no
time to leave us. In all the course of our life, let us say to the Lord with
Moses, I will not go forward one foot, except thou go with me, otherwise we
shall faint under every burden, stumble at every impediment, and fall under the
least tentation, that shall overtake us: but if the Lord be with us, we shall
be able to do all things, through him that comforts us.

CHAP. II. Gods fatherly compassion appears in that he handles us most
tenderly, when we are weakest.
NOtwithstanding, for this infirmity in Jacob the Lord does not reject him, but
rather like a loving father, handles him so much the more tenderly. It is the
Lords praise and our comfort, he breaks not the bruised reed, and quenches not
the smoking flax, he is the God who comforts the abject, and binds up the
broken in heart. It was not for Jacobs worthiness, that the Lord did first
choose him, and now for his weakness he will not reject him: therefore does he
now appear to Jacob in his need, and minister unto him greater comfort then
any he got before. In the beginning of the Chapter, the Lord sent his Angels,
his ministering spirits to comfort him; and now because Jacob yet is in fear,
in the end of the Chapter, ye see how he comes himself, and comforts him. Such
is thy tender mercy O Lord toward those whom once thou have chosen to be
thine, that thou will never forsake them surely, because thou Malac.
art not changed, therefore it is that we are not consumed, though we fall thou will put under thine hand and raise us up Ps. 37. 24.
again, and make thy last comfort always the greatest.

The vision is rare; the like not again This rare vision teaches the manner
of Gods wrestling with his children.
to be found in all the book of God: yet most profitable for our edification,
as containing in it an exemplar of Gods wrestling with his own children, and
therefore meet to be considered of all the good soldiers of Jesus Christ,
wrestlers in the spiritual warfare. And therefore, for the better
understanding of it, and giving greater light to the whole story, in the entry
we shall permit these three things God willing. First what moved the Lord at
this time to appear unto his servant Jacob. Next what is the form and manner
of the Lords apparition. And thirdly what is the end of it.

CHAP. III. The cause moving the Lord to appear to Jacob, at this time.
THe cause moving the Lord to appear to Jacob, was the hard estate wherein his
servant stood at this time. For Jacob is now in great anguish of mind,
tumbling as it were between fear and confidence, between hope and despair:
hope bidding him go forward in his journey, despair by the contrary
dissuading him; confidence promising him safety, fear threatening him with
danger. His hope leanes on the word of God, who promised to be with him, and
prosper him: his fear is conceived of the words of Esau, who had vowed to slay
him, and is now wakened again, and augmented by the report of his servants,
who told him, that Esau was coming against Jacobs perplexity.
him with an army. Thus did he walk staggering upon feet, not unlike the feet
of Daniels Image, partly of clay, Dan.
partly of iron. Some of his thoughts being weak and impotent; others strong
and forcible to carry him forward. In this perplexity now sta^ds Jacob, having
no conclusion nor counsel within him without contradiction, uncertain what to
do, or which way to turn him; not unlike Iehosophat, which being straited 2
Chro. 20
with the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, stood up before the Lord and said,
O Lord there is no strength in us, to stand against this great multitude,
neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. In like manner
say I, does Jacob here, being assaulted with a force he was not able to
resist, he turns him to the Lord, and expones to the Lord in humble manner
his fear: Deliver me O Lord from the hand of my brother Esau, for I fear him,
least he come upon me, and smite me, and the mother upon the children.
Therefore is it that now the Lord comes, as in due season and convenient time,
to show himself for the comfort of his servant. No help for Jacob in man, the
Lord puts to his right hand, and comforts him. Ibi enim incipit diuinu^ The
help of God begins when other help fails.
auxilium, vbi deficit humanum. When all other helps fails the Children of
God, then comes in the help of God, for he knows best the very point and
article of time, wherein it is meet that he should be the diliuerer of them
who wayt upon him.

As to the manner of the apparition, the Lord is not content to answer The
manner of the Lords apparition is both by word and vision.
Jacob by word only, nor by sending secretly patience and comfort unto his
troubled spirit (which way many a time he answers the prayers of his own) but
he confirms him by an extraordinary vision. For he appears to Jacob, in the
form of a man, and wrestles with him, he assayes him not with a superior
strength which he was not able to withstand, but applies himself to Jacobs
weakness, and disposes the wrestling in such a manner, that Jacob gets the
victory, albeit not without a wound, for his thigh bone is disjoynted, and put
out of the joint, so that he haulteth all the days of his life: which as for
the present time it was a matter of his humiliation, being a discovery of his
weakness, and of the Lords indulgence, whereby only he prevailed victor in the
combat, so was it for all time to come, a memorial and remembrance unto him of
this most comfortable apparition.

And as to the end of the Lords appearing, The end of the Lords apparition is
Jacobs confirmation.
the end, says Theodoret, was the confirmation of Jacobs heart against fear;
ideo enim Angelus cu^ Jacob luctari voluit, vt timenti fratrem fiduciam
inijceret. And this ye may perceive out of the words which the Lord vtters when
the wrestling is ended, thou have wrestled with God, and shall also prevail
with men. Fear not therefore (will the Lord say) O my servant Jacob, to
encounter with Esau, who is but a mortal man; I, who have furnished thee with
strength to stand in this wrestling with GOD, shall furnish thee with strength
also in all thy conflicts with men, and thou shall prevail. This is the
ground of all our comfort in trouble, which if we could remember, then would we
not be cast down nor disquieted with fears,, but would sanctify Esaias. 8. 13.
the Lord of hosts in our hearts, and make him our fear. It is not in our
name, nor strength, nor in the power of nature that we stand and wrestle. We go
forth against our Goliath in the name of our God, weak in our selves, yet in
him more then Conquerours: Mayor enim est Cyp. lib. 2 epist. 6.
qui prae est in nobis, quam qui in hoc mundo, nec plus ad deijoiendum potest
terrena poena, quam ad erigendum diuina tutela. He is stronger that rules in
us, then the Prince of this world, Neither are these evils which earthly men
are able to inflict upon us, so forcible to cast us down, as the heavenly
help is able to raise us up: let us always walk forward in this our
strength. The Lord Psalm. 27.
is my light and salvation, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then
shall I be afraid.

But now, before that yet we enter into the particulars, let us mark this
profitable lesson, that upon the grounds I have laid, arise to be observed. If
we consider what is the Lords purpose How meruailously God in dealing with his
children works by contraries.
and intention, what again are the means that he uses to bring about his
purpose: and ye shall see that the Lord uses means, which appears contrary
to his end. His purpose is to confirm Jacob, the means he uses, is
wrestling with Jacob, a strange manner of working, that the Lord should shake
him he minds to strengthen, that he should wound him whom he purposes to
confirm: and thus, and this manner of way on a sudden, terrify by a strange
wrestling in the night, and in a solitary place, his servant, whom he came to
comfort; but so it is, the working of the Lord often times is by contraries. In
the first work of creation, he made all things of nothing. So did he work
in them the work of creation.
He commanded light to shine out of darkness. He formed the body of man, his
most excellent earthly creature, of the basest matter dust and clay; of the
vilest creature, he made the most honorable, and all to show the glory of his
power. In the work of redemption in So also in the work of redemption.
like manner, our Savior Jesus by sustaining shame, has conquered to us,
glory; by enduring the Cross, has obtained the crown; by suffering death,
has destroyed death, and him who had the power thereof: and after the And so
daily in his Saints Psalm.
same manner of working, he is yet daily marvelous in his Saints: By death he
brings them unto life; He kills and he makes alive. Through doubtings he leads
them to assurance; by temporal despair he brings them to abound in hope; he
afrayes them with his terrors, to make them the more capable of his
consolations. It is strange and marvelous in our eyes; may not we learn it
by daily experience, that God delivers us from Satan, by letting Satan
loose for a while upon us? He saues us from our sins, by gathering all our
sins against us, and laying them to the charge of our conscience, and by a
present feeling of his wrath, he makes us flee that terrible Wrath which is
to come.

Be not therefore discouraged, ye We should not therefore be discouraged when
God seems uncouth and strange to us.
who find this working of the Lord, faint not though the Lord after this
manner do exercise you, that when ye cry for mercy, yet to your feeling ye
apprehend nothing but anger: reverence the working of God, suppose for the
present ye understand it not; let the Lord walk on his own way, and wait
thou with patience for comfort in the Psalm.
end, the Lord will send a gracious rain upon his inheritance to refresh it,
when it is weary: though he kill us, he shall make us to live again. When he
has humbled us to the grave, yet will he raise us again. After two days he
will revive us, Hose. 6.
and in the third he shall raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. It is
no rotten foundation we lean to; the foundation Tim.
of the Lord remains sure, and therefore, albeit the Lord should s^ay us yet
will we trust in him. He sent a fearful darkness on Abraham or ever he showed
him Genesis.
the comfortable vision. He stroke Paul Acts.
unto the ground, and confounded him, before that he converted him; he struck
him with blindness, or ever he opened his eyes; he began hardly with Jacob,
but ends with a blessing; at the first he dealt rigorously in his answers with
the woman of Canaan, but in the end comforted her. As Joseph for a long time
made it strange with his brethren, but at length his inflamed affection
compelled him to embrace them: So the Lord, though he make a show of an angry
countenance toward his own, yet his inestimable love and fatherly compassion
shall force him to reveal himself unto them in the sweetness of his mercy:
For a little while have I forsaken Esaias.. 54. 7
thee, for a moment, in mine anger, (as it seemed) I hid my face from thee for
a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee,
says the Lord thy redeemer. We shall perceive For in the end he shall show
himself a loving father to his own
in the end, that which now in the midst of trouble we see not: though in our
afflictions we take him up as an adversary, through the weakness of our faith,
yet shall we find, that then God was with us, working for our deliverance,
when he seemed to be against us. Let us not therefore be cast down, when the
Lord works with us after his own manner of working, by means unknown to us.
Let us learn of Jacob to wrestle with the Lord, and with that woman of Canaan,
cleave to him the faster, that he seems to put us away: we shall feel in the
end, the Lord is near Psalm. 1. 19.
unto them who a^e of a contrite heart, and will save such as be afflicted in
spirit. Yea, we shall with David rejoice and glory in the Lord, it is good for
me that ever the Lord corrected me; The Lord be blessed therefore, for he
has shown his marvelous kindness toward me.

It is now time that we enter into the Division of the history.
History it self, which has these two parts: The first sets down the Angels
1 The wrestling, and five circumstances thereof.
wrestling with Jacob: The second contaynes the conference of the Angel with
Jacob, which follows upon the wrestling. As for the wrestling, we have in it
five things to be considered: first, the time of it: secondly, the persons 2
The conference betwixt God and Jacob.
between whom: thirdly, the manner of the wrestling, whether corporal only,
spiritual only, or mixed: fourthly, how long continues the wrestling: and last
of all the event and issue of this wrestling.

CHAP. IIII. The first circumstance, the time of the wrestling.
AS to the first, the circumstance of 1
time is noted by Moses, when Jacob (says he) was left alone. Amongst many
reasons that might move Jacob to be alone, I incline to none more then this:
he sought to be solitary, to the end he might have the fitter occasion to pray,
and pour out his grief the more freely and homely into the Lords bosom. For
we know that the presence of men is oftentimes a great impediment of the free
communing of our souls with God, and that the children of God will boldly
communicate those secrets to the Lord, which they Solitarines convenient for
prayer.
will not utter to their dearest friends. We have here then to learn with
Jacob, sometime to withdraw our selves from the dearest company of men, that
we may have the better occasion by prayer to confer with our God, For he
who loves wisdom, will separate himself to seek it. Yet are we to
remember, And yet solitarines auailes not without inward attention.
that solitariness auailes not without, unless there be silence within: For
though the body be removed from the eyes of men, if the soul in the mean
time be disquieted with bands of restless and troublesome motions, it is not
possible that we can pray. Maxima est segnitia, alienari and capi Cypr de orat.
dom.
ineptis cogitationibus, cum Dominum deprecaris, quasi sit aliquid, quod magis
debeas cogitare, quam quod cum Deo loquaris, quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas,
cum te ipse non audias, vis Deum memorem esse tui cum rogas, cum tu ipse memor
tui non sis, hoc est ab host in totum non cauere, hoc est vigilare oculis and
cord dormire, cum debeat Christianus, etiam cum dormit oculus, cord vigilare.
It is (says Cyprian) a very great sloth to be alienate and carried away with
unmeet cogitations, when thou prayest unto God: as if there were any thing
whereof thou should think more then this, that thou art speaking with God.
How desire thou that God should hear thee, when thou hear not thy self?
or that he should be mindful of thee, who art not mindful of thy self? By
so doing, thou art not wary enough of thy enemy, this is to watch with thine
eyes and sleep with thy heart, whereas it becomes a Christian even to wake
with the heart, when the eye is asleep: I sleep but my heart Cant.
waketh.

When therefore we go to pray, we What preparation should go before prayer.
must do as did our Savior, when he went to raise Tabitha from the dead, he
put the Minstrels and the Mou^ners to the door; and we must put worldly
thoughts out of our minds, tolerable servants (if so be we use them as
servants) at another time, but no way tolerable in the time of prayer: Like
the Asses and Servants of Abraham, which he used as helps to carry him forward
in his journey, but left them at the foot of the mountain, when he went up to
pray, and sacrifice to the Lord. And thus the perturbations of our minds
within being quieted, then let us eschew as far as possibly we can, all
occasions of distractions without us. Let us with his spouse in the Canticles,
follow our Husband to the Cant.
fields, and there talk with him: or with David, let us examine our hearts
upon Psalm. 4.
our ^eds, and be still: or as our Savior Mat. 6. 5.
commands us: Let us enter into our chamber, and shut the door, and there in
secret pray to our heavenly father. After this manner went Daniel to his Dan.
Acts.
chamber alone, and Peter to the top of the house alone, and Jesus Christ How
careful we should be, and why, to seek occasions to pray.
went alone to the mountain to pray all night. And so much the more earnestly
should we practice this Lesson, because now by Jacobs example we learn, that
then the Lord does deal most familiarly to show himself unto us, when we are
best content to separate our selves from all other pleasures, that we may get
conference with the Lord: whereas by the contrary, when we neglect to seek
him, and will not do so much as redeem a time and occasion to speak with
him, by forgoing for a while, the company of men, the Lord accounts that he is
dishonored Neglect of prayer is a conte^ning of God.
of us, that we are such, as have little delight in the Lord, yea, preferres
every thing before him: and therefore also it is, that the Lord delights not to
be homely with us, and to acquaint us with his familiar presence, because we
do not carefully wait upon him.

The Lord therefore increase in us True prayer always returns with profit to
us.
this delight and disposition to pray, that we may esteem it a benefit and
vantage to us to have the least occasion to pray, for it was never yet seen
but that a heart to pray has ever been an undoubted forerunner of a special
blessing of God to ensue. If we open our mouth Psalm.
wide the Lord shall fill it: seeking must go before finding, and we must
knock before it be opened. If we have the first we may be sure of the second.
Our Savior has assured us, that our heavenly father will give his holy spirit
to them who desires him. When Abraham Genes.
prayed to the Lord, the Lord answered him in such sort that every petition he
sent forth returned back with some new gain: at six petitions he brought the
How at six petitions Abraham brought the Lord from fifty to ten.
Lord from fifty to ten, that the Lord promised to spare all Sodom for ten
righteous. And that which is most comfortable, the Lord left not off answering,
till first Abraham ceased from praying: As that Oil miraculously multiplied by
Elisha, continued so long as the poor widow had an empty vessel wherein to
receive it: so may we be sure that the grace of our God, shall without ceasing
be multiplied upon us, so long as our hearts are enlarged to call upon him.
Blessed are they Mat. 5.
who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

CHAP. V. The second circumstance, the persons between whom the wrestling is.
THe second thing that here comes 2
to be considered, is the persons, between whom the wrestling is. He that
wrestles here with Jacob, is not a Man, albeit Moses so calls him, because so
he appears: neither is he a created Angel, albeit Hosea call him an Angel
of God. But he who wrestles is the son of God, the great Angel of the
covenant, hic homo verus Deus Chris. in Genesis 32.
est, non ex nuncupatione, sed natura: he it is, who in this combat is the
wrestler with Jacob.

Where first it is to be demanded, How as man Christ appeared to the Fathers
before his incarnation.
how it is that Jesus Christ appeared to the Fathers under the law, in form
and shape of a man, he not being yet incarnate and made man indeed. The
answer is, that appearing of Christ in form of a man, was as Tertullian
calls it, praeludiu^ humanitatis, a presignation of his manifestation after
in the flesh: but there is a great difference between the appearing and his
incarnation that followed, in the fullness of time. For Gal.
first, albeit christ before his incarnation took on verily the body of man,
yet Difference between Christ's apparition and his manifestatio^ after in the
flesh.
was he not then a man indeed, he was not then of the seed the woman, but when
fullness of time came, God sent his son into the world made of a woman, then
the word was made flesh: then took he on the seed of Abraham, and became in all
things man like unto us except sin: then he assumed our nature, and joined it
into one subsistence with his divine nature, that is, into one personal
union, for the straitness of the which conjunction, it is said, and most
truly, that Christ Jesus Man is God, and Christ Jesus God is Man: which
before his incarnation could not be said of him. Secondly, whereby Christ
under the law took on the body of man, was but temporal, and for the doing
of some particular errand, which so soon as he had finished, he laid away
again. But Christ Jesus has now assumed the nature of man, never to be laid
away again: as he has joined our nature with his divine nature in a
personal union, so also in an everlasting union; so that there shall never be
a separation between them.

Always in this manner of Christ's appearing Christ's love is seen in his
familiar apparition to the fathers before the Law.
unto Jacob, and other of his servants before the law: let us take up the love
of Jesus toward his own, that for their sake he is content to abase his
majesty, and appear to his servants, not in a shape answerable to his glory,
but in such a form as their weakness might best comport with: for what kind
of more homely and familiar apparition can God use to man, than to appear as a
man, in the shape most familiar to man? Not as God clad with glory and
Majesty, for that way no flesh might abide him. In this O Lord thou have
showed thy goodness to man: in this our father Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had a
proof of thy loving kindness: and in this, all thy children may see what
great account thou make of them, who love and fear thy holy name.

But what is all this, if it be compared But more abundant ly has he showed
his love to us in this last age.
with that which after followed, I do mean with that great love, which now in
this last age of the world, according to the truth of his promises he has
showed unto his Church, in that he has kept the precise, promised, and Iraen.
contra Val lib. 3 cap. 28. Bern. S^r 2. de aduen. dom. Iraen. contra ^al. lib.
3 cap. 31. Tertullide carne Christi. Phil. 2. 7.
appointed period of time, wherein he has appeared to his Church, not in sh^pe
of a man only, as he did to our fathers, but in the very nature of man. A man
indeed, albeit not made man, after the manner of other men: For he is the
stone cut out of the mountain without hands: He was not made man by the
operation of man: He is a flower of the field, not of the garden; he grew up
like a Branch of the root of Iesse: but not by the ordinary labor of a
Gardener. He is the second Adam, very man, but not begotten by man: He being
the God of glory, made himself of no reputation, he took upon him the shape
of a servant, and was made like unto men: and all this he did, that in our
nature he might work the work of our redemption. He came down from the bosom
of his Father, as the great Angel of his counsel, to reveal to us his
fathers will concerning our salvation. It is not customable, that honorable
personages should come to the poorer, but his compassion of our necessities
constrained him: Iacentes enim paralytici in grabbato, Bern. de aduentu. Dom.
Sermon. 1.
diuinam illam non potteramus attingere celsitudinem: For we lying sick of the
palsy in our cowch, were not able to reach unto that divine and high
majesty; therefore he humbled himself to come unto us, because we were not
able to go unto him.

And herein has he uttered toward Man lost himself aspiring to be like unto
God: Christ has saved Man by humbling himself to become like man.
man, his wonderful love. Man being man only, aspired to be like unto God,
and so lost himself, that now he is become worse then a Companion to beasts:
But Jesus being very God, was content to become man, that he might save man,
who was lost. O how has the love of Jesus overcome our ingratitude! he
became the son of man, to make us the sons of God, he has taken on him our
sins, and given to us his righteousness, he refused not to undergo that
death, which was due unto us, that he might make us pertakers of his life. In
a word, Quod homo est, Cypr. de Idol. van.
Christus voluit esse, vt homo possit esse, quod Christus est: That which Man
is Christ would be, that man might be made that which Christ is: and
therefore, Humiliauit se, vt populum qui Cipr. de Eleemos.
iacebat erigeret; vulneratus est, vt vulnera nostra sanaret; seruiuit, vt ad
libertatem seruientes extraheret; mori sustinuit, vt moriens immortalitatem
mortalibus exhiberet. He was humbled himself, Esaias. 53. 5.
that he might raise up his people lying in bondage: He was wounded for our
transgressions, that by his stripes we might be healed. He became a servant,
that we who were servants might be restored to liberty: He suffered death,
that he dying might give immortality to us that are mortal. This is, O Lord,
the greatness of thy love toward us, the length, and breadth, the height, and
depth whereof all thy Saints are not able Ephesians.
to comprehend: But O Lord grant that we may daily grow in the feeling
thereof, that with joy of heart, we may resign our selves fully to thine only
service, who so willingly hast^ given thy self to be ours.

But to return to the consideration How is it that weak men in wrestling
should be party to the mighty God.
of the persons; who wrestles: ye may marvel what wrestling can be between
parties so unequal, between God and Man, between the Creator and the
Creature, between the Potter and his Vessel. When the Lord is angry, the
foundations of the mountains and earth do shake. He breaks down, Psalm. 18.
and it cannot be built, he shuts up, and it cannot be loosed. The pillars of
heaven Job. 12.
tremble and quake at his reproof: at his rebuke he dryes up the sea, and
makes the flood desert, there fish rot for want of water, and dye for thirst.
He clothes the Job. 26.
heavens with darkness: he bids his lightning walk, and they say Lo,
here we Esaias. 50. Job. 38. Job. 41. 1 Samuel 6.
are: he makes the pot to boil like ae pot of ointment, who is able to stand
before this holy Lord? And how then is it that Jacob is brought in here as a
wrestler with the Lord? But here ye must consider the parties, as they are set
down in this conflict by Moses.

The Lord in this wrestling vtters Because God utters not his power and
houlds up man by secret grace.
not himself as the mighty God, he shows not himself in his power, for so
should he easily have confounded his creature, but the Lord utters himself
as a man, and a man in pith and strength inferior to Jacob. Jacob again is
here to be considered, not as a simple man, nor as a man wrestling by his own
strength; but as one standing and wrestling by the strength of God: and hereof
comes his pre^ailing in this battle. The Lord vtters himself less then he
is, and makes up Jacob much more then he was. Magna certe Dei Chrisost. in Ge
32
nisericordia in figura hominis luctari voluit cum iusto vt se illius
humilitati attemperar^t. And this same is the Lords dealing in all his
wrestling with his children, that neither does he use his strength against
the^, nor yet leave them to their own weakness. If the Lord should show
himself a strong God in wrestling against us, then indeed none were able to
stand before him. The three Disciples at the sight of Christ's glory, when he
was transfigurate on mount Tabor, fell to the ground astonished. If sinful
flesh be not able to abide the sight of his glory; how shall Otherwise Man
could not stand before him.
it endure the dint of his power? and that which is most of all, how could
frail man sustain the bensall of his Wrath and anger, if the Lord would
intend it?

Hereof then comes our standing in these inward conflicts of conscience, 1
Cor. 10. 13
that our faithful God suffers us not to be tempted about our power: he
assailes us not above our strength: he sets not our Psalm. 50.
sins in order before us, that we should see them as we committed them. He
permits not his deputy the Conscience to accuse and torment us according to the
merit of our transgressions, he mittigates the stroke of his rod, and
extenuates the pith of his hand, when he puts at us. And with this also by his
secret grace he underprops us; otherwise no power should be found in weak
man, to stand in the meanest of these battles, wherein God shows himself our
adversary party. Yea if the Lord should set up one of our sins to pursue us,
and then withdraw his secret grace from us, we should fall into the
desperation of Caine, and Judas. And if he should arm, but one of our own
cogitations against us, we should become miserable murderers to our selves,
like Saul and Achitophell. If he take his breath out of our nosthrils, we fall
to the ground: or if he should abstract from us the use of Reason, which he
has lent us, we become worse then the beasts. Thus, neither in inward, nor
outward wrestlings, have we any strength of our own to stand before him.

Our standing in trouble is only by the strength of God, who sustaines us: he
puts at us with the one hand, and In wrestlings spiritual, God is both our
assaulter and vphold^r.
underprops us with the other. It is God in us, who overcomes himself
opponing unto us. Qui pro nobis morte^ semel vicit, semper vincit in nobis. And
this ye may see clearly in his dealing with that woman of Canaan, Cyp. lib. 2
epist.
his audible voice was against her, but the secret help of his spirit was
with her: with one hand he repelled her, and with the other he drew her heart
near unto him.

CHAP. VI. Consolation for the Godly afflicted.
THis I have marked for thy consolation, thou who art the warrior and
vvrestler of God, that thou may know, God is the strength of thy life: and
finding it so, may be thankful, and entertain his presence with thee. For
whereof (think thou) has it come, that so many years thou have stood in
the midst of so many tentations? that so long thou have endured these
spiritual vvrestlings, wherein thy conscience, and God who is greater then
thy conscience, has stood up thine accuser: has it come of any strength in
thee? None at all If the Lord Psalm. 94. 17
had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. It is the Lord that
k^epeth Psalm. 66. 9.
our souls in life. The Lord who seemed our Adversary, was our secret
helper; he shook us with tentations, and sustained us with his grace: Even
the Lord who wounded us, did heal us. Hose. 6.
The Lord is the d^liuerer of our soul out of all adversity. Otherwise it had
been impossible for thee (O weak man) to have holden up thi^e head in the
least of these tentations; over which now through his Grace thou have
prevailed, and obtained the victory. Not unto us therefore, O Lord, not unto
Psalm.
us, but unto thy name let the glory be given.

It is again here to be marked, that the Lord when he appears most
familiarly to Jacob, hec exercises him The Lord will not give his children
immunitie from troubles.
with a wearisome wrestling; the suddaintie and novelty vvherof (no doubt) at
the first, did greatly terrific and disquiet him. The Lord then when he coms
to Jacob, does not ^ast him asleep into careless security, but he tosses and
shakes him too and fro, and exercises him with fighting, and struggling all the
night long? whereof we may learn, that even when the Lord is ne^rest, and
most familiar with us, then oftentimes our tentations and wrestlings will be
greatest. So soon as Jacob got the first blessing, therefore withal
incontinent, he behooved to sustain the enmity of Esau, and was forced, for
eschewing his cruelty to undergo banishment. And now when the Lord comes to
bless him again, he first wakes and prepares him by tentation. This is the
order of the Lords working: Blessed is the man, who endures Iam. 1. 12.
tentation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the Lord has promised to them who love him.

It is not then true which sometime Spiritual wrestling a witness of gods
familiar presence with us.
the weak Conscience does conceive and apprehend, that spiritual exercises,
wrestlings, and fightings against tentations, are tokens of descrtion, of the
Lords absence, and departure from us: by the contrary, they are sure witnesses
of the Lords familiar presence with us, whether we fight with the spiritual
weapons of our Warfare against carnal 2 Cor.
men without us, or against our own infidelity, and rebellious affections,
laboring to subdue them, and bring them captive: to Christ's obedience: or
against any other of Satan's temptations, standing with the complete armor of
God at all occasions to resist him. All these vvrestlings I say, are undoubted
tokens of a spiritual life within us, and of the Lords presence with us in
mercy, and forerunners of a further blessing; for as the carnal peace, and
security of the wicked, ends in destruction, and their pride goes before a
fall: when they say Prouer. 1 The. 5. 3
peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction: like that
which fell on the Philistines in the midst of their carnal rejoicing (the
pillars of their house were not sure enough to sustain them) so the inward
humiliation of Gods children, is by a good token, a sure argument of
approaching grace. But as to the wicked, with whom the The wicked being dead
captives cannot fight.
Lord is not, they are no Wrestlers against Satan and sin, for they are dead
in sin and trespasses, and have rendered themselves prisoners, and captives
unto Satan, and are taken of him Captives 2 Timothy
at his will: they live under a miserable peace, with the enemy of their
Salvation. If he wound them, they mourn not, if he command them, they resist
not. And such (alas) are many in this age, whose eyes it may please the Lord
to open, that they may see that miserable state wherein they do stand; and once
may be moved by his Spirit to sigh, under this heavy servitude and bondage
and earnestly call unto God for deliverance*

CHAP. VII. Comfort for Christ's soldiers.
But as for you whom GOD has set at enmity with the Serpent, and entered to
fight in that battle, which once was proclaimed in Paradise, and wherein all
the soldiers of that blessed seed of the woman must fight by course unto the
end of the world. Blessed are ye, for hereby ye may know that the Lord has
loosed the chains of your captivity Ye are no more the slaves and prisoners
of satan, but by grace warriors against him; ye stand on that side whereof
the Captain is, that triumphant conqueror, the victorious Lion of the tribe
of Judah, even that God, Peace, (...) I. Romans
who shall shortly trample Satan under the feet of his Saints. ^aint not ye
therefore because of your continual tentations. Wrestling a sure token of
spiritual life.
Think not the Lord is from you because you are exercised with inward
wrestlings. Wrestling in this life is our greatest perfection, an undoubted
testimony of another life in us, then the life of nature. None can strive
against satan and sin, but by the spirit of the Lord Jesus: or who can hold,
or retain the Lord till he bless him, but he who has the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus: Nature will make no opposition to Nature, and Satan will not strive
against himself: where striving and wrestling is, striving (I mean) for a
blessing from God, and wrestling against sin, there Christ is, there the
spirit of the Lord is, and there a new life is. By it thou art known to be the
good soldier of Jesus, to be the man for whom is prepared the Crown, For no
Tim.
man is crowned except he strive. Let it be therefore no discouragement to thee
that thou art kept under, wrestling with daily tentations, but rather let it
be to thee a witness that God is with thee, as he was with Jacob.

Farther it is to be considered, that Moses says, a Man wrestled with Jacob:
so he appeared to be, but as ye have heard the wrestler was the Lord. In all
our afflictions we should go by the instrument and look to God as our party.
This yields a notable lesson for the children of God, that in all our
wrestlings, what ever appear unto us, or who ever seem our party, it is the
Lord, with whom always we have to do. This consideration vpheld Job that
worthy warrior, in the midst of his Job.
greatest afflictions: when the tempest of wind overthrew the house and
destroyed his seven sons, and three daughters: when fire came down from
heaven, and burnt his seven thousand sheep, and his servants: when the
Sabaeans destroyed his sieve hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she Asses:
when the three bands of Chald^ans took away his three thousand Cammels: yet in
all this he complains not of the iniquity of the Chaldaeans and Sabaeans: he
murmures not against the elements, the air, nor the fire: he speaks no word
against any that were instruments of his trouble: he knew that they were all
under the Lords commandment, to come and go at his pleasure, he turns his
eye toward the Lord, and takes him up for his party. The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And so with this one weapon
of godly consideration he keeps off at one time manifold buffets and blows of
Satan, and is preserved unwounded by them: For in all this Job sinned not with
his mouth.

Good were it for us, if in the whole Our impatience proceeds of this, that
we look to the instrument more then to God.
course of our life, we could remember this: for so should we not be
discouraged, and cast down (as commonly we are) by looking too much to the
instruments of our trouble. Many things we bear the more impatiently, because
we conceit they proceed from men, or other second causes, which we would
receive much more willingly, if we could remember they come from God. Not so
much as a Sparrow, nor a hair of our Mat. 6*
head falls to the ground, without the providence of our heavenly father: He
that keeps our hearts will he not keep our self? Si sic custodiuntur
superflua August. hom. 14.
tua, in quanta securitate est anima tua? If thy hairs be kept, in what
safety is thy soul? What ever cup of trouble men prepare for us, we shall not
drink of it, unless the Lord appoint it, and temper it first with his own
hand. Nabuchad-nezzar Dan.
boasted the three children with a fiery furnace, yet were they not afraid, and
all because they considered that God above him ouer-ruled his intention. Shimei
cursed David, and he Sam.
was not incenced with anger; because he considered that the Lord had sent
him. And Nahomi with this comforted Ruth.
her self against the loss of her husband: It is the Lord (said she) who
humbles me. All these do warn us, whom God has appointed for greater
conflicts, that it is a great feeblenes arising of inconsideration to suffer
our souls to be dimoued out of the state of patience, by the inordinate
behavior of any outward instrument of our trouble. Absit a seruo Christi tali
inquinamentum, Tertul. lib. de patien.
vt patientia maioribus praeparata in minoribus excidat. Let such a spot and
foul blemish be far from the servants of Christ, that our patience which is
prepared for greater conflicts should fail, and fall away in smaller
tentations If when we run with footmen Ier. 12. 5.
they weary us, how shall we match our selves with horses? If when we wrestle
with men, who are flesh and blood, we are so easily ouer-throwne with every
breath of their mouth, and wounded with their smallest injuries, that we
faint and become impatient, how shall we wrestle against principalities and
powers? Romans 8.
or how shall we resist the fiery darts of the Devil? We have therefore for
help of our weakness, to gather our thoughts and remember, that whosoever be
the instrument of our trouble, it is the Lord, with whom we have to do, so
shall we the more easily possess our souls in patience, and give glory to
God.

CHAP. VIII. The third Circumstance, the manner of the wrestling, corporal,
spiritual, or mixed.
IN the third room we promised to speak of the manner of this wrestling,
whether it be corporal only, or spiritual only, or mixed. Now that it is
mixed, and so partly corporal, and partly spiritual will appear, by comparing
Moses and the Prophet Hosea together. That the wrestling was corporal it is
clear, of the disjoynting of Jacobs thigh, whereof Moses makes mention: and
that it was also spiritual appears, partly of that which Moses says, that
Jacob straue for the blessing, and partly of that which Hosca says, Hos. 12. 4.
that he prevailed by wrestling and praying.

These are the sorest kind of wrestlings, when the Lord at one time exercises
his children, both in body and mind, that his heavy hand of sickness, Sore
wrest lings when God at one time humbles his children both in body and mind.
Prou.
poverty, or some such like is upon their bodies, and therewithal heavy
inward troubles upon their minds. This is indeed a very hard estate: for as
Solomon says, the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear it? and yet with both those at one time has the Lord
exercised his dearest servants so hardly, that the vehemence of their trouble,
has forced them to pour out most lamentable complaints; My heart (says
David) Ps. 109. 22
is wounded within me. My spirit is Psa. 143. 4
in perplexity, and my soul is amazed. The Lord renewes his plagues, and
increases Job. 10. 17 Job. 9. 8.
his wrath against me (says Job) So that changes and armies of sorrows are
against me: the Lord suffers me not to take my breath, but fills me with
bitterness. The Lord (says Nahomi) has given me much bitterness. I have
fightings 2 Cor. 7. 5
without, and terrors within, says the Apostle. It is a common disease of the
Children of God in their troubles, to think that their troubles are singular:
I have therefore marked this, that none of them should think themselves
marrowlesse, when the Lord deals with them after this manner; For no tentation
has overtaken you, but 1 Cor. 10.
that which appertains to men.

We have here in like manner to A rare tentation when Gods working seems to
fight with his word and promise.
mark another kind of tentation, whereby God tryes the faith of his children,
which is, when his work seems directly to fight against his Word, so that in
working with his children he appears to come against his promise. As for
example, the Lord has promised, that if I repent, he will forgive; if I
mourn for my sins, he will comfort me; if I ask from him, he will give
unto me, so says he in his word: Yet I find in his working with me, the
contrary (will the troubled conscience of the Child of God say) I do repent
from mine heart of my sins, and am sorrowful that ever I offended my God, but
I cannot feel the Remission of them: I mourn, but the Comforter who should
refresh my soul comes not. I call and cry night and day, but the Lord
hears me not. Unto this estate I know that oftentimes the dearest of Gods
children are brought, as if the Lord had forgot to be mercifuli unto them, and
shut up his tender mercies in displeasure, they can find no promised rest to
their soul, nor peace to their troubled minds.

CHAP. IX. How we should be have our selves in this tentation, we are taught.
THou therefore whose heart is set to seek the Lord, and in this perplexity
would know what to do and how to behave thy self, I can no better way
resolve thee, then to send thee to look unto Abraham, Jacob, Job, and the rest
of these, who have been exercised with the like tentations before thee. Mark
therefore, and consider how the Lord commanded Jacob to go back again unto
Canaan, and promised to be with him; yet now in the journey (as it would seem)
he comes against him. He bad him go forward and yet disioynts his thigh bone,
and so vnables him to go as he was wont. Notwithstanding Jacob still cleaues
fast to the promise of the 1 By Jacob.
Lord, being persuaded that the Lord could not fail him; and therefore
contrary to his present sense and feeling, trusting still on the word of the
Lord, for all the appearing contrariety of his working, he craves a blessing
from him that wrestles with him.

Again, will ye look unto Abraham 2 By Abraham.
our father? the Lord made him a promise, that in Isaac, his seed should be
blessed, and yet he commands him to slay him. A wonderful tentation, that the
Lord commands him to slay that child, in whom he had promised the
multiplication and blessing of his posterity: for here the promise of God and
his commandment seems to fight together. Yet Abraham strengthened in the
faith, as he received Isaac from the dead womb of Sara, does not doubt but God
was able to raise him from the dead again; and therefore resting on the Lords
promise, he spares not to sacrifice Isaac, being fully assured that the Lords
apparent contrary working, could no way be prejudicial to the verity of his
word. O strong! O rare! O wonderful Faith! Therefore the Lord who gives no
vain styles to his servants, honors Abraham with this name, the father of
the faithful. For by his example, our weakness is strengthened to give credit
to the Lord, when he speaks to us.

And the same lesson of Faith, is in 3 By Jacob.
like manner taught unto us, by the example of patient Job (for many
schoolmasters and examples have we on whom the ends of the world are fallen.)
No doubt he had laid up the promises of God in his heart, whereupon he
depends: yet does the Lord handle him sohardly, both in body and mind, as if
he were determinate to keep no promise unto him. Yet Job for all this
distrusts not the truth of Gods promise, but gripes them so surely, that in his
greatest extremity he resolves, O Lord, albeit thou should slay me, yet
will I trust in thee. That is albeit Lord thou should deal hardlier with me
then thou have done, yet will I never think but thou will be merciful to me
according to thy promise: there is a heart knit to the Lord; there is a soul
cleaning to God without separation, that thus concludes. O Lord, none of thy
works shall make me to misbeleeue thy word: though thou cast me down to hell,
my eye shall be upward toward thee, and my soul shall love thee, even when
it appears thou say that thou have no delight in me.

And the like also may we see, in that 4 By the woman of Canaan.
woman of Canaan, according to that promise, ask^ and it shall be given, call
on me in thy trouble, and I shall hear thee, and deliver thee. She (...), O
Lord have mercy on me: but at the (...) gets no answer. She cries again, and
again, but contrary to another promise, as it would appear; God gives to all
men liberally and reproaches no man, not only is she refused, but reproched as
a dog, and one not meet to eat the childrens bread. But at the length leaning
without wavering to the Lords promise, she receives a favorable answer, O
woman, great is thy ^aith.

CHAP. X. Let us ever lean to the Word of God, how strange soever his work
s^eme unto us.
OF all this then the lesson arises unto us, that when ere the Lord shall
exercise us so hardly, as to our Judgment Gods working with us seems to fight
with his promise made unto us, so that suppose we pray, and we mourn, and we
seek comfort, we can find none: yea the more we pray, the more our trouble
increases; yet let us not despair, but learn at our brethren, who have
fought the like battles before us, to rest assuredly on Gods promise. For in
the end his hardest working shall be found to tend unto the performance of his
promise made us in Christ Jesus: let the Lord walk on in his secret ways
known to himself, and let us give to the Lord this glory. I know, O Lord that
it cannot Ps. 119. 75 verse. 89.
(...) but well with them, who loves thee. I know O Lord that thy judgments
are right, for thy word endures for eu^r in heaven, and thy truth is from
generation to generation. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one iotte of
the Word of God shall not pass (...). O happy are they to whom the Lord has
made a promise of mercy! they shall sing in the end with Ezechiel: The Lord
has ^sa. 38. 15. Pst 119. 18 Psa. 89. 33
said it, and the Lord has done it: he will stablish the promise he has made
to his servant, and he will not alter the word that he has spoken with his
lips. Wherefore, O thou that art afflicted, and humbled in spirit, disquieted
within thy self, wait upon God, and thou shall yet give him thanks.

Now in the fourth room, we have to speak of the time, how long the 4 The
fourth circumstance how long endures the wrestling.
wrestling continues. Moses says it lasted, to the breaking of the day. Here
then is a new mercy to be marked; the Lord will never so exercise his children
with wrestlings, but in regard of their weakness, graunts them some
intermission, and a breathing time, least they should faint: he will lay no
more upon them, then they be able to bear, 1 Chro. 10 13.
neither suffer his rods to lie longer upon their backs, then may serve for
their weal. Al our afflictions are measured Our afflictions are measured in
quantity, quality and time.
by the Lord, in quantity, quality, and continuance of time. For quantity,
the Lord propines to each one of his Children, a c^p of affliction convenient
for their purgation: and as to quality, he tempers also our afflictions, that
where of their own nature they are exceeding bitter, being the fruits of
sin, worse to drink then the waters of Marah, until Moses changed them by
prayer, and made them sweet. He alters them in like manner, by the virtue of
the Cross of Christ, and his intercessions for us, the become so sweet and
delectable, that we rejoice in t^bulation. And as for time, he gives us but
days of try all and affliction, hours of tentation, attending to his good
pleasure, and wish^ dispensation. If we cast Shadra, Mesah, and Abednego into
the fire, one like the son of God shall go with them, to wait upon them, and
relieve them in convenient time. Yea, no goldsmiths waits so diligently upon
his gold to take it out of the fire in due time, as the Lord attends upon his
children, that in due season he may draw them out of their troubles. Jacob
wrestles no longer then the dawning, and all our troubles have an appointed
time of deliverance, Weeping may abide Psalm.
in the evening, but joy comes in the morning.

And of this arises to us, a lesson This should teach us patience in trouble,
for there is no deliverance till God give it.
of patience, that so long as it pleased the Lord to exercise us with any
cross, so long should we be content to bear it. No minting to cast off the
yoke, until it please the Lord to take it from our neck. Noah was weary of his
abiding in the Arc a year and a day (for so long he remained) and no doubt
when he saw the ground he was greatly desirous to come forth, but he will have
no deliverance till the Lord who closed him in command him also to come out;
and in very truth there can be no deliucrance but that which comes from the
Lord, as this one notable example among more makes manifest unto us. When the
Angel commanded Lot to escape for his life to the mountain, ^e requested the
Angel for license to ^arry at Zoar. And so, where the Lo^d pointed out the
mountain for the place of his deliverance, he himself makes choice of
another; but when he obtained that which he desired, durst he for all that
abide in Zoar? no certainly, he could never live without fear, until he went
forward to the mountain, whereunto the Angel at the first directed him. So
that both the time, and the place and the manner of our deliverance must be
referred to the Lord, and not elected by our selves. Then we rest in
quietness, when we rest on the will and mercy of God, not upon our own
deceitful refuges of vanity.

And here is discovered the foolishness How foolish are the wicked, who seek
deliverance by other means.
of the wicked, who being impatient in trouble, have recourse with Achaziah to
Beelzebub, to Satan, or his instruments, seeking by sorcerie, charming, or
some other such unlawful means to prevent the Lords deliverance. Alas, these
blind wretches see not that which after this manner they seek to read
themselves, they fall under the danger of an everlasting wrath. When Hananiah
that false Prophet brake that yoke of timber, which the Lord put about the
neck of (...), to presignifie the captivity of Babel, the Lord insteede of
it, put a yoke of iron about his neck, which Hananiah was not able to break.
So shall it be with thee: O thou, who withdrawest thy self from thy Lord;
thou who wilt cast off the yoke of God, and not tarry till the Lord deliver
thee. Instead of a yoke of wood, the Lord shall fasten thy neck with a yoke of
iron, that is, in stead of a light temporal affliction, whereof thou have
freed thy self for a time, by means unlawful, The Lord Ier. 28. 13.
shall sting thee with Serpents, and Cockatrices, which thou shall not be able
to charm: he shall cast thee into that Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, and shall bind upon thee for ever that terrible wrath, which is a
wrath to come, except in time thou repent.

But leaving the wicked, let us learn We should pray to the Lord in trouble,
but not prevent him.
at Jacob, who with patience continues in the wrestling, as long as the Lord
will wres^le with him, so that as the Lord began it, so is he the first that
breaks it off. We may indeed with a good warrant, pray for deliverance out
of trouble, saying with Christ our Lord; If it be thy will, Lord let this cup
pass by me; but always so, that we submit our will to the Lords most holy
will; Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. And in the mean season,
so long as it shall please the Lord to keep us under affliction, let us bewa^e
that we murmr not, neither limite the holy one of Israel, to preseribe unto
him, either the time or manner of our* deliverance. (...) to the Lord his own
praise; He is the God that saves us, and Psa. 16. 20
unto the Lord belongs the issues of death: Wait thou patiently on the Lord:
Psalm. 27. 5.
Commit thy way to him, trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 25. And when he saw that he could not prevail.
THe fifth thing we promised to 5 The fifth circumstance the event of the
wrestling.
speak of, is the event and issue of the wrestling; where we see that the
wrestling is so dispensed by God, that in the end, the victory inclines unto
Jacob. So says Moses here: The Lord saw that he could not prevail. This
speech does not import any superior strength in Jacob, but an abundant mercy
in God. The Lord cannot, is no other thing, but he will not: he is the God of
heaven and earth; he that speaks, and it comes to pass* all the nations
of the earth compared with him, are but as the drop of a bucket: if he Esaias.
40.
had pleased to have taken from Jacob his breath out of his nosthriles, he
might easily have confounded him, and laid him dead unto the ground. But it
pleases him by secret strength to make Jacob victorious; yet not so, but that
he carries away some mark of his weakness and infirmity: For the Lord
disjoynts his thigh bone, and makes him to halt, and that partly for Jacobs
humiliation, least he should impute the victory unto his own strength, rather
then the Lords mercy, and partly that it might be a memorial unto him all the
days of his life, and provocation to thankfulness. As also the Lord gave him
this mark in his body, as Theodoret thinks, to assure him, that it was no
fantasy, nor vain vision, which had appeared unto him.

And in this is shadowed unto us, the manner of that victory, which the
children In our spiritual battles we get no victory without a wound.
of God obtain in their wrestlings, to wit, that it is such a victory as is not
without a wound. A notable wrestler was David, yet got he sundry times the
foil. A notable wrestler was Peter, and such a one for whom Christ prayed,
that his faith should not fail, because he knew that Satan was to sift him:
yet was he deadly wounded by a very weak instrument. A notable wrestler also
was the Apostle Paul: many rare revelations received he of the Lord, much did
he in his calling, to draw many to righteousness; he labored more abundantly
then all the rest of the Apostles: he founded powerfully that ^umpet, which
cast down the walls of spiritual Jericho wheresoever he came: so that from
Jerusalem to Illyricum he made the Gospel of Christ to abound. Yet, least he
should be exalted out of measure, an Angel of Satan was sent to buffe^ him.
Noah that preacher of righteousness to the original world, spotted with
drunkenness. So Moses speaks of him though Basil excuse his fact, that in
respect he was the first planter of a vineyard, his drunkenness came rather of
the lack of experience, that he knew not the strength of wine, then of his
intemperance. Yet the Spirit of God marketh it in him as a blemish. No victory
then to the Children of God in their battles in this life, without some wound.
Who can say, he has so fought against sin, that at no time he has been
overcome by sin? The best he that ever lived in the world (our blessed
savior excepted) has had his breuia, le^iaque peccata, quamuis pauca, quamuis
par^a, non tamen nulla: And those sins, as they were done by them, so are
they written for us, not for our imitation, but for attention: not that we
should make sport of their weakness, as Cham did of his fathers nakedness,
Qui lapsu alieno gaudet, gaudet Diaboli victoria. He that rejoices at another
man's fall, rejoices at Satan's victory: but rather, Ut medicamenta nobis de
alienis vulneribus faciamus, that so knowing our own weakness we may learn
by their example to take heed to our selves.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 26. And he said: let me go.
Having spoken of the wrestling Second part of the History containing the
conference beetweene Jacob, and the Angel.
that was between the Lord and Jacob, it now remains we speak of the
conference, that upon the wrestling fell out between them.

The Lord begins the conference, and he craves of Jacob, that he would let
him go. This may seem very strange, that the Lord this manner of way should
speak unto his servant; he that loosed the coupling of Jacobs thigh, might he
not have loosed the grasps of Jacobs hand? he that came to Jacob without Jacobs
knowledge, might he not have gone without Jacobs license? He might indeed: yet
does he make intimation of his departure unto Jacob, and why? only to stir
him up the more earnestly to seek his blessing before he go.

This is the Lords manner of dealing Threatninges of spiritual (...) are
prouocations of the Godly to draw near unto the Lord.
with his Children, that he makes the mintes of his departure from them, to be
means that prouokes them to draw nearer unto him, so that spiritual
desertions, are prouocations, whereby God his Children are wakened more
effectuously to desire the continuance of Gods mercy with them. When lesus
Christ accompanied his two Disciples Luke 24. 20.
unto Emaus, and communed with them by the way, when they drew near to the
town, Jesus made him (says the Evangelist) as if he would have gone a little
further, only to stir them, to seek his abiding with them In the doing of
our Savior, is figured unto us the manner of the Lords working with his
children, who sometimes does so behave himself, as if he were instantly to
depart* and take his holy Spirit from them; which mints of spiritual
desertion, because they are exceeding grievous to the godly, let us for our
comfort consider, the Lord by them seeks no other thing but to increase our
faith, to kindle our love, to stir us up unto greater feruency in prayer,
that we may with Jacob constrayne the Lord to tarry and bless us. And with
the two Disciples may cry Lord abide with us, and forsake us not.

For we are to understand that the The Lord will have us to pray for these same
blessings that he has concluded to give.
same blessings which God has concluded to bestow upon his children, he will
have us to ask them before that he give them: the Lord came at this time to
Jacob, of purpose to bless him, and yet he makes as if he would go away, and
not bless him; not that he had changed his mind, but because he will have
Jacob to pray for that blessing of corroboration, which he had concluded to
give him. And let this warn us in the least threatening of a spiritual
desertion, to lay hold on the Lord by prayer, least for fault of seeking, we
close up the Lords hands, which are full of blessings, ready to be bestowed
upon us.

Again, we are to consider that the The Lords presence is not joined without
intermission in this life.
Lords presence in a like manner, cannot be continually kept in this life:
neither from the beginning have any of the children of God enjoyed it at all
times. Where for the better understanding of the lesson, and our farther
comfort, Two sorts of the Lord his presence one secret, which we want never,
another felt, which allwaies we enjoy not.
we must distinguish between th^se two kinds of the Lords presence; there is a
presence of the Lord, which is felt and perceived; there is another which is
secret, and not perceived, yet known by the effects. The secret presence of
God, is continually with his children vvhere-euer they go, ruling, guiding,
and sustayning them in all their troubles, according to his promise, when thou
passest through the waters I will be with Esaias. 43. 3.
thee, that they do not ouerslow thee: when thou walk through the sire,
thou shall not be burnt. As to us we have our own vicissitudes of feeling,
and not feeling, we are changeable but the Lord remains the same; whom he
loves, he loves to the end, he will never leave us, nor forsake us: but by
his secret presence, he intertaines life in our souls, when to our own judge
meant, we are become altogether dead and senceles, as there is a substance in
the Elm and Oak, even when they have cast their leaves. And th^s, as I said,
appears by the effects, that we have stood in many tentations, wherein we
could feel no present grace upholding us.

CHAP. XIII. What notable effects the felt presence of God brings with it.
THe other sort is, when not only God is present with his children, but also
make themselves sensibly perceive it by inward and glorious feelings: this
presence when we get it, makes a sudden change of the whole man, it raises us
from death to life, it makes a comfortable light to shine where fearful
darkness abounded, it makes our faith lively, our love fe^ent, our zeal
burning, and our prayer earnest. Then is our water turned to wine, our sighs
are turned into songs, and our mourning into glorious rejoicing, because the
Bridegroom is with us, and the Comforter that does refresh our soul is come
to visit us. This presence is as evidently felt of them to whom it is
granted, as was that descending of the holy Ghost perceived of the Apostles,
to whom he came.

This presence sometime is granted This felt presence before trouble is as a
preparatiue.
before trouble, as here unto Jacob, and then it is a preparation of him that
gets it to the battle, it embouldens, incourages and strengthens him in such
sort, that he fears not in Gods cause to encounter with whatsoever
adversary. He triumphs with David, the Lord is Psalm. 27. 1.
the light of my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my
li^e, of whom shall I be afraid? This presence makes Jacob with his family go
forward in the face of Esa^, and of his armed men without fear, where before
he was afraid at the rumor of his coming. This presence made Moses lightly
regard the angry countenance of Pharaoh, because he had seen him, who was
invisible. This presence made Paul go up with joy to Jerusalem, where he knew
he should be in chains for the name of Iefus. This presence has emboldened
many faithful Martyrs, to offer their bodies more freely and willingly to the
fire, for the testimony of Jesus, then ever any worldling has stepped into his
bath to wash himself, or to his bed to rest him. Let Peter be prepared with
this presence, and he will preach Christ boldly, in the face of a Counsel
that condemned Christ: Let Peter be unprepared of this presence, and he will
deny Christ at the voice of a s^ple damsel.

Sometime again, this prescence is And after trouble it is to Gods children a
restoratiue
granted to his Children, after their long continuance in some trouble, and
then it is to them as the neesings of that child, whom after swouning, Elisha
reduced unto life: or as a glimps of the bright shining Sun, to the tender
fruits of the earth, which before has been oppressed with blasting, and
consuming tempests: it brings to the children of God a pacifying of all these
distrustful perturbations, which did before disquiet them: yea, it so delights
and rauishes them* that with the three Disciples on Mount Tabor, when they had
seen a little glance of Christ's glory, they cry out, It is good for us to be
Mat. 27. 4.
here. Yea, they wish, oh that my soul might for ever abide in this happy
state and condition! But as I said before, to enjoy the Lord continually in
this manner, is not given to any man upon earth, for a while he will be
familiar with thee, as he was with Jacob; but soon after he must go, and
thou must learn to reverence this dispensation of his presence, and not to be
dis couraged because for a while he is gone from thee; yea, albeit with Mary
one sword (of many sorrows) should pierce through thy soul, yet with her
also, magnify the Lord, and let thy spirit rejoice in God thy savior, blessing
him with heart and mouth, that he looked to the base estate of his servant.
Account thy self happy that at any time the Lord shows thee his merciful
face, being assured that he who has given thee an earnest penny, will in his
own good time, give thee the principal sum; and that the glimps of mercy
which thou have gotten are pledges of a fill of mercy, which yet abides thee.
For so David of that which he had felt concludes, doubtless kindness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.

CHAP. XIIII. The presence or absence of God is ever dispensed for the weal of
his own Children.
FOr the Morning appears. These words contain the reason why the Lord
desires that Jacob should let him go, because the Morning appears. This at
the first seems a strange reason. Is it not a like to thee O Lord to abide
with thy servants in the morning as in the evening? or is there O Lord with
thee any such distinction of time? Surely none at all, for thou O Lord art Psa.
104. 2
covered with the light as with a garment, even the darkness with thee is
light; yea, those bright Angels, that stand about thy throne, makes the
midnight where they come, for shining light like the noone-tide of the day. But
we must consider that this reason respects not the Lord, it respects Jacob,
and so the meaning is. It is for thy cause O my servant Jacob, that I desire to
go, for now the morning appears, and thou must go on in thy journey, thy
servants and family will wait for thy coming, as being uncertain whether they
shall remove or remain, till thou direct them, and therefore that I be no more
to stay thee from them, let me go.

And of this we may more evidently It is granted for our consolation, and taken
away for our humiliation.
perceive, that which I said, how the going and coming of the Lord to and fro
his children, is always ordained and dispensed for their weal, when he
comes, when he goes, all is for our weal. Ne timeas o Sponsa nec existimes
Bernard.
te contemni, si paulisper tibi sponsus subtrahit faciem suam: omnia ista tibi
cooperantur in bonum, de accessu, and recessu lucraris. Be not afraid (says
Bernard) O spouse, neither think that thou art contemned, albeit for a short
while the bridegroom withdraw his face, all that he does works for the best
unto thee: thou have gain both of his coming to thee and of his going from
thee. And this for the comfort of one exercised with spiritual desertion, does
he explain more clearly in the words which he immediately subjoynes, tibi
venit, and recedit, venit ad consolationem, recedit ad cautelam, ne magnitudo
consolationis extollat te, ne si semper adesset, exilium deputares pro patria,
and arrham pro prae^ij summa, paulisper permittit nos gustare quam suauis sit,
and antequa^ plane sentiamus se subtrahit, and ita quasi alis expansis te
prouocat ad volandum. He comes (says he) for thy consolation, and goes for
thy warning and humiliation, least the greatness of his comfort should puff
thee up, and least if he were always present, thou should esteem this
place of thy banishment for thine own country, and should take this earnest for
the principal sum, he lets thee taste of his sweetness for a short while
and incontinent before thou feel it fully, he withdrawes himself; and so, as
it were, with his wings stretched out over thee, he prouokes thee to mount up,
and sly after him.

This is the reason, why the Lord dispenses in such sort his presence, and
absence unto his Children. If at no time he shows himself unto us, then
would we be overcome of that heaviness under which we lie through manifold
tentations: and if always he should be familiar with us, then would we take
the earth for the heaven, and forget our fathers house, which is above;
therefore Spiritual desertions are prouocations of us to follow the Lord.
sometime he with-drawes his presence from us, that he may teach us, to become
weary of this barren wilderness wherein we live absent from our Lord He
ascends many times from us, that we may stand like these Disciples on the Mount
of Oliuet, not looking downward to the earth, but gazing, and looking upward
toward our Lord who has gone from us; he gives us a little taste of his
graciousnesse, and then he goes, but goes in such sort, that he cries after
him, Come and see. Not of purpose to defraud thee of any joy that is in him,
does he go from thee: only that he may prepare thee to follow him to that
place, wherein he will communicate to thee, the fullness of joy, and let thee
see that glory, he had with his father from the beginning. He will not always
tarry from us, least we despair, neither yet always remain with us on earth,
least we presume. Sometime he will kiss us, with the kisses of his mouth, and
as it were, with the Apostle, ravish us up to the third heavens: other times
again, as it seems, he casts down his angry countenance upon us, he humbles
us to the hell, and permits Satan also to buffet us least we should be
exalted out of measure. Always this comfort we have of the Lords vvorking
with us, that as here we see he comes to Jacob, and goes from him for his
weal: so whether he show himself familiar with us, or again for a while
hide his face from us; in both the one and the other, he is vvorking for our
comfort and weal. Only let us possess our souls in patience; and give
glory to God.

CHAP. XV. How their inward exercises of conscience, works in the godly a
diuorcement of their souls from all creatures, and a nearer adherent to the
Lord.
WHo answered I will not let thee go. Perceive here, how the mint of the Lords
departure works into Jacob a more constant cleaving, and adhering to the Lord.
This as I said before, is that notable fruit which all the Lords spiritual
desertions works in his children; it augments in them a desire of mercy, and
a more earnest carfulness to seek the Lord. And this also we see in our
daily experience: for among all them, who profess the name of Jesus Christ,
ye shall find none more fervent in prayer, more continual in mourning and
sighing for their sins, none that thirsts more earnestly for mercy, then
they, whom God has humbled in their spirits, with threatenings of spiritual
desertion. As here Jacob is more wakened by this one word, Let me go, then by
all the rest of the wrestling, so is there nothing goes so near the heart of
the godly, as does the mint of the Lords departure from them; they are never so
loving to him as at those times, when he seems to count least of them: if
he look angerly upon them, the more pitifully look they unto him: if he
threaten them, they threaten kindness upon him: the hardlier that he answers
them the more importunately do they cry upon him. Then with David they water
their couch with tears, and call upon God all the day long. Their Lam. 1. 14.
eyes cast out water continually, when the comforter that should refresh their
souls, is away from them.

In a word, these desertions work in Gods children a diuorcement of their
souls from the delight of every creature, and a straiter adherence to
himself: when he threatens to go from them, they follow him with these
lamentable voices, turn again O Lord, and cause thy face to shine upon me,
that I may be saved. O Lord take from me what thou will, take from me all the
worldly comforts, that ever thou gave me, only let me enjoy thy self; for
whom have I in the heavens but thee? and I have desired none in the earth with
thee; my flesh farles me and my heart also, Lord fail thou me never: when thou
hidest thy face I am sore troubled, return therefore O Lord and be merciful to
me, be thou the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, for thy loving
kindness is better then Life. These are the effects of sanctified trouble,
while I have marked, that we may be comforted, and not discouraged, when we
find that our outward or inward troubles produce into us a loa^ thing of
earthly pleasure, and a more fervent love of our God.

We have yet more narrowly to consider There is a striving with God acceptable
to him, and namely, when we will take no refusal of that that God has
promised.
this answer that Jacob gives to the Lord: I will not (says he) let thee
go, Is this a seemly answer for a servant to give unto his Lord? when the
Lord says let me go, becomes it Jacob to answer I will not let thee go?
Is this good religion, in any thing to strive with the Lord? Yea indeed, there
are some things wherein the Lord is very well content that thou strive with
him; as namely, when the Lord has promised any thing unto thee, and thou have
his word for thy warrant, to seek it in sort, that albeit the Lord say thee
nay, yet thou will receive no refusal at his hands: this is a strife, which
pleases the Lord, for in effect it is no other thing but a constant
affirmation, that his truth is inviolable. After this manner, that woman of
Canaan strove with him, she would take no denial of that which he had
promised: and after this manner, here also Jacob strives with him, he will not
be denied of a blessing. And Moses also strove with the Lord, protesting he
would not go forward one foot, unless the Lord went with him; because the
Lord had so promised. But far be it from us to strive with the Lord, as the
wicked do, grieuing him daily with our murmurings and rebellions, still living
in contrary terms with the Lord. Woe be to him, that strives with his
maker, do ye provoke the Lord unto anger? or are ye stronger then he? The
end of this strife to them will be horrible confusion

There is yet farther to be considered in these words of Jacob, how he says
to the Lord, I will not let thee go; by what mean is this, that Jacob is able
to hold, and detain the Lord? The Prophet Hosea will resolve this: It was
Nothing in the world so strong as the prayer of the godly, for they are the
bands whereby the Lord is holden and detained.
(says he) by mourning, and weeping that Jacob prevailed, and held the
Angel, whilst he got the blessing. There is nothing so strong in the world, as
the prayers of the godly, they are the only bands, by which the Lord is
holden, and detained: the Lord will not be restrained by all the powers of the
earth, neither will he cease to do any work, that he is about to do, for the
cries of all the men in the world: yet the prayers of his children are able to
constrain him, to power down an undeserved blessing, and turn away a just
deserved punishment. When the people of Israel had fallen from God by
worshipping the golden Calfe, the Lords anger was highly incensed, and kindled
against them, which moved Moses to fall down on his face before the Lord,
beseeching him to be appeased toward his people, for the glory of his name.
This prayer did in such sort constrain the Lord in the midst of his anger,
that he is compelled to say unto Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, for I will consume them. This manner of speech used by the Lord,
declares that the prayer of Moses did bind and hold in the wrath of God, that
it brake not out upon this people. In like manner we read in the Gospel, that
when Jesus was passing by those two blind men, who cried upon him, Osanna,
thou son of David have mercy upon us: albeit the multitude regarded not their
crying, and the disciples also (as it seems) took little thought thereof, yet
Jesus was moved thereby to stand still. They could not come near for the
multitude to lay hands on him, but their prayers reached unto him, and does so
take hold upon him, that by that place he could not go, until he had given
them a comfortable answer, the prayer of a righteous man auatles Iam.
much, if it be powered out in faith.

CHAP. XVI. Prayers of the godly must be forcible and acceptable to God, seeing
they come from his own Spirit.
THis then is to the great comfort of the godly, that our prayers are
effectual, and are (as I may call them) the Lords own bands, wherewith we are
able to detain and hold him, till he bless us. And no marvel, seeing these
prayers are not ours, but the intercession of Gods own spirit in us, powered
out in the name of Christ, in whom he is ever well pleased. For as to us we
know not what to pray as we ought, but the Romans 8.
spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed.
And therefore may we boldly think, that the Lord will not despise them.
Spiritus est in quo clamamus Abba pater: sicut Bern in fest. Pent. Sermon. 1.
in nobis interpellat pro nobis, ita in patre delicta, donat pro ipso patre,
quod postulamus, idem ipse donat, qui dat vt postulemus. It is the spirit
(says Bernard) by whom we cry Abba father: as in us the spirit makes request
for us: so with the Father he graunts our requests, and forgiues us our sins,
that for which we pray even he gives it unto us, who gives us this Grace to
pray. Let us therefore pray continually, and strengthen by these godly
meditations our feeble hearts, and weak hands, that they faint not in prayer.
Let us go and desire good things from the Lord, seeing we have the Lord bound
to us by his promise. The Lord will fulfill the desire Psalm.
of them who fear him. And again, Pro. 10. 24
That which the wicked fears shall come upon him, but God will grant the
desire of the righteous. Thou who art made sure to obtain, if so be thou can
desire, art here made inexcusable: none wants mercy and grace, but he who
desires it not.

And yet take heed, that in thy prayer A warning for attention in prayer.
thou be not vnreuerent, remember, a quo, and quam magna petas: from whom and
what great things thou crauest. Chrisost. de Canan homi. 15.
Great things from a great king, should be desired with reverence and
affection: they can best speed at the Lords almes-dealing that fall down
lowest with the Publican, not they who with the Pharisie stand up prowdest upon
their feet. Abraham, the father of the faithful, in his prayer, considering
in himself, and looking to the majesty of God, humbly confesses that he was
but dust and ashes. Yea Adam in his best estate of his innocence, was bound to
glorisie God, with the like confession of the baseness of his original; and
to let Adam alone, the heavens are not clean in his sight, yea he has found
folly in his Angels, they cover not only their feet, but their faces before
the Lord: what then shall thou do O man, who dwell in lodgings of clay? a
sinful creature by thine own apos^asie, laden with iniquity: how should
thou be humbled and bow down thy soul, in the presence of thy Maker,
Redeemer, and thy judge? We should not desp^e our own prayers, they being
povvred out without presumption, and why?


Presumption in prayer thus being removed, I return to the comfort. Thou being
thus humbled with an hatred of thine own sins, with fear and reverence of
that divine majesty, trusting to his promise, go on with boldness to the
throne of grace. Noli vilipendere orationem tuam, quoniam illo ad quem oras,
non vilipendit: esteem not lightly thine own prayer, as though it were a small
thing; seeing the Lord to whom thou pray est has declared that he accounts so
much of it; suppose it be weak, yet remember, etiam solis vagit^bus Macar.
hom. 31.
infans matrem commou^t ad misericordiam: even the very cries of the infant
that vtters no distinct voice, moves the mother unto commisseration. And what
comparison between the love of a mother toward her children, and the love of
the Lord toward his? No father will give to his children that asks, a stone
instead of bread, nor a Serpent in stead of a fish: What kindness then (if we
crave it) may we look for at the hands of our heavenly father? As the Cyp.
lib. 1 epist. 1.
heavens are above the earth, so are my thoughts above yours. Our prayers
(says Cyprian) are arma coe^ s^ia, quae stare nos faciunt and forti^er
perseuerare, haec sunt munimenta spiritualia and tel^ diuina, they are
spiritual armor, whereby we stand and strongly persevere to the end they are
heavenly darts and defenses.

Oh that we understood the excellen^e A commendation of prayer.
of this grace of prayer, that so we might the more delight in it! it is the
hand of a christian, which is able to reach from earth to heaven, and take
forth every manner of good gift out of the Lords treasure. It is one of those
keys of the house of David, whereby we open the doors of the heavenly
palace, and go in to take a view of that eternal building and glorious
mansion, prepared for us in heaven. It is the messenger that with speed goes
from our souls, saluting no creature by the way, and enters straight into the
Mercy seat in heaven, reporting to the Lord all our desires, and returning
back a favorable answer from him. Yea, it is unto us as that ^iery chariot
of Eliah, whereunto we mount up, and have our conversation with God in the
heavens. O happy soul therefore which God has endued with this most
heavenly grace!

Except thou bless me. It were for us Jacobs feruency, and zeal in prayer
convinces our inconsideration and coldness.
a good thing, if we could learn from Jacob this holy vvilfulnesse, never to
let the Lord alone till he bless us. But alas, here we are taken in our sin,
we fall to our prayers without preparation, we power out a number of words
without devotion, and so go away without a blessing. We send out our prayers
like to incense, made indeed according to the Lords direction, but not kindled
with fire from the Alter; that is, petitions lawful enough, and agreeable to
Gods word, but not powered out in feruencie. And so no marvel that the Lord
smell not in them a sweet sacrifice; for incense without fire has no fragrant
smell; and so having finished our cold prayers, we rise without examination,
not once considering with what fruit we have prayed; and whether we have
gotten a blessing from God or no.

CHAP. XVII. Jacob cannot end till God have blessed him.
GOdly Jacob will here teach us another lesson, that we should not let our
gripes go, nor cease from crying, until the Lord have blessed us. Then has
Jacob done, when as the Lord has blessed him: but till he get the blessing,
Jacob in no wise will part with the Lord. Where, if thou despair, how shall
thou know in prayer when God blesses thee? I answer: Except the Lord teach
thee, I cannot tell How may we know when God blesses us in praying to him.
thee: the spirit of God, when he comes down with a blessing, makes himself
to be known. No man has felt so sensible a shower of rain, descending on
his body, as the child of God will feel, when the shower of grace descends on
his soul, then the foundations of that earth (which is in man) are shaken; the
stony heart melts, the eye abounds in joyful tears, the tongue is
loosed, that was bound before, the mind is filled with vnaccustomable light,
the whole soul with unspeakable comfort. Finally, such an alteration is made
of his whole desires, for a change of his whole inward and outward disposion,
as the child of God feels better than he is able to utter. Which if we
obtain not in prayer (as many times it falls out) let us receive it as a
check of our coldness, as a spur to further humiliation, that so with a new
blessing we may fall to seek the Lord and his blessing.

And here again we have to consider The quick nes of faith
another lesson; for in this, that he seeks a blessing from him, who wounded
him, we are to take up the nature of faith, which is of such quickness that
no marvel the Ancient said, Fides Linceos habet oculos: for albeit the Bern.
in Epiphan. sermon. 1.
Lord would take on him the shape of an enemy, and show himself an angry
judge to his children, yet will they still look for favor and kindness at
his hand. It was the Lord who afflicted Job with outward and inward troubles,
of the which, nature and sense could gather no other conclusion but that God
had forsaken him, and had become his en^mie; yet faith above sense and nature
leads him through all these misly clouds to look unto God, as unto his
merciful father; and therefore res^s he in that notable conclusion, whereof we
have made mention before, Albeit the Lord stay me, yet will I trust in him.

CHAP. XVIII. Faith through death espies life.
THis fullness of faith does also appe^e manifestly in all the rest of Gods
children, especially in time of trouble, for what makes them rejoice in
afflictions, and to triumph when they are going through the valley of death,
but the sight and certainty of a better? How comes it, that in the same
moment wherein God is taking their temporal life from them, they are seeking
an eternal life from him? Out of doubt it comes of their lively faith, which
Faith in wrath can see mercy.
through wrath sees mercy, through the cloud of light and momentary
afflictions, it beholds an infinite weight of glory.

But this quickness of faith appears Faith offends not at the base form and
shape, in which Jesus Christ appeared, but through it sees him to be the king of
glory.
most of all wonderfully in the up* taking of Jesus Christ, for he appeared in
the world disguised, A King in sh^pe of a servant: He being the God of glory
came covered with such contemptible couerings that the world mis-knew him. His
miraculous conception without the help of man was obscured with the covering of
Mary's espo^sing unto Joseph: his birth without all uncleanness, obscured with
the covering of Mary's purification: his innocence in like manner obscured with
the covering of circumcision: and so (...) est noui solis fulgor, (says
B^rnard*) Ber ser. 4. in vigil^. Dom.
and thus was the glory of this ^ght shining sun which the world saw never
before, obscured. Yet through all these, and many couerings, that Centurion,
through faith esp^ed him to be the son of God; and those three wise men who
came from the East, by the Mat. 2. 11.
light of faith, through all these vayles saw him to be a glorious King; and
therefore also fell down and worshipped him. But these blind Bethleemites,
amongst whom he was borne, having no more but the eyes of nature, wherewith to
look upon him, could not discern him: albeit this was their glory, that out
of them came that Governor, Mich.
who should feed his people, by this faith, Agnouit Simeon infantem tacentem,
for August. sermon. 20.
lack of it, occiderunt Iudaei mirabilia facientem. Simeon by faith
acknowledged Jesus, even in his infancy, when he had not yet spoken a word: but
the Jews for lack of faith, blinded with infidelity, flew him, after that he
had wrought many Miracles. So then to return to our ground, it was a great
faith in Jacob that he sought a blessing from him, who wrestled against him.
Nature will never learn us that lesson. Come, and let us return to the Lord,
he has spoiled, Hos. 5.
and he will heal us; he has wounded and he will bind us up. Without faith,
there can be no prayer to God, especially, at that time, when God lays his
heavy hand upon us: How shall they call to him, in whom they believe not?
Where the fountain is dry, what water can there be in the strand? ergo vt
oremus, credamus, and vt ipsa non deficiat ^ides, qua credimus, oremus.
Therefore that we may pray, let us believe, and that our faith, whereby we
believe faint not, let us pray. And this for the fulness of faith.

CHAP. XIX. The goldy in their prayers, above all things seek Gods favor and
blessing.
Perceive yet farther out of these words, that Jacob seeks nothing from God,
but his blessing. The children of God, even then, when God is most familiar
with them, seek nothing comparable to his blessing. Herein they are
insatiable: on the earth they can never get enough of his blessings. Jacob was
blessed before of the Lord, and now again, he seeks a new blessing, and
every time that he meets with the Lord, all that he desires is a blessing.
It is far otherwise with miserable Worldlings: it is seldom, and far between
that they come to the Lord, they seek some other thing then himself, or his
blessing; some worldly benefit, or deliverance from temporal trouble is the
sum of all their suite: So Cain forgetting to seek mercy for his sin,
sought only protection to his body, Whosoever finds me, shall slay me: and
from time to time he got that he went out from the presence of the Lord. O
miserable man, that left not behind him so much as a petition to God for
mercy, and deliverance from that wrath, which his sin had brought upon him!

CHAP. XX. Worldlings in their prayers dishonor God, and preiudges themselves.
IN this doing wicked men do both dishonor the Lord, and prejudge
themselves; they consider not the insinite goodness, and the al-sufficiency of
the Lord; they measure him with their base and earthly minds, and therefore in
stead of eternal they seek nothing but temporal and perishing things. It was
a princely answer that Alexander gave his friend Perillus, to whom he had
offered, fifty talents of silver, to help his daughter to marriage; which the
other thinking too much, replied, that ten talents were sufficient. Yea, said
Alexander, it were enough for thee to receive, but not for me to give. And to
another in like case he gave the like answer: Ne quaere, quid t^ accipere,
sed quid me dare, deceat. But much more may our all-sufficient God, that Monarch
of the world indeed, who is rich unto all who calls upon him, give unto us a
greater rebuke, that cannot enlarge our hearts, nor open our mouths wide, that
he may fill them with his good things, contenting us to seek the earth, when
the Lord offers us the heaven; seeking with worldlings, that our wheat and our
wine Psalm. 4.
may abound, and not with Godly David, that the light of the countenance of
God, which brings joy to the heart, may be upon us. The Lord esteems this a
very great indignity, and contempt done unto him: and therefore he complains
on the Jews, by his servant, the Prophet Hosea, They howl upon me in their
beds for wine and oil, they cry like dogs for that which may fill their
bellies; but sends not out the voice of my children, to cry unto me for mercy
and grace.

It is in like manner very prejudicial How foolish they are, who in prayer seek
to themselves, who do it: for they fast and weary their spirits in seeking
many things, and in the mean time, are careless other things before they seek
the Lord.
to seek one thing; the obtaining whereof might bring them unto all things:
thus they consume themselves with vain labor. Qui rerum magis Bernard.
specie, quam authore dilectati, prius vniuersa percurrere, and de singulis
cupiunt expiriri, quam ad Christum curent vniuersitatis principem peruenire.
Who being delighted with the show of things, more then with the author of
them, are desirous to know every thing by experience; but not careful to come
unto Christ, who is that head and fountain, of whom all things are: where
otherwise, if according to the command of our blessed Savior men would first
seek the kingdom of God, then all other things should be cast unto them. This
is the only compendious way, to satisfy our insatiable desires: Quicunque hic
August. sermon. 4.
varia, quaeris, ipse vnus tibi erit omnia: whatsoever thou be, who here
seeks sundry things, seek the Lord, and he shall be all things in all to thee.

When the Lord offered to Solomon to give whatsoever he would ask, he The
only way to get other things, is first of all to seek the Lord.
sought from the Lord a wise and understanding heart, which so pleased the
Lord, that not only he gave him that which he asked, but also second and
inferior gifts, as riches and honor, which he asked not, so great delight
has the Lord to here us seek from him, those things which are greatest and
excellent. Let us therefore ascribe unto the Lord glory and power, he is a
great King: let us not dishonor him by seeking from him small and perishing
things, the least of them is enough for us to receive. For we are not worthy of
the least of his mercies: but not enough for the Lord to give: suppose the Lord
would ^ue us all the works of his hand into our possession, they shall be
found but comfortles comforts in the end, unless we enjoy his favor toward
us in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXI. Faith obtaines every good thing that i^ craves.
Verse 27. Then he said.
Upon this earnest desire of Jacob, the Lord resolves, that he will bless
him: we have a promise of God, Ask and it shall be given you, and we have also
manifold confirmations of this promise. Zedekiah spoke it in a slattering
manner to his Princes. Ye know that the King can deny you nothing, but it is
most true in the Lord our God, such is his loving affection toward all Ier. 38.
his subjects of the kingdom of grace, that in very deed he can deny nothing
which they ask in faith. As to the wicked (says S. James) they ask, and get
not, because they ask not in faith, nor for the right end. It is written of
Uitellius the Emperor that one of his friends being denied his petition, which
was not rea sonable, waxed angry, and said unto him, what auailes to me thy
friendship, seeing I cannot obtain that which I crave? who replies unto him,
and what auailes to me thy friendship, if for thee I must do that which is
unlawful? If such equity has been found in man, what shall we think of our
God? with what face dare we seek that from God, which is unlawful to be
given? But whatsoever we ask of the Lord in faith, we are sure to obtain it,
or a better. So rare a jewel is faith, that Faith a rare ^ewell and why?
he who has it, has all things to be his: God for his Father; Jesus Christ
for his Savior; the holy Ghost for his Comforte^; the Angels for his
minist^ing Spirits; this world for a sojourning place; all the good creatures
therein for his Servants; and the heaven for his inheritance: therefore said
Cyril, Lata Cyril. catech 17
mer^atura est sides.

Before the Lord bless him, he asks A new name is given to Jacob.
Jacob what his name was: he answered, My name is Jacob: to whom the Lord
says: Thou shall no more be called Jacob (only) but shall be called Israel
also. I give thee now a new name, and this blessing, that thou have had power
with God, so hereafter shall thou prevail with men, fear not therefore the
face of thy Brother Esau. He that gave thee strength in this wrestling, shall
sustain thee also in all thy conflicts with men. Thus the Lord will have Jacob
use the present experience of Gods mercy at this time, as a confirmation of him
in all time to come.

Jacob then (as ye see) has two Jacob had two names and they both are from
wrest ling.
names, and both of them he gets from wrestling. He wrestled once with his
brother Esau in the womb of his mother, and from it he received the name
Jacob, because he held his brother by the heel. Now again he wrestleth with
the Lord, and from it he receives this other name Israel, a prince of God. As
it was with Jacob, so it is with all the true Israelits of God; wrestling
abides them, and in wrestling they must be exercised, sometimes with God, as
Israel; sometime with man, as Jacob with Esau, and Paul with beasts at
Ephesus. No man is crowned before he strive: the husbandman must labor before
he receive the fruit; and we by many tribulations must enter into the kingdom
of God.

Again, ye see that as the Lord With the new name God also gives him new
grace.
bestows upon Jacob a new name, so therewithal he bestows upon him new
graces, increase of faith, and spiritual strength to resist tentations. It is
not the Lords manner of dealing to set out his servants, with vain glorious
titles, which imports nothing; when he gives them a new name, he gives also
new graces answerable to the name; by his word he calls things to be, which
were not, Soli Deo idem facere, quod Ber. hom. 4. super miss^s est.
loqui, for unto God it is one to speak, and to do. And he gives names to
things according as they are. Sometime he changes a name from the better to the
worse, as the place once called Bethel, the house of God, the Lord called it
Bethauen, the house of vanity: and this the Lord does not, but where a change
is indeed from good unto evil. Sometime again he changes the name from the
worse to the better. Where it was said unto you, Ye are not Hos.
my people, it shall be said, ye are the sons of the living God: and this he
does not but where a change is indeed of the persons, who gets the name from
evil unto good.

And this is a rule, whereby we may By this rule we should try, if the new
christian name be pertenent to us or no.
try our selves, whether the new name that appertains to Christians, be
ginen unto us of the Lord, or not; or if we have usurped it our selves. If
the Lord have changed thy name, as he did Jacobs name, let it appear in this,
that he has also changed thy self. Has he given thee that grace, which the
name imports? Have thou received an ointment Ioh.
from that holy One? Has he illuminated thy darkness? quickened thy dead heart?
sanctified thy unclean affections? Then may thou be sure, that thou have
received thy name from God: but if yet we be such as remain in our natural
estate, living in our old sins, under the new name of a Christian, as now the
most profane men have gotten on the covering of a Christian name, and Esau does
put on him the apparel of Jacob: thou that so do, may be sure, the Lord
never gave unto thee this new name, but thou have violently usurped it unto thy
self. It shall be no more available to thee then was the garment of good king
Iehosophat unto wicked Achab: yea, it shall augment so much the more the wrath
of God upon thee, because that under an holy name thou have lived It is
horrible sacrilegde, to sin under the christian name.
an unholy life. Beltasar sinned against God by excess and intemperancie, but
that he abused the holy vessels of the house of God, to serve him to profane
drinking, was a double sin, a horrible sacrilege, yet not so horrible as
thine. He abused dead Vessels, but thou profanest a living soul and body;
they are not thine own, they were once made by the Lord, and bought again by
the price of his blood, and so by all right are the Lords, by Baptism they
were separate to the service of God, and his mark put upon them.
Notwithstanding all this, thou dare sacrilegiously abuse them, and make them
weapons of unrighteousness to the service of Satan. O miserable man! what
fearful judgment may thou look for at the hands of God? The wrath of God
is revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of man. Tribulation
and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil, every man
shall receive according to that which he has done in the body. Turks and
Pagans shall not escape unpunished, but thou that abusest thy soul and body to
the service of Satan, which by Baptism were separate and consecrate to the
Lord, committest a double sacrilege, and therefore must look for a double
judgment except in time thou repent.

CHAP. XXII. It is the curse of the wicked to pray and not prevail, but it is
not so with the Godly.
BEcause thou have had power with God: As ^acob sought a blessing, so at the
length he ge^teth it; for the Lord, at the last will fulfill the desires of
them, who fear him. The desire of the child of God, is as a birth conceived
in the soul of man, which shall not dye, but come to perfection. Solomon
promised to give his mother Bethsheba, whatsoever she would ask, and it were
to the half of his kingdom; yet when she asked, that Abishag the Shunamite
might be given to Adoniah his brother to wife, Solomon refused to grant. Thus
men can promise much, and perform little: it is not so with the Lord our God.
He has bidden us pray, he has promised to hear, and shall not also fail to
perform, Nunquam oranti beneficia denegabit, qui orantes vt ne deficiant, sua
pietate instigat. He will never deny his benefits to us when we pray, who
prouokes us to pray.

But as to the wicked, the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish: their souls are
full of desires, like so many strong voices, Miserable are the wicked, for they
desire that, which they shall never obtain.
crying for that which they shall never obtain; they wait upon lying
vanities; which shall never come to pass. Quid tam poenale, quam semper velle,
quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle, quod nunquam non erit, in aeternum non
obtinebit, quod vul^, and in aeternum quod non vult sustinebit. What punishment
more fearful can fall on a man, then that he should ever wish, that which
never shall be, and always wish that were not, that shall be for ever: that
which he will, he shall never obtain, and that which he will not, he shall
for ever sustain: and yet this is the miserable estate of the wicked. Let us
therefore take heed to our praedominate desires; for miserable are they, whose
desires are on the world, more then on the Lord; and on vanishing trifles, more
then upon his permanent mercies. For when the Lord has filled their bellies
with his earthly treasure, and given them enough, that they leave the rest
behind to their children: what have they more to crave from the Lord? They have
gotten their desire, they are not to look that ever they shall be pertakers
of the felicity of Gods chosen, their heart was never set upon it, they have
received their consolation The wicked have received their consolation on earth.
on the earth, they have no more to look for. Wherefore our Savior
pronounces a fearful woe upon them, and no marvel; for miserable indeed is
their condition, their consolation dies before they dye themselves; their
comforts forsakes them, before they go out of the world: and like the Gowrd of
Jonas.
Jonas withers before their eyes: in their life they sat under the shadow of
it, but in their death it is gone, and they find no comfort in it. Well knew
David their misery, and therefore he prays, Deliver me O Lord from the men
Psalm.
of the world, who have their portion in this life: that is, let me never be
one of them. We have therefore to mark, where-away the benefits of our
affections do carry us, for if we feel the Lords blessing, no doubt we shall
find it; and if the desire of our hearts be above all things toward the
Lord, such a desire I mean as uses the means that may bring us unto him; for
otherwise wicked Baalam will desire Oh that I might dye the death of the
righteous! which he shall not obtain. But let us go the right way to mercy,
protesting with godly David, O Lord I desire to do thy commandments, and then
no doubt the Lord shall crown us with mercies and compassions at the last.

Thou shall prevail with men. I do now here by my word (will the Lord say)
inuest thee in this privilege, that no power of man shall be able to overcome
No immunitie from affliction promised unto us.
thee. Go on therefore with courage in thy journey which I have commanded
thee, and fear not any thing, that man is able to do against thee. Where it is
to be marked, that the Lord promises not of his servant any immunitie from
affliction: yea by the contrary, the Lord fore-warnes, that men will make
opposition to him; for where no opposition is made by men, how can there be a
privilege by Jacob? It is needful we consider what it is that the Lord has
promised unto us, least looking for that which he has not promised us, we
deceive our selves. Many in the time of trouble make foul apostacy from
Christ, and all because when they entered into the profession of Christian
religion, they considered not they could not be his Disciples except Many not
considering this, become apostates in the time of trouble.
they bare his Cross; but foolishly looked for some temporal ease, or worldly
commodity in the following of Christ, which he never promised them. These are
professors like to the Samaritans, who so long as the Jewish religion
flourished and was in honor, caused also to be built a temple on a high
mountain of Samaria, named Garazin, Carol. Sigon. de repub. haeb.
that in this they might not be inferior to the Jews. They boasted themselves
to be the progeny of Joseph, and worshippers of God also with them: but when
they perceived that the Jews were cruelly afflicted for worshipping God, by
Antiochus Epiphanes, and fearing least they should be also handled in the like
manner, they changed their coat, affirming that they were not Isiaelites but
Sidonians, and had built their temple, not unto God, but Jupiter: thus a little
wind seperates the chafe and the corn, and a fierce trial distin guisheth
the counterfeit and true professor.

In like manner the ignorant Jews, This made the Jews stumble at Christ,
because they looked* or a temporal kingdom.
because they understood not the promises made concerning the Messiah, looked
that Christ should have restored unto them their temporal Kingdom, peaceably
and free: whereof, when they saw themselves disappointed, they were offended
with him, and persecuted him to the death. It were therefore good for us that
we should follow the counsel of our Savior, and reckon with our selves in
time, in what state of life we enter, when we enter into the profession of
Christianity, before Luke 4. 18.
we build a Tower let us count the cost, whether we have sufficient to perform
it, least that when we have laid the foundation and not able to perform it,
we fall not under this shame, to be mocked of men, but bring upon our selves a
more fearful wrath of God. For it had been better not to have known the way
of righteousness, 2 P^. 2. 20
then after we have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto
us, like dogs to the vomit, and like the sow that was washed to wallowing in
the mire. If we could resolve in time, that they who will live godly in Christ,
Tim.
must suffer persecution, and arm our selves before hand thereunto, reckoning
with our selves that of the Lords indulgence, we are spared every day, wherein
some notable cross is not laid upon us, then certainly should we account the
less of trouble, when it comes unto us.

We have here again to consider the connection of these words, because thou
have had power with God, thou shall prevail with men: and out of them ye may
perceive, that the Lord will have this wrestling of Jacobs, wherein he was
exercised, immediately by the Lord, to be a preparation unto him against other
tentations, which were to come by men. Wherein is shadowed unto us, how the
Lord does first prepare his children by wrestling with himself, before he send
them out to encounter with men, and so makes the inward exercises of their
minds, preparations, whereby they are made ready the better to endure all
outward troubles, that do come from men.

CHAP. XXIII. The Lord by inward exercises of conscience, makes his children
strong to endure outward troubles which come from men.
THis made Moses that he was not afraid of the face of Pharaoh, because he had
seen first the face of God, for he saw (says the Apostle) him Heb. 11. Pro.
19. 12
who was invisible. The Kings wrath (says Solomon) is as the roaring of a
Lion: but when the Lord vtters his wrath, then the heart and countenance of the
greatest Monarch in the world, make him as high as Beltasar, shall fail him:
he will never loose a good conscience for fear of the wrath of man, that
knows the power of the wrath Esaias.
of God: Fear not the man whose breath is in his nosthrils: the most he can
do, and that by permission, is, he is able to kill the body, but let us fear
the Lord, who is able to cast both soul^ and body into hell fire. This
sustained aged Policarpus, against all the threatenings of the Proconsull. Ignem
minaris ad horam arsurum, Eus. lib. 4 cap. 16.
and paulo post extinguendum, ignoras vero ignem illum futuri iudicij and
aeterni They fear not much the wrath of man, who have been humbled with the
sense of the wrath of God.
supplicij impijs reseruatum: Thou theatnest me (says he) with a fire which
will burn for an hour, and shortly after be quenched, but thou know not
that fire of the judgment to come, reserved for the wicked, which vvil burn
for ever. It is the holy fear of God which banisheth out of our hearts the
profane fear of men, that we will not do evil to offend the Lord; no, not
for all the pains that can follow us in this present life. And therefore the
Lord in great mercy toward his children, does sometimes exercise them with the
sense of his wrath, and lets them feel the sting of an accusing conscience,
that so they may come out to the world, strong in the Lord against outward
tentations, fully resolved rather to displease men then the Lord, rather to
endure present punishments, than to cast themselves under danger of the wrath
with is to come. And so are the children of God to reckon with themselves, that
their inward wrestlings are preparatiues for outward troubles.

CHAP. XXIIII. It is a sinful curiosity to seek to know that which God
has not taught us.
Verse. 29. And Jacob asked, What is thy name?
NOW Jacob having received the blessing, proceeds in the conference, and
desires to know the name of him who blessed him. No doubt but he knew before
that it was the Lord, otherwise he had not sought a blessing from him. It
stands not with the nature of faith, to pray to any in whom we Romans
believe not. By this question he attaineth not to any new knowledge; for he
who blessed him refuses to tell his name; but Jacob by calling the place
Peniel, as afterward follows plainly declares he knew it was the Lord. So
then this asking imports not that Jacob did not know it was the Lord that had
given him the blessing, only it declares an earnest desire of Jacob to have
had a more familiar revelation of the Lord to him: which I think he did of a
good mind and intention, such as Moses had when he desired to see the face of
God. Yet ye see all our good intentions are not always approved of the Lord.
With his good intention there is joined a piece of curiosity, that he will
have more knowledge of the majesty of God then the Lord thought expedient to
communicate unto him; otherwise the Lord had not denied it to him.

To seek a greater perfection of Especially not to search out the divine
majesty, farther the^ it is reuea^ led to us in the word.
knowledge, where the Lord offers it, is very commendable, but to aspire to
know that which God will not teach, and namely to search out that majesty
farther then he pleases to reveal himself. is curiosity and presumption,
worthy to be damned, He that searches: Prou. Basil. de martyr Maman.
Quantus sit Deus, and quae illius mensura, and qualis essentia, talia
sciscitanti sunt periculosa ei qui rogatur complexa, and talium medicina est
silentium. To ask the quantity and measure of God, or what is his essence,
such questions are perilous to him that asks, intricate to him that is asked
at, and are best answered by silence. There be names whereby the Lord
expresses himself to us according to our capacity, but as to his proper
name, it is himself, it cannot be comprehended. Why ask Iud.
thou my name, which is wonderful? And from this curiosity Jacob here by gods
reproof is restrained. This sin with our nature we have drawn from our first
father Adam, the knowledge wherewith God endued him contented him not, he
aspired higher, and sought to be equal with God in the knowledge of good and
evil. And that this poison from Adam is propagate to his posterity, does
daily appear among the common fruits of our corruption; for either we are
careless to learn those things, whereof the Lord has offered himself a
teacher: or else we are curious searchers of those things, which the Lord has
kept secret and hidden from us.

There are two points of knowledge 2 Points of necessary knowledge
most excellent and needful for man; the first, to know God, and him whom he
has sent, for herein consists eternal life: the second is, to know our
selves, and Yet neglected by Adams sins who desired rather to eat of the tree
of knowledge then of the tree of life.
the state of our own consciences. But such is the vanity of the mind of
man, that with Adam had rather eat of the tree of knowledge, then of the tree
of life, and delights to be well read in any book rather then in the book
of his own Conscience. And ye may mark in the carnal professors of this
age, that if at any time they begin to speak of Theology, then do they handle
divine things in a devilish manner, altogether inexpert in the words of
righteousness: and having no skill to speak the language of Canaan, either
else they talk profanely upon that which God has revealed, insisting most in
points of doctrine least profitable for them, or then curiously they inquire
for that which God has concealed from them, not remembering that warning of
Moses, secret things are for the Lord, but Dent.
things revealed are for us and our children.

This curious demand of Jacob, is This curiosity bridled, and reproved.
answered with a gentle refusal, Why ask thou my name? The Interrogator
strives to send Jacob within himself, that by a new trial taken of his speech
within his own mind, he might see how unnecessary and unprofitable his
Petition was. After this manner it is customable to the Lord to rebuke the
frivolous curiosity of his own children, that we may learn to be sober; and
not presume above that which is written. In Romans Ciril Catechi. 6.
his quae de Deo dicuntur, maxima est scientia ignorantiam fateri; terra^
inhabitas, and terrae fines ignoras, quo modo conditorem terrae comprehendes?
animam habes cuius facultates enumerare non vales, stellas vides, quas numerare
non potes, numera prius illa, qu^ vides, and tunc illum, qui nonapparet,
enarra. In those things which concern the divinity, it is a great knowledge to
acknowledge our ignorance; thou dwell in the earth, and know not the
borders thereof, how then shall thou comprehend him, who is maker of the earth?
thou have within thee a soul, the faculties whereof thou art not able to
enumerate; thou see the stars, and can not tell the number of them: begin
first, and reckon on those things which thou see, and then, if thou can,
him that is not seen. Let us therefore restrain our selves from such idle
speculations; and if others spare not to prove us with the like of these rash
and perilous questions, which I have condemned, then remember with Basil,
Taliu^ optima medicina est silentium.

CHAP. XXV. The Lord sometimes refuses to give that which his chidren seeks,
that he may give them other things more convenient for them.
YEt it is to be marked, that albeit he refuse to tell Jacob his name; yet he
refuses not to give Jacob his blessing. Sometime the Lord grants his
children their desires, because he sees it is for their weal. Other times he
refuses them, and that also for their weal: but whether he say yea or no to
their petitions, he works always in mercy toward them. He granted flesh to
the children of Israel, because they sought it, but therewithal his wrath fell
upon them: of the which it is evident that sometime he grants men their
petitions, because he is angry with them. Others again he refuses, because
he is merciful to them, denying unto them that which they crave, but granting
another thing, which is much more profitable for them; Multi Aug. de unit at.
Eccl. cap. 19.
Deo irato exaudiuntur, multis propitius Deus non tribuit, quod volunt, vt quod
vtile est tribuat: The Apostle Paul being buffered by the Angel of Satan,
besought the Lord thri^e, that he might be delivered from him, he received a
refusal of that which he sought, and yet the Lord left him not Bernard.
destitute of comfort: Saepe multos Deus non exaudit ad voluntate^, vt exaudiat
ad Act. 1.
salutem: In the first of the Acts, the Disciples ask a question of Christ:
Will thou at this time restore the kingd^me to Israel? but what answer receive
they? a plain refusal: It is not for you to know the times and seasons: yet
he promises to them a better thing; But ye shall receive power of the holy
Ghost.

O happy exchange! let it be unto us O Lord, according to thy Word; deny us O
Lord any thing thou will, And this is a happy exchange, whereunto we should
(...) agree.
but never deny us thy holy spirit, that it may lead us into all truth, so long
as we remain here; and in the end may bring us unto the sight of thy joyful
face. Let us give unto the Lord this glory, that he is our merciful father,
not only when he grants, but even when he refuses some of those things
which we desire. It may well stand, that Bodily sickness has chased many to
their souls health.
being diseased, thou do seek of the Lord bodily health, and seek it too
with this restriction, if it please him; and yet thou obtain it not, the Lord
thinking it good to keep thee under a sick body, to the end he may restore
unto thee health of thy soul; for so may ye read in the Gospel, that many
being moved by bodily diseases, who otherwise were not minded to come unto
Jesus Christ, has found in him health both of body and soul. It may also fall
out, that thou do seek from the Lord temporal riches, and that
conditionally, if it please him, for a benefit, that thou be not burdenous unto
others, and yet the Lord thinks it Riches refused to some of Gods children,
for their greater good.
more expedient to refuse thee, least riches should be a snare unto thee; for
unto many they are but speciosa vincula quibus alligantur, and a quibus
possidentur, magis quam possident. Beautiful bands wherewith they are bound,
which they Cyp lib. 2 Epist. 2.
possess not, but are possessed of them. Thus their posterity and riches
becomes their ruin, so corrupt is our nature that the same gifts, which should
draw our hearts after the Lord, are allurements to turn them from him: Facile
enim cor humanum omnibus, quae frequentat, B^r. super Mat. 19. Ecce nos
reliquimus omnia.
adhaeret adeo, vt vix, aut nunquam sine amore valiant possideri: For the heart
of man cleaves very easily unto that, wherewith it is acquainted, so that
hardly or never can we possess the things of this world, without immoderate
love of them. And therefore the Lord in great mercy take them from us, that
they do not take us from him. Let us therefore commit the success of our
prayers to the Lord, let us not presume to limite the Holy One of Israel, being
always comforted with this, that if the Lord deny us that which we would have,
he shall give us another thing which is more expedient for us.

CHAP. XXVI. How Jacob shows himself thankful to God for the benefits
received in two things.
Verse 30. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, etc.
THe conference between the Lord and Jacob being ended, Moses now makes mention
of Jacobs thankfulness, which he declares in two things: first he impones such
a name to the place, as might stand for a perpetual memorial of Gods familiar
apparition unto him. And next he renders himself obedient, not regarding any
danger, that might be before him, trusting unto the word of the Lord, he goes
with courage forward in his journey.

First I say he impones a name to the place, and calls it Peniel, the face
of God, he gives the reason, because I have seen the face of God, and my life
is preserved. Seeing the Lord (will he say) has shown me this mercy, that I
have seen his face and am not confounded, I will never burn it in
vnthanfulnesse; Such tha^kfulnes becomes the children of God.
and therefore that it may be remembered of the posterity, I call this place by
the name Peniel. It becomes (says the Psalmist) upright men to be thankful.
Seeing all good Psalm.
things come of God, it is good reason the praise of all should return unto
him: As the waters that come secretly from the Sea through the veins of the
Pro.
earth, return again in their troghs publicly unto it, so every good thing
which the secret blessing of God has conuayed unto us, by public praise
should again return unto him. If we have gotten comfort from the LORD, we
should give unto the Lord his glory. And it is the manner of the children of
God, they cannot rest contented, when God has refreshed them with his mercies,
till the Lord get his (...) praise. And hereof it comes that they erect
public monuments and memorials, or at the least send out public thanksgiving
for these mercies, which God privately and secretly has bestowed upon them.

But as to the wicked, they swal ow up the benefits of God in unthankful The
great vnthankfulness^ o^ the (...)
oblivion: if the Lord increase then wealth and prosperity, they sacrifice to
their own net, as though their providence and wit had done it: and if he do
preserve them from dangers, they impute their deliverance to their idol, they
make their mouth to k^sse their hand as if their own arm had saved them. Thus
are they like unto that salt sea, whereinto Jordan flows, it swalloweth up
all the water of Jordan, but waxes no greater, neither yet does the salt and
bitter waters thereof become sweeter, for all that the wicked receive from the
LORD, their old scent remains in them, they are not the better, neither is
their heart enlarged to praise him. They do take from the Lord without giving
again, like barren and unprofitable ground, that deuoureth seed and renders
nothing: And therefore is near unto cursing, whose end is burning. Learn Hos.
6.
therefore O man to be thankful to thy God, every benefit that thou have
received, that increases not thy thankfulness, shall assuredly increase thy
judgment. Qu^m enim beneficia accepta Chris. de Sacerd. lib. 4.
meliorem non reddunt, is certe etiam grauius supplicium commeretur: He whom
benefits received makes not the better, does assuredly thereby demerite
heavier punishments.

We are next to consider, how it is How it is that the sight of God terrifies
man seeing he is the God of comfort
that Jacob accounts it a great mercy, that he has seen God, and yet his life
preserved. Seeing the Lord is the God of comfort, how is it his presence should
bring a terror unto men? it is his countenance that makes glad the heart: when
he hides his face the creature is troubled; but when he sends forth his spirit,
they are created, and the face of the earth is renewed. When thou did hide thy
Psalm. 104. 29.
face (says David) I was sore troubled. How is it then that Jacob here should
say that the sight of the face of God causes death, and that his countenance
should confound man? Adam in Paradise in the state of innocence was familiar
with God, he saw and heard the Lord, and was comforted: from whence then
comes this change, that man cannot see the Lord and live? Surely the fault is
not in the Lord, his countenance is the wel-spring of life: he is The cause of
this is not in the Lord but in our sins.
the father of light, and the God of all consolation. The fault is in us, in
our sinful and perverted nature. Faulty and weak eyes cannot behold the
light without pain, not for any evil which is in the light which is good and
comfortable, but for the infirmity which is in themselves. And sinful men
cannot see the Lord without fear, not for any fault in the Lord who is
merciful and gracious, but for that perverse disposition, which sin has
wrought in our selves. This made the Israelites to tremble, when Exodus
they heard him, and made that holy Prophet Esaias cry out, woe is me, when Esaias.
6.
he saw but a similitude, and representation of his Majesty. And who then may
abide that Majesty in it self?

These three pillars of the Church, Sin therefore is to be removed, if we would
see the Lord with joy.
Peter, James, and John, fell down to the ground, astonished at a small
manifestation of his glory: the brightness of his glorious face, shining like
the Sun, confounded them: and how then should they bear the glory of his
divinity? And in us it is this same sinful nature, which only hinders us from
the sight and familiarity of our God. What then shall we do, but embrace the
counsel of the Apostle S. John? Whosoever has this 1 Ioh. 3.
hope in himself (namely to see God) purges himself, even as God is pure. We
must remove our sins, and draw the powers of our souls to some nearer
conformity with the Lord, if so be we hope to dwell with him. For without
peace and sanctification, none can see the Heb. 12.
Lord.

But here again it is to be asked, how says Jacob he saw the face of god; In
what sense says Jacob, he saw the face of God.
seeing the Lord gave Moses this answer when he sought a sight of his face?
No man can see me and live: and we know that John the Baptist says, No man
has seen God at any time, but the son, who is come from the bosom of the
Father he has revealed him. How is it then I say, that Jacob here says, I
have seen God face to face.

I answer, that this is spoken in comparison of other visions and revelations
made to Jacob before: his meaning is no other but that he had now seen the
Lord, by a more excellent and notable manner of apparition, then ever he had
seen before. And where Moses is said to have seen the Lord face to face, this
is only spoken in comparison of Moses with other Prophets, who had not so
clear a revelation of the Majesty of God, as Moses had: this is evident out
of the Lords own words. If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be
known to him by a vision, and speak to him by a dream: my servant Moses is
not so: who is faithful in all my house, to him will I speak mouth to mouth,
not in dark words, and he shall see the similitude of the Lord. Yea, let no
man think, because of these Never any man on the earth, saw the Lord as he is.
words, that any of the Fathers saw the Lord as he is; thou can not see the
Sun as it is. He that a far off looks to the sea, says truly that he
has seen the sea: but what is it that he sees, in respect of that which he
sees not? Yea we cannot see a mortal man as he is; and how then shall we
see the Lord, as he is? If the Fathers had seen the Lord as he is, then all
the fathers had seen him one manner of way; because God in himself, is one,
simple, and undivided essence: but they saw him many manner of ways, in diverse
so^mes, and apparitions. To Jacob he appeared in a siery bus^; to the
Israelites in a cloud; to Elias in a soft and calm air; to Esaias in another
manner of vision: all which do prove that he showed not himself, neither did
they see him as he is, but only in such manner of manifestation, as the Lord
thought most expedient for the time.

But what speak I of the sight of Neither shall we see the Lord in the heaven
as he is, and why?
GOD on the earth? we shall not see him as he is in the heavens. For even
those holy Angles which stand about his Throne, are described unto us, covering
their faces with their two wings, witnessing thereby, that there is a God, of a
more infinite glory; then they are able to comprehend. And no marvel: for
every Creature, Man or Angel, is finite: a vessel of limited and definite
bounds. Now sure it is, that no finite thing can comprehend that which is
infinite, that peace of God, promised unto us, passes all understanding: and
these things prepared for us, are such, as the heart of man cannot understand.
What then shall we think of him who prepared them? Must not his glorious
Majesty by infinite degrees surpass the reach of our understanding?

CHAP. XXVII. What sight of God shall we have in the heavens?
YEt I speak not this to take away that sight of God, which we shall have in
the heavens. It must be true which the Apostle says, We shall see him as he
is, it being understood with these restrictions: First, the sight of God which
we shall have in heaven, shall be perfect in respect of us; the Lord shall
dwell in us fully, and replenish every power and faculty of soul and body,
with his joyful presence. He shall fill my whole mind with ^is light, no
darkness shall be left in it: he shall quicken my whole heart, no more
deadness shall be in it; and the whole affections shall be replenished with
his peace and joy. Now the Lord 1
dwells in us, but he fills us not. We are yet hungry and thirsty: We know but
in part, but in the heavens we shall be filled perfectly with that presence,
It shall be a perfect sight in respect of us.
wherein is the fullness of joy: the Lord shall then be all things, in all unto
us.

Now the greatest measure of the sense of mercy, is called by the holy spirit a
tasting, taste and consider how gracious the Lord is: but there is promised unto
us a full satisfaction; ye shall be satisfied: Inebriabor ab vbertate domus
tuae, I call this sight perfect in respect of us, the Lord shall fill all that
is in us, we shall desire no more, but we shall not be able to comprehend all
that is in the Lord. Augustine expresses this by a proper similitude: for he
compares the godly in the heavens, to vessels cast into the sea, were they
never so large they shall be filled full of water; and yet that which they
contain is nothing, in comparison of that great abundance which is about
them. So every godly man glorified in heaven, shall be fully filled with gods
comfortable presence, so that he shall know no want, and yet shall he not be
able to comprehend that infinite majesty, and peace, and joy, and glory of the
incomprehensible God. Therefore said I, that in respect of us, we shall have
in the heavens a perfect sight of God, that is, so far as we can be capable
of him, Mensuram plenam, and superfluentem tunc dabit in sin^s vestros. A good
measure, pressed and running over, says our Savior, shall be Luke.
then given into your bosoms.

Secondly, that sight of God, that in 2 It shall be an immediate sight.
heaven we shall enjoy, shall be immediate, and this is such a sight, as none
can understand till we get it. Yet to make it as plain as we may, let us
compare it with that which we have here in earth. The sight that now we have of
God, is as through a glass or a veil, that is, by mediate revelations. Now
we know him, by seeing him in his Creatures: we know him, by hearing him in
his word: we know him also even in the earth, by spiritual meditation, that
begets some secret sense of his mercy: yet al these are a walking by faith,
not by sight, at the least, but a dark sight of God, and through couerings: but
in the heaven we shall see him, not by halues, but by an immediate sight, which
we shall then best understand (as I said) when we shall attain unto it. The
Lord of his mercy purge and prepare us in time, and then hasten No sight of God
in heaven except first we see him in earth. And hereunto there things are
required.
that day wherein we shall see him.

And yet because eternal life must be begun on the earth, and that it is not
possible we can see God in the heaven, unless we have first seen him in the
earth; let us take heed unto those three things whereby we may attain unto
the sight of God. First remember that God without his own light cannot The
light of his word.
beseen: the eye suppose it be an organe of sight, were it never so quick,
sees nothing in the dark; the Sun, without the Sun cannot be seen:
far less can the Lord be seen without the Lord. In light (says the
Psalmist) shall we see light. If therefore we would begin Psalm.
to see the Lord, let us walk in his light, making his word a lantern to our
feet in all our ways, taking heed unto it, as unto a most sure word, and a
light shining in darkness, therewithal Pet.
joining to the Lords prayer, Open my eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy
law.

Secondly, we must remember, that A similitude and co^formitie with God.
we cannot see God without some similitude and conformity with him. Therefore
says Christ. Blessed are the poor in spirit for they shall see God. Among all
the members of the body none can see the Sun but the eye, because of some
similitude that is between them. For as God has set (...) in the great world,
the Sun and Moon in the sirmament, as instruments of light to serve it: so
has he placed (...) in the little world (which is Man) two eyes in the
highest part of his body, as organes of light to serve him. But the eye being
any way troubled or offended, as we see by experience, ^bhorres the light,
wherein it otherwise delights: and after the same manner, the mind of man
polluted with sin, neither can, nor dare look up to the Lord. Oculus cordis
parturbatus, auertit se a luce iustitiae, August. sermon. 18.
nec audet eam contemplari. The eye of the heart being perturbed (says
Augustine) turns it self away from the light of righteousness, and dares
not behold it. And to the same effect he says in another place, Male viuen
August. sermon. 10.
do videri a Deo non potes, videre Deum not potes, been autem viuendo, and
videris, and vides. If thou live an evil life, thou shall be seen of God, but
shall not see him: but if thou live a good life, thou art not only seen of
him, but thou may also see him. So necessary is this conformity with God by
sanctificati on, that without it we cannot see God

Thirdly, to the sight of God, there 3 Attention and consideration.
is requisite attention and consideration, a meek and quiet spirit, a heart
stablished by grace, separate from other things, and fixed on the Lord, Oculus
circu^mact^s non videt etiam, quae ante se sunt: A watering and reeling eye,
sees not those things which are before it; and an unstable mind, tossed too
and fro with restless cares and perturbations is not meet to see the the
Lord. When the Lord appeared to Eliah, there went before him a mighty wind, an
earthquake, and fire: but God was not in any one of them; he followed in a
soft, and still voice, to teach us, that we must have meek, settled, and
pacified spirits, if we look that God should be familiar with us: and we
must set the eyes of our souls stable and sixth on the Lord; attending on his
shining mercies, like the eyes of servants on their masters, and while the
Lord has mercy upon us. These are the principal helps, whereby the sight of
God is begun in earth, which will be perfected in heaven.

CHAP. XXVIII. The other thing wherein Jacob shows his thankfulness, is his
obedience.
Verse. 31. And the Sun arose to him.
THe other thing wherein Jacob utters his thankfulness, is in the obedience he
gives to the Lords calling, walking on in the journey, which God commanded him.
Without this the other had been nothing: for except we obey and serve the Lord
in our callings, doing that which is commanded us, wherein can we be
thankful to him? and truly there is no better token that we have been
refreshed by the countenance of God, who is the strength of his people, then
this, if with boldness and spiritual courage, we follow him, where away he
calls us, albeit we should find never so many impediments before us.

But it is to be marked, Moses says, Jacob his wound makes him not give over
the journey.
he halted as he went on in his journey. This is the marvelous working of the
Lord no doubt, that Jacob being hurt in the night, and his thigh bone
disjoynted; yet walks upon it in the morn, and the hurt, which he received of
the Lord, hinders him not, nor stays him from going forward in the journey,
which was enjoined him by the Lord. We have showed you before, how the children
of God in their wrestlings do in such sort prevail, that they get no victory
without a wound; who is able to say, that he has in such sort fought against
Satan and sin, but oftentimes he has been buffeted by Satan, and And the
wounds which the Godly receive in the spiritual combat make them stronger, and
more circu^spect.
wounded by sin. Yet such is the gracious dispensation of the Lord, that as
Jacobs hurt made him not give over the journey, but rather confirms him to go
forward with greater boldness, now halting on one thigh, then before when he
went straight upon both: so the Lord does so dispense the spiritual battles
of his Children, that out of their manifold falls, buffets, and wounds, which
they receive in this warfare, he works in them a greater hatred of sin, and
love of righteousness; a greater attention and circumspection in all their
ways, and a greater feruency and zeal to run out the race which is set before
them, and to renew the battle against Satan and sin.

And this we may see clearly in Example hereo^ in David and Peter.
David, who after his adultry and murder, being renewed by repentance, ^iseth
again with a greater hatred of sin, and more earnest desire of mercy, than
ever he had before. And did not Peter's fall bring forth in like manner the like
fruits in him, that he sheddeth tears now more abundantly, then at any time
before? he now stands boldly to confess the Lord Jesus before the Counsel,
whom before he had denied before a D^msell; and in all the rest of his life he
shows himself an example of godly zeal, laboring to confirm his brethren
by a good conversation, whom before he had offended by his stumbling and
falling. Thus the Lord by some one sin, wherein he sussereth his children to
have experience of their weakness, wakeneth them to a narrower inquisition of
their sins; for a light pain in the head men run not to the Physician, nor
to the water for a light spot in their garments: but if the defiling be great,
then we do take occasion thereat to wash away even the smallest spot that is
in them. So the godly, when oftentimes they pass over small sins without
remorse, the Lord This comes not of any goodness in us, but of the Lord his
marvelous dispensation.
permits them to fall into greater, that so they may be moved to mourning, and
hasten to an earnest reformation of all.

Where we are not to think that this comes of any goodness that is in us,
or in sin which we have brought forth, but of the excellent wisdom and
goodness of God: Deus etiam summus Aug. ad Boniface. lib. 3. cap. 7.
est medicus, qui been nouit vti enim malis, For God is that great Physician,
who can use to good even those things which are evil. And it does (says the
same Father) more advance the glory of Gods goodness, etiam de malis been
facere, quam mala esse non sinere, even to draw good out of evil, rather then
that he should suffer evil not to be. Thus the Lord our God makes all things
serve and work for the best to them that love him: so as even the wounds which
we receive in spiritual wrestlings may well work in us a greater humiliation
but shall not confound us, so that we leave off the race and course to our
heavenly Canaan. Wherein if we cannot always run in the strength of the spirit
with Eliah, yet let us by Gods grace endeavor to halt forward with Jacob, at
least creep forward toward our heavenly Father, as his little babes and
children, who are but yet learning to walk, proceeding always from strength to
strength, till we appear before the face of our GOD in Sion: whereunto the
Lord that is the author and finisher of our Faith, the beginner and perfecter
of our salvation, bring us of his great mercy in Christ Jesus. To whom with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
A CONDVIT of Comfort.

Full of sweet Consolations for all those that desire the comfortable
sweetness of Jesus Christ.

By WILLIAM COVPER Minister of Gods word.

LONDON:

Printed for John Budge, and are to sold at his shop at the great South door
of Paul's.

1608.

A CONDVIT of Comfort.
Romans 8. 28. Also we know that all things work together for the best, to them
that love God; even to them who are called according to his purpose.
My help is in the name of the Lord. THis Chapter may be conveniently termed
A compend of Christian consolation; for whereas many kinds of comforts, are
dispersed throughout the holy Scriptures, for the strengthening of the man of
God, some of every kind, are here gathered together in one, and like chosen
flowers picked out of the word of God, are knit together in one bunch, and
presented to thee who art a Christian. The sum and diuition of this Chapter.


There are two things only which trouble us in this life. The first, is the
remanents of sin in our corrupt nature: this was such a matter of grief, to
the holy Apostle, that it made him Romans 7. 24
to cry ou^; O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? So displeasant was it to him to l^ue in that body, wherein he found the
motions of sin rebeling against the law of God. And if the Apostle accounted
this but then so weighty to him, alas, how should we complain? and Esa. 31.
15.
what cause have we with Ezechia, to walk weakly in the bitterness of our
souls all our days, in whom the life and power of that sinning, is far
less restrained? Yet least we should be so cast down with the sense of sin,
that we despair and perish, being swallowed 2 Cor. 4. 9.
up with grief: the Lord furnishes us with many comforts against it, from the
beginning of this Chapter, to the midst of the 17. Verse. The other thing
which may discourage us, is the manifold troubles that follow us in following
Christ.

For the Church of God on earth, is as a Lilly among Thorns, and our Cant. 2.
2.
Lord Jesus, as an Apple tree among the trees of the forest: If we delight to
sit under his shadow; and if his fruit be sweet in our mouth, we must be
content to walk toward him through many sharp afflictions: therefore are we 2 Timothy 2. 3
commanded, not only to suffer afflictions as the good soldiers of Jesus
Christ, but also to rejoice in tribulations: and if we cannot attain to that
perfection, at least to count it exceeding Romans 5. 3.
joy, when we ^al into diverse temptations: Iam. 1. 2.
Yet because no chastisement is sweet for the present, it has pleased Heb. 1.
2.
the Lord of his fatherly indulgence and pity toward our weakness, to
seison the cup of our bitter griefs, with Heb. 12.
his sweet comforts; which as he does in many other parts of holy Scripture,
so especially from the 17. verse of this Chapter, to the 30. wherein the
Apostle abounds with consolation; showing himself a faithful Steward in the
house of God, most careful to lead as it were, by the hand, the weary sons and
daughters of the living God, into the wineceller; there to refresh and stay us
with the Flagons of his wine, and to comfort Cant. 2. 4. Can. 5. 1.
us with his Apples; to strengthen us with his hid Manna; and to make us merry
with that Milk and Honny, which our immortal Husband Jesus Christ has
provided for us, to sustain us that we faint not through these manifold
Tribulations, wherewith we are compassed in this barren wilderness.

That this is the Apostles purpose, and order of proceeding in this Chapter, I
think his conclusion makes it manifest, which you have from the 31. verse to
the end; wherein he draws all that he had said, into a short sum,
containing the glorious triumph of a Christian over all his enemies: the
triumph is first set down generally in the 31 Verse, What shall we say then
to these things: If God be with us, who can be against us? thereafter he parts
this general in two: there is (would he say) but one of two that are against
us, either sin or affliction: as to sin, he triumphs against it, Verse 33.
and 34. Who will lay any thing to the charge of Gods Chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ who is dead, or rather who is
risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.
As to affliction, he begins his triumph against it, Verse 35. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? his answer mounts up by a gradation: Will
tribulation or anguish do it? Yea, will death it self do it? or that which
is more; will Principalities and powers do it. 10. In all these things we
more then Conquerours, through him that loved us. Thanks therefore be unto our
2 Cor 2. 14
God, who always makes us to triumph in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now in this verse as Jacob gave his sons his greatest blessing in the last
room, so the Apostle gives to christi ans his greatest comfort in the last
room, whereof this is the sum^: ou^ afflictions are so far from being
p^eiudiciall to our salvation, that by the contrary, through the Lords
merueilous working, they tend to the aduancment thereof, and he in largeth the
comfort: Not only afflictions, but all other things work^ for the best
together, to them that love the Lord. The parts of the Verse are two: the first
contains the comfort: the second, a disc^ption of the persons to whom the
comfort appertains. Now I come to the Our troubles are many, but our comforts
are more then our troubles.
words.

Al^o, that is besides all the comforts which I have given to you before, I
give you yet this further: learning us, that albeit our troubles be many, yet
our comforts are more. Many (says Psalm. 31. 19 1. Cor. 1. 13.
David) are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers them out of
all. As if he would say, for every trouble, the Lord has a several
deliverance. Every temptation (says the Apostle) has the own issue. Every
horn that ri^eth against us to push us, has attending upon it, an hammer to
repress it, (says the Prophet.) Esau mourned Zac. 1. 21.
upon his father Isaac: although he was profane, yet he cried pitifully, Have
thou but one blessing my Father? But we (with the holy Apostle) may bless^ our
heavenly Father, who comfort us so in all our tribulations; that as the
sufferings of Christ a bound in us, so our consolations abound through 2. Cor.
1. 5
Christ: not one, but manifold are his blessings, and the storehouse of his
consolations, can never be emptied. The Lord our God has not dealt nigardly
nor sparingly with us, but a good measure of consolations, pressed down and
running over, has he given to us in our bosom, his name be Luke 6. 38
praised therefore: and yet how little is all this that we now receive, in
comparison of those inestimable joys of God, that he has prepared for us; the
like whereof the eye never saw, the care 1. Cor. 2. 9
never heard of, and the heart cannot understand: Surely the greatest measure
of comfort that we have in this life, is but the earnest penny of that
principal, which shall be given to us hereafter. If the earnest be so great,
what shall be the principal? If the first fruits of the heavenly Canaan be
Psalm. 17. 15 Psalm. 16. 11
so delectable, how shall the full mass thereof abundantly content us, when
we shall behold the face of our God in righteousness, and shall be satisfied
with his Image; when we shall be filled with the fullness of joy, which is
in his presence, and with those pleasures which are at his right hand for
evermore.

CHAP. II. The Privileges of a Christian, cannot be known of them who do not
possess them.
We know. If you ponder the Apostles words, you shall find, that by an
Emphasis he restraines this knowledge to the Children of God, excluding
Worldlings and Naturalists from it. The spiritual man discerns all things:
but he himself is judged of no man. A natural man cannot understand 1 Cor.
2. 14. 15.
the things that are of God. The Gospel is Wisdom indeed; but Wisdom among
them that are perfect. Every Article 1 Cor. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
of our faith, and point of Christian Doctrine: every privilege of a Christian
is a Mystery: therefore no marvel that the Gospel be foolishness to the
natural man, who perishes. And this does draw us to consider that the
excellent things of Christianity can be known of none, but of those that
possesses them. The value, or rather vanity of earthly Jewels, has been
better known of some that never enjoyed them, then of them who possessed them:
but the Jewels of gods kingdom, such as Peace, Righteousness, Joy in the holy
Ghost, can be known of none but of the Christian only, who enjoyes them. The
new Name given to the Christian, who can know but he Reu. 2. 17.
that has it? and none can know what is the sweetness of hid Manna, except he
taste it: therefore says the Psalmist, Taste and consider how gracious the Lord
Psalm. 34. 8.
is, telling you that the graciousnesse of the Lord cannot be considered by him
who never di^ taste it. If you go to speak to a vvorldling of inward Peace, of
spiritual Joy, or of the Privileges of a Christian, you shall seem to him a
Barbarian, or one that speaks a strange language, which he vnderstaneth not;
or if he himself speak of them which he sees learnedly hearing or reading; yet
shall he speak like a Bird, vtte^ing voices which she understands not. As
the bruit Beast knows not the excellency of man's life, and therefore
delights it self with Hay and Prouender seeking no better, because it
knows no better: So the natural man knows not the excellency of a
Christian, and therefore disdaines Act. 26. 24
him, counting him a fool, a mad man, and the off-scum of the world: he
takes the dongue of the earth in his 1 Cor. 4. 13
arms for his inheritance, let him brook the portion of Esau, that the
fatness of Gen 27. 39
the earth may be his dwelling place: let his wine and his wheat abound to him,
Psalm. 4. 7.
he cares for no more, he knows not what it is, to have his soul made glad
with the countenance of God. This is your miserable condition, O ye wretched
Worldlings, ye are cursed with the curse of the Serpent; ye creep, as it Genesis
3.
were on your bellyes, and lick the dust of the earth all the days of your
life; ye have not an eye to look up to Gal. 3. 1.
heaven, nor a heart to seek those things which are above: most fearful is
your estate; we warn you of it, but it is the Lord who must deliver you
from it.

This resolute knowledge is the mother Resolute knowledge is the mother of
patience.
of spiritual courage, constancy and patience: therefore the Apostle urges
it in this place, that the Christian may be made thereby strong and patient in
tribulation; and indeed what needs he fear in the evil day; yea, though the
earth should be removed, Psalm. 42.
and the Mountains fall into the midst of the sea: who knows that the
Lord sits on his throne, having the Reu. 4.
whole world, as a glassie Sea before him, governing all the walterings,
changes, and events of things therein, to the good of them that love him? Oh
that we had prosited so much in the school of Christ all our days, that
without any doubting, or making any exception, we could believe this which
here the Apostle lays for a most sure ground of comfort, that so we might
change all our thoughts and cares into one; namely, how to grow in the love of
God, that in a good conscience we might say to the Lord with Peter, Lord thou
know I love thee. And as the rest of our fears, griefs, and temptations,
which many times do so compass us, that to our judgments we can see no
out-gate: cast all the burden Psalm. 37.
of them upon the Lord, who cares for us; and has given us this promise for a
Praemunire: All comes for the best. The Soldier with courage enters into the
battle, under hope to obtain the victory: the Mariner with boldness
commits himself to the stormy Seas, under hope of vantage: and every man
hazardeth in his calling; and yet are they all but uncertain venturers, and
know not the end: But the 1. Cor. 9. 26.
Christian, runs not as uncertain; but as one sure to obtain the Crown:
for he knows that the God of peace shall shortly To. 16. 20.
tread Satan under his feet.

What then? shall he not with courage enter into that battle, wherein he is
made sure ere ever he sight, that all the Warriers of Jesus shall become more
To. 8. 27. Exo. 14. 13
then Conquerours through him? If we will only stand still, we shall see the
salvation of the Lord. Gedion and his three hundred, fought against the great
Host of Midian without fear, because he Iud. 7. 19.
was sure of victory. David made have and ran to encounter with Goliath,
because 1. Sam. 17. 48.
he was persuaded, the Lord would deliver him into his hands. The Israelites
spared not to enter into the flood of lorden, because they saw the Ark^ of God
before them, dividing the Ios. 3. 16.
waters: And shall only the Christian stand astonished in his temptations,
notwithstanding the word of God go before him to resolve him that whatsoever
fall out shall work for the best unto him? The Lord increase us, and make us
abound more and more in love of our God; for perfect love casts ou^ fear. The
Lord strengthen our Faith, that through these misty clouds of afflictions,
which now compasses us, we may see that comfortable end which the light of
God has discovered unto us.

But we are to beware of the subtle sleights of Satan, who to the end, he
may spoil us of this comfort in trouble Judge not of Gods working before the
end, for that does greatly im pair our comfort.
endeavors by many means, either to quench this light of God in our minds;
or else to darken and obscure it by the precipitation of our unbelieving
hearts, carrying us headlong to judge of the works of God, by their beginnings;
and to measure our selves in trouble, by our present estate and condition, not
suffering us to tarry while we see the end: whereof it comes to pass that our
hearts being tossed to and fro with (...), like trees of the Forest shaken
with the wind: in our necessities, we hasten to be our own prouisors: in our
dangers, we will be our own deliuerers: and every way we become the caruers of
our own condition: we have so much the more to beware of this precipitation,
because the dearest servants of God have fallen through it into fearful
sins against the Lord their God, and breed great unquietness unto
themselves. When David was in extreme Psa. 116.
anger in the wil^ernesse of Maon, he said in his fear that all men were
liers. O what a blasphemy! that even the promises of God, made to him by Samuel
the Lords Prophet, were but lies: and how many times thought he (in his other
troubles) that God had forgot to be merciful, and had shut up his tender
mercies in displeasure? But when he saw the end, then was he compelled to
accuse himself, to give glory to God, and to say: I should have been dumb,
and not opened my Psalm. 77. 9. Psalm. 39. 9.
mouth, because thou did it: I said it in my fear, but now I see, Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Psalm. 116.
Saints. A^ this precipitation made David to stumble and fall, so will it carry
us also to the like inconvenience too, except we beware of it: For if we should
look to Lazarus in the dongue hill, Luke 19. 19
full of Byles and sores, having no comfort, but from the dogs, and compare
him with the Rich man clothed in purple, and faring daintily every day. What
can we judge, but that Lazarus is the most miserable of the two? yet tarry
while the Lord have ended his work, and Lazarus he conveyed to Abraham's
bosom, and the rich glutton be gone to his place, then shall truth appear
manifestly, All things work together for the best to them that love God. Let
us learn therefore to measure the event of things, not by their present
condition, but by the prediction of Gods word. Let us cleave to his Promise,
and wait on the Vision which Abac. 2. 3.
has his own time appointed, it shall speak at the last, and shall not lie:
though it tarry, let us wait for it, it shall surely come, and not stay. Let
us go into the Sanctuary of God, and consider the end; there shall we find
and learn, that there is Psa. 37. 37
no peace to the wicked, howsoever they flourish for a time? and that it can
not be but well with them that fear the Lord. Mark the upright man, and
behold the just; for the end of that man is peace: but the transgressors shall
be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off: So both in
the troubles of the Godly, and prosperity of the wicked, are we bound to
suspend our judgment, till we see the end.

CHAP. III. Many working instruments of contrary qualities and intentions in
the world, yet agrees all in one end.
ALl things work together. O what a sing^lar (...) has the Christian, that
not only Afflictions, but all things whatsoever works for the best: and not
only so, but they work together for the best to him. Many working instruments
is there in the world, their course is not one, they communicate no counsels,
yea their intentions oftentimes are contrary, yet the Lord brings all their
ways to this one end, To the good of them that love him. Where ever they be,
in regard of place: what ever they be, in regard of persons: what ever their
purposes be; howsoever disagreeing amongst themselves; yet such is the power
and providence of that supreme Governor our heavenly Father, that All of them
works together to the good of them that love him: and herein does his power
and wisdom appear more clearly, then in the tempering of this great universe,
making Elements of so contrary qualities, to meet together, and agree in one
pleasant harmony. For the illustration of this, let us mark but one example for
all: Jacob sends his son Joseph Genesis 37.
to Dothan to visit his brethren; his brethren cast him into the pit, Ruben
relieues him; the Merchants of Midian buy him, and sell him again to Potiphar,
his Mistress accuses him, his master condemns him, the Butler (after long
ingratitude) recommends him, and Pharaoh exalts him. O what instruments are
here! and how many hands are about this one poor man of God? but how does the
Lord direct them all? yea, besides their own intention to further Joseph's
advancement in Egypt, for his own good, and the good of his Church. But now to
the particulars.

There is nothing in the world, which All the works of God, are for the best
to his children.
works not for our weal: All the works of God, all the stratagems of Satan,
all the imaginations of man, are for the weal of Gods Children, yea, out of
the most poysonable things, as sin and death, does the Lord draw healthful
and medicinal preservatives to them that love him.

All the ways of the Lord (says David) are Mercy and Truth. Mark what he
says, and make not thou an exception, Psalm. 25.
where God has made none: All, none excepted. But be thou strengthened in
Faith, and give glory to God, saying with the patient Job, Albeit the Lord Job.
13. 15
would slay me, yet will I trust in him.

Sometimes the Lord walks in the way of anger, seeming angry with his
Children, and to walk stubbornely against them, which has moved them to
pour out the like of these pitiful Lamentations. The arrows of the
Almighty are upon me (says Job) the venime Job. 6. 4.
whereof does drink up my Spirit, and the terrors of God sight against me:
Thou sets me up as a mark against thee, and make me a burden to my self.
Thy Ps 88. 7. 15
indignation lies upon me (says David) Yea, from my youth I have suffered thy
terrors, doubting of my life. For felicity, Esa. 38. 17
I have had bitter grief, (says Ezechia) for the Lord, like a Lion, brake my
bones, so that I chattered like a Swallow, and mourned like a Dove. I am
troubled on every side (says the Apostle) having 2 Cor. 7. 5
fighings without and terrors within: And yet in all these, the Lord has a
secret way of mercy, wherein he walks and works for the comfort of his
children; which albeit for the present we cannot Job. 13. 24
perceive, and can see no other oftentimes, but that the Lord has taken us for
his enemies: yet in the end we shall be compelled to acknowledge it, and
confess with David, O good was it for Psalm. 119.
me, o Lord, that ever thou correctedst me: Therefore also, said the Apostle,
The 2 Th. 1. 10
Lord is marvelous in his Saints, and the Apostle cries out, O the (...) To.
11. 35.
of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out! His glory is great when he
works by means; his glory is greater when he works without means: but his
glory shines most brightly when he works by contraries.

It was a great work that he did open the eyes of the blind; but greater,
that he did by application of spittle The Lord works by means, without
means, and by contraries, and then is his glory greatest.
and clay: such means as are meeter to put out the eyes of the seeing man,
then to restore the sight of a blind man. So he wrought in the first Creation,
causing light to shine out of Darkness: So also in the work of Redemption:
for by cursed death, he brought happy life: by the Cross, he obtained the
Crown: and through shame he went to Glory: And this same order, the Lord
keeps yet in the work of our second Creation, which is our regeneration; he
casts down, that he may raise up; he kills and he makes alive: he wounds,
and he will bind up: he wounds and he will heal: he accuses his Children of
sins, that so they may get remission of their sins: he troubles their
consciences, that so he may pacify them: and in a word, the me^nes which he
uses in working, are contrary to the work it self, which he intends to
perform toward his Children. He sent a fearful darkness on Abraham, but
afterward communicated unto him a joyful light. he wrestled with Jacob, and
shook him too and fro; but in the end blessed him: he stroke the Apostle Paul
with blindness, and then opened his eyes, that he might know the Lord Jesus:
he frowns for a while upon his own, as Joseph did upon his Brethren; but in
Genesis 43.
the end with a loving affection shall he embrace them: he may seem angry at
thy prayers, as he put back the petition of the woman of Cana^n; but at Mat.
15. 22
length, will grant a favorable answer unto them: therefore let us now learn
to possess our souls in patience: let the Lord work by any means it
pleases him: It is enough that we know, All the ways of God (yea even when
he deals most hardly with his children) are mercy and tends to the good of
those that love him.

CHAP. IIII. All Satan's stratagems, work for the best to the godly.
ANd as to Satan's stratagems, it is also out of doubt that they work for the
best, to them that love the Lord, not according to his purpose in deed, but
because the Lord trappeth him in his own snare. If under the serpents shape
he deceived Adam, under the Serpents name shall the Lord curse him, and all
these weapons whereby he intends to destroy the work of Gods grace in us,
shall the Lord make forcible to destroy the workmanship of Satan in us, I
mean that whole bastard generation of sinful affections, which Satan has
begotten upon our mutable nature, by a most unhappy and unlawful copulation:
The experience of all the saints of God will prove this, that How Satan's
temptations for sin, does good to the christian.
Satan by his restles temptations does destroy himself; which is most evident
both in his temptations for sin, which tend to desperation, as also in his
temptations to sin, which tend to presumption. Every accusation of the
conscience for bypast sins, is a preservative to the child of God, to keep
him from sin in time to come; he reasoning with himself after this manner:
If my eni mie does so disquiet my mind with inward terrors, for these sins
which foolishly I did by his inticement, why shall Shall I hear and trust the
enemy of my soul, that has deceived me so often? Rom 6. 2. 1
I harken to him any more hereafter, and so increase the matter of my trouble?
for what fruit have I of all the sins whereof I took pleasure, but terror
and shame? And shall I look that this forbidden Tree, shall render any better
fruit hereafter? O what a faithless traitor is Satan, he inti^eth man unto
sin, and when he has done it, he is the first accuser and troubler of man
for sin. When he works in us, he is a temptor: when we have finished his
work, (which is fin) he is an accuser of us to the judge; and when he
returns, he returns as a troubler and a tormentor of us for our sins. Stop
thy ear therefore, O my soul, from the voice of this deceitful enchaunter.
His temptations again unto sin are so many prouocations, spurring us forward
to the throne or grace: for whilst we find his restless malice pursuing that
sparkle of spiritual life, whereby the Lord has quicned us; and our own
weakness, and inhabilitie to resist him: then we are forced with Israel in
Aegipt, to sigh for 1. Cor. 20. 12.
the thraldom; and to cry with Iosah, O Lord our God we wot not what to do!
but our eyes are turned toward thee. And who feels not this? that the grace of
fervent prayer (wherein otherwise we faint, our hands being more ready to fall
down then the hands of Moses, except they be supported) is greatly weakened,
and abridged in the children of God by the buffets of Satan: So they weakened
the holy Apostle, and stirred him up to such feruency in prayer, that he
besought the Lord thrice, 1. Co. 12. 7
that is, many times, to deliver him from them, Yea, which is more) the Lord
made them effectual means to beat down the power of natural pride in him,
least he should have been exalted out of measure, through the greatness of
his revelations. A wonderful work, that the Father of pride, becomes
against his will a represser of pride: and he who first powered this poison into
the nature of Man, is made (contrary to his intent) an instrument to suppress
it. Thus the Lord our God outshooteth How asslictions are profitable to a
Christian.
Satan in his own bow: and with the sword of Goliath, cutteth off his own
head: his holy name be praised therefore for ever.

Now as concerning outward afflictions, it is true that as the Philistines could
not understand Sampsons Riddle, how sweet came out of the sower, and meat
Judge. 14. 14.
out of the eater: So can no Worldlings understand, that tribulation brings
out Romans 5. 3.
Patience: and that our light and momentary 2 Cor. 4. 17
afflictions causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory:
but the Children of God have learned by experience, that albeit no visitation
be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them who are thereby exercised: and that there is more
solid joy in suffering rebuke with Christ, then in all He. 11. 25.
the pleasure of sin, which endure but for a season. For as Moses, the
mediator of Ex. 15. 15.
the old Testament, by his prayer made the bitter waters of Marah sweet, that
the Israelites might drink of it; so Jesus the mediator of the new Testament
by his passion, has mittigated to his Children, the bitterness of the Cross;
and not only mixed it with joy, but made it most profitable. The forlorn Luke
15. 12
Son concluded never to return home to his Father, till he was brought low by
affliction. And many in the Gospel were forced by corporal diseases to run to
Jesus, where others enjoying bodily health, did nothing but disdain him. The
earth which is not tilled and broken bears nothing but Thorns and Briars: the
Vines wax wild by time, except they be pruned and cut: so would our vain
hearts ouergrowe with vilde affections, if the Lord by sanctified trouble did
not continually manure them. Therefore said Jeremy, It is good for a man to
bear the yoke in Lam. 3. 27
(...) youth. And David confessed; It was Psalm. 1. 19.
good for him, that he was afflicted. Yea, (says our Savior) Every branch
that Ioh. 15. 2.
bears fruit, my heavenly Father purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit. No work can be made of Gold and Silver without fire: and stones are not
meet for Palace work, except they be pollished and squared by hammering: no
more is it possible, that we can be vessels of Honor in the houses of our
God, except first we be sined and melted in the fire of Affliction: neither
can we be as living s^ones, to be placed in the wall of the heavenly
Jerusalem, except so long as we be here, the hand of God beat us from our
proud lumps, by the hammer of Affliction. As standing waters putrifies and
rot^, so the wicked fears not God (says the Psalm. 55.
Psalmist) because they have no changes. And Moab keeps his sent (says the
Ier. 44. 11.
Prophet) because he was not powered from Vessel to Vessel, but has been at
rest ever since his youth. And therefore, O Lord, rather then we should keep
the old sent of our natural corruption, and live in careless security,
without the fear of thy holy name, and so become sit-fasts in our sins; no,
rather O Lord change thou us from estate to estate; waken us with the presence
of thy hand: purge us Lord with thy fire, and chastise us with thy rods: always
O Lord with a protestation, that thou stand to thy promise made to the Sons of
David, I will visit them with my rods, if they sin against me: but my mercy
will I never take from them.

CHAP. V. How death also works for the best to Christians.
THe same comfort have we also against death, that now in Christ Jesus it is
not a punishment of our sins, but a full accomplishment of the motificatian
of sin, both in soul and body; for by it, all the Conduits of sin are
stopped, the weapons of unrighteousness broken: and though our bodies seem to
be consumed, yet are they but sown like grains of Wheat, into the field and
husbandry of the Lord, which must dye before they be quickened; but in the day
of harvest, shall spring up again most glorious, and shall be restored by the
same holy spirit, who now dwells in them: and as to our souls they are relieved
our of this house of servitude, and that they may depart and turn to him from
whom they came: therefore have I Death compared to the red sea, wherein the
Egiptitians were drowned, and the Israelits went through to Canaan. Romans 8.
compared death to the red sea, wherein Pharaoh and his Aegiptians were
drowned, and sanck like a stone to the bottom, but the Israelites of God, went
through to their promised Canaan: So shall death be unto you, O miserable
Infidels! whose eyes the God of this world has so blinded, that no more then
the blind Egiptians can you see the light of God, that shines in Goshan, that
is, his Church, although you be in it: to you I say, your death shall be a
sea of Gods vengeance, wherein ye shall be drowned, and shall sincke with
your sins, heavier then a Millstone about the neck of your soul, to press
you down to the lowest Hels. But as to you, that are the Israelites of God,
ye shall walk through the valley of death, and not need to be afraid,
because the Lord is with you; His staff Psalm. 13.
and his rod shall comfort you: Albeit the terrors of Hell, the horror of the
Grave, the gultinesse of sin, stand about thee like mountains, threatening to
ouerwhelme thee; yet shall thou go safe through to the land of thine
inheritance, where with Moses and Meriam, Exo. 15. 11
and all the Children of God, even the Congregation of the first borne, Thou
shall sing praises joyfully to the God of thy Salvation. And thus we see how
that not only our present afflictions, but Satan, Sin, and Death are made
to work for the best, to them that love the Lord.

CHAP. VI. How the plots and imaginations of men work for the best to the
Christian.
NOw in the last room concerning, the imaginations of men against us, we
shall have cause to say of them in the end, as Joseph said to his brethren,
You did it unto me for evil but the Lord turned it unto good. The whole
History of Gods Book, is as a cloud of manifold witnesses, concurring
altogether to confirm this truth: I content my self therefore for all, to
bring one. When David was going forward in the battle against Israel, with
Achish King of Gath, under whom he soiourned for a while, in the time of his
banishment) the remnant Princes of the Philistines, commanded him to go back;
and this they did for the worse to disgrace him, because they distrusted him:
but the Lord turned it to him for the best: Consider David's estate now, and ye
shall see him set betwixt too great extreamities. If he had gone back of his
own accord, the Philistines might have blamed him and handled him as an
enemy: if he had come forward, he should have been guilty of the blood of
Israel, and especially of Saul the Lords anointed; who was slain in that
battle.

In this strait the wit of man can find him no out-gate, but the provident
mercy of God delivers him in such sort, that no occasion of offense is given to
Saul and his people, because David came not against them: neither yet could the
Philistines condemn him, because he went back by their command. So notable a
benefit did David receive even by that same deed, wherein his enemies thought
they had done him a notable shame: and it should learn us in our straitest
extreamities whereunto men can drive us, to depend on the Lord, and ever then
to hope for an outgate, when we see none. For such is thy providence O Lord,
whereby in mercy thou watchest over those evils that are intended against them,
that by thee they are turned into good to them.

And here we have further to consider, If this comfort belong to every member,
much more to the whole body and state of the Church.
that seeing this is the privilege of every one that loves the Lord; much more
must it appertain to the whole Church of God. It is the portion of Abraham,
being the father of the faithful, and one of Gods children, I will bless them
that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee: and shall it not belong
(think we) to all the congregation of the first borne? will not the Lord be a
Wall of fire round about Jerusalem, Zac. 2. 5.
and the glory in the midst of her? will he not keep her as the apple of his
eye? Zac. 12. 2.
Shall not Jerusalem be as a cup of poison, unto all her enemies, and a heavy
stone? Yea surely all that lift up themselves shall be torn, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it, the weapons made against
her shall not prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against her in
judgment shall be condemned. This is the heritage of the Lords servants, and
the portion of them who love him. For the Church is the Genesis 7. 18.
Ark of God, which may mount up higher as the waters increases, but cannot
be overwhelmed: the bush which may burn but cannot be consumed: Exodus 3. 2.
the house built on a rock which Mat. 7. 15.
may be beaten with the wind and rain, but cannot be overthrown.

The Lord who changes times and Enemies of Gods church look to their end.
seasons, who takes away Kings and sets up Kings, has reproved Kings for his
Churches sake: and he governs all the kingdoms of the earth in such sort
that their risings and fallings, their changes and mutations are all dispensed
for the good of his Church: for there is but one of two sentences, wherein all
the Judges of the world may judge of themselves, and see clearly their end.
Either Ester. 4. 14
that which Mordecai said to Ester, who knows if for this thou art come to the
Kingdom, that by thee deliverance might come to Gods people? Or else that
which Moses in Gods name said to Pharaoh (the first oppressor of Gods Church in
his adolescency) I have set thee up to declare my power, because thou exaltest
thy self against my people. How miserable then are they who when they are
highest abuses their power, to hold the people of God lowest.

Have they not cause to fear least the Lord have set them up against him, as
an object of his power and Justice? if we will mark the course of the Lords
proceeding ever since the beginning of the world, we shall find that as he
orders the state of earthly power, for the accomplishment of his will,
concerning his Church; so evermore a blessing follows them, who are
instruments of her good: and by the contrary, an inevitable curse follows them
who are the instruments of her evil.

When the Lord concluded to bring his Church from Canaan, to sojourne in
Aegipt, he sent such a famine in Canaan, as compelled them to forsake it: but
made plenty in Aegipt by the hand of Joseph, whom the Lord sent before as a
prouider for his Church? and by whom Pharaoh was made so favorable to Jacob,
that he was allowed to dwell in Goshen: but when such time came that he would
translate his Church from Egypt to Canaan, then he altered Pharaohs
countenance; he raised up a new king which knew not Joseph, and turned the
Egyptians hearts away from Israel, so that they vexed Israel, and caused them
to serve by cruelty: and all this the Lord did, to the end his people should
become weary of Aegipt, and enforced by violence to make forward to Canaan,
whereas otherwise (as it well appears) if they had been dandled as in the
beginning, they would have neglected the promised land, and contented
themselves with Onions and Fleshpots of Aegipt. Thus Pharaoh by his obstinacy
brings on himself, his just deserved punishment; and the Lord works to his
people their undeserved deliverance: and afterward, when the sins of his people
drew to that ripenes, that they had caused their days to draw near, and were
come to their term; the Lord stirred up the king of Babell, as the rod of
his wrath, and Ezec. 22. 4
staff of his indignation, he sent him to the dissembling Nation, and gave him
a charge against the people of his Esaias. 10. 5.
wrath, to take the spoil and the pray, and to tread them under feet like mire
in the streets; and then that the Lord might be avenged of the sins of Israel,
he subdued all kingdoms round about them under the king of Babell, that no
stop or impediment should be in their way to hold off the judgment from them:
But yet again, when the Lord had accomplished all his works upon Mount Sion,
and the appointed Esa 10. 12.
time of mercy was come, and the 70. years of Captivity was expired, then the
Lord visited the proud heart of the The government of the whole earth altered
for the Churches sake.
King of Ashur; and for his Churches sake, he altered again the government
of the whole earth, translating the Empire to the Medes and Persians, that
Cyrus the Lords anointed might perform to his people the promised deliverance.

All which, should learn us in the greatest changes and alterations which can
fall out in the world, to rest assured, that the Lord will work for the good
of his Church, though the earth Psalm. 42.
should be moved and the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea, yea,
though the waters thereof rage and be troubled, yet there is a River whose
streams shall make glad the City of our good God, in the midst of it, and
therefore it shall not be moved; yea, they who should be as nursing fathers
and Mothers to the Church of God, may forsake her and become her enemies: but
assuredly they shall perish; and comfort and deliverance shall appear unto
Gods people out of another place. The Lord for a while may put the bridle of
bondage in the Philistines hands to humble the Israelites Esaias. 12. 1.
for their sins, but it shall be taken from them: and the day shall come,
wherein we shall with joy draw water out of the Wels of salvation, and praise
the Lord saying: Though thou were angry with me, thy wrath is turned away, and
thou comfortest me. Yea, Sion shall cry out and shout for joy, for great is the
holy one of Israel in the midst of her: and therefore in our lowest
humiliations, let us answer our Adversaries: rejoice not against me, oh mine
enemy, though I fall, I shall rise: and when I shall sit in darkness, the
Lord is a light unto me: I will bear the wrath of the Lord; because I have
sinned against him, until Mich. 7. 8.
he shall plead my cause, and execute judgment for me, he will bring me
forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness: then he that is mine
enemy, shall look upon it, and shame shall cover him who said to me, What is
the Lord thy God?

CHAP. VII. What is a Christians best.
WHat is the Lord thy God? Now shall he be trodden under, as the mire in the
street: yea so let al thine enemies perish O Lord! For the best. This best, is
no other thing, but that precious salvation prepared to be shown us in the
last time, reserved in the heavens for us, and whereunto we are reserved by
the power of God through Faith; whereof we learn that our best estate is not
yet wrought so as it is accomplished; it is only in the working, says the
Apostle, and therefore we are not to 1. Pet. 1. 5.
look for it in this life.

There is a great difference between the godly and the wicked: the one inioyes
their best in this life, the other looks for it, and are walking toward it:
For if it should be demanded, when a wicked man is at his best? I would The
wicked man is at his best, when he comes first into the world. Job. 3. 12.
answer, his best is evil enough; but then a wicked man is at his best, when
he comes first into the world; for then his sins are fewest, his judgment
easiest. It had been good for him, that the knees had not prevented him, but
that he had died in the birth: for as a River which is smallest at the
beginning, increases as it proceeds by the accession of other waters into it,
till at length it be swallowed up into the deep; so the wicked, the longer
he lives, waxes ever worse and worse: deceiving, 2 Timothy 3. 1
and being deceived (says the Apostle,) proceeding from one evil to worse
(says Jeremy,) till at length he Ier. 9. 3.
be swallowed up in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And Reu.
19. 20.
this the Apostle expresses most significantly, when he compares the wicked
man unto one gathering a treasure, wherein he heaps up wrath to himself,
against the day of wrath; For even as the Worldling, who every day casts in
money into his treasure, in few years multiplies such a sum, the particulars
whereof he himself is not able to keep in mind; but when he breaks up his
Box, then he finds in it sundry sorts of Coin, whereof he had no
remembrance: Even so is it and A warning for impenitent sinners.
worse, with thee, O impenitent man, who not only every day, but every hour
and moment of the day, do multiply thy transgressions, and desile thy
conscience, hoording up into some dead work or other: to what a reckning
think thou, shall thy sins amount in the end though thou forget them as
thou co^mittest them? Yet the Apostle tells thee, that thou have laid them
up in a treasure, and not only so, but with every sin, thou have gathered a
portion of wrath proportionable to thy sin, which thou shall perfectly know in
that day, vvherin the Lord shall break up thy treasure, and open the book of
thy conscience, and set thy sins in order before thee: then shall thine own
Psa. 50. 18.
wickedness correct thee: and turning back, shall reprove thee: then shall
thou know and behold, that it is an evil thing Ier. 2. 19.
and a bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God: And shall be astonished
to see such a multitude of witnesses standing up against thee; then shall thou
perceive that these sins which thou have cast behind thy back, the Lord
has set them in the light of his Psalm. 90. 8.
countenance, and then woe shall be unto thee, for the Lord shall turn thine
own ways upon thy head, when thou have accomplished the measure of thine
iniquity: the Lord shall give thee to drink of the cup which thou have filled
with thine own hand, and shall double his stripes upon thee, according to the
multitude of thy transgressions.

CHAP. VIII. The Christian is not at his best now: it is the working only.
But as to the children of God, if you will ask, when they are at the best? I
answer, praised be God, our worst is ended, our good is begun, our best is at
hand: as our Savior said to his Kinsmen, so may we say to the Worldlings; your
time is always, but my John. 6. 7.
time is not yet come. We are at the worst immediately before our conversion,
for our whole life till then, was a walking with the Children of disobedience
in the broad way that leads to damnation, and then were we at the worst, when
we had proceeded furthest in the way of unrighteousness, for then were we
furthest from God. Our best began in the day of our recalling, wherein the
Lord by his word and holy spirit, called upon us, and made us turn our backs
upon Satan, and our face toward the Lord, and so caused us part company with
the Children of disobedience; among whom we had our conversation before:
then we came home with the penitent forlorn, to our fathers family; but they
went forward in their sins to judgment: That was a day of division betwixt us
and our sins: In that day (with Israel) we entered into the borders of
Canaan, into Gilgall, and there were circumcised, and the shame of Egypt was
taken Ios. 5. 9.
from us, even our sin, which is our shame indeed, and which we have
borne from our mothers womb: the Lord grant that we may keep it for ever in
thankful remembrance: and that we may count it a double shame to return
again to the bondage of Egypt, to serve the Prince of darkness in Brick and
Clay; that is, to have fellowship any more with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but that like the redeemed of the Lord, we may walk Psalm. 84. 7.
from strength to strength, till we appear before the face of our God in Sion.

Always this difference of estates The difference of the godly and wicked
concerning their best, should learn us comfort and patience.
of the godly and wicked should learn us patience: let us not seek that in
the earth, which our gracious God in his most holy dispensation, has reserved
for us in the heaven: let us not be like the foolish Jews, who loved the place
of their banishment in Babell better than their home: for here we are not at
our best, now our life is hid with 1 John. 3.
the Lord, and we know not yet what we shall be, but we know when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: the Lord shall carry us by his mercy and bring
us Exo. 15. 13
in his strength to his holy habitation. He shall plant us in the mountain of
his Esaias. 35.
inheritance, even the place which he has prepared, and Sanctuary which he
has established: then everlasting joy shall be upon our heads, and sorrow and
mourning shall sly away from us for ever. And now till the Lord has
accomplished his work unto us, let us not faint, because the wicked flourish:
neither Psalm. 7.
think we have cleansed our hands in vain because they prosper, they are to
be pittyed rather then enuyed: let them eat and drink and be merry; sure it
is, they will never see a merrier day then that they see presently: they have
enjoyed their heaven in the earth: they have received their consolation in this
life, and have gotten their portion Luke. 19.
in this world. Oh what tongue can express their misery! And yet as Samuel How
miserable are the wicked who have their heaven in the earth.
mourned for Saul, when God rejected him: and Jeremy wept in secret for the
pride of his people, that would not repent of their sins, how can we but
take up a bitter lamentation for many of you, whom in this time of grace, we
see to be strangers from grace? We vvish from our hearts, ye were not like
the kinsmen of Lot, who thought he was scorning, when he told them of a
judgment to come; and therefore for no request would go with him out of
Sodom, but tarried while the fire of the Lords indignation consumed them. But
rather as Sara followed Abraham from Calde to Canaan, so you would take us by
the hand, and go forward with us from hell to heaven.

But alas, The lusts of the flesh, holds you captive, your sins has blinded
you, and the Love of the world does bewitch you; but all of them in the end,
shall deceive you: For All the labor under the Sun, is but vanity and
vexation Ec. 2. 17.
of spirit.

When you have finished your task, you shall be less content then ye were
at the beginning: you shall be as one wakened out of a dream, who in his
sleep thought he was possessor of many things, but when he awaketh, behold he
has nothing, Like that rich man, who said in his security, Now my soul thou
have much good for many days: and even upon the next day was reducted to
greater poverty then that despised Lazarus, that he had not so much as a drop
of cold water to cool his tongue with: then shall you lament, we have wearied
our selves in the way of iniquity, and it did not profit us. Alas, how shall I
learn you to be wise? The Lord when he created man, set him in a room above
all his creatures; and now degenerate man, sets every creature in his heart
above the Lord. O fearful ingratitude. Do you so reward the Lord, ye
foolish people and unwise? There is nothing which you conceive to be good; but
when you want it you are careful to seek it: when you have it, you are
careful to keep it; only you are careless of the Lord Jesus, though he be
that incomparable jewel, that brings light in darkness, life in death,
comfort in trouble, mercy against all judgment; you should set him as a
signet, on your heart, as an ornament on your head; and put him on as a
glorious attire, that gets you place to stand before God. But what pains do
you take to seek him? what assurance have you, that ye are in him, or what
mourning do you make, because ye are strangers from him? Can ye say that the
tenth of your thoughts and words are employed upon him? Alas, how long will
you wander after vanities, and follow lies? Will ye for ever forsake the
fountain of living waters, and dig to your selves broken pits, that can hold
no water? O consider this (in time) ye that Psa. 50. 22.
forsake the Lord, least he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver
you.

CHAP. IX. All things work to the worst, to the wicked.
THe last lesson we observe in this part of the verse, is this: as All things
work for the best, to them that love the Lord, so all things work for the
worst to the wicked: there is nothing so clean, which they defile not, nothing
so excellent which they abuse not. Make Saul a King, and Balaam a Prophet, and
Judas an Apostle, their preferments shall be their destruction. If they be in
prosperity, they contemn God, and their prosperity becomes their ruin: if
they be in adversity, they blaspheme him, and like raging waves of the sea
cast out their own dirt to their shame. Yea, what speak I of these things,
even their table Psalm. 69. 22 2. Cor. 5.
shall be a snare to them: Jesus Christ is a rock of offense to them, the
Gospel the savor of death to them, and their prayer is turned into sin to
them: And what more excellent things then these? as a foul stomak turns most
healthsome food into corruption, so their polluted Conscience turn judgment
into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Wormwood. And all this should
provoke us to become good in our persons, or else there is nothing, were it
never so good, can be profitable unto us.

To them that love God. Here follows The second part of the verse, is the
persons to whom the former comfort belongs.
the second part of the Verse, containing a description of the persons to whom
this privilege appertains, together with a reason of the former comfort. Of
force all things must work for the best (namely to salvation) to them that
love God, because they are called (namely to salvation) according to Gods
purpose. The strength of this reason, stands in the necessity and
immutabilitie of the purpose of God, more stable then the decree of the Medes
and Persians, for what he has decreede cannot be revoked, anulled or
hindered. It is that supreme cause of all, which orders all inferior causes
and incidents whatsoever, in such sort, that they must work to the advancement
of that most high purpose of God. Our calling comes from Gods purpose, and
carries us to the determined glory.


This reason is made clearer in the subsequent Verse, where the Apostle lets us
see how the links of the golden Chain of our Salvation are knit together
inseperably by the hand of God, that no power in heaven or earth can sunder
them: whereof it comes, that he that is sure of one, is sure of all. And now
let us take a short view of it, for confirming of the Apostles Reason. Election
is the first, and it is the most ancient Charter of the right of Gods
Children, to their Fathers inheritance. Calling is the second, and it is that
gift of God, whereby we are known the sons of God, and our Election secret
in it self, is made manifest to our selves and others. Justification is the
third, and it is the grace of God, whereby we are infeoft in Jesus Christ, in
such sort, that we are made one with him, and pertakers of all that is his.
Glorification is the last, and it is that grace of GOD, whereby we shall be
entered in the due time, full Heirs to our heavenly Father.

No King on earth can produce so ancient a right to his crown, as the
Christian, effectually called. No man on earth can be known his fathers heir
upon such sufficient warrant, as the Christian: for in his Regeneration, the
Father communicates to him his Image, his Nature, and his Spirit, whereby he
begins from feeling to call God his father: and in life and manners resembles
him. No Freeholder so surely infeoft in his Lands, having so many
confirmations of his right as has the justified Christian, who upon his gift,
has received the earnest, the Pledge, the Seal, and the Witness of the great
King: and last of all, the Christian shall be entered to the full fruition of his
inheritance, with such joy and triumph in the glorious assembly of the Saints,
as the like was never seen in the world, no not in Jerusalem that day when
Solomon sat down in 1 Kin 1. 14
his fathers Throne; then their joy was so great, That the earth rang with the
sound of them, but nothing comparable to this. And herein stands the excellency
of a Christian, and certainty of his salvation.

CHAP. X. How the Christian is made sure of his Election and Glorification.
FOr this Chain of our Salvation, reaches (as I may say) from eternity to
eternity: the beginning of it (albeit before beginning) is our Election: the
end of it (albeit without end) is our glorification: and these two ends of the
Chain, the Lord keeps them sure and secret in his own hand: but the two
middle links of the Chain, to wit Calling and Justification, the Lord has
letten them down from the Heaven to earth, that we should gripe and apprehend
them: that being sure of the two middle Links, we might also be sure of the
two ends; because the Lord has knit them inseparably together. Then thou, who
would be comforted with the assurance of thy Salvation, take heed of this,
making it known to thine own Conscience by a holy life, that God has called
thee, and justified thee: Gripe sure, as it were with one hand, the link of
Calling, and with the other hand, the link of Justification; then may thou
know assuredly, Election before the world is thine; Glorification after this,
shall also be thine. To make this yet more plain, we are to remember, this
mortal life of ours, is a short interiected point of Time, betwixt two
Eternities (if so I may call it:) or like a stepping stone, betwixt two
Gulphes, whereupon some in fear and trembling work out their Salvation; and
so steps from Gods eternal Election to endless glorification.

Others again, in wantonness and careless security drinks in iniquity
with greediness, and so steps from the By your disposition in this life, each
man has to consider of his everlasting weal or woe.
decree of Reprobation, that most justly they procure their everlasting
condemnation: So that every man is to consider of his everlasting weal or woe,
by his present disposition in this life. Oh that we had sanctified memories to
remember this so long as we are here. If of weakness we fall, we may rise
again: and if we have not learned well to repent in one day, we have leave
of the Lords patience to learn it better another day, his name be praised
therefore, who has opened a door of mercy to sinners, and with long
suffering waits for our repentance. But he who in the day of his transmigration
steps the wrong step, will never get leave to amend it. Where the tree falls,
it shall lie there; the wicked dies in their sins, and so steps downward to
the deep pit and gulf, out of which there is no redemption. Let us therefore
be well advised before we leap. Let us fasten our feet in the borders of that
Canaan in time, which shall be done, if we make our whole life a proceeding from
Election to Glorification, and that through Calling and Justification; which
two, has inseparably following them, the Sanctification and Renouation of the
whole man.

The Lord make us wise in time, that we may consider our course, and think of
the end whereunto it leads us, for there is but one of two, as Moses protested
to the Israelites, so do I unto you: I have laid this day, life and death
before you: the Lord give you grace to make choice of the best.

But now to return to the words of this description of the persons to whom
this privilege appertains, we have these things. First, the Purpose of God:
Secondly, his Calling according to his purpose: Thirdly, the evident token
according to Gods calling, which is the love of God. The purpose of God,
concerning thy salvation, thou may know by thy calling: and if again thou will try thy calling, try it by the love of God, which thou finds in thee. And
of these three, I will now speak briefly.

CHAP. XI. What comfort we have in this, that our salvation is grounded on the
Lords unchangeable purpose.
ACcording to his purpose. Here you see then how the Apostle draws our
Calling from the purpose of God: and so when he will comfort us with the
certainty of our salvation, he leads us out of our selves, up to the Rock
that is higher then we, he teaches us to cast our Anchor within the veil,
and to fasten our souls upon that unchangeable Purpose of God. It is most
expedient for the Children of God, to mark this, because the manifold changes
we find in our selves, do oftentimes interrupt the peace of our minds, that
the Lord our God has in such sort dispensed our Salvation, that the ground
thereof is laid in his own immutable Purpose, but the marks, tokens and
pledges he places in them, after their Calling, for whom it was ordained. The
tokens are changeable, as we our selves in whom they are are changeable: but
the ground holds fast, being laid in the unchangeable God, in whom can be no
shadow of alteration: and this should comfort us against our daily
vicissitudes, changes, defects, and temporal desertion; our faith may faint,
our spiritual life may languish, our hope hoouer, our hearts in praying fall
down like the infeebled hands of Moses, yet let us not despair, no change in
us can alter the Lords unchangeable Purpose, he who has begun the work in us,
will also perfect it. Because I am Mal. 3. 6.
not changed (says the Lord) therefore is it that ye, O Sons of Jacob, are
not consumed. Our salvation is neither in part nor in the whole, ascribed to
our merits.


This purpose of God is called otherways, The will of God, and the good
pleasure of his will: and it does learn us, to give to the Lord the praise
which is due to him, namely the praise of the whole work of our salvation,
should be ascribed to the good pleasure of his will only, and not to our
foreseen merits: that poison of pride, which Satan powered in our first
parents, whereby he provoked them to aspire, to be equal with God, does yet
appear in their posterity, the corrupt heart of man ever aiming at this,
either in part or in whole, to have the praise of salvation ascribed to
himself, and so would start up in the room of God, usurping that glory which
belongs to the Lord, and he will not give to another: then the which no
Sacrilege more fearful can be committed against the Lord. O man! content
thee with that which the Lord offers thee, and let that alone, which the Lord
reserueth to himself, My peace (says the Lord) I give unto you, but my glory
I will not give to another. It is enough, that the salvation of the Lord is
thine, but as for the glory of salvation, let it remain to the Lord, he is
for this called the Father of Mercy, because mercy is bred in his own bosom:
many causes without himself found he moving and procuring him to execute
Justice: but a cause moving him to show mercy, found he never, save only the
good pleasure of his will. Therefore says the Apostle, The Lord has called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works but according to his purpose
and grace. Surely except the Lord had reserved mercy for us, we had been
like Sodom and Gomorrha, but it has pleased him in his mercy, of the same
lump of clay, to make us Vessels of honor, whereof he has made others
vessels of dishonor; and who is able sufficiently to think of so great a
benefit? Therefore let the re deemed of the Lord, cry out with a louder voice
then David, O Lord what Psalm. 8
are we, that thou have been so mindful of us? Not unto us O Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy name give the glory: for thy loving kindness and for thy
truths sake, for our Salvation comes of god that sits upon the throne, and
of the Lamb: to thee therefore be praise and honor, and glory, for ever and
ever.

CHAP. XII. Two callings, outward, and inward.
TO them that are called. The purpose of God, which is sufficient in it self,
is made known and manifest to us by his Calling: for our Calling is a
declaration of the decree of our Election, and as it were the secret voice of
God, bringing from the Heavens to our souls, this comfortable message, That
we are the sons of God. Now we must know that Gods Calling is twofold: one
outward, which is common also to the wicked, and of it speaks our Savior,
Many are called, but f^w are chosen: The other inward and effectual, proper
only to the godly, whom the Lord is purposed to save. And this will learn us
to consider of three sorts of men in the world, whereof some are not called at
all, some called, but not chosen, some chosen, and therefore are called to be
sanctified, justified, and Glorified. Ye that will take a right view of all
mankind, shall find All the world stands in three Circles, and that none are
happy, except they who are within the third.
them as it were standing in the three circles; they only being happy who are
within the third. In the outmost Circle are all those on whom the Lord has not
vouchsafed so much as an outward calling; and here stands the greatest part of
the world. In the middlemost Circle, which is much narrower, are all those
which are partakers of Gods outward calling by the word and Sacraments, And in
the third circle, which is of smallest compass in regard of the rest, stands
those who beside the outward calling of God by his word, are called also
inwardly and effectually by his holy Spirit. These are Christ's little flock,
the few chosen, the communion of saints, the Lords third part, so to speak
with Zacharic; Zach. 13. 9
the two parts shall be cut off and die, but The third will the Lord sine as
silver and gold: of them will the Lord say, This is my people, and they shall
say, The Lord is my God, It is a great step indeed, that we are brought from
the uttermost Circle unto the second, but it is not sufficient to salvation,
yea rather they who stand in the second Circle, hearing the voice of God call
them to repentance, and yet harden their hearts, and will not follow the Lord,
may look for a more fearful condemnation, than they who are in the utmost
rank of all. Weighty are all those warnings of our Savior: Sodom and
Gomorah shall be in an easier estate in the day of judgment, then they to whom
the Lord has spoken by his word, but they would not receive it; and that
double stripes are for him that knows his Masters will, and does it not.
Content not your selves therefore with this, that you are brought within the
compass of this visible Church, and made partakers of an outward Calling, that
ye have been baptized in the name of Jesus, and communicated at his holy table;
for not every one that says Lord, Lord shall enter into his kingdom, except
ye find also the Lords inward and effectual Calling, that the arm of his
grace has drawn you within the compass of this third circle, and so brought
you to be of his own third part, and set you down among the generation of
them that seek the face of God, and therefore forsakes their sins, that they
may find him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the inward Calling.
THen we see this excellent privilege is restrained to them who are called
inwardly, and therefore let us yet a little consider it. This inward Calling is
the Communication of Christ's saving grace, whereby the mind is enlightened,
the heart purified by faith, the affections sanctified, and the whole man
reformed. For as the Lord by his Gospel offers to his children righteousness
and life, so by his holy spirit he gives them that justifying Faith, and
opens their hearts to receive that Grace which is preached and proclaimed to
them in the Gospel, So then this work of our Calling, is altogether the Lords:
It is his praise 2 Cor. 4.
that he calls things which are not, and makes them to be: the Lord that
commanded light to shine out of darkness, has given to our minds the light
of the knowledge of his glory in the face of Christ Jesus: he it is that
creates in us a new heart, and puts Psalm. 41.
a new spirit into our bowels, that we may walk in his statutes. The Lord
promised that he would call many of the Gentiles to the spiritual Jerusalem,
Ez. 11. 19.
to suck out the milk of the breasts of her consolation, and be delighted with
the brightness of his glory: shall I Esa. 66.
cause others to be fruitful (says the Lord) and remain barren my self?
and this his gracious promise has he most abundantly performed in our days;
his name be praised therefore.

As this work is only the Lords, This inward calling is the arm of God,
choosing out in the world his own elect.
so he restraines it only to them who are his own. The outward Calling is
extended to all; but the inward calling makes a particular separation of a few
from the remnant: where it is wonderful to see the distinction which is made
betwixt man and man in all ranks and estates, by this effectual calling of
two Brethren, as Jacob and Esau: of two Prophets, as Moses and Balaam: of two
Kings, as David and Saul: of two Apostles, as Peter and Judas: of two thieves,
the one is taken, the other rejected, and thus the arm of the grace of God,
goes through to every corner of the earth, according to his pleasure, culling
out by his word, from among the remnant of the world, those who belong to his
Election.

This grace of God, it enters in a Land, and not into every City: it enters
into a City, but not into every Family: yea it will enter into a Family,
and ^et not come to every person of the Family, or husband and wife, of
Masters and Servants, of Parents and Children, of Brethren and Sisters,
oftentimes the one is taken, the other is left: It came to Jericho, and chose
out Whereof it comes that the Gospel where it is preached makes a great
difference betwixt man and man.
Zacheus. It came to Philipi, and weiled out Lidia and the Iaylor: It came to
Nero his court, and not to himself; It entered into the family of Narcissus,
and yet past by Narcissus himself; It is the work of God, and merueilous in
our eyes. The Gospel is preached to many, but the blessing brought by the
Gospel, lights only upon the children of grace: And hereof arises this daily
distinction, which we see between man and man, all hear alike, but all have
not Faith, all are not edified alike: Some forsake their sins, and follows the
Lord, others forsaking the Lord, walks on in their sins. As the Lord
governs the rain, and makes it fall upon one City, and not upon another:
so he dispenses the dew of his grace, that he makes it drop down upon one
heart, and not upon another. And of this I would wish that so many of you as
yet are strangers from Grace, should learn to know your miserable state: What
a fearful thing is this, that God has converted so many in How the heart
whereon grace descends not now in this time of grace is accursed.
the City wherein thou dwell, yea perhaps many in the family wherein thou
remainest, and yet his grace never lighted upon thee, but thou art left in thy
old sins? Consider it rightly, I pray you. If the Lord should do to you as
he did to Israel, in the days of Achab, causing it to rain for three years
and a half on all the lands about you, but not upon your Land, would you not
conceive in it a sensible curse of God upon you? O Hypocrite, thou that can
discern the face of the sky, and take up the tokens of Gods anger in the
creature, can thou not discern the state of thine own soul, nor apprehend
this for a sensible curse, that thirty or forty years, the showers of saving
and renewing grace, has descended upon the people round about thee, but never
upon thy self? thou possessest thy old sins and keep still a hard, a
barren, and a fruitless heart. What shall I say to thee? to cut thee off from
all hope of mercy, and so send thee to despair; I have not that in
commission: the Lord has his own time of calling, and can when he will, of
Saul a persecutor, make Paul a Preacher. But one thing I can certify ^hee of:
so long as thou a^t in that state mourn if thou vvilt, thou have much cause of
mourning; for if this effectual calling by grace, go by thee in time to come,
as it has done in time began, it is an evident declaration, that thou art a
man reserved to wrath, and not ordained to mercy.

CHAP. XIIII. In the inward calling, the Lord begins at the illumination of the
mind.
NOw that this Calling flowing from Election, may be yet made sure to our
Consciences for our greater comfort, let us mark the manner of the Lords
proceeding into it and so gather up some tokens whereby we may discern it.
As in the first creation, the Lord began at the light; so in the second
Creation he begins at the illumination of the mind: For we can neither know
the Lord to fear and love him, neither yet our selves and our sins aright,
till the Lord who commanded light to shine out of darkness, shine also into
our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD in the
face of Jesus Christ: and this light of God, discouers to us so many works of
darkness, wherewith in ignorance we defiled our Consciences, that we begin to
be ashamed of our selves, in the sight of God; yea, our very flesh trembles
for fear of his judgments, and we cry out with Job, Now my eye has Job.
42.
seen the Lord, therefore I abhor my self. And thus the Lord proceeds from
the mind to the heart, working into He works motions of sorrow and
contrition in the heart.
it such a contrition and godly sorrow, as causes repentance unto salvation,
whereby the heart that was senseless before, being dead in sin and
trespasses, begins now to stir and move* as Iosiahs heart melted at the reading
of the Law: and the hearts of those penitent Jews, which were pricked at the
sharp Sermon of Peter, then feeling our selves under death through sin, we
begin to think us of the ways of life, and to ask with the Iaylor, What Act.
24. 25
shall we do that we may be saved? These motions, meltings and prickings of
the heart, wrought in the ^lect by the operation of Gods word, are the very
plucks of the hand of God, translating thee out of Nature into Grace: yet must
we not rest here, for Felix may tremble while Paul is preaching, and many for
a while may receive this word with joy, and yet afterward fall away in the time
of temptation. We must He works a respondence and answe ring of the heart to
his calling and a following of the Lord.
therefore consider, if there be in the heart a respondence and answering unto
the Lord, so often as he calls, do we present our selves before him, ready
to follow him saying with Abraham here I am Lord, and with Samuel (after he
knew the Lords voice) Speak on Lord, thy Servant hears thee. This answering
and following of the Lord, are undoubted tokens of effectual Calling. So often
as the Lord calls, the Christian answers: When thou said Seek ye my
face, my heart answered Psalm. 27.
O Lord I will seek thy face. If the Lord command the Christian answers, O
Lord, quicken me according to thy loving Ps. 119. 18
kindness, that I may apply my heart to keep thy statutes always to the end.
If the Lord promise mercy, the Christian answers, Stablish O Lord thy promise
Ps. 119. 39
to thy Servant, and let it be to me according to thy word, for I believe in
thee, but Lord help my unbelief. And thus in the heart of one effectually
called, there is a continual respondence to the voice of God, a waiting on the
Lord, a walking with him, and a following of him where ever he go. If the
Lord have called thee, sure it is thou will follow him, and no power of the
Devil, of the world, or of the slesh shall hold thee back from him. When Eliah
touched Elisha with his cloak, he left his Oxen, and came after him. When Jesus
called on Andrew and Peter, they left their nets, their ship and their Father,
and followed him: when he called on Matthew, he left all his gainful trade of
the receipt of custom, and followed him: when he called on Mary Magdal^ne,
she forsook her sinful life, and followed him. Here is the finest Touchstone
to try an inward calling. If the Lord has called thee, thou will follow him,
but if yet thou be wandering after vanity, walking on in the course of thy
sin, turning thy back and not thy face unto the Lord, deceive not thy self,
pertalcer of this heavenly Calling (wherein stands the only comfort of a
Christian) have thou never been.

CHAP. XV. The love of God a sure token of an inward calling, and of the
commendation of love.
THat Love of God. And last of all, to return to the words again, the whole
effects of out inward Calling, the Apostle compriseth under one, to wit, The
love of God, and that most properly, for Love compriseth all the rest under it.
Love is the Cognizance of Christ's Disciples (says our Savior.) It is the band
of perfection (says the Apostle) and accomplishment of the L^ Love speaks
with the tongue of eue^ Virtue, Pity bids thee help the indigent; Justice
bids thee give every man his own; Mercy bids forgive; Patience bids suffer:
but the voice of Christian Love commands all these. Holy Love is the eldest
Daughter of a justifying Faith, that is, the first affection that Faith
procreateth and sanctifies, and whereby she works in the sanctification of
the rest. Love is the strongest and most imperious affection in the whole
nature of man: all the rest of the affections gives place unto it, which we
may see even in the man natural and unregenerate: Where Love is kindled, Fear
is banished, Covetousness coucheth, Ambition is silent. A Coward inflamed with
Love becomes valiant; and a covetous man is often times ^y Love made to be more
prodigal; yea, the proud and ambitious man, who otherwise gives place to (...)
man, for obtaining that which he (...), cares not to prostrate his honor (...)
the dust. If carnal Love be so forci^, what shall we say of the spiritual
Love? How much more does it draw (...) whole powers of soul and body (...) the
Lord? neither is it possible to (...) otherwise, for every thing returns to
his own original, as the waters go (...) to the deep from whence (...) came;
and fire tends upward to his own place and Region: even so holy Love, being a
spark of the heavenly fire, kindled in our hearts by the holy Ghost, does
continually inflame them toward the Lord, from whom it came, and suffers us
never to rest while we enjoy him: then we begin to live, when we begin to
Love. As no Creature can live out of his own Element, so the Soul is but dead
in sin, which is destitute of the love of God. No fear to offend him, no
care to please him, no obedience to his Commandments, can be given by the
heart that loves him not. It were tedious to speak of all the properties of
Love, we make choice of a few, as chief trials of our Love.

CHAP. XVI. First trial of Love.
THe first property of Love, is a burning desire to obtain that which is
beloved, as a Woman that loves her Husband unfeignedly, cannot be content with
any Love token she receives from him in his absence, but longs more and more
till she receive himself: So the soul which is wounded with the Love of Jesus
her immortal hushand, has a continual desire to be with him. I grant
enerie token sent from him, brings comfort, but no contentment till she
inioyes him: whereof comes these and such like Psalm. 42. 1.
complaints. As the Heart brayes for the rivers of water, so pants my soul
(...) thee, O my God: O when (...) I come and appear before the presence of my
God? my soul desires after the Lord, as the Psalm. 143. Phil. 1. Reu. 22.
thirsty land, for I would be dissolved and be with the Lord: therefore come,
even so come Lord Jesus. But alas, here are we taken in our sins: Thou say
thou love him, but how is it then thou longest not to see him, neither
desi^est to be with him, yea a small appearance of the day of death, wherein we
should go to him, or mention of the day of judgment, wherein he shall come
to us, does terrify and affright thee. Thou that contents thee with the gifts
of God, and think not long for himself, thou art but like an adulterous
woman, who if she posses^e the goods of her husband, regards not, albeit she
never see himself. The Jews are blamed, because they called on the Lord
rather for oil and wine, then for himself. The Gentiles are convinced for
worshipping the creature, rather then the creator, but more justly shall the
bastard Christian be condemned for loving the gifts of God, more then the
giver. Let us therefore beware of this fearful ingratitude. We may indeed
rejoice in all the gifts the Lord has given us, and they should thankfully be
received: but, always with a protestation, that nothing given unto me here,
be allowed unto me for my portion, and inheritance; and that no contentment
ever comes to our hearts, till we obtain the full fruition of our loving
husband Christ Jesus.

If the Love of men compelled the Apostle to say to the Corinthians, it is not
yours, but you I seek, how much more should the Love of GOD compel us to say
to our Lord, It is not thy gift, but thy self O Lord I long for: thou art the
portion of my soul: If thou would^t give me all the works of thine hands,
yet shall I never have comfort nor contentment, except thou give me thy self:
therefore O thou whom Cant. 2. 6.
my soul loves, show me where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone, for
why should I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy companions?
Blessed is he that hungers and thirsts for thy righteousness, for he shall
behold the face of his God, and be filled with his Image; for in his presence
is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand, there are pleasures for evermore.

CHAP. XVII. Second trial of Love.
THe second trial of holy Love, is Obedience, and a care to serve and honor
the Lord in all estates and callings. Preachers must be tried by this rule,
Peter love thou me? feed my flock. Governors and counselors in your
callings, must be tried by this: Can ye say with the godly governor David, I
love the Lord? then will ye Psalm. 119.
also say with him, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits. How
shall I show to the Lord my Love? and what shall I do in my time, for the
advancement of his glory? If you love the Lord then be nursing Fathers to his
Church; be faithful aduancers of his kingdom, wise prouisours to remove the
stumbling blocks that hinder the course of his Gospel: If ye love the Lord.
Stand up with David and say, Do I not hate them, O Lord that hate thee? and
do I not earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee? Surely I hate
them with unfeigned hatred, as if they were my utter enemies. I^ ye honor the
Lord as David did, the Lord shall bless you as he did David. David swear unto
the Lord, that he would not rest, till he found out a place for the Lord, even
an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. And the Lord swears again to
David that of the fruit of his body he would set upon his Throne to reign
after him. But if otherways there be nothing in you, but a care to stablish
your selves and your houses, with the neglect of the glory God; then remember
the curse of Shebna, and not the blessing of Eliachim, Esaias. 22.
shall be upon you: you shall not be fastened as a nail in a sure place, but
shall Psalm. 140.
be rolled and turned away like a Ball: The Lord shall drive thee from thy
station, and out of thy dwelling place shall he destroy thee; for the wicked
shall not have their desire; his thoughts shall not be performed, neither
shall he be established on the earth, but evil shall hunt him to destruction:
the Lord shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy Tabernacle, and root thee
out of the land of the living: and generally all of you in your callings,
remember the value of your Christian Psalm. 52. 4
love, must be tried by the same touchstone; not by your words, but by your
deeds. If any love me (says Christ) (...) him keep my commandments. But
here also the hypocrisy of this age is clearly discovered: In word they
pretend the love of God, but indeed, they grieve him with their
transgressions: as the Jews, they called him king, and bowed their knees
before him, but sp^t in his face, and buffeted him: So the bastard Christians
of this age, call Christ their Lord, and bow their knee before him, yet they
c^ucisie him, and trample his blood of the Covenant under their feet: they
kiss him and betrai^ him with Judas. It is but a Scepter of Re^d they yield
and grant to him, for they give him no command^ment over their affections:
wherefore great is the controversy which the Lord has this day with the men
of this generation.

CHAP. XVIII. The last trial of Love.
THe last trial of Love, whereof I will speak at this time (leaving many
other) is Bountifulness. Love (says the Apostle) is Bountiful. Experience
proves this: every Lover is a bountiful ^ower on them whom he loves. Ye love
your backs and spare not to cloth them, yea with excessive apparel: ye love
your bellyes, and therefore are bountiful daily to them in feeding them: ye
love your Children, and therefore lets them want nothing that is needful for
them: yea, ye love your beasts, and ye bestow large ly on them; only you
say, you love the Lord, but wherein are you bountiful toward him? It is true,
that in nothing can a man be profitable to the Almighty, says Job. But are
there no works which should so shine before men, that by them our heavenly
Father may be glorified? Though works can be no merits, yet are they your
witnesses of your Love toward the Lord: Though your goodness extend to the
Lord, yet where is your delight that should be in his Saints, and excellent
ones upon earth? Where is your compassion and love toward the brethren? Are not
the men of this age like the Figtree, that have fair leaves, but not so much
as one Fig to give Jesus in his hunger, having the show of Godliness, 2 Timothy
3. 5
but has denied the power thereof, rendering words enough, but not any fruits
at all to adorn the glorious gospel of our Lord Jesus. And so (if we might
proceed) every trial of Love should discover the hypocrisy and bastard
Christianity of the most part of professors of this age. But being forced at
this time, to conclude, I turn me toward you (whom I know have set your hearts
to seek the Lord) that I may leave my last blessing behind me unto you, being
no more purposed ^o speak to you, from this place: to you, and to every one of
you who can say with Peter, in a sincere Conscience Lord thou know I love
thee: to you here, in the name of God, I ratify this privilege; All things
shall work together for the best unto you. Faint not therefore I beseech you,
in the course of Godliness* but be strong in the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, stand fast in the power of his might, praying to the Lord continually,
that he would stablish that which he has wrought in you, and bring it
forward to perfection.

And now I commend you to that Grace of God, which is able to build you
farther, and to gi^e you inheritance among them that are Sanctified in Christ
Jesus: to whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise and
glory, for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
A PREPARATIVE for the new Passover.

Very profitable to be perused and read of all those who are called to the
holy Table of our Lord.

By WILLIAM COVPER Minister of Gods word.

Proverbs. Chap. 9. Verse 5. Come, eat of my meat, and drink of the wine
that I have drawn.

8 My fruit is better then Gold, even then fine gold, and my revenues better
then fine silver.

LONDON:

Printed for John Budge, and are to sold at his shop at the great South door
of Paul's. 1608.

To the right worshipful Sir David Murray, special Gentleman of the Prince
his Bedchamber, multiplication of mercy, grace, and peace.
RIght Worshipful, albeit no distance of place can disioynt them in affection,
who^ God has conjoined by the band of one spirit: yet is it no small stop of
that Christian conference, whereby either of them might happily edify, and be
edified of others. I have therefore taken me to the next remedy, since I
cannot reach toward you with my tongue, I have endeavored by writing to bestow
upon you some Spiritual Gift, Romans 1.
according to my line or measure, for recompense of that Comfort, which I have
reaped of that Grace of God which is in you.

I know these colder parts of the I Will, wherein we soiourue, do not usually
render such ripe fruits as those on which the Sun beats more hotely; yet
are they also profitable in their kind for nourishment, specially of such* who
from their youth have been accustomed to feed upon them. Neither has the
Lord our God debarred us from Communion of that which is the greatest glory of
the I Will: the Sun of righteousness has shined upon us also. The Lord has made
our Es. 42. 16.
darkness to be light, and lead us who were blind a way we knew not. The
Lord has set his Standard amongst us. Esa. 49. 22.
He has not only said to the South, keep not back, but he has also
commanded the North to give and to bring Esaias. 43. 6.
unto him his Sons from far, and his Daughters from the ends of the Earth.
As the going forth of the Sun, is from Psalm. 19. 6.
the one end of Heaven to the other, rising in the East, and running on like a
mighty man, his race toward the West; so has the Law gone forth of Sion, and
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: the light of the Gospel through many
nations Esa. 2. 3.
has come from them of the East, toward us in the West, where now it stands
more meruailously, then the Sun stood in Gibeon in the days of Joshua, Josh
10. 12
till the fullness of the Gentiles in these To. 11. 25.
parts, the remnants of Iaphets house be brought into the Tents of Sem. How
long it will so continue the Lord knows.

Now the shadows of the evening are stretched over them of the East: the Sun is
gone down over their Prophets. Darkness Mich. 3. 6.
is unto them in stead of Divination. If our unthankfulness provoke the Lord
to withdraw it from us, woe in like manner shall be to this Land, when God
Hos. 9. 12.
departs from it. There was never people before us had any more but their day
of Grace, some longer, some shorter, but as they had a Morning, so has an
Evening also overtaken them. While therefore Ioh. 12. 35
we have the light, let us walk in the Light: Blessed shall we be, if Luk
19. 42
we know those things, which belong to our peace: for in our days, that
promise which the Lord made two thousand and six hundred years ago, is
abundantly performed: that he would give Psalm. 2.
the ends of the earth to his Son for a possession: Happy are they among us,
who shall be found of that number, sought out by the Candle of the Gospel, as
pieces Luke. 15. 8
of lost Money, and like wandering Sheep taken out of the mouth of the Lion,
and given in a Gift to Christ, that he may save them: these are the Redeemed
of the Lord, let them praise the Lord; and among them come ye in also, and
give glory to God: take in your heart and mouth with David that Song of
thanksgiving: The Lots are fallen unto me Psalm. 16. 6
in pleasant places: and I have a fair Heritage.

It is written of Theodosius, that he thanked God more, for that he was a
Christian, then for that he was an Emperor; because the Glory he had by the
one would vanish, but the benefits he enjoyed by the other he knew, were to
continue for ever: and though it may b^e most justly great matter of your joy,
that by the fatherly care of our Gracious Sovereign, ye have been placed a
Domestique Attendant on his Majesty's most Princely Son, even from his very
Cradle (wherein hitherto you have been praised for Fidelity, and I hope shall
be so to the end) yet let this be your great^st Glory, that the Lord has
made you partaker of that blessing which comes by the Gospel, and given you
the earnest of that Inheritance prepared for them, who are sanctified by Faith
in Christ Jesus. For increase whereof in you, as I daily send up my weak
Prayers unto the Lord, so shall I be abundantly contented Act. 20. 32
to know that these small fruits of my h^sbandry, which have grown this last
Sum mer in the pleasant valley of Perth, not far from your native soil, may be
any way profitable to confirm and establish that which GOD has wrought in
you. (...) them therefore (right Worshipful) come toward you, as those fruits
which Jacob sent to Joseph from Canaan Southward, Gen 43. 11
to more plentiful Aegipt; though not as supplements of your need, yet as
Testimonies of that love which I bear toward you in the Lord, to whose mercy I
commend you for ever in Jesus Christ.

Your W. in the Lord Jesus, M. William Cowper, Minister of Christ his Euangell
at Perth.

A PREPARATIVE for the new Passover.
CHAP. I. Of the fervent desire Christians have to be united with Christ. How
Inexcusable they are who neglect this holy sacrament. The great danger in
coming unprepared. The parts of the precept: First that we try: Secondly that
we eat: the last handled first.
AS the soul of a Christian longs for nothing more then to be fully united
with the Lord Jesus; so does he greatly account of every mean, whereby this
union is advanced. The Apostle S. Paul was so inflamed with the love of Christ
that in comparison of him, he este^med all other things to be but doung, and
every thing an advantage that might serve to conioyne him wi^h Christ: for
albeit the nature of man abhors nothing more then death (yea even the soul
of the godly desires not to lay aside the body, if it might stand with the
Lords dispensation, which the Apostle is not ashamed to protest of himself: We
would not (says 2. Cor. 5. 4
he) be unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life.) Yet did the love of Christ so far overcome him, that he
was content through the valley of death to follow his Lo^d, yea most desirous
to be Phil. 1. 23.
dissolved by death, in so much as he knew it to be a mean to conioyne him
nearer unto Christ.

And herein he stands up to witness unto us, that unless we have a most
fervent desire to participate of this holy Sacrament, which the Lord has
instituted to seal up and increase our spiritual Communion with him; we are
manifestly convinced to be such, as in whom their is no love of the Lord Jesus:
If we will not go with him to They will not ^uffer with him on mount Caluarie;
who refuse to ba^quet with him in his parlour.
eat and drinck in his Parlour at Jerusalem, it is not likely that we will
follow him out of the City, bearing his reproach to be crucified with him on
mount Caluarie. The Apostle is desirous to go through death that he might
come to Christ: and it was the notable word of that ancient Ignatius, the
scholar of Christ's best beloved Disciple Saint John. Nihil visibilium Eusebius.
li. 3. Cap. 36.
moror, nihil inuisibilium modo Christum acquiram. I stand (said he) upon
nothing visible, nor invisible, I care not what torments come upon me, so that
I enjoy Christ Jesus: and will not we then (casting away all impediments) come
joyfully forward to this holy Table, wherein our blessed Savior communicates
himself unto us, and whereunto this day so lovingly he inuites us? Now he
stands at the door, and he knocks, offering to come in and Reu. 3. 20.
suppe with them who will open unto him. Now the master shall say to his
Disciples: Take re and eat, this is my body. Ma. 26. 16
Now says the bridegroom to his friends, Eat O my friends, and make Cant. 5.
1.
you merry my welb^loued. Now does the Angel intimate that proclamation, which
hereafter will be resounded with greater joy from heaven: Let us be glad Reu.
19. 7.
and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come. And now the Savior calls
upon sinners with outstretched arms: Come to me all ye who are weary Mat. 11.
28.
and laden, and I will refresh you.

Those diseased creatures who lay at the poole of Bethesda, waited diligently
on the occasion, when they should step down into the water: for he that first
stepped in, after the Angel had troubled the water, was made whole, whatsoever
his disease was: Praised be God, though we have not now those waters of Siloam,
wherein with that John. 5. 8.
blind man we may cure our bodily diseases; we have the waters of that John.
9. 7.
Shiloh, of the which whosoever drinks shall not thirst any more: these are the
waters of life, that are able to cure Gene. 49. 10. Ioh. 1. 14. At Siloam
poole, only he was healed who first stepped down, not so at Shiloh his Table.
all our spiritual infirmities, the benefit is not restrained to one that
first sits down at his Table, but is extended to all those who make themselves
ready to come unto him. Let us not therefore neglect so fair an occasion of
grace, but let us up and arise, let the Bride make her self ready, and go
forth to meet the Bridegroom. Let us begin in this wilderness to eat the
fruits of our promised Canaan, which is above: Let us open to the King of glory
that knocks: let us go to our savior that cries come, and joyfully communicate
with our Lord, who commands Take and eat, this is my body. For here is given
the greatest gift, and that in the most excellent manner, that God has to give
on earth unto the sons of men: for here he gives it, as it were with both
his hands, that is, not only by his word, but also by his Sacrament, only
take heed to this warning, let a man try himself and so let him eat.

There is danger in hearing of the word, and therefore our Savior forewarnes
us: Take heed how you hear. There is danger also in communicating: in the
preceding verse the Apostle forewarned us of it; He that eats of this Luke 8.
18.
bread, and drinks of this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord. In the subsequent verse he forewarnes us also of the
danger. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation. And in this interiected verse, which now by the grace of God we
have to handle, he shows us the way how to eschew them both, and therefore
let us harken the more attentively unto it.

This precept has two parts: in the first we are commanded to try before we
eat; in the second we are commanded to eat after trial. Before we
communicate; he requires trial; and after trial he commands to communicate:
and so he encounters with two sorts of men, whereof the one eats of this bread
and tryes not; and these fail against the first: the other tries themselves,
but eats not of this bread, and these fail against the second; both of them
are here corrected by the Apostles precept. In handling whereof, we begin first
at the last part, that such as are resolved to bide away, if it please God, may
be made willing to come: and then by God his grace, we shall return to the
first, that such as are willing to come, may be instructed how they should
communicate.

And so let him eat. It is not then as We are bound by Gods command to eat
at this table.
ye may perceive, left free unto men to communicate or abstain from the
Communion, as they please; but we are bound by a commandment to eat and
drink at this Table. Do this (said our Savior) in remembrance of me. Our
first father Adam failed in eating of that tree of knowledge of good and evil,
whereof God forbade him to eat; but many of his sons fails in refusing to
eat of that tree of life, whereof God commands them to eat. In their words
they condemn the fact of their fathers, because they were Sicut omniu^
parents, ita omniu^ peremptores, and Bernard.
prius peremptores quam parents: perishers of their posterity ^re ever they
were parents; and in their deed they are daily imitators of their folly. It
was a punishment unto Adam to be debarred from the tree of life, and it is but
a pastime to many of his foolish posterity to debar themselves from it. The
Apostatate man will eat where God forbids him. and will not eat where God
commands him


Thus stands the corrupt nature of man still in contrary terms with the Lord,
And the children fulfilles the measure of their fathers iniquity: where God
forbids man to eat, there will he eat, and where the Lord commands him to
eat, there will he not eat. The Serpent spoke from the earth: albeit ye eat
of that tree (which God has forbidden) ye shall not dye, and man hearkened
unto it. The Lord Jesus speaks from heaven, come and eat of Mat. 24. 12
Because the seducer is believed and not the Savior.
the tree of life, and ye shall live; but man will not hear him. O silly and
fearful Rebellion, the Seducer is believed, and the Savior is not believed.
This day wisdom has prepared his Table, he calls upon you all: Come and eat
of my meat, and drink of the Prou. 9. 5.
wine that I have drawn: he that find Pro. 8. 34.
eth me finds life, and shall obtain the favor of the Lord; but he that
sins against me hurts his own soul, and all that hate me love death.
Thus are we lovingly called, and fairly forewarned, and all those are made
inexcusable that will none of his counsel, they will not eat of this bread,
but shall eat of a worse: For they shall eat of the Pro. 1. 30. 31
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devises, their paths
shall tend unto death, because they refuse to lay hold on the tree of life.

CHAP. II. Ignorance the mother of all Recusancie to communicate. The Reasons
of diverse refusals condemned. Better excuses rejected by Christ in the Gospel
then these. They consent not to the Marriage of the Lamb, who refuse the
smallest token of his love.
WHat ever be the pretented excuse of these recusants, ignorance is the mother
of their sin, and therefore may I say that unto them, which the Lord Jesus
said unto that Samaritane woman: If thou knew the Gift of Ioh. 4. 10.
God, and who it is that says to thee, give me drink, thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee the water of life. This sweet
gradation of our Savior his words: If thou knew, thou would ask, if thou
asked I would give, evidently points out the sin of these men to be (as I
have said) the Daughter of Ignorance; whereas out of doubt, if they knew the
gift that is given them here by God, they would answer with those Jews, Lord
evermore Ioh. 6. 34.
give us this bread, and with that Samaritane woman, when she was better
informed, Lord evermore give me Ioh. 4. 15.
of that water to drinck that I thirst no more.

But that we may deal particularly Some resuie to com municate because they
know not they excellency of this Sacrament.
with such as refuse, we are to know that albeit this their rebellion proceeds
of ignorance, yet they who refuse, are of sundry rancks, some knows not the
utility and excellency of this Sacrament: these think they may be
Christians good enough, although no Communicants: they look to this Table with
natural eyes, they judge of it by things which they see, and so despise it,
because after their reckoning, they have better replenished tables at home.
These are like Naaman the Syrian, These are foolish like Naanam the Syrian 2
King. 5. 10. 12.
who came to Elisha to be cured of his leprosy; he was commanded to go and
wash himself seven times in Jordan, which at the first he disdained to do:
are not (said he) Aabanah and Pharpar ^iuers of Damascus better then all the
waters of Israel? he contemned the means commanded by the Prophet; he went
away in displeasure, and his leprosy went with him; but afterward, when he
reverently used the means prescribed unto him, he was made clean of his
leprosy. Wherein we are taught, not to despise the ordinance of God, although
it seem never so base unto natural judgment: It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them who believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21.
and he has in like manner appointed this Sacrament for communication of his
Christ to them who are his.

Let a man therefore be content to take salvation out of the hand of God, by
such means as he in his wisdom has concluded to give it: No worldling will
refuse treasure of gold, although it were given him in a Box of Wood; nor
precious Pearls presented to him in a purse of Leather: and we see that noble
personages disdain not take infeftments of stately buildings, and fair
inheritances, by acceptance of a contemptible little piece of earth and stone:
and shall a Christian refuse so excellent a gift, because it is given by so
small a mean? far be it from us, that we should examine the ordinance of God,
but rather that we prepare our selves in faith and fear to obey it: let us
not look to the means, but to the blessing by Gods promise annexed to the
means; to the gift more then to the manner of giving. In this banquet we must
learn to exercise our faith, not to satisfy our senses, it is no banquet for
our body: if so the Lord had intended it, he could have furnished his Table
with the delicatest things, and made thee a banquet far exceeding that which
Ahasuerus made to the Est. 1. 3.
Princes and governors of his provinces: For all the Fowls of the ayr^ and
Psa. 50. 10
beasts that feed on mountains and fields are his. He may command as his
own all the creatures of his three store houses, the Air, the Earth, and the
Sea, but here the less we see, the more we The less we see in this Table the
more we are bound to belecue.
are bound to belecue. Say with vnbelecuing Naaman, what better is this Bread
and Wine then other Bread and Wine? such blasphemies sometime has fallen out of
the mouths of ignorants, whose darkness we shall (God willing) discover by
the light of Gods word he^reafter: for the present, my conclusion to the
Recusant is, that if as thou pretend, thou be a lover of Christ; then will thou
esteem every new token of his love, a new benefit unto thee, and what ever he
puts in thine hand as a pledge of himself, in that respect it shall be deerer
unto thee, then all the world beside.

Others again there are, who knows both the v^ilitie, and excellency of this
holy Sacrament, and yet refuse to communicate (but as they think) with a
reason, pretending that it is not contempt but reverence of the Sacrament,
which makes them to abstain. To whom I answer, that there is no excuse in the
world can warrant a man to bide back from Christ Jesus, when he calls upon him:
for what art thou able to allege? want of preparation? the 1 If it be want
of preparation, the fault is their own.
fault is thine own: for since the marriage of the Lamb is come, and thou art
warned thereunto, why do thou not make thy self ready, and remove the
impediments? And yet if thou al leadge that common excuse of the ignorant
multitude, that thou art at variance 2 If it be variance with their neighbor
they excuse one sin, by another.
with thy neighbor, by reason of some injuries done to thee, not as yet
repayed by him* nor to be borne withal and disgested by thee* what do thou,
but by a singular subtlety of Satan, excuse one sin by another? as if one
would teach thee to wash away the spots of thy face with puddle water, were not
that in stead of cleansing, to make thy self more unclean? and thou while as
thou will iustisie thy contempt of God his calling, by alleging thy
unsanctified affection and heart that cannot forgive, do no other thing, but
make thy self guilty of a double rebellion, as one that will not discharge thy
Christian duty neither to God nor man.

Consider I pray thee, the excuses pretended by those who were bidden to the
Marriage of the great king, and compare them with thine: one of them said, I
have bought a Farm and will go Mat. 22. 4.
see it: Another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and must go prove
them: And the third said, I have married a Wife and may not come. The worst of
their excuses is better then thine, and yet were they all repelled: the use of
husbandry and merchandise and the duty that a man owes unto his wife, are
sometime lawful, albeit not to be preferred before that duty we owe unto
Jesus Christ: but that thou should They who excuse their recusancie because
of variance are further convinced
live at variance with thy neighbor, and carry within thee a heart that cannot
forgive, is never lawful. If that which sometime is lawful cannot excuse thy
delaying to come unto Christ when he calls upon thee, what mockery of God is it
to allege that which never is lawful?

And here also beside the offense done against thy God, consider what prejudice
thou do unto thy self; what folly is this, that because thy neighbor has
sinned against thee, thou will also sin against thine own soul? I suppose
as thou have said, he has wounded thee and hurt thee in thy body, goods or
name, is that a reason why thou should contemn the calling of Christ, who
offers to cure thy wounds, and heal all the infirmities of thy soul, yea, to
pacify all those passions and perturbations of mind, wherewith thy impatience
disquiets thee? he forewarned his own, that in the world, they Ioh. 16. 33
should find trouble, but in him they should have peace: If thou find (as he
forespake) trouble in the world, why will thou not go and seek that peace in
him, which he has promised? As to thy right, I require not thou should
loose it; neither yet forbid I, that by ordinary means thou should seek a
redress of those wrongs which against order are done unto thee: for the law is
the stay of confusion, and the Sinew of the Commonwealth; without which no
fellowship can be entertained amongst men: and God has appointed the
Magistrate, that unto good men he should be like the rain to fields new Psalm.
7. 26.
mowen, under whom, they may flourish; but should be to the wicked like that
Westerly wind which drove those Locusts Ex. 10. 13.
into the red Sea, that troubled the Land: but as for grudge, rancour, hatred,
malice, and such like, what have they to do in the heart of the child of God?
Since we are commanded to forgive on another, even as god for Christ's sake
forgave us: and plainly foretold, that if we do not forgive men their
trespasses, Mat. 6. 15.
no more will our Father forgive us our trespasses. A fearful recompense that
we should possess our own sins, because we will not forgive the sins of
others: Certainly thou that do so, give out a hard sentence against thy
self: for in stead of mercy thou cryest for judgment, as often as thou prayest,
forgive me my sins, as I forgive them that have sinned against me: for that is,
Lord forgive me not at all.

It was a horrible sin of the Jews They who do so, prefer Barrabas before
Christ.
that they preferred Barrabas a wicked malefactor to the Lord; but I pray thee
consider, how nere thy sin draws to theirs, if thou judge rightly of it: for
when thou refusest to come to this holy table, unless thou have amends of such
wrongs as are done unto thee, thou say in effect, rather then I Will renounce my
will, I will renounce my part of Christ, and communion with him; for Renouncing
their communion with Christ, before they renounce their own wicked will.
here is the very question: whether will thou forsake thy communion with
Christ, or thine own corrupted will? say not now to me these are hard speches,
God forbid that every one who is no partaker of this sacrament, should in so
doing, forfeit his part of communion with Christ. I grant indeed they are hard
speeches, but true speeches, and no harder then thy sin deserves: for I pray
thee, to what end did our Savior institute this Sacrament? was it not that in
it he might communicate himself to thee? how can thou then excuse thy self,
and say thou have ^ot rejected him, seeing thou reiects the means whereby he
is given to thee? When Eliezer the servant of Abraham sought Rebecca in
marriage unto Isaac, what Ge. 24. 53.
way did she testify her consent? surely not only by word, but by acceptance
of those jewels of silver and gold, which he gave her as love tokens in the
name of Isaac. Now we are sent forth to you as the Ambassadors of the living
God 2 Cor. 5. 20
to win you in marriage unto his son and to prepare you, that ye may be
presented a Chaste spouse unto him: and we are commanded to minister unto you
this holy Sacrament as a pledge of his love toward you. If ye agree to the
marriage, and be content to forsake your fathers house, and go with us to the
house of Abraham: then testify your consent by receiving these holy tokens of
his love, which in his name we exhibit unto you: but if ye will not, then
shall we stand up as witnesses against you, that we have called you, and ye
refused to come.

O man! what will thou do for thy They love not Christ who wilfully refuse to
communicate.
Christ, that wilt not come and banquet with him at his Table? how can thou
say thou love him, when so small an impediment keeps thee back, from going
unto him? have thou not cause to hang down thy head for shame, when thou art
convinced to have less love to thy Savior then Esau had to Jacobs Ge. 25. 30
pottage; for love of them he sold his birth right, which he should have kept:
but thou for love of Christ, wilt not forsake thy corrupt will, which thou art
bound to abandon. Abraham for the love of God, was content with his own Ge. 22.
20
hands to slay his only lawful Son; and thou for the love of God, wilt not
slay thy unlawful bastard affections, nor do the holy will of God, except thy
wicked will be first fulfilled. This evidently proves that thou have not
Abraham 1 Ioh. 3.
for thy father, but art of the race of wicked Cain, that hated his Brother
unto the death. Assuredly except thou repent, that merciles judgment bides
thee presignified in that merciless servant, who having gotten mercy from his
King, could show none to his Companion: Ought not thou to have had pity on
thy fellow, a^ I had pity on thee? Thy former sins shall be imputed unto
thee, and thou shall be delivered to the Iaylor, till thou pay all that is due
unto thy Lord, which thou shall never be able to do.

But that the pitiful ignorance of both these sorts of Recusants may the
better appear, and farther light may arise to such as are willing to
communicate; we are to consider what a banquet this is, and what are the
delicates, unto the participation whereof we are here called The Apostle says
not, let a man eat bread and drink wine, but let him eat of this bread and
drink of this Cup. The particle ( This) tells us it is no common Bread and
Wine: no surely, the comfort is great, that we are commanded to eat of that
Bread, whereof our Savior says: This is my body, and to drink of that Cup
which he calls his Blood of the New Testament shed for the remission of the sins
of many. He that eats of my bread and drinks of my Cup unworthily, becomes
guilty of the abuse of Gods Creatures: but he that eats of this Bread, and
drinks of this Cup unworthily, becomes guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, and eats his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body.

And therefore that we fall not into In this Sacrament are things of sundry
kinds which must be distinguished
this fearful sin, we are to know that this Sacrament is not a simple
thing, but a compound, wherein are things of sundry kinds which must be
distinguished, and so the word of discerning imports that secret. There are
here things of sundry sorts, we must discern every thing in the own kind: so
our Savior taught us, and after him his Apostles? and this truth the ancient
Fathers have delivered unto us, Eucharistia (said Irenaeus) ex duabus rebus
Iren. li. 4. cont. Val. Cap. 43.
constat, terrena and coelesti. The Eucharist consists of two kind of things,
the one earthly, the other heavenly; And Augustine, calls it visibile signum,
inuisibilis graciae: the visible sign of invisible grace. And Macarius calls
Macar. hom.
this Bread and Wine (...), Examplaria figurae, seu Typi carnis and sanguinis
Christi. Resemblances, figures and Types of the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus.
Now it is sure, that a Type, Pattern, or figure must ever be distinguished
from that, whereof it is a figure. This Sacrament then being a compound thing
must be considered, not as a simple, but as a compound thing: If it be asked
whether a man be earthly or heavenly, because he is a compound creature? It
must be answered by a distinction. If it be asked how a Christian, being on
the earth, the Apostle says that he has his Conversation in the Heavens? it
must be answered by a distinction: and if also it be asked whether this
Sacrament be an earthly or an heavenly thing, how the sign is given, and how
the thing signified: how Christ Jesus is in heaven, and yet present in the
Sacrament? All these I say must be answered by distinction: Sursum est Dominus
Aug. in 10. cap. 7 Tract. 29
(said Augustine) sed etiam hic est veritas Dominus: corpus enim Domini in quo
resurrexit vno loco esse potest, veritas eius vbique diffula est. Our Lord is
above in heaven, yet here also is our Lord, as he is the truth; for the body
of our Lord, in which he arose from death, can be but in one place, but his
truth is diffused into every place. And again, Ibat per id quod homo erat, and
manebat per id quod Deus: ibat per id quod vno loco erat, and manebat per id
quod vbique erat: He went hence by that which was man, he stayed by that which
was God: he went away by that which was but in one place, he stayed by that
which was in all places. And again: Ascendit super omnes coelos corpore non
recessit maiestate: He ascended above all the heavens in his body, but he
departed not hence in his Majesty. And Cyrill in Ciril. ca. tech. 14.
like manner: Non enim quia nunc non adest in carne ex eo putes, quod spiritu
medio hic non adsit: Think not that with his spirit he is not here amongst us,
because he is not now amongst us with his body. Thus ye see we must use a
distinction. Yet are they so to be distinguished that we destroy not their
union.


And yet albeit we are forced here to acknowledge the sundry natures of things
compound, and consider them in their own kinds: we must for all that take
heed to the wonderful union, and Sacramental conjunction that is between
them, which is so strait, that unto the receiver, they are inseparable, for the
which also the earthly thing receyues the name of the heavenly. And this must
also be considered, least on the other hand separating those things which God
has conjoined, we make this Bread and this Wine but naked and bare signs, and
so justly incur that blame, which our adversaries unjustly would lay upon us:
and in like manner this punishment which here the Lord threatens against them
who are evil discerners.

CHAP. III. Three rules to be observed in the right descerning the Lords body.
First, that every thing in this sacrament be taken in his own kind. Who
fails in this and how. Secondly that this sacrament be used according to
Christ's institution. How the Papists fail in this. Thirdly, that this
sacrament be used to right ends, and those ends set down. The conclusion of
the first part of the precept.
WE are therefore to consider, that for the right discerning of the Lord body,
these three rules are to be observed: first, that in this sacrament we take up
every thing in the own nature, and kind. Next that we use every one of them
in the manner appointed by Christ, and with that reverence that is due unto
them. And thirdly, that this Sacrament be celebrated unto the right ends, for
which our Savior appointed it.

Against the first, fails both Papists and bastard professors: Papists are
evil discerners, because they take the sign for the thing signified; the
earthly thing for the heavenly: The men of Lystra were evil discerners, when
they took Paul and Barnabas for Jupiter and Mercurius, Gods in Act. 4. 12.
their account; and therefore would have worshipped them as Gods: but (in this
light) far blinder are they, who will adore a creature insteade of the
creator, and that with the same kind of worship (...) which by their own
confession is due to God only. They allege for their error the word Papists
are evil discerners and why.
of truth: Jesus Christ speaking (say they) of the bread, called it his body;
we say in like manner, that this bread is Christ's body, but sacramentally:
b^t deny that the bread is transubstantiate into the very natural body of
Christ, as they against the principles of faith and nature, falsely affirm. It
is strange to see what backward perverse handlers of holy scripture, these men
be: where they should stick to the letter, they enforce an allegory to serve
their purpose. What plainer History then that which Moses has: God made two
great lights: the greater to Genesis 1. 16.
rule the day, the lesser to rule the night: yet is this place violently
wrested when out of it they will gather, that the Papal dignity, which as
they say) God has appointed to rule over the spirituality, is g^eater then the
regal; and that the Pope by as many degrees excels the Emperor, as the
Sun excells the Moon. And again, where the Spirit of God uses a figure,
there they stick to the Letter, These words according to the Letter: Mandant
flagitium, command an impiety: And therefore by Augustines rule, should Aug.
de d^ct. chri stiana. lib 3, cap. 16
be esteemed figurative: Si praeceptiua loquutio est, aut flagitium, aut
facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem and beneficentiam iubens, non est figurata
loquutio: si autem flagitiu^ vel facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitate^ aut
beneficentiam vetare, figurata loquutio est (nisi manducaueritis (inquit
Christus) carnem ^ilij hominis facinus iubere videtur) figura est ergo
praecipiens passioni domini esse communicandum and suauiter and vtiliter
recondendu^ in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa sit. If a speech of
precept, either fo^bid some sin, or heinous deed, or else command a
profitable or a good deed then it is no figurative speech; but if it seem to
command a sin or heinous deed, or forbid a profitable and honest action, then
it is a figurative speech: unless thou ^ate of the flesh of the son of Man
(says Christ) here he seems to command a heinous action, and therefore it is
a figure commanding us to communicate with Christ's passion, and sweetly and
profitably to lay this up in our memory, that his ^lesh was crucified for us.
And after this manner also the perpetual phrase of the holy spirit does teach us
to interpret them, when he calls circumcision, the covenant; the Lamb, the
Passeoue^; Baptism, the Lauer of regene^ation; the Wine, the cup of the new
Testament; In all these they are forced to acknowledge a figure: Only here,
This is my body, they will ad here to the letter. The learned and godly
fathers, have with us also acknowledged this for a Sacramental speech: so
Tertul. Expounds, Hoc est corpus meum, Tert. li. 4 con. Mar
id est, ^igura corporis mei: This is my body, that is, the figure of my body.
And again: Dominus pane corpus Aug. in Psalm. 3.
suum repraesentat: God represents or resembles his body by bread. And
Augustine said in like manner: Non dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum
signum daret corporis sui. He doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave
only a sign of his body. And again, Iudam adhibuit ad conuiuium, in quo
corporis and sanguinis sui figura^ commend^uit discipulis. Christ admitted
Judas to his supper, in which he commended to his disciples the figure of his
body and blood. As Jesus Christ is called a stone, and called bread: so is this
bread called Ber. in ^ss. Mariae. Ser. (...)
his body, and that says Bernard is per significationem non proprietatem, by
signification, not that properly it is so.

And as for carnal professors, they are also evil discerne^s, because they
esteem less of this Bread and Wine then they ought, putting no difference
between it and common bread and wine, whereas it is not so indeed; for in all
the world there is not the like of This bread and this wine, except in the like
action: it is changed by the ordinance of Christ, and virtue of his
institution: not changed in the substance, but in the use and end: Panis (enim)
Iren. cont Ualent. lib. 4. cap. 34.
terrenus percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed
Eucharistia: for that earthly receiving Gods appointment, is now no common
bread, but the Eucharist. The Lord who calls things that are not, and makes
How the Bread and Wine are changed.
them to be, does here appoint this bread and this wine to a far more
excellent use, then that whereunto they serve by nature. As wax stamped with
the seal of a King, in substance differs not from other wax; and yet for value
is much more excellent, and may not be irreverently handled, with out contempt
of the king; so this bread though in substance it differ not from other bread,
yet concerning the use it is separate, and much more precious then any other
Bread in the world: being now appointed by God to be a sign and a seal, and
an exhibiting instrument of Christ his body, and therefore cannot be
profaned, nor abused without contempt of Christ Jesus.

Against the second condition required 2 Rule.
in the right discerning of the Lords body, Papists fail in like manner,
because they pervert Christ's institution, and use not this sacrament as he com
maunded: for, seeing our Savior is the ordayner of this Sacrament (says
Cyprian) ^tique id nos facere oportet quod Cyp. lib. (...) Epist. 3.
Christus fecit, et quod faciendum mandauit. Of truth, we ought to do tha^
which Christ did, and which he commanded us to do. And Ambrose writing upon
this same place, says plainly: Indignum est domino, misterium hoc aliter
celebrare, quam ab eo traditum est. I^ is an indignity to our Lord, to
celebrate this mystery otherwise then he delivered it. Christ ordained it a
sacrament Papists fail against this rule, because they perue^t Christ's
institution
for the communication of himself to the faithful at the Table; they have
turned it in^o a sacrifice for the oblation of Christ to his Father on an
alter. Jesus brake the bread and gave it: but they, if they break the bread,
they give it not, and if they give it, they break it not. In their daily
Mass, the Priest bre^kes the bread, he abuses the words of Christ secretly
whispering them, accipite, comedite: he bids others take and eat, but gives
them nothing, and when he gives, he stops it whole in the mouths of the people
and breaks it not. Thus most sacrilegiously they alter our savior his sacred
institution, as though of purpose they had concluded to be contrary to him.
Besides this, they withdraw from the people the use of the cup, and so mutilate
the holy sacrament: Sacrilegiously they abstract the use of the cup from the
people.
a horrible sacrilege in like manner, yet ratified by the decree of that
haereticall Council of Trent. Si quis dixeret ex dei praecepto: vel de
necessitate salutis esse, omnes et singulos Christi fideles, Consil. Trent.
vtramque speciem Eucharistae, sumere debere Anathema sit. If any man avouch
that it is by Gods commandment, or upon neces^itie of our Salvation, that all
Christ's faithful people should receive the ^ucharist under both kinds, let him
be accursed: To whom it contents us at this time to oppose the decree of their
own Pope: Gelasius: Comperimus, quod quidam De conse* did. 2 cap Comperimus.
sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione, a calice sacraticruoris abstineant:
qui proculdubio, quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur, astricti aut
integra samenta percipiant, aut ab integris, arceantur; quod diuisio vnius
eiusdemque misterij sine grandi non sit sacrilegio. We understand, that
certain receiving only the portion of Christ's body, abstain from the cup of
his sacred blood: which men (because undoubtedly they are trained up in some
kind of superstition) let them be enforced either to receive the whole
sacrament, or to be restrained from the whole, because this dividing of one and
the same mystery, cannot be without great Sacrilege. In this (...) among
themselves, which way I pray you shall the poor people tu^ne the^? The
council curses all them, who ^ffirme this Sacrament should be (...) with bread
and wine. The Pope sa^es plainly it is supe^stition, and sacrilege, to give
the one without the other, and commands that either we abstain from both, or
retain both together. If ye follow the counsel, the Pope shall condemn you;
if you follow the Pope, the Council shall accurse you: but, curse as they
(...), the Lord shall bless them, who in faith communicate at his holy Table
according to his institution; and the curse of God shall not fail to cleave
unto them, surer then the leprosy of Naaman to Gehesi, yea their part shall
be taken out of the book of life, who dare presume Reu. 22. 19.
to change the ordinance of God. The Apostle has delivered unto us, that which
he received from the Lord, how not only he took the bread, blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it: but that in like manner he took the cup, and gave also
to his Dis^iples: What boldness is it then to take from the people that which
Christ by his Apostles has delivered unto them? and thus while they boast of
antiquity, they are found fathers of novelty.

And against the third, they fail 3 Rule.
who use not this Sacrament to the right ends; which a^e especially two. The
first is the commemoration of Christ's The first end of this sacrament is a
thankful commemoration of Christ's death.
death and p^ssion, with thanksgiving: for the which also the G^ecians called
it (...). The second is the communication, of Christ to them who are his; And
for this the Apostle calls it (...). The first I take out of our Savior his
words, do this in remembrance of me. And from the Apostle: So often as ye eat
of this bread, and drink of this cup show forth the Lords death till his
coming again. And in very deed, this holy Sacrament being used according to
Christ's institution, is a lively representation of Christ crucified; while as
the signs of his blessed body and blood, being sundred one of them from the
other, the one is broken, the other poured out, remembering us how his blessed
body was broken with the Crown of thorns, the Scourge, the Nails, and the
spear: and his blood shed for the remission of our sins; which should work
in us, so often as we behold it, an inward contrition, and godly sorrow for our
sins, wherewith we peirced and wounded our blessed Savior unto the death. And
indeed, if we be of the number of those upon whom God has powered out the
spirit of grace and compassion, so often as we look upon him, whom we have
peirced as (here in this Sacrament we may see him crucified Zach. 12. 10.
before our eyes) as often shall we ^ament for this, as one mourns for his
only Son, or is sorrowful for his first borne: but of this we shall speak
God willing hereafter.

Now here is also discovered the vanity of that error of concomitance,
wherewith the adversaries would excuse Error of concomitance disprooued.
their dis^embring of this holy Sacrament: for (say they) by concomitance where
the body of Christ is, there is his blood, and therefore the bread which is his
body being given: there is no need to give the cup. But as the Lord asked the
King of Tyrus in dirision, Art thou wiser then Daniel? So Ezec. 28. 3
may we ask of them, are ye wiser then Christ? will ye amend his
institution? This assertion takes away one Concomitance destroies the first end
of this Sacrament.
of the principal ends of this Sacrament, to wit, the Commemoration of Christ's
death and passion: for to have the blood within the body, is no declaration of
a crucified man; nor a showing forth of the Lords death: whereas our blessed
Savior ordained them, to be exhibited and received sundry, that it might not
only be preached to our ears, but represented also to our eyes, how his
blessed body and blood were sundred for our sins.

The second end for which this Sacrament was ordained, is, that it might be a
means of the communication of The second end of this Sacrament is the com
munication of Christ to them who are his.
Christ to all them who are his, for the sealing up of our spiritual union
with him, ideo enim sacrame^tu^ illud hominibus datur, vt Caput in terris
corpori coadunetur. And this (as I said) I take out of the word of the Apostle,
This bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ? And in
this respect, this holy bread and wine, are not only signs representing Christ
crucified; nor seals confirming our faith in him, but also effectual
instruments of exhibition, whereby the holy spirit makes an inward applycation
of Christ crucified to all that are his.

And herein stands our greatest comfort, In this sacrament Christ is truly
exhibit and given.
for if we had no more to do in the celebration of this holy sacrament, but
to remember Christ's death and passion: then certainly looking to it only were
sufficient to put us in remembrance thereof, but when we hear and see, that
this bread which is his body, it given us, and we are commanded to take and
eat it, what shall we thinck, but that we are called to this high mercy, as
to be pertakers of Christ and all the benefits that flow from his death. The
Lord does neither deceive us with words, to bid us take when he gives
nothing: neither, calls he us only to a communion of naked bread and wine,
far be it from us to thinck so basely of this holy Sacrament. Certainly, he
that with any measure of light and grace, will ponder these words of our
Savior, Take and eat this is my body: Shall perceive that there is here a
real and effectual exhibition made of the Lord Jesus, to the penitent and
believing receiver.

And yet let no man think, that albeit Yet Christ is not received of every one
who receives the bread. For there is a great difference between communication
and acceptance.
the breaking and giving of the bread be the communication of Christ's body,
that therefore the bread is transstubstantiate into his body, or that every one
receives the body of Christ, who receives the bread: for there is great
difference between communication and acceptance on the part of God. In this
Sacrament, there is indeed a communication and exhibition of Christ, but on
the part of the unbelieving receiver it fayles for fault of acceptance;
because they have no says whereby to receive him, nor a purified heart wherein
to lodge him. It is therefore a vile error also of the Papists, who affi^me
that the wicked in this Sacrament eat Christ, but to their damnation: It is
contrary to the Word of God and reformed antiquity: For whosoever (says
Christ) eats my The wicked care not Christ in the sacrament Ioh. 6. 54. Aug.
in Joan. cap. 6. Tract. 26.
flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day. Sacramentum quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium, res vero
ipsa cuius est sacramentu^, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium. (...), Qui
non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, proculdubio non manducat
spiritualiter earnem, nec bibit sanguine^ eius, licet visibiliter premat
dentibus Sacramentum sanguinis et corporis eius. The wicked who believe not,
may with Judas eat: Panera Domini, non panem Dominum. The bread of the Lord,
but not the bread which the Lord himself is to his worthy receiver.

Of all this, then it is evident, that They refuse a great gift w^o refuse to
communicate.
this banquet is most heavenly, and excellent, wherein as there is no less
offered then Christ Jesus, so no less is refused by them, who refuse to
communicate: they proclaim by their deed (if they continue in it) that they
have No po^tion in David, neither inheritance 2 Samuel 20. 1.
in the Son of Ishai.

But now we leave them, and return to speak as we promised of that trial,
which they who mind to communicate, are to take of themselves.

CHAP. IIII. The second part of the precept commands trial before we
communicate. The Lord will not that this table be a snare to us, as was Absalom
to Ammon. Banquetters at this table should be holy persons.
LEt a man therefore try himself. This Particle ( therefore) is relative to
that which went before: since there is a danger (will he say) and many eats
and drinks unworthily: therefore take ye heed how ye come: he says not
simply, let a man eat, but let a man try himself, and so let him eat. This
warning then of the Apostle, stands in the entry of this holy action, like
that Cherubin armed with a sword in the Genesis 3. 24
entry of Paradise: yet not to hold out the Sons of Adam, but only to
terrify us, that we presume not to draw nere without sanctification. And
herein does our Lord Jesus discover his wonderful love toward us; who before
he inuit us to eat and drink at his table, does first of all instruct us how
we should do it* Absalom called his younger Brother Ammon to a banquet, only
of purpose to slay him, he prepared delicate meat and drink aboundant'y for
him, but concealed the danger. It is not so with our elder bro there, he calls
us here to a banquet no^ of purpose to slay us, but to save us; (...) is no way
willing, we should make th^s Table a snare to trappe our selves to damnation*
which he has ordained a^ a mean of our Salvation: and therefore before hand
forewarnes us of the danger, that we may eschew it.

It is pity to see how the great multitude run to this holy Sacrament
without trial and examination of them selves, and all because they hear of a
bread of life, which here is exhibited to the Communicants at this holy Table:
it is very true, that great things are exhibited here indeed, but thou
should first of all enquire of thy self, who art thou? what interest thou
have in this Communion? and whether or no thou be one of those to whom these
holy things do appertain? for if thou in thy person be a profane and
unsanctified creature, thy touching of these holy things may defile them, and
Hag. 2. 14.
make thee guilty of the contempt of them, but shall not benefit thee; yea a
greater curse then that which Elisha ^. kin. 7. 2.
pronounced on the unbelieving Samaritane Prince, shall light upon thee: thou
shall see the Table of the Lord, and hear of the plenty of the bread of life
therein communicate, but shall not eat of it: Let a man therefore try
himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup.

For as this Sacrament is a holy and excellent thing, so should they who
celebrate it, be holy, and separate persons. It should not be received with
common hands, that is, with earthly hearts, and unsanctified affections. The
Pharisees would not eat their common Lu. 11. 38.
meat with unwashed hands, and that was but superstition, but here to wash
before we eat, both our hands and our head with Peter, yea, to wash as Jeremy
John. 13. 9 Ierem. 4. 14.
exhorts us, Our hearts from our wickedness, is devotion, and good Religion
both commended and commanded by the word of God: Otherwise fearful is that
warning of our Savior. If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me.
To the unclean all things are unclean, for even their consciences are defiled.

CHAP. V. Vnreuerent handling of holy things has never been left unpunished.
The Lord will not show his presence without preparation. The excellency of
this Sacrament, and an exhortation to come unto it with reverence.
THe Lord has never suffered unpunished the vnreuerent looking to, or handling
of the holy signs of his 1. Sam. 6.
presence. Them of Bethshemesh looked irreverently into the Ark, and the Lord
1. Sam. 21.
slew fifty thousand of them. Uzza touched irreverently the Arc, and the Lord
in like manner struck him instantly to death; Abimelech would not give to David
the hallowed bread of proposition, but conditionally, that the young men, who
were with him were sanctified. No uncircumcised man might eat of the pascall
Lamb, under pain of death, and such as were Ex. 12. 48.
circumcised, being unclean, behooued to abstain till they were cleansed,
according to the law; yea, such of them, as were clean did not eat without
four days preparation, for the Lord commanded Exo. 12. 6.
them, to take the Lamb the tenth day, and not to slay it till the foureteenth
day at night, that all the space between, they might the better prepare
themselves to that holy action. Neither will the Lord any other way be familiar
with us, except we be sanctified. Before the Lord came down on Mount Sinai to
give his law to Israel, he appointed them three days of preparation, wherein
to sanctify themselves. Exo. 19. 9.
The Lord appeared to Moses in the fiery bush, but revealed not his will unto
him, till he put off his shoes: I will be sanctified (says the Lord) in all
that draw near unto me. The Lord will not take a wicked man by the hand, nor
have fellowship with the Exodus 3. 5.
Throne of iniquity? his eye is so pure, that he can behold no iniquity,
unless Abac. 1. 13
we put off our worldly thoughts and sinful affections, whereby we have troad
in the unclean ways of sin: it is not possible that the Lord can be fa
miliar with us.

All these stand up as examples, warning us to draw near to this holy action
in assurance of Faith, sprinkled in our hearts, from an evil Conscience: Here
is a Sacrament more excellent then the Passover; here is bread more holy then
that Shewbread; here are the tokens of Gods presence, more glorious then the
Arc; here the Lord comes down, and salvation under his wings* not to sound
by Angels the precepts of his Law on Sinai, but to scale up by his Spirit the
promises of his Gospel to the inhabitants of Sion; shall we then presume to
come to this holy Table without sanctification? Or if we will, may we not
look assuredly 1 Cor. 11.
for judgment? The Corinthians were stricken with death and sundry diseases,
because they discerned not the Lords body, and that which is most fearful of
al, he that came to the marriage, wating his wedding garment, was he not taken
Mat 22. 13
from the banquet Table, and cast into the place of utter darkness? and shall
we look to escape the like judgment, if we fall into the like contempt of God?

Prepare thy self, oh Israel, to meet thy God: let us search and try our
ways: let us lift up our hands with our hearts unto God in the heavens. If we
be this day come to the Lord with our Lam. 3. 14 1 Samuel 7. 4
heart, let us put away our strange Gods, (which are our sins) from among us:
let us with Joseph's Brethren, make ready Genesis 33.
our presents, since we have no better thing then our heart: let us sacrifice
our hearts to the Lord, and that in the best estate that possible we can get
it; for the Lord our God is a great king. Cursed is he that has a male in his
stock, Mal. 1. 14.
and voweth and sacrifices a corrupt thing to the Lord. Beware therefore we
offer not that which is lame and torn to the Lord, a divided heart, a halting
heart between two; an unpenitent heart, is neither a meet Sacrifice to offer
unto the Lord, nor a meet vessel wherein to receive that holy thing, which
here the Lords offers unto thee.

CHAP. VI. Not to put new wine into old vessels. Comfort for the tender
conscience cast down with the sight of sin after trial: two sorts of
trials: the one of things perfect, the other of things imperfect. Daily trial
most necessary.
THe Apostle says, that the breaking 1 Cor. 10. 16
of this bread is the Communion of the body of Jesus; Since Christ is that holy
thing which here is communicated, take heed how we make ready the heart,
wherein to receive him. Joseph of Aramathia, and the rest of Ioh. 19. 40
those Godly ones, who took down Jesus from the Cross, wrapped his dead
body in pure and fine linen; what shall we then do, with the living body of
Jesus? shall not we receive it into pure, sine, and well prepared hearts? No
man (says our Savior) puts new wine into old Vessels, Mat. 9. 17.
far less will any man put the ordinary food of his body into unclean,
unseasoned, and unsavory Vessels; but least of al should men presume with
unholy hearts and hands, to meddle with things sacred and heavenly: here is new
wine indeed, let us not put it into old vessels: here is heavenly manna, let us
not receive 2 Cor. 5. 17.
it with earthly hearts: Every man that is in Christ should become a new
Creature: Reu. 19. 9.
If we be these blessed ones, who are called to the participation of the
Lambs supper, then shall it be granted to us, to be arrayed with pure fine
linen and shining; which is the righteousness of the Saints. The Lord vouchsafe
this grace upon us, that since he has made us pertakers of the heavenly
vocation; and called us to the marriage of his Son, that we receive not so
excellent a grace in vain, but it may be unto us his servants, according to
his word.

And now before we enter to speak of this trial, least the tender Consciences
of the Godly, by reason of that which I have spoken should be discouraged, and
cast down with the sense of their own unworthiness, which at all times is
great in their eyes, but greatest when by trial they look most narrowly unto
themselves: We have therefore to consider that there be two sorts of trials:
One whereby a thing perfect is tried in such sort, that it is not made better,
but sound to be that which it is, and with this kind of trial, man is said to
try the Lord and his Word, so speaks the Lord by Malachie: Mal. 3.
prove me and try me now, if I will not pour you out a blessing without
measure. By this trial, if a man fall to try the Lord, he shall find him
such as he is, true, constant and faithful, to perform that which he has
spoken; or if again man will enter, and try the word of the Lord, he shall
find that Psalm. 19. 7.
the law of the Lord is perfect, no dross in it, but like silver fined seven
times Psalm. 12.
in the fire. There is again another trial, whereby things imperfect are so
tried that they are made better, and at the length perfected: and hereby God
tryes man, for so he speaks by the same Malachie, The Lord will Mala. 3. 3.
fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as gold and silver, that they bring
offerings to him in righteousness: And with this The trial here commanded, is
a searching out of our imperfections.
trial also man tryes himself, searching out his iniquities that he may
forsake them: and this trial tends indeed to a perfection at the last, but
stands rather, in a sinding out, and forsaking of our imperfections, then in
any present perfection. And of this t^yall the Apostle means here: so that
this precept does command us to search out our iniquities, and to depart from
them; but does no way import that we should not communicate at this Table,
because that new trial discouers to us new transgressions; for we come not
here as men without sin, but as poor and miserable sinners, seeking the
Savior of the world, knowing that he came not to call the righteous, but
sinners Luke 5. 32.
to repentance.

Thou then, who after examination, shall find thy self a miserable and yet a
penitent sinner; say not with Peter Lord depart from me, for I am a Luke. 5. 8.
sinful man: but so much the rather go to him and cry with David, have Psalm.
51. 1.
mercy on me O God, and according to the multitude of thy compassions, put away
mine iniquities: for it is a true saying: Christ came into the world to save
sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15
Stay not thou therefore back from him, because thou art sinful, only try
if thou be weary of thy sins, for we are sure, that a sin discovered by
trial, and cast out by repentance, will never condemn us: Wash you (says the
Lord) make you clean, take away the Esai. 1. 16
evil of your works from before my eyes: and then though your sins were as
crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were red like Scarlet,
they shall be as Wool. Omne quod ipse mihi non Ber. in ca^t Ser. 23.
imputare decreuerit, Sic est quasi non fuerit; every sin says the ancient,
which God has concluded not to impute unto me, is as if it had never been: If
therefore in thy conscience thou feel thy sins an heavy burden unto thee,
under the which thou sighest and gronest, and whereof thou earnestly desire
to be relieved, crying with that holy Apostle: O miserable man that I am, who
Romans 7.
shall deliver me from this body of sin? then go thou to the Lord Jesus, for
surely thou art one of those, whom he is seeking, he came into the world to
sane thee and the like of thee, lay thy burden upon the back of Christ, and he
shall bear it, and take thou up his yoke which is easy, and his burden which
is light: So shall thou find rest to thy soul. Mat. 11. 29
O happy exchange, when we are taken from the servitude of sin, and entered into
the service of Christ, when the burden of sin that presses us down is taken
from our backs, and the sweet yoke of Christ that lifts us up, is laid upon
us: for albeit it be called a burden, yet is it such a burden as eases us,
and makes us lighter, like the wings of a Bird: Quidenim leuius co onere, Ber.
Epi. 72.
quod non solum onerat, sed portat omnem cui portandum imponitur.

Where for our farther comfort, let us consider what manner of Guestes these
were, whom the great King commanded to bring into his banqueting Banquetters
there were the poor, the maimed, the blind.
house, even the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the blind. Take heed unto
this O thou that art disquieted in mind, and wounded in spirit with the sense
of thy infirmities; the Lord is gracious and Math. 22. Math. 12. 20. Esaias. 42.
3.
ready to show mercy: He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax, he will not despise thee, because thou art weak, but bids thee
come to him, that he may heal all thy infirmities, Art thou then poor and
destitute of spiritual grace in thy seeling? turn thee to Christ, who being
rich became poor for thy sake, that 2. Cor. 8. 9 Luke 5. 31.
thou in him mights be made rich. Art thou weak and diseased? remember they
who are whole need no Physician but the sick, and that it is the glory of
this excellent Physician to cure diseases, otherwise incurable: quid enim tam
mortem quod Christi morte non saenetur. Art thou lame, and complainest that
thou can not with Danid run the way of the commandments of God: yet
endeavor to halt forward with Jacob unto Canaan, and to creep to the Lord
Jesus, as one of his little Babes, praying unto him, O Lord that raisest up the
crooked, I beseech thee Ps. 146. 8.
to order my goings aright, and to stay my steps in thy paths, that I slide
not any more, as I have done. And thou who laments thy blindness, and the
weak measure of thy knowledge now in this time of light (alas) as we have all
more then cause to complain, that by our own default, the eyes of our
understandings are not lightened, and we have so little insight into the riches
of that glorious inheritance and rich mercies, manifested to us by the Gospel,
in comparison 1. Pet. 1. 12.
of that we might have had. If with the Angels we had been desirous to behold
them, surely in regard of time, we should have been teachers, yea the Heb. 5.
12. Zach. 12.
meanest inhabitant of Icrusalem should have been as David, and David as the
Angel of God. But we are become such, as have need that the principles of God
should be taught again unto us, yet must we not despair, but go to Jesus,
who gives sight to the blind, and pray to him: Lord open our eyes Psalm. 146.
Psalm. 119.
that we may see the wonders of thy Law. Let us go to this Table, stand and
cry with these two blind men: Jesus the Son of David have mercy on me, O
Lord enlighten mine eyes that I sleep not Psalm. 13.
in death. Comfortable then is that mes sage sent by the Lord Jesus to the
Church of Laodicea, I know that thou Reu. 3. 18.
art miserable and poor, and blind, and naked, Yet I counsel thee come to
me: I have the fine gold that will make thee rich; I have the white raiment to
cover thy filthy nakedness: I have the Eye-salue, that will open thy eyes. Let
us not therefore hearken to the voice of our infidelity against so clear
testimonies of the Word of God; neither so look on our miseries, that we turn
our backs upon Gods mercies, but rather let our miseries Ephesians. 3. 20
chase us to him, who of his abundant mercy, is able to fulfill all our
necessities, above all that we can ask or think.

But now to return, and speak of This trial is not that daily and ordinary
trial required in all our actions
the trial here required: we must consider that as this action is not a daily
action, so it requires a trial above our daily trial: as to our daily and
ordinary trial, in it we are bound to examine all our actions in the Court of
Conscience, that we may call our selves to account: Not concealing the
iniquity of our bosom, as Adam did, but judging our selves that we may not
be judged of the Lord. And this trial without a daily loss cannot be
neglected; for since we are subject to so many changes, that even the just man
falls seven times in the day, and no man knows the errors of his life;
we have great Psalm. ^9. 12
need by daily consideration, to view the state of our consciences, and to
look into the course of our life* whether or not it be such as will lead us
unto that end, whereat we would be. Such profit found godly David by the
examination of his ways, that he praised the Lord, Who gave him counsel, and
Psalm. 16. 7.
made his reins to teach him in the night. And he acknowledges it a special
means whereby many times he was reduced into the way of life, when he had
wandered from it. I have considered Psalm. 119. 59
(says he) my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. As David
learned this from God, so does he recommend it unto us, that morning and
evening we should examine our selves, as a most profitable means to nourish
that holy fear in us, whereby we keep out sin, when we are tempted to it;
or cast out sin, when we have once conceived it: for this holy fear is
Innocentiae Cyp. lib* 2 Epist. 2 Psalm. 4. 4.
custos: Tremble therefore (says he) and sin not, examine your hearts upon
your beds and be ye still: Again, he protests that every day he was
punished, and chastised every morning: that he daily cleansed his heart, and
washed his hands in innocence. Every day of our life we contract some new
Psalm. 73. 13
debt of sin, and wisdom craves, that every day we should seek a
discharge thereof. As we cannot live without daily food, far less can we
live without daily mercy; and therefore our Savior who in the one Petition
taught us to pray, give us this day our daily bread; in the next he taught us
also to pray, and forgive us our sins, that no day should go by us, without
examination of our selves, and crying of God mercy for our sins.

But here comes to be lamented Miserable is their estate, who live without
daily trial.
the senseless slupiditie of this generation: in all their affairs, they use
consideration, and bring to account and recl^oning their whole business with
men; but as touching their conversation toward God, and the state of their
consciences, and whether or no they be translated from Nature into Grace,
there are they so carried away by presumption, that they leave no place to the
examination of themselves* but proclaim peace to themselves, though there be
no peace; blessing themselves in their hearts, albeit God (in their hearing)
pronounce them and their actions accursed in his Word. They They are like
Achitophell, who put his house in order, but not his soul. 2 Samuel 7. 1 23
are wise like Achitophell: he put his house in order, but not his soul in
order; wise in things perishing concerning this life, there they over see
nothing, wise enough in their generation; but fools concerning things
pertaining to life eternal; for they suffer a daily debt to run on upon their
souls, which at length shall ouer-charge them. A count that is long
ouer-passed, in the end becomes difficult to be finished, and he who long has
lived in darkness, if ye bring him to the light, cannot hold up his eyes to
look upon it, but is forced to cast them down toward the ground: even so
shall it be with him, who suffers his debt of sin to multiply, and the
reckoning of his transgressions to run on; in the end, His own wickedness
shall reprove him, The Iere. 2. 19.
Lord shall draw him out of his lurking hooles, and bring him out of the dark
chambers of his imagination: and as now, his secret sins are set in the light
of Gods Countenance, so then shall the Psalm. 90. 8. Psa. 50. 21
Lord set them in order before him that did them. He shall manifest his inward
thoughts to the light, and present him naked unto judgment: and then, with
what confusion and astonishment, with what trembling and blackness of face,
shall he that was prodigal of the time of grace, living in his sins a
contemner of God, come forward unto judgment? And this to awake us to the
daily trial and ordinary examination of our hearts.

As to this action, it is not ordinary, But a singular and ex traordinarie
trial, is required before communion.
and therefore requires a singular and extraordinary trial, far above that
which every day we are to take of our selves: for if (as I said) the Jews had
assigned to them the space of four days for preparation, before they eat
their Passover, what shall we do that have to celebrate a more excellent
mystery? they searched diligently every corner of their house, to see that no
leaven were in it; but more diligently should we search every corner of our
hearts, that no known leaven of wickedness and maliciousness be left in it,
which we have not purged and cast out by repentance: Then shall we find that
every new sight of our selves Every new sight of our selves discouers new
corruption.
shall discover a new corruption; for the heart of man is a great deep, and
deceitful above all things; many Chambers of corruption are in it. If we have
entered into one, and seen the abominations which are there, think not for
that we have entered in all. No doubt the Prophet Esaias knew before that he was
a sinful man, but a new vision of the Majesty of God brought him to a deeper
insight of his own uncleanness, and made him to cry out, woe is me, for I
am undone: Because I am a Esaias. 6. 5.
man of polluted lips, and mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts: I
have seen (says Job) The Lord, therefore Job. 42. 6.
do I now abhor my self. And this I speak, that none of us think a new
trial unnecessary, but that even ye, who through grace have been accustomed
every morning to chastise your selves, and every evening to examine your
hearts in your beds, may be warned: to you also belongs this precept, Let a
man try himself, and so let him eat.

CHAP. VII. What a laborious work is enjoined a man when he is commanded to
try himself. Two things necessary for this trial: First, the Spirit of God:
Secondly, the Word of God. Many try themselves by wrong Rules, and are so
deceived.
Which shall appear more evidently, if thou ponder this preprecept, Try thy
self: it is a restless and laborious work, that here is enjoined to thee,
thou art set to a task which may hold thee exercised all the days of thy life.
The Lord by this precept will have every thing that is in man, brought under
examination; Man as he is the workmanship of God, is every way so marvelous,
that no marvel the Philosophers called him a little world: Augustine in his
Estimation, accounted man a greater miracle then all the miracles that ever
were wrought among men: but as he is perverted by sin, and become the
workmanship of Satan, he is so fraughted Iam. 3. 6.
with iniquity, that Saint James calls one member of his body, a world of
wickedness, and if in the tongue only, which is but a small member of the
body there is so much wickedness, that the Spirit of God, who gives names to
things as they are, calls it a world of wickedness, what shall we think of the
rest? what bottomless depth of iniqui tie must there be in the fountain,
when there is so much in the stream? and therefore I say he had need to be
full of eyes within and without, that will practice this precept of the
Apostle, Let a man try himself.

For if ye shall begin to take a view Man being well tried shall appear a new
found world of wiekednes.
of your mind, and consider how far it is enlightened, and what natural
darkness yet remains in it, how many bands of strange cogitations at
several times soiourne in it? some flowing from the love of the World, and her
Four bands of cogitatio^s which oppress the mind.
deceitful pleasures, intending to steal our hearts after them: some from the
root of concupiscence, and her inordinate Lusts, that oftentimes violently
oppress us: and some from the root of bitterness, raising wonderful
commotions and perturbations within us, reeling too and fro by courses, in our
swelling and restless minds, raging like waves of the Sea, carried with
furious winds, besides infinite armies of other vain and idle cogitations,
whereof we cannot tell from whence they come, nor whether they go: and if
from the mind they proceed to the heart, which is the seat of the affections:
and take a particular view of them, how our love and our hatred, our fear and
our confidence, our joy and our grief, our care and our contentment are
renewed, and framed according to that word, which is the rule of
righteousness. And if again, ye go to try the affections, and see how the
members of your bodies are employed as Romans 6.
weapons of righteousness in the service of God, if ye have made a Covenant
Job. 31. 1.
with your eyes or not, that they regard not vanity, or if negligently ye let
them stand open as windows, at the which death enters every moment into your
souls; and if ye have learned to take heed to your lips, that ye sin not
Psalm. 39. 1.
with your tongue; if ye shall also take a time to consider the ignorances of
your youth, and sins of your old age: if I say, ye look unto all these
which yet are few in regard of many more we have to look unto, what shall
appear, but a new found world of wickedness dicouered unto thee? which most
justly may make thee ashamed, and compel Psalm. 19. 12
thee to cry out with David, O Lord who knows the errors of his life, Lord
cleanse me from my secret sins, and keep me from presumptuous sins, that
so I may be made clean from much wickedness: yea, thou shall wish with
Jeremy, O that my head were full of water, Iere. 9. 1.
and mine eyes fountains of tears, that all the whole day long I might with
Ezekiah Es. 38. 15.
recount my sins, in the bitterness of my heart; and all the night cause my
bed Psalm. 6.
to swim, and water my couch with tears, for the manifold transgressions,
wherewith I have offended the Lord my God.

And now because this trial of our selves is so necessary, let us here
remember that there are two things without which we cannot profit in this
work of trial. The one is the Spirit of God: the other the Word of God. As to
the first, man by nature is so blinded with self Love, that he accounts his
own deformity, beauty, and his bondage liberty: what viler bondage then the
Servitude of sin? O quam multos Dominos habet, qui vnum non habet (said
Ambrose) and yet man unregenerate counts it his liberty to live uncontrolled
in the service of his lusts, to do what he will: what liberty again so
excellent as to be the freeman of God; Seruire Deo est regnare: and yet foolish
man, accounts the obedience of Gods Law (which is the law of liberty) a
servitude, and the Commandments of God he esteems as bonds, wherewith he will
not be bound, walking the footsteps of other Rebels before him: he cries out
Let us Psalm. 2. 3.
break their bonds, and cast their cords from us. It was not the disease of
the Laodiceans only to account themselves Revel. 3.
happy, when indeed they were miserable; it is the natural disease of all the
Sons of Adam, for every man's way seems good in his own eyes. Pro. 16. 2.
A pitiful blindness that death should reign over man, and man not feel it;
that strange Lords who can claim no right unto him, should tirannize over him,
and he not endeavor to vvithstand it; and that Satan should lead him away
in Captivity, bound with chains, even the cords of sin, blinder then
Zedekiah, having his eyes pulled out, and man should not lament for it, But
where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and freedom, there is a
knowledge and detestation of sin, and a sighing to God for deliverance from
the Bondage. The Prophet Ezechiel could not see the abominable Ezec. 8. 9.
idolatries of the house of Israel, till the Lord taught him to dig through
the wall: but we shall be far less able to see the vile abominations that
are in our own hearts, until the spirit of the Lord dig through and
demolish that thick and hard wall of induration, that naturally hides us from
the sight of our sins, and keeps us in blindness under Satan's bondage.

The other thing whereby we are to proceed in this trial, is the word of God;
for every thing that is imperfect, must be tried by another not by it self:
gold is tried by the fire and touch stone, the weight of a thing is tried by
the balance, and the spots of the face are tried by the glass. Thus every
imperfect Every imperfect thing must be tried by an other then it self.
thing that is tried, is tried by another not by it self. As to the law of
God, it is a most perfect rule, by which God will have men and their actions
tried; but it is to be tried by no other then it self. If any man will try
scripture, he must with the Nobles of Beraea, Act. 17. 11
try it by the scripture, so then the word serves unto us as a touchstone for
our trial, as a glass for discovery of our spots, and as the balance of the
sanctuary, wherein we must be weighed, in Romans 16.
the last day the secrets of all hearts will be judged by the Gospel, and
therefore it were good that in time we did judge our selves by it; some try
themselves by it, some t^ye themselves by themselves, supposing they are such
indeed, as they have conceived themselves to be: some again measure themselves
by others, specially with such as in their opinion are behind them, not with
such as in light and grace do far excel them, like that Pharisie, who when
Luke 18. 11.
he came to examine himself before God, thought he was good enough, because
he was not like the Publican, wherein he was also miserably deceived, for
suppose he spoke the truth yet spoke it ignorantly, as Caiaphas said, that
one behooued to die for the people: he was not like the Publican indeed, the
Publican was much better then he, for he came to the temple, humble, and
penitent, and went home to his house justified, whereas the Pharisie puffed up
with a conceit of his own righteousness, and justifying himself, went away
out of the Temple more guilty then he came. In the trial therefore of thy
self make not thy neighbors disposition thy rule, least thou in like manner
be deceived.

And yet if thou would profit by How we may profit by comparing our selves
with others.
the example of others, remember it is a great folly to think that thou art
religious enough, because in religion some are behind thee, and not rather to
be displeased with thy wants, when thou see so many before thee enriched
above thee in all spiritual grace, and have profited more then thou in the
mortification of their sinful lusts: having out run thee further in the way of
Gods commandments, then that other Ioh. 20.
Disciple ouer-ran Peter unto Christ's Sepulcher, to learn his resurrection. It
is pity that the Sons of men in worldly things can look to those who are
above them, thinking they have little, because they have not so much as others,
yet in spiritual things, they should look to others, that are inferior to
them, and so easily stand content with the little beginning of religion they
have, because there be many, who in their judgment have not so much; whereas
certainly if we could try our selves by the right rule, we should find that
as yet we are far from that which we should be, and therefore have more
need then that holy Apostle, To forget that which is behind, and endeavor
our selves to that Phil. 3. 4.
which is before: following hard toward the mark for the prise of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.

We have therefore here yet farther It is not enough that pastors and Elders
try us, we must try our selves.
to observe, that seeing the Apostle commands us to try our selves, we think
it not enough that others try us, and give us their approbation; we must also
try our selves. The Pastors may try thy knowledge, and think it good enough,
thy superiors may try thy conversation, and find it unreprovable of 1. Cor. 2.
11
man: But thou must try thy own conscience, for no man knows the things of
Ecclesi. 37 14.
a man save the spirit of man; the mind of a man will show him more sometime
then seven watchmen that are in a tower. When this sacrament was first
instituted, there were twelve who communicated with the Lord Jesus, and one of
them was a Devil, and a traitorous hypocrite: the remnant knew him not, and
therefore could not reprove him, but that made not Judas the better man; yet
the fault which man could not find out, the Lord discovered it: one of you
(said he) will betray me. Think it not therefore enough albeit vnchallenged of
man, thou may sit down at the Lords table. Remember the king will come, and
take a view of the Guests, even he who is the God of the Spirits of all flesh,
and to whom the secrets of Other men cannot know whether thou come to the Table
as a John or as a Judas.
the heart are manifest. Iosaphats garment cannot hide Achab from him, he is
not blind like Isaac, that he should be deceived to take one for another;
therefore try thou thy self, how thou come to this holy table, whether as
John loving Jesus, and beloved of him, or as Judas betraying Christ, and
accursed of him: for as Christ foretold them, that one of them was a Devil,
so the Apostle has foretold us, that many will eat and drink vnvnworthily
at this holy table; who they are, we know not, yet are they known to the Lord;
let every one of us strive to purge one, every man try himself, and wash his
heart from his wickedness, Let every man therefore ask for himself: is it I Lord.
and so shall we be all clean; let every man ask for himself with the
Disciples, is it I Lord? am I one of them that comes to betray thee? to
crucify thee again, and to tread the blood of the new Testament under my
feet? let us never rest til we have gotten the Lords certificate in our
consciences, and that after due trial of our selves, we come not as
Hypocrites, unpenitent and unbelieving Atheists, but as diseased and poor
sinners, to seek the Lord Jesus, the Savior of the world: for if we do so,
then shall we get that answer which the Angel gave to the two Mary's, fear
not ye, because ye seek Jesus, who was crucified: we shall eat at this Table
and be satisfied, and shall go away, not without fear indeed, but having our
fear tempered with great joy, because we found the Lord. We should try our
selves, and not other men.


And lastly, let us take heed that the Apostle commands us to try our
selves, and not to try other men. It is a corrupt custom of men at those
times of holy communion, to sift the conversation of their neighbors and
brethren, more narrowly then ever Laban searched the stuff of Jacob, to see if
he could find any thing wherewith to charge him; and this they do not of a
heart to forgive, which were commendable, but of purpose to seek the uttermost
recompense and satisfaction for smalest offenses done against them, This
reproues them who before communion try ^aults done to them, more then sins done
by them.
and so where they should cast open the door of their hearts, to the King of
glory, and prepare in the desert a path for our God, by making low that which
is high within them, and making straight that which is rough, by the contrary
they stop all the passages and ways of God his access unto them: for now
their affections are exalted so high by Esaias. 40. 3.
pride against God, that they despise the counsel of his word: crooked were
they before, but more crooked now; they lived without love before, and
dissembled it, but now are not ashamed, when God calls them to the table of
love, plainly to profess with rough and sierce speeches, the hatred of their
hearts, they put off that which the Apostle commands them to put on as the
elect of God, namely tender mercy, humbleness of mind, meekness and long
suffering: they insist to search out the sins done against them by men, and
ouerpasse the sins by themselves done against God; Lovers of themselves more
then lovers of God.

I grant indeed it is a point of Christian duty to admonish our brethren of
their sins, if it be done in Love: for so we are commanded, Thou shall
Leu 19. 17
not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shall reprove him. It is hatred and not
Love, for the father to spare correction, or the brother to spare admonition to
his brother in his sins. I confess in like manner that he who has offended is
bound to reconcile himself unto thee, before he offer his Sacrifice to the
Lord; but in case that he neglect to do it, yet stand thou bound and
obliged to forgive him, and to take heed that thou despise not so great a
Salvation offered by the Lord: because an other discharges not that brotherly
duty, which he ought unto thee. As another man's faith will not justify thee,
so another man's sin will not condemn thee; And therefore mourning for that
which we cannot amend in others, let us chiefly attend to our selves, as we
are here commanded.

CHAP. VIII. The points of preparation are two: First, that we lay aside our
old sins: Secondly, that we put on the new Christian disposition, consisting
in three things. First, that toward God we be holy and heavenly minded.
Secondly, that toward our neighbors we be loving: Thirdly, that we be
sober and little in our own cies. The comfortable fruit arising to us at this
holy Table.
But now leaving to speak any more of this trial ingenerall, we enter to
speak of the particular points of this trial. The whole trial and
examination required in those who are to be banquetters at this holy Table, I
reduce to these two: the first is, that we try our selves whether or not with
Joshua, we have cast away our filthy Zach. 3.
garments, that is, if we have cast off the old man, which is corrupt
through deceiuable lusts. And next, if we have Ephesians. 4.
put on our marriage garment, that is, put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. First of all therefore we must
take pains to remove the impediments that may hinder our Union with Christ,
that we come not to this Table (as Judas d^d) with our old sins, having that
lodged in our hearts, which we dare not present unto God: for seeing no man
will sit down at the Table of his enemy, what great presumption is it in us
to sit down at the Lords Table, as long as our sin, which is the cause of
enmity is not removed: There 2 Cor. 6. 14 To. 13. 12.
can be no communion between light and darkness. Let us therefore be
changed from that which we are, let us cast away the works of darkness, and
be renewed in the spirit of our mind, if so be we desire to be united with
the Lord: he is the holy One of Israel, God blessed for ever, in whom there
can be no shadow of alteration, so that of necessity Iam. 1. 17.
the change must be upon our part. It is written of the Lioness, that
Otherwise no commu nion with the Lord.
having had con mixtion with the Leopard, she washes her self in water before
she company again with the Lion, that so he should not by sent Basil Hexam.
hom. 7.
d^scerne her adultery. And Basile in his Hexameron writes, that the Vipe^ a
most pernicio^s kind of Serpent before his copulation with that Seafish called
Mu^aena, does first vomit and cast out his venomous poison: thus the Beasts in
their kind (so far as they can) do reverence one to another, to teach man,
that he is wo^se then a Beast indeed, except he cast off the filthy sl^e of
his old sins, that he may be joined with the Lord, for by nature we ar^
more adulterous then the Lioness (for what is the vanity after which we have
not gone a whoring) more venomous also we are then the Viper, full of hatred,
malice, envy, debate, and therefore have need to vomit out our iniquities by
repentance, and to wash our selves in that fountain opened to the house of
David. Before that Ester was presented to Ahasuerus, Est. 2. 12*
she was purified by the space of twelve months, six months with oil of
myrrh, and six months with sweet odours: shall such reverence be done to
mortal flesh, whose carcass was shortly to be made a pray to the worms, and
shall we carry no reverence to our immortal husband the Lord Jesus? shall we
take no pains to 2, Cor. 12. 2.
purify our heart, that we may be presented as a chaste spouse unto him?
Without Diuorcement from our old sins, no marriage with the Lamb.


Let us not deceive our selves, except we forsake our fathers house and our
own people, that is, except we be deuorced from our old sins, wherein we were
borne and brought up: it is not possible that the king shall have pleasure in
our beauty. Let us call our deeds to Psalm. 4. 5.
examination before the tribunal of our conscience: let us cast out the
Cananits and not pity them, that the peace of God may dwell with us: let us
deliver Barrabas to be crucified, that Christ Jesus may live in us; why shall
these Serpents (I mean our crooked affections) be nourished any longer in our
bosom, which live upon our blood, and cannot live except we die? Oh that we
could make this day a day of new division between us and our old sins.

Neither must we here think it Not a general confession, but a particular
inquisition should be made of our sins
enough to fight against our sins, but we must every one of our selves make a
particular inquisition of these domestique sins, and predominate evil
affections, that has most of al oppressed us: for there is none of us all but
we have in us our own Idol, whereunto many times we do service, to the great
offense of God. And albeit, this narrow trial of our sins shall discover to us
a wonderful disco^dance between our nature and the most holy law of the Lord,
yet let us not be discouraged, considering that we are best in the eyes of
God, when we are worst in our own eyes, and most acceptable 2. King 21. 29.
to him, when we are most displeased with our selves. The Lord was moved even
with Achab his temporal humiliation: see thou not (said he to Eliah) how
Achab is humbled before me: because he submits himself before me, I will
not bring that evil which thou have spoken in his days: and will not then the
Lord much more be moved with the true humiliation of his own Servants? No
doubt, if we 1. Pet. 4.
cast down our selves before the Lord he shall lift us up, if we humble our
selves, he shall exalt us. If we judge our 1. Cor. 11. 31 Psalm. 34. 18
selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord: for the Lord is near to them that
are contrite, and will save such as are afflicted in spirit. But if we come
before the Lord in the presumption of our minds and not touched with the sense
of our sins, then shall he execute that Iere. 2. 35. Esaias. 2. 12.
fearful threatening upon us, I will enter into judgment with thee, because
thou say I have not sinned: though thou were high, and exalted like the
Caedars of Lebanon, and the Oaks of Bashan, proud and hautie in thy conceit,
the Lord shall abase thee, and bring thee low, for he is the Lord that
resists 1. Pet. 5. 5.
the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

The other point of our trial and preparation, stands in putting on that
threefold Christian disposition; that toward our God we be holy and
heavenly minded; toward our neighbor loving, righteous and merciful; and as
concerning our selves, that we be sober and lowly, for so the grace of God,
which has appeared, teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and Tit. 2.
11.
wordly lusts, and should live godly, righteously, and soberly in this present
world. This is our wedding garment, even that pure, fine, and shining linen,
which is Reu. 19. 8.
the righteousness of the Saints. A Garment not party colored like Joseph's,
Ge. 37. 23.
but compact of many virtues and graces of Christ Jesus. These be his badges
and Cognisances, whereby we are Col. 3. 12.
known to be his: the putting on of these, is the putting on of Christ; for
his grace translateth us out of nature, and transformeth us into his image by
his own spirit.

And first as concerning our disposition toward God, it should not only be
holy (as I have said) but also heavenly: for since we call him our Father
which is in heaven, we must see what heavenly disposition we have to go
after him: and whether we be weary of our absence from the Lord, like David
weary of his dwelling in Psalm. 120. Phil. 1. 23
the Tents of Keder, and desire with the Apostle to remove out of the body,
that we may dwell with the Lord: for here is not the place of our rest. The
best of our life upon earth (except it be the little taste of that hid Manna,
wherewith the Lord now and then comfort our souls in this barren
Wilderness) it is but like the life of that forlorn Son, who having
banished himself from his fathers house, was driven to fill his belly with
the husks, that was given to the Swine, and oftentimes could not get them. We
have experience enough of the vanity of worldly comforts, wherein there is no
contentment; would to God we could also learn with that prodigal Son to be
think our selves, and conclude to make home again to our fathers house, in
whose face is the fullness of Psalm. 16. 11
joy: surely the least of them that dwell in our Fathers house have bread
enough, they are filled with the fatness of his house, and receive drinck out
of the rivers of his pleasures: what pleasure then should it be to us to live
here in this strange Land, where our souls are almost dead for hunger?

There is no greater thankfulness that man can show to the Lord, then to
declare in his affection, that he cannot live without the Lord, nor rest
content, so long as he is absent from him. The Lord in the work of creation
Genesis 1.
never rested till he had made man, and man can do no lesle of duty then
passing by all Gods Creatures, to resolve with himself; I will never rest
till I enjoy the Lord. The Soul of man should be like that Dove of Noah,
which being sent forth from the arc, found no rest to the sole of her foot,
until she returned again to him that sent her: and indeed without the Lord
where can we rest? Go thy way with Our souls cannot rest but in him.
Solomon and prove all the goodness of the children of men, which they enjoy
under the Sun, thou shall find Eccl. 2. 3.
it is but vanity and vexation of Spirit, whatsoever man clea^eth to, beside
Jehovah the true subsisting Lord, it is but a lying vanity, which has not in
it that substance and certainty, which man imagines, yea man (without God)
Psalm. 39. 5.
in his best estate is altogether vanity, and his wisest actions are but a
disquieting of himself in vain. It is a godly saving of Augustine, which the
word of God and experience taught him; F^isli nos Domine ad t^, and semper
inquietum August.
est cor nostrum, done requi^at in te; thou made us O Lord unto thy self,
and our heart is ever unquiet till it rest in thee. The wicked who are
strangers from the womb, pretend in their countenance what they will, yet
even in laughter their heart is sad, for Pro. 14. 13 Esa. 48. 22
there is no joy nor peace to the wicked, (says my God) their heart is moved
as the Trees of the Forest shaken with the Esaias 7. 2.
Wind. As the point of the Mariners compass, so long as it is not direct to
the North, trembles continually; so the spirit of the wicked (not set upon the
Lord) is never quiet, but tossed too and fro with restless perturbations,
which in a part presently he feels, but shall better perceive it, when he
goes out of the body. For tribulation and Romans 2.
anguish shall be on the soul of every man that does wickedly: this is the
portion of them that forsake God, and wander after vanity. It is good
therefore for us to draw near unto God, saying with David, whom have I in the
heaven but Psalm. 73.
thee? and I have desired none in the earth with the. The Lord work this
heavenly disposition in us.

And now to help forward ou^ Two things pro fitable to help us to this
heavenly disposition.
earthly minds unto it, we have to consider both the time and space, when and
where our Savior did institute this sacrament. The place is recorded by Saint
Luke, to have been an upper Parlour: the consideration of the place (says
Nazianzin) does some way warn us that we should celebrate 1 Consideration of
the place wherein this Sacrament was first instituted.
this holy sacrament with high and heavenly affections. When God gave the law,
he came down from heaven to the top of Sinai, and Moses went up from the
plain to it, and so (says he) had familiar conversation with the Lord: and
here as the Lord comes down as low as he can in this Sacrament for our
capacity, it becomes us to mount up as high as pos^ible we can in our
affections, if so be we be desirous to meet the Lord, otherwise if the Lord
shall abide in his glory, and inaccessible light, and if man shall lie still
in the dark dungeon of this base and earthly mind, what familiar meeting can
there be, betweenne God and man? And as to the time, Saint John witn^sseth 2
Consideration of the time.
that our Savior ordained this sacrament when he was to go out of the world
to his father; wherein said Augustine: August. in Joan.
Spes membris in Capite data, quod essent in illo transeunte sine dubio
sequutura. Yea, not only should it nourish our hope, that where he is there
once we shall be, but should waken our affection and desire to go after him:
we should eat and drink at this holy table, not as if we were here to
remain, but should celebrate this supper like a passover, standing as The
time warns us to celebrate this supper like a Pasteouer.
pilgrims and our loins gi^ded up, having our staves in our hands ready to
follow our Lord, who is gone into heaven before us: and every day of our
communion should be a new departing of our hearts out of this world, unto our
heavenly Father; yea, we should receive this meat from the Lord, with that
wa^ning which the Angel gave to Eliah in the wilderness: 1. Kin. 19. 7.
up and ^ate, for thou have yet a great journey to go. This bread is given us,
that in the strength thereof, we may walk forward the way, which is before us,
not that we should lie down and rest us in this wilderness, as if we had
now attained to the end of our journey. The Angel wakened Eliah twice sleeping
under the Juniper, twice he touched him, and twice he bad him, up eat and
walk; at length he rose and vvalked in the strength of that bread forty
days: But alas, our security is greater then his, many a time has the Lord
warned us of the journey that is before us: many a time has he proposed
heavenly food unto us, and now against this day the Lord renews his mercy
toward us. The Lord vvaken us, and grant at the length, that we may rise and
walk, following the Lord, till we appear before the face of our God in Sion.

But of all other means, the most But most of all the meditation of the love
of God is profitable to work in us this hea uenly disposition.
forcible to ravish our hearts after the Lord, is a deep meditation of the
love of God toward us. The Apostle protests it is a love that passes
knowledge; the height and breadth, the length and depth whereof, none is able
to comprehend; he that at one time cried out; Come and I will tell you what God
Ephesians. 3. 18. Psa. 66. 16 Psalm. 139.
has done to my soul, is compelled another time to confess: O Lord my God,
thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can count in order to
thee the thoughts toward us, I would declare and speak of them, but they are
more then I am able to express. And yet although we be less able then the
Elephant at one draught to drink Job. 30. 18
up the River of Iordaine, let us be content with the wearyed Passenger,
willingly to take in so much as may refresh us; we cannot measure the waters of
the Sea in our fist, nor number the stars of heaven; and how then shall we
number his mercyes which are above all his works? shall we Psa. 145. 9
therefore not look to them, nor behold that glory of God which shines in
them: Though we cannot comprehend It is not a light meditation of this love,
that will raise up our hearts.
his incomprehensible love (yea blessed are we if it shall comprehend us) let
us notwithstanding earnestly and fervently meditate upon it, not by starts and
vanishing motions: for as a Candle does not at the first receive light from the
fire, were it never so blown, but if for a time it be holden constantly to
the fire, it is at the length enlightened: so it is not vanishing meditations
that will warm our hearts with the Love of God; but if we shall continue
without wearying to exercise our thoughts upon this great love that the Lord
has borne toward us; it shall happily fall out at length, that the powers of
our Soul shall be inflamed with his love, and we shall find the savor of
death in every thing that smells not of his love.

No greater Love then this (says Never such a love showed as Jesus has
showed unto us.
our Savior) can be showed among men, then that a man should bestow his life
for his friends: but that which man is not able to show, our Lord Jesus God and
man has showed to his children Ioh. 15. 13
his good will: for the Love he bore to us, he gave himself in a sacrifice
for our sins on the Cross, even when we were his enemies, and has here in
this Sacrament given himself a food and nourishment unto us: for so that
disciple beloved of him does testify; When Jesus knew that his hour John. 13.
1
was come, that he should go out of the world unto his Father, forasmuch as
he loved his own, unto the end he loved them: therefore did he institute
this Sacrament, that therein he might communicate himself to them. O
wonderful Stronger then the love of Jonathan to David.
love, stronger then the love of Jonathan to David! When Jonathan and David,
were forced to part company because of Saul's Tyranny, Jonathan 1 Samuel 20.
gave David his Garment, his Girdle, and his Armor: he had no better, and
could give no better, and so with many tears and mutual imbracings departed
from him: but our blessed Savior before he removed his corporal presence
from us, gave his life to redeem our life from the death: he sent out bloody
sweat abundantly, as the witnesses of his burning love toward us, he powered
out an everlasting John. 17.
prayer to his father for us, he has left behind him, in his last will, his
peace for our portion: he has given us his spirit for a Comforter, his Word
for a warner, and this Sacrament for a spiritual food, until his second
coming again. No marvel his spouse in Cant. 5. 9.
the Canticles praised his love to be far Or the love of a mother to her
Children.
above the love of women: for though in some of them the natural strength of
affection be so great, that it makes them endure the painful bearing and
bringing up of their children with the milk of their breasts, yet what is that
comparable to this? nothing indeed. Such a Love as here our Savior has
discovered toward us, is not to be found again in the world: for whereas
mothers (says Chrysostom) either Chrisost. sermon. de corpore Christi.
commit their Children to Nurses, or else brings them up upon the milk of
their own breasts: Jesus Christ feeds us not with the milk of another, but
with his own flesh and his own blood. Necessity sometime has compelled the
Mother to eat her own Children, but we never read that compassion has moved
the mother to give her own flesh to preserve her Children, that they should
not dye in famine. But our Lord Jesus is that kind Pelican, that sends out
his own blood to nourish his young; and all this has our Lord Jesus done, not
grudgingly but willingly, provoked hereunto by that fervent Love he bare to
the glory of God his father, and to our salvation.

Which shall yet appear more evidently A proof of Christ's wonderful love
toward us.
out of his own comfortable saying to his Disciples, I have greatly desired to
eat this Passover with you. O word full of consolation* sundry Luke. 22.
Passeouers had he eaten before with them, but he protests this was his
desired Passover: See ye not here his unquenchable Love? he knew it was the
last he was to eat upon the earth; he knew he was to drink no more with them
of the fruit of the Vine, till it was fulfilled in his Fathers kingdom: he
knew that the same night they would ^ay him, and that after Supper a bitter Cup
of Passion was abiding for him, yet his love overcame all these impediments,
and made him think long to eat of this Passover: And which is much more,
before ever he gave himself to be crucified for us on the Cross, he
provided this Sacrament, as a means of the communication of himself unto us,
thereby assuring us that his subsequent passion should not defraude us, but
rather afford unto us, and make ready for us, that righteousness and life by
Christ purchased on the Cross, and communicate in his holy Table to them who
are his. In the one he was prepared, and made ready as the only food of our
souls to eternal life; in the other he is applied, Communicated and given
unto us; both of these necessarily behooued to be done for the work of our
Salvation. Sicut enim ad potandum Cyp. lib. 2 Epist. 3.
vinum venire nemo potest, nisi botrus calcetur ante, and prematur: sic nos
sanguinem Christi bibere non potuimus, nisi Christus prius fuisset calcatus and
pressus. It was a great Love which made our Savior content that his blood
should be shed out on the Cross, and so should be made both a ransom, and a
convenient food for us, for the Ber. in Epiph. ser. 1
father sent him, Quasi saccum plenum misericordia, in passione conscindendum
vt effundatur quod in eo latet pretium nostrum. So is this also a new
declaration of his love, that before his body was broken and his blood was
shed, he first ordained the means whereby it should be communicated unto us.

These and many more spiritual What a notable comfort we have here, that this
banquet begu^ in earth, shall be fulfilled in heaven.
meditations, should be unto us as the breathings of the mouth of God, to
kindle in our souls that little spark of the love of God, which alas, for
fault of entertainment, is almost over gone and extinguished with the ashes of
our corruption: for seeing our Savior longed to eat with us, shall not we
long to eat with him? he greatly desired to give himself to us in this table,
and for us on the cross; and shall not we earnestly desire to receive him? he
knew it was the last he should eat upon earth, and that after it, heavy
sufferings abode him: we know that our banqueting here, is the banquet that
shall be accomplished in heaven, it is begun here, it shall not end here.
Comfortable is that word of our Savior: it shall be Luke 22. 16
fulfilled in my kingdom; and will not we then joyfully begin this banquet?
shall we be so foolish as to wait upon lying vanities, and forsake our own
mercies? shall we turn our back upon the fountain Iona. 2. 8. Iere. 2. 13.
of living waters, and dig to our selves Cisterns that can hold no water?
certainly our darkness is grosser then the darkness of Egypt, and our hearts
harder then the Adamant, except this burning love of the Lord Jesus ravish
upward our hearts after him. The Can. 5. 8.
spouse in the Canticles professes she was sick of the love of her glorious
husband the Lord Jesus, but alas we are not touched with the like love, we
feel not the smell of his ointments, and Can. 1.
therefore with the rest of the Virgins we run not after him. Eliah touched
1. Kin. 19. 19
Elisha with his Mantle, and therwithall the Lord joined his inward calling,
and suddenly Elisha left his plough of Oxen, and of a husbandman became
Prophet. Now the Lord calls upon us by his word and Sacrament, let us also Romans
5.
pray, that the Lord would shed abroad in our hearts by his holy spirit, the
sense of that love of God; then should we neglecting all things run after
the Lord, seeking only to enjoy him. Worldlings, who tarry from Christ, if
they were touched with the sense of this love, would forsake all and follow him.


The men of this world marvel to beehold the sudden change of life, which is
made in the children of God by his effectual calling; they marvel to see them
running so fervently after Christ, seeking him by continuance in prayer, by
hearing of his word, by participation of his Sacrament, and that with such an
insatiable desire, that in this life they can never be satisfied with hearing,
reading, praying, and communicating: but if the Lord should in like manner
touch their hearts, and let them feel the power of an inward calling then would
they marvel no more, far less disdain, yea, they would make have, and
join themselves to the company of the godly: And Saul also 1. Sam. 19. 13
should become amongst the Prophets. The woman, who had lived before a
licentious Women would be changed like Mary Magdalen
life, would now change it with Mary Magdalene: she had been a great sinner
in the City, but became an example of Repentance to all the Luke. 7.
sinners in the City: she prostrates no more her body to her carnal Lovers,
but falls down at the feet of Christ, to crave his mercy; in stead of her
wanton looks, her eyes pour out tears, and her beautiful hair, which
before she set out as a proclaimer of her Lust, now she pulls down to wash
the feet of Christ. Thus all the former means of her sin, she makes new
witnesses of her repentance; the man in like manner, who had sat all his days
with Matthew at the receipt And sinful men should be changed like Matthew the
Publican.
of Custom, that is, who had lived in the sinful trade of unlawful gain,
would now in like manner forsake it: but where the Lord by effectual calling
works not in the heart an earnest love of God; no marvel they lie still in
the grave of their sins, and rise not to walk after the Lord. We are therefore
so much the more to use all the ordinary means, which may entertain in us that
little spark of the Love of God, till it grow up unto a great flame, for the
farther union and conjunction of our Souls with Jesus Christ: and this for our
disposition toward God.

As concerning our Christian disposition to our neighbor, it is usual to the
spirit of God, to comprise it under Love. Our Savior says, that love is the
Cognizance of his Disciples, and the Apostle calls it the band of perfection,
and fulfilling of the Law; and no marvel, for Love speaks with the tongue
of every Virtue. All the sundry precepts we are commanded to do unto our
neighbor, are summarily comprehended under this one, Love one another. As this
Sacrament seals up the Communion of the members with the head, so it seals
up the communion of the members among themselves: for this bread whereof we
eat, is of many grains of wheat made up into one bread; and the wine is the
juice of many berryes, collected and united into one, to teach us that all the
Communicants at this holy Table, how many soever they be, ought to agree
together in one, like members of one body, as having one Father, one Faith, one
Baptism, one Inheritance; as Brethren quickened all by one and the self same
spirit, (which is not to be found again in all the world, except in this
excellent brotherhood) Without Love we cannot be of the communion of Saints.
as we cannot be joined to the head without faith, so can we not be knit to
the members without Love. Stones and timber cannot make up a building till they
be joined, and sundry pieces of metal cannot be melted in one work without
fire; no more can Christians be united in one mystical body without Love, and
therefore our Savior at the celebration of this Sacrament recommended Love to
his Disciples, Ioh. 13. 34
by a new Commandment, which he so called, because it should never wax
old: yea, so much does he account of it, that he will accept no service we
owe to himself, without that duty of love we owe to our brethren. If thou
bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee, leave thy offering, go thy way, and first be reconciled to thy
brother, then come and offer thy gift. Of this it is evident, that without Love
to our brethren, we can do no acceptable service to the Lord. Of the effects
by which our love should be tried.


In this therefore, let us try and examine our selves, what compassion find
we in our hearts toward our brethren: what willingness to do them the good
we can, what love to bear one another burden: what readiness to forgive
when we are offended: what humbleness of mind to ask them forgiveness
against whom we have Gal. 6. 10.
sinned, practicing these precepts: While ye have time do good to all men.
And again forbear one another, forgive one Ephesians. 4.
another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. The Majesty of God
(suppose first offended) did first seek man Readiness to forgive rare to be
found.
to be reconciled with him; and shall man that has offended think evil to
seek his Brother to be reconciled with him? but alas are these fruits of
Godliness now to be found amongst men? if thou seek them thou shall Mich. 7.
1
find them, as the Summer gatherings, or as the grapes of a Uintage cut down;
though thy soul desire to eat the fruit thereof, thou shall not find it:
Psalm. 12.
for the good man is perished out of the earth, such as are Christians by
Christians live now like Jews and Samaritans of old.
name, they live like Jews, and the Samaritans of whom it is written that they
might not converse together: to forbear and forgive one another, to them are
precepts of an uncouth language, which they understand not: as a sparkle of
fire easily kindles a heap of powder, so a small offense remoueth all their
affections: they are not slow unto wrath like the Lord, and far less like him
in readiness to forgive. As men (says Lactantius) are mortal, so As men are
mortal so should their anger be.
should their anger be mortal: our Savior says, the Sun should not go
down upon our wrath: the Apostle commands us to be Children concerning anger
and maliciousness, who as they do not deeply co^eiue it, so they do not long
retain it, but are shorly familiar with them, with whom they were a little
before offended: but as it was doubted of Sylla, Sylla ne prior, an Sylla
iracundia sit extincta, so is it out of all doubt, that in many vipers of this
age, anger dies not, till they die themselves.

And as for doing of good to their Readiness to do good to others is as rare.
neighbors and brethren, they live in the world like monsters, or like those
Giants, The sons of Anack: they alone will be Lords of the earth, as if the
world were made for them only, or they at the least were borne for themselves.
Churlish like Nabal, shall I take (said he) my bread and my flesh, and give
unto David? all that they have Professors lives like the sons of Anack,
churlish Naball, or the rich glutton.
they account so to be theirs, as if they had not received it, or were not the
Lords stewards, bound to distribute to the necessities of his Saints; the rich
gluttons, they use it as a morsel for their own mouth: Now my soul thou have
enough for many days, let Lazarus find as he may: they think with Cain, they
are no keepers of their Brethren; That which dies let it die. These and Zac.
11. 9.
many more are the common and seen corruptions of this age: wherein we are to
examine our selves, how far the renewing grace of the Lord has made us to
depart from them, and what holy love we have put on: For he that 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
loves not, knows not God, because God is love; and he that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? hereby
we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
Brethren. And thus much we are content to have touched of our disposition
toward our neighbor.

Now last of all concerning our disposition in our selves, let us be sober,
esteeming basely of our selves, highly of the Lords mercy, hungring and
thirsting for his salvation, and in very deed the more we shall consider how
God has magnified his holy name by his marvelous mercies toward us, the more
shall we be compelled to cast down our selves before him in all humility
and submission of our spirits. When David promised to Mephiboseth 2. Sam. 9.
that he would show him kindness for Jonathan his fathers sake; Mephiboseth
humbled himself to the ground and said, what is thy servant that thou
should look to such a dog as I am? but here the Lord our God, not only
promises unto us kindness for his Son Christ Jesus sake, but presently
performs it, and inuesteth us again with our Fathers inheritance, which we
forfaited in Adam: and where we were of our own nature, but dead dogs,
unclean creatures, dead in sin and trespasses; Now behold what love Ephe. 2.
1. Ioh. 3. 1.
the Father has shown us: He has made us partakers of this heavenly
vocation, as to be hi^ sons and his heirs; and shall not we then in our
very hearts be humbled before him, acknowledge our great unworthiness and his
excellent mercies. Let us confess with Godly Jacob, I am not worthy (O Lord)
of the least of all thy Like Jacob and the Centurion the woman of Canaan and
Elizabeth.
mercies, and let every one of us say with the Centurion, I am not worthy Lord,
that thou should enter within my roof. Let us with the woman of Canaan,
acknowledge our own room, if the Lord should give us but the benefit of
vvhelps and dogs, that is, should suffer us to go under our masters Table,
and eat of the crummes that fall from it, yet were it more then any way we
have deserved, and how then are we bound to have our hearts and our mouths
filled continually with the praises of our God, who has bestowed upon us his
greatest mercies, when we were not worthy of the least; and has set us down
as Sons and Daughters and Heirs at the Table of his children, that were not
worthy as dogs and whelps to creep under it? have we not cause to cry out
with David, O Lord what is man that this manner of way thou art mindful of
him? Psalm. 8. Luke. 1.
Elizabeth maruailed that Mary came to visit her, and in the humility of her
heart cried out: Whence comes this Our humiliation necessarily required. for
effecting our union with God.
that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? but we have more cause to
marvel at the maruailous mercies of the Lord, for what are we that the fairest
among the Children of men should be delighted with our love, and our Lord
should come to visit the base estate of his Servants, and communicate himself,
his light, his life, and his grace unto us? Let no man think that I have
multiplied these places of scripture without a cause. The beginning of the
division between us and the Lord, slowed from the pride of our nature; and
unless we humble our selves, and be content in our mind to sit lower then
dust and ashes, by reason of our sin it is not possible we can be united with
the Lord, This is the council that in fevv words, Michah gives unto us,
Mich. 6. 8.
He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee;
surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with
thy God. The Lord is indeed a most high God, yet he is nearest unto them, and
they go soonest up unto him, who are least in their own eyes, and tremble at
his words. With this humiliation, we should have also an hungring for the
Lords salvation.


And beside this inward humiliation arising of the sense of our own
unworthiness, let us come with a hunger and thirst of the Lord his
righteousness and salvation: For he will satisfy the hungry, but the full he
sends away empty: only they that have the spiritual appetite, hunger and
thirst, are meet to be communicants Luke 1. 53.
at this holy table. As that oil multiplied by Elisha, ceased not so long as
the widow had any vessel wherein to receive it: so shall never that oil of
grace decay, but be multiplied and increased unto all that with open and
enlarged hearts are ready to receive it. Thou therefore, who art more ready to
faint for spiritual hunger then was Jonathan, come hither, put out the hand of
faith, eat of this honey and make thee full; and thou that For the Lord fills
the hungry and strengthe^s them who are ready to faint.
art sick (with the Spouse in the Canticles) for the love of Jesus, come
hither and the Lord shall stay thee with the flagons of his wine. Art thou
almost dead like that Egyptian, the Servant of an Amalekite, whom David found
in the fields, take and eat of this bread, and thy Spirit shall return again
unto thee? But alas, where is this spiritual appetite to be found amongst us?
the deadnes of our heart is lamentable, we see not our wants; we see not his
beauty; we smell not his ointments; we taste little of his goodness, and
therefore we make not have to run after him. David mourned over the 2. Sam. 3
33.
dead body of Abner, but alas (if we could) we have much more cause to mou^ne
over our dead souls. Oh that there were in us that holy desire which David
protests to have been in him: My soul faints for the salvation Psalm. 42.
of God: As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, and thirsty ground
desires rain, so my soul pants after the living God. Blessed are they who
hunger Math. 5.
and thirst for his righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

These only are the guests and banquetters that shall eat of the delicates
which here he has prepared, and whose soul shall be delighted with his
fatness. These shall go from this Table, as Moses came down from Mount
Sinai, and his countenance changed. They shall arise with Eliah, and walk on
in the strength of this bread all the whole days of their pilgrimage. They
shall go on in their way with Sampson, eating of the honey which they have
found. They shall depart from this Table, as the two Maryes did from Luke 18. 4.
the Sepulcher with great joy. These shall go home to their own houses,
justified with the Publican, rejoicing because they have found a treasure, and
has felt the sweetness of this Manna: they shall not be able to conceal
this great joy from Israel, but shall be forced 2. King. 7.
to tell every Nathaniell whom they meet: We have found the Messiah. And John.
1.
in all time to come their soul shall cleave to the Lord without separation,
1. Cor. 7. 35.
more straightly then the men of Judah and Jerusalem cleaued unto David their
2. Sam. 5.
King. They shall say to the Lord, as Elizeus said to Eliah; As the Lord
lives, 2. King. 2. 2.
and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee, and with Peter, whither O Lord,
shall John. 6. 68.
I go from thee, seeing thou have the words of eternal life? The Lord work
this spiritual disposition in us for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the
Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise and glory for ever.

FINIS.
A Table wherein all the Chapters of the three forenamed Books are
particularly set down.
1. Jacobs wrestling with God.
A Privilege of the Godly, that say God is with them, none can be against
them to hurt them. Chap. 1 Gods fatherly compassion appears in that he handles
us most tenderly when we are weakest. Chap. 2 The cause moving the Lord to
appear to Jacob at this time. Chap. 3 The first circumstance, the time of the
wrestling. Chap. 4 The second circumstance, the persons between whom the
wrestling is. Cha. 5 Consolations for the Godly afflicted. Chap. 6 Comfort for
Christ's soldiers. Chap. 7 The third circumstance, the manner of the wrestling,
corporal, spiritual, or mixed. Chap. 8 How we should behave our selves in this
tentation, we are taught. Chap. 9 Let us ever lean to the word of God, how
strange soever his work seem unto us. Chap. 10 Verse. 25. And when he saw
that he could not prevail. Chap. 11 Verse. 26. And he said, let me go. Chap. 12
What notable effects the felt presence of God brings with it. Chap. 13 The
presence or absence of God, is ever dispensed for the weal of his own
Children. Chap. 14 How their inward exercises of conscience, works in the
godly a diuorcement of their souls from all Creatures, and a nearer adherent
to the Lord. Cha. 15 Prayers of the Godly must be forcible and acceptable to
God, seeing they come from his own Spirit. Chap. 16 Jacob cannot end till God
have blessed him. Chap. 17 Faith through death espies life. Chap. 18 The Godly
in their prayers, above all things seek Gods favor and blessing. Chap. 19
Worldlings in their Prayers dishonor God, and preiudges themselves. Chap. 20
Faith obtaines every good thing that it craves. Chap. 21 Verse. 27. Then he
said. It is the curse of the wicked to pray and not prevail, but it is not so
with the Godly. Chap. 22 The Lord by inward exercises of conscience makes his
children strong to endure outward troubles which come from men. Chap. 23 It is
a sinful curiosity to seek to know that which God has not taught us.
Chap. 24 Verse. 29. And Jacob asked, What is thy name? The Lord sometimes
refuses to give that which his children seeks, that he may give them other
things more convenient for them. Chap. 25 How Jacob shows himself thankful
to God for the benefits received in two things. Chap. 26 Verse 30. And Jacob
called the name of the place Peniell, etc. What sight of God shall we have in
the heavens? Chap. 27 The other thing wherein Jacob shows his thankfulness,
is his obedience. Chap. 28 Verse 31. And the Sun arose to him.
The Table of the second Book, entitled, A Conduit of Comfort.
Romans 8. 28.
ALso we know that all things work together for the best, to them that love
God; even to them who are called according to his purpose. Chap. 1 The
Privileges of a Christian, cannot be known of them who do not possess them.
Chap. 2 Many working Instruments of contrary qualities and intentions in the
world, yet agrees all in one end. Chap. 3 All Satan's stratagems, work for the
best to the Godly. Chap. 4 How Death also works for the best to Christians.
Chap. 5. How the plots and imaginations of men work for the best to the
christian. Chap. 6 What is a Christians best. Chap. 7 The Christian is not at
his best now: it is the working only. Chap. 8 All things work to the worst,
to the wicked. Chap. 9 How the Christian is made sure of his Election and
Glorification. Chap. 10 What comfort we have in this, that our salvation is
grounded on the Lords unchangeable purpose. Chap. 11 Two callings: outward, and
inward. Chap. 12 Of the inward calling. Chap. 13 In the inward calling, the
Lord begins at the illumination of the mind. Chap. 14 The love of God a sure
token of an inward calling, and of the commendation of Love. Chap. 15 The first
trial of Love. Chap. 16 The second trial of Love. Chap. 17 The last trial of
Love. Chap. 18

The Table of the third Book, entitled, A Preparatiue for the new Passcouer.
OF the seruent desire Christians have to be united with Christ. How
inexcusable they are who neglect this holy sacrament. The great danger in
coming unprepared. The parts of the precept: first, that we try: secondly,
that we eat: the last handled first. Chap. 1 Ignorance the mother of all
recusancie to communicate. The Reasons of diverse Resusals condemned. Better
Excuses rejected by Christ in the Gospel then these. They consent not to the
Marriage of the Lamb, who refuse the smallest token of his love. Chap. 2 Three
Rules to be observed in the right descerning the Lords body. First, that every
thing in this Sacrament be taken in his own kind. Who fails in this and how.
Secondly, that this Sacrament be used according to Christ's institution. How the
Papists fail in this. Thirdly, that this Sacrament be used to right ends, and
those ends set down. The conclusion of the first part of the precept. Chap. 3
The second part of the precept commands trial before we Communicate. The Lord
will not that this Table be a snare to us, as was Absalom to Ammon.
Banquetters at this Table should be holy persons. Chap. 4 Unreuerent handling
of holy things has never been left unpunished. The Lord will not show his
presence without preparation. The excellency of this Sacrament, and an
exhortation to come unto it with reverence. Chap. 5 Not to put new wine into
old Uessels. Comfort for the tender conscience cast down with the sight of sin
after trial: two sorts of trials: the one of things perfect, the other of
things imperfect. Daily trial most necessary. Chap. 6 What a laborious work is
enjoined a man when he is commanded to try himself. Two things necessary for
this trial: First, the Spirit of God: Secondly, the Word of God. Many try
themselves by wrong Rules, and are so deceived. Chap 7 The points of
preparation are two: First, that we lay aside our old sins: Secondly, that
we put on the new Christian disposition, consisting in three things. First,
that toward God we be holy and heavenly minded. Secondly, that toward our
neighbors we be loving: Thirdly, that we be sober and little in our own
eyes. The comfortable fruit arising to us at this holy Table. Chap. 8
FINIS.
Psalm. 36. 7. How excellent is thy mercy O LORD? therefore the children of men
trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied with the fatness
of thine house, and thou shall give them drink out of the rivers of thy
pleasures.

Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to come to
thee, he shall dwell in thy courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures
of thine house.

Revel. 1. 5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father, to him be
Glory, and Dominion for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

