CHRIST HIS CROSS OR THE MOST COMFORTABLE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST crucified, and
joyful tidings of his Passion, teaching us to love, and embrace his Cross, as
the most sweet and celestial doctrine unto the soul, and how we should
behave our selves therein according to the word of God.

NEWLY PUBLISHED BY JOHN ANDREWS Minister and Preacher of the word of God at
Barricke Basset in the County of Wiltes.

Wherein is contained, first the chief and principal motives and causes, that
should move and stir us up to the earnest meditation of his Passion.
Secondly, with what mind we should come to this meditation. Thirdly, how
diverse and manifold is the meditation of the passion. The fourth part
entreats of the Types, and Figures contained in the old Testament, touching
the Passion of Christ.

HEB. 13. 8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day; and the same also is for ever.

PSALM. 119. 103. O how sweet are thy words unto my throat!
Yea sweeter then honey unto my mouth.
Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, Renowned, High, and mighty Monarch, JAMES, our dread
Sovereign, by the grace of God King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the says, etc. All grace, true honor, continual health, joyful
prosperity, with all other princely virtues in this life, and the crown of
glory, through the mercy of Jesus Christ, in the life to come.
MOST Gracious and Dread Sovereign, unworthy (I know) are these my endeavors,
either to be shrouded from the prejudice of contempt, under your Royal
Majesty's protection, (a Prince of so great magnanimity and judgment) or
offered unto your learned view; yet your continual bountifulnes and daily
favors toward good learning (especially ifit savor of divinity) as it does
exceed your Roialty or greatness, so will it also (I trust) excuse my boldness
in this my humble entreating your gracious Patronage of this my first and
unlearned Treatise, the which being rawly comprised in a few scattered leaves,
and as rudely composed in a sort of scribled and unlettered lines, the out ward
haske whereof, although it be far unlike the lordly gift that Aconitanus
offered unto Alphonsus king of Aragon, being unpolished, may seem unpleasant,
yet (no doubt) the inward kernel once tasted, and well digested, may prove
cordial, and right fruitful. And although I cannot with ramping Lions run in
with mighty prays; yet with the little Ant by hawling in my wheaten grain, I
am ready pressed to signify the force of my love, and loyalty toward your most
excellent Majesty. And thus in all humility, I beseech your Highness to accept
this mite of my poor labors: so shall I (if God spare me life) be comforted
and encouraged, under so mighty a favourer, to proceed in the like studies;
and according to my bounde^ duty, incessantly with all humility pray unto
almighty God (by whom both Kings and Princes reign) to his glory not only to
preserve your Grace, in Royal throne of Monarchy upon earth, but also to be
far more adorned, to reign with a celestial crown of glory in the
kingdom ofheauen.

Your Royal Majesty's faithful and ever loyally devoted subject, Io. ANDREWS.

TO THE CHRISTIAN REAder, health in the Lord.
RIght well says the Wiseman, (gentle Reader) that there is nothing new under
the Sun; and further, that there is no end of writing books: for, how soever
in a generality the subject of any knowledge be declared, yet the particulars,
that may be gathered out of the same, be so many, as new or more matter may
be produced to write thereof again; and, as Horace also affirms, it is hard
to entreat of any subject, that has not been formerly handled by some other.
Wherefore seeing that of all the benefits that ever Almighty God bestowed on
man from the creation of the world, as there is none more glorious and
admirable, the^ the giving of his own dear, and welbeloved Son to us, and for
us to be crucified: so likewise I thought it best to bestow these my first
labors in the meditation of his passion; because that of all the duties that
man can do, or are required of man to be done unto God, there is none so high,
nor so acceptable unto him, as to embrace the same, his crucified, and
passionate son by faith in our hearts, (which must not only be done for our
own practice, or private use, but also to endeavor our selves, to help and
further others in the same.) For, it is the only doctrine, that avails with
God, the key also to bind and loose sinners, the touchstone to try all
doctrines, the lantern and light that scatters and expels the mist and
darkness of all hypocrisy, and a preservatiue against all error and heresy,
the mother of all goodworkes, the earnest of everlasting life, and title
whereby we challenge our inheritance. And also, it is the only motive, that I
might in all humbleness of duty, with these or such like meditations, end and
spend the rest of my time in the divine service of my Lord Jesus, that has
called me from teaching of School, and brevity in writing, to become a
Minister, for to instruct, and labor in the vineyard of the Lord. Wherefore
(Gentle Reader) if I, that spent the whole prime of my youth in that form or
faculty, be now applied unto better labors, think though it be Sero, yet it
is Serio; and though these my first endeavors begin but in the Autumn, or
declining of my age, yet doubt not, by the help of God they will continue the
time of my whole life. Hoping you will grace me with your favorable suspense,
until my deeds prove my doctrine; in which hope I kindly present you this
Treatise, entitled my Saviors Cross. The which if you balance with the zeal
of my mind, I shall be sure you will not mislike it, in regard of the matter,
although happily you may find some distaste in the method. For, what can be
more commodious to reviue, and preserve the soul of a good Christian, then a
serious meditation in the doctrine of our Saviors bitter Passion? which is the
sum of my small and unlearned Treatise. Wherefore if you look in the book of
God, where this my draught would draw you, you would not only find there
sufficient salve to cure your own soul, which conteines the full satisfaction
of these my labors; but also it would be a motive to animate me forwards to
continue my endeavor in the like studies. In which hope of your zealous
pervsing and daily practicing of the same, I commit my self, and my book, to
your favorable censure, praying the Almighty, to give you such spiritual
refreshing unto your soul, that neither Satan may deceive you, nor the Law
terrify you, but that you may rightly enjoy the abundance of Gods mercies.
Vale in Christo.

John Andrews.

THE FIRST PART.
What the chief and principal motives be, which should enforce and stir up
all of us to the earnest meditation of the Passion of Christ.

THe first motive is the severe commandment of Almighty God, which he gave to
Adam, saying, Thou shall eat freely of all the trees in the garden, but of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat thereof. Which
commandment if he had not violated, he had yet holden that goodly Eden, and
pleasant Paradise, wherein he was seated as Vicegerent, and sole supreme
^overaigne over the whole world. Where no^e, what harm and inco^venience our
first Parent purchased us, by the breaking that one commandment, which was
given unto him: if he had carefully observed that one, then had not our
Savior Christ suffered his death, and passion on the Cross, for our sins;
neither had the other ten commandments been imposed upon us. As if he should
have said, in the severitie of his justice, looking upon the guilt of Adams
sin; have I given thee but one commanndement o Adam, and could not thou
observe that? Now therefore, I will charge and enioine a greater matter unto
thy seed after thee; I will charge them with ten commandments. Whereby we may
note, that it was not so much the eating of an Apple that God respected, (when
he plagued A^a^,) as the breach of his commandment, the which He has charged
that Psalm. 119 4.
we should keep diligently. Wherefore the contempt and breach thereof, is the
more dangerous unto us: for, if they were punished in Adam, and so many
millions of Gen 3 17.
people, for once breaking of them; nay, If God spared not the Angels that
sinned, (which were a thousand degrees 2. Pet. 2. 4.
before us,) but cast them down into hell, oh! what Job. 4 18. Iud. 6.
shall we look for then, which have oftentimes broken them, and committed so
many sins against him? If the poor man was punished even unto death, for
gathering a few sticks on the Saboth day, and Vzza for touching the holy Arc,
and Saul for sparing Agag king of Number. 15. 32. 36. 2. Sam. 6. 7. 1. Sam. 15. 2.
8.
the Amalekites (notwithstanding their good meanings and intents) how careful
ought every one of us to be in observing them. Discamus igitur fratres, let us
therefore learn brethren, and thoroughly consider the first cause that should
stir us up unto the earnest meditation of the passion of Christ. Which is (I
say) the severe commandment of Almighty God: which speaks by Moses, saying,
These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, yea and in
thy soul, and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, that they may
be as frontlets between thine eyes, that ye may Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
meditate upon them both at home and abroad, and when Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
thou risest in the morning Deuteronomy 6. 6.
. Likewise our Savior speaking to a rich man says, If thou will enter into
life keep the commandments Mat. 19. 17.
. Job loved to keep Gods commandments so perfectly, that he esteemed them
more then his appointed food Job. 23. 12.
. And Christ himself says, whosoever shall break one of these least
commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven Prove 19. 16.
: But to our comforts he adds further and says, whosoever shall observe and
teach men these commandments, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven Mat 5. 19.
, therefore says he, If ye love me, keep my commandments, for he that loves
my commandments and keeps them, loves me, and he that loves me, shall be
beloved of my father, and I will not only love him (says our Savior) but will
also show my self unto him, and dwell with him Ioh 14 15. Ioh. 14 21. Ioh. 14.
23.
. Wherefore says David, I will meditate upon the law of God both day and night
Psalm. 1. 2.
. And so is Timothy likewise willed by his master Paul to meditate, Haec
meditare, meditate, ponder, and consider of these things 2 Timothy 3. 14.
, and be not ashamed of the testimony of the Lord 2. Tim. 1. 8.
. Thus meditation upon Gods laws and commandments has always been the
ordinary exercise of the godly. David says, I did meditate upon thy
commandments which I loved, o Lord how have I loved thy law, it is my
meditation all the day long Psalm. 119 97.
. And with what fervent, and vehement zeal he uses to make his meditations,
he shows, when he says of himself, my heart did wax hot within me, and
fire did kindle in my meditations Psalm. 39. 4.
, yea the very zeal of thine house, has even eaten me up Psalm. 69 9.
. Thus we may plainly see, not only by the example of Moses Deuteronomy 6. 6. Deuteronomy
11. 18.
, Job Job. 23 13.
, and Paul ^ T^m. 4. 13. 15.
, but also the vehemence of the Prophet David Ps 39 4.
may most co^fortably show us, how we ought to let the very entire love of our
souls Sol song 3. 3
bend unto the Lord in our daily meditations Psalm. 1. 2.
, that Christ may dwell in our hearts Ioh. 14 13.
, and be the very life of our souls Eccle 23. 4. Ioh. 14 6.
, whereby we may behold the fair beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27 4.
and make him our chief delight Cant 1. 6.
, our sweet solace Wis. 16 21.
our Lord God Heb. 11. 16. Ier 24 7. Ps 7 1. 3. Mat. 4 7. 16.
, and the very glory of our souls Psalm. 62. 7.
. Thus God would have us to meditate upon his commandments, laws, and
prophecies, that thereby the great benefits of him, and his son might be
known, and also reverently celebrated and meditated upon of all mankind; as it
is written, Narrabo nomen tuum, I will declare thy name unto my brethren Psalm.
22. 22.
, one generation shall praise thy works unto another Ps. 145. ^4.
: and he ordained a law in Israel, that they should teach their children the
same, and that their posterity might know it, and their children which were
yet unborn; to the intent that when they came up, they might show it unto
their children Ps 78 7, 8.
. Likewise Moses commands, that they should rehearse them unto their
children, and to their childrens children continually Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
. In like manner S. Paul commends his scholar Timothy, for that he had
known the Scripture of a child 2 Timothy 3. 18. 2. Tim. 1 5.
, and that he had learned the faith, that was in him of his grandmother Lois,
and his mother Eunice: whereby it appears, what diligent care they had in
bringing him up in good learning, knowledge, and faithfulness in religion. And
Solon the lawmaker amongst the Athenians made a law, that the child whose
father never Solon.
regarded to bring him up in good knowledge, exercises, and learning, should
not be bound to succor or relieve his father, no not in any respect, what
need so ever he were in. It is good therefore (says the Wiseman) that parents
should not only exercise themselves in Gods commandments, but also have their
children taught in the trade of their way, while they are young, that when they
are old, they should not depart from it Prove. 22 6.
, but continue Col 4 2.
in their way as children of light Ephesians 5 8.
, that they may be perfect to do the will of their Father Heb 13. 21.
which is in heaven 1 Pet. 3. 22.
; that he may make them swift to hear his word Iam. 1. 19. Romans 2. 13. Eccl 4.
17.
and carefully prepare themselves to give thanks and praise unto God the
father in the name of his son Jesus Christ Ephesians 5. 20.
, which is the giver of all things John. 3. 27.
, and thus indeed, to this end is man created, that he should continually with
thankfulness set forth the praises of Almighty God, as the Prophet David
says, let every thing that has breath praise the Lord Ps. 159 6.
. Not, that God has any need of our praise, Act 17. 25.
but it is needful for us to praise him; Philip. 2. 13. Ier. 10 23. Ioh. 15 5.
that thereby we may obtain grace and favor at his blessed hands. The Sun
has no need of our aspect to behold him, yet we have need of his heat and
cleerenesse that thereby we may be comforted with his brightness, and
cherished with his heat. Moreover David asks the Lord, saying, What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? (and answering himself,
adds) I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I
will (says the Prophet) praise the Lord with my whole heart, and call upon him
so long as I live Ps. 116. 12. 13
, viz. for his benefits. Thus in our prayers and daily meditations upon Gods
commandments, we ought to obey his will therein diligently Luke 10. 27. Deuteronomy.
6. 5. Luke 19. 18.
, embrace it dutifully Mar. 1. 18.
, and to the very utmost of our power keep his commandments effectually Ioh.
2. 3. Heb. 10. 7.
, that thereby we may avoid the snares of death, Prove. 22. 24.
and think not to live forever in the deceitful cradle of security Esa. 47.
7.
, which dandleth careless men in the lap of folly Eccle. 2. 2.
. But with all diligence keep Gods commandments with as great and entire love
as the careless Ninivits had to Jonas preaching Jonah. 3. 5.
, the desperate soldiers to John's sermon Luke 3. 14. 15
, and the obstinate Israelits to Peter's persuasion Act. 2. 37.
; yea, continue daily in the earnest meditation thereof; as willing as the
Macedonians were in the hearing of Paul, when they continued his doctrine
until midnight Act. 20. 7.
, or as the Eunuch in giving ear to Philips sermon Act. 8. 38.
, or Cornelius the Captain with a great multitude were to hear Peter Act. 10.
25.
. We read that K. Agrippa almost became a Christian at once hearing of Paul
Act. 26. 27. Romans 12. 1.
. Oh then let it be far from the heart of a Christian, that may hear, read,
and daily meditate upon Gods Commandments, to prove so ungrateful, as quite
to forget, and not once to think or meditate upon the same, a benefit so great
and infinite. Finally let our hearts be pricked on with the feeling of Gods
incomprehensible mercies toward us, in our daily meditations Ps. 1. 2.
; encouraged by his gracious promises of accepting our poor endeavors to do
him service 1. Cor. 15. 58
, yea ravished with the expectation of such a reward as is assured us, by the
death and passion of Jesus Christ Ephesians 1. 7. Col. 2. 13. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. 1. Pet 2.
24. Esa. 53 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
. And withal, let us be ashamed of our selves in doing no more Ps. 16. 2.
Mat. 25. 36.
, and condemn the carelessness of our own hearts for doing our best works so
imperfectly Ps. 130 3. Ps. 143. 2. Dan 9 7. 8. Luk 21. 36. Mat. ^4 42. Mich 6
6. Romans 11. 25. Romans 12. Mat 10. Prove. 4 13. Eccl. 25. 5.
. What shall J more say? seeing the whole course and canon of Scripture runs
that all Christians in their keeping of Gods Commandments should be Attenti,
vigilantes, soliciti, instantes, ferventes, perseverantes, sine intermissione;
that is, Attent, vigilant, careful, instant, fervent, and perseverant, without
intermission of the service of God; because therein is contained Fons vitae,
radix prudentiae, corona and plenitudo sapientiae, gloria and gaudium quod est
felicissimum donum, that is, the fountain of life, the root of prudence, the
crown and fullness of wisdom, the glory and joy which is the most happiest
that can be given to man. A blessed gift! what will thou desire more, to move
thee toward the meditation of the passion of Christ?

THe second motive is the Dignity, the Majesty, and highness of the person
suffering for us. It was not the African Scipio, nor Hanibal, nor the
peerless Pompey, nor the mighty Persian Cyrus, nor Darius, nor the renowned
Marius, nor the Macedonian conquering Monarch Emperious Alexander, neither yet
Caesar, that in the Senate house received of sixty conspiratours 23 wounds,
and every of them mortal: But it is Jesus the Creator and preserver of all
mankind Ps. 33. 12.
, it is that Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending, which is, and which
was, and which is to come Rev. 1. 8. Rev. 18. 17. Rev. 11. 17. Esa. 44 6. Esa
48. 12.
, even the Almighty, which was crowned with glory and honor Heb. 2. 9.
, at whose name all knees shall how Phil. 2. 10.
, and at whose feet the four and twenty Elders laid down their crowns Rev.
4. 10.
, it is the strong God Ps 24 8.
, the God of power S^p. 12 16.
, the high and most mighty God Ephesians 2. 14.
, yea the mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah Deuteronomy 32. 39.
, the Prince of peace Ephesians. 2. 14 Heb. 2. 10.
, the conqueror of death Hos. 13. 14. 1. Cor 15. 54.
, Hell Heb. 2. 14
, and sin Genesis 18. 25.
, yea the great judge of the world Pet. 2. 25
, and bishop of our souls 1. Pet. 2. 25.
, Christ Jesus our Savior Ier. 17. 10
: it is he, that is Lord of Hosts, the righteous judge, that tries the reins
and hearts of all men Ioh 14 6.
: it is he that is the way, the truth, the light, and the door to enter into
heaven John 14 6.
, if any man enter in by him he shall be saved Ioh. 10 9.
: it is he that is the prevailing seed of the woman, which was promised in
Paradise by God the Father unto Adam saying, semen mulieris conteret caput
Serpentis, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head Genesis 3 15.
: it is he whom David wills us to kiss and embrace least he be angry Ps 2.
12.
. It is he that is Lord of Lords, and king of kings Rev. 17. 14.
, yea the spiritual Rock whom all our forefathers did eat and drink of 1.
Cor. 10. 3.
: it is he who is acknowledged and confessed by his greatest enemy, to be the
son of the most high God Mark 5. 7.
, in whom God the father said I am well pleased Mat 3. 17.
: it is the Lamb of God pointed at by John, and sent to take away all the sins
of the world Ioh i. 29.
; it is he that freely forgave his servant the ten thousand talents that he
owed unto him Mat. 18. 27.
: finally it is he that is the only mediator between God and man 1. Tim. 2 5.
, he is the Author, and finisher of our faith Heb. 12. 2.
, and without him we can do nothing Ioh 15 5. Ambros. de Isaac and anima lib.
.

And as S. Ambrose says, Ipseos nostrum est, per quod ad patrem loquimur,
oculus noster per quem patrem videmus, dextra nostra, per qua^ nos patri
offerimus; he is our mouth wherewith we speak unto God, our eyes where with we
see God, and our right hand wherewith we offer our selves unto God; who says
by the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 50. 7.
I gave my back unto the smiters, and my cheeks unto the nippers, I hid not
my face from shame and spitting, and I have hardened my face like a flint stone;
yea I alone have trodden down the winepresse, and there was not an Esa. 33. 3.
helper, neither King nor Kesar, neither Cherubin nor Seraphin, neither Angel
nor Archangel, says the Lord our redeemer, whose name is from everlasting, yea
I my self, says he, have done it. In which verse Christ yields a reason of
his new and strange habit, and of the bloody color mentioned in the first
verse. A matter differing as it should seem from mercy; wherefore the Church
is moved to ask the question, saying, what means thine apparel, red?
importing, I know not what, threatening or danger. In the answer whereof for
that there lies an Allegory, it is more plainly to be expounded thus. That
in his anger he would tread down under foot, and destroy all the enemies of
him and the Church. A very artificious and skilful speech for the expressing
both of the power of Christ, and severitie of his judgment. I, says this
great and excellent person whom we speak of, by the Prophet, yea I will spurn
and tread them under foot: setting down through the vehemence and greatness
of his affection, none in special, but indeed understanding all his enemies
whatsoever. And the^ speaking by another figure, the blood, says he, of them
shall be sprinkled upon my vesture: that is, as Christ comes with his garment
dipped in blood, as one that came from Bozrah, and all the fiends in hell, like
Bulls of Basan, ran upon him, yet through his magnanimity and worthiness in
glory, he makes their horns to stick fast in the tree of his Cross, as
Abraham's Rams horns did in the bush, and Genesis 22. 13. 1. Macab 6. 46
so he kills them; but he did it in one manner as Daniel killed the Dragon or
Eleazer the Elephant, that is, they died both together, even so that great
enemy the Devil, in killing Christ, is killed himself; but Christ being a
mighty person, both God and man; and far stronger then the Dragon, stronger
then the Elephant; and stronger then the Devil kills the Devil, and yet
lives himself. Even as the Phoenix of Arabia when she prepares her self to
death, sings, Moritur, me no^ moriente, senectus, old age dies in me, and I
die not: so Christ being immortal in himself, dies not, though death and
mortality dies in him; but like as Noah's branch flourished Genesis 8. 11.
in the waters, and Aarons rod, that budded in the Number. 17. 10. Heb. 9 4. Exodus
3. 2.
pot, and Moses bush, that burned and was not consumed; so Christ when he
seemed most dead, he most lived, and like as David hackt of Golias head with
his own sword, so Christ killed the Devil, even with his own weapon, that is,
with death: as the Apostle says, Christ by his death did not only overcome
death, but potestatem Heb. 2. 14.
mortis, him that had the power of death.

THe third Motive is the weakness of our Nature, when we shall find that we are
continually subject to sinning to offending, to erring and conceiving amiss of
the will of God, to our eternal damnation.

Man is borne in iniquity (says David,) and conceived Ps. 51. 5.
in sin; for the corn of evil seed has been sown in the heart 2. Esd. 4. 30.
Genesis 8. 21. Romans 7. 23.
of Adam from the beginning: yea all the imaginations of man's heart are evil
from his youth; and his natural inclination leads him captive: Wherefore
Augustine speaking of the miserable estate and condition of man, sets it down
in a Bestiall resemblance and spiritual bondage; August. lib. 6. conf. cap. 12.
who being free, became captive and bound, Ligatus eram non ferro, sed mea
ferrea voluntate; It was not iron (says he) that troubled me, but my hard and
stubborn iron mind that captivated and enthralled me. He adds August. lib.
8.
farther and says, that his passions would needs persuade him, (before his
conversion,) that he should never be able to abide the Austerity of a virtuous
life, especially touching the sins of the flesh: wherein he had lived wantonly
until that time; it seemed impossible that he could abandon the same, and live
chastely, which notwithstanding he felt easy, pleasant, and without difficulty
afterward: for the which he breaks out into these words, my God let me
remember and confess thy great mercies toward me, yea let my bones rejoice
and say; O Lord who is like unto thee, thou have broken my Ps. 113. 5.
chains, and therefore I will sacrifice unto thee a sacrifice of thanksgiving.

And S. Bernard speaking of the miseries and weakness of man, describes his
miseries three ways, saying, Bernard in his 7 Sermon. of the coming of Christ.
^f we would discern between good and evil, we are deceived, If we go about
to do good, we quickly faint, if we endeavor to resist evil we cannot endure,
but are easily overcome. The consideration of which frailty and misery made
our Savior Christ graciously to admonish his disciples saying, watch and pray
least ye fall into temptation. Mat. 26. 41.
The third motive therefore that should stir us up to the earnest meditation
of the Passion of Christ is (l say) our extreme need, and misery, that being
conceived and borne in sin, we are guilty of the wrath of God, of bodyly and
spiritual, of outward and inward, of temporal and eternal punishment, subject
to daily and howrely perils and dangers, environed with enemies, the Devil, the
flesh, and the world, the world does allure us, the flesh deceive us, and the
Devil seduce us. Here now our only comfort and safest refuge is the Passion of
Christ, in whom, and by whom, we have al things; wherefore mark I pray you, if
thou desire to be cured of thy forenamed miseries, he is thy Physician, if Ier.
33. 16. Isa 42. 6. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ps. 24. 8. Eccl. 23. 4. Ioh. 1. 9. Ioh. 14. 6.
thou be grieved with the burden of thy sin, he is thy righteousness, if thou
lack help, he is strength, if thou fear death he is thy life, if thou be in
darkness, he is thy light; if thou will go into heaven he is thy way, if thou
seek meat he is thy nourishment, he has borne our infirmities and carried
our sorrows, that is, our punishment due for Esa. 53. 4.
our sins, for the which he has made satisfaction for us. He has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for us, for he has put out
the handwriting Gal. 3. 13.
that was against us, contained in the law, which was contrary to us, even he
took it out of the way, and fastened it Col. 2. 14.
upon the Cross, and has spoiled the principalities, and powers, and has
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in the same Cross. And as the
people which in the wilderness were stung with the fiery Serpent and so
inflamed with the heat thereof that they stood in danger of death, yet looking
upon the brazen Serpent set up Number. 21. 69. Ioh. 3. 14 4. King. 18. 4.
by Moses upon the pole, were healed, and recovered their strength: Even so
whosoever lifts up his heart by faith unto the wounds of Christ, shall not
feel his own, because the blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed us from all 1.
Ioh. 1. 7. 2. Cor. 5. 15. Rev. 17.
our sin; yea he has so loved us, that he has washed us from our sins in his
blood. What shall I more say? if thou seek for cleansing thy self from thy
sins, it is in his blood; Heb. 11. 32.
if thou seek for newness of life, it is in his resurrection; 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
if thou seek for relief of thy curse, it is in his cross; if thou seek for
reconciliation, it is in his going down Apoc. 15. Gal. 3. 13.
into hell; if thou seek for mortification of the flesh, it is in his burial;
if thou seek for thine inheritance of Zach. 9. 11. Ioh. 19. 40. Romans 8. 33. 34.
the kingdom of heaven, it is in his very entrance into heaven: finally since
the treasures of al good things proceed from him, let us not seek them at the
hands of the blessed Virgin Mary, nor of Paul, nor yet of Peter, nether of any
other Saint whatsoever; but only at the hands of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
suffered his death on the Cross for us; in who^ we may assure our selves, that
what pains, torments, or death, soever he suffered, it was for our redemption
which were dead in our sins before; and that all his righteousness through faith
is made our righteousness; for he himself alone, has fully discharged by his
death, the debt which all we owed, and has made us by his passionate
obedience, Gal. 3 26. Gal. 4 7.
the sons of God, and fellow heirs with him of eternal life.

Oh therefore let us not forget so great an inheritance, but take an example of
those in the Desert, who having but a glimmering of light, being purblinde, and
as it were half sighted, yet if they could with their little sight, perceive
and behold the Serpent (which was a type and figure of Christ) they were all
cured. Even Number. 21. 9.
so let not thy forenamed miseries dismay thee, for if thou have but a little
faith, if it were but as much as a grain of mustard seed, thou shall by
looking up with the eyes of thy mind, unto the Passion of Christ, be most
joyfully comforted, and relieved. Oh! da aman. tem, says S. Augustine
(speaking of this matter) et sentit Augustine.
quod dico, sin autem frigido loquor nescit quid loquor, give me a man that is
in love with God, and he feels this to be true which I say; but if I talk to
a cold christian, he knows not what I say. Again S. Augustine speaking of
himself, Turbabor, says he, sed non perturbabor, I shall be troubled, but not
overcome, because I Augustine.
will daily think upon, and call to mind, the wounds of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

There is a threefold comfort against the temptation of the Devil, the flesh,
and the world: which daily labors to attempt, trap, cause and procure us to
sin, that we may forget our duty and remembrance, which we ought to have on the
Passion of Christ.

Our first comfort is in this, that we have not sinned against the^, but they
have offended against us; seeing that which we do, we do it rather through
the instinct of them; therefore tempt, accuse, and condemn us too they cannot.
Therefore David says, tibi soli peccavt, to thee O Lord have I sinned, and
done this evil Ps 51. 4.
in thy sight. Secondly, that I hide not, but confess all these things whereof
I am accused: yea I do accuse mine own self and say, Tibi Domine iustitia,
nobis co^fusio facie i, To thee O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness,
and unto us good Lord shame and confusion. And as the Beggar in the high ways,
shows and lays open all his soars to the passers by, that they may have
the more compassion on him, so O Lord, I confess all my faults unto thee, and
say with the Prophet David, Turn thy face away from Ps. 51. 9.
all my sins O Lord, and blot out all mine offenses. I am the wounded man,
Blessed Samaritan help me: I am the Luke 10. 30. Luk 15. 19.
wandering child, that is not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of
thy meanest servants: I am the lost sheep Mat. 10. 6.
O seek and save me.

The Ostridge, as Historiographers write, will hide her head in her feathers,
thinking her self safe enough, as long as she sees no body. And man supposes
all well enough, so long as his gross, grievous sins are not laid open to
the view of the world; as though he feared the sight of man (which can but
punish the body) more then the sight and wroth of God, which can destroy both
body and soul.

There is no hill so high, but a man may climb to the top; no journey so long,
but may be gone in time, no sea so deep but may be sounded with line and lead,
nothing so hid, but in time may be revealed, N am verit as est filia temporis,
time is the mother of truth; all only the heart of man excepted, which indeed
is so secret unto it self, that in seven years one man cannot know another
mind. But what thought? shall not he that made the eye, see? and shall not he
that made the heart, understand, and accordingly reward that which Ps. 93. 9.
is closely spoken, and secretly conceived? yes verily, for he is Scrutator
cordis, a searcher of the heart and reins. And therefore unto thee O thou God
Omniscient. to who^ al hearts be open, and to whom no secrets are hid, do I
come, confessing my sins, and most humbly do beg at thy hands, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, Ps. 51. 1.
to do away mine offenses, and give me an heart to think on thee Prove. 2. 1.
, a mind that may love thee Mark. 12 30
, a soul that may remember thee Deuteronomy. 9* 6, 7.
, and a reason that may always stick fast unto thee Mat. 10. 37. 38. John. 29.
.

Thirdly, we are comforted in this, that the son of God takes away the sins
of the world, and is become our propitiation for our sins. Now our comfort
against Ioh. 16.
the world, and death is set down in these words; Ye shall weep and the
world shall rejoice, and ye shall sorrow and your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. Boldly therefore do we thus shake off the world and fly from it, Genesis
39. 12.
(as Joseph casting off his cloak, ran away from his mistress) and say, O
world thou have done enough with me already; Oh leave me now and take thy
pleasure of some other, as the Devils did the possessed, and entered the swine:
Mat. 8. 22.
for I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ, into whose hands I commend
my spirit, sweet Jesus receive my soul. And cry with David, Lord remember thy
servant in all his troubles; with the Publican, God be merciful unto me a
sinner; and with the woman of Canaan, Jesus Luke 18. 1^.
thou son of David have mercy upon me, O Jesus of Nazareth Mat. 26. 71. Mat.
1. 24.
, O fountain of mercy Mar. 10 24.
remember my spirit Act. 7. 59.
, O my life, take my soul Ioh. 14. 6.
, enter thereinto O my joy, that it always may joy in thee Psalm. 4. 4.
: for thou have redeemed me O God faithful and true, so that I am persuaded,
that neither Romans 8 38. 39
death, nor life, Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creatures, shall be
able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Concerning the comfort that is against the fear of the latter judgment, our
Savior Christ says, he John.
that believes in me shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death unto life: they that have an eye unto him shall be lightened, and their
faces shall not be ashamed Ps. 34. 5.
. Whither then shall I fly, but unto thee? which art my Creator Col. 1. 16. 17
, my redeemer Gal. 3. 13.
, my father Mal. 2. 10. Heb. 12 9. Mat. 23. 9.
, my brother Mat. 12. 50.
, who art set on the right hand of the throne of God Heb. 12. 2.
, to be my God Psalm. 63* 1 Heb 11. 16.
, my judge Ioh 5 22, 23 Act. 10 42. Mat. 16. 27. Apoc. 12.
, my defender, my physician, mine all and only Savior.

True it is that there was a great battle in heaven, as we read in Apoc. 12.
between two mighty armies, yea and such a battle, as before the birth of
the woman there mentioned, was never seen or heard of, between Michael and his
Angels with the Dragon. For when as all sinners through Adam were held guilty
by Gods judgment, unto this huge and mighty mass of man's miseries fell out
another no less grievous, eve^ a most bitter accuser in heaven, the old
Serpent, who attempted the Lords Saints, with a continual accusation before
the tribunal seat of the great judge: whereby it came to pass, that none
being found to take our matter in hand, to plead for us, and to defend our
miserable case, against the complaints of our accuser, how could it otherwise
be, but that this armed and strong enemy must needs still keep his hold, and
that in peace, so long as there was none to resist him, or to stand up against
him in the defense of the poor Saints? Insomuch as the invincible power of
this cruel accuser, could by no power or force of man, or Angel, be resisted
or any thing weakened, until the foresaid woman, clothed with the Sun, and
the stars, and the moon under her feet, brought forth a man child.

Now lo! a certain new strength, courage, and boldness, possessed the Saints
of God and Angels in heaven, wherewith the holy ones of God being strengthened,
with Michael, that is Christ, enter battle with the Devil, whom, as a
vanquished vassal, they thrust and tumbled out of heaven, and so freed the
holy servants of God (though charged with a multitude of sins) of all and
every accusation intimated by their bloody adversary against them. But how did
they effect this victory, how, I pray you, came it so to pass? not by our
own power or merits, but only by the blood of the lamb, in whom, and for
whom, all things are appeased: the hand writing of the law which was against us
put out, the power of the enemy abated, Col 2. 14. Heb. 2. 14, 15. 2. Cor. 5.
15. Ioh 5. 22. Gal 3. 13.
the head of that hellish Serpent broken, the sins of all believers in Christ
are forgiven, and all power of judgment is given up into his hands, who is not
only our judge, but our redeemer, not only a revenger of our sins, but also a
sacrificer for our sins.

What felicity then can be wished greater then this; what comfort and
consolation, more full and co^plete then this; that the Saints of God be now so
conversant in heaven, as they stand not in fear of any thing, and so think of
the terrible judgment of God as they need not fear the peril, and danger of
damnation? for what danger is there now, when as Satan being with all his
Angels quite overthrown, there is Apoc. 12. 9.
none any longer left to condemn thee, and where there is no accuser, there is
no crime produced for the judge Romans 4. 15.
to condemn: for Eius quod non est, non est poena, peccatum remissum non est,
Ergo peccati remissi non est poena, that which is not has no punishment,
forgiven sins are not, Ergo forgiven sins have no punishment; as S. Paul
says, where remission is given there is no more offering Heb. 10. 18. Ier. 31.
14.
for sins.

Now if thou will be resolved of the difference between the law and thy
conscience, that thou need not fear the force of the law, know this: The
law in a Christian, ought not to pass his bounds, but ought to have dominion
only over the flesh, which is in subjection unto it, and ought to remain under
the same, when it is thus, the law is kept under his bounds, but if the law
presume to creep into thy conscience, and there seek to reign, see thou play
the cunning Logitian, and make true division; give no more to the law then is
convenient, but say, O law, thou would climb up into the kingdom of my
conscience, and there reign and reprove it of sin, and would take from me
the joy of my heart, which I have by faith in Christ, and drive me to
desperation, as thou did Judas, that I Mat. 27. 3. Gen 3. 14.
might be without all hope, and utterly perish. Truly this thou do besides
thine office, keep thy self within thy bounds, and exercise thy power upon the
flesh, but touch not my conscience. For as Satan himself is cast out of
heaven, even so likewise does the accusation that any one can lay against thy
conscience, fall down with him. Now if thou would know how, Ioh. 1. 29.
I answer, by the blood of the lamb, who for our sins was hanged upon the
Cross, who by faith justifies sinners: wherein, eve^ when we are accused, we
do overcome. So that now there remains nothing any more in heaven unto the
godly but peace and salvation, with fullness of joy and mirth without sadness,
health without sorrow, light without darkness, and life without labor, where
the very joys of Gods presence shall be music to their ears, a glass to
their eyes, honey to their mouths, and a most sweet and plesaunt balm to their
smell, there shall never be any enemies to assail, wily Serpents to beguile
thee, or worldly baits to entice thee, but all is peace, all is rest, all is
joy, and al is security. Thus we way conclude with the saying of a father;

Non melius poterit caro luxuriosa domari,
Quam been, qualis erit post morte^, praemeditari.
No better mean to tame the flesh,
That want on is and bold,
Then well to weigh what it shall be,
Once dead and laid in mould.
THe fourth Motive, that should stir us up to the earnest meditation of the
Passion of Christ, is the amplitude, and excellency of the Doctrine, touching
many difficult and high matters therein contained; and chiefly these five
following.

The first point of the fourth Motive and cause of the meditation of the
Passion is the divine justice of God, not forgiving sin without satisfaction;
for the law without all exception binds either unto obedience, or unto
punishment, and this order set down in the law abides:

All mankind has sinned, (Ergo) al mankind is Rom 3. 23. 1. John. 1. 8.
condemned; for if we say we have no sin; we deceive our selves, and there is
no truth in us. As corn clean winnowed from the chafe, yet has nature in
it, to yield chafe again, to that which grows of it, when it is sown; so
does this nature of ours, to those that spring of us, yield corruption, and
original sin, though we our selves were circumcised, or baptized, and so
purged thereby from it; because that purgation which some by Baptism impute
unto us, is ever to be understood thus, Non vt non sit in nobis peccatum, sed
no^ imputetur, not that we are cleared from the being of any evil in us, but
from the imputation of it to us. Nay let us know this; that although Antichrist
were abolished, although Satan were asleep, admit the ungodly were at one
with us, although wickedness were put to slight, although no evil example were
given us, although no outward stumbling block were cast in our ways, yet have
we one in our selves and of our selves, (even original sin, concupiscence or
lust,) which never rests attempting, entising, and alluring us from good unto
evil, and to desile or stain us with all kind of pollution and uncleanness,
according as S. James Iam. 1. 14.
says, every man is tempted of his own lust. This original sin is the breath
of that venomous and subtle Cockatrice, which has infected the whole offspring
of Adam, this is the sting of that old Serpent, whose wounds neither Chiron,
Aesculapius, nor Apollo can heal, no nor any wight in heaven or earth, saving
only God in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the bitter fountain Exampus, which
with his brackishnesse marreth the sweet river Hypanis, that is to say, the
flowing stream of all Gods graces in us. To turn bridle therefore, and to the
knitting up of the conclusion of our Argument, it must needs be granted that as
all mankind has sinned, so al mankind was condemned. This argument can none
resolve and discharge, save one, even the Son of God, who became man, and
yielded himself, in the supply of us al, unto his eternal Father, as an
unspotted and immaculate Lamb, in all things obedient to the law, and suffered
punishment for all mankind, who by his own satisfaction, without the help of
any one, has made us partakers of his heavenly kingdom. If thou were as good
as an Angel, or thy meat as good as Manna that fell from heaven, or thy garments
as precious as Aarons Ephod, or thy incense as sweet as the perfumes of the
Tabernakle, or the days that thou keep as honorable as the day in which
Christ rose again from the dead, yet neither thou, nor thy garments, nor thy
meat, nor thy days can set one of thy feet within this kingdom, which is
Christ's: for he by his own death and passion, has satisfied for it alone, yea
he alone has satisfied the law; and that five manner of ways.

First he has satisfied the law Actiuely, in fulfilling it wholly.

Secondly he has satisfied the law Passiuely, in dying and suffering for us.

Thirdly Imputatiuely, in imputing unto us, that believe, his Righteousness,
and innocence.

Fourthly Inchoatiuely, in giving unto us the holy Ghost, which frames in us a
beginning to perform unto God a new and acceptable obedience.

Fifthly he has satisfied the law Consummatiuely, in all eternity.

Christ dyed for all 2. Cor. 5. 15. Romans 5. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 3. 1. Tim. 2. 6. 1.
Pet. 3. 18.
, and with his blood,
He clens'd our souls from deadly sin 1. Ioh. 1. 5. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb 9. 14.
Esa. 53. 6.
,
And gave his life to ransom those,
Which steadfastly believe in him Io. 11. 25, 26 Ioh. 6. 35. Ioh. 20. 29. Ioh.
3. 16.
;
On the third day again he rose 1. Cor. 15. 4. Mat. 28 6. Mar. 16. 6. Ioh. 20.
27.
,
And came where his Disciples were Io. 11. 20. 29. Mar. 16. 14. Luke 24. ^6. 1.
Cor. 15. 6.
,
For to instruct them in his word Act. 3. 34. Act. 1. 5. Act. 4. 31. Ephesians 4. 11,
12, 13
,
That we thereby might live for ere Act. 1. 9. 10.
.
So he returned to heaven again Act. 17. 31.
,
There to remain till day of doom 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17
,
Then we must all to him appeal 2. Cor. 5. 10.
,
Yielding account when he does come l.
The second point contained in the fourth Motive.

THe second part is the greatness of Gods wrathful anger conceived against our
sins, wherein let us consider, that God is a judge, not such as our own
understanding does imagine him to be; but such a one as he is painted out in
the holy Scriptures, with whose brightness, the stars are darkened; by whose
strength, the hills do melt away; by whose wrath the earth is shaken; by Ps. 28.
12. Psalm. 18 7. Apoc. 6. 14. Heb 12 26. Job. 9. 6.
whose wisdom, the wise are taken in their subtilty: by whose pureness, all
things prove vnpure: whose righteousness the Angels are not able to bear,
whose wrathful vengeance, if it be but once kindled, presses down to the
bottom of hell. For it is not Adramelech, nor Anamelech, Ashima, nor Ashteroth,
Baalim, nor Chemosh, Dagon nor Milchom, 2 King. 17. 30, 31. 2 King. 23. 13.
Moloch nor Nergal, Sucat beneth, nor Tartacke, nor any of the Idolatrous Gods,
of the superstitious Gentiles, whom we have offended, and provoked unto Anger;
but it is the Majesty of the great and angry God Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts,
whose burning wrath we have so often kindled and increased. The which anger of
this wrathful God was so great, that neither man, nor any creature in heaven,
or earth could pacify, nay though al Angels and men were joined together, yet
they could not appease it, much less take it clean away, therefore it is
written, God is a consuming fire, and Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
a jealous God. For the appeasing therefore of Gods anger, there was need of
God himself, his mercy, his counsel, and help, that is to say, the
deprecation, and intercession of the son of God, and not this only, but also
his Incarnation, Passion, Death; the Father spared not his only begotten Son,
his only Innocent his best beloved Son.

Thirdly the greatness of sin, and the deformity of The 3 matter (...) point
contained in the fourth cause.
man's whole nature in the sight of God. There is no sin so small that has not
cast the son of God into a sea of miseries. The which sin that it may the
better appear in his likeness, we will so Anatomize it, as both by
definitions and descriptions those ougly and loathsome Serpents shall be plainly
laid open, so well as we can.

It is written of the spotted Panther, a party colored beast, (whose fur being
dressed, is worn of great personages;) that his hinder parts are so fair and
pleasant, that what with the beautifulnes of his color, and the sweetness of
his sent, all the Beasts of the forest do run and follow after him, whom when
he has gotten into a place of advantage, he turns his ougly and fear full
face upon them, and devoureth them. Even so the cursed bait of sin, with his
fair faced shows of his plesantnesse, and sweetness of his alluring
entisements, turns and draws men after him, which at first some small spark
of Gods grace within them will cause me^ to blush at, and to be ashamed to have
known what they do; although the entisement of the Devil do allure and
embolden them to do it, yet they will use all cloakes and colors that possible
they can, to hide their wickedness from the sight of the world, (having little
or no care if God see them) but at the last they grow bold, and, by the sweet
and pleasant baits of their diabolical practices, become impudent; even to
say what care we? And why? certainly because this is the course of sin in
Gods judgment; that it shall so benu^be and harden the hearts, wherein it is
suffered, and so sear up the conscience, and conceit in time; that there
shall be no shame left; but such a thick vizard pulled over their faces, that
they cannot blush at any thing, either to say or do it: and then in the end will
their sin turn to a loathsome, detestable, and ougly deformed looks upon
them, and destroy them, and cry in the ears of the Lord for revenge, with
such an alarm, that God can turn no way but they will follow him. Thus sin
causes the children of unbelief Ephesians. 2. 2.
, so to dandle in the lap of folly Eccl 10. 10
, that they never fear the fall of future inconveniences Judge 8. 27. Mat. 25.
12.
, until they be served with the writ of present penance Luke 12. 19 46.
; it blinds the clearness and bright sight of many which in their own
conceits do seem to be wise Romans 1. 22. Ier. 5. 22.
, and separates them from God Esa. 59. 2.
, and peruerteth many careless men Ier. 15. 6. Eccl. 10. 13.
. Wherefore mark I pray you, Who^ Satan can divert from the milk of Gods word
1. Pet. 2. 2.
, he politikely plotteth against with the doctrine of vanity Ier. 10. 8.
, whom he can frustrate from the rock of Religion 1. Cor. 10. 4
, he unites unto the God of Ekron 2. Kin 1. 2.
, whom he can divorce from the sweet spowse of Christ Rev. 21. 9.
, he deflowreth them with the foul whore of Babylon Rev. 17. 3.
. What then? Oh then, sin comes ten thousand times more ougly fashioned,
and deformed, then the aforenamed Panther Job 40. 20. Rev. 12 34.
, and brings with him his damned spirits Mat. 25. 41. Luk 13. 27.
, his howling helhounds Ps. 22. 16. Reu. 22. 15.
and roaring Lions 1. Pet 5. 8. Ps. 35. 17.
, prepared ready for their prey Rev. 12. 4.
.

You may define sin thus; It is an effect or inclination, or an action
striving with the law of God, and making the sinner guilty of eternal
punishment, unless there be a remission ofsinnes through the Son of God our
mediator. This is, as Schoolmen say, peccati genuina definitio, the proper,
peculiar, natural definition of sin: for the Genus, or general word (being
as Cicero says, notio adplures differentias pertinens, a general voice
comprehending sundry particular kinds) is peccatum, sin; the difference of
sin, is the striving with the law of God.

The proprium or property of Sin is the making of a sinner guilty of the
eternal anger and wrath of God. The accident of sin, is in these words, nisi
fiat remissio propter satisfactione^ filij dei, unless there be forgiveness
through the satisfaction of the son of God. Some say that sin is the missing,
or declining as it were from a certain mark, which we constantly, and
directly go and reach unto.

We read in the 20 of Judges of the 700 chosen of Judge. 20. 16.
the Beniamites, which every one could fling stones at a hairs breadth, and
miss not: wherefore when we should define sin, we must look unto the mark,
which is prefixed and set up by God unto all men. Sin therefore is whatsoever
does swerve and decline from the Communion of Almighty God, whether it be in
the understanding and thought of man, either in will, thought, or deed; and I
call the Communion of God the agreement and unity with his truth and will. So
that in this point it is sin not to think the same, not to will the same, and
not to do the same, which the omnipotent God wills. As if a man would say,
it is sin in the kings Court, whatsoever is wide, and discrepant from the kings
will and mind, which ought to be as a mark indifferently set up unto all
Countries to prick unto. Therefore says the Wiseman, Wish the King no evil in
thy thought, neither speak hurt of the rich in thy Eccl. 10. 20.
privy chamber, for the foul of the air shall betray thy voice, and with her
feathers shall she betray thy words. But as the greatness and horriblenesse of
sin, (being the third point of the fourth motive) is the matter whereon we now
stand; so let us consider how there are four things, that make manifest the
greatness of sin.

These four causes following show manifestly unto us the greatness of sin.

The first is the anger of God, the curse and thunder of the law. Secondly,
Corporal punishment, Diseases, corporal death Thirdly, eternal punishment.
Fourthly, The Cross, passion, and death of the Son of God.
Now the evil of sin appears in three things following, first the
deformity; for God does loath it. Secondly the iniquity thereof, for the
Devil does love it. Thirdly, the infirmity thereof, for the whole world is
infected with it.

Touching the first, it is said in the holy Scripture in many and sundry places
Odio est Deo impius and impietas eius, God hates the wicked man and his
wickedness Wis. 14. 9. Ps. 5. 4. 6. Ps. 14 4. Pro. 15. 8. 9. 29 Job. 11. 52.
Esa. 1. 15. Psalm. 4 9.
too: he hates all those that work iniquity, and both the wicked man, and
his wickedness are in hatred with him: yea the whole life of sinners, as much
as their very thoughts, words, and works God hates. And farther more, their
actions also, are abomination in his gracious sight: he cannot abide them, but
says, he that commits sin, is of the Devil 1. Ioh. 3 8.
, and therefore, their name shall rot Prove. 10. 7.
, their dwelling place shall not remain Job 8. 22.
, but their destruction shall come suddenly, when they least think upon it
Prove 24. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 10.
. He does not only say, their houses shall be destroyed Prove. 14. 11.
, but also they themselves shall be no more remembered Job 24. 20.
, because they shall be taken in the sin of their own transgressions Prove.
11. 6.
; and farther yet, he cannot abide, nor permit sinners to praise him, or to
name his testament with their mouths, as the holy Ghost testifies. And
therefore no marvel, if he show such rigor to sinners at the last day, whom
he so greatly hates and abhors in this life. Therefore let sinners take
heed, that they by true repentance, and steadfast faith in Christ, be able to
discharge their reckoning; lest they chance to hear the dreadful sentence of
Christ, Qua^tum in delitijs fuit, tantum dato illi tormentum, look how much he
Apoc. 18.
has been in delights, so much torment do you lay upon him. And thus the
dissolute sinner is unto God far more vile then the bafest creature of all,
even the Droane, Caterpiller, or Toad: for what is he else but a filthy
dunghill of all abominations, and uncleanness: the stink whereof, has
infected heaven and earth, and no perfume could ever allay it in the nostrils
of the Lord; saving only the Passion of Jesus Christ, being a sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor to Almighty God.

We make it very dainty to come near a Lazarus, that is full of botches,
blaines, and sores. But how much more are those men to be abhorred, who having
layne many years dead in their sins, and therefore do now nothing but
putrify, rotte, and stink in them, like ougly and loathsome carions,
lingering in their iniquity, until it come to maturitie, that God in his just
judgment and measure of time, may lay his heavy curse upon them when they
shall behold the great, terrible, fearful, and angry countenance of that
mighty God Jehovah, above them to be their judge, with a sword of vengance in
the one hand to terrify them, and a scabart of justice in the other hand, to
judge them, and their sins on the one side to accuse and cry vengance against
them, and those cursed caitifes Genesis 3. 14.
, those ougly monsters Esa. 27. 1.
, those damned spirits Mat. 25. 41.
, those houling helhounds Psalm. 22. 16.
, and roaring Lions 1. Pet. 5. 8.
, will then and there be in a readiness with vasa furoris, their vessels of fury
on the other side to execute the vengance of Gods eternal sentence, and
indignation upon them, their consciences within them gnawing, without them al
damned souls bewailing, and beneath them the infernal pit of hell open, and the
cruel furnace ready boiling to devour them, without and on every side of them,
all the world burning on fire. Oh the^ what shall they do, to go backward
impossible to appear intolerable. Thus much concerning the infirmity of sin,
and how God does loath it.

Secondly, sin is evil, in that the Devil does love it. First let us
consider, that it is not gold nor silver that he would have, but animas
peccatrices, the very souls of sinners, wherewith he is enriched and fed;
whose note is Da mihi animas, cetera toll tibi, give me the souls, take thou
the rest; yea he is that ravenous bird that desires and delights in the
heart of his prey. The Devil being once asked what he best loved, answered
three things, viz: Primam Lunam, Rotam Solis, Canis iram, the first quarter of
the moon C the circle of the sun, O and the rage of a dog, R. The second sign
and token, whereby we may prove that the Devil loves sin is thus; he is never
wearied out with his seeking, roaring, attempting, and earnest following after
sin. For, from the beginning of the world he has done nothing else, but cause
and procure sin; who indeed being once asked of God (as in the book of Job)
from whence he came, said, from compassing the whole Earth.

Thirdly he loves sin, because he is never satisfied therewith: for how many
thousands and millions of souls has he vanquished, devoured and overcome! and
yet like a hunger-starved Lion still seeks whom he may devour.

Lastly sin is an evil, in that it corrupts, and an infirmity that
infecteth the whole world. It is like a tertian 1. John. 2.
fever, because whatsoever is in the world is either the lust of the flesh,
or of the eyes, or pride of life. Secondly it is like a quartane Ague, for his
4. degrees, 1. cordis, 2. oris, 3. operis, 4. consuetudinis. Thirdly, Sin is
like a quotidian fever being continually and that by the means of the sin of
pride which is every where. Sin is like a gout in the feet, by the means of
sluggishnes and idleness: when we should go about any good works, we lack
both hands and feet, but the gowt makes us feel and confess, that we have
both. It resembles the Palsy, by means of anger, which makes a man often
shake through the veheme^cy thereof. It is like the Dropsy through insatiable
desire of having; and like a leprosy by the means of luxuriousnes. Musculus in
his common places has exquisitely opened unto us the true Anatomy of Sin,
drawn out of the first Chapter of S. James, where we read that every man is
tempted, drawn, and entised of his own concupiscence afterward, when
concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth sin, then sin perfected
brings forth death.

Herein is declared, how sin begins in us, increases, and is perfected.
There is in us a corrupt poisoned strength of concupiscence readily given unto
al kind of evil, whereof is bred al kind of sin in this sort.

First there creep into our hearts temptations, whereof Suggestion.
are innumerable sorts of kinds: one man through covetousnes, honors gold
as his God; another through ambition is tempted with pride, an other through
lasciviousnes, is become effeminate, and haunteth after the flesh as carelessly,
as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or a fool to the stoekes, for correction,
another Prove. 7. 22.
has his thoughts environed with furiousness and wrath, an other to gluttony
and surfeiting, an other to drunkenness, swearing, backbiting and such like.
Now the temptation creeps into us by suggestion, either of Satan (as it
chanced unto Judas and Ananias) or of our remembrance, or of the sense of the
body, which is by sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, or touching.

After that Temptation is infected with a certain Delectation.
delight, as it were a sauce, to feed and draw unto it the Genesis 3. 6.
mind of man. So Evah was allured with the beauty and delight of the forbidden
Apple.

The children of the strong were allured with the Genesis 6. 2. Mat. 26. 14, 15
Mar. 14. 10, 11 Luke 22. 5. Zach. 11. 12. 3. Consent.
daughters of men; Judas with the sweetness of gain, and so forth. Afterward
follows a consent to sin; lo here is a conceiving of sin, done as it were
in the womb of concupiscence, which upon every light occasion, concupiscence
the unhappy mother of sin 4 Perfection.
brings forth: whiles that the sin, which is conceived within, by consenting
to temptation is in work perfected abroad. But although the work come not
out, yet nevertheless, the sin is perfected before God, which by consent is
conceived in the heart; whereof we may see, Mat. 5. He that sees a woman, and
lusts after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Mat.
5. 28.
Therefore seeing the beginning of sin, and the proceeding is of this sort, a
virtuous man, and he that fears God, must have a special care and regard to
mark diligently all the thoughts of his heart, and suggestio^s of sin, either
bred within, or slyly slipping in from without; and as he finds them, so
presently to overthrowe them, and cast them away: for man has before Ier. 21.
8. Eccl. 15. 17.
him life, and death, good and evil, and so what he likes, shall be given
him, therefore he ought to abandon sin, and to delight in the ways of God,
and he will give him his hearts desire, yea he will help him and Ps. 37. 8.
Eccl. 2. 6.
order his ways aright, if he will carefully watch and pray, that God may take
away his sins from him, that he may enjoy eternal life.

Fourthly, of the infinite and unspeakable mercy of The fourth matter contained
in the fourth cause.
God toward us most miserable sinners. The quantity of mercy is not strange,
it droppeth as the gentle dew from heaven upon the place beneath, it is twice
blessed, it blesses him that gives, and him that takes, it is mightiest in the
mightiest, it becomes the throne of Monarchy better then his crown; his
Scepter shows the force of temporal power, the attribute to awe and majesty,
wherein does sit the dread and fear of kings, but mercy is above the Scepters
sway, it is inthroned in the hearts of kings, it is an attribute to God
himself, and earthly powers do then show most like to Gods, when mercy
reaches justice.

Thus may we speak in some part and measure of mercy that should somewhat
lodge in the hearts of men authorized: But not deliver a full and clear
discourse of the infinite, ineffable, and incomprehensible, compassionate, and
provident God toward us most miserable, and wretched sinners. God commends
his mercy toward us, that when we were sinners Christ died for us; much more
now being justified in his Romans 5. 8.
blood, shall we be free from wrath through him: for wherefore was it that he
had experience of evil, wherefore was he abased? wherefore did he bear our sins
upon his body and was truly broken for our transgressions but that in his
feeling of our sorrows, we might the more sensibly see, what was all his love,
and mercy toward us. God humbled himself unto a low degree, that he might
exalt us that are truly humbled. We must suffer with him, that we may come
unto him in his glory; without him we are borne in anger, in him we are
reconciled through many afflictions. Therefore our Savior Christ in his last
testament, did commend unto his Father his spirit, to the Jews his body, to
the good thief Paradise, to the vnrepenting sinner hell, to the Apostles his
Gospel, and to the faithful affliction for their trial. He that likes not
through these afflictions to go unto glory, may lie down again in his shame,
where Christ did find him, and make the world witness of his unspeakable
folly; and he that will murmr against these afflictions in this way of life,
which are none other then Christ did suffer a thousandfold more then he has
left for us, let him leave his redeemer, and dwell again in the bondage of
death, that the Angels may be witnesses of an unthankful wretch. So awake
therefore thou that sleep, that thou may well embrace, and apply this
mercy of God unto thy self, by thy repentance and amendment of life.

God, says Nazianze^, is delighted with nothing so much, as the recovery and
amendment of man. Paul says, that God would have all men to be saved, and to
1. Tim. 2.
come to the knowledge of the truth.

S. Bernard says, to redeem a servant God spared not his son. God spared
not his son, says the Apostle, but delivered him up for us all, for thieves,
murderers, enemies, etc.

Fifthly, of the infinite love and affection of our Savior The 5 point and
matter of the 4 motive, and cause. P^^u. 8.
toward mankind. Solomon says, in the person of God, my delight and pleasure
is to be conversant among the sons of men; I will remember the mercies of the
Lord, and for the great goodness toward the house of Esa. 63. 7.
Israel, which he has given them according to his tender love, and according
to his great mercies; and in the ninth verse, in all their troubles he was
troubled, that is, God bare their afflictions, as if they had been his own.
The Angel of his presence saved them, in his love, and in his mercy he
redeemed them: and as a Father says, David has compassion on his children, so
has the Lord compassion on them that fear him; and as far as Ps. 103. 14.
the east is from the weast, so far has he removed our sins from us. Cyrill
says, He can no more cease to be merciful Cyrill.
and loving unto the repentant sinner, then he can cease to be God.

The tongues of all men living (says Marlorate) cannot declare Gods mercies
and love toward us, nor Marlorate.
the pens of all the writers in the world, can never sufficiently express
the same; because the multitude of all man's offenses in respect of Gods love
and mercies, is like a small drop of rain to the greatest sea, or like a
spiders web before the boisterous wind.

Taulerus says, that God so loved us, as if the Essence and proper health of
him did consist in us; this is that love, which being once, as it were, quite
quenched, with the everlasting waters of our iniquities, Rursum acce^ditur
intercessione atque obedientia filij Dei, is again kindled with the
intercession and obedience of the son of God. And the story of Carpus is well
known, which Dionysius recites unto Demophilus, where these words of Christ
are read, I so love mankind, that I had rather die for it than suffer it to
perish. And what greater love can there be, says the scripture, then a man to
give his life for his friends?

Thus prove we our Savior to be as David says, Ps. 86. 15.
a pitiful God, merciful and slow to anger, yea such a God as his compassion
is of no short continuance; but as the Psalmist Ps. 103. 17.
says, it endures for ever, and shows his love and mercies Deuteronomy. 3. 19.
unto thousands of them that love him.

The fifth motive of the fifth cause is the fruits The 5 cause moving us to the
earnest meditation of the passion.
and effects of Christ his Passion, that is to say, all the benefits of Christ,
and the applying of these every one of them unto our selves, without doubting,
without respect of persons, without particularity, without any respecting of
those that do believe.

The first benefits are such as take away from us, things evil, and mortal,
whereof are seven sorts.

The first is the freeing us from Sin. Christ was delivered up for our sins
and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.
and the blood of Christ does cleanse us from al our sins. And without shedding
of blood is no remission. Christ is the 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Heb. 9. 22. 1. Ioh. 2.
15. Tit. 2. 14. 1. Pet. 2.
propitiation for our sins. Christ gave himself for us, that he might deliver
and free us from all iniquity. Christ himself has offered up our sins in
his body crucified, that we being free from sin, might live unto
righteousness.

The second is the freeing us from the curse of the law being made a curse for
us, Cursed is every one that Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
hangs on a tree.

The third is the freeing us from the wrath of God, God raised Christ from the
dead, and putting out the hand writing Gal. 3. 13. Col. 2. 12. 14.
of ordinances that was against us, he even took it out Ephesians 1. 20. Ephesians. 2. 15.
of the way.

The fourth is, the freeing us from the tyranny of the Devil, Christ has
destroyed through death, him that had Heb. 2. 14. Hos. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 35.
the power of death, viz. the devil. Our Savior Christ also came as S.
Augustine says, at such time when learning most flourished, and when the
greatest Empire, the Devil, the world, the flesh, and al other subtle, or
politic wisdom should acknowledge their wits, and crafty dealing to be mere
foolishnes, and all powers weak before God.

The fifth is, the freeing us from the world, and the vileness thereof, Christ
gave himself for our sins, that he Gal. 1. 4. Luke 1. 74. Genesis 22. 16, 17
Ier. 31. 33.
might deliver us from this present evil world; to the end, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear.

The sixth is, the freeing us from death, Christ has abolished 2. Tim. 1. 10.
death, and has brought life and immortality unto light: Christ (says S.
Augustine) was clothed with Augustine.
death; for, death could not die, but in life. And as Elizeus made iron to
swim, which naturally sinketh, (says Cyrill) so Christ by his death, brought
us back from death, and hell, which deservedly we should have Cyrill.
entered. And therefore, in the praise of our Saviors victory, S. Paul
reioiceth and says, Death is swallowed up into victory. 1. Cor. 15. 54.


The seventh is, deliverance from damnation, and hell: the son of God has
appeared, that he might destroy the works of the devil, and therefore, God
sent him not into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. Now follow seven other benefits which we
receive by the Passion of Christ.

The first is our reconciliatio^ with God, By the death Romans 5. 10.
of the Son of God, we are recouciled unto God, when yet we were enemies;
Christ is our peace. And as a corner stone ioineth two walls together, so Christ
our true corner stone, has reconciled, both Jews, and Gentiles unto God. Ephesians.
2. 20.
Christ has made peace by the blood of his own body Col. 1. 20.
shed on the Cross, Christ has once suffered for our sins the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

The second is the remission of sins, through Christ we have redemption from
our sins, by his blood, even the whole forgiveness of our sins.

The third is righteousness, Christ dyed for all, that they which live, should
not live unto themselves, but unto him. 2. Cor. 5. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 3, 4.


The fourth is the giving of the holy Ghost, Know ye not that your bodies are
the temple of the holy Ghost? for ye are bought with a great price, therefore
glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits which are Gods: God has
powered into us the holy spirit, yea and that ple^tiously.

The fifth is our victory against sin, the devil, and the world, Be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world, and Ioh. 16. 33.
have abolished death, sin, and the Devil.

The sixth is salvation and life eternal, for if we believe that Jesus is dead,
and is risen, even so them which sleep in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. Tit. 3. Ioh. 14. 1.
Tim. 3.
Jesus, will God bring again unto life; through Jesus Christ we are made
righteous and heirs of eternal life; God sent his son into the world, that
through him we may have life everlasting, Christ came into the world to save
sinners, he Luke 19. 10.
came into the world to save them which were lost, and not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Therefore Mat. 9. 13.
every spirit, which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God, and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God. 1. Ioh. 4. 2, 3.


The seventh is, A compendious Epitome and Catalogue of the benefits which a
Christian enioieth by the death Cross, and Passion of Christ.

Through Adams fall, thou have transgressed the whole law; By Christ's passion,
death and resurrection, thou have fulfilled it. Through Adam thou art before
God a vile and loathsome sinner; through Christ thou appearest glorious in his
sight. By Adam every little cross is the punishment of thy sin, and a token of
Gods wrath; By Christ the great crosses are easy, profitable, and tokens of
Gods mercy. By Adam thou art dead, by Christ thou art quickened and made alive
again. By Adam thou art a slave of the devil and the child of wrath: By
Christ thou art the child of God. In Ada^ thou art worse then a Toad, and more
detestable before God; But by Christ thou art above the Angels, for thou art
joined unto him, and made bone of his bone, mystically.

Through Adam, sin and Satan have rule in thee, and lead thee captive; By
Christ the spirit of God dwells in thee plentiously: by Adam came death unto
thee, and it is an entrance into hell; by Christ, though death remain, yet it
is the only passage unto life.

Lastly in Adam, thou art poor, blind, and miserable; But in Christ thou art
rich, and glorious, thou art king on earth, and fellow heir with him in
heaven. And as sure to be joint heir, and partaker of all the joys, that
heaven contains, as he is now. Adam when he must needs taste of the fruits
that God had forbid him, he made us all to rue it even until this day, but
here thou see the fruits that grow, not in the earthly Paradise, Rev. 22.
but in the tree of life, which is in the heavenly Jerusalem.

Now therefore, fear no danger, be bold in Christ, to eat of the fruit, as
God has commanded thee, it will quicken, and reviue thee being dead; thou
can do Satan no worse displeasure, then to feed on the godly fruit of this
Tree, and to smell on the sweet leaves, which it bears continually, that
give such a refreshing savor.

THE SECOND PART.
With what mind we should come unto the meditation of the passion.

THE second part unto the things which we have already spoken of, being well
considered, follows, that we bring with us a true penitent mind: the
practice and exercise whereof consists in these four points of repentance
following.

1 Contrition of the heart. 2 Unfeigned confession. 3 A believing and full
confidence settled in the passion of Christ. 4 The fruits of faith.
But first we will speak of repentance. To the end We may instruct our
present age with what mind they should come unto the meditation of the passion,
is first the contrition of the heart, by the nature of Repentance, which for
the most part little understands the doctrine, and less practices the
duty, wherefore first we must show what repentance is.

Repentance is the constant turning of man in his whole life from all sins
unto God, which must be done so directly, that he must hate and detest his
former evil life, purposing to become a new man, that God may make him a new
heart and a new spirit, (not Ecles. 18. 31.
in substance nor quantity, but in quality) arising from a true and lively
faith, with a full persuasion of Gods mercies by the merits of Christ, for the
forgiveness of his sins. But first let us consider that there be two 2.
Repenta^ces
kinds of Repentance, the one, a true repentance unto life, the other a false
repentance unto death; and example we may have by Judas, who is said to have
repented, 1. The false.
and which is more, to have confessed his fault, and which is most of all, to
have made restitution, and yet it was a false repentance, because it sprang not
of a true faith, but rather of the fear of death, which he saw imminent
before his eyes, of the grief and tediousnese of pain, of the horror of hell,
and fear of Gods invincible punishment which he knew he must needs abide,
because he betrayed the innocent blood. Cain repented, yet he was condemned;
Esau repented, yet he was condemned; Antiochus also did repent, yet he is
condemned because their prolonged repentance sprang not of faith. S. Paul
says, without faith it is impossible to please God, and without faith there
can be no true repentance. Heb. 11. 6.


Thus many Iudasses and desparing wretches will say (when a minister or preacher
goes about to persuade them to amend their lives, and return unto God by
repentance, in showing them that God is more merciful then man can be sinful,
if man will be sorrowful) this or such like answer; You say well indeed, God
is merciful, but alas, I am so unworthy of my self, and find so many
imperfections in me, that I am not worthy of the mercy of God, and therefore I
cannot expect it. Oh mark I beseech you, this common objection is altogether
without faith, and it rises not from humility, but from the pride of the
heart, and thereby it makes many careless men to distrust in God: the reason
is, because they would not be beholding unto God for his mercy, but would
rather seem to have God to be beholding unto them for their worthiness. But
if they would have God to have the glory, as most of right they should, they
must not stand upon their own infirmities; for the more unworthy they are in
their own sight (if they truly repent and be heartily sorry for their sins,
with a full purpose to continue in newness of life) the more worthy will they
be in the sight of God, and the more acceptable, because gods glory is then
most magnified, who can make their sins Esa. 1. 18.
if they were as red as crimson, to be as white as snow, etc. And as our
Savior Christ's power was not so much magnified in curing one that was but a
few days sick, Ioh 5 8.
as in curing him that was thirty eight years diseased, so the mercy of God
is not so much magnified in curing a small sinner, or a few sins, as in
curing of great sinners his goodness shows it self: for when they have so
humbled themselves, by returning unto God by true repentance, that with the
Centurion, they can send their friends (that is) their zealous and full
believing prayers unto Christ with this message, Lord I am not worthy thou
should enter under my roof, but Luk 7. 6, 7.
speak the word and my sins will be cured, or with Peter Lord depart from me
a sinful man; then shall they find Luke 5. 8.
their souls cured, their sins pardoned, and Christ will come to them in
mercy. Thus much concerning the false repentance, with this short persuasion to
withdraw men from the same.

Now follows the true repentance. Wherein first let us consider, that there is
no doctrine in the Church 2. The true repentance
of God so necessary, as the doctrine of repentance, and ame^dme^t of life;
neither does the holy ghost so much labor in all the Scripture, as he does to
beat repentance into men's heads: it was the only sermon which John Baptist
preached, while he prepared the way for Mat. 3. 2.
Christ, Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand.

This repentance is not defined altogether by this word poenitentia, because
(as Divines say) it does not comprehend totum terminum, a quo and ad quem,
from whom and to whom we must return.

But this is the true Repentance, which the latins interpret by this word
Resipiscentia, or Conuersio, which is not only a changing of the mind, but it
is Recessus a malo, a forsaking of evil, accessus ad bonum and returning unto
that which is good. reuertimini vsque ad me, says the Lord, return as far as
unto me; we must return unto the Lord, we must return unto him alone, for he
is the truth, and the fountain of all goodness.

For better proof, that true Repentance is a turning unto God, we may prove it
by the Authority of the holy Scriptures plentiously, where God commandes us to
return unto him, O ye children of Israel (says he) Esa. 31. 6.
turn again from your infidelity, wherein you drowned your selves. Again,
turn you, turn you from your evil Ezech. 33. 11.
ways; for why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? And again, Esa. 55. 7.
let the wicked for sake their evil ways, and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon them, for he is merciful, and very ready to forgive.
Hosea exhorting the people unto repentance, says, Come and let us return unto
the Lord. And again, O Israel return unto the Lord Hos. 6. 1. Hos. 14. 2.
Ier. 4. 1. Ezech. 18. 30 32.
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Likewise says Jeremiah, O
Israel if thou return, return unto me. As much says Ezechiah, return unto
the Lord, and cause others to return away from all their transgressions.

Therefore this returning unto the Lord (as a Father says) ought not to be
done carelessly, but Lavandum est cor poenite^tiae lacrymis, we must wash our
hearts in the troubled poole of Bethesda, in the troubled tears of repentance,
having an inward sorrow of the mind, wrought by the holy Ghost, for the sins
before committed against so good and gracious a God, joined both with a perfect
faith, to be forgive^ for Christ his sake, and also with a full and determinate
purpose, from henceforth to amend and lead a new life. Now beloved the holy
scripture alleges that true repentance has two principal parts mortificatio
and vivificatio, mortifying the old man, and the quickening of the new man;
mortificatio^ contains, first acknowledging of sin, secondly, a sorrow and
grief for sin, thirdly, a flying and shunning of sin; vivification which is
the quickening of the new man, co^prehendeth those things that are contrary to
mortificatio^, which is first acknowledging of Gods mercy, and the applying
thereof in Christ, secondly a ioyfulnes thence arising, thirdly, an ardent, or
earnest endeavor to sin no more: we may add unto true repentance those 4.
parts as before said, the first Contrition of the heart, in the which we ought
for to be sorrowful for these three things, first for the sin we have
committed, secondly for the good we have omitted, thirdly for the good time we
have lost, so that we may plainly see, that Contrition, is a fear and
sorrowfulness of conscience, which perceives that God is angry with sin, and
is sorry that we have sinned. Now to speak more largely of it let us know that
contrition also comprehe^deth these two things, first the knowledge of God,
requiring obedience, and discommending disobedience, and not remitting sin
without a full and perfect satisfaction, either in respect of obedience it
self, or else in respect of punishment: secondly the discussing or examining
our own nature of our thoughts, our wills, our affections, and al our actions
and deeds, according to the square and rule of Gods laws in every point,
whereby we are lead and brought to the knowledge, as well of our filthiness, as
also of our just condemnation. Therefore S. Paul wills us to examine our
selves and call our souls to daily 2. Cor 13. 5.
account thus did Sextius when the day was ended and the night come, wherein he
should take his rest, he would ask his mind, what evil have thou healed this
day? what vice have thou stood against? in what part art thou bettered? In the
which examination if we thoroughly consider, we may easily find, that we
offend God three manner of ways, that is, by the delight of the thought, by
the lapse of the tongue, and by the pride of works; and those three are to be
cured, by three contrary remedies, the delight of the thought, by inward sorrow
and contrition of the heart, the lapse of the tongue by confession of the mouth
in the examining of our selves, and the pride of works, by our upright living:
al these being rightly done show, that we are in the way of true Repentance.
And thus much for the first part.

The second part of Repentance.
Secondly, Repentance requires also confession, not Auricular, but before God,
and craving of pardon in seeking and most earnest entreating the help and
merciful favor of our Savior Jesus Christ. Now of this confession I have
already spoken of in the third motive, which does declare the weakness of our
nature: but to speak more largely of it, Chrysostom says that nothing
pleases God more then Confession, if it be joined with true contrition, and
that it is a part of humiliation, and ever joined with true repentance,
because they cannot be truly humbled, and repent, who confess not their sins
unto God, neither will he give them pardon, for God couers, when men uncover and
acknowledge, he justifies when men condemn, he pardons when men accuse
themselves. And if any man plead unto God non est factum, and deny his deeds
and debts of sin, there is no reason why he should have the acquittance of
grace. Therefore says Solomon, He that hides his sins, shall not prosper,
but he that confesses Prove. 28. 13.
and for saketh them shall have mercy. Thus David confesses his sins unto God,
and says, Against thee O Lord have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight,
behold I Psalm. 51. 4, 5.
was borne in sin, and in iniquity has my mother conceived me. And in another
place, I said I will confess against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest me the punishment of my sins. This confession, as S. Augustine
Ps. 32. 5.
says, if it be joined with true contrition of the heart, opens the gates of
heaven, and stops the gates of hell; he adds farther and says, it is an
expeller of vices, a restorer of virtue, an impugner of wicked spirits, and an
impediment of the Devil. And S. Ambrose says when the confession of the mouth
proceeds from the heart by true repentance, then the ve^gance of God cease
to pursue the penitent person: for if God hears a sinner (says he) in true
co^tritio^ of the heart utter but this one word, peccaui, I have sinned, he is
in a manner so charmed with it, that he has no more power over himself, and
cannot choose but grant pardon and remission: yea and his mercies are so great
unto penitent sinners, that he says, Before they call I will answer, and while
they speak I will hear. The Pelican Esa. 65. 24.
was never more willing to pecke out her own heart blood to feed her young,
nor the nurse to give her breast unto the child, then our Savior Christ is to
give pardon unto those that truly confess their sins unto him. Oh therefore
beloved seeing God is thus merciful, let us remember our own estate in time,
and live no longer like slaves unto sin, but confess our sins unto God, either
with David, who cried unto him in the bitterness of his heart, saying, O Lord
have mercy upon me and heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee; or with
the Ps. 41 4.
prodigal son, let us (in our confession) cry unto God, as he did unto his
Father, saying, O Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am
no more worthy to Luke 15. 18, 19
be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants; or else with Manasses
king of Judah, who in his penitent prayers bowed the very knees of his heart
before God crying, I have sinned, O Lord I have sinned, above the number of the
sands of the sea, but I humbly beseech thee to forgive me and destroy me not
with my transgressions: which in so doing we shall surely find the Lord to be
merciful. And thus much concerning the second part of repentance.

The third part of Repentance.
Thirdly faith, which is the ground of repentance, and it causes men to hate
sin, and without hatred of sin, there can never be any true repentance. Now
hatred of sin, rises from sanctification: for, the unsanctified man may leave
sin, but not hate it, as sin; it is holiness that hates iniquity.

Now there can be no sanctification, without justification, and this cannot be
without faith, for faith co^prehendeth justification, that is, absolution from
our sins, or the forgiveness of our sins, and an accepting and receiving us
into eternal life freely for Christ his sake, the adopting us into sons,
imputation of the righteousness, not for any works of me^, either past, present,
or ever shall be, but for the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ alone.

Again, the inward or isntrumental cause of repentance, is faith, which may
be called the mother of repentance, which brings it forth, as the word is
the begetter, and so may have the name of a father; for he that is without
faith, though he has a name to live, yet is he dead, for the just shall live
by faith; no life then without faith, and no repentance without life. Hab. 2. 4.


The fourth part of repentance, is the fruits of faith, holiness, and
righteousness of life, toward God and our neighbors, thanksgiving, prayer,
zeal, and other works of Christian charity. Now seeing the fruits of
repentance brings forth zeal, where there is little zeal, there is little
repentance, and where no zeal there is no repentance, for he that repents
truly, the fruits of his faith will make him sorry, when he cannot further
Gods glory as much as he would, if he cannot enjoy his word, if he see God
dishonored, and false worship established, he will pine and grieve, and fall
away, as it is written, The zeal of thine house has eaten me. Ps. 69. 9. and
1. King. 19. 10. Elias says, I have been very zealous for the house of the
Lord: it is said, he was so stricken with sorrow, that he was ready to die,
because he saw not the glory of God go forwards: so that where there is true
zeal in their repentance, there also the fruits of their faith brings forth
this affection of sorrow and mourning, declaring thereby, the zeal that the
faithful can offer unto God for their sins.

The third part,
viz. How manifold is the meditation of the passion of Christ. The meditation
of the passion is fourefold. 1. Literal or historical. 2. Spiritual, which
is proper to the believers. 3. Exemplariall. 4. Allegorical.

WE must use our selves to the old and accustomed words for our instruction
sake, seeing that we have none other, the Literal meditation is the knowledge
of the reading, the hearing, the thinking of, and the reciting of the History
of the Passion, as it is preached or written, printed or painted, so it be
without any superstition. So as the desire and study of learning, and
practicing of Repentance, and amendment of our sinful lives with confirming of
our faith, may thereby be the better stirred up, and kindled in our hearts.
This meditation therefore is not to be despised. For the cogitating or thinking
of the history, is a beginning of the ardent and earnest motions wherewith God
indeed is well pleased. As it is written, faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God; hereunto pertains many godly sermons, books, prose, or
verse, treating of the Passion of Christ, all which without superstition, ought
godly to be used and continued.

There are many things in the reading of this history to be thought upon, as
what the Passion is, what be the causes: and in this passion, what is the
difference between the passion of Christ, and the passion of other Saints of
God; how it is to be applied, and what fruits may follow the applying of the
passion. But because these cannot be done without the spiritual meditation, we
will speak first thereof.

The spiritual meditation thereof is this, first truly to tremble and fear
at the knowledge of sin, and of Gods anger and wrath powered out upon the
son of God; then to be illuminated with a new light, and cleernesse, and to
rejoice and settle it sure in faith, that Gods anger is pacified by his son,
and for his sake that our sins be forgiven us, and everlasting life restored
unto us, whereby we may repose our whole confidence in God, being fully and
assuredly resolved, that remission of our sins, everlasting righteousness,
and life is given Heb. 2. 4. Ephesians 2 7, 8, 9. Romans 5. 1. Romans 3. 24. 25. Act. 10.
43. Romans 1. 17. 1. Ioh. 3. 36. 1. Cor. 1. 30. 1. Cor. 2. 2. 1. Ioh. 5. 10.
not to others only, but to us also, and that freely through the mercy of God,
for the merits of Christ alone, by whom we are made righteous before God, and
heirs of eternal life, because our only satisfaction, and holiness of
Christ, is our righteousness before God, and we cannot apply it unto our
selves any other way, then by faith. In this meditation a godly mind sees and
rightly considers what the Passion is: for what the Passion of Christ is,
these words in the 27 of Matthews Gospel, v. 46. do very evidently declare,
viz. Jesus cried with a loud voice saying, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani, my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Observe the manner how Jesus delivered these
words, viz. crying out and that with a loud voice, for even as a vapor drawn
up by the virtue of the Sun, and Stars, ascending up into the middle region,
through the heat that is in it, and the cold compassing it, breaks out into a
violent stroke, and a vehement noise, which causes the thunder; even so
Christ, through the extremity that his humanity suffered for our sins, was
driven to break out into this thundering voice, and cry alowd, Quare
dereliquisti me? why have thou forsaken me? God indeed had forsaken him until
his anger was pacified, and his wrath appeased. Notwithstanding that he
feels himself as it were wounded with Gods wrath, and forsaken for our sins,
yet he cease not to put his confidence in God, and call upon him. Which is
written to teach us in all affliction to trust still in God, be the assaults
never so grievous to the flesh. And yet this loud crying noise was not of the
fear of death; for, should not he that saves all men, be able to save
himself? Neither fear of his enemies, nor pains of his torments, as commonly
it fares with men, who suffer many torments at the hands of their enemies,
without giving any knowledge or note unto their adversaries, of their pain,
sorrow, or grief: for so might he as well as any have borne it out with
silence. Saul sheathed his sword in his own bowels; Sampson brought death upon
his own head, rather the^ the Philistines should triumph over him: But it was
our sins, and the heavy burden thereof, (the weight whereof none else could
ever have borne) which this deeply tormented Christ did undergo. Through the
which our sins, and iniquities, God was so highly displeased, that they being
laid upon his sons shoulders, made him to cry out with a loud voice, about the
ninth hour of the day, saying, O my God, my God, why have thou for saken me?
Oh therefore I beseech you, let the horror of it be fresh in our memories, and
the meditation imprinted in our thoughts, so that our hands may tremble, and
shake for fear, and our whole bodies quiver and quake with terror of it, when
any evil imagination is hatched in our hearts, or any wicked deed should be
acted with our hands, that we may be terrified from nourishing sin within our
bosom, that laid so heavy a burden and so mighty a Cross upon our sweet
crucified Jesus, to make him cry with so loud a voice. Oh what envy had robbed
the hearts of the Jews, and dispoiled all their senses of common humanity,
yea what infernal phrensey, what Tyrannous impiety, what execrable Tyranny
can be compared to this Jewish cruelty, that they could find no remorse of
pity, to bestow one mite of mercy to help and ease the intolerable pains of
our grievous Savior, when he cried with so loud and pitiful voice, saying, O
my God, my God, why have thou for saken me Mat 27. 46.
, whose bloody sweat came trickling down to the ground Luke 22. 44.
, yet notwithstanding their eyes were more hard then a rock, that they could
not yield one tear of pity, and hearts more unapt then Adamant, to relent
with any tender compassion, when they saw so woeful and doleful a spectacle,
which was forcible enough to have drawn streams of tears out of the driest
eye that ever was in the head of man, and to have incited a multitude of heavy
and sorrowful groans, out of the hardest heart that ever God made. Oh! was
there ever cruelty like unto this; that they should be attempting, spitting,
smiting, and mocking the son of God, put the crown of thorns on his head,
nail him to the Cross, and when he was a thirst, to give him vinegar to
drink, and crucify him.

So that now, I say, what the Passion of Christ is, these words do plainly
teach us, viz: O my God, my Mat. 27. 48.
God why have thou for saken me: My soul is thirsty even Mat 26. 38.
unto death: these and many other examples may show us the Cross of Christ.
The first by diet, when he fasted Mat. 4. 2. Mat. 26. 26.
forty days, and forty nights, the second by Electuarie, when he gave his
most precious body and blood in his last supper; the third, by sweat at his
agony in the garden, the Luke 22. 44. Mat. 27. 30.
fourth by plaster, when his face was spitted upon by the Jews, the fifth by
potion, when he tasted vinegar mixed Ioh. 19. 29.
with gall, the sixth by letting blood, when his hands and feet were pierced,
yea when his heart vain was stricken, Ioh. 19. 34.
his sides goared with a spear. But this one thing more note, that no man
could take his life from him, but he laid John 10. 18. Act. 2. 24. 1. Ioh 1. 2.
1. Ioh 4 9. Ioh. 3. 16. Mat. 1 23. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
it down himself, for he being both God and man, had power both to lay down
his life, and power to take it up again that he might by the power of his
godhead sustain in his flesh, the burden of Gods wrath, and recover for us
that righteousness which we by the fall of Adam had lost. And herein are we
also taught a doctrine of his double nature, viz: his deity which has many
things that in the humanity was never performed; and his humanity, having
diverse things not answerable unto the godhead, whereupon speaks a Father in
this manner? When Christ suffered death in his flesh upon the Cross, the
godhead and manhood were still together, but his godhead did not suffer: that
we might be justified, not only in his flesh, but also in his Divinity, and
that we might be saved, both in his godhead and manhood together: for this
cause was the whole enduring of al his baseness, vileness, and humiliation, of
his taking upon him our infirmities (sin only excepted) which brought upon him
the horrible wrath of God, against sin, with griefs in heart, in soul and
body, which he took, and suffered patiently, only for the making amends unto
his Father for our sins, and the pacifying of Gods most wrathful judgment,
against mankind, by this his offering himself a sufficient sacrifice or
equal price answerable fully for the sins of the whole world. To conclude,
this his sacrifice caused the sweet streams of pure water of life, to flow out
of the clear and continual springing fountain of his mercies daily powered
upon mankind, comfortable to cool the heat of our thirsty tongues, and as
medicinable to cure the spreading malady of Adams fall, which infected our
souls with the leprosy of sin.

The Passion of Christ is threefold. 1 External. 2 Internal. 3 Consisting of
both.


First External, being in the body members and parts thereof, as the tearing
and rending of the veins.

Secondly Internal, as the sorrow and grief working in the heart, and the
great torment arising out of the fear of the tearing of the body, and death,
and also the feeling of Gods wrath.

Thirdly, that which consists of both, is belonging to the body and soul,
and to the whole Christ, God and man. The injury, afflicting, slandering,
scoffing, the crown of thorns, and other like torments concurring together in
his body, pearcing (as it were) and entering even unto the Divinity, which it
self never suffered, because it is unchangeable, and therefore impassible.
Touching his Divinity, it did always support his humanity, which Habacuck
perceiving says in his Hab. 3. 4.
third Chapter thus, ibi abseondita est fort it udo eius, he had horns coming
out of his hands, and that was the hiding of his power. For as the Sun when it
is covered with a cloud is hidden, and yet it is not clean spent, and gone,
and that light, which spreading all the world over, illustrateth every thing,
with his clear brightness, is included in a small obstacle from us: even so
was the Deity hid in that humanity which he put on him, and yet separated
neither from body nor soul. We read in Leviticus that the sacrifice that did
purify and cleanse from Leprosy was on this sort; Levit. 14.
they took two male Sparrowes being alive, one of them was killed and put into
an earthen vessel, having fair and clear running water, the other Sparrow
that was alive his wings, with Cedarwood, and scarlet cloth, with hyssop, were
dipped in the blood of the slain Sparrow, which he that was diseased, and
infected with the leprosy, was sprinkled withal. The slain Sparrow
signifies the humanity of Christ put to death: the Sparrow that was left alive
signifies the Godhead of Christ, which was impassible. But yet for all this it
was diversely violated, and abused by the enemies thereof, and as much as in
themlay, was hurt, blasphemed, and debased.

As when the high Priests accused Christ, for saying that he was the son of
God, also when they spat in his face, and bad him prophecy, tell who it was
that stroke him, and also they bowed themselves before him, they smit him with
their fists, saying, Hail king of the Jews, being mocked, crowned with
thorns, overburthened, and laden with bearing of his Cross, which they made
him to carry, nailed on the Cross, and being both with jests, and scoffs,
gybed at in this wise, if thou be the son of God, come down from the Cross,
and save thy self; here now was the word, even the son of God, yea the whole
Trinity, moved both to a just commiseration, and a rightful indignation.

Howbeit we must understand, that this Passion of Christ had not then his
beginning, when he was crucified. But all his life time after his conception,
by the space of thirty years even unto the punishment, and pain of the
Cross, to have bin nothing else but a continual and full Passion, misery,
satisfaction and sacrifice for our sins. He was borne an infant, and laid in
the manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn, but in the stable,
in cold and want of all things Luk 2. 7.
needful, whereupon says Gregory, Christ came from heaven into a woman's
womb, from a woman's womb into a cratch or manger, from the manger to the
cross, from the cross to the grave, and from the grave he went to heaven
again. But to recite or speak more of his troubles, (what can I say, but that
which has been already spoken of by others?) in his infancy he fled from the
tyranny of Herod, and was carried into Egypt. After his baptism, he was
oftentimes, and diversely tempted, by the space of two days of Satan, whom
afterward acknowledged and openly confessed Mar. 5. 7.
him to be the son of the most high God. The princely Prophet David, in the
110. Psalm, speaking Psalm. 110. 7.
of Christ's afflictions, and his passion through the which he should enter
into his glory, uses these words, He shall drink of the brook in the way. The
which for the diversity of interpretations, I am the more bolder to insert,
that among many the plainest and truest signification might be best known and
allowed. The jews which always fed themselves with the vain hope of the
coming of such a Messiah, as should be a certain earthly, civil, and
powerful king, do very fondly apply this sentence unto victories, for thus
they expound it, He shall drink of the brook, that is to say, of the blood
of them that are slain; as if the Prophet should say, that the Messiah, as a
mighty conqueror, should perform so great a slaughter upon his enemies, that
the blood of the slain should stream and flow like a brook, and that the
whole army as victorious, and conquerours, might drink of the brook in in
the way, as they are pursuing their enemies. In the which form and manner of
speech they suppose it to be thus signified, that Christ will be satisfied
with the blood of his enemies. But seeing the text in this place, speaks
nothing of blood, neither can blood be thought a fit drink for conquerours;
except it be figuratively spoken, as in the prophecy of Balaam, where the
drinking of blood is referred unto the Lion, neither is it spoken of the people
of Israel, but by a figure among the later writers. Some think it a similitude
taken from the circumstance of strong and valiant captains, who in their chase
and pursuit of their enemies slack nothing of their heat and fervency, neither
will be hindered, with any care or desire of meat, drink, sleep, or any other
pleasure, to the end they might the better follow, and enforce the course and
pursuit of the victory, but content and very well pleased to quench their
thirst with water for their drink, running out of every brook, which they
meet withal, never leave chasing and pursuing their enemies. As Gedeon made
trial of the valor and virtue of his soldiers courage by their drinking of
water. Judge. 7.


Thus therefore would they have this verse understood of Christ, as if by this
manner of speech, a warlike strength and courage were to be attributed unto
him, that he is so hot and hasty, so eager and resolute in pursuing his
victories, that he will not cease and leave of, nor by any means, either for
love of meat, drink, or any other delights whatsoever, be revoked from his
purpose; and so by this means may strike it into the hearts of his enemies,
how terrible and fearful his power and strength is. Howbeit we will hold the
most plain and simple sentence that the phrase it self does yield and offer
us. The Prophets speech first tended unto Christ, the king ascribing unto him
the chiefest power and victories over all his enemies; and therefore, least
after the manner of the Jews, this should be understood of a corporal
kingdom, he adds the doctrine of his passion, which should open, as it
were, a way from him unto glory, and advancement in his kingdom, as it is
said, it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to Luke 24.
enter into his glory. For, to drink in the Scripture is taken thus, to be
afflicted, for thus says the Lord, behold, they whose judgment was not to
drink of Ier. 24. 12.
the cup, have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall escape free? thou
shall not go free, but thou shall surely drink of it: which is as much to say,
I have not spared my own people, and how should I pity thee? Can ye drink
of the cup which I shall drink of? But there is somewhat more contained in
this phrase, when he says, He shall drink of the brook, then if he had
simply said, He shall drink of the cup: for to drink of the cup siguifieth the
suffering and enduring but of a part or portion of some certain misery
allotted unto any one: but to drink of the brook in this place, signifies
the tasting of al kind of miseries, and the undergoing of the greatest burdens
of all miseries, and calamities, even in the highest degrees. For Torrens a
brook, imports both the greatness and fierceness of miseries and
calamities, streaming and flowing of all sides. For Christ felt the anger of
God to be powered upon him, yea and the sins of all mankind Instar Torrentis,
like a river brook to run and flow round about him on every side; therefore
is he said to drink of the brook in the way: and by this his passion, says
the Prophet, shall he enter into the kingdom, and exalt abit caput, and shall
lift up his head, that is, he shall rise again from death unto life, and shall
rule in power, and this is to be held as a sentence most significant and
plain, showing the kingdom of Christ to be far more otherwise, then that
which the Jews fondly dream of.

For Christ through miseries, afflictions, and through death, which he suffered
is ascended up into the glory, that has gotten him a name, that is, dignity
and renown.

Now then, seeing that it behooves us to be confirmed, Phil. 1. 9.
and made like unto the image of the son of God, let us not think, or look to
have the Church glorified, before she be mortified, that is, tossed, and
confirmed through many afflictions and calamities. Our Savior Christ drank
deeply of the water brook, for he was made weak, he hungreth, he thirsts,
he is bitten with the cold of winter, and dried up with the outrageous heat of
summer, he weepeth, he watches, he is troubled, he is despised, and daily
beholds, and thinks upon the Tyranny of Satan, working against mankind,
and the extreme miseries of all men, as also the horrible anger and wrath of
God, powered upon the son himself, with sharpness of punishment, and with
all the great ingratitude of the greatest part of the whole world, yea the
carelessness, and impenitencie even of Christians themselves. The persequtions
of the godly, and those grievous afflictions of his afflicted and troubled
heart, do these words set down and declare, I must be baptized with a
baptism, and how Luke 12. 50.
am I grieved until it be ended.

He came unto his own, and those people received him not, his Disciples are
indocil and dull in understanding his doctrine, Judas betrayed him, the rest
do forsake 1. Sin.
him. In mount Olivet he shakes and trembles, and mournefully lamenteth with
such great weight and heaviness, as exceeds the hugenes both of heaven and
earth, he sweateth blood, and being betrayed with a traiterous kiss, is
apprehended of his own people, and led forth like a thief or a murderer.

In the house of Annas and Caiphas, and in the counsel 2. The law.
of the high priests, with false witnesses is he brought forth, spit upon,
whipped and derided, and here he wrestleth with the law, and the curse of the
law.

In the house of Herod he is despised, and mocked of the 3. The world.
chief Lord, and of all that were in his Court, and being attired in a new and
strange habit, like a fool and an idiot with asses ears, having his nails
pulled from his feet, clad in a long side gown, with a book in his hand, (for
so those Philosophers the enemies of Christ painted and set him forth, as
Tertullian writes) he is sent unto Pilate, and here Christ wrestleth with the
world. He is accused in the common hall, being overcharged 4 The Devil.
with opprobrious nips and taunts, with blows, and blasphemies, he is condemned
to be crucified, and to be executed in punishment with two thieves, and here
he wrestleth with the kingdom of the Devil. He is stretched out upon the
cross, he is hanged as a 5. The anger of God and death.
most vile transgressour between two thieves, he is mocked, and strives with
the anger of God, and death it self, he is pierced, etc.

Through the bitterness and sharpness of these his miseries and calamities
the son of God cries, Save Psalm. 69.
me O God, for the waters are entered even unto my soul, in this Psalm we may
see what the passion of Christ is, and what he suffered. Let us now say
somewhat concerning the causes of the passion of Christ.

The principal efficient cause is the will of God, and his own person, being
ready to perform the obedience unto his eternal father, whose wrathful anger
could not by any other host or sacrifice be appeased. And therefore, says the
Psalm, 40. 7. Lo I come, in the volume of the book, it is written of me, I
desired to do thy good will and pleasure O God, yea thy law is within my heart.

The book is the old Testament, the Roll is the sum, the argument of the
old Testament, are the fore mentions of Christ, the will of God is the
exinanition, and debasing of his son, his obedience, his humbleness and
offering up his body upon the cross. He comes forth as a bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoices like a mighty man to run his race. Psalm. 19. 5.


The object moving the son of God, is sin, and damnation of mankind, which
he would not that it should utterly perish. Therefore, says he, in Esa. 43.
thou have made me to serve him with thine iniquities; I am he which take away
transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins: and also
the tyranny of the devil upon mankind.

The impulsive cause, is the great and exceeding love of God the Father, and of
the son unto mankind, of whom it is written, God so loved the world, that
he Psalm. 103, 13.
gave his only son etc. and David says, As the Father has compassion over
his children, so has the Lord on the^ that fear him: for he knows whereof
we be made, he remembers we are but dust: and therefore the mercy of God, and
the intercession of his son, offering himself to be punished for us is the
Impulsive cause.

The Subject or matter of the passion, is the very son of God made man, as the
Prophet says, I was not rebellious, neither turned I my back unto the
smiters, and Esa 50. 5.
my cheeks unto the nippers, I hid not my face from shame and spitting. 1.
Cor. 2. they have crucified the Lord of glory.

The formal cause is the obedience of the person it self. The final causes
are four, first that God should be worshipped, and praised for his love,
Justice, and mercy. Secondly, that the scripture might be fulfilled for the
satisfying of the will and fore promise of God. Thirdly, that mankind might
thereby be reconciled un to God, and be saved. Fourthly, that the works of the
Devil might be destroyed.

Of the difference between the passion of Christ, and the passion of other
Saints of God.

All Saints and holy men are sinners, conceived and borne in sin, but Christ is
both everlasting God and man, free, from sin, and unspotted, and being
righteous and 1 Pet. 3.
just, died for the unrighteous, and unjust. Moreover, there is a difference of
the causes of the Passions, for all we do suffer for our sins: and if we had no
sin, there should no punishment be laid upon us, but Christ suffered for us,
and laid down his life for our sins.

There is also a difference of the passions.

Touching both the matter, and form thereof, we that believe, although we
suffer the death, yet through a steadfast faith and hope which we lay hold upon
Christ Jesus our Savior and redeemer, our death will be unto us, but a sure and
joyful passage unto eternal life. But Christ bearing the sins of all the
whole world, upon himself, which the first Adam caused to be committed, yet he
as a second happy and blessed Adam; nay more, a mighty Savior, felt for our
sakes, all the heavy wrath and anger of God, which was powered out upon him, and
would not deny it, but contentedly suffered it, yea to be laid and done upon
his own body, and so thereby he set us free from the wrath of God, and eternal
death.

Again, although we suffer, we do not thereby deserve either unto our selves,
or unto any other, life and salvation, and therefore Christ's Passion differs
from all other passion of Saints, first in the special property of his own
Passion, which is only a sacrifice for our sins, secondly in the persons,
thirdly in causes: and fourthly in the matter it self, as is already said.

The exemplariall meditation of the Passion of Christ.

The exemplariall meditation beholds Christ as a teacher, and observes him
as a guide and leader unto eternal life, and studieth to follow his humility,
obedience, meekenes, patience, as himself says, learn of me, for I am meek,
and humble heart; he that takes not up his Cross; and follows me, is not
worthy of me, be ye followers of Christ as dear children, and 1. Pet. 2.
Christ suffered, leaving unto us an example, that ye should follow his steps:
and 1. Ioh. 2. he that says he abides in Christ, ought so to walk, even as
he walked. And Paul 2. Phil. Be ye like minded, every man esteem better of
an other, then of his own self; look not every man of his own things only, but
every man on the things of other men. Let the same mind be in you that was in
Christ, for Romans 8. It behooves us to suffer with Christ, that with him we may
be glorified. Now it is well known that our Savior went through many
afflictions; as whips, thorns, buffets, and the most shameful death of the
Cross. And through all these must he be contented to follow Christ Jesus,
that will be a Christian if matter so require.

Therefore our Savior Christ in his last Testament did commend unto his
Father, his spirit, to the Jews his body, to the good thief Paradise, to the
vnrepenting sinner hell, to the Apostles his Gospel, and to the faithful
affliction for their trial. Furthermore let us learn, that as there were two
crosses prepared for Christ Jesus, the one of passion, (as that wooden cross
whereon his body suffered; the other of compassion, whereby his soul suffered)
so there is prepared a double cross for every good Christian, the one of the
soul, the other of the body. The cross of Jobs body was that power that Satan
received of the Lord, to afflict his flesh, the cross of his soul, was the
cursed counsel of his wicked wife, who said, curse God and live, Job. 2. The
cross prepared for king David's body, was that Saul his father in law, and
Absolon his son sought his death; but this was that which afflicted his
mind, that the man whom he had continually fed, should be false hearted unto
his person. Paul's body was in many dangers by sea, and by land, by night and by
day, by thieves and by robbers, but that only afflicted his mind that he
travailed among treacherous brethren, unto his exemplanal meditation, do
appertain these four parts, first the Cross: Secondly comfort. Thirdly,
patience and humility. Fourthly, natural love, peace and concord.

The allegorical meditation, is that which considers the tipes and similes,
representing such like things as should happen to the Church and members
thereof. The two thieves, are an image of the whole mankind, subject unto
death, in the midst, Christ is a redeemer, the one part is freed, the other
abides in death; the scoffs and taunts, are the furies and outrages of
Hypocrites, whereby the Church is scorned and derided. The dividing and tearing
of his garments, notes Heretics tearing the Gospel in pieces, and the
wicked ones, snatching away the faculties, and maintenance of the Church.

A table, wherein is set down a collation of the whole course of Christ,
compared with the estate of the Church.

Eve^ as at the birth of Christ, the cleerenes and brightness of God, overshined
the shepherds. So in the primitive Church the glory of God shined over the
Apostles, that they might find Christ in the Scriptures, as the shepherds saw
him swadled in his clothes. As in the first year after Christ, was borne,
Herod endeavoreth cruelty, and exercises it upon infants, that there by he
might destroy Christ: So in the first year of the Iubile, of the new
Testament, tyrants exercised cruelty upon all the Apostles. As Christ fled into
Egypt, and there continued until the death of Herod. So the doctrine of Christ
long suffered persecution, and corruptions, and lurked in the assemblies, and
companies of the godly, until the death of Tyrants and Heretics, Domitian,
Dioclesian, Julian, etc.

As Mary lost Christ in the 12 year of his age, and in vain sought him among
his kinsfolks, and at last found him in the Temple amongst the Doctors,
opposing and asking them questions. So the Virgin Mary, even the Church in the
12 year of Iubile, being troubled with many heresies, had utterly lost Christ,
had she not found him in the Temple, that is in holy Scriptures, Prophetical
and Aposticall.

After the 30 year of Christ, as John Baptist teaches in the wilderness,
repentance and faith in Christ, who is baptized, and as it were with the figure
pointed out, and showed forth unto the people. So in the 30 year of our
Iubile, the true and sincere doctrine of the Church, both of the law and the
Gospel, began by little and little to be restored in the desert, not in the
Hals of the high priests, and Palaces of the Caesar's and kngs of the world, but
in a few certain schools and cities. As neither John Baptist, nor Christ
himself did openly teach in the Temple at Jerusalem (whenas the high Priests
did possess the same) but in the wilderness, or in Galile. So the doctrine of
the Gospel has no place in the kingdom of the Pope, but either privately as
it were in a desert, or else under certain Princes, and limits of some
kingdoms, is it heard and favored. As in the time of Christ Satan stirred and
raised up diverse tumults, and vproares, through blasphemous Judas of Galile,
Simon Magus, and such like. So perturbers and heretics do always hurt the
Church by their bringing in, and giving of scandalous offenses and stum bling
blocks. As Christ after three years and almost half preached, afterward
suffers, is crucified, dies, is buried, rises again, ascends up into
heaven, and reigns in eternal glory. So after three years and a half,
after the year of Iubile, from the renewing of true doctrine, after many
sufferings of the godly, which are every where common, the Church shall be
freed, and glorified forever, but the whole time shall not fully be expired, for
the days shall be shortened.

THE FOVRTH PART.
Which contains the Types, Figures, Allegories, similes and such like of the
old Testament, or prophesies of the Prophets.

AS out of Adams sleeping, is a Rib taken, and thereof Evah is made, so out of
the celestial or second Adam, that is, Christ sleeping on the Cross, and
making himself to be as it were, nothing (in his Passion) and death, was the
church framed, and made his Spowse, Ephesians. 5.

Abel both in name and deed is despised, who notwithstanding is just and
innocent, he is carried forth into the field, and is slain of his brother
Caine, Genesis 4. brethren Christ became a very worm, for us, and is slain of
his Isaac being ready to be offered of his Father, is a Type, and figure of
Jesus Christ, Genesis 22.

Joseph is not borne of foul Laea, but of fair Rachel, which word signifies
labors, and wearines, Christ is not borne of the Gentiles, but of the Jews,
Esaias, 11. of the stock of Iesse, Mich. 3. in Bethlehem where Rachel was buried
Ioh. 4. and Bethlehem signifies the house of bread.

Joseph is sent forth to seek out his brethren, to refresh the^, and recover
the^ again to his father: Christ is sent from the father unto mankind, which
was lost to seek it, and reconcile it unto God.

Joseph is divested of his Pall, and stately coat and cast it into the
Cesterne, Christ is dealt withal and handled, as a man bereaved of al divine
glory, forsaken of God, and as one in whom there was no grace or goodness, he is
apprehended, etc. Joseph is sold of the Ismaelites, and is lead into Egypt,
when as his brethren thought him quite cast away. Christ is sold and put away
of the Jews, given to the Gentiles, and to the people whose king and Savior
he becomes when as the Jews thought him to be of no reputation, Joseph is
with lies accused of his impudent mistress, and is cast into prison; Christ is
falsely accused of the Jews and heretics, crucified and thrown into the
grave, guiltless Joseph lies in prison between two guilty offenders, a
butler and baker, of whom the one is slain, the other is saved; innocent
Christ, is condemned between two thieves, of whom the one, on the right hand is
saved the other condemned, Joseph freed out of prison is honored; Christ
escaping out of perils and dangers is crowned with honor and glory, Jacob and
Joseph, do come together again, reviving in spirit, and there is one fold,
and one house of the Jews and the Egyptians; Christ and the believers at the
day of judgment, shall all meet together, and out of al Nations there shall be
one people in Christ for ever. The flaying of the pascall lamb, Exodus 12. was
a Type, and figure of Christ, as it is written Ioh. 1. Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world, the unleavened bread, does signify
purity sincerity of the doctrine and life Evangelicall, the sacrifices of sins
and offenses, Lev. 14. were Types and figures of the true pacifying sacrifice
as, Heb. 5. The quick Goat, that was spent and bearing the iniquities of the
children of Israel, Levit. 16. is Christ made the slaughter for our sins. A red
Cow without spot, Number. 16. is offered up for our sins, Christ is the Red Cow,
being for the weakness of Nature, taken in the state of humiliation, without
sin, cleanses us, by his blood from all sins, as the brazen Serpent lifted up
upon a poale, Number. 21. heals those that are bitten with Serpents, Ioh. 3. so
Christ the son of man must be lift up to ascend into heaven, to heal the sins
of the whole world, Jonah lying three days in the whales belly, is a Type and
figure of Christ dying, buried, and rising again the third day.

FINIS.
A SPECIAL TABLE OF THE COMmon places briefly containing the principal
things handled in this Treatise.
First the chief and principal motives and causes, that should move and
stir us up to the earnest meditation of the passion. The first motive is the
severe commandment of Almighty God. page 1. The second is the dignity, the
majesty and highness of the person suffering for us. 7 The third motive is
the weakness of our nature. 10 The fourth motive that should stir us up to the
meditation of the passion of Christ is the amplitude and excellency of the
doctrine touching many difficult and high matters therein contained, and
chiefly these five following. The first is the divine justice of God, not
forgiving sin without satisfaction. 21 The second is the greatness of Gods
wrathful anger conceaved against sin. 32. The third is the greatness of
sin, and the deformity of man's whole nature. 24. In this third point of the
fourth motive is showed how the evil of sin appears in 3 things, first in
the deformity for God does loath it. Secondly the iniquity, for the devil
does love it. Thirdly the infirmitic, for the whole world is infected with it.
28 The first point and matter of the fourth motive and cause is the infinite
love and affection of our Savior toward man kind. 35 The fist cause is the
fruits and effects of Christ his passion, the first benefits are such as take
away from us things evil and mortal, whereof are seven sorts. The first is
the freeing of us from sin. 37. The second is the freeing us from the curse
of the law. ibid The third is the freeing us from the wrath of God. ib. The
fourth is the freeing us from the devil. ib. The fifth is the freeing us from
the world and the vileness thereof. 38. The sixth is the freeing us from death.
ib. The 7 is deliverance from damnation and hell. ib. Now follows seven other
benefits which we receive by the passion of Christ. The first is our
reconciliation with God. 39 The second is remission of our sins. ib. The
third is righteousness. ib. The fourth is the giving of the holy Ghost. ib.
The fifth is our victory against sin. ib. The sixth is salvation and life
eternal. ib. The seventh is a compendious Epitome and Catalogue of the
benefits which a Christian enjoys by the death cross, and passion of Christ.
40
THE SECOND PART.
With what mind we should come to the meditation of the passion. The second
part unto the things which we have already spoken of (being well considered
(it follows that we bring with us a true pemtent mind, the practice and
exercise whereof consists in these four points of repentance following.
First what repentance is. 42. Now follows the true repentance. 44. This true
repentance has four parts: the first, contrition of the heart. 46. Secondly
unfeigned confession. 47. Thirdly faith, which is the ground of repentance. 49.
Fourthly, the fruits of faith. 50
THE THIRD PART.
How manifold is the meditation of the passion of Christ. viz. the meditation
of the passion is fourefold. First litterall or historical. 51. Secondly
spiritual. 67. 3. Exemplerical. 82. 4. Allegorical. 83 The passion it self how
manifold it is, viz. The passion of Christ is threefold. 1. External. 2.
Internal. 3. Consisting of both. 56 The cause of the passion of Christ. The
principal efficient cause is the will of God. 64 The object moving the son
of God is sin and damnation. 64 The impulsive cause is the great and
exceeding love of God the father, and of the son unto mankind. 65 The subject
or matter of the passion is the very son of God made man. ib. The formal cause
is the obedience of the person it self. ib The final causes are four, first
that God should be worshipped for his love, justice, and mercy. Thirdly that
the Scripture might be fulfilled for the satisfying of the will and force,
promise of God. Thirdly, that mankind might thereby be reconciled unto God, and
be saved. Fourthly, that the works of the devil might be destroyed. ib. Of
the difference between the passion of Christ, and the passion of other Saints
of God. ib. There is also a difference of the passions. ib. A table wherein is
set down a collation of the whole course of Christ, compared with the estate
of the Church. 68.
THE FOVRTH PART.
Contains the types, figures, allegories, similes, and such like of the old
Testament, or Prophesies of the Prophets. 70
FINIS.
MY Author did the impression buy
And from the press he did me take
That none should sell me certainly
But he himself which did me make.
Except it be his nearest friend
Which may me sell, both give and lend.

