THE IESVITES GOSPEL: Written by themselves. Discovered and published by W.
Crashaw, B. of Divinity, and preacher at White-chappell. The second Impression
Corrected and enlarged by the Author.

printer's device of Bernard Alsop, featuring a head with an exotic head-dress
and pendulums hanging at each side (not in McKerrow)

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at his house, being the
next house to Saint Annes Church 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR William Cockaine, the now Lord Mayor, and Sir
Francis Jones, Lord Mayor Elect; of the ancient and honorable City of London,
and to the reverend and renowned assembly, the Court of Aldermen.
The spirit of Wisdom, Truth Zeal, and unity, be multipied.
IT is well known to the learned, and many your selves right Honorable, and
Worshipful, that the Jesuits (the Popes best and dearest sons) have not yet
troubled the world a hundred years: for the Pope that to his own hurt
excommunicated Henry the 8. and against his will called the conuentikle of
Trent, established also the order of the Jesuits Paul the 3. in the year 1540.
allowed and established the order of the Jesuits, being begun by these 10.
named in the Bull. Ignatius Loyal^ Petrus Faber, Iaco^^^ Laynes, Claudius Iai^^
Pascha^ Broet, Francis^ Xauie^, Alphon. Salmeron Simon Rodericus, Ioanne^
Coduis. Nich. Bobadilla. and restrained their number to 60. but 30. year after
in another Bull h^^ enlarged the^, to as many as they could get.
what their order is, what their vows be, and what their Religion, you may
know out of the book called the Jesuits Rule. What service they have done
their Master the Pope, all men guess, wise men know, and all Nations in
Christendom feel to their pain, more or less. And how sensible the Pope is
of their service, apeares in that the first 5. Popes in their time, in
recompense thereof, have bestowed no less then 36 See the book calle^ Regula
Iesuitica^ print^ at Rome, 1580. and sine^ at Lions, and obseru^ wisely some of
the^ rules, and you shall find that the present state, of a great part of
Christendom is a large coment upon the Jesuits rule.
Bulls or Charters of Privileges upon the society (besides some which we shall
never know of) every one co^firming or enlarging another, and the later
yielding more ample graces and favors then the former: Now if in their first
40. years, (being the time^ of their infancy) they were able to deserve so
well, what service may we think have they performed, and how great thanks have
they received of the latter popes in these last 30. years. of their age, when
they are come to strength and ripeness: for tho Sixtus 5. See the book called
Literae Apostolicae, quibus Institutio confirmatio and priuilegia. soc, Jesus
continentur: printed at Rome 1587.
(being as wicked and wily as themselves) perceiving their plots, and
discovering their deepest drifts; used them accordingly, and not only gave them
nothing he could keep from them, but intended also Watson in his quodlibers,
confesses as much, but this matter* has better proof then Watson.
the restrayning or ruinating of their order (had not they done as much for
him, as he intended the^) yet he and Paul the 4. only excepted (for it was ill
halting before 2. such criples) they can hardly name a Pope that lived a year
of whom they received not such favors, as may well testify to the world the
great account the Pope makes of them. And will you know the reason? their
devotion, their doctrine, and. their deeds, do merit it at his hands: what
their particular devotion to the Pope is, appears by the vow which they (above
all other: Regulars) make to the Pope of present and absolute obedience See the
book called Constitutiones Romanorum Pontif. per Petrum Matthaeum, ^ugduni
1588, amongst the Constitutions of Paul the 3. in the third consti^ution, page
305. there be the words of this vow
to do whatsoever he should command them, to go whethersoeuer he should send
them, to Turks, Insidels, Heretics, without excuse, denial or delay. Their
deeds for the Pope are answerable to their devotion toward him, for these 50.
years have they vpheld Popery Sol^aue diverse Popes confessed in the preambles
of the Bulls granted to the Jesuits, especially Paul the 3. in his third Bull
anno 45. and in his 5. an. 49. and Julius the 3. in his first, and Pius the 4.
in his first, and others.
as far as wit and learning, nay as far as craft and cruelty can uphold it,
which without them had utterly r^inated (as notwithstanding it shortly will,
and they with it, do what they can) They have picked out the finest young wits
of the world, these be their words in the regula Iesuitica, cap. 3. reg. ^4.
Inepta turba ad institutum nostru admitti non potest.
and so trained them up, that the Pope shall never want instruments to kill
Kings, to subvert states, to patch up a peace, or to break leagues as he
thinks good: let but the Devil devise it, and the Pope command it, and
forthwith the Jesuits will find him shall execute it.

Moreover what they have attempted for the Pope, in England, Scotland, Hungary,
Bohemia, Venice, and the Low Countries: what they have performed for him in
France and Poland: how they rule and reign in Spain and Italy, who so blind
as sees not? Bu^ ^s this all they have done? Nay they scatter themselves like
Locusts over all the world; and with the Frogs of Hgypt creep into great men's
houses, and first seduce the silly women, and not so content, work themselves
into the favors, at least into the Courts, Coaches, and counsels of Princes;
and diuing into men's consciences and counsels, by the stratagems of their
confession, and after into their purses and estates, by benefit of their
absolution, many orders of Friars and many popish nations have complained of
the Jesuits, in these espects.
and lastly into the conceits of the Vulgar, by an hypocritical austerity and
dissembled devotion, they have hereby gained more to the Pope their Lord and
Master, then all the Romish Clergy in the world besides: But is this yet all?
nay, that the Pope may seem to have a good cause, and not to do all things by
a strong hand, they have taken a course to make all writers in the world speak
for him: (an attempt which the former ages suspected not, and the future will
scarce believe) for some books they prohibit and extinguish and make it
damnable to open them: the rest be they old or new, printed or manuscript, they
alter add and take away For the first see their ^ook called, Index li^rorum
prohibitorum, ^et out by authority of several Popes. And for the second, see
the books called, Indices librorum expurgandorum, printed in Belgia, Italy, and
spain, as also Gregorij. Capuccini, Enchiridion Ecclesias^icum, and Posseuine
the Jesuit his apparatus sacer.
till they have sucked out the sweetness, and purged out all the goodness,
and taken out all testimonies of the truth: insomuch as if they had not been
warily watched, followed by the footesteps, and taken even in the manner, they
had not left one book allowed in the world, that had not spoken for the Pope:
Such worthy workmen are the Jesuits, that those good and worthy men which
preached and wrote against the Pope, whilst they lived, their Sermons and
writings shall testify for him, long after they are dead: But why do I offer
to discern or or discover Jesuits practices? alas, I am too silly and too
shallow, I confess I know them not, and yet I am sorry I know so much: my hope
is that their beginning, their breeding, their feeding, their growth, their
greatness, their rules and religion, their plots and practices, their murders
and massacres (being such as makes England banish them, Denmark detests them,
Venice will none of them, Italy, is weary, and France is sick of them, and
Spain it self is justly jealous of the^) My hope I say is, that a perfect
discovery of all these will be attempted by some that may make perfect that
small beginning and foundation, which in 2. little books is already laid in
that kind Aphorismi doct. Iesuitie. De abstrusioribus studijs Iesuitarum
mean time for the better uncasing of this Fox, and unmasking this Hypocrite,
let me come to that which is nearer to my Element, and consider a little of
their doctrines, which is the third means by which they have deserved so well
of the Papal state: concerning which, I will say nothing but what I know, and
what I dare refer and do submit to your just and iuditious censures, I say
therefore that whereas the Romish Church is that scarlet whore, Reu. 17. 1, 2.
etc.
and her Idolatries and superstitions the spiritual abominations with which
she makes drunk the inhabitants of the earth and that in this latter age her
cup of abominations was almost drunk up, and emptied even to the dreggs: in
this exigent and extremity these like Locusts fly out of the bottomless pit,
to repair the ruins of the Romish state, and to fill her Revel. 9. 2.
golden Cup with a new supply of spiritual fornications: to which end they
have first revived many devilish doctrines, half dead and damned in the
former ages, and what in former times were scarce muttered in corners by the
worst of their Predecessors, is now by them preached on the house tops: And
secondly, not so content, the better to fill her cup with the very quintessence
of most refined abominations: they have hatched many horrible doctrines and
hellish opinions never heard of in the elder ages; which are such excellent and
exquisite infections to a man's soul, that the purple Whore has willingly
thrown away Popery is much altered since the Jesuits both in their service, as
may be seen in their Missals and breuiaries: and in their ceremonies, as
appears in their pontificale and ceremoniale comparing the old and new
together.
a great part of her older druggs, to make room for the new and more precious
poisons confected by the Jesuits.

Of the first sort, and so of the second, I dare be bold to give you a taste,
though they be mortal poisons, because I know you are armed with Antidotes
and precious preservatives against them.

Of the first sort are these.
1 That an Image of God or Christ is to be worshipped with (...), that is, with
the same same worship as God himself: So teach Gretser and Gregory de Valent,
and say it is the common and received opinion,
2 That God has divided his Kingdom with the Virgin Mary, keeping justice to
himself but committing mercy to her. 3 That a man may appeal from Gods
justice to the mercy of the Virgin Mary. These two Biel and Bernardine de Bust
do teach and Posseuine the Jesuit, highly co^mends those very books.
4. That the Pope is superior to the Emperor, not only in spiritual but even in
temporal things, and ought to have place and predence before him ^o teaches
liber sacrarum ceremoniarum, Roman Ecclesie, which is highly commended by
Bellarmine as Posseuinus also confesses.

These and many others which scarce durst peep out in former times, are now by
the Jesuits made public and plausible doctrines, and being almost bur^ed and
forgotten, are by them again revived.

Of the second sort.
1 That God has made the Virgin Mary partaker of his divine power and majesty,
So teaches Horasius Tursellinus a Jesuit.
as far as he may. 2 That a man shall often time be sooner heard at Gods hand
in the mediation of the Virgin Mary, then of Jesus Christ. So teaches
Chrisostomus a Visit. a Cistertian, and is allowed by Posseuinus.
3 That a man may equivocate before a Magistrate. So teach Azorius and Tollet
and all Jesuits.
4 That Heresy makes a man incapable of a Kingdom, and makes him an Usurper,
that is otherwise a lawful King So teach Marianus Simancha, Bozius and others
allowed by the Jesuits.
5 That the Pope has power not only to pronounce what is heresy, but after
that to deprive him of his Kingdom, and to dispose of it as he thinks best.
So teaches Rosseus and others allowed by the Jesuits.

With many other, not convenient here to be perticularized which the former
times never heard of, at least in such manner as now they be holden,

But seeing they be all of two sorts, either touching the crown of Christ
himself, or the crowns of Kings his deputies on earth, I will desire you to
be contented with one example of both sorts. Concerning not such Kings as make
not themselves slaves and harlots to the purple whore: thus teaches a Jesuit
too well known in Eglnand.

See the book called Andrea Philopatris responsio ad Edictum Elizabethae ann.
91. sect. 2 artic. 157. page 109. editionis aug. 1592. This man is Arthur
Creswell the Jesuit.
It is the judgment of all Catholic Divines and Lawyers, and it is certain,
and de fide: that what Christian Prince soever, does apparently fall from the
Catholic Religion, and would also draw others with him, does Ipso facto
forthwith fall from all right, title, place and power of their Kingdoms or
Dominions, by force both of Gods and man's law, and this before any sentence be
pronouced against him by the Pope: and that all his Subjects are free from the
Oaths they have made to him. And they may. nay they ought (if they be able) to
put him down and cast him out from all government, as an Heretic, an
Apostate, and an enemy of God and the commonwealth etc. And this doctrine is
certain, undoubted and resined etc.

Alas that we should live to hear such doctrine taught, especially by an
Englishman I but whereas he styles himself a Divine and a Priest of Rome, we
thence conclude that he carried no such learning with him out of England, but
found it at Rome.

Concerning Christ, that which I have before set down is vile and wicked and
such as the elper world and misty times of Popery would have abhorred. But
there is one impiety of late broched by one Jesuit, and approved by all, so
horrible and heinous, as I want words to express it. Clarus Bonarseius a
Jesuit, writes it: Posseuine the Jesuit in the name of all other approues it.
But this I can say, it is such as the world yet never heard of, such as the
ages past feared not, and the future will not believe: nay such as we in these
days would not believe of our very enemies, if the evidence of the fact made
it not past all denial and excuse: for would a man imagine that those who
profess themselves the servants of Jesus Christ above other men, should
conceive of him, speak to him, and play with him, as with a sucking child in
his mothers arms? Nay that is nothing, they make him an underling to a woman,
and not his Person only but his blood and merits, and compare together his
blood and her milk, and upon comparison finds them so equal, that they mix
them together, and in the mixture finds the milk so excellent, that they
prefer it before the blood, as a thing more precious, and with which, they may
not be so bold as with the blood of Christ, and fear not to affirm that the
corruptions of our nature, and sins of our soul are healed and helped as
well by her milk as Christ's blood. A blasphemy whereat the Angels will
shrink, and the very devils tremble, and yet no doubt we shall find Jesuits
will defend it.

Having observed this blasphemy 2. or 3. years ago, I held my tongue,
expecting it would be discovered and reproved by some that could do it with
more authority, but failing of my hope, I long concealed my labors till now,
that the necessities of these evil times does force it from me: I therefore
do here discover it, and am bold to send it abroad under the protection of
your honorable names, that so all the world may know the state and government
of this honorable City, to be no approouers, but Censors and condemners of so
horrible and hideous Atheism.

I am therefore a suter to you all, in mine own and the name of all my
brethren the Clergy of this City, that you look well to the execution of the
laws, and yet rather against Popery then Papists: For it is the wicked Popery
that makes our men Papists, and ill subjects to God and the King: The men would
be good enough if the grounds of their religion were not wicked. Therefore we
beseech you have care, that Justice be so executed as rather the wickedness of
the Religion may be rooted out, then the persons punished as in his style, to
be The defender and propogatur of the true Christian Faith.

Honorable and worshipful, vouchsafe to hear us in this just and necessary
request, being no less then your Religion craves at your hands: The Clergy
and Ministry of England are slandered by the Papists, that we seek their
blood, and exasperate the state against them: but they do us wrong it is the
extirpating of Popery, not the blood of Papists, that we seek and sue for: we
pity their persons, and wish them rather all banished then any executed, but
we hate their heresies, and wish them censured, condemned, and extinguished as
as they deserve: This is the way fully to discover Antechrist, and to hasten
his confusion, for almost all Churches of Christendom have pronounced him
Antchrist, and his Religion Heresy: And this is the sure way to be free from
treasons, conspiracies inuations, murders and massacres, from which (as you
see) Denmark by this means is defended, and many countries well freed as
soon as they get free of Jesuits: and by the contrary we see the miserable
accidents in France, to the amazement of the Chri^tian world: for when all the
truth is known, and the whole account cast up, the charge of those foul facts
the murders of 2. Kings, and many more unnatural disasters, will lie upon the
ungodly positions of Popery: As David said of Abner when he mourned for him, so
may we much more of their last King, Know you not that a great man is fallen in
Christendom? Surely one of the greatest many ways that Christendom has
yielded: It is full time to look about you, when your neighbors house is on
fire, and the rather when Jesuits teach this doctrine to be defined, and to be
de fide, that subjects not only may but ought to take away such Kings as he
was, and ou^s (much more) is, and long may he so be: Nay long shall he be so if
you take this and other courses for exti^pating Popery: When you and other the
Magistrates Ecclesiastical and ciuell shall begin seriously and effectually to
do this, then Rome trembles, Popery shrinkes, Antichrist frets, and the Jesuits
his darlings begin to look pale, and hang down their heads for their
confusion is at hand: for though they have continued but just. 70. years (not
the half of many other orders) yet they must know that bloodthirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days. And if they be not guilty
of these 2. faults blood and deceit, we will free them from all How bloody the
Iesu^tes be appears in that this is their maxim imprinted. Nisi religio
Lutherana, ferro and igne tollatur, Ecclesia Romans ^acem and tra^quilitatem
habere non poterit See the book called Epistolarum Iesuiticar. Libellus agab.
Bariaco 99. in Epist. art 11. page 66. A great Image, whose glory was
excellent) and form terrible, whose head was of fine gold, his breast and
arms of ^^uer, his belly and thighs of brass, his legs of y^on, his feet
part of y^on, and part of clay. Daniel. 2. 31. 32. ^^inc dubium non est
^ocietatem nostram vt ^ubito caepit, it a subito ^^territuram qui quoti^^em
peius ruit.
faults: but if they be, and that above all men, then take heed you Jesuits,
that this your 70. year, be not a dismal and fatal year unto you, and that
our David and Moses do not pronounce of you, the years of your continuance are
threescore and ten, and the y^^ be so mighty and so crafty, you may hold out
till fourscore, yet shall your life be nothing but sorrow and misery (as you
have deserved) and quickly shall ye be cut off and vanish away: and if this
Prophecy like you not, take one of your own. In the year 83. ^^ Jesuit
preached at Auspurg, and his text being, we are made a spectacle to God,
Angels, and the world: in his Sermon he compared the Jesuits order to the
Image, which Nabuchadnezzar saw in his ^^^aulo. Our Father Ig^atius (says he)
is the golden head, together ^ith those that lived with him: but when the first
10. fathers were dead, others followed, nothing so good as the first, and these
were the breasts and arms of silver. Then our society being enlarged from 60.
to many hundreds, it grew in greatness, but decayed in goodness, and then
most of them were idle bellies; and such whose God was their belly, and these
are the bellies and thighs of brass: and then still growing line number, and
falling into more voluptuousness and carnalty, they were so drowned in
pleasures, that their hearts were hardened against all good counsel and
admonitions, these were the legs of Iron: and lastly many of us are such as tho
they live in our golden society, yet they are altogether earthly minded men:
and these be the feet of Clay. Hereupon (says he) It is out of all doubt that
as our society suddenly begun, so shall it suddenly come to naught, seeing it
daily falls from ill to worse: O my brethren says he, such a spectacle are we
made! Now therefore least this Image of ours be broken in pieces (as that other
was) we must go to our father Ignatius, that good Alchimist, and learn of him
how we may be transformed from clay and iron into gold again: let us therefore
go into the furnace and purge our selves: Thus far the Jesuits Sermon: But
if their lives be looked at for the 30. years since he spoke, we shall find
that either they could not yet speak with Ignatius, or if they did, he was no
true Alchimist, but a quacksaluer, and could not direct them, or if he did,
the furnace is to hot, for all the world can witness they are not purged from
their ambitions, covetousness, treacheries, blood, cruelty, deceitfulnes, and
all carnalties, but have grown on riper in all rottennes, and more fit to be
driven and dashed in pieces: but if the Jesuits will follow their Allegory still,
and ask us how they can be broken, for that Image was broken with a stone cut
out without hands, I answer, seeing they have found the Image, I can find the
stone. (a) Christ is the great and chief corner stone who can and will grind
to powder all that exalt themselves against him. And was cut out without hands,
even made man without the help of man.

But by and under him, his holy religion settled in this Island: in England,
under a woman, in Scotland, under a child, is a stone cut out without hands;
for it was the Lords doing, and was marvelous in the eyes of all the world:
Morouer, his Majesty's coming to us, and settling with us, and uniting of us,
with our ancient Brethren and neighbors of Scotland, who but God could have
done it in that peaceable and blessed manner as it was: Sure it was a stone cut
out without hands of man: It was the Lords own work, all the world excepting
the man of sin, the Jesuits, and their wicked adherents rejoiced to see it.
Know therefore you Jesuits, that this stone cut out by God, even this true faith
professed and settled in this Island, and this gracious King whom God has sent
us to be the zealous defe^der of that faith, shall cast down the great excellent
and terrible Jesuitical Image. smiting him upon the feet of iron and clay,
and breaking them to pieces, till your iron and clay, and brass and silver,
and gold, (if you have any left) be broken altogether, and become like chafe
of the summer flowers, and the wind shall carry you away till there be no
place found for you. And then the stone that smote the Image, even this holy
Religion now professed and maintained in England, shall become a great
mountain, that is, shall be enlarged, and fill the whole earth which as we are
assured will be true of our Religion (which is the glory of our land, and that
which unites us to Christ the true corner stone) so we doubt not, it shall be
also true of our Sovereign and his seed, that they after they have broken the
Jesuitical Image, shall against Gog and Magog, and Antechrist, and all his
Adherents, become a great and strong mountain, and fill the whole earth with
the glory of their renowned deeds: and let earth and heaven say Amen, with the
honorable religious and loyal City of London, and all good Christians: and
with

Your humbly devoted servant in Jesus Christ. W. Crashawe.

THE POINTS OF NEW Divinity contained in this Gospel.
THat the milk of Mary may come into comparison with the blood of Christ.

2 That the Christian man's faith may lawfully take hold of both as well as one.

3 That the best compound for a sick soul, is to mix together her milk and
and Christ blood:

4 That the sins and spiritual diseases of the soul are cured as well by
her milk as his blood.

5 That Christ is still a little child in his Mothers arms, and so may be
prayed unto.

6 That her milk and the merit and virtue of it, is more precious and
excellent then Christ blood.

IN THE APPENDIX.
THat no man, but a woman did help God in the work of our redemption.

2 That God has made Mary partaker and fellow with him of his divine Majesty
and power.

3 That God has divided his Kingdom with Mary, keeping Justice to himself,
and yielding mercy to her.

4 That a man may appeal from God to her.

5 That a man shall oftentimes be sooner heard at Gods hands in the meditation
of Mary, then of Jesus Christ.

THE OCCASION OF THIS IESVITICALL Blasphemy.
IVSTVS LIPSIVS, a man of learning enough, but too much leuity, having run over
all religions; and at last set up his rest in Popery: fell in his declining and
doting days to open Idolatry: And as he never troubled himself much with
Christ in his life (whose very name a man shall seldom find in his books) so at
his end, wanting matter (it seems) to magnify Christ, he writes 2 books in
praise and honor of 2 Idols: namly 2 old rotten, or 2 new forged pictures of a
woman with a child in her arms. Which must needs be taken for pictures of our
Lady: Wherein the profane wrerch blusheth not to write, that at these 2 Images,
there are more and greater miracles wrought, then the scriptures speak of to
be done by Christ himself. A learned Low Country Divine wondering that such
Owls durst fly abroad at Noone light, and such trompery be set to sale in
these days of knowledge, wrote a short reproof of the impieties uttered in
the first of these books, which is:

De Virgin Hallensi. Wherein because the Jesuits were also touched, as being
the fathers of such fooleries, and the makers of those bolts which such fools
as Lipsius do shoot: Thereupon a Jesuit of Antwerpe calling himself Clarus
Bonarscius, (but his true name being Carolus Scribanius) taking upon him in a
Jesuitical pride, the general quarrel of the whole order of Jesuits,
undertakes to defend their innocence, and their honor (forsooth) against all
the world: and to that end writes a book, and calls it, The great Theater of
the Jesuits honor.

Amphitheatrum Honoris. In quo Caluinistarum in Societatem criminationes
iugulatae. Wherein, after many blasphemies against Christ: calumnies and
slanders against princes: all kind of lies against our ministers and
professors: he comes at last to defend their friend Lipsius, and his legend of
our Lady of Hall: And after he has abused him that wrote against it, with all
despightful terms, and rayl'd most artificially, wherein he excels all other
Jesuits, (Parsons excepted) as far as they, all other Papists: He makes a
transition from railing on men to playing with God: and from disgracing Princes
to dallying with Jesus Christ: and not only defends the legend of Hall,
written by Lypsius, but further to show his own devotion, he makes a Poem,
not to the honor of God, or of Christ the Mediator: but to our Lady of Hall
and the child Jesus. Wherein, whether the verse be better or the matter worse
is hard to tell: But whether his devotion therein is greater to a creature, or
his blasphemy against the blood of the Mediator, let the Christian Reader
Judge, by the Poem it self, which hereafter follows.

EX CLARI BONARSCII AMPHYTHEATRO HONORIS. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. page 356. editionis
2. 1606. AD DIVAM HALLENSEM, ET PVERVM IESVM.
HAEREO lac inter meditans, interque cruorem
Inter delicias vberis, and lateris.
Et dico, (si forte oculos super Vbera tendo)
Diua Parens Mammae gaudia posco tuae.
Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto)
O Jesus, lateris gaudia malo tui.
Rem scio. Prensabo, si fas erit, Vbera dextra
Laeua prensabo vulnera, si dabitur.
Lac matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati:
Non possem Antidoto nobiliore frui.
Vulnera restituent turpem vlceribus mendicum:
Testa cui saniem radere sola potest.
Vbera reficient I smaclem sitientem
Quem Sara non patitur: quem neque nutrit Agar:
Illa mihi ad pestem procul and procul expungendam:
Ista mihi ad long as eualitura febres.
Ira vomit flammas, fumat que libidinis Actna?
Suffocare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
Liuor in expleta rubigine saeuit in artus?
Detergere queo lacte cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua prurigine tentat?
Exaturare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
Ergo Parens and Nate, meis aduertite votis:
Lac peto, depereo sanguinem: vtrumque volo.
Paruule maternis medius qui ludis in vluis
Qui tua iam comples vbera, iam vacuas:
Quid me respectas obliqua tuentibus hirquis?
Roboris in Coelum nil habet Inuidia.
Saepe quidem dixti, noxis offensus iniquis,
Tune meas mammas, Improbe, tune meas?
Nolo tuas, O nolo tuas Puer auree mammas:
Non sum tam duri tamgrauis or is homo:
Sed tantum later is pluat vnica and vnica stilla:
Et saltem a dextrae vulnere gutta pluat.
Si nihil e dextra vis impluere, implue laeua:
Si nihil e laeua, de pede sanguis eat.
Si tibi non placeo vulnus mihi vulnera danto:
Mercedem danto vulnera, si placeo.
Saepe mihi Babylon patera propinat, and auro,
Ingeminatque me is auribus, euge, bibe.
Non faciam, vel si Coelum miscebitur Orco,
Non faciam, meretrix impia, non faciam.
O sitio tamen, O vocem sit is intercludit!
Nate, cruore sitim comprime, Lacte Parens.
Dic matri, meus hic frater sitit, optima Matter,
Vis de font tuo promere, deque meo?
Dic Nato, tuus hic frater, mi mellee fili
Captiuus monstrat vincula, lytron habes.
Ergo redemptorem monstra te iure vocari
Nobilior reliquis si tibi sanguis in est.
Tuque Parens monstra matrem te iure vocari,
Vbera si reliquis diuitiora geris.
O quando lactabor ab vbere; vulnere pascar!
Delicijsque fruar, Mamma, latusque tuis!
Parce Deus, magno si te clamore fatigem:
Non potis Imperio, non potis art regi.
Exagitante siti, Patientia perdit habenas,
Clamores si vis tollere, toll sitim.
Pluris ego clauis: saturasti sanguine clauos:
Lanceaque erubuit sanguine tincta tuo.
Pluris ego pannis: maduerunt vndique panni
Natia vulneribus, Matris ab vberibus.
TO OUR LADY OF HALL, AND TO THE CHILD JESUS.
MY thoughts are at a stand, of milk and blood
(delights of breast and side) which yields most good.
And say when on the tears mine eyes I cast:
O Lady, of thy breast I beg I a taste.
But if mine eyes upon the wounds do glide,
then (Jesus) I had rather suck thy side.
Long have I mused, now know I where to rest
for with my right hand I will graspe the breast,
(If so I may presume) as for the wounds:
with left i will catch them: thus my zeal abounds. A mixture of Christ's blood
and a creatures milk to make up the confection which which must heal our
souls.

And of the milk, and blood in mixture, make
the soueraignst cordial sinful soul can take.
These wounds corrupted ulcers mundifies
which none can cure unless he cauterize.
Those breasts the fainting Ismael well would cherish
whom Sara scorned and Agar would not nourish:
The first from me expels all pestilence:
the second drives all lingering feauers hence.
Does Ire belch fire, or lust like Aetna smoketh? How the blood and the milk
are made equal

either the blood or milk this feruor choketh.
Does enuies rust enroule me round about?
this milk, or that same blood soon scoures it out.
Or do vain glorious tumor stuff me still
here is blood and milk enough my thirst to fill.
Mother and Son give ear to what I crave:
I beg this milk, that blood, and both would have
Yongling, that in thy mothers arms art playing
sucking her breast sometimes, and sometime staying:
Why do thou view me with that look of scorn?
it is forcelesse envy that against thee is borne.
Often have thou said (being angry at my sin)
dare thou desire the teates my food lies in? Here the milk is advanced
above the blood.

I will not, oh I dare not, golden child
my mind from fear is not so far exilde:
But one, even one poor drop I do implore
from thy right hand, or side: I ask no more.
If neither; from thy left hand let one fall:
nay from thy foot, rather then none at all.
If I displease thee let thy wounds me wound:
but pay my wage if I in grace be found.
Oft-times does Babylon in gold me send
strong wine, and whispers to me, drink my friend.
No, no, though heaven and hell should make confusion
I Will none false strumpet, hence with thine illusion.
But ah, I thirst: ah droght my breath does smother
quench me with blood sweet Son, with milk good Mother
Say to thy Mother, see my brothers thirst,
Mother your milk will ease him at the first.
Say to thy Son, Behold thy brothers bands,
sweet Son, thou have his ransom in thy hands.
Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed:
thou Son, if that thy blood excel the rest.
And show thy self justly so stilde indeed,
thou Mother, if thy breasts the rest exceed.
Ah when shall I with these be satisfide?
when shall I swim in joys of breast and side?
Pardon (O God) mine eager earnestness:
if I thy laws, and reasons bounds transgress.
Where thirst ore swayes, patience is thrust away:
stay but my thirst and then my cries will stay,
I am better then thy nails: yet did a stream
of thy dear blood wash both the lance and them.
More worthy I then clouts: yet them a flood
Moistened of Mothers Milk, and of Sons blood.
THE APPROBATION OF THIS AVTHOR.
CLarus Bonarscius, otherwise called Carolus Scribanius is a Jesuit now living
at Antwerpe, and of much account amongst them; he wrote this book, and spewed
this blasphemy out of his unclean heart some four or five years ago. And
whereas both the Author and his book deserved the fire and halter, it was so
far from being misliked in the Romish Sinagogue, or any way censured, that
since then the book has bin reprinted and the Author and his book stand
enrolled, approved and commended (in their great volumes set out for that
purpose) for good and Catholic.

Glory Bornascij Amphitheatrum Honoris Iesuitici, in quo Calunistarum in
societatem Jesus criminationes iugulatae. Prostant palaeopoli 1605 and postea
1606. Haec Posseuinus Palaeopoli h^c est Antuerpi^.
Iesuit^ in Apparar^^ sacro Tom 1. l* it. G. page 3^7. edition is vltim^.

And it is to be noted that these volumes of Posseuine contain only an
inrolement and approbation of no writers at all, save such as are approved
Romish Catholics: and are set out with great and public allowance of the
Romish State, as may be seen at the beginning of the first Tome.

Besides, let all men know the book stands yet uncensured, and the man lives
still unpunished; nay, unreproved, or rather commended and rewarded for it:
therefore this cannot be called an obscure or private fact, but may properly be
held the fact of the Romish Church or State.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE LADIES OF HALL AND SIchem, in way of preface showing
particularly the occasion of this new Gospel.
THE blessed Mother of our Lord, as the Church in all ages has done, so does
ours, willingly honor, as the most blessed of all Saints, yet as a creature,
and as one saved by her son, that Savior in whom her spirit rejoiced: Luke 2.
we know and acknowledge that not she but the holy ghost has said that all
generations shall call her Luke
blessed: Yet we must confess, we are of that fathers religion, who said,
August lib. de virginit.
her spiritual bearing of Christ was happier then her carnal, and her self
more blessed by conceiving Christ in ^ellcior partus spiritualis quam carnalis
beatior enim Maria suit concipiend, Christum side qua^ earne materna enim
propinquitas nihil ei profuisset nisi felicius, christum cord qua^ earne
gestasse^.
her heart then in her womb, and by believing in him then by bearing him: for
her bearing him in her body would not have saved her soul, if she had not more
happily borne him in her heart. And in another place, Idem Inde felix quia
verbum Dei custodiuit non quia in illa verbum caro factum est. Papists
themselves cannot deny but our men do (out of this case) speak and write most
reverently of the blessed Virgin, as namely, Luther, Oecolampadius, Bre^tius,
Spangenbergins, vrb. Rhegus, Bucer Bullinger. All this is confessed by Coccius
the great papist in his The ^^ure Ca^helico. To. 1* Li. 3: at 5. p. 300.
she was happy and blessed, not because in her the word was made flesh, but
because she heard the word of God and kept it.

This her blessedness, far be it from us to impeach: and who would not yield
her all blessedness and honor that a creature may have, of whom GOD
vouchsafed to take the flesh of man? And if any of our Religion has given any
words of her, that may give the least blemish to her blessed state, it was not
done in any the least contempt of her, but in the zeal, they bare to the honor
of their Savior, whom they held dishonored by the unequal co^paring of her
with him: for what will not a Christian man's zeal cause him to do, when he
sees his God dishonored? who would have thought that Moses would have cast so
carelessly out of his hands, so precious a Jewel as were the two Tables written
with the finger of God? and yet when he heard the name of the Lord blasphemed,
he forgot himself and them, and as though he remembed none but God, he threw
them away and brake them in pieces.

If Moses his zeal makes his hastines excusable, then no reason to condemn
them whose (...) gave passage to their passions, and caused them for the honor
of the Creator to forget the privilege of a Creature: and I dare say there was
never learned man of our profession that presumed to touch the very skirt of
the garment of her glory, unless they saw her set in comparison with God or
Jesus Christ: which seeing the Romish Church dare offer to do, thereby
ecclipsing the glory of Gods mercy and the worthynesse of Christ's
satisfaction, we hold it our duties to be zealous for the Bonauenture
himself said that we must take heed least we so far advance the glory of the
mother, that we diminish the glory of the son.
glory of our God, and to preserve as far as in us lies the prerogatives of
our Savior. If it be said, that they match her not with God or Christ: I
answer they do, and that in such a measure, as we dare pronounce her or any
Angel accursed that should either arrogate or accept of that which the Romish
religion ascribes unto her. Too good evidence hereof has been seen in all
ages for these 200. years last past, wherein they have fallen from honoring
her as a Saint, to magnify her as a Mediator: to pray to her as to a God, to
trust in her as in a Savior: Many perticulars have been specified by many of
our writers which by the adversaries could never be denied (they are so
evident) and yet were they neither recanted nor removed, but contrary-wise
Reinoldus de Idolatria. Catalogus testium veritatis. Perkins, of the Idolatry
of the last times.
they have proceeded from evil to worse, till their blasphemy have even
pierced the heavens and touched the Crown of the Almighty, and confronted the
wounds, merrits and blood of our Savior. Particular instances hereof are many,
which may be collected out of the Authors of late years, part whereof shall if
God permit be particularized in this Treatise.

But above all there is one, which as it is the latest, so is it the fowlest,
and wherein Popish Blaspemy is at that height, as now it gives hope to all
Christian men that their prayers are heard, her end is at Revel.
hand, and that her iniquity is come up before God, and there remains nothing
but the revenging hand of God to be stretched out upon her. We have it not
from the report of merchants, from the letters of the Posts, nor from the
Intelligence of Ambassadors, for then our adversaries might suspect it: Nor
from the report or writings of our own men, for then let the world not believe
us: but we have it from the fountain it self even from the Record wherein it
is written with the Authors hand: and surely if the evidence were not beyond
exception, our selves would not believe it of them, though they be our
enemies. Thus stands the case.

Amongst the late devices that Romish policy has forged to uphold their
Hierarchy, a principal is, their art of Miracles, which they pretend to have
so ordinary, that in many Churches they have more In So years the Pope lost
all England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark Sweden, and a great part of Germany,
France, Switzerland, Poland, and Hungary.
miracles then sermons: but alas daily experience shows that they be lying
Wonders and no true miracles. Now because such tricks are most effectual to
delude the common people, and that they find themselves and their cause to
have lost much of late in many parts of Christendom a therefore to recover
themselves and to gain credit to their forlorn cause, they have most busily
applied this point of late, and have by the craft of Machiauilian Jesuits (as
Watson their brother In their quodlibets often.
Priest often styles them) so far prevailed, that there scarce passes a
month wherein some new Image of our Lady is not found, or some strange miracle
and wonders heard of.

Two years ago they caused a story to be written and published wherein they
blush not to make their See the book called, Iust^. liptij diua. Virgo.
Hallensis.
people believe, that more miracles, and greater then Christ did, have been
and are daily done at Hall (a town on the borders of Brabant and Henault) by
the Virgin Mary, at a Picture of hers in a Chapel there: and this is set out
by no triuiall or vulgar fellow, but by that famous Apostata Lipsius, that the
tale may carry the more credit: and the miracles are not of ordinary but of the
highest nature: for healing of fre^sies, fevers, co^uultions, is nothing, nay:
sight is given to the Iai^^^ daughter
blind, and whereas Christ raised but 3. from the dead (that we know of) our
Lady of Hall (says Lipsius) gave life to 7. at least that were dead: Lo here
how far short Christ himself is of his Mother: and now we marvel Omniae quae
fecit Christus fecit Franciscus plura quam fecit Christus fecit Franc^^. lib.
conformitatum beati Francisci.
no more if they have written that St. Francis did all that Christ did, and
more then Christ did, seeing the Picture of his Mother, can do more then he did.

I say the Picture of his Mother, because Georgius fabricius, the Popes censor
of books, in his allowance of this Legend of Lipsius says, that God gives and
communicates divine power to work miracles nor only to the Virgin Mary and
the Saints, but even to their Images or Pictures: behold good reader a worthy
piece of new refined Popery, Gods divine power is Strange doctrine of Popery
communicated to the very pictures of creatures: And if any man object that
miracles are not in these days to be expected, Lipsius has a learned and
Catholic answer, that now indeed in respect of Christ, or to auerre his
Doctrine, or to maintain his honor, they need not, but the ease is otherwise
(says he) with the Saints, for many do refuse to worship them, and grudge at
the honor that in the Romish Church is given them, and therefore to defend
them in this point, and to establish By Popish doctrine christ does more to
establish the worshipping of Saints then his own.
that worship which they do unto them, God suffers so many miracles to be
done even by their Images: which answer being well considred of, what a kind
of Doctrine it contains, I leave to the learned and judicious Reader.

I only say, that if this be true, then how forteth it with the very body and
current of his story, by which no man can deny, but it is apparent that most of
the miracles which he specifieth, were done almost 200. years a^oe, namely
betwixt the years 1400. and 1500. long before Luther began to preach, and (as
they say) before our Religion was in the world, and consequently before the
worshipping of Saints was withstood; therefore it follows, that miracles were
ordained at Saints Images, even then when worshipping of Saints was not denied:
Lipsius might have done well to have reconciled so evident a contradiction.

But what assurance have we for the truth of these miracles? or how know we
that this is an approved Picture of our Lady? Lipsius answers that there was
one Sophia daughter to the Landgraue of Hesse, by his Lady Saint Elizabeth: (a
Saint of Pope Gregory the 9. making within four years after her death.)

This Sophia (says he) as it is thought, had certain Images of our Lady,
given her by her Mother Elizabeth, (was it then but thought so, and must we
now believe it?) one of these she gave to the Nuns of the Nunry at Vilvord,
and that was called our Lady of comfort: 2. more she gave to Madam Machtild, or
Maud, her husbands sister, who bestowed them thus: one she gave to Grauesand,
another to Harlem (two towns in Holland) the third (which it seems stole all
the virtue from both the other) to Hall a town in Henalt, (and this is that we
now speak of:) and to ad more credit to the story, he tells us that this Lady
Maude was Mother to that Lady Mawde, who bare at one birth 364. children, An
old story, but greatly suspected by Erasmus and other learned men, to be
fabulous
which were all borne alive, and baptized by a Bishop: So (says Lipsius) this
is that Image, which now we worship at Hall: and thus strong a foundation has
the Story: and now may not all Caluinists be ashamed to doubt of this Story or
to suspect these grounds?

Now therefore surely we must needs believe (else we are unbelieving Heretics)
that one was before this Image dispossessed of a Devil without any other
means, for so he says, and that ten at least were delivered from present
death by but calling or thinking upon our Lady at Hall, and that seven were
raised from death to life being but laid before the Image; and all these within
the space of 20. years, and in one country (so ordinary a matter it is in
Popery to raise the dead.) Nay we must believe (or else we are Infidels) that
when a Faulkner should have been hanged for loosing his Lords Faulkon, and had
the rope about his neck, An excellent and new found way for faulkners to find
their lost Hawks, never before heard of Prove this Lipsius, and thou will have
many Faulkners turn Papists.
and did but call to mind the Lady of Hall, forthwith the Hawke came flying
home again, and lighted upon the Faulconers shoulder, and so saved his life:
for this is not Lipsius ashamed to report. Which if it be true, then we shall
less wonder hereafter at that in the Legend, where it is reported how a
Parrat having got abroad out of her Cage, and sporting her self in the air,
was by and by espied by a Hawke, who being ready to See the old English legend
in folio, of the life of S. Thomas of Canterbury.
seize upon her, instantly the Parrat seeing her self in danger to be
surprised, cried out S. Thomas a Becket save me, and presently the Hawke fell
down dead, and the Parrat was delivered.

As also those miracles of S. Francis so far beyond Christ's or his Apostles,
that he tamed wild beasts, that See the book called, liber conformitatum, S.
Francisci, of any impression.
he preached unto a Wolf, and converted him from his cruelty, and calling him
by the name of his brother Wolf, made the town of Engubium and him friends,
who of long time had been at contention, and for the assurance of the peace,
he made his brother Wolf to give him his faith in the Market place, before the
Magistrates, and afterward the Wolf went up and down the City, and took his
meat from door to door. Lo here you Heretics, here is a Miracle worth
something; and if they will not believe me, look in the holy Book of
Conformities, and there you shall find all See the conformity of the old
impression and his life in English.
this and much more: as namely, how the Birds would come flying, and the Beasts
flocking about him to hear him preach, and how the Nightingales and other
Birds would come and help him to say Mass, and sing his office, and would
answer him Verse for Verse. Come out ye Heretics (Caluinists and Lutherans)
Saint Francis and his followers challenge you all to bring Sedulius a Popish
writer has this last year defended all these.
out one miracle like these, to approve your Religion: surely they may, and for
ought I see Christ and his Apostles also, for they never wrought such a Miracle
to confirm the Gospel. Is it not then apparent that S. Francis has done more
then Christ did?

Oh my dear countrymen (you that name your selves the Catholics of England)
if you would but open your eyes and consider of this, I durst make your selves
Judges, what divinity this is: if you suspect me, believe me not, look into
the books themselves, and believe your own eyes: If you say unto me that some
such impieties and follies might creep into the old Books, 100. or 200.
years ago when the times were not so wary nor suspicious; but the Church has
since reformed such abuses, I answer, I allege most of this out of the Book
of conformities, lately corrected and printed in Italy within these 20. years:
but if you look into the old one, printed 100. years ago, (wherewith your
forefathers were abused) you shall there find such matter, as for reverence of
the Reader I shame, and for the honor of God I fear to write.

And as for these miracles at our Ladies Picture at Hall they were never offered
to the worlds view nor ever came to light till within these 3. years that
Lipsius (a man who durst do any thing but honor Christ) presumed to publish
them, and with foul impiety to write that in these days Christ and his
doctrine, service and Religion needs no miracles but the Saints and their
service and worship do stand in need thereof: and as in the infancy of the
Church Christ had his, so in the perfect state of it, Saints and their Images
must have their miracles: but observe withal that (if See the conformity of
the old impression, or his life in English.
they say true) more strange and as I may so say, more Miraculous Miracles are
done by the honor of Saints, and approouing the worshipping of them and their
Images, then were for the establishing of the Gospel, the abrogating of the
Ceremonial Law, and for proving Christ to be the Son of God.

If Lipsius were living I would not spare to tell him: Lipsius dyed a relapsed
papist at Louoin. Ano
that this his Doctrine smells strongly of that whereof he has been, (it
seems not without cause) suspected, which because he is dead I will forbear
to name.

But some of our English Papists (which are not learned) may doubt whether
there be such a Book or no, or if it be not devised by us, and fathered on
them, (for so do their Priests often suggest unto them of such Books as they
fear the people will mislike) but if any of their misleaders do so
mis-informe them, let them know the Book has been twice printed at Antwerpe,
and once at Paris, with allowance of authority in both places, not only of the
Censors of Books, and the Archbishop of the place, but the matter and miracles
in the Book are confirmed These bulls of 2. Popes are in the end of the book.
with the Bulls of a Popes, one of Pope Nicholas, in the year 1451. the other
of Pope Clement the 8. within these 8. years: and if any should be so
vnreesonable as to think that we have forged all this, Posseuine, the Jesuit
may give him full satisfaction: who in his Apparatus sacer has published to
the world that Iust^^ Lipsius vir vere Catholicus inter complures eruditissimos
l^bro^ anno 604. edidit librum h^c praenetati^ne. Iusti Liptij diua virgo
H^stens^s eiusque beneficia and miracula bona fide atque ordine descripta.
Antuerpia apud moret^m. Posse. Appa^sa. To. 2. in litera. I page 318. Iusti
Lipsij diua Aspric^llis.
Lipsius in the year and at the place aforenamed, did put out such a work,
and gives him special commendation for his labors, in that and the like for
the Catholic cause.

But has not Lipsius recanted, or the Romish Church reformed this since then?
Alas, Lipsius was so far from that, that the year after, very near unto his
death, as though he intended nothing but to heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, he added drunkenness to thirst, as the Prophet says, for heaping sin
upon sin, instead of reuoking and recanting his former collusion, he published
another pamphlet, a more ridiculous Legend, and fraught with more
improbabilities and impossibilities then the former. It bears this Title:
Iustus Lipsius his History of our Lady of Sichem, or of our Ladies Picture of
the craggy-rocke or sharp hill, and of her new miracles and benefits: at
Antwerpe. 1605.

At this Image says he, are wrought miracles of al sorts Apoplexis,
Epilepsies, gouts and all kind of diseases are healed, lame are restored to
limbs, blind to sight, deaf to their hearing: and all by these heaps, not
sildome or extraordinarily, but yearly monthly, daily: almost 60. are
registered by Lipsius besides many more omitted, and all to be done in 2. or 3.
years, insomuch as if his report be true, God makes miracles far more
ordinary for the honor of Saints and their Images, then he did for confirming
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: But what credit has the Story of our
Lady of Sichem? even as good as has our Lady of Hall, else let the Reader
judge. The tale of the ^^age of craggy Hill,


Near to the little poor (but old) town of Sichem says Lipsius, there is a
mount, barren, rough, and craggy, on oue side thereof there is a little
Hillocke: on it grows an Oak, and in it or fastened to it, is a little Image
of our Lady, which has done great miracles in time past, and was therefore
worshipped of the people there: but how is that proved? thus; about 100 years
ago, a Shepherd found that Image, and put it in his bosom, thinking to carry
it home to worship it, but as he was in these thoughts, he was suddenly
stricken and astonished in his senses, and benumbed in his whole body, insomuch
as he could not stir one foot but stood still like a dead trunk, not knowing
what to think of it, nor how to help himself: his Mr. wanting both his
shepherd and his sheep, sought them, and found him so standing, who told him
the whole matter: his Mr. taking the Image, went with great devotion and set it
up in the Oak again, and forthwith the shepherd had his limbs restored, and
went and worshipped it, and so by their reports, all the country heard of it,
who came by heaps and were healed of all diseases, but agues especially: and so
it continued (says he) til within these 20. years, about which time the
blessed Image was stolen or lost no man can tell how. (But is it not strange
that if it could do these Miracles, they would let it be lost so carelessly?)
well, lost it was: But what tho? people went as fast then as before, and still
as great cures were there done as when the Image was there: and in want of the
Image, the people worshipped the Oak, and why might they not say Lipsius, the
holy Image had hallowed the Tree? so that it might lawfully be worshipped: (be
hold Popish devotion!) yet, says he, we worshipped not the Tree, but in it
the Image, and in it our Lady and in her God. Mark good Reader, God gets his
worship at last, though it be at the fourth hand: they tender it to the tree,
the tree yields it to the Image, the Image conueyes to our Lady, and she
presents it to God: so then by Popish doctrine and devotion God is served and
honored after his creatures, and so at last gets his own. If they say that the
worship is intended to God, and is not ended but in him: I answer; but were it
not better that the worship were offered immediately from the heart and hands of
the worshipper to God himself, and to pass through no hands, but of his Son
the Mediator? but this is Heresy let it pass, or else it must pass the fire.

To return to the story: our Lady of Sichem is lost; but what then must the
poor town loose her traffic and living? (Nay rather we will make another,
for that is no hard nor unlawful thing in that Religion:) and so says he 7.
years after: an honest and devout Alderman of Sichem (perceiving well how his
and his neighbors gains came in, and how the poor town lived) like a good
townesman, made another Image, put it in a box of wood, and fastened the Box
to the Oak that so their Lady might not be lost so carelessly as before.

This new Image thus made, did as many miracles as the other, and why should it
not for was it not as good as the other? nay it may be it was more curiously
carved and Always remembered that I mean not in any of these syeeches the
blessed virgin whom as I hol^ a blessed Saint in heaven, so I present her with
all the honor that may be given to a creature: But I mean Lipsius his Lady of
Sichem, or our Lady of Hall.
better wrought.

Thus it continued certain years till at last the Parish Priest perceiving
they began to be well customed, bestowed some cost on their Lady which got them
so much, that they built her a little Chapel of boords, and there placed her.
But still their custom growing greater, they showed themselves thankful to
their patroness, and as she filled their purses they sought her honor and built
her a fair chapel of stone, some 2. years ago, and in that rests the
Image, working miracles every day. But what become of the holy Oak? it was cut
away by pieces by devout persons, and carried away, that it was in danger of
falling, and a counsel was called in the town what were to be done with it
(as in so great a matter it is requisite) and there, after serious
consideration, it was gravely concluded, that it should be cut up by the
roots, and with much solemnity brought into the town of Sichem, where when it
came, forthwith happy was he that could get a piece of the holy Wood, whereof
(says Lipsius, and blusheth not to write it) diverse made them little Images,
and with much piety do worship them: others that were sick of grieueous
dieases, shaued it into their drink and drunk, and so were healed. See what
an excellent Religion this is: one Image has begot many, and the first Image
being but fastened to the Tree, so sanctified the whole Oak, that every Image
made of the whole Tree, should be as good as it self, and every crumme of the
Wood should work Miracles as fast as the Image did.

Lo here the History of our Lady of Sichem, or of the sharp hill: and this
legend is not Lipsius ashamed to thrust upon the world, for a true and
undoubted story: such are the times we be fallen into, that to set fast the
crown upon the Popes head, truth must stand aside, and lies must pass for
current without control: and such a cause is Popery as cannot continue in
credit before the people, but by forging a continual succession of lying
wonders, for now we are made believe, that the Virgin Mary has 2. Images
within few miles together which have done more miracles in a few years
bypast, then God himself did in the old, or Christ and his Apostles in the
new Testament: Such Idols of indignation does the Romish harlot advance against
the sovereign majesty of God, to provoke him withal: for what is it but an
Idol of indignation, that not a creature only, but the very Image of a
creature should be made pertaker of the divine power and Majesty of God?

The time was when Isaiah the Prophet durst say of Esaias 42. 28,
God, I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory I will not give unto
another, nor my praise to graven Images: but how soever that might be
tolerable doctrine in those days had he lived in these, he must have been
taught that a part of the glory and praise of God, may daily be given to graven
Images, and yet the glory of God not at all thereby impeached, but rather
augmented: Lo what Idols of indignations and abominations lie hid under the
mystery of iniquity.

And yet good Reader (as God says unto the prophet (turn thee a little and
thou shall see greater abominations Ezeth.
then these.

It is yet scarce 3. years ago since the tale of our Lady of Hall, was forged
by some Jesuit, and published by Lipsius, when withal a fair Picture graven
in brass was prefixed upon the first Page before the book of our Lady holding
her Son in her arms.

And behold, the Jesuits as though the Mother were a woman, and the Son but
an Infant: or as though they had gained enough by Christ a ready, and would now
see what they could get by the Mother, began to call in question his merits and
mediation, and the dignity of his wounds and sufferings, and at last pronounce
that his wounds and her paps his blood and her milk, are either all one, or
else that the milk is better.

And yet before we enter into the particular, let the Reader observe that
though the Image be both of our Lady (as they call her) and of her Son Jesus
our Lord, yet notwithstanding the miracles are all ascribed to her and her
Picture, and none to Jesus Christ: for the coloring of which impiety, what
they can say I see not, unless they dare affirm that the son will do no
miracles in the presence of his Mother, to which end, it may well be noted, and
generally in all places where the Mother and the son, the Virgin Mary, and
our Lord Jesus be pictured together in their Churches, she is always set
forth as a woman and a Mother, and he as a Child and Infant, either in her
arms or in her hand, that so the common people might have occasion to imagine,
that look what power of ouerruling and commanding the Mother has over her
little child, the same has she over her son Jesus: and that seeing the son
is but an infant in his mothers arms, therefore they might not wonder why her
picture does all the miracles, and his none; for its like, Christ did no
miracles whilst he was a child: into these superstious and even blasphemous
concelts do they endeavor to drive their people, not caring what they derogate
from Christ, so they give it to their Saints.

Is it not admirable that still they will make him an Infant, still in his
mothers arms, still under her power, and still all miracles must be wrought by
her, and at her picture, as though either he could not, or in his mothers
presence would not, or (at the least) as though she had many enemies, and
therefore needed miracles, and Christ none?

But alas who sees not that the Athisme and prophannesse of the world causes
even the name and religion of Christ to be blasphemed, that if miracles might
lawfully be expected, we should think them as needful as ever since the
first planting of the Gospel: it is therefore a strange piece of Popish
doctrine, that there is more cause that the Virgin Mary, and her Picture should
have miracles for them, then Christ and his Religion.

But yet this, and all other their suspicious and impious speeches and
practices against the honor of Christ and his Religion, are in my judgment
inferior, and may all stoop to this new impiety of the Jesuits, whereby the
Mother is compared to the Son, not as being a child, or a man, but as the
Savior and mediator: and the pappes of a Woman equalled with the wounds of our
Lord, and her milk with his blood.

If this were written by Protestants, some might say we might report partially,
or if it were a matter of old, the age might yield suspicion that it were made
worse in the carriage: But when it is a matter of yesterday and comes from
themselves, partiallity it self cannot cavil against it.

And the particular is this, Clarus Bonarscius, a Jesuit or the Jesuits Patron,
published this present year to the world, a volume large enough, in defense of
the whole order of Jesuits, the book bears this title.

Clari Bonarscij Amphitheatrum Honoris. In quo Caluinistarum in societatem
Jesus, criminationes Iugulatae. Editio altera, libro quarto auctior. Palaeopoli
Aduaticorum, apud Alexandrum Verheidon 1606. This volume he erected, as a
Theater, yea an Amphitheater of Honor, in defense of the Jesuits wherein after
he had assaied with much sleight of wit, and in a strange style, to wipe away
many foul blots, with which that Atheistical brood has stained the holy
name of Jesus, and adorned it self (for generally that which dishonors God
adornes them) and after he had ranged over all the former Churches, and raked
up all rotten slanders, and revived the callumniations that were answered,
dead and buried, 40. 50. and 60. years ago, and rayled upon the living and
dead, Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Stenius, Tossanus, Faius, and many other holy and
learned men, with that bitterness and virulency as never was before him: yea,
moreover after that he had laid high and horrible imputations upon this whole
state of England, and (like a true Jesuits Impe) slandred the whole government,
with foul injustice, and monstrous cruelty in many perticulars, and See for
these perticulars of our Queen and state lib.
had in Jesuitical pride, dared to defile the name and honor of renowned
Queen Elizabeth, (whose memory for ever will be blessed) with words unworthy
the mouth of man (if he were not a Jesuit) at last from the defense of
Jesuits, he falls to defend Lypsius, (a good friend of theirs) and his two
stories of our Lady of Hall, and our Lady of the craggie Rock, and not only
labors to to make good all his fancies and fables, but further (to show that a
Jesuit has one trick of impiety beyond all, and is anointed by the Devil with
the oil of mischief above all his fellows) adds a number of verses
directed to that Picture, which he calls our Lady of Hall, fraught with so
many blasphemies against the blood and merits of the Mediator, as no Christian
ears to this day did ever hear, and doubtless no Christian heart can
patiently endure: and certainly if the blessed Virgin Mary, to whose picture
he has consecrated them, may be his Judge, without doubt both he and his
blasphemy will be condemned to hell: and she whose soul rejoiced in God her
Son and Savior, Luke ^. 47.
her soul I say will rejoice in the just damnation of him who shall match the
milk of her a creature, with the blood of him her Savior: But shall we hear
them? no will some say, let blasphemy rather be buried in the depth of
oblivion, darken not the Sun, defile not the heavens, poison not the air,
burden not the earth with it, amaze not the minds, and terrify not the
consciences of weak Christians: and assuredly could I bury it so that it might
never live, and quench it so as it might never flame again, and if my Book
were the only Copy in the world, I would rather choose to cover this shame of
the shameless whore of Babylon, then by discovering it to cause good men's
ears to tingle, and their hearts to tremble: But seeing the strumpet has the
whores forhead, and glories in her own shame, and sounded out this blasphemy
(as with a trumpet) in the ears of all Christendom by publishing it in a
book which he calls the great theater of the Jesuits honor, even bringing so
fearful blasphemy upon the stage, and dare diu^lge it in a second impression,
least the world should want it:

Let us therefore crave leave of our Lord Jesus, to discover her shame wherein
she glories, and that we may without impeachment of his honor, repeat so
foul blasphemy, that so the world may both perceive what a Religion Popery is,
and that we for our parts have no fellowship with such abominable works of
Ephesians. ^.
darkness

The Title he gives them is this:

Ad diuam Hallensem. and Puerum Iesum.

That is,

To our Lady of Hall, and The Child Jesus.

See first the impiety lurking in this Title. She is a Queen or Lady, Jesus a
Child or Infant: compare this with holy Scriptures, they indeed speak both of
him and her, but of him as God and a Savior, of her as a creature; the Mother
only of his humanity (although the Mother of him that was God) and exercising
power only over his humanity, and that only during his infancy and
priuatenesse, but not after he took upon him the Prophetical Office of the
Mediator, for then he said (in a certain case) woman, what have I to do with
thee? and again, being told* she was without to speak John ^. 4*
with him, he answered that he had more Mothers, tho not in the same, yet in
a better sense: for whosoever did the will of his father, the same says he is
my mother: Mat 12. vlt.
thus the scripture proceeds to describe him in his prophetical, and
afterward in his Priestly Office, and leaves him not till at last he be
ascended into heaven, and have taken possession of his kingdom, and then the
Scripture leaves him in his glory.

Is all this true? and yet must he now after 1606 years be an Infant in his
Mothers arms? And for her the holy scriptures speak no more of her, but as of
a creature, a woman, a believing Jew, a holy Saint, saved by faith in her
savior Jesus Christ, and so leaves her, with little mention (after Christ was
baptized, and entered his prophetical Office) her body to go the way of all
flesh, and her soul to enter into that great glory which Christ had purchased
for her, and all that spiritual kindred of his, whom with his own mouth he
had pronounced more blessed for hearing his word and keeping it, then they
could have been by being the mother of Luke 12.
his flesh.

And yet now after 1600. years, she must still be a commanding Mother, and
must show her authority over him, and he must receive our prayers by her
means, and Monstra te esse Matrem sumat per te preces. So are the missals,
Breuiaries, and Offices that are reformed.
still she must bear him in her arms, or lead him in her hand, and her
Picture must work all the miracles, but his none: and she must be salured as a
Lady, a Queen, a Goddess, and he as a Child: If this be not so, let this
Title judge: Ad Diuam Hallensem, and puerum Iesum. But let us leave the Title,
and not stand long at the gates, but enter this City of confusion.

And now all good Christians hearken with grief of heart to that which I
rather wish you might never have heard; but if your ears tingle, your hair
stand up, and your hearts tremble at the blasphemy following, blame the heart
that indighted it, the hand that wrote it, the Religion that allows it, and
not the pen that discouers it.

THVS THEN BEGINS THE IESVITS Gospel.
Haereo lac inter meditans interque cruorem,
Inter delicias Vberis and Lateris.
That is:

My thoughts are at a stand of Milk and blood:
Delights of breast and side, which yields most good.
HEarken thou blessed Apostle Paul, (if thou in heaven can hear the
blasphemy on earth) thou that did preach and 2. Cor. ^. 2
write, that thou desiredst to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucisied: thou that did teach the Churches only to know and believe in
Christ for salvation: and almost 20. times in thy Epistles have magnified his
Blood, without once mentioning the Virgin or her Milk.

Hear and be astonished at this, that some who profess to be thy Disciples or
thy fellows rather, cannot tell whether to choose that blood of the Mediator,
or the milk of a woman: At least harken thou blessed spirit of truth, thou
that can and wilt hear, thou that did inspire those holy truths into that
holy Apostle: behold a Religion risen up in the world that dare compare the
blood of that God who was by thee conceived, with the milk of that W^man, who
was the Mother of his humanity and was saved from hell and damnation by that
blood, and that dare allow her professors to make doubt whether to esteem the
greater delight of their souls her milk or his blood: and we for reproving
this, must be accounted Heretics: hear from heaven we beseech thee and Judge
betwixt us.

The blasphemer proceeds.

Et dico si forte oculos ad Vbera tendo
Diua Parens. Mammae gaudia posco tuae
Sed dico si deinde oculos ad Vulnera verto
O Jesus Lateris gaudia malo tuae.
That is:

And say aloud when I the Teates do see,
O Goddess mother, lend thy Breasts to me!
But thus I beg, when on the wounds I think
O Jesus give me from thy side to drink.
What before he delivered more darkely, now he makes plainer: if any doubt
what milk what blood he meant, he answers our Ladies Milk, and Jesus Christ
his blood: but what, does popery make question whether of these two is better?
Is this their holy Catholic Roman faith? If no^, let their words be Judge, I
stand musing says he and cannot tell whether to take milk or blood: If I
look at her paps, then I long for milk, If to his sides, then I would have
blood.

Mark how indifferent a Papist is, whether he receive the one or the other: is
not this evil enough? a man would think so, yet hearken what follows, and
we shall hear worse: but let us do it with fear and reverence of that
glorious name, and precious blood which are blasphemed.

Rem scio, prensabo si fas erit vbera dextra
Laena prensabo vulnera si dabitur.
In English thus:

Long have I mused, now know I where to rest,
for with my right hand I will graspe the breast:
(If so I may presume) as for the wounds,
with left I catch them, thus my zeal abounds.
Hitherto he doubted, now he is resolved: but such a doubt, and such a
resolution, Christian ears never heard of: he doubted whether were better, the
blood of God, or the Milk of a creature (the devil himself never doubted
hereof) but now what is his resolution, does it make amends? yes doubtless as
the Pope uses to make Christ amends, when he has dishonored him: I was at a
stand (says he) whether to take, and now I resolve I will have both: both are
so good I will refuse neither, her milk his blood both so precious, both so
powerful, both so virtuous, as I will have both. Both are good, and so good as
hardly can I find difference but if there be any, it is that the Milk is more
excellent, and therefore with my right hand, I will make it sure mine, if I may
be so bold as to touch it, or if it be lawful for a sinners soul to taste so
glorious, so invaluable and divine a liquor as is the Milk of the Mother: and
as for the child it is well for him if he may follow his Mother, and have the
next place to her: therefore if he please to give me leave I will lay hold
with my left hand on his wounds.

O glorious God, the eternal son of the eternal Father, thou blessed Jesus
Christ the stay and comfort of all Christian souls, hear in heaven thine only
habitation this heinous blasphemy, and judge thy own cause: And if it fall out
that any contagion of sin catch hold on me the writer or any the readers here
of, by not trembling or not sufficiently detesting such fearful impiety as
this that is past, or that that is to come; vouchsafe in mercy to forgive it,
and to wash it away with that most precious blood of thine, whereto all the
creatures in the world are not worthy to be compared.

And though this that is past, be abominable, yet with reverence to thy holy
name and precious blood, give us leave to discover the height of their
iniquity, which still goes forward in more horrible and fearful manner: for
thus sings the Jesuit.

Lac Matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati,
Non possum Antidoti nobilore frui.
That is:

And of her Milk mixed with his blood I Will make,
The soueraign'st Cordial sinful soul can take.
So now Christ Jesus shall have satisfaction, (if there were a fault before) for
if he complain that the Mother of his flesh, a woman and a creature, have the
right hand when himself and his merits must take the left or none, here they
will make him amends, for that he may have no cause to complain, for want of
place or precedence, her milk and his blood will he mingle both together, and
so make a sovereign compound cordial for his soul. But what? a mixture of
milk and blood, of the Blood of God with the Milk of a creature? and is now
the blood of the Lamb of God but one of the simples in that cordial Antidote,
that must both restore and preserve the life of man's soul? ye heavens be
astonished at this, so may we well say, for so said the Prophet at a matter of
fa^re less wonder, hearken O Christendom, and all ye people, nations, and
languages to whom the blessed name of Jesus Christ has sounded: that poor
paschal Lamb of the Jews that was but a shadow of our Savior, the Sign and
Sacrament, and in some sort the means and instrument of the Israelites
temporal preservation, might not, nay needed not to have any thing mingled
with the blood Exodus 12. 5. etc
thereof, but the blood alone being sprinkled on their doors, delivered them
from the stroke of the destroying Angel: this was their Passover, and says
the Apostle, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: shall this then be 1.
Cor. 5. 7
true, of their Passover, a Lamb taken out of the fold and flock, and only
dedicated by Gods instirution, and shall not the blood of our Passover the
Lamb of God, God and man Jesus Christ (whose Godhead is consubstantiall and
coequall with the father, and his humanity personally and indiuisibly united to
the deity) being sprinkled on our hearts and souls, suffice to preserve them
from the infernal stroke of hell and damnation, unless it be mingled with
the milk of a creature? pardon this blasphemy O blessed Jesus Christ, if it
be not a blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and a despighting of the spirit of
grace: pardon it in as many of them as do not sin vnpardonably, for thy
mercies sake. Amen.

But say (I pray thee) tell us in good earnest, (If so we may presume to call a
Jesuits Proctor to his answer) is there not a more sovereign Antidote for a
sinful soul, then a mixture and co^pound of Mary's milk and Christ his blood?
chen tell us who can make this mixture? who has the skill sufficient for this
confection who gives the true dosse? who appoints the quantities, Mithridates
and triacles for the body are not compositions for every conceit, nor matters
for every hand to make, but rather beseeming the skilfullest, and require the
ouerviewing eye of the whole College of Physicians, shall then the heavenly
Antidote of the soul be compounded without a heavenly Physician? say then
(Man) if thou dare stand to thy deeds, who was the Physician that prescribed
and gave thee this receipt, was it God the Father, the foundation of holiness
and happiness? himself says no, for thus proclaimed he twice from Heaven of
Jesus Christ, This is my well-beloved Mat. 3. At his baptism Mat. 17. At his
transfiguration
son in whom I am well pleased: In none as in him, nay in none, no not in his
Mother, but in, for, and by him. Thus the Father of Heaven has testified that
the blood of the son is one sufficient and sovereign simple, for a Heavenly
Methridate. Now show thou, (and take the Pope to help thee) where ever he
testified so much of her milk: but if no such thing, nay nothing at all, then
he was not the Physician that prescribed this mixture.

Who then, was it Christ himself the Son of God and the Son of this woman?
No, for of himself he says, My flesh is (spiritual) meat indeed, and my
blood is (heavenly) drink indeed: but of her he says that every John 6.
true believing Christian, is his mother (as well as she) Mat. 12 46
in the best sense, and much more then she, had she been no more but the
mother of his flesh: surely then if this be a lawful mixture, which this
Papist makes, the son was much to blame to say so much of his own blood,
that it is drink indeed, and that it gives the drinkers eternal life, etc.
and not one word of his mothers milk: Not a word said I? I recall that, for
when once a certain woman hearing him preach, not for any thing she saw in
her, but for the powerful and gracious words, that came from him, would have
had her womb blessed that bare him and her Paps that gave him Luke 11. 27. 28
suck: (the worst whereof is better then her milk) he instantly answered her,
that much more blessed was every man that heard Gods Word and kept it. If no
extraordinary blessedness belong to the womb that bare him (in that respect
only, because it bare him carnally) If none to the womb or paps, which shall
endure for ever, then how much less to the milk that fed him, which is
vanished and shall be no more: If Christ would not match her womb or paps with
a man that feared God, what will he say to them that make her milk a match for
his own blood, the milk being a matter far inferior, either to womb or
paps. Thus they may see that Christ is not a fit Physician to make this mixture.

What then was the holy Ghost the Physician that framed this receipt?

No, for he by his divine power, conceived Christ in that holy and miraculous
manner, that Christ was fully without original sin, and therefore his blood
might well be a pure and perfect simple to make the Aqua Caelestis that must
quicken dead souls: let them approve as much of her if they can: they speak
and write that she was conceived without sin original, and have a holy day
for it, but they can not prove it. It is an Article of our faith, and grounded
on plain words of Scripture, that Christ was conceived without Learned Papists
hold that the Popes Bulls and the decree of the counsel of Basil do not
conclude it as an article of faith.
out sin: and though the Whore of Babylon, affirm as much of her, yet was
she yet never so impudent, as to conclude it an Article of the faith. Thus God
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, do all disclaim the composition of
this Antidote, as neither prescribed nor allowed by them.

Who then may be imagined to be this Physician? Exodus 12.
was it Moses? no, for he allowed nothing to be mingled with the blood of the
Pascall Lamb: was it Esaias? no, for he avouches that with his stripes we
are healed, Esaias 53.
and his stripes were not without blood.

Was it Zacharia? no, for he teaches that the Church Zacha 9. 11.
is saved by the blood of her covenant, which is grounded only on the Messiah.

If any other Prophet, let them show him: was it John Baptist: no, for he
restified that not the Mother of his Lord, but his Lord Jesus Christ was that
Lamb of God Io^n. 1. 29.
that takes away the sins of the world.

Was it St. Paul? no, for he teaches the Romans, that Romans 3. 24. 25.
We are justified freely by his blood: (behold ye Romanists, there is no
milk) and the Ephesians that we have redemption Ephesians. 2. 13. Coloss. 1. 14.
through his blood: (yet there is no milk) and the Collossians, that he set us
at peace tbrough the blood of his cross not the milk of her paps: and the
Hebrews that not Hebrews 9. 12.
with any milk, but with his own blood he obtained eternal redemption for
us: to conclude, 13. times at least in his Epistles does he mention the blood
of Christ, to the same purpose, and with the same honor as before, and not once
did he so much as name our Ladies milk: surely either this was an intolerable
omission in Saint Paul, not once to name it, else, presumptuous impiety in the
Papists to match it with blood of the son of God.

Then who is it, was it St. Peter whom you brag to be the founder, nay the
foundation of your Church to and head of your Herarchie? No, that blessed
Apostle renounceth it, for he proclaims to all the world, that we are
elected through the sprinckling of the 1. Pet. 1, 2.
blood of Jesus Christ, here is no milk: and as we are 1. Pet. 1. 18.
elect and sanctified, so redeemed also not with things corpuptible (therefore
not with milk) but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, Behold ye Jesuits
and be ashamed, Peter is all in Blood, blood, he knows no milk.

There remains but one (for St. James and St. Jude if they name not Christ's
blood, I am much more sure they name no milk) was it St. John the beloved
Disciple, to whom Christ committed her, (as his mother, but not his Savior?)
no verily, for he is plain, that not the milk of the Virgin Mary, but the
blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all our sins: and that there
are 1. John 1. 7
three which bears witness on earth, the spirit and water and blood: behold
three witnesses on earth of our sanctification 1. John 5. 8.
and redemption, and of them blood is one, but milk is none, yea water is, and
yet milk is not: surely if the fathers of the society of the inquisition might
be Judges, St John were sure to be censured to remember water, and forget
milk. But see how St John and the Jesuits differ, they dare match and mix
her milk with his blood, he will neither mix nor matchit so much as with the
water, showing that the very water issuing out of his precious side, was more
of worth and value, then all her milk, even that which fed the flesh of Christ
when he was an Infant: Nay, the Apostle has Revel. 1. 5.
nor yet done, but tells us that Christ loved us and washed us (not in his
mothers milk, but) in his blood: and that the Robes of the Saints are made
white (even white, and yet not in white milk, but) in the red Blood of the
Lamb: Revel. 7. 14
See here, if ever milk had been apt it had been here, if ever it had been
seasonable to have named it, here had been the place: for what should make
white, milk or blood? and yet the whiteness that must cloth the Saints; must
be dyed not in the milk of our Lady, but in the blood of Jesus Christ, if his
beloved and blessed Apostle John, nay if his own holy word may be believed. If
none of all these, was it then her self that prescribed this portion and made
this mixture? no assuredly: They say we dishonor and disgrace her, yet I dare
venture even my soul upon it, that her heart never consented to such a
thought, as to match and mix her milk with his blood: for seeing the Angel
says she was beloved Luk^ 1. 2^
of God, I am sure that no creature can be beloved of God, that durst offer to
match the best thing in him (if it were his very hearts blood) with the blood of
his son; no his soul would hate him, his wrath break out upon him and his
vengeance pursue him to destruction. Far therefore was she from so vile a
thought: nay, her soul rejoiced L^ke 1. 47
in him her Savior, so far was she from making her self in any part a
Savior of her self: yea rather, if a Saint in heaven does hear a blasphemy
on earth, then doubtless that blessed soul of hers; that magnified her Son
and rejoiced in him as her Savior, will never cease to cry and call upon him,
to revenge so high impiety: which is so much more heinous, in as much as they
make the mother the dishonourer of the son. And if her prayers be as
powerful with him as their Doctrine teaches, assuredly she will net cease to
provoke, his justice against them, til she have laid their tottering kingdom
flat on the earth, for erecting up her as an Idol against her son, and for
mixing the virtue of her milk with the the merits of his precious blood.

Thus then, if neither God the Father, nor Christ Jesus, nor the Holy Ghost,
nor Moses, nor the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor the blessed Virgin her
self, did any of them prescribe this portion? nor make this mixture: It
follows, that either the Devil was the deviser of it, or else that they
framed it out of their own brains and therefore to be judged Mountebankes,
and spiritual deceivers: who make show to the world, they have a confection of
miraculous virtue, when indeed it is a perfect poison to all that take it: for
if St. Paul say true, that if we join circumcision to Christ, Christ shall
profit Galath. 5. 2.
us nothing: then without all controversy, if we mix the milk of a creature
with the blood of the Mediator, that blood of his has lost the virtue, and
shall profit us nothing: And thus the Church of Rome has spunne a fair
thread: she will needs have both the son and the mother to be hers, in such
a manner, as she has lost them both, and made them both her enemies, the
mother to be her bitter accuser, and the son to be her angry Judge. But thus
has God in Justice blinded her, that whereas for these 2. or 300. years past,
she came to this height of blasphemous devotion, as This is ordinary in many of
their books especially Bernar. de Bus. to his mariale: and reuelationes Brige^
and others
to trust more the piety of the Mother, then the merrits of the son, and
often to appeal from him to her: Now ar last by this dealing they have taken
the direct course to turn her against them also, and to make her curse and
abhor them and their superstition, who dare make her name and her Milk to be
the disho nourers of her Son, her Savior, and his precious blood.

Thus we have heard and seen the strangest piece of Physic, and most
unequal mixture that yet was ever heard of, The blood of God, and milk of a
woman are mixed to make a cordial potion, But now what will this potion do,
what is the operation of it, hearken to the Mountebancks proclamation, and he
will tell you.

Thus he cries.

Vulnera restituent turpem vlceribus mendicum,
Testa cui saniem reddere sola potest:
Vbera reficient Ismaelem sitientem
Quem Sara non patitur, quem neque nutrit Agar,
Illa mihi ad Pestem procul and procul expungendam
Ista mihi ad long as eua litura febres.
That is:

These wounds the sores do cleanse and cure full well,
Which none can dress but scrape them with a shell,
These breasts the fainting Ismael well would cherish,
Whom Sara would not, and Hagar could not nourish
The first from me expels all pestilence,
The second drives all lingering Feauers hence.
Now he tells us what his Physic will do, and that particularly in both his
simples, the blood and the milk: and as for the one of them that is the blood
and wounds of the Mediator, if he had ascribed much more unto them, he might
have past with praise (for us) for he cannot sufficiently extol the merit and
virtue of them, but as for the other, that is the milk of a woman, (tho it be
the blessed virgin) or a confection of both, there he shows himself both
impious in making such a mixture, as also a vain deceiuer, proclayming great
and sovereign power in that which is nothing worth; for I say again, if it
be true that to him that joins circumcision to Christ, Christ is no Savior:
then we dare boldly say: To him that joins a creatures milk in equallity
Galath. 5
with Christ's blood, that blood of Christ is of no virtue: for circumcision is
of the fathers, nay it was Gods own ordination. But her milk is merely apart
(and no essential part) of her body which is a creature, and G^n. 17
as for the mixture of it with his blood, it is an impious device of profane
pollititians, not derogating from the dignity, but even quite abollishing the
glory of the mediator: then if his passion may not be joined with
circumcision, may his blood be mixdd with her milk? But what is that he
proclaymeth vulnera restituent, etc. Christ's wounds will restore and heal the
spiritual sores of a sinful Lazar, we believe it will, they will do so and much
more; yet for not his sake that says so, for we know that devils themselves
for a vantage would bear witness Mat. 8
to Christ. But for his sake that said. He was wounded for our transgressions,
He was broken for our iniquities, the cha^isement Esaias 53.
of our peace was upon Him, and with his Stripes are we healed: and for his
own sake especially, who said it and did it, I lay down my life for my
sheep. Thus he has said well and truly of the wounds; but the wounds of John
10.
Christ will not serve his turn: He therefore adds.

Vbera reficient, etc.
The Pappes will quench and refresh thirsty souls.
And will they so? who taught you this Divinity? will a creatures Paps quench
and satisfy that soul that hungreth and thirsts after righteousness? Say
ye children of iniquity, have you not read Esaias the Prophet, who tells us He
was despised, He was afflicted, He was Esaias 53.
broken, He was plagued, and all for us: His stripes healed us, and not a word
of her nor her Milk, but all of Him, his stripes and his wounds: what will ye
say, wanted he knowledge of her worthiness? or devotion to her deserts? Indeed
the Papists ha^ue taught so informer times as s^ith their mariale.
Can ye say the first without blaspemy to God? or the second without injury to
the Prophet? could it be he knew not her who knew her son? could he foresee
him and not her? or could any such mystery be kept from him who spoke and
wrote, as he was inspired by Gods spirit? and to conclude, was it not he that
says, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, even Emanuell
Jesus Christ? so that its plain as the Prophet knew a Messiah should come and
should save his people by diing for them; so also he foresaw and knew he should
be borne of a virgin: If the^ the Prophet had knowledge of her, dareye say he
wanted due devotion? and yet one of these you must say, and for want of one of
these you must condemn him, who names none but Christ, or else your selves,
who dare mix her milk with his blood.

But is this all? No,

Illa mihi ad pestem --
Ista mihi ad febres. --
One can heal spiritual pestilence, the other spiritual Fevers; see what
difference there is by their religion, betwixt her milk and his ^loud: are not
these men great and devout honorers of Christ, and his suffering that can find
other helps to heal their souls besides his blood? But if it be thus that
both can heal so well, how comes it to pass they have so many sick souls in
Popery, even sick of all spiritual diseases, especially seeing by their own
doctrine and daily practice, it is apparent they can neither want the one nor
the other of these 2. simples: for first they say, they make Christ's blood
every day, then they have blood at hand continually: If they say that the
Laytie may not have that, but only their Priests (who indeed drink it up all)
yet then they may take their Ladies milk whereof (if themselves say true) they
have so much in several places* as some that lived 100. years ago do write,
that Erasinus and others have spoken more plainly and fully then I do.
in those days, it was more then a woman upon one child can give out, though
the child sucked none at all: If that that is kept, and showed and worshipped
in so many Cities of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, be not her milk, then
where is the truth and honesty of that Religion, so to deceive the world? if it
be, then why are their souls so full of spiritual diseases? why are they not
healed, seeing this Jesuit teaches that it will heal as well as Christ's
blood? as well as Christ's blood will some say, why do you them that wrong? they
are never so wicked to speak such blasphemy, No? then judge by that which
follows.

Ira vomit flammas fumat que libidinis Aetna?
Suffocare queo Sanguine, Lacte queo,
Liuor inexpleta rubigine saeuit in artus?
Detergere queo Lacte, cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua prurigine tentat?
Exaturare queo Sanguine, Lacte queo.
That is,

Let Ire belch fire, and lust like Aetna flame,
Choose either milk or blood, does quench the same,
Let Enuies rust canker my heart about,
This milk, that blood, either will fetch it out,
Or do vain glorious passions stuff me still,
Either with milk or blood the same I Will kill.
Here judge and spare not (without all partiallity,) whether that I said be
not true, that her milk will heal as well as Christ's blood, and this they
affirm, not in general terms but in plain particulars: if, says he, Anger
swell, if Lust inflame me, blood will quench them and so will milk: are there
two stronger passions, two more conquering corruptions, two more raging and
reigning sins then Anger and Lust? yet even these two are quenched and
conquered by her milk as well as Christ's blood: hearken ye Children of the
Romish Sinagogue, hearken I say what instruction your father gives you, hear I
pray (but learn it not) a creatures milk will cleanse your Souls from sin, as
well as your Saviors blood: O spirit of error and blasphemy, whether will thou
go? O Romish impiety, when will thou make an end? will thou not cease till
thou have pulled down the fire of Gods fury, from heaven upon thee? O Babylon we
would have healed thee, but thou will not be healed, Io: 51. 9.
for who can heal him that will needs kill himself? so who can heal thee,
whose blasphemy has wounded and yet benumbed thy heart, gone over thy head and
is ascended up to heaven, and in the presence of God cries vengeance upon
thee; and as for you seduced souls (my dear cou^try-men) you who are deceived
with shows of holiness and devotion, behold here a piece of Popish
holiness, and of the doctrine of their devotion, that the sins of the soul
are cleansed and taken away as well by a creatures milk as by Christ his blood!
is this the catholic Doctrine they brag so much of? is this the catholic
Church that teaches such divinity? is this the chair of St. Peter, and the
seat that cannot err? If it be so, then what did thou mean thou St. John
Evangelist, to teach that it was Jesus Christ that faithful witness, Revel.
1. 5
that first begotten from the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of the earth
(even he, and not any creature) who has loved us and washed us from our sins
in his blood: sure either must you recant this Doctrine, else they that boast
themselves to be^ successors of thy brother Peter may be ashamed of theirs, who
tell us that our sins are washed away in her milk as well as by his blood: and
you that are the dutiful and devoted children of that Romish seat, be Judges
even your selves in this case, what can be said heereunto: how can it stand
with scripture, or with the tenor of true catholic faith? or how can it any
way be defended that a creatures milk can quench the fire of sin in the
soul as well as Christ his blood?

Can ye say that here is only ascribed to her and her milk, a derived virtue
from another, and that the original and fundamental power, is only and wholly
in Christ and his blood? if it were so, it were less evil (though Christ
Jesus may not, nor will not bestow the prerogatives of his Mediatorship on any
creature) but look and weigh over the words again and again, expound them
with any favor that the words may bear, and you shall not see the least
difference.

Suffocare queo Sanguine Lacte queo,
Detergere queo Lacte Cruore queo.
If Lust burn, and Anger boil, Envy fret, vaineglory swell, I can help it
with blood, so can I with with milk^: I can help it with milk, so can I with
blood: there can be no greater equality made betwixt any two things in the
world, then here they make betwixt this Blood and Milk.

Can it be said that the Author is a Poet, and said thus but to make up the
Verse, which otherwise would not have fallen so fitly? surely no, for a young
versisier can soon show how the verses might have run as well as they do, if
he had not purposely labored to sort his verse to his matter, and not the
matter to his verse:

For thus he might have said, Detergere queo sanguine Christ tuo.
with very little altoration.

And so of the rest: but he as truly endeavored to magnify the milk as the
blood, and therefore without any necessity of the Verse, gives the same power,
place, and pre-eminence, in every respect to the milk as to the blood: but had
he been as sound and sincere a Christian as he is a good Poet, he might in as
good verses have given all the honor to Christ as he deserves. Therefore (my
dear countrymen) be no longer seduced by a Religion so fraught with
Atheism, blasphemy and impiety: do but look into the Scriptures, Counsels,
or Fathers: yea ask the honestest and learned of your own Religion, (or any
except Jesuits or such other like them, who frame a religion to their own
purposes.)

If this be tolerable Divinity that the milk of the Virgin does cleanse man's
soul from sin as well as Christ his blood.

If it be not Divinity but Blasphemy, no Christian Doctrine but impiety, and
yet suffered, yet approved in the Roman Church, both by doctrine and practice;
then return to that truth and holy Religion, which out of Gods word, and
according to the purest antiquity is established amongst us: and with heart and
voice join with us to embrace and say Amen, to that holy doctrine of blessed
St. John, who says it is Jesus Christ Revel. 1, 56.
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood to him be glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

This was his Religion, this is ours: oh that it were yours also! he sucked
this divinity out of that blessed breast of Gods Son, whereon he leaned: and
if he had I^h. 13. 23.
sucked thence this divinity of the Jesuits, that the virgin Mary washed us
from our sins by her milk, surely he would never have concealed it from us,
nor have deprived her of the honor, nor us of the comfort that thereby might
accrue both to her and us: for he was her son by her own adoption, yea her
Son by the gift and nomination of her son and Savior, yea her Son in
love, duty, and all respectiuenesse could he then, or would he in any sort
obscure her due glory? would he give too much to her son, and too little to
her? would he give all that to her son, which in part was hers? can this, may
this, or dare this be immagined by any Jesuit? If not, then how dare they
extend their devotion beyond his, and ascribe that to her which he never did,
yea that to her, which he appropriates to Jesus Christ.

If they think that Peter had more devotion then John, hearken then what he
says: Jesus Christ his own 1. Pet. 2. 24.
self bare our sins in his body on the tree: let the words be Pondered,
Jesus Christ says he bare our sins: true (say they) but so did the Virgin
Mary also, No (says Peter he himself* his own self bare them* yea in his
body. he bare them in his body: (say they) that is true, but he bears them in
his mystical body, in his members, much more therefore in his mother, which is
more then many members of his body: nay, says St. Peter, he bare our sins
his own self in his body: but what body? even that body that was on the Tree:
therefore if St. Peter preach true divinity, then is this doctrine of your
teacher heinous blasphemy.

All that may be imagined for their defense at the best is this, that all this
is but poetical, and hyperbolicall, or proceeds from the passion and height
of devotion: but that in truth and earnest he ascribes all to Christ, and to
his blood, makes his prayers to him, and puts the confidence of his heart in
him alone: but least any man should have the least suspicion of him this way,
or think so good a thought of him, he deals yet more plainly and to preuenr
all such thoughts and objections, he makes his prayer both to the Moth^r and
the Son, without any difference in the world, to the one for her milk, to
the other for his blood: for thus he says.

Ergo parens et nati meis adverti^e votis,
Lac peto depereo sanguinem vt rumque volo.
That is:

Mother and Son give ear to what I crave,
I beg this milk, that blood and both would have.
Here is plain dealing, it is not the Son and his blood that will serve his
turn he must also have the Mother and her milk, is not this good catholic
doctrine and devotion? but further is not this strange to see how he marshalls
them in the order of his judgment and affection? he prays to the mother and
the son: but first to the mother, he will have both milk and blood, but
first milk: thus Mary has the precedence of Christ, and her milk of his
blood: But you will say it is not that he so esteems them in his judgment,
but only for the necessity of of the verse: the answer is that a grammar
scholar, can soon show how the verse is as good, and give Christ his
precedence, as it is doing him this wrong:

Ergo Nate parensque meis aduertite votis.
But he still keeping Christ in wardship and under age, held it not fit that he
should have the place before his Mother only, and therefore without all
necessity even wittingly and wilfully, he puts Christ in the second place. But
now let us hasten to an end of this (if it be not endless and bottomless)
impiety.

Upon these fearful premises thus he proceeds.

Paruule maternis medius qui ludis in vluis
Et tua iam comples vbera, iam vacuas:
Quid me respectas obliqua tuentibus hirquis,
Roboris in Coelum pilhabet inuidia.
Saepe quidem dixti, noxis offensus iniquis,
Tune me as mammas, Improbe tune me as?
Nolo tuas o nolo tuas puer auree mammas:
Non sunt tam duri, tam grauis or is homo:
Sed tantum lateris pluat vnica and vnica stilla:
Et saltem a dextrae vulnere gutta pluat.
Se nihil e dextra vis impluere, implue laeu^:
Si nihil e laeua, de pede sanguis eat.
Si tibi non placio vulnus mihi vulnera danto
Mercedem danto vulnera, si placeo.
That is,

Youngling that in thy mothers arms art playing,
Sucking her breasts sometimes, and sometimes staying,
Why do thou view me with that look of scorn,
Its forcelesse Envy that against thee is borne.
Often have thou said, being angry at my sin,
Dare thou desire the teates my food lies in?
I will not, oh I dare not (Noble child)
Duty from me is not so far exild:
But one, even one poor drop I do implore,
From thy right hand or side, I ask no more.
If neither: from thy left hand let one fall,
Nay from thy foot rather then none at all,
Do thou dislike me? let thy wounds me wound,
But pay my due, if I in grace be found.
Now from blasphemy he proceeds to plain Atheism, not fearing to expose the
greatest mysteries of Christian faith, and even our blessed Savior himself,
to the rediculous and scornful contempt of profane men: Speaking unto
Christ, God c^aequall with the father, and whose very humanity raineth now in
glory at Gods right hand, as to a seely Infant in his mothers arms: and to him
whose very humanity is fed with the glorious presence and contemplation of
the deity, as to a poor child sucking his Mother breasts: such conceits are
common, and such words and writings rise with thm, of our blessed Savior, who
never speak of the Virgin Mary, but with the Title of Queen of heaven, Lady
of Angels, the gate of Paradise, the fountain of mercy, or some such other
titles, fitting none but him that is God, or at least she is always a
commanding Mother, and he an Infant governed, and an obedient child: But let
us consider his words a little better. Paruule etc, youngling (says he) thou
pretty babe, thou playest in thy mothers arms, and sometimes suckes her breasts
till they be empty, and again stayest till they be full, etc. Is this good
and sound Divinity, that Christ our Redeemer is now this present year, at
Halla in Brabrant, an Infant playing in his mothers arms, and sucking her
breasts.

If it be so, then sure St. Paul was much to blame to teach us, that even the
man Jesus Christ, after he had Heb. 10. 12
offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever (not in his mothets arms,
but) at his Fathers right hand: and what doing? not playing in her arms, nor
sucking her breasts, but there he ever lives to make intercession for us. Heb.
7. 25.
Intercession! to whom? not to her in whose arms they will make him play, but
to him, at whose right hand he sits for evermore.

And much more to blame St. Peter, who (not foreseeing, it seems what doctrine
his pretended successor would teach after him) teaches us that Jesus Christ is
at Gods right hand, gone into heaven* to whom Angels, powers 1. Pet. 3. 22.
and might are subject. Are Angels, powers and might subject to him? and must
he be subject to a mortal and humane creature? Nay, is he now an Infant,
playing in his mothers arms, and hanging on her breasts? is not this good
Catholic Romish doctrine? and is not this good pure Romish devotion, to pray
to him who is God of glory, and whose manhood is now at Gods right hand, Angels
and powers subject to him, in such words as these: Thou pretty Child that
playest in thy mothers arms, and hangest at her breasts? Is this a salutation
fit for the son Heb. 7. 28. Heb. 1. 23
of God, who is the Son consecrated for ever? the heir all things. the
brightness of Gods glory, and the engraven form of his person? or is this a
Christian like description of him, who having by himself purged our sins,
sits at the right hand of the Majesty in the highest places? But this is
natural to Popish Religion, to disgrace the mediator they care not how, so
that they may advance some creatures, and magnify their own devises: but
though they never so much abuse most of Gods ordinances, and nullify the very
Offices of the Mediator: Yet me thinks they should be a little fearful how
they touch the Person it self of the Mediator and son of God, and should
shrink and shame to expose the person of Jesus Christ, to the base conceit of
the ungodly: for what can the carnal man, much more the Atheist, the Turk,
and the Jew imagine of Christ, when he that is hi^ pretended Vicar suffers his
followers to speak and write of him, and pray to him, as a playing child, and
sucking Infant, and to describe him in his behauiours as a very child, greeuing
and crying that any should touch his mothers Paps but only himself? alas what
will this Religon of Rome do at last? the word of God and Sacraments and other
his holy ordinances they have profaned, the officer of the Mediator have they
nullified, and yet no^ content: here they labor to make ridiculous to all
irreligious men, the very person of Jesus Christ himself: could this be done
by any but those that are the Children of that Mother of fornication, that sits
upon the beast full of names of blasphemy Revel. 17, 3.
arise Lord, mainetaine thine own cause, deliver thy holy Name from that
pollution, and thy Religion from that contempt which they bring upon it. To
conclude: it may not be amiss here to observe the opposition betwixt God in
his holy Scripture, and and the Pope in this his Religion.

The Scripture says. Popery says. Christ Jesus is no more to be known after
the 1. Cor. 5. 16
flesh. Christ is yet to be known and worshipped as a child. The Scripture
says. Popery says. Christ bears up all things Heb. 1. 3.
by his mighty Word. Christ is now borne in his mothers arms. The Scripture
says. Popery says. Christ sits for ever at the Heb. 7. 10
right hand of God. Christ is playing in his mothers arms. The Scripture says
Popery says. Christ tarrieth at his Fathers Psalm. 110. Heb. 10. 12, 13.
right hand, till his enemies be made his footestoole. He is in Heaven, till
it please the Pope to allow a Picture at Hall or Sichem. The Scripture says.
Popery says. Without Controuersye 1. Tim. 3. 16
great is the mystery of godliness that Jesus Christ is received up into
glory. Without controversy that it is no such mystery, for Christ is still in
his Mothers arms. The Scripture says. Popery says. Christ must suffer and so
Luke 24.
enter into his glory. Christ after all his sufferings, must again be subject
to the infirmities of an Infant.

Out of all this follows a conclusion of good use: It has been often
objected to the Romish Church, that they have not true Christ left amongst
them, but an Idol of their own rearing, erected in their own carnal
fancies: now that this is no flaunder, no cavil, no hyperbolicall or
figurative speech, nor an accusation forced upon them against their wills, is
apparent by their own doctrine and practice in this place: for the Christ of
God and of his Church, is God equal to the father, and can do all things
himself: the Christ of the Romish Church is a Child inferior to his mother
and may deny her nothing. The true Christ, being man grew in stature and
wisdom, and being grown a man, so lived and dyed, rose again and was
glorified, and never decreased: but theirs is now become a child again and a
playing Infant: the true Christ sits at the right hand of God his Father,
theirs is borne in the arms of Mary his mother.

Hence the conclusion is evident, that therefore the Romish christ is not the
true Christ of God and of the true christian Church. This conclusion I
demonstrate thus: the Title of these verses is this, To our Lady of Hal, and
the Child Jesus: this child they speak of, is either Jesus Christ indeed or it
is not: if not, then they proclaim themselves liars and impostors: if it be,
then my conclusion stands good: for this Jesus in all the forenamed respects,
and many more, differs from the true Jesus and Savior of Christian men: let
them take whether they will, the better is to bad. But now let us see what is
that he says to this child Jesus.

Quid me respectas, etc.

Why (says he) do thou frown on me (thou pretty child) art thou angry with
me for desiring thy milk? do thou ch^d me that I dare presume to ask the
milk of thy mothers teates? this is all the cause he lays of Christ his
anger, what should a man say to this? what would a Jew say, what will an
Atheist think of it? surely they will deride and laugh at that Religion that
allows it, if our Christ be such a one as is angry at such a cause: But say I
pray thee thou Romish Jesuit, (thou want neither wit nor learning to give
answer) speak thou in jest or earnest? if in Jest, then, know thou with
whom thou iestest? considerest thou that it is Jesus of Nazareth, the great
one, the holy one of God, of whose kingdom there shall be no end, he that is
the brightness of Gods glory and the engraven form of his person, he at whose
remembrance the devils tremble, and to whom all knees bow in heaven, earth, and
hell, and dare thou exercise thy wit, and whet thy style, and practice thy
poetical vain upon him? and unto him that now having conquered sin, death,
and hell? sits now at the right hand of Majesty, in the highest places?
dare thou present such a Petition as this? O pretty child do not envy me
that I should touch thy mothers paps, with which I perceive thou will suffer
none to play but thy self: oh be not angry that I long for that which is
thine, namly for the milk of thy mothers teates; did thou ever find in
Scriptures or sound antiquity, that any holy man did ever conceive of him, or
speak to him on this fashion? no for its rather a sporting speech ^it to be
spoken to a playing child, then a salutation sit to be tendered to the Son of
God and Savior of the world.

But if thou say thou speak in earnest according to the truth of Religion,
and soundness of divinity, then tell me I pray thee in earnest, is this any
part of christian faith, or is it catholic deuinity, that Christ Jesus is
offended with that man that shall desire to touch the Virgin Mary's paps, or to
taste of her milk (not in this regard that its a thing not possible, and
therefore indeed not to be wished by a Christian, but) because they be
peculiarly and propperly his paps and his milk, still as they were when he
was an Infant? If this be Romish divinity, alas for the sheep that are fed in
such pastures, and ^ild with such doctrine: for this is fundame^tally both
false and impious, false, for if it be true that the holy scriptures teach,
that Jesus Christ is now no more to be known nor conceived of according to the
flesh, that is as a mere and mortal man, but as a glorified Man, a spiritual
conqueror of his enemies, and spiritual head of his Church: If this I say be
true, that he is no longer, to be known as a man, as he was upon earth, then
it is false that he is still to be conceived of and spoken unto as a playing
child: Besides it is impious and irreligious, and a step to Atheism to imagine
that Christ our God and Savior, is offended for such an imaginary toy as this
is, to touch his mothers paps, or to desire her milk: and what enemies of our
religion would not loudly laugh at this our Christ whom we so magnify, that we
make him the rest and comfort of our souls, to be^ such a one as he is here
described? namely one that chides him that dare touch his mothers paps, for so
says the verse:

Tune meas Mammas improbe tune meas?
That is,

Dare thou desire the teates, my food lies in?
Alas, how shall the mouths of Turks and Jews be stopped from blaspheming,
and saying: Is this your Christ? is this the glory of Christianity? Is this he
whom you make a God? are these the sins he is offended withal? Surely no ways
can such and fowler blasphemies be prevented, but that the Christian world
publicly renounce, condemn, and curse, this damned doctrine, as being the
private and impious blasphemy of the Machiuillian Jesuits, but not the
Catholic doctrine of Christianity: For we cannot deny but there is a
generation of vipers, bred of the corruption and putrefaction of an old and
sinful world; calling themselves Jesuits, or Priests of the society of Jesus:
who as they come nearest to God in their mouths; so are they in their hearts
(if their courses can discover them) the furthest from him. With these fellows
it may be it is a doctrine or a piece of devotion, that its a great sin for a
man to desire from Jesus some of his mothers milk: but if they be asked who
made this a sin, they must answer, themselves: if what law? even their own
fancies: But as for the catholic and christian Church, she does renounce it.

But to proceed, is it not strange that a witty and learned Jesuit, should
frame such a speech as this unto Jesus Christ, for thus to begin, Oh blessed
Child why art thou angry at me, and offended with me? often have thou said to me
being angry at my sins, etc. would put a man in hope that some great matter
followed: for upon so good a beginning, would not a man presume that some good
confession of sins should follow? as this, I must confess O Lord I have
sinned in ignorance, in self love in security, in hardness of heart, in
incontinency, in malice, in hatred, in covetousness in omis^ion of my duties
in commission of evil, etc. for these O Lord, and for any of these, thou
might say unto me, thou miserable wretch, how dare thou thus pollute my
name, and as far as in thee lies, crucify me again by these thy sins? how
dare thou dust and ashes, thus vilify my eternal Law, the curse whereof
thou have hereby incurred? how dare thou bear my Name, or look me in the
face, whom thou have thus provoked? See Watson the Priest his judgment of the
Jesuit often in his Quidlibets. Costerus in Euchiridio: cap de ^aleba^u sacerd.
Sacerdos si forn^catur aut demi concubinam foueat tamet si grau^ sacriligio se
obitringet Grau^us tamen peccat si mali^ monitum contrahat.


Oh that our ears might have heard a Jesuit saying thus, and then in reason a
man would have expected some good conclusion from such a beginning. But why
should we look for either reason or religion from a Jesuit, (if that be true
which their brother Watson the priest has written of them.) To have supposed
Christ to be angry with him for breaking the Morrall Law had been good
divinity, and no poetical immagination, but these holy Fathers have no such
faults: nay see how innocent Lambs the Jesuits be, that when Christ is most
angry with a Jesuit, and rebukes him for sin, he has none to lay to his
charge, nor find any whereof This is also desended both by Gretser the Jesuit
in his historia ord. Ies. and by Ignatius armandus the Jesuit, in his Epistles
to Cha^^er: vid. Ep. Iesuiticas. for the points af swearing and holy days, see
Tollet in his instructio sacerdotum: and Azorius in his institutiones morales.
Sixtus 5. made that a saint at King I hilips request for recompenc^ (expressly)
of his invasion ^f England in 88.
he is guilty, but a little holy presumption, or rather height of ardent
devotion, that he dare touch the Paps, and beg the milk of the virgin Mary: O
fearful presumption, O carnal selfeloue, O hellish pride, and well beseeming
the Jesuitical brood! is not this the generation that praises it self, and
(as Solomon says) is good in his own eyes? But say in earnest, is this all
the fault that thou think Christ can find with thee? then belike there is
either no breaches at all of the morrall Law, amongst Jesuits, or else the
breaches of Gods Law, are less sins amongst them, then are the breaches of
their own devises, and well may it be so: for he was a Jesuit who taught that
a Priest sins less if he kept a whore, or lie with another man's wife* then
if he marry a wife of his own, I say he was a Jesuit that wrote it, and he
was a Jesuit that defended it.

Again, they teach that its a less sin to swear in common talk by the
holy name of God, then it is to eat an egg in lent: for the latter say they
is a mortal sin, the first is but a venial. Again, that he sins no more that
works upon the holy Saboath day then he that works upon the feast day of St.
Didace the Spaniard whom Sixtus made a Saint, not yet 20. years ago: they
who^e doctrines these and such others be, no marvel tho they hold that the
breach of of a duty of their own devising, is a greater sin, then the breach
of the morrall Law: for so must he hold that wrote this, or else that Christ
can find no greater fault in him, but that he durst beg his mothers milk: or
else that Christ would pass by all other faults in comparison of that, let him
choose which of the three does please him best, for one he must needs take, or
else confess that all this while he is but in jest.

I would leave this point, but that my love to you (my dear countrymen, the
Papists of England) prouokes me to one word more, to you and for your sakes.

Consider I pray you what these men are, who be the Fathers and founders, at
least the guiders and governors of your faith: A generation that knows no
evil by it self, but this that (I dare stand to) is no evil at all, but of
their own making, a generation against whom Christ has nothing but this
ridiculous allegation which you have heard of: which if it be true, as they
are a society of all the world to be honored, so being false, they are a
brood of Hyppocrites, of all the world to be detested: Then see how, you are
daily bewitched by their enchantments, and carried up and down as they please
to lead you: but consider I pray you what will not those men say of themselves
to you in private, which speak thus insolently of themselves in public? what
marvelous, miraculous, and incredible things will not these fellows buz into
the ears of their Nouices (whom they endeavor to bind Prentises to their
Beelzebub?) who offer to publish to the eyes and censure of all the world, that
Christ lays nothing to their charge unless it be an extremity of devotion,
to his blessed mother: O beloved countrymen, be not seduced by such impostors!
let not such vipers eat your hearts; but discover the Hypocrites and send them
home unmasked to Hell where they were hatched, for they that dare thus dally
with our Savior, no marvel tho they be so bold with your souls and
consciences, your children and your estates and all that belongs to you.

Now to go forward, he has told us the great quarrel that Christ has to
him, and the hideous fault for which he chides him, that he offers to touch
his mothers teates, and will needs have some of her milk: but now let us see
what he answers and how he defends himself.

Nolo tuas o nolo tuas puer auree mamas.
I will not, oh I dare not, golden child:
Duty from me is not so far exild:
But one even one poor drop I do implore.
From thy right hand or side, I ask no more.
To a strange accusation, here is a more strange answer: for now the tide of
his blasphemy is even at at the highest: the quarrel he supposed, Christ to
have against him, was that he durst presume to touch his mothers paps, or
desire to taste of her milk: a fearful sin doubtless, yet neither
forbidden in the Law nor the Gospel; but a sin of the Popes making. But what
is his answer hereunto? he plainly pleads not guilty, alleging for
himself, that he is not so bold, so rude, so presumptuous, as to dare to
entertain any such thought, or attempt any such thing, as to touch her sacred
paps, or to drink of that glorious milk: no his ambition reaches not so
high, he only prays to have part of his wounds and blood, that he desires
as being a thing of an inferior nature and not comparable to the other.

O miserable times of ours, that we should live to see that any man's heart
should conceive* any man's tongue utter, especially any man's pen should
publish such horrible blasphemy against the blood and person of our Savior!
what, must the Virgin Mary be first compared, afterward equalled, and is not
that enough unless now she be preferred before, and advanced above Christ? is
his blood inferior to her milk? and is it less presumption to be bold with
Christ then her? whither will Romish religion go at the last, that already
comes to this?

But to come to a more particular consideration of the words: the answer that
here the Jesuits makes, contains apparently both absurdity and impiety, and
both in the higest degree: The absurdity appears in his evident contradiction
of himself; for now, as tho he had either forgotten or cared not what he said
before he denies that which before he spoke almost in every verse: dare you not
now touch her Paps, nor taste her milk? then who was it that before said: I am
doubtful whether to take paps or side, milk or blood: If I look at the Paps,
I long for milk: if at the Wounds, I would have blood: seeing therefore both
are so good, I will have both: I will catch the milk with my right hand, the
blood with the left. Did thou this even now, and now say thou dare not
touch it? Nay, was it not thou that said I will mingle the milk of the
mother with the blood of the Son, and so make a souerainge co^pound to heal
my soul, and now dare thou not touch the milk nor paps? was it not thy
mouth that said, if Anger, Lust, or any sin vex my soul, blood will help
it, and so will milk: therefore Mother and Son here my request, I must have
milk, I will have blood, I will have both? and do thou now say, Oh I will
have blood indeed, but I dare not desire milk? was it then devotion to take
it, and taste it, and drink it, and mingle it with Christ's blood, and apply it
to the soul, and is it now presumption to desire it? can one mouth send out
such gross contradictions? but let it pass, for no absurdity nor contradiction
can be so vile as should ever have moved me to have set Pen to paper at this
time, (for they are sufficiently discovered already in these and other points,)
but when dishonor and blasphemy is offered to the blood and person of Jesus
Christ, how can a christian hold his peace? for if that be true which the
learned father says, that in accusation of heresy ^iero^im:
he would have no man patient, whereas heresy is but the shame and hurt of the
man that holds it? then sure in the case of blasphemy and impiety, touching the
very crown, and striking at the head of Jesus Christ our Lord and redeemer,
who can be patient, who can but speak? neither think that herein I challenge
ought to my self above my brethren, but know contrariwise, that though I
only write, who first, or with the first discovered it, yet speak I, and
write I in the person of many millions more, who all with one heart and voice
detest his Romish impiety.

The impiety that bewrayes it self in this answer is such as goes beyond all
we yet heard, and wherein it seems the blasphemer thought to exceed
himself: that we may the better discover it mark the current of his speech: O
Christ (says he) often have thou being provoked with my sin, rebuked me and
said: dare thou sinful wretch presume to touch my teates or meddle with the
milk that feeds me? he answers, oh no blessed child I dare not, nor I will
not so far presume, I never was so rude, nor so uncivil, as to imagine that
I might touch those precious Paps, or taste the blessed milk of thy mother: I
only beg a little of thine own blood, from thy side, thy hand or foot: that
shall content me: what is this we hear? you are content to have Christ's Blood,
but as for the virgin Mary's milk thou dare not desire it what: is her milk
more precious, more dainty, more sacred then the blood of the Mediator? Ye
heavens be astonished at this, and all ye creatures of God (in your kinds)
renounce and detest this heinous blasphemy. And you (my poor countrymen) that
are the devoted children of that Church, behold here a piece of Popish
divinity and devotion, a creatures milk is of more esteem then Christ his
blood: a christian by the power of his ordinary saving faith may be partaker
of the benefit of Christ's blood, but not of the blessed milk of our Lady. The
blood he may boldly challenge, the milk he scarce may name: in the blood, he
may diue and wash his soul, the milk he may not presume to touch: Oh new
divinity, fo^merly it seemed strange that her milk was but compared to his
blood, but when after it was made equal to it, and mingled with it, and held
as fit to heal the soul as it that seemed incredible, till we saw it: then
what is this that now we hear, that her milk is not only comparable nay
equal but even more precious, more sacred, more excellent then the blood of
Jesus Christ: Oh miserable Religion of Popery! whether will thou draw thy
deceived children in the end? what will become of thee and thy followers? If
the devils confessed that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ of God, that is the
only Savior of the world, and the only anointed of God, to be the mediator,
and yet for all this are Devils still and no better: then what are they and
what a religion is that, which makes his blood no^ so good, so virtuous, so
sovereign, so precious as her milk, and so by consequent will neither let him
be the only nor the principal Savior. Now the same glorious God and Savior
Jesus Christ, whose merrits are debaced, whose person dishonored, and whose
blood little better then trodden under foot, either convert in mercy, or in
justice confound all that shall consent, defend or give countenance to so
fearful a blasphemy: and the same God give you grace poor seduced English
men, to relinquish that Religion, which is the Mother of such monsters as upon
this theater of the Jesuits, are presented unto you: and especially to detest
that Jesuitical Sect, whose honor it is to dishonor Jesus Christ, and who
bring upon the great Theater of their honor, the blood of Jesus, so
dishonored, as it yet never was by any sect or profession, Turk or Jew,
Atheist, or Heretic, devil or man, since the world began.

But let us see what remains.

Saepe mihi Babylon patera propina and auro
Ingeminatque me is aurib us, euge, bibe,
Non faciam, vel si Coelum miscebitur Orco
Non faciam, meretrix impia, non faciam
O sitio tamen, o vocem sit is inter cludit:
Nate cruore sitem comprime, lacte parens.
Often times does Babylon in gold me proffer,
Delicious drink and wooes me to her offer:
No, no, though heaven and hell should meet, I Will none,
I Will none ungracious strumpet, hence be gone:
But ali I thirst, a drought my breast does smother,
Quench me with blood sweet Son, with milk good Mother.
After the discourse imagined (as we heard before) to be betwixt Christ and
him, containing Christ's accusation, and his defense touching the high
presumption of being as bold with his mothers milk as his blood: now
sodaainely he turns himself from Christ to Babylon and supposes that Babylon
that spiritual strumpet allures him to her unlawful lusts and vild
Idolatries, and that her temptations have been both frequent and forcible. And
surely herein we easily believe him: for what is spiritual Babylon but the
kingdom of sin and Satan, of impiety, Idolatry, blasphemy, superstition,
prophanes: and where is that as in Popery, and where to be found so fully as
in the bowels of the Popish state, whom they well know all the world either
clearly condemns, or at least justly suspects to be that spiritual Babylon
so fearfully accused and condemned in the Revelation. For what City is so
notoriously known to stand upon the notable and famous hills as Rome is? what
City in all the world did reign over all the Kings of the earth, then when St.
John wrote, but only Rome? and the Text says (as plainly as can be) that the
woman, the great Whore of Babylon the mother of fornicatio^s, is the great
Revel.
City that reigns over the Kings of the earth: and lastly there is no place,
person, state, nor power, in the world, in whom the number of 666. so fully
concurreth, in so many languages, in so many respects, so directly, and with so
little strayning as in the Popes.

I will specify but few for many: the Pope or none but the Pope challenges to
the principal of the Clergy, in the world, and therefore in the former years
has called himself universal Bishop, and Pastor of Pastors: Now it falls out
that this his pride does proclaim his shame to all the world, for the number
of the beast is in this name, without adding, altering, or any strayning, as
he shall find that will reckon.

D V X C L e r I 500. 5. 10. 100. 50. 1. Total. 666.

Again the Pope glories in this Title and honor, that he is Gods general
Vicar on earth: this is the foundation of all his pretended power and
usurpation: this he and his imps fight for as for their lives.

This his seduced creatures, English Priests and Jesuits, do in England dye for
(excepting some that dyed for horrible treasons) and no marvel, for they know
they lose all if they lose this, and yet the Pope cannot hold it, but withal
he must have the number of the beast engraven in his forehead, so as he that
runs may read it: for put down this Title in the latin tongue, (which is
the tongue by him advanced above Greek o^ Hebrew, wherein he writes his
Letters, gives his laws and his bulls, and works all his fears) and it
contains the number of the beast, and neither more nor less.

G E N E R A L I S V I C A R I V S D E I. I N T E R R I S. 50. 1. 5. 1. 100. 1.
5. 500. 1. 1. 1.

50. 1. 5. 1. 100. 1. 5. 500. 1. 1. 1. total 666.

Thus its clear, that as the Pope will needs be Gods general Vicar on earth,
so he cannot have it, but he must bear the mark and number of the beast. If
any man say he calls not himself Gods Vicar, but Christ's Vicar, I answer
Christ is both God and man, and he holds himself Christ's Vicar, even as
Christ is God, and full little would he thank him that holds him Christ's
Vicar, only as he is a man: But I answer further, that who ever reads his
own decrees and public constitutions, shall easily see that he calls
himself ordinarily the Vicar of God, and suffers others so to style him: and
that the world may see they have not reformed it, the Pope that now is, Paul
the 5. has suffered one of his own creatures in a Book dedicated Tuccij
Tuccij patritij luc^nsis and protonet Apostol: comment in cant. ^ug: 606 In
titulo libri.
to him, to call him the Vicar of God. Thus Thus he will needs be Gods Vicar,
but his pride is well paid for, for as he will be Gods Vicar against Gods
will, so God makes him bear the devils mark, in the number of the beast
against his own will.

If therefore it be so likely that Rome is Babylon, and her doctrines and
deceits, superstitions, and Idolatries, the fornication of that whore of
Babylon, then we easily believe this to be true, that often times did Babylon
allure him with her entisements, and woo him to her spiritual fornications:
so has she done many more, and preuailes with too many.

But what, with him? No, he will have none: it is well said. Oh that you would
do as well, that is the worst we wish you Jesuits, though you wish us nothing
but fire and gunpowder.

Oh that you would turn into your selves and see your error in believing her,
and in being deceived with her enchantments, and drunk with her fornications
that you would no longer be the sons of her that is the mother of
abominations least you be also children of abomination:

Oh that you would forsake her and discover her skirts, and tear her in pieces
as she has deserved, and then return to be the children of the Church, and
servants of the living God! this is that we wish you from the Lord, whom we
also pray that thou whosoever thou art, that wrote this and all other of the
faction in the world, may have grace to perform that which here thou promisest.
No no, though heaven and hell should meet I Will none, I Will none ungracious
strumpet get thee gone.

Well then, if he will have none of Babilons dainties what will he have? for he
says he thirsts, and must have his thirst quenched, but how?

Quench me with blood sweet son, with milk good mother

But alas these are children of Babylon, they will not be healed: for lo he
sings his old song again, he must have blood, he must have milk: lo here
the hunger and thirst of a Papist, it is for milk as well as blood: out
Savior proclaymeth to the world, blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness. I would here ask Mat 5.
a reasonable Papist, a brief question, whether this righteousness can be
attained by any means, but by the blood of the Mediator: If he think it may,
let him that says so, take time to consider of it, and he will answer
otherwise: But if not (as if Christians they must needs answer) then what a
kind of thirst is that, that thirsts for the milk of a creature, as well as
for the blood of the Mediator: but whilst they take time to answer this
question, let us go forward, and trace this Jesuit to his unhappy iournyes end.

Dic matri meus his frater sitit optima matter
Vis de font tuo promere, de que meo?
Dic nato, meus his frater mi mellee fili,
Captiuus monstra a vincula, litron habes,
Ergo redemptorem monstra te iure vocari
Nobilior reliquis si tibi sanguis in est.
Tuque parens monstra matrem te iure vocari,
Vbera si reliquis diuitiora geris.
That is,

Say to thy mother see my brothers thirst,
Mother, your milk will ease him at the first:
Say to thy son, behold thy brothers bands,
Sweet son thou have his ransom in thy hands.
Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed,
Thou Son, if that thy blood excel the rest:
And show thy self justly so stilde indeed,
Thou mother if thy breasts the rest exceed.
Now if you please to observe a little, you shall see a new piece of Popish
devotion: his ground already ^ayd is, that he must have milk from the mother:
blood of the son.

But how will he come by them? he has found a ready way, he will make the
Son mediator to his mother, and the mother to her Son: Christian Religion
has ever taught, that the Son is our Mediator to the Father: and Popish
Religion has long taught that the Mother is a Mediator to her Son: But now
they begin to reach that the son is also a mediator to his mother: what will it
come to in the end?

And here observe, that as ever heretofore when there was any honor in
precedence, the mother had the first place: so now when it is a burden and a
duty, the son must have it, but not till then, for so now he says.

Say to thy mother see thy brothers thirst,
Mother your milk will ease him at the first.
First indeed he intreates the Son and then the Mother: but what intreates he
him? to be a means: to whom? to his Mother* for what? for her milk: so that
upon the matter, her Milk is it that is first in his thoughts, its that he
longs for principally, and Christ Jesus shall be preferred to go a message to
his mother and to entreat for him, that he may have it: as tho he had said, O
Jesus my soul so thirsts for milk, that I cannot be without it: now because
thou have rebuked me for my presumption, in offering to take it as boldly as
thy blood: I have therefore no other way but to entreat thee to be a means
to thy mother, that so by thy mediation and her mercy I may obtain it,
therefore I beseech thee Jesus say to thy mother, etc.

Is not Christ honored and well advanced by Popery that makes him mediator to
a woman for her milk, and for the benefits and merits of it, and that for such
a one as will not be content with the benefits and merits of his own blood
shedding: But behold good Reader seriously what divinity here is! A Christian
man in his devotion may (says this Jesuit) desire Jesus Christ to go entreat
his mother for him, and to compaline that his poor brothers soul thirsts,
desiring her to quench and comfort him with her milk: what is this we hear?
Is Christ a mediator to a creature? and for something in that creature to
quench the spiritual thirst of the soul? If this be true, then what meant
Christ to say, Come unto me all that be weary, and I will ease you: for if
he send Mat 11
them that be thirsty and weary to his mother to be eased, surely in that
word, Christ either spoke too much of himself, or too little of his Mother.

If Christ held that they might come only to himself, then it appears the
Jesuits Religion and his be contrary: if he knew that they might come to her,
as well as him, or to her by him, then what meant he to say Come unto me, and
not rather Come unto her or unto me* what can they, what dare they say? was he
undutiful to his mother? or envied he her dignity, or forgot he her when he
thus spoke? or was he swayed with too much self-love? If none of these
without blasphemy may be imagined, then what may be said, that there were any
such thing due to her, and he knew it not? If this also be impossible, then
there remains but one, that he named himself, but excluded not his mother, he
bids come to him, and forbids not to come to her: I answer, first here he
bids us come to himself, let them show where he bids us go to her, if he no
where bid it, it is as good as forbidden: aga^ne, he that in one case of truth
said, I and my Father are one, would not John 10. 30.
have spared in this case if it had been true, to have said I and my mother are
one, and he who out of his holy humility, and knowing the difference of the
fathers deity of his own humanity, freely confessed my father is John. 14.
greater then I, would never have scorned (if it had been true) to have
acknowledged, my mother is as great as I: whereas contrariwise, leaving ou^ her
and all creatures in the world, he says directly, Come unto me: And whereas he
came to fulfill all righteousness: and the fifth Mat. 3. 15.
commandment we know commands as well reverence to Parents, as obedience:
therefore doubtless he who went home says the text and was obedient to them,
Luke 2. ^.
would also most readily have yielded her this reverence if it had been due
unto her, or if it might lawfully have been given her: But he knowing the
contrary, does in this case pass by her, and commands Come unto me: If yet
they will reply and say, he says indeed come to him, but meaning to send us
from himself to her for ease and comfort, who is the Mother of mercy and
grace: I answer so indeed, is she called in their service book, Maria matter
grati^: matter miserecordiae: tunos ab host Pro^ege, and hora mortis, suscipe.
Officium beatae mariae.
but God in this book takes that name to himsele only, and gives it to no
creature, therefore let them answer it that give it to her: Again, the ground
of this re-plication is false, for as he says Come to me, and names no
other, so neither sends he us to her for ease, but says plainly and directly,
and I will ease you. Further, they not only make Christ a Mediator to his
Mother, and that for spiritual ease and comfort, but they do it in such a
fashion, as they make Christ one that either is not able or not willing to
help us himself: for it he were, then why do they say, that he complains to
his mother, that we thirst and for the ease of our souls desires her to yield
her milk? If here they were asked this question, I wonder how they would
answer it? If Christ be not willing or nor able to ease the thirsty soul,
then how is he a perfect Savior? If he be, then how is it likely that he
would send him that humbles his soul to him for help, to another to be
eased, seeing he asks of him, who said, Come unto me all that are weary,
does he ask that that Christ has to give, and is it likely that he will deny
it? does he ask that that Christ has no^ to give, and is it probable that his
mother has it? then they may as well say that she has more grace and mercy,
or more power and ability then Christ himself has: let the^ answer these
questions, how they will, here will be found strange divinity, which we see
is curra^t in the Romish Church.

But whilst they prepare their answer, let it please the reader to observe how
contrary the Romish doctrine is to the doctrine of Christ, and of the holy
scripture.

Christ says of himself as man. Romish doct. makes him say. My father is
greater then I John. 14. 28
My mother is in some respects greater then I. Christ says of himself as God
Romish do. makes him say. I and my Father are one. John 10. 30.
I and my mother are one. Christ says. Romish doctrine makes him say. Come to
me all that are weary, I will ease you. Mat. 11. 28.
Come to me and I will send you to my mother for ease. The scripture says.
Romish doctrine says. Christ is the mediator betwixt God and man. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
Christ is the Mediator betwixt Man and Mary. The scripture says. They make
him say. No man comes to the father but by me. Ioh. 14, 6
No man comes to my mother but by me. The scripture says They make him say.
Whatsoever you ask my father in my name he will give it you. Io. 15. 16
Whatsoever you ask my Mother in my name she will give it you.

These and such like oppositions are common betwixt Christ's Gospel and Romish
divinity, may not this give strong suspicion that their Religion is
Antichristian, which in the foundations of it are so repugnant to Christ's, as
these and others which stand confirmed with more authority then yet these do?
well, thus Christ is made a Mediator to his Mother, now the Jesuit proceeds,
and to make him amends, he makes the mother a mediator to him.

Say to thy Son behold my brothers bands,
Sweet Son thou have his ransom in thy hands.
That Christ Jesus has the ransom of sinful souls in his hands is good
divinity, and we heartily embrace it, wishing it were as heartily and truly
(without Equivocation) intended by this Papist: if he and all other Papists do
so hold it, we heartily rejoice, but then we desire them to answer to a few
questions.

Who pays this ransom? is it not Christ? who accepts it? is it not God the
father? is it not mercy, grace and love, that either the one will accept it, or
the other pay it? can any pay it but the one? can any take it but the other?
are not the^ they the fou^tains and fathers of mercy, which have done so? if
all these be true, then what a Religion have they, who in their liturgies and
daily prayers, call a creature the mother of mercy, and mother of grace, oftener
then either God the Father, or Christ the Redeemer, or both put together, we
desire some conscionable papist to answer us seriously: was the Virgin Mary a
Creator or a creature? If a creature, was she any more then an excellent
creature, set apart for the most excellent use in the world? and was it not in
Gods election to have chosen any other woman, at his own good pleasure to have
been the mother of Christ? and was it not his own free mercy, that he
regarded the low estate of her his handmaid? if this be so, then did she any
thing in our salvation, which any woman had not done, if God had taken her to
be his mother, was there any thing in her to move God to choose her, which was
not Gods own gift in her and to her? she may be then a vessel of grace, but
she can be no way a fountain of grace: for what had she but she received it:
but if (as they say) she be the fountain of mercy and mother of grace, then
she gives but receives not, as the fountain receives from no other, but has
of it self, and sends out to others: and the mother takes not of her children,
but lays up for them, Now if it be as their Liturgy says; it is, that she
is the mother of mercy and grace, etc. Then sure she has the ransom in her
hands: but if it be in Christ's hands, as here they say it is, then how is she
the mother of mercy? hardly would these be reconciled, but that they have
equivocations, reseruations, or distinctions, that will make any thing seem
good enough to serve their turns.

Thus then they have not only made Mary Mediator to Christ, which is common in
their Religion, but (which was scarce ever heard of before) they make Christ
their mediator to her, her to him for his blood, but first him to her for her
milk: Now to leave this point, observe (in one word) how in these two messages
of mediation, here is no difference, but she that is a creature and saved by
her son, is made to speak to him in the same terms as he to her, and with
no other words or signs of reverence: and her son and savior, yea God
himself made to speak to her with the same reverence as she does to him: as
though there were no difference betwixt him and her, and as though he being God
and her savior, was as much beholding to her for her milk, as she being a
creature is to him for his blood: Lo what popish devotion is here? now if
they be ashamed of this, then why are they not ashamed of the other? But they
are far from that, for where are the intreatings, the cries, the humble
requests and submissiue beseechings to him for his blood? here be none such:
but contrariwise as though there were no difference in the world, betwixt
either the persons entreating, which are Christ and Mary, or the things desired
which be his blood and her milk, he says to Christ.

Say to thy mother see my brothers thirst,
Mother your milk will help him at the first.
And to her he says:

Say to thy son behold thy brothers bands,
Sweet Son thou have his ransom in thy hands.
Thus Popery makes of Christ and Mary, one no greater a person then the other,
and of his blood and her milk, one no greater a matter then the other: Christ
with no more reverence to be implored then Mary, his blood with no more
vehemence to be desired, with no more difficulty to be obtained then her
milk: If this doctrine may be defended under pretense of devotion, then will
not there want a color for any blasphemy: But the Jesuit goes forward and
says to Christ.

Ergo redemptorem monstra, etc.
Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed,
Thou Son, if that thy blood excel the rest:
And show thy self justly so stilde indeed,
Thou mother if thy breasts the rest exceed.
It may be doubted in whose name he speaks these words, whether in his own,
to both Christ and his mother, Hora^ius. Tursellinus Iesuita in hist. lauretana
in pr^fat.
or in Christ's name to his mother, and in hers to him: if in the first, they
contain blasphemy, if in the second absurdity: for if he suppose the virgin
Mary says thus to Christ.

Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed,
Thou son if that thy blood excel the rest.
It is foully absurd to imagine that she being so dignified as she is (yea
rather as they hold almost deified) should make an if, or a question whether
Christ's blood excel the rest or no: and much more absurd is it to make Christ
seem to be ignorant of of his mothers power and state how great it is: be it
more or less. But if so be he speak these words himself to the^ both, then
behold the heinous injury done to the precious blood of the mediator.
Concerning which this wicked papist makes as much and equal doubt, whether it
excel the blood of other creatures, as he does: whether the milk of the
Virgin Mary excel the milk of all other women: let all christian men shrink
and tremble at so great a blasphemy, for all the learned Papists in the world
may be challenged to prove (if they can) out of Gods word and the grounds of
religion, that she was any more the^ another holy woman, (saving this
prerogative, that she was his mother according to the flesh) or any more then a
Saint of God sanctified by the spirit, and saved by the blood of Jesus Christ,
whose mother she was in regard of his flesh: or that her milk had any virtue
in the world, but to nourish the body as does the milk of other women, their
children: for was not he a man like unto us in all things (sin excepted) and
if Christ take it no prejudice to himself, to be like unto men, shall it be a
wrong to her to be like to other women? Nay we dare go further and ask them,
if God have vouchsafed once in the whole new Testament so much as to name the
milk of the Virgin Mary? whereas almost in every Chapter he extolleth the
blood of Christ, and is ever magnifying the virtue, merits, and efficacy of the
same: if this be so, then what shall we say to that Religion and to those men,
who make it as questionable, whether Christ Jesus his blood excel the blood of
other men, as whether the Virgin Mary's milk exceed the milk of other women?
is this Romish religion? is this popish divinity? then see what follows: But
it cannot be proved either to reason or to faith that her milk excels other
women's: in any spiritual or corporal virtue or operation: therefore it is not
to be prou^ed that Christ's blood is more precious then other men's: See here my
dear countrymen, how you are misled, see what doctrine you are fed withal by
your teachers! open your eyes and be no longer deceived; offer not this injury
to him that gave his life for you, to make this unequal comparison: if they
will not teach you holy and sound divinity, then hate them, and learn from us,
or rather with us, from the holy scriptures, that his blood is the price of our
redemption: but as for her milk we know no such thing, since she lived on
earth: acknowledge with us that it is a fundamental ground of Christian faith
that his blood is more worth then ten worlds: but that her milk is now of any
vallue, can nether be persuaded to reason nor believed by says: and yet dare
this malignant sinagoue make that as likely as probable, as certain as the
other: If enemies of Religion take hold here, and say, that therefore the
ground, of our Christianity are uncertain, and so blaspheme the blessed blood
of our Savior, we can say no more but our Church is innocent, our hearts are
free, our hands are clear of it: woe be to them by whom the offense comes.
But now let us see how the Jesuit concludes, and whether his end be any beter
then his beginnning.

O quando lactabor ab vbere, vulnere pascar!
delitijs que fruar, mamma, latus que tuis!
Parce Deus: magno si te clamore fatigem:
non potis imperio, non poti art regi,
Exagitante siti, Patientia perdit habenas
clamores si vis tollere, toll sitim.
Pluris ego clauis: saturasti sanguine clauos
lanceaque erubuit sanguine tincta tuo.
Pluris ego pannis: maduerent vndi que panni
natia vulneribus, Matris ab vberibus.
That is:

Ah when shall I with these be satisfied,
when shall I swim in joys of breast and side:
pardon O God mine eager earnestness,
If I thy laws and reasons bounds transgress,
Where thirst ore-swayes, Patience is thrust away:
stay but my thirst and then my cries will stay,
Better am I then nails, yet did astreame
of thy dear blood wash both the Lance and them:
More worthy I then clouts, yet them a flood
moystned of Mothers milk and of Sons blood.
Now comes he to his conclusion, but alas his iniquity is as much at the last
as at the first: for still he persists in his impiety, without repentance,
without remorce, without sorrow or sense of the evil he has done, for still
he sings his old song:

O when shall I suck the milk of these breasts, when shall I drink the blood
of these wounds. His soul thirsts, but for what? for milk and for blood:
but first for milk and then for blood: If this be tolerable divinity, nay if
this be holy devotion, then what did our blessed Savior mean to cry out to
all weary and thirsty souls, If any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink: I wish the Jesuits would tell us what they think, whether he did well
or no, to leave out the Virgin Mary: for if this divinity of theirs be good,
then he ought to have said, If any man thirst let him come to my mother or to
me to drink: and surely if her milk be thus equal in vallue, price and
merit to his blood, then we do no longer marvel that they teach how the
Virgin Mary did rise from the dead, and was assumed into heaven corporally,
that as Christ rose and ascended to apply and make good the merit of his death
so did she also to make effectual the merit of her milk. But then good Paul
how far art thou to blame, that esteemest all things in the world dunge and
dross, and only that thou might know the virtue of the resurrection! for
then it seems, thou will give little ^or nothing to know the virtue of her
assumption: But it may be thou art half an Heretic, and beleeuest not any
such assumption: but if thou could be taken within the reach of the holy
inquisitio^, thou should pay well for such thy heretical incredulity: If now
thou were alive thy better and more holy brethren the Jesuits, could reprove
thee for many indiscreete passages, and teach thee better divinity then thou
seem to know, for whereas thou durst say, thou esteemedst to know nothing
Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10
but Jesus Christ and him crucified, they can tell thee thou art far short in
thy duty, and but cold in zeal in respect of them, for they stand in doubt
whether to esteem now the blood of his wounds, or the milk of her Paps: and
whereas thou will give all to know the virtue of his resurrection, they can but
wonder at thy ignorance, who carest not to know the virtue of her resurrection
and ascension also: Be thou content to know the one, they for their parts will
know both: and if thou be so precise for thy Master, that thou can not be
co^te^t to say, that he purges our sins, but must exclude all other, and say,
that he by himself purges our sins: know thou that they dare be so bold as to
put out that word by himself out of the text: and when they read Heb. 1. 3
thy Epistles they are half ashamed to see what a bloody man thou art, for
thou art all in blood, blood, insomuch as twenty times at least thou art still
upon blood as though there were no salvation but by blood, and as though
blessed Mary's milk had no merit at all. It seems that as thou were a
persecutor, and delighted in blood before thy conversion, so thou bears still a
bloody mind: but now behold these meek, and mild and merciful men (the
Jesuits) a generation that loves no cruelty, nor seeks to shed no blood (as
most nations Witness in England the Powder treason: In France the last Kings
death, the present wars in Sweden and broils in Poland. etc.
of the world can well bear witness) these sweet and gracious fathers being
possessed with a better spirit, are weary of blood and do rather choose and
desire milk to quench the spiritual thirst of their souls.

If they would utter what their profane hearts think, or discover openly what
they mutter amongst themselves, we should here them publish even such divinity
as this is: (a taste whereof, besides the present poems, you shall read anon.)

But now for his conclusion, this blaspheming Jesuit dare proceed and turn
his speech to God and not fearing the commandment that forbids him to take
Gods Name in vain, under pain of standing guilty, at the bar of Gods
justice, he dare offer to abuse the name of God, with such a prayer as this.

O Lord thou must pardon me though I cry aloud, for it is not blood will serve
my soul, I long for milk, and am so a thirst, that I may not keep silence:
and why Lord should thou so long keep me a Pe^ioner in this case? I am
better then the nails, yet they had blood enough: I am not so vile as clouts,
yet they wanted neither milk nor blood.

What kind of men are these Jesuits, or what a God is their God, to whom they
dare present such a prayer as this? surely they think as basely of him as they
do highly of themselves, or else they never durst thus insult over him, and
thus abuse him, as after he has told them plainly, that his blood is drink
indeed, and commanded them that are a thirst to come and drink of that well of
water John. 6. 55 John 7.
of life, to come and tell him to his face that their souls thirst for milk,
and they must have it? belike these crawling frogs think that they have such a
God as they may leap and play upon at pleasure: But O thou that dwell in
heaven langh them to scorn, have them and their wickedness in derision: and
either work them to repentance and visible conversion, or bring them to
vengeance and just confusion.

The Jesuit concludes with a comparison of himself to body, and the clothes
that touched him in his infancy and death: and indeed the first comparison is
not much unequal, for the Jesuits are most like to nails and lances in
Christ's body; for seeing the holy Ghost tells us that wicked men by their
sins did and do pierce Christ: then the Jesuits who by their Atheismes,
cruelties, periuries, equivocations, treasons and manifold impieties, have
been sharper nails and lances in Christ's body, and greater dishonorers of
his Religion, then any other sort of men (if the voice of all Christendom, and
the testimony of their own brethren be true) the^ the Jesuits I say are not
unfitly resembled to nails and lances: and indeed they are thorns in the
eyes, and pricks in the side of all princes and states where they come: less
marvel though they be like the nails and spear in Christ's body! therefore
let the Jesuit please himself in this comparison, as long as he will, we envy
it not.

But for the second, that he is better then the clothes that were about these
two blessed bodies, I say but this: that either the Jesuits are far more holy
then the Prophet Esaias, or else he far more humble in his own eyes then they:
for he professes in his own and the churches name, that they were no better
then the filthiest clout that ever was, even a menstruous cloth, But says the
Jesuit, I am better then the best cloth that ever was: for though we hold that
God has given lasting virtue to his Word and Sacraments but none that we know
to rags, or clouts: yet we acknowledge that as far as clothes may one excel
mother those that touched the bodies of our Loid and his mother, are the most
precious, and if we could be sure we had them, we would esteem them above
cloth of gold: we therefore wonder how a man coming before the Lord his God,
dare in his prayer make himself better then those clothes, especially hearing
the Prophet cry before him, O Lord all our righteousness is like a menstruous
clout. If our best be so filthy, what is our nature, what is our sin? if he
answer that this is but a cavil, for he means that he being a man he is
therefore capable of grace and salvation, which the clothes are not, I think
so also: But why then does he envy that milk and blood should touch them? If
he mean the material and real milk and blood that were in the bodies of
Christ and his mother, then he is more then mad, to envy the nails, the
lance, the clouts, for that they did touch them, and yet he cannot, and if he
complain that he may not, we ask him why then did not the Apostles take more
careful order to gather up and preserve that milk and blood, or if they did
not, at least why did they not complain of the want of them, as he does here?
surely either they had too little devotion, or the Icluirs too much
superstition.

But if he mean the virtue, merit and efficacy of the blood and milk, then
let him answer us two short questions. First, what spiritual virtue and power
had that milk, what did it work in our salvation, (more then the milk of
another woman could) what did it merit for us? what the blood did we know and
most willingly do acknowledge: but what the milk did or can do, if the Jesuits
can tell and teach us, we will not refuse to learn: But supposing that it had
as much virtue as the blood (as the Jesuit affirms, but far be it from us
once so to think) then secondly we ask him whether he think the Nails,
Lance, and Clouts, were partakers of the virtue and merit of that blood, if
he do, let him show where he received such divinity: if not, then to what end
complains he to God in such a fashion.

Lord I am better then the Nails and Clouts, and yet they had Blood and Milk
enough, but I dye for thirst.

If this be not to take Gods name in vain, and that in a high measure, we
appeal to all Christian men of reasonable judgment.

And thus at last are we come to an end of this Jesuitical Gospel, the
impiety whereof I now remit to the censure of the Christian world.

And for my conclusion, least any should say that this is but one private
Jesuits deed, and therefore may not preindice the whole society of Jesuits,
and much less the Religion of Popery.

To these I answer, 1. the book is allowed and has been twice printed, and
stands approved by Posseuine, Posseu. in appar. see lit, C
amongst good and catholic authors. 2. Let them show what Jesuit or other
popish doctor has reproved, or what Inquisitor or other popish Magistrate
has censured this wickedness. 3. Which is worst of all, it is no more in
effect then others of them have taught or approved, though not in so open,
apparent, and foul a fashion, for let any Christian man judge what divinity is
laid down in these points that follow.

1 The papists have a book called the Mariale, It has been objected unto them
that in this book it is thus This has been long ago laid to their charge in
Catalogo, testium veritatis editionis 1609.
said: Solomon says the name of the Lord is a strong tower Pro. 18. 10. But
Solomon knew little of the Virgin Mary, let us therefore say, the name of our
Lady is a strong tower, let the sinner fly unto her, and he shall be saved:
and again: thou art a sinner, fly then to the name of Mary, that alone shall
serve to heal thee: and again:

The Lord was with Mary, and Mary with the Lord, in the same labor and same
work of our redemption for the Mother of mercy helped the Father of mercy, in
the work of our salvation: and thereupon was it spoken of the first woman, It
is not good for man to be alone, let us make him a helper: But why then says
God, Esaias 63. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all people, there was
no man with me: the book answers, it is true Lord that thou say, there
was no man with thee but there was a woman with thee, which bore all the wounds
in her heart, that thou did bear in thy body.

Lo here a piece of rare divinity! Solomon is blamed for ignorance, that he
knew but little of the Virgin, and in a sort is rebuked for saying the name of
our Lord, and not rather the name of our Lady is a strong tower: and though no
man did, yet a woman (namely Mary) did help Christ to tread the winepresse of
Gods wrath, and was fellow worker with God, in the work of our redemption.

This book stands vnconfuted, uncondemned, unreproved by the Jesuits or the
Romish Church, till this day for ought that I can yet find, yet has it been
many years laid to their charge*

2 Again the Papists have a book, they call it the Ladies Psalter, printed at
Paris in the year 1520. or therabouts, Vide Psalterium beat Virgini^ Maria ^
impressum cum Psalterio Cisterciensi Par. circa anno 1520. Extat etiam idem.
Psalm. ad verbum, apud Chem* in examine council Trident: in part 3. P. 149
editionis franco furt. 1996.
wherein every one of the 150. Psalms are in whole or in part turned from
dominus to domina, that is, from God our Christ to our Lady, as

In the first Psalm. Blessed is the man that loves thy name O Virgin Mary,
etc. In the 19. Psalm. The Heavens declare thy glory O Virgin Mary, etc. In
the 29 Psalm. Bring unto our Lady O you mighty bring unto our Lady worship and
honor, etc. Ine 51 Psalm. Have mercy upon me O Lady, thou that art called the
Mother of mercy, and according to the bowels of thy mercies, cleanse me from all
my sins, pour out thy grace upon me, and take not thy wonted mercy from me,
etc. In the 57 Psalm. Have mercy upon me O Lady, have mercy upon me, for my
heart ie ready to search out thy will, and in the shadow of thy wings will I
rest. In the 68 Psalm. Let our Lady arise, and her enemies shall be scattered,
etc. In the 72. Psalm. Lord give thy judgment to the King, and thy mercy to
our Lady his mother. In the 94 Psalm. God is the God of revenge, but thou O
Lady the mother of mercy, do bow him to take pity, etc. In the 96. Psalm.
O sing unto our Lady a new long, for she has done maruailous things, etc. In
the 110. Psalm. The Lord said unto our Lady, sit thou mother at my right hand,
etc, Thus I might go over all the Psalms, but as he began he ends in the last
words of the last Psalm.

Let every thing that has breath praise our Lady.

Now this book stands not only uncontrolled, but Greg. de val in vol. de
rebus ^idei controuersis, sect. 5. lib de Idolatria 5. cap. 10. Bernar. de
Bustis in Mariali part 3. ser. 3
rather even defended by the Jesuits, and those of the principal.

3 Again, a famous Friar and well approved amongst them, preached this doctrine
in the pulpit (amongst many other, little better.)

A man may appeal from God himself to the Vitgin Mary, if any man feel
himself grieved at the justice of God, seeing God has divided his kingdom
with her, for whereas God has justice and mercy, he has reserved justice to
himself, to be exercised in this world as it pleased him: but mercy he has
committed to his mother: If therefore any man find himself agrieued in the
court of Gods justice, let him appeal to the court of mercy, of his mother.

This Divinity was so well relisht in the Romish Church, that after he had
preached it, he published it under the Popes own Patronage: and the book was
Alexan. the 6.
again printed within these three years: but what say the Jesuits to it, they
testify that this book, is a learned and godly book, full of goodness and
piety.

Fourthly, Horatius Turcellinus, himself a Jesuit of Horatius Tursellinus: in
Hist. virg. lauretan^ in pr^fat.
good esteem among them, writes thus.

Almighty God has made the Virgin his mother, as far as he may lawfully,
partaker of his divine power and Majesty.

Now surely if God have made her fellow with him of his divine majesty, less
marvel if Christ have made her fellow in the work of redemption. And this
book Posseu. in lit. 11.
written by a Jesuit, has public allowance, and is dedicated to Cardinal
Aldobrandino.

Fifthly, a great Spanish Doctor, and professor of divinity of his order, writes
thus.

We have often seen and heard of very many who in John Chrysostom. a
visitatione, de verbis dominae to 2. lib. 2. cap. 2
their extreme dangers have called upon Mary and presently were delivered: for
often times safety is sooner obtained by calling upon the name of Mary, then by
calling upon the name of Jesus Christ the son of God.

And this book is both dedicated to Pope Clement the Posseu. in apperatu sacro
lit. l.
8. and receives public allowa^ce by the Jesuits: his name is Chrysostom, as
tho he were a golden mouthed speaker: but if thi^ ^e his doctrine, that her
mediation is as powerful, or rather more then is her sons, it is pity but
he should be called and accounted a leaden mouthed wretch:

By all these and many more that (as the learned know) might easily be
produced, it may appear that this blaspheming Jesuit Bonarscius, in this his
detestable comparison, of her milk with Christ's blood, says no more in effect
then others both of this Religion and particular sect, and therefore it may be
justly concluded, this is the doctrine and divinity not of him alone, but of
the Jesuits, and of the popish Church it self, as long as it stands approved
or not condemned by them: Now then if this be the divinity of the Romish Church.

1 That a Creatures milk may be mingled with Christ's blood in the matter and
merit of our salvation. 2 That it helps and heales spiritual sores of the
soul as well as the blood. 3 That though no man did, yet a woman did help
Christ in the work of our salvation. 4 That the Psalms may be turned from
Lord to Lady. 5 That a man may appeal from God to the Virgin Mary. 6 That God
has divided his kingdom with her, keeping Justice to himself, and
surrendering Mercy to her. 7. That God has made her pertaker with himself of
his divine power and Majesty. 8. That a man's prayers are often heard, rather by
and through her, then Christ Jesus.
If these I say be the doctrines of the present Church of Rome, then let the
Christian world be pleased to observe,

1. How far the present Romish Church, is degenerate from the ancient. 2. How
great cause we and all Churches of God have to separate from such a sinagogue.
3. How justly they may be pronounced Antichristian. who thus hainously
disparage the Person and office of the Mediator. 4. How untrue is it that by
any suggestion, that the present Religion of Rome is much reformed and refined
at this day: for it is most certain in the former times these would have been
condemned as blasphemies even in the Romish Church it self. And lastly you of
this most honorable City, especially you the Lord Mayor, and your brethren,
being one most worthy renowned Benches of the world, one of the greatest
glories of this land, may here see what cause there is to hold the true Papists
Heretics, considering the present Church holds not only these but many other
fundamental errors, both for matter of faith, and of government: which shows
them not only enemies to all true religion, but the subuerters, or at least the
underminers of all civil states in the world, wherein they were ever suffered.
And considering that all means has been used, to reclaim and reform her,
but all is in vain, (for she is that Babylon that will not be healed)
wherefore it is our duty to forsake her and leave her to the just hand of God.

Thus shall we follow the counsel of the Prophet in like case who says: We
would have healed Babylon, but she would not be healed: let us forsake her and
go every man to his own Country, for he^ Judgment is come up to Heaven and
lifted up to the Clouds.

FINIS.

