THREE HEAVENLY TREATISES, concerning Christ: 1 His Genealogy. 2 His Baptism.
3 His Combat with Satan.


TOGETHER WITH devout Meditations, for Christian Consolation and Instruction.

By Mr. William Cowper, Minister of Gods Word.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shops, at
the great South door of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Noble Lord, John, Earl of Montrose, Lord Graeme and Mugdok, one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel in this Kingdom.
My Lord,
I Have been bold to publish these Treatises, under your Honorable name, not
for any light, that by them can accresse to that treasure of knowledge, which
is in your Noble mind, but that (so far as I can) I might make evident to
others, for imitation, that grace which God has made so eminent in you.

I may truly say, there is no quality, which in the judgment either of
learned Ancients, or recents, has been required, to complete Nobility,
lacking in you. Your honor being not (...) only, Noble by birth; but (...)
also, generous by manners, such as retain, yea, by virtue increases, the
honor of your honorable Fathers. It passed among the ancient wise men in a
proverb, (...): because commonly it falls out, that children of worthy men,
coming short of their fathers virtue, derogates to their glory: aequat rara
patrem soboles: And therefore in them qui clariores genere cens^ntur, it was
ever thought an high commendation, maiorum famam sustinere; like as no greater
shame can be to them of that rank, then when by their ignoble life, they
quench the light of their noble stock, et generi suo dedecori sunt.

It is now twelve hundredth years since your honorable name has been famous
in this kingdom: but which is much more, and wherein, in my judgment, it is
marvelous, the first mention of your Tribe, in the story, does not record the
rising thereof from a small estate unto an higher, as it does in many Peers of
the land, who for their virtue also were advanced; but at the first sight, it
presents your worthy Predecessor standing in the highest top of Honor, wherein
a subject can be: for not only was he then brother in law to king Fergus the
2. but for his Wisdom, Valor, and Manhood, by consent of the Nobles, both
Scots and Picts, then gathered to battle, he was chosen, as meetest
Chieftaine, to demolish that diuision-wall of Abircorne, stretching from the
East sea, to the West, built first by Victorine, and fortified thereafter, more
strongly, by Gallio, both of them Roman Lieutenants; but more victoriously,
first and last, broken down by the valiant Graeme, in presence of both the
Kings, that so a way might be prepared to their armies, to make irruption upon
the Romans, for which, unto this day, the remanents of that work, bears the
name of Graeme his ditch, when himself is gone. Facta ducis viuunt, Ovid.
operosaque gloria rerum. Haec manet.

It is true, there are many honourrable families in this land, who communicate
with you in the same name: but that this is the honor of your house, is
evident, not only by the lands, bordering with that wall, possessed as yet by
your L. and was, as the story records, one of the motives why that weighty
charge was committed to your worthy ancestors; but in this also that the
remanant families, who come under the communion of the same name, hold lands of
your house, from which, as from a most ancient stock, they as sproutes and
branches, have grown and sprung out.

And of this, as it is evident, that your honorable house is more ancient then
the Chronicle can declare, so does this greatly increase the glory of it, that
it has continued in honor ever since, even to the days of your noble Father
of famous memory, who for fidelity to his Prince, love to his Country, equity
toward all men, after he had borne many other offices of honor, was in his
old age honored to be his Majesty's high Commissioner, and also great
Chancellor of this kingdom: his house like the open court of Ahasuerus his
palace, wherein he banquetted his people, ever plenished* and patent to such,
as pleased to resort.

In a word, no less honorable in this Kingdom has your Family been, then
the Tribes either of Leontis, or Aeantis, among the Athenians, for their feats
of arms, and glorious victories achieved in battle; or among the Romans,
these five principal families, Vitellij, Fabij, Antonij, Potitij, Mamilij, who
for their most ancient descent, were called Aborigines.

But howsoever these be great things, yet are they not the greatest, which do
commend you, Virtute decet, non sanguine niti. It is a miserable poverty,
where a man has no matter of praise in himself, but must borrow it from
others.

Miserum est aliorum incumbere famae. Yea, the more honorable the parentage
is, the greater is the shame of him that degenerates from it, and so becomes
indignus genere.

Perit omnis in illo
Gentis hono^, Ovid.
cuius laus est in origin sola.
Here then is your greatest praise, that as you are, (...), lineally descended
of so Noble, and ancient, a stock (for no writ, nor memory of man, can record
the interruption of your Line) so are you the undoubted heir of those virtues,
which shined in them, Wisdom, declared in doubtsome and difficult matters:
Manhood, tried, as we say, in discrimine: Truth, fit enim quod dicitur, your
words are sufficient warrants to such, as know you. Noble manners: Veram
nobilitatem testantur facies and mores: these are Insignia numina diuum.

And beside these, beautified with other two rare graces, whereunto they, in
regard of their times, could not attain, at least, in the like measure, Piety
and Erudition: your honor being learned, not only in the common languages of
the most famous countries of Europe, but in the three most renowned languages,
whereby as ye have attained to the knowledge of liberal Sciences, so do ye
still conserve and daily increase it, by diligent reading, and conference with
the learned: who for learning are loved, and honored by you: Nam quae mox
imitere legis nec des^nit vnquam, Claudian.

Tecu^ ^rataloqui, Tecum Romana vetustas.


That which the wise K. Solomon said of Beauty without discretion, the like may
be said of Honor without Erudition; It is as a ring in a swynes snout: and
therefore has the learned, expressed Erudition, Aul. Gal.
by the name of humanity, both because the care and study of Sciences, is
committed to man only, among all the creatures, and for that man without
Erudition, is liker a beast, then a man. Turpe est viro principi parem
dignitatisuae virtutem non afferre.

And these two, Honor, and Erudition, shine so much the more clearly in you,
that they are both crowned with singular and vnsimulate Piety, both professed,
and practiced, and that in a time of reu^lting, and great defection: yea, in
most dangerous places, even there where Satan has his throne: for this is no
small argument of true religion, deeply rooted in your heart, that having
traveled through Italy, Rome, and other parts of the Popes Dominions, heard,
and seen all those allurements, which carries away instable minded men, not
rooted, nor grounded in Christ, after the love of that richly busked Babilonish
Whore, your Lordship has returned home unspotted, neither burnt with their
fire, nor blacked with their smoke: not unlike those three children, who came
forth out of Nabuchadnezzars fire, and had not so much as a smell thereof on
their garments.

This Piety, even in the judgment of them, who had no more but Natures light,
was esteemed the highest matter of a man's praise, maiorem virtutem religione,
Plato in Epino.
and pietate in Deum, nullam in humano genere inueniri quisque sibi persuadeat.
The reason hereof is given by Divines, illuminate with the light of the word,
to be this, that by Piety, and holiness of life, we ascend ad primarium illud
bonum vnde originem traximus: Nazian. Orat. 33. in laud. Hiero.
and therefore the same father speaking in the praise of Cyprian, affirms,
(...). And indeed, since we are the generation of God made, to his image, what
greater glory can man have then to conserve that image, and be like unto him,
to whose similitude he was made? Vna itaque nobilitas imitatio dei.

Go on therefore right Noble Lord, follow the course, which ye have happily
begun; show your self the kindly son of so worthy Fathers: above all, the
Son of God, by the new generation; his worke-manship created in Christ Jesus
unto good works. Keep in mind that warning of our Lord, Much will be
required of him, to whom much is given: as the double portion obliged the first
borne to the greater service, otherways, Chrisost.
(...). In all your ways look up to the Lord, he it is, that exalts them of
low degree, Luke 1. 52.
and puts down the mighty from their seats, Hos. 4. 7.
turning their glory into shame, who use not their glory to honor him.

Pitiful proofs whereof we have in this fearful earthquake (as I may call
it) going through this country, by which many Castles, Houses, and Lands,
spewes out their inhabitants, shaking off the yoke of their ancient Lords, and
rendering themselves to be possessed of their servants, because they have also
cast off the yoke of the Lord their God, or at least not welcomed his grace,
offered in the Gospel, as it became them. The consideration whereof, I doubt
not, does affect your Lordship, as it does others who are become wise through
the fear of God, and learnes by the loss of others to gather their thoughts,
and make peace with him, whose praise it is, that he buildes houses to men, 2 Samuel 2.
and vpholds them: for by him enterprises are established.

And herewithall remember Right Noble Lord, that as trees, on tops of hills, are
subject to the blast of every wind, so men in the height of honor to great
temptations; against which they have need to be armed.

But least I seem Monere memorem, (...), more laborious then need requires, I
end: Humbly praying your Lordship to accept these small, and scarse-ripe fruit
of my labors, as a testimony of my affection to your Honor, till it may
please God some better token come into my hand, whereby to declare it.

Your Lordships to command, M. WILLIAM COVVPER Minister of Perth.

The Preface.
IT may justly be spoken of many in this age, which the Apostle Saint Paul
spoke of the Hebrews, Heb. 5. 12.
When, as concerning the time, ye ought to be teachers of others, ye have
need again that we teach you the first principles of the word of God, and
are become such, as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat: they profess
faith in Christ, but in truth do not believe in him, neither yet can they,
because they know him not: they are baptized in his name, but are not bureid
with him through Baptism, neither raised up together, through the faith of the
operation of God, that raised him from the dead: they carry his cognizance and
badge, but are not militant under him in his warrefare.

As the Athenians sacrificed, Ignoto Deo, to a strange God, and the Samaritans
worshipped that, which they knew not; so our Atheists, profitentur ignotum
Christum, profess a strange Christ: they know not what he is in himself, nor
how he is become ours, nor what he has done for us: and therefore neither in
life, nor death, do they express his virtue. They live licentiously,
reprobate unto every good work, dishonouring Christ, as if he were a Savior
who had no power to sanctify those which are in him; and they dye without
comfort, as if Christ by death had not obtained life, and by death did not
transport to life, all that are in him; thus while they profess fellowship
with him, they declare themselves to be strangers from him.

It is witnessed by the Lord, in Ezechiel, Ezech. 18. 20.
the same soul that sins shall die: the son shall not bear the inquitie
of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son, but
the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon himself. A question good to waken drousie Christians out of
their dead security.
If according to this testimony of the word, it be demanded of them, seeing
Christ is holy, and righteous, and we are the sinners, how is it that he is
punished and we are spared? This is but one of the least of Satan's assaults,
by which he impugnes the faith of men, and yet if they be required to answer
it, they shall soon bewray themselves to be void of knowledge and solid
faith, confident only in a naked profession, which will not fail in the end
to beguile them. For as an house faulty in the foundation cannot abide the
stormy winds, Math. 7.
and rain, no more can a Christian not informed with knowledge, not rooted,
grounded, and builded in Christ Jesus, by faith, endure in the hour of
tentation.

That therefore the doctrine of Christianity may be learned by such as knows
it not, The doctrine of Christianity comprised in three articles, collected
out of his Genealogy, Baptism, and Tentation.
from the very foundation, we have here proposed three most necessary points to
be entreated: The first, is Christ's Genealogy: the second, his Baptism: the
third, his Tentation. In the first, we are taught what manner of man our Lord
is in himself. In the second, what manner of way he is become ours. In the
third, what manner of way he did begin to work the work of our Redemption:
all most necessary to be known, for the right grounding of our Faith on The
first is to know that Jesus the son of Mary, is that promised Messiah.
In his Genealogy we see how Jesus, the son of Mary, is that same blessed
seed of the woman, whom the Lord promised in Paradise, to whom the Prophets,
of all times, pointed, and for whom the godly fathers of all ages waited, and
expected, lineally desended from Adam, by seauentie and four fathers. The
second teaches us what manner of way he is become ours.
and ordained, in most solemn manner, to do the office of the Mesias, that
is, of an anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, for our Salvation, so that he is
now no more a private man but a public, by most sure authority, and in most
solemn manner, become our The third, how he has done the work of a Redeemer.
And in his temtation we see how immediately after his ordination, he
encounters with Satan in a singular combat, ouercomming him in the
wilderness, who before had overcome our parents in paradise: and so by his
first deed after his consecration, makes it manifest that he was come to
destroy the works of the Devil. These three joined together make up a
complete doctrine of Christianity.


If these three be joined together in one, we shall find them making up unto
us a complete doctrine of Christian consolation. The Lord Jesus, in regard of
his divine nature, is called by the Prophet Zachary, Gnamith, Zach. 13. 7.
Iehoua, that is, the fellow and companion of Iehoua,
or as Saint Paul expounds it, John 2. 6.
(...), equal with God. In regard again of his human nature, Job 19. 25.
Job calls him Goel, my kinsman. In regard of his united natures, he is
called by Esaias, Esa. 8. 8.
Emanuel, God with us. Nomb. 3 5.
Now we know that by the law he who was nearest kinsman, How Christ being his
fathers equal and our kinsman is properly the true auenger and redeemer of his
brethren.
had power to revenge the blood of his brother upon the Murderer, if he had
found him without a City of refuge; and therefore was he styled by the name of
an auenger, and likewise he had power to redeem the inheritance which his
brother, through poverty, had lost: for the word Gaal, from which Goel
comes, has in it these two principal significations, to redeem, and to
revenge; So that here we see how the Lord Jesus, being nearest of kin unto
us, as we may see out of his Genealogy, being likewise clad with the power of
a redeemer and revenger, as we shall learn out of his Baptism, comes
immediately after his entry to the public Office of the Messiah, upon Satan
that murderer, and finding him out of a City of refuge, enters into combat
with him, to revenge the blood of his Brethren, and to redeem the inheritance
which they had foolishly sold for nothing: yea moreover he does that which no
tipicall Goel under the Law, was able to do; for not only does he overthrow
the murderer, but restores life again to his brethren that were slain and
murthred by him.

Yours in the Lord William Cowper.

THE GENEALOGY OF CHRIST:

Declaring how Iehoua becomes Gnimanuel, GOD with us.

MATTHEW 1. 23. Behold, a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bear a
Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, GOD
with us. THE FIRST TREATISE declaring Christ his Genealogy.
THe Genealogy of JESUS CHRIST our LORD, Christ's Genealogy is regist^ed to
let us see that Jesus is the Christ.
is written for this end, that we might know him, and believe that Jesus, the
son of Mary, Ioh 20. 31.
is the Christ, the son of God, that blessed seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.
promised to Adam, that should break the Serpents head; that seed of Abraham,
in whom all nations were to be blessed; for whom the godly looked in all ages;
the same is he whom in the fullness of time GOD has exhibited unto us, a
branch of righteousness; Ezech. 34. 29.
a pllant of renown, sprung of Judah his tribe, Heb. 7. 14.
according to the flesh. Herein have we need to be confirmed, that we wander
not in uncertainties, but our faith may be stablished, and grounded aright in
him.

There are four which have written unto us the holy Gospel, Four Evangelists
agreeing in one, do greatly confirm the truth.
not at one time, nor at one place, nor yet aduising one with another, for so
it might have been thought, there had been some collusion among them, but in
that they wrote in several places, and times, and yet do speak all, as it
were with one mouth, no difference at all being among them in these Articles,
that concern the substance of salvation, to wit, the Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord, it is out of all doubt as Chrysostom
calls it, Chris. in Mat.
(...), a very great demonstration of the verity. The diversity between Saint
Matthew, and S. Luke, maks up the sweeter harmony. For where Saint Matthew
reckons from the fathers downward, Saint Luke reckons from the children
upward: and why.


Of these four, there are two only that records his Genealogy unto us, Saint
Matthew, and Saint Luke, and these write of it diuerso modo, sed non aduerso;
diversely, but not contrarily; and the diversity being well considered, shall be
found to make up the greater harmony: as shall appear in the particular
handling thereof.

For, Saint Matthew reckons from the Fathers downward to the children, but
Saint Luke reckons from the Children upward to the Fathers: the one lets us
see, how both they and we come from God, by his eternal Word Christ Jesus;
the other, how by that same Word incarnate, we assend, and return to God
again. We are of him by Christ, Creator, as his creatures, or sons, by our
first creation: we go to him by Christ, Redeemer, as his new creatures, or his
sons, by regeneration: the first of these is common to all men, the second
proper to those only who are of Christ's spiritual kindred: and the praise of
this communion between God and man, is to be reserved to CHRIST Jesus only:
for it is no less absurdity to say that we can go to GOD the Father, by any
other then Christ, then if it should be said also, that we came of God the
Father by another then Christ.

But now for orders sake, The whole Genealogy divided into five Sections.
we will divide the whole Genealogy into five sections; reckoning as Saint
Matthew does, from the Fathers to the Children, for the better help of our
memories: the first is from Adam to Noah; the second from Noah to Abraham; the
third from Abraham to David; the fourth from David to Zorobabel; the fifth from
Zorobabel unto Jesus Christ.

In the first and second, The different courses of the two Evangelists.
from Adam to Abraham, Saint Luke runs him alone. In the third, from Abraham
to David, Saint Matthew and Luke run together. In the fourth, from David to
Zorobabel, they take different courses: for where Saint Matthew goes down, from
David by Solomon, Saint Luke follows the line from David by Nathan, and both
of them meets in Salathiel; where going on two steps together, they part
again, and the one takes his course from Zorobabel by Rhesa, to Mary; the
other from Zorobabel by Abiud, to Joseph: and in the end both of them meets
again in Christ Jesus: the reason of which diversity, will appear God
willing, in handling the several sections thereof. The first section is of ten
fathers, from Adam to Noah.


The first then is from Adam to Noah, containing ten Fathers, Adam, Seth,
Enosh, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared, Henoch, Methusalem, Lamech, Noah. Here, as I
said, Saint Luke reckons him alone, Why these are reckoned by Saint Luke, and
not by Saint Matthew.
where Saint Matthew goes no higher, then Abraham: the reason of this diversity
is, that Saint Matthew, in writing, had a special respect to move the Jews to
embrace the Gospel, and therefore begins it in a manner most plausible to
them: Why these are reckoned by Saint Luke, and not by Saint Matthew.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham; because it was then most commonly in the mouths of all men, that the
Mesiah should be the son of David. But Saint Luke being, as testifies
Eusebius, Colos. 4. 14.
by birth a Gentile, borne in Antiochia, learned in medicine, and now a
proselite converted himself, Saint Matthew teaches that the Savior is to be
sought in Abraham's house, Saint Luke shows that he is also a Savior of the
Gentiles.
he writes his Gospel to convert others: wherein especially, for the comfort
of believing Gentiles, he draws the line of Christ, by twenty degrees,
higher then does Saint Matthew, the one teaching us to seek the SAVIOVR of the
world in the lineage of Abraham, and DAVID, the other again teaching, how all
believing people has their interest in Christ, not they who are of Abraham's
posterity only, but they, who are of Adams also.

In this section we mark no particular, Adam the first son of God, among
men, and the first father of Christ according to the flesh.
but this one, that the first father of Christ according to the flesh, reckoned
in this Genealogy, Adam, is called the son of God, to wit, both by creation,
and regeneration: for in it, we have manifold comforts discovered unto us, if
we conioyne the end of this Genealogy with the beginning. For in the
beginning thereof we see that the first Adam is the son of God, and the same
by divine dispensation; the the first father of Christ according to the flesh,
and so as Euthymius said of David, Euthym. praef. in Psalmos.
he is, et deifilius, and pater dei. In the end of it again we see, how
Christ the son of God, does also become the son of man. A marvelous
dispensation, that man made by God, What a comfortable union between God and
man is made by Christ Jesus.
should become a father to Christ, who being very GOD, would also be made the
son of man, that by him men might be made the sons of GOD. See what a
binding cornerstone the Lord Jesus is, knitting together not man with man
only, Gentiles with Jews, but man with God also, and that not by a personal
union only, which he has perfected in himself, but by a spiritual union
also, by which he unites all the members of his mystical body in a blessed
peace and fellowship with God: and this has he now begun, and shall perfect
in the end.

O what a comfort is here! Zach. 13. 7.
that Gnamith, Esa. 8. 8.
Iehoua, the fellow, or companion of Iehoua; for so the father styles his son
Christ Jesus, should now become (Emanuel) God with us, Never was there so great
a token of Gods favor to man declared as in the incarnation of Christ.
yea as Job calls him (Goel) our kinsman, nearest to us of flesh and blood,
clad with power and might from God, to revenge our blood, to redeem our life,
to restore our lost inheritance Where shall we find such joyful tidings as
these are? We read that under the Law, the Lord came down to Mount Sinai,
Exodus 19.
and Moses went up; a great favor indeed, that the Majesty of God should come
down to visit his own creature, and should honor man, by keeping diet to
speak with him in so homely a manner. But under the GOSPEL, in a more
favorable manner the Lord shows himself familiar with men, for not only do
his holy Angels join in company with shepherds, Luke 2. 9.
but himself becomes the son of man, walking among men, to make men the
sons of God. How we should be thankful for so great a mercy.
Let us meditate upon this mercy, that howsoever we be not able to conceive
the greatness thereof, yet at least we may grow in thankfulness to our God
for it: he came to seek us, he found us imprisoned, bound with the fetters of
our sins, he has loosed our bands, gone up again before us, and bidden us
follow him, worthy are we of double shame, and confusion, and that our second
woe should be worse then our first, if we will not arise to make have and
follow him. The sins done against the Law may be cured by the grace of the
Gospel, but if the grace offered in the Gospel be despised, remains there any
other sacrifice for sin? Heb. 10. 27.
None at all, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire. The
article of Christ's Incarnation confirmed.


Beside this, we are here confirmed in two other notable points of Christian
religion, the one is, of Christ's marvelous Incarnation, by which he became
the son of man, the other is of our supernatural Adoption, whereby we
become the sons of God. We believe that our first father Adam was a very
natural man, yet neither gotten of a man, nor borne of a woman, but formed
immediately by the hand of God, and that of the earth, being as yet a virgin (so
to call it with Ireneus) for neither had the Lord rayned upon it, Iren. lib. 3.
Cap. 31.
neither had the hand of man tilled, or labored it: And that by a comparison
taken from the creation of Adam and Euah.
as likewise we believe that Euah was a natural woman, yet neither begotten
by a man, nor borne of a woman, but formed of Adams rib, immediately by God.
Why then will we doubt that Christ was made a very natural man,
yet not begotten by man, but formed of David's seed in the virgins womb, by
the immediate operation of the holy Ghost? Indeed if the first Adam had been
begotten of the seed of man, it might probably have been thought that the
second Adam was begotten of Joseph, How the second Adam has with the first the
same similitude of generation.
but seeing the first Adam was formed of the earth, by the hand of God
immediately, it was also convenient, that the second Adam, who was to bring
home man again to GOD, should be made man by the hand of God, without the
operation of man, that so the second Adam, might have with the first (...),
Theodoret. Dialog. 1. Cap. 18.
the same similitude and likeness of generation.

The other point, Our spiritual Adoption is here also confirmed.
wherein here we are confirmed, is of our own supernatural Adoption: we see
that the son of God is become the son of man; the son of David; of
Abraham; of Adam; and why then will we not (says Chrysostom) be strengthened
in the faith,
to give glory to God, For seeing we see that God is become the son of man,
why shall we think it impossible that man may become the the son of God?
by believing that the sons of Adam and Abraham, following the Adoption,
shall also be made the sons of God? surely in man's judgment, it seems more
impossible that God should become Man, should walk on earth, in the shape of a
Servant, and suffer the ignominious death of the Cross, then that man should
be exalted unto heaven, and crowned with glory; yet the first of these we see
done, and we believe it, why then shall we any more doubt of the second?
Chrisost. in Math. Hom. 2.
especially seeing it was not in vain, and for nothing, that the God fo glory
humbled himself unto so base an estate: No, no but that from our baseness he
might raise us up into his glory.

The second section of this Genealogy is, The second section is of other ten
Fathers, from Noah to Abraham.
from Noah to Abraham by other ten Fathers, Sem, Arphaxad, Sale, Heber,
Peleg, Regu, Sarug, Nahor, Terah and Abraham. In this, we observe no thing,
but that of Noah his three sons Iaphet, Sem, and Cham, from whom all mankind
are descended, the Lord makes choice of the second, Sem, to be the father of
Christ, according to the flesh; and where Sem also had many sons, he passes
by them all, and makes choice of Arphaxad, and so contracting his promises into
narrower bounds, he makes up the covenant with the Hebrews, and is content to
be named the God of Sem, Genesis 9. 26.
which is the first time, that ever we read God to have been called the God of
one man more then of another. Comfort against this that Iaphet our father is
not in the roll of Christ's fathers.


Where, least of our weakness, we should faint, and be discouraged, when we
hear that Iaphet our father, of whom we are descended, is not in the line of
Christ's parents, let us remenber that promise which God made to Iaphet, and his
posterity, at the same time that he entered into covenant with the house of
Sem, Genesis 9. 27.
and we shall be comforted: for then the Lord promised that he should persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem, It is sufficient that when Sem was chosen
to be Christ's father, it was also promised to Iaphet that he should have his
part in Christ.
that is, in most loving manner he should allure the posterity of Iaphet to
embrace the covenant made with the house of Sem; like as at this day, praised
be God, he has performed. For now partly obstinacy is come to Israel, till
the fullness of the gentiles come in. Sixteen hundredth years did the Lord
dwell in the house of Sem, Romans 11. 25.
and now other 1600 years has he dwelt in the house of Iaphet; going through
the several families thereof: among whom he has also visited us in these
ends of the earth, his holy Name again be blessed therefore for ever: for now
we see that unto us no less then to them appertains the promises of Mercy,
and covenant of Grace.

And therefore though our parents be not among the progenitors of Christ,
Though Christ be not come of us according to the flesh, yet if we be come of
him by grace, we have comfort enough.
according to the flesh, for that is the privilege of our elder brethren the
Jews, that theirs are the fathers of whom Christ is come, according to the
flesh, yet let us endeavor to make sure this comfort to our selves that we are
come of him, Romans 9. 5.
according to the spirit, and grace of regeneration. When that woman in the
gospel cried out after our Lord, Luk 11. 27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the papps which gave thee suck, she
received this answer from him, Math. 12. 47.
yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. For the
Lord Jesus has always esteemed* most of the spiritual kindred.
And when again one told him, behold thy Mother, and thy Brethren stand
without, desiring to speak with thee, he answered, who is my Mother, and who
are my Brethren? and he stretched out his hand, toward his Disciples, and said,
behold my Mother, and my Brethren. Now it is known that many of his Disciples
were not his kinsmen, according to the flesh, but to remove all scruple, and to
show how much he esteems of the spiritual kindred, he subioynes, For who
soever shall do my fathers will, who is in heaven, the same is my Brother, and
Sister, and Mother.

It is true indeed all Christ's progenitors were blessed, Wherein did the
greatest happiness of our Lords progenitors consist? See the Rhemists
marginall Notes on Luke 11. 28. out of Bedatract. 19. in Joan.
being honored by him, and endued with faith by his grace (teaching by the
way) all children to communicate the best things they have unto their parents,
yet is it true of them all, which Beda cited, by the Rhemists themselves, said,
of the Virgin Mary, She was blessed indeed in that she was the tempor all
mean and minister of the Incarnation, but much more blessed in that she
continued the perpetual keeper of his word: that is, blessed indeed in that
she was the mother of our Lord, and conceived him in her womb, but much more
blessed for conceauing him in her heart by faith.

Then our instruction is, that though neither our names, nor our Fathers,
be in the catalogue of Christ's progenitors, yet if we be in the roll of his
children and brethren we shall have comfort sufficient: though he be not come
of us according to the flesh, if we be come from him, according to the spirit,
as his sons, and daughters by regeneration, we shall be blessed in him, even
as they were.

The third section contains the roll of Fathers, The third section is of
fourteen Fathers, from Abraham to David.
from Abraham to David; fourteen in number: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah,
Phares, Esrom, Aram, Aminadab, Naasson, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Iese, and David.
Where first, it comes to be considered, how is mention made that Jacob begat
Judah and his brethren, more then that Abraham begat Isaac and his brethren,
That all Jacobs sons are within the covenant, not so all Abraham's what does
it teach us?
or that Isaac begat Jacob and his brother: the reason is, that all the sons
of Abraham did not belong to the covenant, howsoever circumcised; neither did
the Lord choose their posterities to be his Church and peculiar people, as he
did choose the sons of Jacob, and their children. Romans 9. 4.
for unto them all pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law and the service of God, and promises. What a
dispensation is this, all the sons of Jacob are pertakers of the external
Adoption, not so the sons of Abraham? What cause of thanks giving is this
that so many families of Iaphet pretermitted, we are brought within the
covenant?
But so it is, the calling of the Lord is freely: he is debtor to none, and
therefore they to whom his calling is come, should so much the more acknowledge
themselves obliged to his mercy, as this day we are bound to do; considering
that he has passed by so many of the sons of Adam, so many of the families
of Iaphet, more famous and honorable, then we are, and has been pleased to
make his covenant with us; but let us be wise, ever remembering that there are
many within the covenant externally Adopted, who do not for all that belong to
the election of grace, A warning to such as are within the covenant.
and therefore giving thanks to God for the one, that we are in the covenant,
and have received the seals thereof, let us prease further to be pertaker of
the other, that is, the grace of the Covenant.

Next, Three reasons given why in this Genealogy, Thamar and Rahab are
mentioned among Christ's mothers, not Sara, nor Rebecca.
it is to be considered here, why in this Genealogy Thamar, Rahab, and
Bethsabe, are mentioned among the mothers of our Lord, and not Sara, nor,
Rebecca, women famous for godliness; whereas this Thamar, howsoever she had
an earnest desire of seed, and thereby declared her faith in the promises of
God, yet she sought it by an unlawful incestuous copulation with her own
father in law; and Rahab by Nation was a Cananite, by conversation a harlot,
and Bethshabe the wife of Vriah was she with whom David committed double
adultrie. The reasons of this are many, but we content us with three: the
first is to humble the Jews: the second is to comfort sinners: the third to
show the great glory of Christ.

As for the first, The first is to repress the arrogancy of the Jews,
glorying of their progenitors.
it is known how insolently the Jews gloried that they were the posterity of
Abraham, neglecting the virtues of their fathers, they boasted that they were
their children, esteeming their fathers virtue a sufficient Apology and
defense of all their vices: and therefore to humble them, the blemishes of
their parents are purposly showed in this Genealogy. And to teach all men that
true Nobility is not in the privileges of flesh, but in the graces of the
mind, neither to be sought without us in the prerogatives of our parents, but
within our own proper virtues, An answer for such as vainly glory of their
parentage.
whereby we are rectified. But at this day it may be spoken to many, which, as
Nazianzen records, was sometime answered to a Noble man, despising another that
was come of mean parentage, and boasting of his own nobility, Nazan* in
nobilem male moratum.
mihi, inquit, probro genus meum est, tu autem generituo: My parentage is a
reproach to me, The second is, for the comfort of poor penitent sinners, he
asumed that nature which once was sinful and did separate it from sin.
but thou art a reproach to they parentage.

The second reason is to comfort poor penitent sinners. The Lord Jesus came
into the world non vt iudex, sed vt medicus, not as a judge, but as a
Physician, non vt nostra fugeret opprobria, sed extingueret potius: that he
might not shun our reproaches, but rather that he might blot them out, and
heal them. If it had pleased him he might have created man's nature anew, such
as had never sinned, as was Adams nature before the fall, such a one, I say,
might he have created, and joined it in a personal union with his divine, but
if so he had done, where then should have been the comfort of sinners, we had
still remained under desperation, without any hope that this nature of ours,
See wat a comfort is here.
should ever have been delivered from the corruption thereof, but that now he
assumed our nature,
which once was sinful, and has fully separated it from all sin, it gives
unto us lively hope, that he will also sunder us from our sins, so that they
shall not be able to hinder our spiritual fellowship, and communion with him.

The third reason is, The third is to manifest Christ his glory, in that he
took no holiness from his parents.
to manifest Christ his greater glory, by declaring to the world, that he
took no holiness of his fathers. If all his parents mentioned in this
Genealogy had been famous for godliness only, it might have been thought a
small matter for Christ to be holy, that was come of so holy progenitors; but
in that he descended of sinful parents, and yet was borne a holy one, and
without sin, it declared him to be that great high Priest, holy, harmeles,
undefiled, Heb. 7. 27
separate from sinners, who gives holiness to all that are in communion with
him, but takes not holiness from any. This is his peculiar glory belonging to
himself alonely, and to none other.

And therefore the Papists, It is erroneous doctrine to affirm that the Virgin
Mary was conceived and borne without sin.
while as they go about to honor Christ, by affirming that his mother the
blessed Virgin was conceived and borne without sin, do in very deed rather
dishonor him: as if from her, he had taken the holiness of his nature, or
that he could not have been conceived and borne without sin, unless his
mother had been conceived and borne without sin before him. They might
consider that the holy Ghost, by whom our Lord was conceived, could very well
discern the seed of David in the Virgins womb, from the sinful corruption
thereof; he took that seed; he sanctined it, and separated it from sin,
and of it framed the humane body of our Lord, and this is the true doctrine,
reserving to Jesus Christ his proper glory, and to poor sinners their
necessary comfort.

But the contrary doctrine of the Adversaries, How this errore was condemned
long since by Barnard.
long before us, was condemned by Bernard as a presumptuous novelty, the
mother of Temeritie, the sister of of Superstition, the daughter of Leuitie; so
he termed that unadvised attempt of the Channons of Lions, who first did
institute a feast of the conception of Mary, to be observed in the Church, in
the honorable remembrance of her conception without sin: for it is, says
he, the only prerogative of Christ, who was to sanctify all: he came without
sin, to take away the sins of others, Ber. Epist. 147. in Canonicos Lugdun.
quo excepto, de caetero vniuersos respicit ex Adamo natos, quod vnus
humiliter, de seipso, and veraciter consitetur: In iniquitatibus conceptus sum,
et in peccato fouit me matter mea. What then will be the reason of this festival
conception? how shall that conception be esteemed holy, which is not of the
holy Ghost, but of sin? or how shall it be honored with a feast, which is
not holy? Lubenter gloriosa virgo tali honor carebit, quo vel peccatum
honorari, vel falsa induci videtur sanctitas: willingly, says he, will the
glorious Virgin want such honor, by which either sin seems to be honored,
Among Christ's mothers in the Genealogy, some are Gentiles, foretelling how
Gentiles also should have their pa^ in Christ.
or a false holiness brought into the Church.

In the rest of this section no other particular is to be touched, but that
Solomon begets Booz of Rahab, who was a Cananitish woman; and Booz begets Obed
of Ruth, a Moabitish woman; both of them Gentiles, yet reckoned in by name
among Christ's mothers, according to the flesh, and that for the comfort of the
Gentiles also, to let us see that God is no accepter of persons, but that
whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: Galat. 5. 6.
for, in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision auailes any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but says which works by love. Both Jew and Grecian, bond and
free, male and female, are now all one in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 28.
And if we be Christ's then are we Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise.

The fourth section contains the roll of Fathers, The fourth section has a
roll of Fathers from David to Zorobabel.
from David unto Zorobabel; where again Saint Matthew, and Saint Luke takes
diverse courses; for where Saint Matthew diduces the line from David by Solomon,
Saint Luke brings it down from David by Nathan, not Nathan the Prophet, but
another of that name, David's son by Bethshabe, 1 Chor. 3. 5.
and so Salomons brother german. Where if the doubt be moved how our Savior
could descend of them both, they being two brethren, it is answered that by the
Law established among the Jews, Deuteronomy. 25. 5.
it was provided that if a man had died without issue, his brother, or nearest
kinsman, was bound to marry his wife, and raise up seed unto him: now
Salomons race, Salomons race ends in Ieconiah.
we may see, ended in Ieconiah, the eighteenth man after him, according to that
word of the Lord, Ierem. 22. 26.
by Jeremy. O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord, thus says the
Lord, write this man childelesse, for there shall be no man of his seed that
shall prosper, and sit upon the throne of David, or bear rule any more in Judah.

It is true that to this same Ieconiah children are ascribed, Where Ieconiah is
said to have children, understand them to be by succession, not generation.
1 Chro. 3. but these are children by succession, not by generation. And
therefore Ieconiah, as I have said, dying without issue, Salathiel the son of
Neri, in the line of the other brother Nathan, comes in, as nearest Heir, and
is reckoned by Saint Matthew the son of Ieconiah, to wit, Legal.

For we must understand, A double descent usually reckoned among the Jews.
that there was a double descent usually reckoned among the Jews, the one
Legal, the other Natural: the Natural descent was, when as one by Natural
generation descended of another, the Legal when one not naturally descended of
another, yet succeeded as nearest of kin to the inheritance, now to let us see
the agreement of the Evangelists, Saint Luke diduces the Natural line of
Christ from David, Saint Luke diduces the Natural line of Christ, Saint Matthew
the Legal.
making it known how Christ, by Nathan, is the Natural son of David,
according to the flesh, but Saint Matthew diduces the Legal line of Christ from
David, making it known how Christ, as Salomons heir and lawful King of the
Jews, succeeded, as nearest of kin, to sit upon the throne of David his
father? For the which also Saint Matthew calls him, borne King of the Jews,
and the Jews themselves could not name any of there nation nearer then he, and
therefore having no lawful exception against him, cried out in their
wilfulness: We will have no King, but Caesar.

This is necessary for us to observe, Christ Jesus is never called the son of
Solomon, Natural.
that Christ our Lord is not the Natural son of Solomon, neither read we,
that at any time it was promised that so he should be, but he is the Natural
son of David by Nathan, Christ as man, was borne a noble man of the most
honorable and ancient stock that ever was in the world.
and yet Salomons lawful heir, whereof it is evident that our Lord, even in
respect of his manhood was a Noble man, yea, a borne King, descended of the
most honorable and ancient stock that ever was in the world, and therefore we
have no cause to be ashamed,
neither of him nor of his testimony, but so much the more to love him, who
being every way so honorable a person, yet for love of us was content to be
dishonored, yea, to suffer the shameful death of the Cross.

And in this sudden decay of Solomon his temporal kingdom, The sudden decay
of Salomons kingdom in his son, and of his posterity, in the eightenth man
after him.
and posterity, the one whereof was weakened by the folly of his son
Rehoboam, whereby he procured the abstraction of ten parts of the kingdom
from him; the other ends in the eighteenth man after him: all men may learn
what dangerous sins, the sins of spiritual and corporal whooredome are.
Solomon to stablish and increase his posterity, he multiplied Wives, contrary
to the commandment of God (who did make one woman, for one man, though he had
abundance of spirit, Malach. 2. 15.
and might have made many, yet he would not, Was procured by the sins of
harlotry and idolatry.
because he sought a godly seed:) and by this evil he was carried to a
greater, for the pleasure of outlandishwomen, he tolerated their abominable
idols in a holy land, and was himself at length polluted with their Idolatry.
And therefore received he this fearful recompense of his error, that the
Lord divided his kingdom, and cut off his posterity, so that of all his
seed, which he had multiplied, there was not one to sit upon his throne.

In the last section the difference is, The last section: the Evangelists are
showed to agree where they seem most discordant.
that from Zorobabel, the son of Pedaiah and nephew of Salathiel, Saint
Matthew reckons by Abiud, otherwise named Hananiah, 1 Chro. 3. the fore fathers
of Joseph, nine in number: Saint Luke again reckons the forefathers of Mary,
eighteen in number from Rhesa: Adricho. Chronologia.
this Rhesa was the second governor of Israel after the captivity, called by
Philo, Rhesa Mesciola, or as 1 Chro. 3. Meshullam. Now in the end of these
lines all the difficulty is, that Joseph by Saint Matthew is called the son
of Jacob, but by Saint Luke the son of Eli, for resolution of it we must
understand that he is called the son of Jacob, Lucidus de emendatione
temporum ex Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 1. Ca. 10.
because Jacob was his Natural father, but the son of Eli, because Eli, the
Natural father of Mary, was Joseph's father in law.

And therefore is it to be observed, In the Natural line diduced by Saint
Luke, Joseph is the only man who is not Christ his Natural father.
that in Christ his Natural line, diduced by Saint Luke, Joseph is the only
man who is not Christ's Natural father, but supposed only of man so to have
been, where all the rest are Christ's Natural fathers, according to the flesh,
and Eli the Natural father of Mary, Heb. 7. 14.
the mother of our Lord, for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah.

Of all this then, Great comfort arises of the consideration of Christ's person.
as was said before, if we take a short view, of the person of Christ Jesus,
unspeakable is the comfort that shall arise unto us: for we shall see how
meet and convenient a person he is to do the work, He is the companion of
Iehoua.
whereunto he is consecrated. He is called by Zachary, Zach. 13. 7.
Gnamith, Iehouae, the fellow, or companion of the Lord: which the Apostle to
the Philippians expounds, when he says, that he was equal with God; and this
is in regard of his divine nature: for these styles do clearly point out in
him a nature above the nature of any creature, Job 19. 25.
Angel, And yet our kinsman.
or man, he is called again by patient Job, Goel, my kinsman: for by the eyes
of faith he saw his incarnation long or ever it was accomplished, and this is
in respect of his human nature, for which also Jacob calls him in his
Prophecy, Genesis 49.
Shiloh, which signifies that little skin, Why Jacob called him the Shiloh.
or tunicle of flesh, wherein infants are wrapped, when they come into the
world: thereby pointing out also his humane nature: he is also by Es^y called,
Esa. 8. 8.
Gnimmanuel, God with us, and this is in respect of his united nature.

Here we must understand the word, The true redeemer and auenger of his
brethren.
Goel, used by Job, properly signifies a redeemer or revenger; from the word
Gaal, redemit, vindicauit. Now, by the Law, Leuit. 25. 25.
the power to redeem the inheritance belonged to the nearest kinsman, Number. 35.
12
as likewise the power to revenge blood, for which it is used, to signify a
kinsman, so then our inheritance being lost by reason of our sin, and the
posterity of Adam* cruelly slain and murdered by Satan, here comes in our
kinsman of our own flesh and blood, the son of Adam, to redeem again our
inheritance, and to revenge our blood. Yea, to do that which never was done by
any tipicall redeemer, or revenger: for they might have slain him that flew
their brethren, if they had found them out of the City of refuge, but could
not give life again to their brethren: but the Lord Jesus, has not only
slain the murderer Satan, finding him without a City of refuge, but has
like a mighty conqueror, restored life to his brethren. In this Genealogy we
have seen how he is our kinsman, and in the next Treatises we shall see how
among all the sons of Adam never any, but he was consecrated and endued with
power and calling from above, to be an Auenger, a Redeemer, and a Savior of
his brethren.

REVEL. 7. 12. Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and
Power, and Might, be to our God for evermore. 1 TIMOTHY 1. 17. Unto the King
everlasting, Immortal, Invisible, unto God, only wise, be honor and glory
for ever, Amen. A TABLE SHEVVING the Harmony of S. Matthew, and S. Luke, in the
diduction of Christ's GENEALOGY.
Here S. Luke reckons alone, stepping up by twenty degrees higher in the
GENEALOGY of our LORD then Saint Matthew does.

GOD. Adam. 3 Seth. 4 Enosh. 5 Kenan. 6 Mahalaleel. 7 Iared. 8 Henoch. 9
Methusale^. 10 Lamech. 11 Noah. 12 Sem. 13 Arphaxad. 14 Sa^e. 15 Heber. 16
Peleg. 17 Regu. 18 Sarug. 19 Nahor. 20 Terah.
Here the two Evangelists reckon on together the Natural line of our Lord,
from Abraham unto David.

Abraham
21 Abraham. 22 Issac. 23 Jacob. 24 Judah. 25 Pharez. 26 Ezrom. 27 Aram. 8
Aminadab. 29 Naasson. 30 Salmon. 31 Booz. 32 Obed. 33 Iesse.
From David Saint Matthew reckons the legal line of Christ, to let us see that
christ was lawful King of the Jews, and succeeded by the law as nearest of
kin to sit upon the throne of his father David.

34 David Solomon. Roboam. Abia. Asa. Iosophat. Ioram. Ozia. Ioatham. Achaz.
Ezechia. Manasse. Amon. Josias. Ieconias.

Here ends the race of Solomon.

From David Saint Luke reckons the natural line of Christ, to let us see that
Christ is the son of David, naturally descended of him by Nathan according to
the flesh, for the Messiah was promised to be the son of David.

35 Nathan. 36 Mattatha 37 Mainan. 38 Melea. 39 Eliakim. 40 Ionan. 41 Joseph.
42 Judah. 43 Simeon. 44 Leui. 45 Matthat. 46 Iorim. 47 Eliezer. 48 Iose. 49 Er.
50 Elmodam. 51 Cosam. 52 Addi. 53 Melchi. 54 Neri.
Where S. Matthew calls Salathiel the son of Ieconias, understand his legal
son succeding as nearest of kin.

Salathiel. Pedaiah. Zorobabel.
Where S. Luke calls Salathiel the son of Neri* understand the natural son
of Neri.

S. Matthew reckons in this line the forefathers of Joseph.

Abiud. Eliakim. Azor. Sadoc. Achim. Eliud. Eleazer. Nathan. Jacob. Joseph.
Joseph is called by Saint Luke, the son of Eli, because he was his son in
law.

S* Luke again reckons in this line the forefathers of Mary.

58 Rhesa. 59 Ioanna. 60 Judah. 61 Joseph. 62 Semei. 63 Mattathia. 64 Maath. 65
Naggi. 66 Esli* 67 Naum. 68 Amos. 69 Mattathias. 70 Joseph. 71 Ianna. 72
Melchi. 73 Leui. 74 Matthat. 75 Eli. 76 Marie.
JESUS CHRIST that blessed seed, promised to Adam, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Judah, David, Zorobabel, and Mary.

THus you have the golden line reaching from ADAM to CHRIST: it begins at the
first Adam, and is absolved in the second: it contains a roll of the Fathers,
who through the privilege of the first borne, were ordinary Doctors, and
chief lights of the Church, till the coming of Christ. Upon this golden line
runs the whole book of God: he that would read it with profit, must remember
the course of the spirit of God in the diduction of this line. If at any time
he divert from it, it is only to interlace some purpose, which may clear the
story of the line. So with the description of the lineage of Seth, he adioynes
also a description of the house and offspring of Cham, who are not in the line.
Likewise when he draws the Genealogy of Sem, he entreates of the posterity
of Iaphet, and Cham, and as he handles the History of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, so likewise the history and posterity of Nahor, Ismaell, and Esau. But
as we may easily perceive, he insists not in the history of them who are
beside the line, but having spoken so much of them as may clear the story of
the line, he lets them alone, and returns to his purpose, always following
forth the line, till he come to the promised Shiloh.

THE SECOND TREAtise, of Christ his Baptism.
THe second ground of doctrine we proposed to be entreted of, The time of
Christ his public ministration was from his Baptism to his ascension.
is the Baptism of CHRIST, wherein we have as I said before his most solemn
consecration to the public office of the Mesiah. Hitherto he had lived a
private life, for the space of twenty nine years, and now beginning to be
thirty years of age, he is manifested unto the world, by doing the great
work of a redeemer, for which he came: for so Saint Peter reckons all the time
of his public charge, and ministration, Act. 1. 22.
to have been from the Baptism of John, to the day of his ascension.

Many Kings, There was never a King, Priest, nor Prophet, consecrated in so
solemn a manner as Christ Jesus here is.
Priests, and Prophets, has God sent unto his Church since the beginning of
the world, but never one like Jesus, the great King, high Priest, and Prophet
of the Church, and therefore it is not without cause, that exordium tanti
officii tot est mistriis consecratum. Never one was sent to do such a work as
he, and therefore never one had such a calling, and confirmation as he, for
now the heavens are opened, the holy Ghost in a visible shape discends upon
him, and God the father by an audible voice from heaven, does authorize him.
The principal end of this Treatise will be to teach us how Jesus is become
ours, which is a special and necessary point for us to learn.

The parts of his Consecration are two; Two things considered in this
consecration of Christ to the office of a Redeemer.
In the first we see, how the Lord Jesus by receiving the Sacrament of
Baptism, does come in our place and room, as our kinsman, as the first borne
of his brethren, as the head of That Christ willingly makes himself debtor
for us.
as our cautioner, acting, and obligating himself to pay our debt, and to
fulfill those points of righteousness which we were bound to fulfill, but
could not do by our selves, and so, to releive, and redeem his brethren.

That the father not only accepts him, but ordaines him to this work.
but also designs and ordaines him to this great work, by anointing him with
his holy spirit. And thereafter in a public assembly of the people at Jorden,
in most solemn manner, by an audible voice from heaven, proclames him, to be
that great high Priest, by whom only atonement must be made between him and
us.

These two joined together make up unto us a most sure ground of Christian
comfort. What sweet comfort arises to us of these two conjoined together.
If first we consider that the Lord Jesus, for the love he bare to the glory
of his father, and salvation of his brethren, voluntarily steps into our
room, and in our name becomes obliged to his father, according to that notable
Prophecy. Psalm. 40. 6. 7. which yet were a small thing were it not that the
second follows, to wit, that the Father of his infinite wisdom finding out in
Christ a way to preserve both the glory of his mercy, and justice, does of his
special love toward us, not only accept him, but ordain him to do the work
of a mediator, imponing to him, that singular law of a redeemer, which was
never imposed to man nor Angel, as we shall here hereafter.

And here we learn how by most sure right the Lord Jesus becomes ours, How
Christ Jesus is become ours in most sure manner.
to wit, by the surest right that can be, namely, the free gift of God, he is
given for a Prince of salvation to us, according to these testimonies, both of
Angels and men, speaking by inspiration of the holy Ghost. Luke 2. 11.
Unto you this day is borne in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord. Ioh. 3 16.
Again, God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
And again, Christ Jesus is made unto us, of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Look then what way any other thing is ours,
which most properly we may call ours, that same way Christ is ours; Namely by
the free gift of God the Father.
namely by the free and sure gift of God. If we know, and believe this, we
shall find it a most sure ground of comfort to uphold us in the hour of
tentation. It is true, Gloriatio Ecclesiae, est omnis Christi actio: Every
action of Christ is the Churches rejoicing and comfort, but what rejoicing
shall we have in any of his actions, Except we know this we can have no
comfort in any of Christ his actions.
if this ground be not first laid, that he is ours, and what he did he did it
for us, and unto us? If he had not died for our sins, and risen for our
righteousness, what could his death and resurrection have profited us? But
here is the ground of all, that he is given unto us of the Father for a
Savior, whereunto most willingly he condescends, and for which work the
spirit annoints him, so that now he is not another, nor a stranger to us, but
our own, by divine ordination, and all that he does, is for us. These being
premitted, we come now to the particular history of his Baptism, as it is set
down by Saint Luke, Chap. 3. Ver. 21.

LVKE 3. 21. Now it came to pass, as all the people were baptized. What these
people were, We read not in the Gospel of any Pharise converted but one.
you may understand out of the 7. Chap. ver. 29. 30. for there it is said, that
the Pharisees and expounders of the Law, despised the counsel of GOD, and would
not come to be baptized of S. John. Here then comes poor Publicanes, and
sinners, and goes before them into the kingdom of God. There are many of every
sort of people (as we may read) saved in the Gospel, but of Pharisees we find
none but one, namely, Nicodemus: no sort of men are further from the kingdom
of God then proud iusticiars. For a soul filled with a conceit of the own
righteousness is not capable of grace.
For as a vessel full of one liquor is not capable of another: so the soul
which is filled with a vain conceit of her own righteousness, is not capable
of the grace of Christ. Huiusmodi animum gratia non intrat, Ber. in Can. Ser.
67.
etc. Grace enters not into such a soul, because it is full, neither does
grace find any place to dwell therein And again, Non est quo intret gratia
vbi, etc. There is no place for grace to enter in, where merit has possession:
what thou attributest to merits is wanting to grace. I will none of that merit
which excludes grace.

But that the Lord Jesus comes in among these poor people, That Christ comes
to be baptized among sinners, shows his great love and rare humility.
it shows his wonderful love, and rare humility: his love, for to the end
that he might help us, he would be like us, he assumed our nature, and in it
abhorred not the company of poor sinners. Tu cum homo esses, deus esse
voluisti, vt perires, ille cum esset deus, homo esse voluit: vt quod perierat,
inueniret. Thou being a man did presume to be as God, and so did perish,
but he being God, would become man, that he might save man who was lost. We
see by experience, that if a man fall another cannot raise him, unless he bow
himself down unto him, he that will stand in his stateliness can never
raise up him who has fallen before him, the Lord Jesus that he might raise
us, was content to bow down unto us, and like a Physician among patients, The
second Adam takes a course flat contrary to the course of the first Adam.
so has he his conversation among poor and miserable sinners.

Thus by a course plain contrary to Adams course does the LORD JESUS remedy
that evil, which Adam brought on himself, and his posterity: for Adam being
in honor aspired foolishly to be like unto God, but he not only came short of
that whereunto he reached, but lost that good also, which he had before. Then
he was clad with the glorious Image of God, now has he for a garment the
skins of beasts, and being so busked, the folly of his presumption is checked
and sore rebuked by the blessed Trinity, Ecce, Adam, factus est quasi vnus ex
nobis. But what the first Adam lost by his proud transgression, to himself and
his children, the second Adam has recovered, Mark what comfort by a contrary
effect has he brought unto us.
by his humble obedience: being equal with God, he is found in shape as a
servant. Now man may rejoice and say, Ecce deus quasi vnus ex nobis, behold God
is as one of us. Now Jesus is among sinners, Gnimmanuel, John 1.
God with us now the word is made flesh: now the tabernacle of GOD is with men:
now God is come down, not in the likeness of men only, as they of Listra
thought of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.
but clad with the very nature of man. Let us rejoice in this goodness of our
God, for this cause is he among men, that he might raise us up, and set us
among Angels in the heavenly places.

Again it is said by Saint Matthew, How he that baptises with the spirit,
seeks the Baptism of water from his own servant.
that Jesus came to John, to be baptized of him; he might have sent for John,
but he comes unto him: he who has the Baptism of the holy Ghost to give unto
all his brethren, does now come, and seek the Baptism of water from one of
his own servants. Why is this done? surely to recommend unto men the reverence
of that ministry, This he did to recommend a reverence of that ministry
ordained by him in his Church.
which GOD has appointed in his Church: no conceit of thy greatness should
make thee disdain it, since the son of God by his example before thee, has
honored it. He would not teach and baptize the Eunuch by his spirit, he sent
Philip to do it: he would not teach, and baptize Cornelius by an Angel, he
sent Peter to do it: he would not baptize Paul by himself, suppose he
converted him by himself, he sent Ananias to do it. It is an order stablished
in his Church, by the foolishness of preaching to save them who believe: 1
Cor. 1. 21.
now none can believe unless they hear, they cannot hear but by preaching,
and none can preach, except they be sent: let it therefore content men to go
to the base servants of CHRIST, in worldly things far inferior to themselves,
and seek salvation by such means as God in his wisdom has thought good to
give it, or else be sure they shall never come near it.

But now let us come and see why Jesus is baptized, For three reasons was
Christ our Lord baptized, when as he needed no washing, being the Lamb
unspotted.
seeing he had neither sin to be forgiven, nor nature to be renewed. The
reasons are many, but we will especially speak of three, the first is given
by himself: for when John refused to baptize him, aledging he had more need
to be baptized of him, he received this answer, let alone now, for it becomes
us to fulfill all righteousness.

As for the righteousness of the First that he might fulfill a point of
righteousness never required of any but of him.
he had fulfilled it perfectly from his youth: for he was the innocent Lamb
of God, without spot or blemish, never guile was found in his mouth: But now he
will say, there is more required of me then the performance of that common Law,
given unto all men, there is the singular law of a redeemer, which yet I have
to fulfill: a law never imposed to Angel nor man, The mystery of our
redemption explaned for our greater comfort.
but only to the son of God, Christ Jesus; by which he was bound so to love
his father, that he behooved to vindicate the glory both of his justice and
mercy, and so to love his brethren, that he behooved to take the debt of their
sins upon him, and satisfy his fathers justice for them: this is it will our
Savior say, that high point of righteousness, which yet I have to fulfill, and
for which I must be baptized, that by receiving of Baptism, I may become
obliged to do that for my brethren, which they could not do for themselves:
for as he that received circumcision, by that same very deed, Gal. 5. 3.
became bound to fulfill the whole law: so he who receives Baptism, becomes
obliged to every condition of that covenant, whereof Baptism is a seal.

That we may the better understand this, Two parts of the covenant of grace,
both of them sealed by Baptism.
we are to know, that the covenant of grace, whereof BAPTISM is a seal, has
two parts in it, to wit, GODS part, and man's: GODS part of the covenant
contains promises made to us of the remission of our sins, and renouation of
our nature, comprised in this one word, I will be your God. Our part again
contains promises made to God by us, of faith and obedience, comprised in this
one word, we shall be his people. Now as Baptism is a seal of God his part, As
Baptism is a seal on Gods part, promising us remission, Christ did not
receive it.
confirming the promise of the remission of our sins, and renouation of our
nature, under which two all other good things are comprehended, that way Christ
our Savior did not receive it for himself, seeing as I have said, he had
neither sin to be forgiven, But as it is a seal of our part, promising to
God obedience, that way he received it, that he might be bound in our name.
nor nature to be renewed: but as it is a sacrament of the resignation of our
selves to God, and a band, whereby we become obliged to be his, by acceptance
of his badge, and mark upon us, that way Christ received it, that by accepting
the seal of the promise, he might become obliged in our name, as our head, to
fulfill that which we promised, but first behooved to be performed for us by
himself, and at last shall in us all, by his grace, also be perfected. And so
we see that sicut nobis natus est, ita etiam nobis baptisatus est, as he was
not borne for himself, but for us, so was he not baptized for himself, but
for us.

Christ Jesus was baptized, to sanctify Baptism.
and give it authority to become a seal of grace unto us, vt nobis secundae
natiuitatis consecraret lauacrum, Beda.
and a lauer of regeneration, as the Apostle calls it. He was washed says
Ambrose in the water of Jorden, Ambros. in Lu. Cap. 3.
non mundari volens, sed mundare, not to be made clean by water, but to make
the water (wheresoever used to this purpose) clean, for so holy and heavenly a
work, that Baptism being consecrated by him, might be an holy mean to
consecrat us.

It is true indeed that Constantine the great deferred his Baptism, till he
might be baptized in Jorden, where our Lord was baptized, though by reason of
sickness he was forced to receive Baptism elsewhere: but even as the Lord
Jesus by consecrating bread and wine which grew in Canaan, did thereby
sanctify all bread, and wine, in any part of the world, to be a Sacrament of
his body, and blood, it being used according to his institution, so by washing
in the water of Jorden he has sanctified water in any part of the world, to be
a Sacrament of regeneration, and remission of our sins, if so be it be used
according to his institution.

Christ was baptized to seal up his fellowship with us.
he was baptized, to seal his fellowship and communion with us: that
cognizance and badge* whereby he will have his soldiers and servants discerned
from professed infidels, he first takes it on himself, vt in nullo
dissimilis esse^ fratribus, ni^i solo peccato: That in no thing he should be
unlike his brethren, except in sin alonelie. And indeed it should be no
small encouragement to us to fight under this badge in the spiritual warrefare
if we do consider how under this same badge, the Prince of our salvation did
encounter with Satan and overcome him, as after shall be showed

And prayed: Our Savior received his baptism with Prayer.
] The Evangelist says, that when our Savior was baptized, he prayed, but what
he prayed, he expresses not. Nevertheless, we may gather it out of other
places of holy Scripture: wherein we shall find, that he prayed for himself,
for his church, and for his enemies. Where if it be demanded, what needed our
Savior to pray for himself, seeing he is very God; the answer is ready,
that he is also very Man: and as man had his own fears, dolours, and griefs,
proceeding from the sense of the heavy burden of sin, How is it that our
Savior did pray for himself?
not his own sin, I say, for he knew no sin, but of our sin, which was
laid upon him. As also from the sense of that fearful wrath due to sin; for
strength, and comfort against these he prayed to his Father, as witnesses the
Apostle, that in the days of his flesh, Heb. 5. 7.
he offered up prayers, and supplications, crying, and tears, to his Father,
and was heard also in that which he feared. Which, as we see in the Gospel he
did before his Passion, so now before his entry to the work of our
redemption; a work greater then the work of our first Creation; for now he
has to satisfy the justice of his Father; to work the confusion of Satan;
and to effectuate the salvation of his brethren. And therefore in the entry of
this great work he prays, no doubt, for an happy success thereof, and as it
is evident by the answer he receives from heaven, he was heard in that which
he prayed for.

And in this also our Savior learnes us by his example to sanctify all our
actions with prayer. Our Lord by his example teaches us to sanctify all our
actions by Prayer.
When he was baptized, he prayed: when he was tempted he prayed: when he brake
bread, he prayed: when he wrought miracles, he prayed: when he was troubled in
the garden, he prayed: when he suffered on the Cross, he prayed. As Isaacs
marriage could not but prosper, because it was begun with the prayer of
Abraham his Father, prosecuted with the prayer of Eliezar his Servant, and
finished with his own prayer: so can it not fail, but a blessing must be upon
those honest actions which are begun, Actions, suppose they be good without
prayer, are like bodies without spirits.
continued, and accomplished with prayer: where otherwise, even those actions
which in themselves are good to the doer, can not be good, where they are done
without prayer. Vere nouit recte viuere, qui recte nouit or are: He knows
truly how to live well, who knows how to pray well. But best actions without
prayer, which obtaines grace to them, are like bodies without spirits: yea, as
the body without breathing cannot live to do any work competent to a Natural
life: so the soul without prayer, can do no work, that truly is Spiritual.
Therefore said Macarius, that continuance in prayer was, (...), Macar. hom. 40.
the head of every good purpose, and the crown of every right, and honest
action.

But here we are to be warned, Continuance required in Prayer.
that we content not our selves, with the shadow of prayer, in steed of the
substance thereof; where we are to take heed of these two things: First, that
our prayer be not by starts, without making of conscience whether it be or not,
but we must continue and persevere in prayer, remembering, he that sowes
sparingly, shall reap sparingly: Feruencie and attention in Prayer.
Secondly, that our prayer be not outward, but inward, made with feruencie of
spirit, and attention of the mind, remembering he is the God of the spirits of
all flesh, with whom thou have to speak in prayer. It is a godly Meditation of
Chrisostomes, Chris. in Math. hom. 25.
that as a man who seeks a thing which he has lost in his house, seeks it
with such affection, that he forgets all other things; yea, he sees not those
things that are before him, so feign is he to see that which he is seeking,
even such should be the disposition of a Christian, so earnestly desiring
mercy, and grace from God, that till he find it, no other thing be in his
mind to distract him from seeking it.

And unto this continuance and feruencie in prayer, it should greatly encourage
us, that now we see after our Saviors prayer the heavens are opened, showing
us the great virtue of prayer: if we pray in his name, if we send it up like
incense, perfumed with his merit, flowing from faith in him, it opens heaven
unto us, and brings us back a favorable answer. Oration iusti clauis est
coeli, Aug.
ascendit precatio, and descendit dei miseratio. When our Savior prayed on
Mount Tabor, then was he transfigurated, and his countenance changed: when
Peter prayed in the top, or platform, of Simon the Tanners house, in Ioppe,
then did he receive in a trance the heavenly vision: The comfortable effects of
prayer.
when Daniel prayed, then the Angel appeared to him: when the Disciples
prayed, then the holy Ghost descended upon them: such is the virtue of prayer,
Prayer is the first step of our ascension to God with Jesus Christ.
that by it, not only do the heavens open unto men, and out of their treasure
send down necessary blessings and consolations to them; but men are also
transported and carried up into heaven, and so begin to practice the first
degree of their ascension with Christ, for as by newness of life they rise
with Christ, partakers of the first resurrection: Reu. 20. 6
so by prayer they ascend with Christ, partakers of the first ascension; which
is unto them an undoubted pledge of the ascension both of their souls and
bodies hereafter. For, if while they are in the body, they get access to the
throne of grace many a time, and find heaven opened unto them, how much more
when they are separate from the body, shall they find the same. And therefore
let us take great delight in this heavenly, and most profitable exercise of
Prayer.

That the heavens were opened.
HItherto we have heard the first point of Christ his consecration to the
office of the Mediator: Follows how the Father not only accepts his Son in
our room, but ordaines him to do the work of a Redeemer unto us.
Wherein we have seen how by receiving the Sacrament of baptism, he did
willingly take our debt upon him, and bind himself to make satisfaction to
his fathers justice for it. Now follows the second, how the Father not only
accepts the Son, becoming debtor for us: but also ordaines him to do the
work of a Redeemer unto us, and to this same effect annoints him, and
publicly proclaims and declares him in this great assembly at Iordaine, to be
that only high Priest, and peacemaker, by whom atonement is made between
God, and Man. Let us join these grounds of comfort together, and we shall see
what a strong fortress of faith, they make up unto us. Since the Father has
given us Christ for a Redeemer: See what a strong bulwark of consolation is
here.
Since the Son has voluntarily aboliged himself, to do the work of our
Redemption.
Since the holy Ghost has anointed him to this same effect: may we not now
say GOD is with us, who can be against us? Let Satan calumniate; let
infidelity, call in question: we see whom we have believed. Our salvation is
more sure, then that the powers of hell are able to disanull it.

But here we have to consider, Three ways does the father bear witness to
his Son.
how by three sundry strong testimonies, God the father witnesses the willing
acceptance of his Son, to this great office of the Messiah, which now is
committed unto him. First, by the opening of the heavens: Secondly, by the
sending down of the holy Ghost, in a visible shape upon him: Thirdly, by an
audible voice from heaven, proclaiming him to be that beloved Son of God, in
whom the Father is well pleased.

The first then is the opening of the heavens, First, by the opening of the
heavens.
by which visible sign is plainly declared, that Jesus Christ is he, by whom
man has access to the Throne of grace: the first Adam for his transgression,
was cast out of earthly paradise, but by the humble obedience of the second
Adam, the heavens are opened unto us, and we are advanced to an estate, as far
exceeding Adams best estate in paradise, as the second Adam is more excellent
then the first: what was figured by the Ladder of Jacob, Ephe. 1. 10.
is now performed by Jesus: for by him, things which are in heaven and in
earth, are now gathered together into one: by him, Angels come down and do
service unto men; by him, men go up to the Father, to worship him. Whereof God
willing, we shall speak more at large hereafter.

And the holy Ghost came down in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him.
THe second way whereby the Father bears witness unto him, Secondly, by
sending the holy Ghost, on him in the similitude of a Dove.
is as you see, by sending down the holy Ghost upon him, in the similitude of a
Dove; whereby his unction, which in it self is spiritual, and could not be
perceived, was represented and notified unto all the people: for he was not
anointed with any material oil, but with the oil of gladness, according to
that Prophecy: The spirit of the Lord is upon me, Esa. 61. 1.
therefore has the Lord anointed me, he has sent me to preach good tidings
unto the poor, etc.

Where for removing of all doubts that may here arise, we must understand that
Christ's unction, Two things considered in the unction of Christ.
has in it these two things: the The separating or designing of him to the
work of a Redeemer.
and this part extends to the whole person of Christ Jesus, God, and Man. Now
in this action of designation, albeit, the three persons of the blessed
Trinity concur, and so Jesus be both the designer, and the person designed:
yet because the father is first in order, this action is ascribed to him, for
him has the father sealed. Ioh. 6. 1.


The other part of this unction, The communication of grace sufficient for that
work unto him.
and this is extended only to his humane nature, so that albeit it be true,
that our Savior was anointed in both his Natures, because he is our Mediator
not in any one of them, but in both: yet we must remember the difference, that
his anointing in respect of the divine Nature imports only the separating,
Christ's unction, in regard of his divine Nature.
and designing of the second Person of the Trinity, to work the work of
man's Redemption. Athanas. de Incar. verbi.
Illius enim opus erat nos restituere, qui ab initio, cum n^n essemus, nos
condidit. Nec poterat alius renouare in nobis abolitam dei imaginem, nisi
patris imago: For it was his work to restore and redeem us, who from the
beginning created us, when we were not, and had no being. Neither could any
other restore the image of God blotted out in us, but the image of the Father,
that is to say, his Son Christ.

But his anointing in respect of his humane Nature, Christ's unction in regard
of his humane Nature.
imports also the communication of the graces of the holy Spirit unto him, not
in measure, as his brethren receives them, but above all measure: for in number
he had all graces of the spirit, he wanted none; and next he had every one of
them in the full degree: in which respects the Spirit was never communicated
unto any, but to Jesus Christ alonely.

Thus we understand how Jesus was anointed; Here we have the manifestation of
Christ's unction.
which unction is not here first made, as if before this he had not been
endewed with the holy Ghost: for we believe that he was conceived of the holy
Ghost; but here is the first declaration, and public manifestation to the
world, by a visible sign of the fullness of grace communicated to him, for the
doing of this great work, whereunto he is now ordained: and this is done
partly for the confirmation of John, who albeit he knew that Christ was come,
yet he knew not who he was, till by this token given of God, Christ was
pointed out unto him, for so he witnesses himself. And I knew him not, John
1. 33.
but he that sent me to baptize with water said unto me, upon whom thou shall
see the spirit come down, and tarry still on him, that is he, which baptiseth
with the holy Ghost: and partly also for instruction of the people, that by
this signs seen of them all, they might know who he was, whom shortly after
the audible voice from heaven, proclaimed to be the Son of God.

And that the holy Ghost discends upon him at this time in the similitude of a
Dove, and not in the similitude of fire, Why the Spirit discends in the
similitude of a Dove, and not of fire.
as thereafter he descended upon the Apostles, it is to declare unto us, both
what he is in himself, as also what sort of creatures true Christians are made
by his grace.

As for himself, To show his love and meeknes toward poor penitent sinners.
he is a meek Savior: not terrible to penitent sinners, but loving and
comfortable, ye shall find that of all those who in the Gospel came to seek
mercy, and grace, from him, never one was rejected, but all of them lovingly
received, and sent away with a comfortable answer: for it was prophesied of
him, that he should not break the bruised Reed, Mat. 12. 20.
nor quench the smoking Flax; and no marvel that he was kind to his own,
for he was meek toward his very enemies: He prayed for them on the cross,
when they were persecuting him to the death, and when his Disciples would have
had him bring fire from heaven, to burn the Samaritans, because they held him
at the Ports of their city: he gave them this answer: Luke 9. 52. 53.
ye know not of what spirit ye are, the Son of man is not come to destroy,
but to save.

The Law was given with fire, The law was proclaimed with terror, not so the
Gospel.
and thunder, with tempest, blacknes, and darkness, in so terrible a manner,
that Moses himself did quake for fear: but Jesus the Mediator of the new
Testament, when he comes to proclaim the Gospel (a doctrine of the joyful
tidings of man's salvation) he comes not in a terrible manner: Neither to
accuse nor convict of sin, nor to trouble and torment the conscience for
sin, for that is the operation of the Law; but as the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, John 1. 29
he cries peace to the conscience within, of every poor penitent sinner,
Christ cures his patients by anointing them.
that believes in him: he is such a Physician as being himself anointed of
the Lord, he cures his patients, not by burning, or cutting, or by any such
hard medicine, but only by anointing them, then the which no gentler kind
cure can be. Whatsoever bitterness was in that potion that heales the deadly
disease of sin, he drank it himself, and wonderful it is; the Physician
drinks the potion, and the Patient is healed.
And therefore let not penitent and believing sinners fear to go near him.

And as he is in himself, With this same meeknes he endues all that are his.
such makes he those who are his, he endues them with the properties of the
Dove, he learnes them simplicity, lowliness and meekenes. As the elect of
God, they put on tender mercy, Col. 3. 12.
kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes, and long suffering: but where there is
yet bitterness, Ephe. 4. 31.
anger, wrath, evil speaking, and maliciousnes, by which, after the manner of
ravening birds, men devour one another: it is an evident argument that such
were never as yet renewed by by the grace of Christ Jesus.

And there was a voice from heaven, saying: Thou art my beloved Son, in thee
I am well pleased.
By an audible voice from heaven.
is by an audible voice from heaven: where we have to consider not only the
testimony it self, but the circumstances that go before it: as, namely who
gives the testimony, Three things considered in this testimony.
God the Father: in what manner it is given, by an audible voice: and from
what place, from heaven.

The author of it, to wit, God the Father.
to be God the Father: the Son comes to make the Father known unto the world,
for no man knows the Father but the Son. Ioh. 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him: and the Father again makes the Son
known unto the world, by the holy Ghost: for even John Baptist, though the
greatest Prophet among the children of women, knew not this Son of God, till
the Father, as we said, pointed him out unto him.

Here then for our further comfort we have to consider, How the three persons
of the blessed Trinity, concur to the work of our Redemption.
how the three persons of the blessed Trinity concur together, to work the
great work of our redemption: for here is the father designing, ordaining,
proclaiming: here is the Son accepting, and the holy Ghost anointing: these
three wrought coniunctly the work of our first creation: in the beginning of
Genesis, mention, suppose obscure, is made of them, by a name Plural, Elohim,
expressing the Trinity of persons, and a verb singular, Bara, expressing the
unity of their Nature, and coniunct operation. But here a more clear and
distinct mention is made of the three persons, This comforts us against the
fear of Satan's power, and our weakness.
yet all working one work, and that for our comfort, that we considering who
it is, has taken in hand to work the work of our salvation, should neither
be discouraged, for the power and malice of our spiritual adversary, that
withstands it; neither yet for our own manifold wants, and infirmities, for
that grace which Jesus has received, is not for himself, but for us; that, as
says the Evangelist, of his fullness we might all receive grace for grace:
John 1. 16.
which was figured in that ointment, Psalm. 133. 2
poured on the head of Aaron, it rested not there, but went down to the
borders of his garments: even so the grace communicated to Christ, flows from
him to the smallest member of his mystical body, in such measure, as shall be
sufficient, to prepare and perfect them unto eternal life.

The next circumstance contains The manner, to wit, by an audible voice from
heaven.
by which this testimony is given, to wit, by an audible voice, such as all
the people there present might hear, and understand. How this voice was
sounded, is needless for us to enquire, the Lord who made the tongue, can
speak without the tongue, and frame Organes of voice at his pleasure, by which
he can proclaim his will, even to the ears of men, who without a voice cannot
hear him. Thus the Lord both by his practice and precept has declared, The
Gospel should be preached in such a language as people may understand it.
that he will have his Gospel, which is a doctrine of Christ, preached to the
whole world, clearly, distinctly, and in such a manner, as all may hear it:
the practice we have here, the precept we have hereafter: for our Savior
commanded his Disciples, that what he told them in the ear, they should
proclaim it on the tops of houses; and for this cause, Therefore Christ endued
the Apostles with the gift of languages.
did the holy Ghost endue them with the gifts of tongs, that unto every people
they might speak in their own language, otherwise one language had been
sufficient for all people. Whereof it is evident, that they who deliver this
doctrine, either by whispering, or muttering in the ear, or else in such a
language as people do not understand, declare themselves not to be the
Ambassadors of the God of heaven, neither following his practice, nor obaying
his precept; but Locusts, proceeding from the smoke that comes out of the
bottomless pit, by which Antechrist, that fallen Star, endeauours to obscure
both the Sun, and the Air, knowing that the vantage of his kingdom stands
in darkness.

The third circumstance is of The place from which the testimony is given.
from which this testimony is given, to wit, from heaven: whereof first we
learn that the doctrine of the Gospel is heavenly doctrine, not written by
nature in the heart of man, as is the law, but heavenly and supernatural, bred
in the bosom of God; proceeding from the deep of God his infinite wisdom,
This lets us see first, that the Gospel is a heavenly doctrine.
which no creature, neither Angel, nor man, by the light of Nature could ever
have imagined, if the Lord from heaven had not revealed it; and therefore even
the Angels notwithstanding they be secundaria lumina, Nazian.
next unto God, Spirits of greatest light, and understanding, are said to
admire this mystery of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 1. 12
desirous to behold those things, which are taught in the Church concerning it.

Secondly, Secondly, the majesty and dignity of the Gospel.
the majesty and dignity of the Gospel, is here recommended unto us; the Law
was given on earth, proclaimed from the top of Mount Sinai: yet, every
transgression, and disobedience thereof received a just recompense of reward,
Heb. 2. 2.
how then shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation, which at the
first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed to us by
them that heard him?

And again we are warned, See ye despise him not that speaks, Heb. 12. 25
for if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall
not we escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks from heaven.

And thirdly, Thirdly, no way to bring a man to heaven, but by the faith of the
Gospel.
the proclaiming of this doctrine from heaven, as likewise the opening of the
heavens, at the first proclamation of it, is to teach us that there is no way,
whereby man may learn a ready way to heaven, but by this doctrine of the
Gospel, which is come from heaven. Pitiful then is the blindness of
worldlings, to whom heaven is opened, and offered by the Gospel: but they will
not so much as look upon it, but like those unclean beasts in the Law, do
creep, with all four, upon earth, seeking the fatness of the earth for their
portion, more miserable then those Jews to whom regresse was offered to Canaan,
Miserable worldlings who have heaven opened, but they love the earth better.
but they would not come out of Caldee: for love of earth, they little esteemed
heaven, and therefore justly shall they be deprived of both; the heavens shall
not be opened to them to receive them, and their place on earth shall shortly
deny them; yea, the earth shall open her mouth, and swallow them; as unworthy
to live upon earth, who rejoiced not at this grace of the Gospel, by which
the heavens were opened unto them.

Thou art my beloved Son.
THe circumstances being permitted; A short sum of the Gospel.
now follows the testimony; which may be called, Contractum Euangelium: for
it contains the sum of the Gospel; first concerning his Person, and next
his Office.

The first, How Jesus Christ in a singular manner is the Son of God.
we have in these words: Thou art that Son of mine, that beloved, for so the
Article imports: Thus the Father speaks of him, to distinguish him from other
sons, and other beloved; the Father has many beloved sons, but none like
Christ; he is not the Son of God by creation, as Adam and the Angels; nor by
Adoption, as regenerate men are; but he is the Son of God by essential
generation, as also by the grace of personal union, that is, as he is the
second person of the blessed Trinity; he is the Son of God, by essential
generation; And that in regard both of his divine Nature.
for the Father begat him from all eternity, by a full and whole communication
of his essence unto him, in a manner most marvelous, and unspeakable: and
therefore rather to be adored by us, then enquired, and searched out. Again,
as man is the Son of God in a most special manner; As also in regard of his
humane.
for he had no man for his Father, but his humane Nature was made and formed
by the holy Ghost, and this Nature thus formed, he has joined, and united unto
the divine Nature of Christ, that so in his person it might have the being, and
subsistence: And thus the Lord Jesus being one Person, in whom are two Natures,
in respect of them both, and of their union, in most marvelous manner, is the
Son of God.

Now, This doctrine of Christ confirmed unto us by most notable testimonies.
because Satan who durst call it in doubt to the Son of God himself, whether,
or not he were the Son of God; will far less spare to call it in doubt
unto us: let us oppose against all his blasphemies, this notable testimony of
God, proclaimed by an audible voice from heaven, at the baptism of Christ, and
repeated again on Mount Tabor, at his transfiguration, as they have reported
unto us, who heard it with their ears, for so witnesses not only S. John, in
the first Chapter of his first Epistle, but most clearly, S. Peter, in his
second Epistle, and first Chapter. By Apostles.
We followed not deceivable fables, when we opened unto you the power, and
coming of our Lord Jesus, but with our eyes we saw his Majesty, for he
received of God the Father, honor, and glory, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. And this voice we heard, when it came from heaven, being with him on
the holy Mount. By Angels.
The Angels in like manner bare witness unto him, and many thousands of his
Saints has sealed the truth of this testimony with their blood. By the state
of the Jews.
The miserable estate of the Jews, who since the day that they rejected him,
and took his blood upon them, and their children, have ever been as
vagabonds, and abiects in the world, proves the truth of this Gospel, which
declares him the Son of God: yea, Satan himself, has been forced to
confess it as a truth, Jesus thou Son of God, Mat. 8. 29.
why art thou come to torment us before the time?

But beside all those, By the Prophets.
we have as says S. Peter, a most sure word of the Prophets, 1. Pet. 9.
to which we shall do well to take heed: for if we well consider, how all
those things which the Prophets of old prophesied, were to be done by the
Messia, are all accomplished in the person of Christ Jesus, we shall find the
word like a light shining in darkness, clearly declaring unto us, that Jesus
the Son of Mary, is the promised Messia.

It was promised in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15.
that he who should trample down the head of the Serpent, By consent of the old
testament with the new, declaring That he should be the Son of a Virgin
was to be the seed of the Woman: this was made clearer by Esaias, that a Virgin
should conceive a Son, whose name should be Emmanuel: how this was fulfilled,
S. Matthew records, Esaias 7. 14.
showing how that when Mary was betrothed to Joseph, Mat. 1. 18.
before they came together, she was found with child of the holy Ghost. Micah
Mich. 5. 2.
foretold that out of Bethleem, should come that ruler in Israel: That he
should be borne in Bethleem.
whose goings forth has been from the beginning, and everlasting. Now that
Christ was borne in Bethleem, Math. 2. 1.
is evident out of the Evangelists. Hos. 11. 1.
Hosea fore-prophesied, Called out of Egypt.
that he should be called out of Egypt. And S. Matthew witnesses, Mat. 2. 17.
that when Herod sought Jesus to destroy him, the Angel of the Lord appearing
to him in a dream, commanded him to flee unto Egypt, that it might be
fulfilled, says he, which was spoken of the Lord, by the Prophet: Out of
Egypt have I called my Son. Mal. 3. 1. and 4. 5.
Malachy foretold, that a messenger should be sent before the Messia, to
prepare his way, whom after that, he calls Eliah the Prophet: Who should be,
Esaias 40. 3.
said Esaias, a crying voice in the wilderness; Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight, in the desert, a path for our God: every valley shall be
exalted, and every mountain made low. How this was fulfilled, S. Luke
witnesses: Luke 1. 17. and 3. 3.
for John Baptist came before the Lord Jesus, in the spirit and power of Eliah,
and he cried in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, and make
straight his paths. Again, it was foretold by Esaias, that he should begin
his preaching in Galile: He began his preaching in Galile.
And so indeed witnesses S. Matthew, Esaias 9. 1.
that when Jesus heard that John was delivered to prison, Mat. 4. 12.
he returned into Galile, and leaving Nazareth, he went and dwelt in
Capern^um, which is nere the sea, in the borders of Zabulon, and Nephtalim,
Specially in the sea borders of Zabulon and Nephtalim.
that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esaias: The land of Zabulon, and
the land of Nephtalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jorden, Galile of the
Gentiles, the people which sat in darkness, saw great light, and to them that
sat in the region and shadow of death, light is risen up. In like manner it
was spoken by Esaias, Esaias 55. 5.
that he should confirm his preaching with many miracles, He confirmed his
preaching by miracles, as was prophesied.
as that the blind should see, and the deaf should hear, all which the
Evangelists records, was performed by the Lord Jesus. Zach. 9. 9.
Zachary fore-prophesied, Mat. 21. 4.
that he should come riding to Jerusalem on an Ass, He came riding to
Jerusalem on an Ass. Betrayed by his familiar friend.
which the Evangelists testitestifies was done. It was also fore-shadowed in
David his type and figure, that his own familiar friend, whom he trusted, Zach.
11. 13.
and did eat of his bread, He was sold for 30. pieces of Silver.
should lift up the heel against him* and that he should be sold for thirty
pieces of silver, said Zachary, with the which thereafter a potters field
should be bought; and so indeed was our Lord betrayed by his own Disciple
Judas, Math. 26. and 27.
and sold for thirty pieces of silver; With the which when it was cast again
were bought a Potters field.
which when he had cast again, to them that gave it to him, they bought with
it a potters field, to be a burial for strangers: and of his suffering Esaias
fore-prophefied, Esaias 53. 12. and 53 5.
as if he had seen it, that he was counted among transgressors; that he was
wounded for our transgressions, Counted among transgressors.
the chastisement of our peace laid upon him, and that with his stripes we are
healed. Psalm. 22. 17.
Join with this the prediction of David, that they should pierce him hand,
Psalm. 22. 18.
and foot; and when they had crucified him, Psalm. 69. 22.
they should scorn him, and nod their heads at him, saying, he trusted in the
Lord, let him deliver him: He was peirced hand and foot, they cast lots on his
garments, and gave him Vinegar to drink.
and again, that they should part his garments among them, and cast lots about
his vesture, and should give him gall in his meat, and in his thirst vinegar
to drink: all which the Evangelists record, most clearly to have been
accomplished, in the Passion of Jesus Christ: for they executed him between
two thieves, scourged him, He was buried in the grave of a rich man.
scorned him, and crucified him. Yea, more particularly also have they
foretold, that he should lie in the grave of a rich man, Esaias. 53. 9.
that he should rise the third day, He rose the third day.
as was shadowed in his figure Jonas, Psalm 68. 18.
that he should ascend on high, and lead captivity captive: He ascended on
high.
all these with many more prophesies, fore-spoken of the Messiah, concerning his
person, his actions, his sufferings, his triumphant resurrection and ascension,
as more particularly they are collected by Athanasius. Athanas de Incarna.
verbi.
Since we see them so clearly fulfilled, in the person of Jesus Christ, what
remains, All these prophesies clearly accomplished in Christ proves him to be
the promised Messia.
but that we close the mouth of Satan, and of our own infidelity, receiving
this for an undoubted truth, which the Lord in this heavenly Oracle delivers
unto us: that this Christ Jesus, the Son of Mary, is the Son of God, and
that promised Messiah, on whom all the Fathers since, the first beginning,
fastened their hope, and of whom all the Prophets has spoken, pointing him
out, as it were with the finger, how he was to come to work the work of our
salvation, which in all circumstances we see performed by him, as was
prophesied by them, to our everlasting comfort.

We might hereunto add some testimonies of the Gentiles, as of Mercurius
Trismegistus, Lactan. Iustit. lib. 1. cap. 6.
little posterior in time to Moses: whose testimony Lactantius calls Diuino
simile, Diuine-like, as likewise out of the Oracles of Sibillae, which were
ten in number; so called, because they declared the counsels of God, quasi
(...), and were by some of the Fathers accounted prophetesses of the Gentiles:
for seeing the Lord Jesus was to be sent into the world for salvation both of
Jews and Gentiles, it pleased the Lord long before his coming, to make
signification thereof, not to the Jews only, by Prophets raised up among
themselves, but to the Gentiles also, who because they could not easily embrace
the testimony of the Jews, in a matter of religion, it pleased him, by their
own Prophets, to make predictions, and descriptions of Jesus Christ, that when
they should come to pass, they might have no exception against them. And
therefore is it that the heathen persecuting Emperors, stirred up with hatred
by Satan, against the very name of Christians, the mystery whereof they no
manner of way understood, nor yet would receive any light, that might bring
them to the knowledge thereof, forbade the reading of their own Sibilline
Oracles, Justin. Mart. Orat. ad Anton. Pium.
and that because even their own prophesies, bare witness to the verity of
Christian religion. But for the present, we content us with that most sure word
of the Prophets, as S. Peter calls it, and rests in this heavenly Oracle,
which the Father from heaven proclaimed, concerning his Son: Blessing the Lord
our God, who has opened unto us the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure, which he had purposed in Christ. By whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich grace. To
him be praise and glory, for ever.

Amen.
THE COMBAT OF CHRIST WITH SATAN.

Declaring a working power in our Redeemer, answerable to his vocation.

MATTHEW 4. 1. 2. Then Jesus was led aside of the Spirit, into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty
nights, he was afterward an hungry. LONDON, Printed for John Budge. 1612.

A TREATISE OF Christ his Temptation.
WE are now come to the history of Christ his tentation, which being joined
with the former two, whereof we have spoken, makes up unto us a complete
doctrine of Christian comfort: for in his Genealogy, we have seen what manner
a man Christ Jesus is. In his Baptism we have learned, how he is become ours,
and now in his temptation we see, how he begins to work the work of
Satan's confusion, and our Redemption.

Great joy was there in the camp of Israel, when they saw that David overcame
Goliath, cast him to the ground, and cut off his head, for he was a dreadful
enemy, he had reviled the host of the living God, and none of Saul his
warriors durst encounter with him. But greater joy should be in our hearts,
when we see how our David in this singular combat, fights with spiritual
Goliath hand to hand, and ouercomes him; who ever since the creation has been
a shameless blasphemer of the everliving God, and an spiteful enemy of all
true Israelites. In this first combat the Son of God casts him down: In the
last combat which he fights with him, on the cross, he bursts his head. Satan
tempting the first Adam in Paradise, overcame him, and so carried him away and
his posterity, in a fearful captivity, and bondage: but the second Adam
suffering temptation by Satan in the wilderness, ouercomes him, and by a more
glorious victory then Abraham had over Chedarlaomer, does he recover his own
Lots, from the power of this enemy.

In all we have three points here to be treated of: Three things to be
considered in it.
first, the circumstances premitted: Secondly the combat it self, consisting
of a threefold assault, made by Satan, with their several repulses, given by
our Lord: Thirdly, the event, and issue thereof.

The circumstances premitted Circumstances going beforeit, six in number.
First, the time, which is declared to have been immediately after his
Baptism: Secondly, the place, expressed to be the wilderness: Thirdly, the
motion, by which he is carried thither, to wit, by the spirit: Fourthly, the
person who is tempted; namely, Jesus, full of the holy Ghost: Fifthly, the
tempter, named here the Devil: Last of all, the occasion of the temptation,
which is said to be CHRIST his hunger, after that he had fasted fotty days.
As for the time it is noted to have been immediately after his baptism: The
time of Christ his temptation is first noted.
he had lived twenty nine years a private man, and all that time we read
not that Satan tempted him; but now when he comes out in public to do the
work of a Redeemer, for the glory of God, and good of his brethren, he is
assaulted of Satan with all his might.

Whereof it is evident, Persons in high callings subject to greatest
temptations, if they be faithful in them.
how Satan intends his greatest malice against them, who are set up into those
high callings, in the which greatest good may be done, to the glory of God,
and salvation of others: So was it with Moses, so long as he lived a private
life, he lived a peaceable life: but when he came forth to be a deliverer of
his brethren, from their bondage in Egypt, then was he persecuted by Pharao: So
also with David, in his private calling he had quietness; but from the time
that he had once begun to work the deliverance of Israel, by the slaughter
of Goliath, and was anointed King by Samuel, for the greater benefit of that
people: then did Satan stir up Saul against him, who hunted him like a
Partrich, through the fields and mountains of Israel. The like also may be
seen in the Apostle S. Paul, in Sosthenes, and many others. As trees on the
tops of hills are object to every wind; so persons in a high calling, if in
a good conscience they labor to discharge it, shall find themselves on every
side compassed with temptations.

Neither is it so only with those that are set up in more eminent callings,
Such as gives their names to Christ, let them look to be tempted of Satan.
but with every Christian also: what malice Satan practiced against the head,
that same will he practice against the members. So soon as our Lord was borne,
so soon was he persecuted by Herod: so soon as he was baptized, so soon was
he tempted by Satan; thus as says Chrysostom, In Math. hom. 7.
ab ipfis vitae initiis ad tentationes praeparam^r: Macar. hom. 47.
then we see that even in the cradle our Lord began to bear the cross, and no
sooner we are borne by regeneration to be his, but so soon without further
delay, does Satan set upon us with all his might, like a new Pharao, pursuing
Israel, to see if he can reduce us to his former servitude, and bondage.

And this I mark for the comfort of weak and young Christians, A comfort for
young Christians who after their conversion are exercised with unaccustomed
temptations.
who after their conversion find themselves troubled with great temptations,
wherewith before they were not acquainted, let them know that it is a cursed
peace, to be at peace with Satan, and give thanks to God, who now has put
them in an inimitie with him: for thereby they may know they are none of his;
but are called to a fellowship and communion with Christ, Diabolus enim non
persequitur nisi bonos, Aug. de Temp. Just. 58.
Satan pursues none but good men, such as hathcast off his yoke: as for the
wicked what needs he to pursue them, seeing he possesses them? yea, so far
is he from tempting them, that he uses them as his instruments, to tempt
others: and therefore let us not be discouraged, but rather confirmed, when we
find our selves tempted by Satan.

The second circumstance is of the place, The place of the combat is next set
down.
noted here to be the wilderness: Wherein two things we observe, one in the
person of the Adversary; letting us see how he is a restless tempter, sparing
no place, not Paradise, nor the wilderness, in the Temple, Vbique insidiatur
homini, Aug. de Temp. 77.
every where he lies in wait for us: neither can we go our way. Wherein he
has not his snares laid before us: Ambros.
multi laquei quacunque progredimur, there be many snares wheresoever we go,
In every piece Satan has his snare spread out for temptation.
our way on earth, being like the way of Israel, wherein lurkes many fiery
Serpents to sting us, that hurts us many time before we can perceive them:
none of all the children of God, but they have marked this in their own
experience, for where is the place, wherein we have not been tempted; yea,
wounded by this subtle serpent, and almost slain to the death; if mercy and
grace had not come in from God to succor us? The remedy is that we suspect
this adversary in every place wherein we come, walking as the Apostle commands
us circumspectly, and with fear and trembling: ever looking up for grace, to
keep us we fall not into his snare, at least we perish not in it.

The other thing to be observed here, In this combat our Lord gives the
Adversary vantage of the place, and why?
is the person of our Lord, who overthrows Satan in so victorious a manner,
that no exception can be made against it; for in that Nature which Satan once
had overcome does he encounter with him, and gives him also the vantage of
place. Satan tempted the first Adam in Paradise, which was the place in all
the world, wherein he should have been strongest to resist the Devil,
considering that in it he had very many tokens of Gods great goodness toward
him, ever before his eyes; yet in it Satan overcame him: But the second Adam
to recover this loss, encounters with Satan in the wilderness, a place of all
other in the world, meetest for Satan to tempt a man in; specially to
desperation. Thus we see, quemadmodum suis nodis praeiudi^ia resoluantur,
Ambros in Luke 4. Nazian. Orat. 21. Apologel.
and suis diuina beneficia vestigiis reformentur: for the first Adam tempted by
Satan, was driven from Paradise to the wilderness, but the second Adam by
suffering himself to be tempted of Satan, brings home the first again from
the wilderness into Paradise: thus does he follow the Adversary, as it were,
foot by foot, confounding him in all those means, by which before over man
he made his conquest.

The third circumstance is, The third circumstance, he is led into the
wilderness by motion of the spirit.
that our Lord was led into the wilderness by the motion of the spirit, to
wit, that same spirit which before descended on him at Jorden; and wherewith
here he is said to have been filled, and replenished. Of this we learn that
temptations comes not by accident, Temptations are ordered by uine dispensation.
or chance, but are ordered by divine dispensation: In our weakness ofttimes
we conceit of our temptations, as if they came to us by the will of Satan:
but in very truth it is not so, he is indeed a roaring Lion, but the Lord have
bound him in chains, and without the bounds of his chain he cannot go,
roar as he will, he is not able to approach unto us, nor move any temptation
against us, but as he is a licenced of the Lord, Ber. in Psalm. qui habit at
Ser. 13..
est quidem leo rugiens, sed gratias ago magno illi leoni de tribu Judah, rugire
iste potest, ferire non potest: he is indeed a roaring Lion, but I give
thanks unto the great Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he may roar, but he cannot
strike me.

It is therefore good to remember in our temptations, Three notable comforts in
temptation.
these three things: First, that it is the Lord who takes us by the hand, and
enters us within the listes to fight in his name, hand to hand with Satan, as
here our Lord is led by the spirit to be tempted: Secondly, that the Lord
measures our temptations, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our power:
And thirdly, that wheresoever he lead us, he goes with us, not as a spectator
only to behold us, which should also greatly encourage us, that we fight
under the eye of our King, but as an actor also fighting in us; helping our
infirmities, and strengthening our weakness, by his grace: and therefore how
ever our Adversary be like a mighty terrible Goliath, yet should we not be
afraid to go forth against him in the name of the Lord our God.

In the fourth circumstance we have to consider the Person, The fourth
circumstance is of the person tempted.
who is tempted, to wit, Jesus, full of the holy Ghost. In regard of his
nature, he is very man, and so he behooved to be, that he might overcome the
Adversary of man, alioqui just victus non fuisset: Theodoret. dial. 2. cap.
26.
otherwise, he had not been wholly conquered, but in regard of the quality of
his Nature, perfectly holy, and fully sanctified: so full of the holy Ghost,
that not so much as a contrary motion of evil could enter into him, no more
then liquor can be conuaied into a vessel, which is full already: and this is
it, which our Savior testifies in another place; The prince of this world
comes, Ioh. 14. 30.
and has nothing in me.

It is true that John the Baptist, Never any full of the holy Ghost as Christ
Jesus was.
and Stephen the first Martyr, are also said to have been full of the holy
Ghost; but that is spoken either in comparison of themselves, who at sometime
were more filled with grace, then at another: for in all the godly the Spirit
has his own intention and remission; or else in comparison of themselves, with
other men. But as for Christ Jesus, it is his singular privilege, that he
received the spirit above, and beyond all measure, that of his fullness all his
Saints and servants might receive grace for grace, every one a portion in their
own measure: whereof it comes to pass, that there being in most holy men, a
great vacuitie and emptiness; room is made for Satan to enter in, and work
upon the corruption he finds there, but in the Lord Jesus it is not so.

But here two things further are to be considered: first, how could Christ be
tempted, there being, as I have said, no corruption in him, Sundry sorts of
temptations.
whereupon any temptation could work: and secondly, for what causes was he
tempted. For resolution of the first, we are to consider the sundry sorts of
temptations, there is one whereby man tempts God: this is expressly forbidden,
God tempts man, and is tempted of man.
as we will show hereafter; one whereby GOD tempts man, so the Lord tempted
Abraham, and he is said also to have tempted the Israelites; as, for that which
S. James says, Deuteronomy. 13.
that God tempts no man; we must know that there is, Aug. in Joan. tract. 43.
tentatio quae probat, and tentatio quae decipit: a temptation which proves,
and a temptation which deceives. One man tempts an other: these sin after
the similitude of Satan.
By the first of these only the Lord tempts, but never by the second. There is
also a temptation, whereby one man tempts another to snare him, or manifest
some weakness in him; so the Herodians and Pharisees tempted Christ: and this is
common to all the wicked men of the world, that not content to do evil
themselves, they delight also to tempt others to evil. Let such remember that
this is to sin after the similitude of Satan, who not content to rebel
against GOD himself, tempted man also to the same rebellion with him: and
therefore may they look to be punished, after the similitude of his
condemnation: and last of all, there is a temptation, Satan tempts man.
by which Satan tempts man, plain contrary to that which is ascribed to the
Lord; for it is not to make man better, nor to manifest any goodness that by
grace is in him, but ever to snare him: for which cause the temptations of God
are compared to fanning, that drives away the chafe and dust, and so fines the
corn: but Satan's temptations are compared to sifting, that letts away the
good, but keeps still the worst. The temptations of Christ were external
only, and could not enter into him.


Now to return to the question; we must know that the temptations of Christ,
in this do differ from the temptations of Adam, and all other men in the
world; that his were only external, that is, such as Satan presented by
external voices and objects to his ear and eye; but could never carry any
further, for incontinent the Lord Jesus discerned the vanity of them, by the
perfect light of his mind, and instantly repelled them, by the unchangeable
holiness of his will; so that he was not so much as affected or moved with them;
far less infected, by consenting unto them, and in this, as I said, he
far excels, the first Adam, and all his posterity.

For as for our first Parents Adam and Euah, It was far otherwise with Adam and
Euah.
in that first onset Satan made upon them, by presenting external objects to
their eyes, and voices to their ears, he incontinent fastened his sting into
them, by reason that they howsoever made holy; yet being mutable, were easily
affected with his allurements, and so wounded by him: but the second Adam,
being perfect, and unchangeable in holiness, was in such sort tempted, that he
was not, nor could not be perverted, no more then the most stable rocks of the
Sea are moved, or removed by the raging waves thereof.

Whereof great comfort redounds unto us, The salvation conquest, by the second
Adam, cannot be lost to any of his members.
who now by grace are the generation of the second Adam, and bears his image;
as by Nature we were the sons of the first Adam, and did carry also his
image. What the first Adam had by creation, he received it not for himself
only, but for his posterity also: if he had kept it for himself, he had
kept it to them also; and when he lost it to himself, he lost it to his
posterity: And the second Adam, the Lord Jesus, in like manner, that stock of
life in whom, by grace we are grafted, and of whom only, we as Christians
have our beginning and being; what he has received as Mediator from his
Father, Comfort.
he received it not for himself, but for his brethren, that he might conquer,
communicate, and conserve unto us a most sure salvation: for so long as he who
have obtained it, cannot loose it, so long we are sure it cannot be lost unto
us, seeing of him, and in him we possess it.

And as for Adams posterity, Our temptations are not external only, but
chiefly internal.
now since the fall, our estate is so much by Nature the more miserable, that
our greatest temptation comes from our inward corruption, so that albeit there
were no external tempter to tempt us with objects of sin, presented to our
eyes and ears: yet we are tempted of our own concupiscence within us. Tale
quippe est vitium malignitatis, Chris. in Math. hom. 7.
vt a nullo impulsa plerunque sese ipsa praecipitet: for such is the corruption
of our wicked Nature, says Chrysostom, that although it be not moved or
enforced by any other; yet it runs headlong into sin; thus we are like
unto a besieged city, that not only has strong enemies without pursuing it,
but in like manner false Traitors within, to betray it. Now have we seen how
the temptations of Christ Jesus do differ from Adams, and ours.

The other thing in this circumstance that comes to be considered, The ends
why Christ was temp.
is the ends for which our Lord humbles himself to be tempted of Satan: and
those we shall see do most of all respect us; as for our cause he was in
carnate, so for our cause he was tempted: all that he suffered in our Nature,
are medicines to cure the infirmities of our nature.

First, First that he might overcome our enemy in a just and lawful manner.
then he was content to be tempted by our enemy, that he might overcome our
enemy, and that in so just, and lawful a manner, as against which the enemy
could have no exception, for in man's nature he encountered with him, in a place
convenient for Sathanin a state and condition most subject to temptation,
wanting all necessaries for refreshment of his body, and having none to comfort
him; and no doubt it did wonderfully astonish, and confound, that evil one,
that having overcome so many since the beginning of the world, now he
encounters with a man, over whom he has so many apparent vantages, and
against whom he assayed all his temptations, yet can he not any way fasten his
sting in him.

Secondly, Secondly, to let us see how Satan is a spiteful enemy of man's
salvation.
to let us see what a spiteful enemy of man's salvation Satan is, for the
hatred he bears to the glory of God, he hates man, made to the image of God,
and does all that he can to hinder his salvation. Non enim vult vt ibi simus,
Aug. hom. 38.
vnde ipse deiectus est: for he can not abide that man should be exalted to
that place, from which for his sin he was dejected. If we could apprehend
this, and take it to heart; what a deadly enemy Satan is unto us, and for
what cause, it would encourage us to make stronger resistance to him then we
do.

Thirdly, Thirdly, that he might teach us how to fight with Satan.
he undergoes this temptation to teach us, his Servants and Soldiers, how
to encounter with him, Pugnat Imperator, vt discant Milites: and therewithal
to assure us, that if we will fight against him in the might of our Lord, it is
possible, that we (clothed with this same nature) shall overcome him. Since the
days of Adam Satan, by sin, has wonderfully prevailed over men: none have
escaped him without a wound; and many has he slain unto the death: but now in
the same nature, the Lord Jesus wrastles with him, and ouercomes him;
Theodoret. dial. 1. cap. 28.
that so, radicitus euelleret desperationem ex natura a nostra; that he might
pluck up desperation by the root, out of our nature.

And fourthly, Fourthly, that he might comfort us in our temptations.
he humbled himself to suffer temptation, that by experience he might learn
wherein the strength of Satan lies; and so might be the more able to succor
us in all temptations: Heb. 9. 11.
For, we have not an High Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities; but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin,
and therefore is able sufficiently to have compassion on us.

And, Lastly, that we should not apprehend our temptations to come from an
angry God.
last of all, that we should not apprehend our tentations to come from an angry
God, as commonly of our weakness we do: we see here, that the Lord Jesus,
who a little before, was proclaimed to be the Son of GOD, in whom the Father
was well pleased, is now led by the Spirit of God, to be tempted of Satan.

The fifth Circumstance is of him that tempts, The fifth circumstance is of the
person that tempts.
called by S. Luke, the Devil; and, by S. Matthew, the Tempter: styles, both of
them properly belonging to Satan: for, before him there was no tempter unto
evil, nor yet after him, except such as are tempted by him: wherefore
Augustine does thus prettily describe him: Quid est diabolus? Aug. in Vigil.
natiuit. Dom. Ser. 4.
Angelus per superbiam a Deo separatus, a semetipso ceptus, alios decipiens,
author mendacij, radix malitiae, caput scelerum, princeps omnium vitiorum: What
is the Devil? Satan properly called a Tempter, and why.
He is an Angel, through his pride, separated from God, deceived by himself,
deceiving others, the Father of lies, the root of malice, the chief head of
all wickednesses, the Prince of all sins and vices. In tempting he is
restless, sparing no time, no place, no person. It may truly be said of him,
which without a reason Esau said of Jacob; was he not justly called Jacob? that
is, a supplanter: for first he stole my Birthright, and now he would steal
my blessing. Is not Satan justly called a Tempter? By our first Creation, we
were made to the Image of God, and that Satan by tempting our parents,
subtlely stole from us; and now the blessing of God, in Christ the Redeemer,
whereby he offers to advance us to a better estate then that wherein we were
created, he laboreth by crafty temptations, to steal from us also. The Lord
give us eyes to see his enmity against us, and hearts to resist him.

But let us mark that he is called a Tempter, Satan a Commander of the
wicked, a Tempter of the godly.
chiefly in respect of the godly: for in regard of the wicked, he is not so
much a tempter, as a commander and possessour of them; Ephesians. 2. 2.
he is the Prince of the air, that rules in the children of disobedience: They
are already in the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26
taken of him at his will. Worldlings count it strange to hear that any of
Gods children should be tempted by Satan, and think all well enough, if in
word they can say, Carnal men in word despise Satan, but in deed do serve
him.
I defy the Devil and all his works; but Satan cares not how thou despite
him in words, if so be thou pleasure him in thy works, as those miserable men
do, who in word defy him and his works, but in deed are ready to serve and
pleasure him in any sinful work, whereunto he employes them: they can abhor
to hear others are tempted who yet resist him, but cannot lament that
themselves, in most miserable manner, are possessed and captiued by him. Two
sorts of Satan's operations
For, there are two of Satan's operations, one is called, (...), and this
expresses his restless assaulting of the godly, to tempt them: the other is
called (...), expressing his effectual power, whereby at his will he works
in the children of disobedience.

We are not therefore to faint, Why we should not faint at Satan's tentations.
because we find our selves tempted by Satan; but rather, as S. James
commands us, to count it exceeding great joy when we fall into tentation: for,
first of all, it proves we are none of his. As a dog does not bark at those
that are of the household, but at strangers; so, Satan keeps a close mouth to
such as are his, and suffers them to brook a false peace; but such as by grace
are delivered from his bondage, those he compasses like a roaring Lion, seeking
to devour them.

And next, there is great profit, and utility, redounding to us by the
tentations of Satan: they humble us, chase us to God, and make us more fervent
in prayer. That which Luther marked in himself by experience (that Tentation,
Meditation, and Prayer, were the three masters, under whom he profited most)
all the rest of Gods children also find true in themselves: It is a great
temptation not to be tempted.
maxima tentatio est non tentari; not to be tempted is the greatest temptation.
And herein does the marvelous power and wisdom of our God appear, in
ouer-ruling Satan so far, that his tentations to evil, whereby he assaults
us, the Lord turns them to good: Fit enim mira diuinae bonitatis
dispensatione, Gregor. moral. lib. 2.
vt vnde malignus hostis, ^or tentat, vt interimat; inde misericors Deus hoc
erudiat, vt viuat; For it comes to pass, by the wonderful dispensation of
Gods goodness, that from whence the malicious enemy tempts the heart, to kill
it; from thence does the merciful God instruct it, that it may live.

But as the one Evangelist calls him a Tempter, Satan expressed by many
names, for the great wickedness of his nature.
so the other calls him a Devil. There is not one name sufficient to
express the wickedness of Satan; neither any creature so evil as is able to
shadow it: and therefore Gods spirit expresses it by many names, calling him, a
Dragon, a Lion, a Serpent, a Satan, a Tempter, a Devil, a Circumuenter, a
Deceiuer, 2. Cor. 2. 11.
beside many given him in holy scripture.

All which may be reduced unto these three; They all may be reduced to three,
for he is in all his actions either a Tempter, or an Accuser, or a Tormenter.
wherein he is continually exercised: for first, he is a Tempter, entising man
unto sin, and there he behaues himself like a subtle warbling serpent, full
of wiles to beguile: Secondly, he is an Accuser, accusing man to God for
sin, and there he shows himself a Satan, a hateful Adversary, and a
Devil. Thirdly, he is a Tormenter of man for sin, and there he imitates a
fiery Dragon, and a roaring Lion: there are the points of his occupation, there
is the labor, whereinto night and day he is exercised; he likes no other, he
can do no other: A singula Preservative against Satan his temptations.
If we could remember this, it might serve to us as a singular preservative, to
keep us from his subtle snares: for why does he tempt us? is it not that he
may have matter whereupon to accuse us to our GOD, and why accuses he us? but
that if he can, he may receive power and commission, to torment us. O
faithless traitor, that first tempts a man to sin, and then for those same
sins done, by his instigation, the first accuser of him unto God: and
therefore if we be wise, let us resist him in the first, give no place to him,
when he is a tempter, so shall we not fear him, when he is an accuser, nor
feel him as a tormenter.

The last circumstance premitted here by the Evangelist, The last circumstance
is the occasion of the temptation, to wit, his fasting.
is the occasion of the temptation, to wit, our Saviors hunger, after that he
had fasted forty days: this fasting our Savior also undertook, partly for
our instruction, and partly, for confirmation of his calling unto us; first,
for our instruction, to teach us, that a spiritual life, wherein God may be
honored, A spiritual life is greatly helped by fasting and prayer.
our own salvation, and the salvation of others procured, can neither be begun
nor continued, without abstinence and prayer, by these the godly have obtained
at the hand of God, the knowledge of great mysteries, as ye may see in Daniel:
by these have they confounded the conspiracies of their enemies, as ye may see
in Esther: these have been always the most effectual armor of the Church, to
divert evil, to draw down good, to confound their enemies, to confirm
themselves, and the one of these strengthens the other. Oration virtutem
impetrat ieiunandi, and ieiunium gratiam promeretur orandi, ieiunium orationem
roborat, oration ieiunium sanctificat. Prayer obtained strength to fast: Fasting
obtains grace to pray: Fasting strengthens prayer, Prayer sanctifies
Fasting.

And therefore it is, By the contrary, carnal lusts are nourished by
intemperance.
that Satan, where he will entise any to a carnal conversation, does
commonly begin at the contrary, surfeiting, and drunkenness; by it he drew
Lot to incest: Nabal to railing against David: Beltasar to blasphemous abusing
those vessels, which were sacred to the Lord; and many a man to that shame,
wherein he thought never to have fallen; for drunkenness is Satan's Dalilah,
whereby he takes away the strength from the strongest Samson, and so he makes a
play-foole of him. Experience has always proved, that where this sin is
welcome, it is easy for satan to bring in any other sin, whereunto the
Nature of that man is inclined.

But this fasting of our Lord, Christ's miraculous fasting was also to confirm
his doctrine.
being miraculous, let us see, that he undertook it for this end also, for
which he wrought all the rest of his miracles: namely, to confirm his calling
and doctrine to us: so then as Moses at the giving of the Law, fasted forty
days: and Elias at the restoring of the Law, fasted forty days: the Lord
Jesus also coming to preach the Gospel, fastes forty days: partly, that he
might answer the former types, in them figuring what he was to do, and
partly as I said, to confirm unto us, the certainty of his calling.

Whereof it is evident, Christ's fast superstitiously abused by Papists.
how this fact of Christ is vainly, and superstitiously abused by the Papists,
for confirmation of their Lenton fastings, they lay this for a ground, that
Instructio ecclesiae est omnis Christi actio: every action of Christ, is the
churches instruction: which helps them nothing, it is true, all his actions
are for our instruction, but not all for our imitation.

The works of Christ our Lord, The actions of Christ reduced.
are of three ranks: the first are works of redemption, as that he Works of
redemption, to follow these were blasphemy.
borne of the Virgin Mary, crucified on the cross for our sins, dead,
descended to hell, and rose again the third day: these are so proper to the
Son of God, the Lord Jesus; that if any man would presume to counterfeit him
in them, he were to be abhorred, as a most wicked blasphemer.

In the second rank, Works of miraeles: to follow him in these is
impossibility.
are his

In the third rank, Moral works: to follow him in these is piety.
are his works moral of a godly life and conversation: such as his humility
in washing his Disciples feet: his meekenes, patience, and love, in praying
for his enemies; his subjection to his Parents: and these indeed stand unto us
for rules of imitation. Learn of me says our Savior, that I am lowly and
meek; he bade us not, said Augustine, learn of him how to make the world, or
how to raise the dead; but learn of him that he is lowly and meek. To strive
to follow him in the first rank of these, is blasphemy: In the second is
impossibility: In the third, is true piety.

Now we are to know that fasting is either supernatural, Fasting is of sundry
sorts, according to the ends thereof.
and so miraculous, as the fasting of Moses, Elias, and our Lord; or natural:
the natural again is prescribed and undertaken, either for physic, for
civil affairs, or for religion: Of the first I speak nothing, save only that
it is a shame that men for bodily health can take them to a diet, A warning for
careless Christians.
use moderation, and abstinence from meat, who for spiritual health will no
way regard it: As for the second, that worldlings to redeem the time of their
market, or otherwise to overtake their civil affairs, can fast from morn to
evening, condemns in like manner careless Christians, who to make unto
themselves increase in the gain of godliness, will not dedicate any time to
the exercises of fasting and praying: As for the third, fasting for religion,
it is either public, such as by public authority is enjoined for urgent
causes: as that of Hester and Iosaphat: or else private; such as private
Christians, either by themselves, or with their families, do willingly
undertake.

Now in both these, The right end of religious fasting is, to subdue the body
by discipline.
we are always to take heed, that fasting be used for the right end, and in
the right manner. Then it is used to the right end, when we fast for this
cause, that the flesh being subdued to the Spirit, may be the more able to
pray. As a natural man delights in the subduing of his enemy, so a Christian
in the subduing of his flesh. In the battle between the flesh and spirit, we
should help that party which we would have victorious.
In a battle between two parties, if the third come in to help any one of
them, it is easily coniectured, that the party helped will prevail: there is a
continual battle in us, between the flesh and the spirit: for these two lust
one against the other: why then do we not help that party which fainest we
would have victorious? If we desire the spirit should prevail, then let us
help it with fasting, and prayer; for Ieiunium est animae auxilium: Nazian.
Orat. 25. in laudem Gorgorij.
Fasting is an help and furtherance to the soul; if otherwise we bring in
surfeiting and gluttony, we strengthen corrupt flesh, we quench the spirit, and
so makes our selves a pray to our enemy.

This being the end, Rules in fasting: first that it be without opinion of
merit.
which in fasting should be proposed unto us, let us beware of those evils,
that may corrupt it, and we shall find it a most wholesome medicine for a
diseased soul And first let us beware of the opinion of merit before God: for
this conceit makes even good works an abomination to the Lord; as it is
evident in that Pharisie, who boasting of his alms, and fasting, went home
without mercy and grace. Ber. in Cant. Ser. 67.
Non enim habet quo intret gratia, vbi meritum occupauit. There is no place for
Grace to enter in, where merit has possession.

Secondly, Next that it be without superstition.
we are to take heed that our fasting be without superstition, which then is
done, quando neque propter aliquorum imitationem fit, Epiph haeres. 33.
nec propter consuetudinem, nec propter diem, velut dies hoc praescrib at: when
it is done neither for imitation of any other, nor for custom, nor for the
day, as if the day should prescribe the same: such is the fasting of many,
undertaken for such a day, or such a custom, and not for cause of conscience:
such fasting is plain superstition.

Thirdly, Thirdly that it be not without prayer: to fast, and not to pray is to
offer a dead thing to the Lord.
that it be not without prayer. Fasting is good, but such a good as in religion
is not to be used for it self, but for another good; namely for prayer:
therefore the spirit of God ioynes these together, fasting and prayer: for
fasting without prayer is like a dead body without a spirit, and to offer such
a fasting unto the Lord is no less abomination, then if under the Law, any
man should have offered a dead thing unto him: and this is also for them who
make not the days of fasting, days of prayer, I mean who are no more instant
in prayer that day wherein they fast, then other days wherein they fast not;
vainly conceiting, that fasting by it self, should commend them to God.
Fourthly, that it be without ostentation.


Fourthly, let fasting be without ostentation before men: Our Savior fasted in
secret, in the wilderness, where none saw him. In cities, and in the company
of men, he did eat and drink, and this commandment has he given us, when ye
fast look not sour, as hypocrites do, who disfigure their faces, that they
may be seen of men to fast: but when thou fastest anoint thine head, and wash
thy feet, that thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy father, who is in
secret, and thy father who sees thee secretly, will reward thee openly. But,
this condemned hypocrisy is now counted good devotion* both among Papists, and
carnal professors; for if they have a day of fasting, it is such, as is known
to all those who knows them. Fifthly, that amendment of life, be joined with it.


Last of all, let it always be seconded with amendment of life: this is Magnum
and deo acceptum ieiunium, August.
a great and acceptable fast unto God, when the eye, the tongue, the hand, the
foot, and all fasts from the works of unrighteousness: Chris hom. 3. ad pop.
Antioch.
honor ieiunii non ciborum abstinentia, sed peccatorum fuga: not the abstinence
of meats, but the flying of sins, is the honor of fasting: and indeed
fasting this way, beautified with abstinence from sin, is not only as
Augustine highly commends it, futuri seeuli forma, Ad frat. in Erem. ser. 23
a resemblance of the world to come: but as Ambrose also calls it a most
forcible and present help of a godly life here. Inde incipio in Christo
vi^ere, vnde in Adamo victus sum: fi tamen Christus imago patris mihi virtutis
sit exemplum, by eating where God forbad me, began my fall in the first Adam,
and by abstaining, as Christ the image of the Father, has taught me, I begin
again to live.

Then the Devil said unto him.
THe circumstances thus being premitted, Satan restless in temptations.
now follows the temptations, which are three in number: for three sundry
times does Satan renew his assaults against the Lord Jesus: letting us see how
the wicked nature of him is restless in tempting: It is said of his wretched
members; they cannot rest unless they have done evil: Prou. 1. After one, let
us look for another.
but it is true in him, that when he has done evil: yet can he not rest. If
he durst tempt our Lord oftener then once, notwithstanding that he strongly
resisted him: what marvel if he be restless in tempting us, over whom he
has so many times prevailed? Let us be assured that where once he has been
harbored, there he thinks to lodge again: and therefore even they who have
cast off this yoke, are to prepare themselves for new temptations, and to put
on the whole armor of God, that they may resist him.

The temptations, How these temptations are distinguished.
by sundry, are sundry ways distinguished. Elias Cretensis commenting on
Nazianzen, thinks that the first of them is, Nazian. Orat. 4. de filio
(...), sieve gulae, gluttony: the second, (...), sieve ambitionis, ambition: the
third, (...), sieve auaritia, covetousness. Ambrose again so distinguishes
them, vt gulae sit vnum; Iactantia, alterum; ambitionis tertium. These are I
confess customable to Satan, and darts dangerous enough, but these which
here he shootes against our Lord, if we look more narrowly to them, we shall
find them more deadly; for here he opens all his treasures of wickedness, and
comes out with his strongest armor to impugn our Lord.

The battle as ye see, The order of Satan's threefold battle.
is threefold: in the right wing stands Presumption: in the left wing
Desperation: in the maine battle, comes in the love of the World, the honor
and glory thereof: these are Satan's three generals, and grand-captaines, under
whom are militant all the forces of spiritual wickedness. As the Philistimes
sought earnestly to know wherein the strength of Sampson lay, that so they
might overcome him: so every good Christian should hear learn wherein the
strength of Satan lies, that so he may overcome him. How a Christian should
order the battle against him.
Arm thee against these three; Desperation, Presumption, and the love of the
world, and Satan shall not be able to hurt thee: for against Presumption, set
thou the fear of God: presume not to sin, because God is merciful, but by
the contrary conclude, that because mercy is with him, therefore thou will
fear him. Again, against Desperation, set faith in Christ Jesus: count not
bodily wants, or spiritual desertions, arguments of reprobation; but cleave
thou to the Lord, resolving with patient Job, albeit the Lord would slay me,
yet will I trust in him. And thirdly, against the love of the world, s^t thou
the love of GOD, and of eternal life. And this have we spoken in general,
concerning the nature and order of these temptations.

Then.
Satan's first temptation is to Desperation: The time, and occasion of
temptation well observed by Satan.
wherein taking vantage of Christ's bodily wants, he labors to persuade him to
doubt and distrust that he was the Son of God; the time of it is first
noted, Then: namely, when he was hungry. Satan can very well observe the time,
and occasion of temptations; he tempted not Euah, when she was with Adam; he
tempted not David, when he was in trouble; he tempted not Peter in the
company of Christ; thus is he a crafty obseruer of times, places, and
conditions, fittest for his purpose; and we should look the more narrowly
unto him.

The Devil said unto him;
Satan is called the Devil, What a false and crafty Calumniator Satan is.
because he is a great Calumniator, and false accuser, a lying reporter: he
never reports good of God to any of his Saints, neither can he commend to God
the good of any of his Saints. If he know any good in them, he extenuates it,
or speaks evil of it; if he know any evil, he enlarges it: and so desirous
is he to speak evil of us, that rather then want, he will feign. Whereby we
may gather how glad he is when we give him any just matter whereupon to
accuse us. Cum magno calumniatore habemus negotium, si quaerit fingere quod non
est, August. de Temp. sermon. 234.
vt in Job, quanto magis obijcere quod est, We have much to do with a great
accuser, if he seek to feign that which is not, as he did in Job, how much
more to object against us that which is? By the smallest circumstances he ever
seeks, if he can make us odious to God, at least infamous among men: And
therefore seeing we have to do with so crafty a calumniator, we should always
take heed that we give him no advantage against us.

If thou be the Son of God.
HIs purpose here, In the left wing of Satan's battle fights desperation.
is to impugn that notable Oracle sounded from heaven at Christ's Baptism:
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: so said the Father, but this
cannot be, now, says Satan; that voice has been but a delusion: for, the
Son of God is the heir of all things, and has the Angels for his ministers
and Servants; but it is not so with thee; for, here thou art among wild
beasts, in great necessity, like to perish for hunger.

The temptation, Two branches of the first re^ration.
if we mark it narrowly, has two branches, and in them both Satan shootes
at one end, which is, to drive Christ to distrust, or else to doubt whether he
be the Son of God or no; or else to remedy his present hunger by converting
stones into bread; and so to limit the Lord, and bound his providence; as if by
no other means the Lord could sustain him, but by bread only; or as if he
could make bread no other way but of stones only: and therefore, neither will
our Savior grant the first, nor yet do the second, though otherwise he
could have done it, because both of them were proponed to urge him to
diffidence,

If thou be the Son of God.
Satan knew that Jesus was the Son of God, Satan of his great malice fights
against his known light.
and afterward he confesses it; yet such is the malice of his nature, that
he fights against his known light. He knew that God had forbidden Adam and
Euah to eat of the Tree: he knew that if they did eat they should die; yet
was he bold to persuade them the contrary. And that which by an Historical
Faith he believes himself, he persuades his wretched captives, either to
deny it, as a false thing; or to doubt of it, as an uncertain thing. He
believes there is a God, and trembles; but how many Fools are there in the
world, blinded by him, who have said in their hearts, There is no God. And his
Scholars profess points of Atheism, which himself dares not avouch.
He believes there is a Judgment to come, wherein greater torment abides
him, then yet is laid upon him; and yet he persuades his Infidels to scorn
and mock at it, as a thing which never will be. Thus as the Pharisees made
their Proselytes ten times more the children of the Devil then themselves;
so, Satan makes his scholars profess points of Atheism which himself durst
never avouch, and to misbeleeue some points of Religion, which he himself
believes to be true.

Now if Satan durst call this in doubt to Christ, Our Election (...) Satan.
whether or no he was the Son of God, what marvel if he dare call the like
in doubt unto us? His principal care is to impugn our Election: for this
cause tempts he man to sin, that man may furnish him arguments to prove that
man is not the Son of God. He could not be content that the first Adam should
live in Paradise, and far less that Adams posterity should be exalted to
inherit those heavenly places which he lost by pride: and therefore either by
tempting him to sin, does he prease to hold him back from the dignity of
the Son of God: or, if so he cannot, then troubles he him with doubting of
his Calling and Election, making him to mis-conceiue, that such a miserable man
as he cannot be the Son of God.

And the reasons, The argument in those tentations that Satan uses, is taken
from our wants.
which in this tentation commonly he uses are taken from our wants,
spiritual, or corporal: for, concerning spiritual desertions; wherein we
are troubled with the sight of our sins, and want, for the present, the sense
of mercy, then his reasoning is, It cannot be that thou art one of Gods Elect;
for, they are not ordained to wrath, but to mercy; if thou were so, then should
the favorable face of God be toward thee, and thou should not be vexed as
thou art, with the sense of his wrath.

In all this he is but a false deceiuer: First, from want of spiritual grace
in time of desertion.
for, was not the Lord Jesus troubled with the same temporal desertion, when
he cried; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46
and yet notwithstanding he was the beloved Son of God: and that this many
times is the manner of his working with his own children, he declares
himself; For a little time in mine anger have I forsaken thee, but with
everlasting compassion will I embrace thee.

Again, Next, from the want of worldly necessaries
out of the want of worldly necessaries, so he reasons with many; thou have
been so long in sickness, daily crying for deliverance, yet the Lord has not
heard thee; thou art vexed with poverty, and prayest every day for daily
bread, but it is not given unto thee; surely this is because thou art none of
his, he is not thy Father, neither has he any favor toward thee, nor cares
he for thee: but herein also he is a deceiuer.

For, The dignity of Gods sons stands not in abundance of worldly things.
the dignity of Gods Sons, stands not in the abundance of these worldly
things, neither is his favor or anger to be measured by them: for, so he might
have proved the rich Glutton to have been the Son of God, and Lazarus an
abject: and therefore let us beware upon our wants to infer any such
Conclusion, as this Sophist would enforce; that we are not beloved of God, if
we be hungry, and have not to ear; remember so was it with Christ: Comfort
against the want of worldly things.
if we have no earthly possession wherein to rest us, no more had Christ: if
our friends be turned into foes, so did Christ's familiar betray him: if our
kindred despise us for our poverty, so was it with our Lord; He came among
his own, and his own received him not. It is enough for us that the Lord is
become our portion, what ever he do with his moueables, which he dispenses
to his Children, more or less, as he sees may do them good; let us give him
glory, and rest in him: what can we want, that enioyes him, as our Father, in
Christ Jesus?

Now seeing this is the point wherein Satan labors chiefly to impugn us; How
we should confirm our selves in the assurance of our Election and Adoption.
to wit, that we are not the sons of God; we should by the contrary la^or
most carefully to confirm our selves in it, which we shall do, if we find
in our selves these two things: first, the Seal; next, the testimony of the
Spirit: for, if we be the Sons of God, we are sealed by the holy spirit of
promise, unto the day of redemption; and as a Signet leaves such an impression
in the Wax as is in it self; so the Spirit of God imprints in us the Image
and similitude of GOD. Naturally we bear the Image of the first Adam, but
being by grace made the Son of God, then do we bear the Image of the
second, another mind, another heart, other affections, words and actions are
given unto us, then those which we had by Nature: whereupon will follow the
other, to wit, the testimony of the Spirit, not only witnessing, but also
persuading our Consciences that we are the sons of God.

Command.
THis which Satan requires, We should do nothing for satan's command, though
it seem never so reasonable.
was such a thing as our Savior might have done, but he will not; learning us
never to do any thing for Satan's command, no, though in appearance it seem
never so tolerable: for, Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
light, and sometime speak a truth, or give a plausible counsel, or a
reasonable command; yea, do some good indeed as it seems to men, but he
never does any of these, but for a greater evil.

And lastly, Satan in his temptations, aymeth at this, to make us earthly
minded.
how Satan in his temptations, aims at this, to make the Sons of God
earthly minded, caring for things of this earth with distrust of God; If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones may be made bread, Mat. 4. 3.
as if no more were to be sought for by the Son of God but bread, bread; to
have the things of this World in abundance. And alas how many are so snared
with the love of things pertaining to this life, that they forget all care of
the life to come; no thought, no speech, no labor, but all for bread. A
lamentable thing, we profess the hope of an eternal life, and we affirm
that this is a perishing life, and yet we care for life eternal, Many care
for this life as if it were eternal, and for eternal life, as if in a moment
it might be obtained.
as if it would last but for one year; but we care for this life, as if it
would never come to an end. Will we look to David, and others of the Children
of GOD; what moved him may we think to pray seven times in the day; to water
his Couch with tears, when he lay down, and to prevent the morning watch to
prayer, but that he knew it was a difficult thing to get through the snares of
this life, and attain unto eternal life? But the professors of this age, live
as if it were nothing to come to heaven, and they were sure at length to get it
for a wish: and therefore they do live busy about many things with Martha,
pertaining to the body, but careless of that one thing, needful, commended in
Mary. From this blindness of mind the Lord deliver us.

VERSE 4. And Jesus answered, and said.
HEre the Lord Jesus repelleth this first temptation of Satan by a testimony
of holy Scripture, Christ's reply to Satan's first tentation.
which conveniently he alleges out of the eight of Deutronomie; there Moses
shows the Israelites how that when ordinary food failed them in the
Wilderness, God fed them with Manna from heaven, to declare unto them and all
others, that it is not by bread man lives only, but by the word of God: and
therefore will our Savior say to Satan; thou do wrong to restrain the
providence of God to this particular means of Bread, seeing both the written
Word testifies, and GOD by his Word, has declared, that any means is good
enough to preserve the life of man, if God by his Word grant his blessing unto
it; yea, his word without all means is able to do it.

It is written.
OF this first we learn, The word is the sword of the spirit by which we
should fight against Satan.
how in our spiritual warfare, we should use the written word, as being the
sword of that spirit, by which Satan is confounded. Of this first, Papists are
convinced, who debar the poor people from the comfort of the word: alleging
it pertaines to churchmen, and not to simple people to read the Scriptures:
whereas by the contrary, as Chrysostom witnesses, it is much more necessary
for them, then for the other. Christin Math. hom. 2.
Qui enim versantur in medio, and vulnera quotidie accipiunt magis indigent
medicamine: Papists convinced who take the use of the word from the people.
for they who comes out in public, and are every day wounded, has most need
of medicine: yea, how can they fight as the good soulders of Christ, seeing the
armor of GOD is taken from them, by such as pretends to be their governors: so
that in effect, as if they were in covenant with Satan, they deliver the poor
people of God armourlesse unto him, handling them as the Philistimes did the
Israelites, who left not a Smith among them, to make them a weapon, that so
they being armourlesse, might more easily be kept in subjection.

And next, (...) upon themselves a famine of the word.
careless professors are also reproved, who being commanded to search the
scripture, that in them they may find eternal life; and having now in the
reformed church, liberty granted them to do so, yet will not use it, but
willingly interdite themselves from the comfort of the word of the Lord, Amos
8. 11.
threatens the famine of the word as a great plague. Chris. ibid.
Quid igitur infoelicius, quam vt, quod deus in panam minatur, hoc tu iam
sponte in caput tuum attrahas: what more miserable thing can be then this, to
draw that willingly upon thine own head, which GOD has threatened as a curse?

Man lives not by bread only.
THis answer has two parts; Two parts of Christ's answer.
Whereof the first is Negative, denying that necessity which Satan alleged:
the other is affirmative. The first is here: wherein our Lord does not deny,
that man lives by bread, if the Lord use it as a mean to nourish him, but that
man lives not by bread only.

Of this first we learn, Of the first we learn that second means ordained by
God, should not be despised.
that the second means, appointed by God, are not to be despised: for we see
our Savior in this disputation with Satan, excludes them not: for in the
right use of them, the power, wisdom, providence, and goodness of God are
praised, who has provided so many good things, for the good of man, and has
given power unto things without life, to help the life of man. And this I
mark, first, for weak Christians, who are so far abused by Satan sometime,
that they think it not lawful for them to eat and drink, and to nourish
that body, This serves first for weak Christians who through error of
conscience defraud their bodies of necessary food.
wherein sin is harbored against the Lord: it is true indeed every
christian ought to have a care, that the nourishment of the body, become not a
nourishment of sin in the body, but so that thou run not to the other
extremity, to account that evil, which God has ordained for thy good.
Certainly as Satan enuies that thou should enjoy the favor of thy GOD; so
enuies he that thou should enjoy the comfortable use of any creature that
ever God made: yea, even of meat and drink. Where he cannot tempt thee to the
abuse of it by intemperancie, he does what he can to defraude thee of it,
working upon thy weak conscience, makes thee to conceive a scrupple, where
there is none, and binds thee there, where God has made thee free. Next for
idle men who neglect the ordinary means by which they should live.
And next the use of the means is marked, for idle men, who are desirous to
live, wanting nothing necessary for their life, but they will not work: these,
as afterward follows, are tempters of God, despising the means, they will
either be fed miraculously by the hand of God, as Israel was in the wilderness,
or else impiously will seek their food by unlawful shifts, out of the hands
of Satan.

Next we learn that howeuer the second means are to be used, And yet we
should not trust in the second means, but in God.
yet are we not to trust in them: as if it were they, and not Gods blessing,
that did help our life. Physic is good, but because Asa trusted in it, it
could not profit him. And flesh is good for nourishment, but because Israel
thought that their life was in it, GOD slew them by the same mean by which
they thought to live: and therefore the Lord to teach men that the virtue is
not in the means, Who sometime works without means, sometime by small
means, and sometime makes the means of life instruments of death.
but in his blessing. Sometime he works without means, as when he made
light without the Sun, fertility of the earth without rain; when he kept the
life of Moses without meat, and made corns grow unto Ezechia without sowing:
and sometimes to small means he gives great virtue; as when he made one
pair of shoes, and one suit of raiment, last Israel forty years. There were
many in the days of Elisha, who had more oil and meal then the widow of
Sarepta had, but wanted the blessing; she had, and therefore was theirs spent,
when her portion, being less, remained to the end.

Beside this, The nature of the second means proves that our life is not by
them.
the very nature of the means which we use, may teach us, it is not they that
preserues our life; for they being things without life themselves, and such as
by time putrifies and rots, what life can they give or keep unto us? Or if they
be things endued with life, we see that they must first loose their life,
before they become helps of our life, to teach us that howeuer by them we
live; yet in them is not that virtue, that conserues our life.

Last of all, Experience also confirms the same.
experience confirms it; if bread preserved the life, then they who are best
fed would be most lively, but we see the contrary: more lusty was Daniel upon
his potage, then the other children were on the kings delicates. David in his
old days wanted no couerings nor garments, but none of them could get heat to
his body. We see by experience, some consuming more then may content other
three, yet in the midst of wealth they dwyne away; and poor laborers feeding
on the refuse of bread and water, more strong and lively then they: all these
do declare, it is not the means which preserve the life, but how it is
preserved he declares in the affirmative part that follows.

But by every word that comes out, etc.
THat is, This is made more clear out of the second part of Christ's answer.
by every decree and ordinance of God: any mean which he appoints is
sufficient to nourish thee. If he decree that thou live without bread, it
shall be so with thee as with Moses, and Elias: or if he say the word, that a
handful of meal shall serve thee for a long time, so it shall be. And hereof
first we learn, how that the life of man hangs on the word of God, to
continue, or to cut it short, at his pleasure: Thou turnest man to destruction:
Psalm. 90. 3.
again thou say, return ye sons of Adam. But alas, how few considers
this, to give unto the Lord the praise of the continuance of their life, The
great stupiditie of men, who rebel against God, of whom they hold their life.
by living to him: but by the contrary, in the blindness and stupiditie of their
minds, rebels against him, by whom alonely they live. A fearful ingratitude:
man can give service to man, of whom he holds his land, and can not give
service to God, of whom he holds his life. The Sidoneans would not make war
with Herod, because they were nourished by his lands, yet man fears not offend
the Lord, from whose hand every day he receives nourishment, without which he
could not live.

And next we learn here how to remedy our faithless cares, Comfort when
ordinary means fails.
when either ordinary means fails us, or can not profit us: as when in
sickness, medicine helps not: in poverty, ordinary means relieues not our
want: in trouble no appearance of deliverance, shall we therefore despair? No,
far be it from us, but remember it is not by bread, that is, by the ordinary
means that man lives (only) but by the word of God, and therefore let us rest
in God, and trust in him, who raises the dead; and many timesmakes the second
means to fail us, that so we may be chased to run unto himself.

MATH. 4. VER. 5. Then the Devil took.
Follows, the second Temptation. Wherein Satan keeps a course plain
contrary to the first: In the right wing of Satan's battle stands Presumption.
in the former he tempted to Desperation, thy poor and indigent estate proves
thou can not be the Son of God: in this he tempts to presumption. If thou
be sure that thou art the Son of God, then do what thou will, nothing can
harm thee. Thus Satan assaults not the godly always with one temptation, but
can craftily change them for his own advantage: such as he cannot draw to one
extremity, Satan changes tentations for his own advantage.
he labors to draw to another: and albeit by this craft he prevailed nothing
with the Son of GOD: yet does he many time by it speed among men. There are
some whom he can not move to be careless in religion, and them he tempts to
the other extremity, to be superstitious in religion: some whom he cannot
induce to shake off conscience, yet he makes scrupulous in conscience,
doubting where they need not; and so of other temptations: for the which we
have need to be armed with the armor of God on the right hand and on the left.

This temptation Saint Luke makes the third: S. Matthew the second: but the
difference is nothing, for in the Evangelists describing this History of
Christ, do not so much stand upon the precise order of the times, as upon the
substance, and matter of things which were done.

In the first assault we have seen how our Lord did overthrow Satan's first
Captain, Satan's second captain overthrown also by our Lord.
Desperation, with his followers. Now we shall see how in the other wing of
Satan's army, he ouercomes his second Captain, Presumption, with his
followers.

Wherein the time first is noted, After victory in any temptation let us stand
ready for a new battle.
Then: that this temptation ensued upon the end of the former; learning us
after victory gotten in any battle against Satan, not to fall into
security, but to stand still in our armor, expecting another assault: In
bodily conflicts, security after victory has many times brought destruction
to mighty armies: the Amalekites (sitting down to eat and drink, after the
burning of Ziklag, suddenly in their security, overthrown by the sword of
David) may stand for a proof of it: but in the spiritual battle it is much
more dangerous.

Secondly, Christ's transportation whether mental or corporal.
the place is described; the holy City, Jerusalem: where first we have to
consider, how it is that Satan carries him unto it, whether was this
transportation mental or corporal? The first I deny; for, it could not be,
that our Saviors imagination could be so far abused, as that he should
think he was carried, when he was not carried; nothing in him could be
deceived. All his tentations (as I said) were external only, and proceeded
not to the moving or affecting any of his internal faculties; and therefore I
agree unto the second, that this transportation was corporal.

Where, Offenses that may arise of Christ's corporal
if it be offensive to any of Gods Children to hear that our Saviors blessed
body should be handled and carried from place to place by that unclean Spirit,
transportation removed.
let them consider that this was done, not against his will, but with his own
will: as afterward willingly he was lead, by Satan's members, like a sheep to
the slaughter, so now willingly is he carried by Satan's self, to be tempted
of him; and that for the greater glory of his own name, greater confusion of
Satan, and greater comfort of his children.

The Lord Jesus permits the adversary to handle his holy body, In it the
invincible power of our Lord is made manifest.
to carry it, for a time, to such places, as might yield him greatest vantage
to tempt it; he permits him to speak what he pleased, and to show what
objects he could for his allurement; yea, he is content to be delivered into
the hands of wicked men, Satan's instruments, and gives them liberty to abuse
his blessed body, to spit upon it, to buffet it, to scourge it, to crucify it,
and yet for all that he could do, either by himself, or by his members, he
can never prevail against the Lord Jesus. Certainly the more liberty Satan
had granted to him, in all this, the greater was his own shame and confusion;
and the more manifest the glory of our invincible captain, who cannot be
overcome, nay not when he is in the hands of his very enemies.

Again, Comfort for Gods children, whose bodies are afflicted by Satan for a
time.
this is for the comfort of Gods children, for sometime power is given to
Satan over their bodies, to afflict them, as we see for a time in Job, or for
a time to possess them, as he did the body of Magdalen (for albeit then she
was not called: yet even then was she an elect woman) least therefore the
children of God should at any time be discouraged with the like of this, to
take it for an argument of reprobation, or final delivery of them unto Satan,
that the Lord for a time permits him to have power our their bodies, the Lord
Jesus who would in all things be tempted as we are, except sin, did taste of
this temptation also for our comfort.

This being spoken concerning the manner of his carrying: The place of this
temptation is Jerusalem, the holy City.
now we come to the place, which is the holy City Jerusalem; and more
particularly, the very Temple, which stood in the sight of all Jerusalem,
Satan sets him on the platform of it, wherein were turrets with pinacles on
their tops, and this place he takes as most convenient for his purpose, thou
have lurked too long as a private man, among this people: if thou be the Son
of GOD, that promised Messiah, the king of Israel, here is the time and place
to show thy self in the sight of Jerusalem, all the people shall admire thee,
and acknowledge thee for to be the Son of God, if thou cast thy self down
among them: which easily thou may do, without all peril or harm, seeing
the Lord has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee.

Concerning the place, No place on earth free from the temptations of Satan.
beside that which we marked in the first temptation, how that there is no
place so holy on earth, wherein we can be free from the temptations of this
unholy spirit: In Paradise he tempted Adam; at Christ's table he tempted Judas;
and in the very Temple, dedicated to the service of God, how often find we by
experience, that he dare tempt us? Yea, in most holy places, he is a most
busy tempter.
making us either to turn the house of God into an house of merchandise, while
he draws away our minds to think upon worldly affairs: or else into a den
of thieves, whilst he carries our Eyes to wander after vanity, that so he
may infect the heart: or else, at least, he casts upon us the spirit of
slumbring, that we cannot with reverence hear the word of the Lord. Satan is
an enemy to every good action, standing always at Iosuahs right hand to
hinder him; but specially does he resist us in the Exerc^ses of the Word and
Prayer, and seeks to pollu^e us most in those places, wherein we should be
most sanctified, and therefore as the Jews in the building of Jerusalem, had
their weapon in the one hand, and their worke-toole in the other; so we, when
we come to edify our selves in the most holy Faith, have need to have an eye
continually upon our adversary, and our weapon ready to resist him.

And set him on a pinnacle of the Temple.
FOr what end Satan set our Lord there, The Lord casts down that he may raise
up: Satan by the contrary raises up, that he may cast down.
is evident out of that which follows, that he might from thence cast him
down. Satan in his working is contrary unto the Lord; for, the Lord casts
down, to the end he may raise up; so did he with S. Paul, first, he cast him
to the ground, and then raised him up to the honor of an Apostle: but Satan
if he raise up any man, it is for this end, that he may cast him down. It is
true, preferment comes neither from the East, nor from the West, but from the
Lord, yet such as come to high places by evil means are said to be raised up
by Satan. It were good for men to abhor such preferments with those famous
Martyrs, who when offers of honorable Offices were made to them, answered;
Nolumus honorem vnde nobis nascetur ignominia; we will none of that honor
which breeds us ignominy: for, that honor whereunto men come with an evil
conscience, shall assuredly end in shame.

If thou be.
THis tentation (as we said) is to Presumption and Vainglory. The pith of
this second tentation.
Before men thou shall have great honor, if by this Miracle thou manifest thy
self the Son of God: and at Gods hand thou need fear none evil; for
since thou art his Son, thou may do what thou will, he will not let thee
perish.

This temptation to presumption in this age preuailes mightily over many, The
temptation of presumption prevails greatly in this age.
who abuse Gods mercy, and turn the grace of God into wantonness, conceiting
with themselves, that because God is merciful, and Christ has dyed for
sinners, and they have received the seals of the Covenant, and are now by
adoption the Sons of God, therefore they may do what they list. And though
they cast not their bodies from on high to the ground, being loath to endanger
their natural lives, yet they spare not to make daily shipwreck of their
Souls and Consciences, by casting themselves down headlong into every snare
of the Devil. A lamentable thing that the death of Christ should be abused to
entertain the life of sin: Christ's death abused to nourish the life of sin.
he died to abolish sin, and destroy the works of the Devil, and miserable
man will take boldness to sin the more freely because Christ dyed for him.
Where desperation enters all men see and abhor it, but though this
presumption possess the greatest multitude in this generation, yet are they
few who perceive it.

The other branch of this temptation (as I noted) tends to a seeking of
vainglory before men, Satan's tentations to vainglory, customable among men.
while he would provoke our Savior to manifest by unlawful means, that he
was the Son of God. And this is Satan's ordinary temptation, whereby he
assaults such as are endued with graces above others. If the Apostle S. Paul
had need of counterpoyse against pride, alas what have we? Many does Satan
so bewitch with a love of their own glory, that rather then it shall not be
manifested, they will blaze it abroad themselves in most vainglorious manner,
and so unawares they cast down themselves before Satan; Pro. 25. 27
for, to seek thine own glory is not glory.

But this is strange that Satan Satan can not hurt us except we help him.
having power to set our Lord on the top of the Temple, puts not to his own
hand to cast him down, but tempts him to cast himself down: thus we see how
in the greatest liberty Satan has, he is always bound and brideled that he
cannot do what he would: if he get a commission or power, it is ever with
limitation, as we see in Job: lo he is in thine hand, but save his life. And
except we our selves give him armor, he cannot hurt: for, it is by man
himself that he gets at any time vantage over man. Let us praise the power of
God that restraines him: let us mark the impotence of Satan: let us confirm
our hearts by grace to resist him, so shall he never be able to hurt us.
Satan's proper voice is, Cast down thy self.


Last of all, as here his voice is, Cast thy self down; so is it in the next
assault, Fall down, and worship me. This is the proper voice of Satan: Cast
thy self down. Never has he any word for himself or others, to bid them
mount up to the Lord, but always to draw them down. He cast himself down
from heaven to hell, and if he might would cast down all Gods Children from
the state of grace, into the state of condemnation. Oh, if we could remember
that in effect, this is the sum of all Satan's temptations, Cast thy self
down, seeking no other thing, Still seeking man's disgrace and destruction.
but our downe-fall, disgrace, and utter destruction. And yet alas, how many
are bewitched by him, to cast down themselves, and wallow in every puddle of
iniquity, doing those works of uncleanness, which are base, and most
unseemly for a Christian, who in regard both of his first and second creation,
is an honorable creature.

For it is written
We have heard what Satan craved in this temptation: The reason used by
Satan to strengthen his most unreasonable desire.
now follows the reason whereby he would allure our Lord to yield unto him.
The end of all is, to take out of Christ's heart the fear of any inconvenience
that might befall him by this precipitation of himself.

And this is Satan's customable policy also to steal out of the heart, the
fear of judgment, which he knows God works in his own, as a curb to
keep them from sin. If you eat of the Tree, whereof I have forbidden you,
He seeks to remove godly fear, that he may bring men to a remediles, most
fearful estate.
(says the Lord) ye shall dye. No (says Satan) though ye eat of it, ye
shall not dye. Blessed is he that teaches his heart continually to fear: Let
us therefore keep this fear, that it may keep us from sin. It was Joseph's
argument to his Brethren, I fear God, and therefore dare do you no wrong.
Fear is called by Gregory, Greg. moral. lib. 6.
Anchora cordis, the Anchor of the heart, which holds fast, that it be not
driven away by the restless waves of temptations.

Now in this testimony we have first to see how Satan abuses it: This
testimony of Scripture is falsely used by Satan in three respects.
and next how were should use it for our comfort. His abusing of it I gather in
three things: first, this is a great abuse, to draw any part of Gods Word to
serve him in tempting a man unto sin, seeing it is true of it all, which S.
John speaks of one part of it; 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
My Babes, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not.

And in this his miserable captives That he makes any place of Scripture to
confirm a sin.
when they use any sentence of holy Scripture of strengthen themselves, or
others, in a sin: so the Drunkard abuses that saying of the Apostle to
cheer up his heart to intemperance: Drink no longer water, but use a little
wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities: whereas if the
Apostle were now alive, How Atheists, Satan's disciples, do learn at him.
he would change that precept to our belly-gods, and give them the contrary:
Drink no longer wine, but use more water, not only for conscience sake, but
even for the stomachs sake: for Intemperance destroys even the natural life.
The idle man again, to confirm himself in his sin, abuses that saying of
our Savior; Care not for the morrow: and many think the less of adultery and
murder, because David was guilty of them, and yet a man commended of God: not
remembering that the virtues of good men are registered for our imitation, but
their sins are recorded for our humiliation Vt casus maiorum, Greg. moral.
lib. 2.
sit tremor minorum; that meaner men should tremble at great men's falls. This is
a piece of Satan's devilish divinity, to confirm thy self in a sin, by
any thing that ever thou heardst or readst in the Word of God.

That reciting such a place of Scripture as reproves his sin, he is touched
with no remorse.
his abusing of holy Scripture, is evident in this, that rehearsing such a
place of holy Scripture as describes the office of Elect Angels, and the
blessed estate of Elect men, who are protected of God, by the ministry of
Angels, and so might very well have remembered him of that first happy estate,
and of his present unhappy condition whereinto he had fallen by pride, yet he
makes no profit by it at all: he is not touched with any remorse for his sin,
nor once moved so much as to lament, according as he had cause. Alas, that
ever I fell from the fellowship of those holy Angels. Alas, that I should abide
in this desperate estate, as to impugn the glory of God, which cannot be
oppugned, and to fight against his Saints, over whom I shall never prevail.
Nay, no such thought or motion enters into his heart.

This proceeds from his great obstinacy in evil, This proceeds from his
obstinacy, which lets him not repent.
which locks him up in final impenitencie, in that sin which is against the
holy Ghost, that neither can he, nor will he repent, but contrary his light,
wilfully, and of malice he sets himself always a contradicter of the Lord.
These are Viae Daemonum praesumptio, and obstinatio, the ways of damned
Devils, Presumption and Obstinacy: Propter praesumptionem stare non potuit,
propter obstinationem resurgere non potest; By presumption he fell, by
obstinacy he cannot rise.
for presumption he could not stand, for obstinacy he cannot rise: the one
casts him into the sin of shameful Apostasy; the other holds him under the
sin of fearful impenitencie: and these are the sins into the which Satan
labors most to draw men, finding by his own experience, they are most forcible
to bring men to the fellowship of his condemnation. We cannot deny we are
guilty of the first, which is Apostasy; the Lord preserve us from the second,
which is impenitencie.

And herewithall let us acknowledge the great love of GOD toward us; Gods
great mercy to us worthy to be marked.
that whereas Apostate Angels have fallen, and shall never rise again; and
reprobate men have sinned, but cannot repent, the Lord has reserved mercy for
us, renewing and raising us up daily by the grace of repentance.

O what a mercy is it! His Grace has put a difference between us and others,
where there was no difference by Nature.
we were once plunged with them, into the same deep, but the Lord stretches
out his hand unto us, to pull us out from among them, and to bring us to an
happy fellowship with himself and his holy Angels. Let us rejoice in this
kindness of our God: let us be thankful for it: let us daily delight in this
grace of Repentance, lamenting our apostasies, recounting our fore-passed
sins, in the bitterness of our hearts, that so the sense of peace and
reconciliation with God; in Christ Jesus, may be increased in us.

And again, Such as hear their sins condemned by the word, and are not moved,
are here convinced.
here is a warning to all senseless and stupid hearers of the Word of God, who
when they hear their sins condemned, are either not moved at all, or else if
they be moved, are not mended. So Pharaoh had some motion, and prayed Moses to
pray for him, but it was without continuance, being choked by the hardness of
his heart. Achab rent his clothes, and put on Sackcloath at the threatening of
Elias, but his humiliation continued not. Foelix trembled when Paul preached,
but he proceeded no further. Yet even these may condemn the senseless
hearers of this age; who, after so long hearing, have been so little moved.
And those come ouer-neare unto the nature of Satan, who is so confirmed in his
sin, that no conviction, made by the clear light of the Word of God can move
him to repent.

It is far otherwise with the godly: How the children of God tremble at the
rebukes of his word.
if the Lord speak they tremble: if his Word condemn any sin in them, they
fall down and mourn before him, till he forgive it. So were the Publicanes
moved, at the preaching of John the Baptist, to cry, What shall we do? So were
the Jews pricked in their hearts at the preaching of Peter, Acts 2. 37.
saying; What shall we do? So cried the Iaylor to Paul and Silas; Act. 16. 30.
What must I do to be saved? And good I^fias his heart melted at the hearing
of the Law. Fruits which are unripe will not easily fall, though the tree be
shaken by the hand of a strong man, but those which are ripe may be pulled by
the hand of a Child: Ita in cordibus electorum sine magna difficultate,
Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 6
efficax est verbum gratiae, a quocunque tandem annuntietur; The word of Grace
is powerful in the hearts of the Elect, without any great difficulty, by
whosoever it be preached. When Augustines hearers with great applause commended
his preaching, but mourned not for their sins; it was a notable answer he
gave them: Folia haec sunt, nos fructus quaerimus; these are the leaves, we
seek for fruit. And the like has Chrysostom; Si haec audientes, doletis,
maximas me debere vobis gratias confiteor; quis est enim, qui me laetificat,
nisi qui contristatur ex me? If ye, hearing these things, are grieved, I
confess that I am greatly endebted unto you: for, who is he that makes me
cheerful, but he who is made heavy and sorrowful by me? Both of them
teaching us, that then only is Gods word profitable unto us; when it works
in us that godly sorrow that causes repentance to salvation, never to be
repented of.

And thirdly, Thirdly, he abuses Scripture, in mutilating of it.
his abuse of the Scripture appears in his mutilation of it: for, he leaves
out these words, In all thy ways; because they made against him: for, it is
not the way of a godly man to precipitate himself from a height, but to come
down some ordinary way. And this is also a piece of Satan's skill, in tempting
men, to hide from them that which may restrain them from sin, and only to
let them see that which may embolden them unto it.

And herein also we learn how we should use the promises of Gods protection
to our comfort, The promises of God can be no comforts to us, if we neglect the
condition whereupon they are made.
and not abuse them to the offense of our God. It is true, God has promised
protection to his Children; but all his promises are ever with a condition,
that we keep ourselves within the ways of God: The Lord is with you while
ye be with him. Satan knows this very well, that so long, as men walk in
the way of God, the Lord is a hedge unto them, and his Angels are as a guard to
keep them, and therefore his first care is to draw them out of the way of God,
that so spoiling them of their protector, they may become a pray unto him: this
is clear in that policy which Balaam taught Balak, and we may see by
experience, it is the daily practice of Satan.

Now, In the right use of this testimony, we consider two things: First, the
great glory and majesty of God.
having seen how Satan abuses this testimony, it remains that we
consider the right use of it. Where, first of all, we have to consider the
great majesty, and glorious power of the Lord our God, who has under his
charge these armies of innumerable Angels: for, thousand thousands stand before
him, Dan. 7. 10.
and ten thousand thousands minister unto him. Psalm. 68. 17
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousands of Angels, and the Lord is
among them, as in the Sanctuary of Sinai. How far inferior the most
glorious Courts of Kings is to the Lords Court.
We admire the glory of worldly Princes, when we see them come forth, backed
with their strong Guards and pompous train: for, Solomon says, The glory of a
King is in the multitude of his Subjects. But if we did see this host of the
living God, wherein are two millions of strong warriors, any one whereof is
able to overthrow the army of the most puissant King of the earth, as was
declared on Sennacheribs army, then would we say he must be a great and
glorious God, who has so great and worthy warriors, and all of them of his
own making, under his charge.

Again, Secondly, the fatherly care and providence of God: toward his Children.
the fatherly care and goodness of the Lord to his children comes here to be
considered: his providence it self is sufficient enough to preserve and
protect us, and yet for help of our weakness, he has given us his Angels,
as ministering Spirits, to attend upon us; and that in such sort, that as Nurses
carry young Children in their arms, or otherwise holds them by both their
hands, till they may go forward at their own leisure, upholding them when
they are ready to fall; even so has the Lord given charge to his Angels, with
their hands to lift his Children, least at any time they dash their foot
against a stone; otherwise it were not possible for us to step one step
forward, without some great inconvenience befalling us, by Satan's malice, if
the protection of the Lord our God, by the ministry of his Angels made us not
sure.

And Jesus answered, and said unto him.
HEre follows our Saviors reply to this Temptation: Satan should always be
refused, and resisted.
wherein (first) we see that as often as Satan impugnes, so often our Lord
defends; ever contradicting and refusing him: teaching us also to do the like.
Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: such as resist not when they are
tempted, declare themselves not to be Christ's Soldiers, but Satan's Captives,
2 Timothy 2. 26
snared of the Devil, and taken of him at his will.

Secondly, The best weapon whereby we can fight against him is the sword of
the Spirit.
our Savior here, by his example, recommends unto us the sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word, as a most necessary weapon in our spiritual warrefare
against Satan. As it were a great ouer-sight in a Soldier, who knows he
can at no time go forth but he must fight, to go forth without his armor;
so is it much more in a Christian. Where wilfully men neglect to get knowledge
by the Word, what marvel Satan easily snare them both in Religion and
manners? They have rejected (says Jeremy) the word of the Lord, and what
wisdom then can be in them? But of this we spoke in his reply to the first
temptation.

Thirdly, Scripture should be expounded by Scripture.
he answers by Scripture; not to oppose Scripture vn-Scripture, for it cannot
be contrary unto it self: but to prove that to be the wrong sense of
Scripture, which Satan would have enforced upon it: and out of this also we
learn how the best way to attain unto the true sense of Scripture, is to
confer Scripture with Scripture.

Thou shall not tempt.
THe sum of our Lords answer is; The sum of our Saviors answer to this
temptation.
As for the truth of that oracle alleged by thee, I doubt nothing of it, so
long as his Children keep his ways they are sure of his Fatherly protection:
now that this is not the way of God, to neglect the ordinary means appointed
by God, that is but a tempting of God, expressly forbidden in the word of God.

As for the forbidden tempting of God, How men tempt God.
men fall into it many manner of ways; sometime they In his providence.
as Israel did in the Wilderness, limiting the holy one. Sometime In his
mercy.
as they who cast themselves into unnecessary dangers, under hope that God will
deliver them. In his Justice.
And By neglecting the ordinary means.
But most

MATH. 4 VER. 8. Again, the Devil took him up.
Satan now perceiving both the wings of his army discomfited by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand, Both the wing^ of Satan's army being
discomfited, he now comes forward with his maine battle.
and on the left, wherewith our Lord resisted, comes now forward with his maine
battle: wherein stands the love of the world, with the pleasures and
preferments thereof; but this he does with no better success then he had in
the former: for, this Captain also, with his Fifty, or rather with his
Legion, is consumed by the fire of our true Elijah, the only Son of God,
having in most singular manner, Jehovah, for his strong God and Father. In him
I say* did the fiery graces of the holy Ghost burn so fervently, that all his
powers were enflamed with a love of the glory of God, and salvation of his
brethren, and no place for the love of the world was left in him.

In this temptation, Satan again seeks vantage by the place.
as in the former, the Adversary takes vantage of the place: for, now he
carries him from the Temple, to the top of a mountain, Number. 23.
as Balak King of Moab changed his place three times, thinking to get Israel
cursed in one place, when he could not in another, but all in vain: so here
does Satan, but in vain also.

And here we have first the onset made by Satan, Christ tempted here at the
eye with a fair show: at the ear with fair offers.
to be considered: Secondly, the repulse given by our Lord. In the onset we
have first to see, how he tempts our Saviors eye with a show of the glory of
worldly kingdoms: Secondly, how he tempts his ear, with an offer of them all
unto him: And thirdly, upon what condition; If thou will fall down and worship
me. By this temptation of worldly things* pleasant to the eye, did he entangle
our first Parents; by this, since then, has he snared and wounded all their
posterity; and by it now, as his strongest temptation, does he hope to
prevail against the Lord Jesus, but (as we have said) the success is not
according to his expectation.

And he showed him.
HOw it is that Satan could show our Lord all the kingdoms of the world, How
it is that Satan presented to the eye of our Lord all the kingdoms of the
world.
we are not curiously to enquire, seeing by the subtlety of his wit, and
knowledge gotten by long experience; he being now almost six thousand years
old, he can do many things, which we cannot understand: for if a man by the
quicknes of his wit, has found out the way to present a view of the whole
world in a Map; or to let a man see himself represented in a glass, if this
I say man can do by the help of nature, who for knowledge, is but a child,
if he be compared with Angels, and for experience but of yesterday; why shall
we think it strange to hear that Satan could make a real representation in
the Air, of all the glorious kingdoms of the world, which we think he did.

But howeuer he did it, One of Satan's customable policies, is to infect the
heart by the eye.
certain it is he presents to our Lord a glorious worldly sight; for we will
never think that he made him believe, he saw that which he saw not: and his
end in presenting this pleasant object to the eye was, out of all question, to
assay if he could allure his heart with the love thereof: for this is one of
his customable temptations, whereby he has greatly prevailed among the sons
of men, by the eye to encroach upon the heart. He deceived Euah, by looking on
the Apple, pleasant to the eye: he deceived the Sons of God, who were of the
line of Seth, by looking on the daughters of men, who were of the house of
Cain: he deceived Achan, by looking on a wedge of Gold, and a goodly Babilonish
garment: he deceived David, by looking on the beauty of Bathsheba: but so
could he not prevail over our Lord: for neither was his nature mutable from
good, as was Euah, in her best estate, far less infected with a corrupt
inclination to evil, by exterior objects, as was David's; and therefore could
not this temptation work upon him.

But as for us, And therefore if we would keep the heart, we should first have
a care to keep the eye.
we have great need to arm our selves against it, by reason of our inhabitant
corruption which is easily wakened by exterior objects, unless by holy
discipline we keep and observe our senses, with no less holy care then Lot
kept his in Sodom, whose righteous soul was vexed, but not delighted by
hearing and seeing the unrighteous words and deeds of the Sodomites. Potiphars
wife first cast her eyes upon Joseph, Augu.
Prima adulterii tela oculorum sunt, the senses, especially the eye, says
Gregory, sunt quasi quaedam viae mentis, per quas for as veniat, by which it
comes after a sort out of the body to view things which are without: by them,
Gregor. lib. 21. Moral.
quasi per fenestras exteriora animus respicit respiciens concupiscit: and then
does death come in at our windows, when by our eyes, concupiscence of things
unlawful is wakened in our souls; and therefore did Nazian, in his
lamentations wish that his eyes and ears should never open, Nazian in
deploratio. calam. animae sua.
but unto that which is good, Malis autem vtrunque sua sponte clauderetur; and
Job protested, that he suffered not his heart to walk after his eye: but this
will require both circumspection, and earnest prayer with David, Lord turn
away my eyes from regarding vanity.

Secondly, Satan speaks of earthly kingdoms but not of the heavenly, which
he has lost.
Satan shows our Lord the glory of worldly kingdoms, but he can speak
nothing to the commendation of the heavenly kingdom: once he was a partaker of
it, but he lost it through his pride, he knows it will never be his again,
and therefore he has no delight to speak of it. This I mark for worldlings,
that they may know of what spirit they are, Worldlings by their talk declares
that they are of the same spirit.
who when the heaven is offered to them in the Gospel, and has no delight
neither to hear nor speak of it: all their talk is of the earth; surely even
their speech bewrayes them; for he that is of the earth, Gregor. Moral. lib. 7.
sanctis viris insolens est and intolerabile, quicquid illud non sanat, quod
intus amant: but unto men who are truly holy, every word which sounds not of
that, which inwardly they love, is not only unaccustomed, but also intolerable.

And thirdly, Satan's great subtlety in showing the glory of worldly
kingdoms, but not their misery.
here is Satan's craft discovered; he shows him the glory of worldly
kingdoms, but not the vanity, and misery, that follows them: In appearance it
seems to be Paradisus bonorum: but in very deed it is, as Chrysostom called
it Euripus malorum: but Satan like a crafty fisher, makes a show of the
bait, but hides the hook: so he in all his temptations makes a vain show of
the apparent pleasure or profit a man may have by sin, but lets him not feel
the terror, or pain, comes by it, till he be snared in it.

Fourthly, Earthly kingdoms may be represented not so the heavenly.
we mark here a difference between the kingdoms of this world and the
kingdom of heaven: the kingdoms of this world may be shadowed, and
represented, they are seen, and perceived by our senses: yea, the glancing
show of their glory, does far exceed the substance, which in effect any man
has ever found in them; All the glory of flesh, is but like the flower of the
field, and but a fantasy: so S. Paul speaking of the great pomp of Agrippa,
and Bernice, says, they came down, (...), but what figure can represent the
glory of that heavenly kingdom as it is? None at all, 1 Cor. 29.
the eye saw never, the ear heard never, neither is the heart of man able to
understand, those things which God has prepared for them that love him. Here
he comforts men by things which he has made, there he shall satisfy them
with himself. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 18.
Deus est vita beatae, non de his quae condidit, sed de seipso verissimus
largitor. So it is indeed, Sed nemo dormiens solemn intuetur: but as no man
while he sleeps can behold the sun, and quae putat se videre figmenta sunt,
and those things which in his sleep he thinks he sees, are but plain
fictions: so cannot a man in whom is no more but the spirit of the world, taste
of that glory which is to come. Relinquamus itaque vmbram, qui solemn
quaerimus, deseramus fumum, qui lumen sequimur: let us therefore forsake this
shadow, if we be seeking the bright shining sun: let us go forth from this
smoke, and darkness, if we be following the clear light. In a word, as we are
taught by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 14
let us awake from our sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall
give light unto us.

And this is yet further confirmed, Vanity of earthly pleasures, proved by
their brevity.
when it is said, he showed them in the twinkling of an eye. It was a glorious
show, but it lasted not; a short time tryes the vanity of al earthly pleasures,
they quickly vanish, and which is worthy the marking, if they did continue, of
pleasures they would turn into pains, and sore displeasures: let us not
therefore judge of them by the present show, wherein Satan may deceive us, but
by their continuance, which Satan is not able to give. Heb. 11. 25.
The pleasures of sin endure but for a season, like the calmness of the
sea; like the fullness of the Moon, like the fairness of winter, so is all
the prosperity and pleasure of this life: apparet ad momentum disparet in
perpetuum, Gregor. Moral. lib. 15.
for a moment it appears, and for ever again it vanishes.

All this power will I give thee.
Having seen the object which Satan presented to our Saviors eye: Satan
having assaulted the eye of our Lord, now goes about and assaults his ear.
now follows the offer he makes in his ear; both tending to this end, to
assay if by them he could infect his heart. In his offer we see two notable
lies: first, says he all these are mine, all this power is delivered into my
hands. The Psalmist says; The earth is the Lords, Psalm. 24. 1.
and the fullness thereof: and we read in Daniel, In this he makes two
notable lies, first in affirming that the kingdoms of the world were his.
that honor, glory and dominion are the Lords, he changes kingdoms, etc. and
this shameless Bear, says all is his: when in very deed not so much as any
beast in the world is his, far less any kingdom thereof: for he could not
do so much, for all his pretended power, as enter into a Sow, until the Lord
gave him power.

Where if ye object unto me, How Satan is called, The God of the world.
how is it then, that Satan is called by the Apostle, the God of this world? I
answer, that is only in regard of the reprobate, whom the Lord in justice
has given over unto Satan, and in whom he commands and works at his
pleasure; no otherwise then an executioner, to whom the judge gives power to
punish a malefactor, sometime in his goods, sometime in his person, and
sometime by taking away of his life: if this executioner should vaunt that he
were Lord of life and death, or had power of health and sickness, riches and
poverty, such as knew him, would not regard him. It is even so with Satan, he
is but a false deceiuer: for he being the executioner of God, employed by the
Lord, to punish the wicked in their bodies, in their minds, or in their goods,
will notwithstanding bear his blinded wretches in hand, as if all this power
were his own.

The other lie he makes, Next he lies in pretending that he would give them
to Christ, which he never would albeit he might.
is that he pretends he would give all these unto Christ, which as it was not
in his power to do, so was it far from his mind: for he enuies that man
should enjoy any creature, that ever the Lord made; so the end will declare,
when he shall bring his miserable captives to such a scarsitie, and famine of
all good things, that if a drop of water might comfort them, they shall not get
it.

We must therefore put a difference between Satan's promises, Satan's promises
are always to be distinguished from his performances.
and his performance: liberal in the one, poor in the other: fair in
promises, but false in deeds. He promised to make Euah like unto God, but he
made her like unto himself: with Laban he can name a Rachel, and give a Leah.
Like Ioab he can kiss with the mouth, and slay with the hand: he can promise
victory to Achah, that so he may chase him to confusion: name what he will,
what can he give, but a part of his own portion? that is, to make miserable
man a partaker with him in his most fearful condemnation.

And yet alas, Yet blind worldlings follow Satan as if the world were at his
donation.
how many are daily bewitched by him, to follow him: as if the world were at
his Donation: for where as men do seek the things of this world, by stealing,
lying, deceiving, oppressing, thinking to be rich and honorable by iniquity:
Is not this to take out of the hand of Satan? Such as multiplyes children by
harlotrie, and increases their rents by impiety, can they rejoice with Jacob,
saying with my staff and bag came I over Jordan, and now God has given me
these bands: or can they glory with Abraham, I will not have so much as the
latchet of a shoe from the King of Sodom, least it should be said, he it is
that made Abraham rich. Good were it for such men, that the Lord in time of his
mercy, and not in his wrath, would give a purgation to cause them vomit by
restitution, all that substance which wickedly they have devoured: for even
reprobate Judas, at length shall cast back again the wages of iniquity: but
happy is he, who repents in time, that ever he took any thing out of the hand
of Satan, that so he may get mercy, while it is to be found. Satan frames
his temptations according to the estimation he has of men.


But mark here yet further, in that he offers to give unto Christ, all the
kingdoms of the world, how he can frame his temptations to men, according to
that estimation, which he has of them, great things offers he for them, whom
he sees cannot easily be conquered, but smaller for those, of whom he accounts
lesser: even as an experienced Merchant bids but a small price for that which
is little in his estimation; He bids but a small price for such as he knows
may be easily conquered.
but spares neither gold nor silver, to give for that which he esteems more
precious, or may make him most gain: there are some whom he sees to be so
base creatures, that he bids but a small price for them; so bought he Achan,
for a wedge of Gold; and Esau,
for a mess of pottage; and many an intemperate man, like him, for a
belly-full of drink; so bought he Judas to do him service for thirty pieces
of silver, and many a covetous man at this day, does he hire to lie, to
swear, to forswear, and deceive, as we see in buying and selling daily
practiced, for one very small piece of money: whereas again, of others he
esteems so much, that he offers them greater things to become his, as high
honors, and rich rents; This is their shame, who do Satan service for small
rewards.
but to none did he ever make so liberal an offer, as here unto our Lord: All
the kingdoms of the world will I give unto thee, etc. And this I mark to make
the men of the world ashamed, who for smallest trifles make ship-wracke of
their consciences, and bow down to Satan to serve him. If there were no more
but a spark of true man-hoode and courage in them, this were sufficient to
beget in their hearts a disdain of the Devil, that they see in his
estimation, they are but base creatures, and therefore he thinks by smallest
trifles to make conquest of them.

If thou will fall down, and worship me.
HItherto we have heard Satan's offer; He seeks more from men then he is
able to give unto them.
now follows his petition: wherein we have to see, what it is he craves for
his offer: For, will he, think we, at any time, give any thing, except it be
for the better? if he give any thing, it is to get thy self for it. He gave
Adam an Apple, and thereby made him his own slave, if mercifully the Lord had
not recovered him: he offered Esau a mess of Pottage, conditionally he would
loose his Birthright; If he offer earth it is upon this condition, that we
forsake heaven.
and it is his daily practice, to offer unto men, the things of this World, but
with such an hard condition, as of necessity binds them to for-goe their part
of that heavenly Kingdom, and so, like blinded fools, they lose them both.
Alas, that men would always remember that warning of our Savior, If a man
should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, what recompense can it
be unto him? The blind folly of men bewitched with Satan's offers.
What can Satan give unto a man worthy of that which he would have from him?
Shall a reasonable soul, made to the Image of God, and redeemed by the blood
of God, come under the bondage and servitude of Satan, for the vain show of
any perishing pleasure that Satan can offer unto it? The Lord open our eyes to
discern the deceit of this crafty Iugler, that we may beware of him, that so
often as he makes any offer unto us, we may give him that wise and courageous
answer, which the forty Martyrs gave the Deputy: Putas ne tantum te daturum
nobis, quantum eripere contendis? Do thou think that thou can give us so
much, as thou striuest to take from us?

But here the men of the world (I know) will object and say; Many abhor to be
called Satan's worshippers, who abhor not to be so indeed.
Is there any man so beastly, as to fall down and worship the Devil? that is
an impiety which all men abhor to hear; but would to God, they thought it
also an abomination to do it. We are commanded to have no God but one, that
is, to trust in him only, to fear him, to love, and obey him. We are also
commanded to worship him not after our own will, for that will worship, (...),
is plainly condemned: in which of these soever we fail, we fall in among them
who are charged in Scripture, to be worshippers of Satan: As namely they who
worship the Lord otherwise then according to his own will.
for, there the worshippers of Idols of gold and silver, timber and stone,
which have eyes and see not, etc. and the worshippers of Devils, are put in one
rank: and though there be many, who by corrupt judgment, fail not this way
in the matter of Gods worship, yet by reason of their perverse affection, and
heart not rightly set to the love and obedience of their God, are charged also
among those who have gone after a strange GOD. Thus is the covetous man called
an Idolater; And they in like manner, who serve their own beastly affections.
and the intemperate man, said to have his belly for his God. And more
generally, every man is declared to be a servant unto that, Romans 6. 16.
whereunto he gives obedience, as he that will not obey the Lord by
sanctification of the Saboth, nor by sanctification of his own body in that
holy manner which GOD has commanded him: or he that in the pride and
impenitencie of his spirit, cares not to deliver all that he has; yea,
himself both soul and body to Satan: If these and such as they be, be
examined according to the rule of the Word, it will be found, they are
worshippers of Satan in deed, how ever in their words, they say, it is an
abominable thing to do it.

And Jesus answered, and said.
THis last answer, Why Christ's last answer is sharper then any of the former.
which our Lord gives to Satan's last temptation, is sharper then any of the
former: teaching us, by his example, that we should not so much as here it
required of us without anger, that we should give the glory of God to any other
then himself, and especially to his adversary. It is true that Satan in all
his temptations should be resisted: but sometime he is to be repelled rather
with a disdainefull rejecting of him, then with reasoning; as namely, when he
dare be so bold as to deny those grounds of Religion, which most justly are to
be holden for undoubted truths, then is this answer meet for him; Hence from
me Satan.

For it is written.
THe testimony our Savior alleges against him, In worship the Lord can
suffer no companion.
is out of Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 20. Out of which it is clear, that in the matter of
Worship, the Lord will suffer no Companion. 1 Samuel 7. 3.
If ye come (said Samuel) to the Lord, with all your heart, then put away the
strange Gods from among you; for ye cannot keep both. If God be the Lord,
(said Elijah) then follow him; if Baal be he, then follow him; the Lord can
suffer no halting between two. Papists worshipping others with God, guilty of
Idolatry.
Out of which it is evident, that the Adversaries, while they part the work of
our salvation, ascribing part of it to Christ's satisfaction, and part to humane
satisfactions: while again they part the work of mediation, joining others
with Christ in it. Making some prayers to God, and some to creatures; making
some religious bowing of the body to the Lord, and some religious bowing of the
body, which they think lawful to give, unto Saints; not reserving falling
down for worship to God only, do fail against this Commandment, and how
ever they please themselves with distinctions, thinking to hide their sin
under a covering of words, yet this most clear word of the Lord does convince
them of the crime of Idolatry.

They say that the worship of (...) they give unto God only, How the
distinction of (...) and (...), does not excuse them.
as due unto him. To Creatures, they give no more but the worship of (...): But
against their own distinction, sometime they teach, that (...) may be given to
others than unto God. And if we take these words according to the use of
Scriptures, it is clear that these two are indifferently used for one: the
whole service men owe to Christ is comprised under the word (...), Romans 16. 18.
And the Apostle condemns the Galathians of Idolatry, because they gave the
worship of (...), to those things which by Nature are no Gods; (...): which
manner of reasoning were not forcible, if this distinction of the Papists were
true, that the worship of (...) may be given to those which are no Gods,
Religious bowing of the knee to creatures a note of Idolaters.
according to the use thereof in Scriptures.

But what ever they mean by these words of Worship, why do they bow the knee
to things of Gold, silver, and stone? they cannot say, it is for civil
reverence; for, their Images have not eyes to see them, nor tongues to answer
them. If it be (as it is) for religious Worship; why do they not remember,
that by this, the Lord distinguishes true Worshippers from false; I have
seven thousand that never bowed their knee to Baall? and that the three
Children are commended, for that they would not bow the knee to fall down and
worship Nabuchadnezars Golden Image? Or how can they excuse their offering of
Incense to their Images, seeing it is commanded to be offered unto God
himself: Leuit. 2. 1.
and the Jews are condemned for offering Incense to the brazen Serpent, 2
King. 18. 4.
and to Baal? 2 King. 23. 5.


Where, if they object unto us that we do great wrong, An objection of the
Adversaries answered.
in comparing their Images, which are of Saints now glorified in heaven, with
the Images of Nebuchadnezzar, of Baal, etc. I answer, we acknowledge a great
difference between the Saints of God, and those falsely reputed Gods of the
Heathen; but, in this point, we affirm, it is no less Idolatry to give
religious worship to the Saints, or their Images, then it was for the Jews to
give it unto Baal. It is true, Paul and Barnabas are more excellent Creatures,
being the chosen vessels of the living God, then Jupiter and Mercurius, yet to
give religious Worship to them, is no less Idolatry, then to give it to
Jupiter and Mercurius: for, if they be compared in this point, Paul and
Barnabas, are no more Gods, then Baal, Jupiter, or Mercurius.

But to return: let us for our own instruction take diligent heed, to those
things which the Lord has reserved to himself only, and be content with
those things which he has offered unto us. Where he says; Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God only, Worship and the glory of salvation should be
reserved to the Lord only.
far be it from us to break that limitation, by giving any part of his
worhip unto another: I will not (says the Lord) give my glory to another; that
which the Lord will not give, how dare man be so bold as to give that unto
another? what greater glory has the Lord, then the glory of a Savior, and
Redeemer? he made us, we made not our selves. What greater glory has he,
then that he is the Father of lights, from whom every good gift does descend?
shall we take this glory, and give it unto another? shall we seek from
another the fulfilling of our necessities then from him, is there any either
more willing to help seeing he is our father? or more able, seeing he is
almighty? Shall I go to him by another Mediator, then by his Son, seeing
the Father has proclaimed; This is my Son, in whom I am well pleased? Or,
shall we join other Mediators with him, seeing the Apostle says; He is able
to save perfectly all those that come to God by him. From such impieties the
Lord deliver us for his great names sake; to whom be all praise, honor, and
glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
MEDITATIONS for Instruction and Consolation.

Very profitable, and right necessary, for every Christian to read.

PSALM. 119. 15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.
LONDON: Printed for John Budge. 1612.

MEDITATIONS for Instruction, and Consolation.
The glory of Britains I Will.
EVery Kingdom glories of their privileges; we have our own also, wherein
we are nothing inferior to them, but let this be the greatest glory of our
I Will, that 2600. years ago, the Lord promised to give the ends of the earth
for a possession to Christ, which in our time (blessed be his holy name for it,
is abundantly performed.

The Law came forth of Sion, the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and with a
speedy course ouer-shadowed this I Will with the brightness thereof: whether it
was by S. Paul, as Theodoret affirms, or by Simon Zelotes, as Dorotheus and
Nicephorus witnesses, or by Joseph of Arimathea, as many testify: sure it is,
by some, either Apostle, or Apostelique man; soon after the death of our Lord,
from Gentilisme we were converted to Christianity: long before that Papistry,
or papal power was known in the world: for which, by the testimony of the
adversaries themselves, even they who dwell in the Northmost part of the I Will,
are honored with the style of ancient Christians; Scoti antiquiores Christiani.

A warning to the I Will of great Britain.
AS the going forth of the Sun is from the one end of heaven unto the other;
rising in the East, Psalm. 19.
and running on (like a mighty man) in his course, toward the West; so has
the light of the Gospel, from them in the East, shined toward us in the West:
where now it stands more marueilously then the Sun did in Gibeon, Ios. 10.
in the days of Joshua, till the fullness of Gentiles in these parts, be
brought into the Tents of Sem. And sure we are, it shall stand like a clear
light in the Firmament of his Church, till all his Saints be gathered together.

Now the Candlestick is removed from them in the East, the Sun is gone down
over their Prophets, and darkness is unto them in stead of divination. While we
have the light, let us walk in the light: for woe shall be to us also, if the
Lord depart from us.

Time of Grace how dispensed by the Lord.
THe time of grace is called by the Lord, 2. Cor. 6.
an acceptable year, or day of salvation, to tell us it is but short, and
therefore we should redeem the time. Some days are longer, some shorter: but
all of them are limited, and come to their end. The Jews had a fair long
Summer day of Grace, sixteen hundred years dwelt the Lord with them, as with
his own peculiar people: and their Father, Sem, was the first, upon whom God
vouchsafed this happiness and honor, as to call himself his God, blessed be
the God of Sem: from them has the Lord removed to the house of Iaphet, and
other sixteen hundred years has he been alluring Iaphet to dwell in the
tents of Sem, offering mercy and grace to their several families, according to
his wise and gracious dispensation, and among the rest, he has also vouchsafed
to visit us. Oh that we knew those things which belong to our peace.

The course of the Gospel.
OTher Trees when they grow, do fasten their roots in the earth, and send
their branches toward heaven, but the Gospel is such a Tree of the Paradise of
God, as has the root of it in heaven: for, it bred in the bosom of the
Father, but the branches grow downward, to the earth, that we may eat of the
threefold fruit which grow upon it, Righteousness, Peace, and Joy. We need
not now to say, Who shall ascend into heaven? Romans 10.
The Word is near thee. If we be not refreshed with the fruit of that
heavenly Paradise, the fault must be in the want of good will in our selves,
not the want of a good occasion, seeing the Lord has turned the branches of
this tree of life downward toward us, that the more commodiously we might eat
of the fruit thereof.

The trial of a true Gospeller:
IN the Gospel there is a truth, and a power: the truth is embraced by many
professors, the power is known to few. Now it is thought religion good enough,
if a man receive the truth (so great is our corruption) not remembering that
truth known, shall, but convince them who by the power thereof are not
converted to walk after it.

A golden Rule for the use of things indifferent.
ALl things which are lawful, are not always expedient: where the lawfulnes
is certainly known, advise on the expediencie; and when thou art resolved of
both, yet remember it is not good to come under the power of any thing: custom
draws a carnal man to necessity, that he cannot want that which he has
been used to have: but so to use the creature that thou keep thine heart
free, vnthralled with the servitude thereof, and ready at all occasions to want
it, is the perfection of him, who has learned, while he walks upon earth, to
have his conversation in heaven.

Three helps to a godly life.
THere are three things which help a man to live godly. as David records, who
found it by his own experience: Psalm. 119. 57.
Determination, Supplication, Consideration. Determination is first, by it we
resolve and conclude to live a godly life: Supplication is second, for without
help obtained of God, our determinations soon vanish: Consideration is the
third, whereby we examine our selves, whether or not, we have done as we
determined. Determination helps us to begin to do well, and this purpose
would be renewed every morning Supplication holds us forward continuing in well
doing: and consideration brings us home, when we have gone astray. I may say,
happy is that man in whose life one of these three is always an actor.

A spur to Repentance.
He that goes down to the grave, says Job, shall come up no more; namely, to
live here on earth, as he was wont to do: he that goes to a far country,
goes from his friends, in hope to come back again; it is not so with him that
goes to the grave: and therefore it is a point of great wisdom, in time to
do what thou have to do. What we learn not one day, we may learn another,
and so long as we have time, what we have left undone at one time, we may
do at another: but if we dye not well, we shall not return to dye better;
where the tree falls, there it lies: and such as a man is when he dies, such
abides he for ever: let us therefore so live, as learning to die; happy is the
man who will not live in that state, wherein he dare not die.

The gain of Godliness.
THe Apostle says, that Godliness is great gain, and the Psalmist, that there
is fruit for the righteous, but what we gain by godliness, and what fruit
grows on the tree of righteousness, is not well known in this life: here, of
all men they who are godly seem to most miserable, because they must suffer
many persecutions: but as the sweet grapes of the vine tree are gathered in the
vintage; and the fruit of the husbandmans labor, comes home in the harvest: so
does the gain of godliness, in the hour of death: when all other comforts
forsakes us, then godliness lets us taste of her fruits, peace and joy in the
holy Ghost.

Grace of thanks giving.
AS a vessel by the scent thereof tells what liquor is in it: so should our
mouths smell continually of that mercy, wherewith our hearts has been
refreshed: for we are called vessels of mercy.

Satan's defianc^.
IT makes no matter what our enemies be, though for number, Legions; for Power,
Principalities; for subtilty, Serpents; for cruelty, Dragons; for vantage of
place, a Prince of the Air; for maliciousnes, spiritual wickedness, stronger
is he that is in us, then they who are against us; nothing is able to separate
us from the love of God. In Christ Jesus our Lord, we shall be more then
conquerours.

A warning to battle.
HE shall not be in heaven with the Church triumphant, who lives not on earth a
member of the Church militant, I, suppose thou have no enemies without, and
know no external cross to trouble thee, thy chief enemy and most
dangerous is the corruption of thy own heart within thee, against which if
thou fight not with the daily weapons of the word and prayer, thou art a
captive, and at a cursed peace with Satan. And yet alas how many are so,
living in security, never grieved, nor troubled, with their inhabitant
corruption?

Gedeons army.
OF thirty thousand men, that rose at the sound of Gedeons Trumpet, only three
hundredth, after trial, were found meet for the battle: and of many
thousands, who now, at the sound of the Gospel, makes a show as if they would
follow Christ in his warfare, few will be found after trial, to receive the
crown; for many are called, but few are chosen: let every man take heed to
himself.

Three most excellent virtues.
THese are Faith, Love, and Patience; he who is partaker of them, is a
possessor of all good, which is to be desired: for by Faith he possesses Jesus
Christ, and all his blessings: by Love he possesses his neighbor, and has joy
of all the good which is in them and by Patience he possesses himself.

A watchword for impenitents, now under grace.
Sins done against the Law, may be cured by the grace of the Gospel: but if
grace be despised also, and the more thou hear the Gospel, the more thou grow
in prophanenes; wherewith then shall thy disease be amended? may we look for
an other Savior, or is there a new sacrifice to be made for sin? No, it is
the last age, God has sent his last message, and has applied to men, his last
and strongest medicine, if this mend thee not, there remains nothing but a
looking for of fearful judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour thee.

Thamars reueuge.
THamar to be revenged upon Judah her father in law, allured him to commit
incestuous adultery with her. Like unto this is all the revenge of carnal
men, who to the end they may hurt others, who has offended them, spare not to
hurt themselves first, and sin against their own soul: he shall be
soonest, and best revenged, who remits vengeance unto the Lord.

True life.
ALl men naturally love life, but true life is only known to the sons of
God. In the Vegetative life, whereby creatures grow from a small estate to an
higher, the trees of the field ouercomes man. In the sensitive life, many
beasts excels him, they see, they smell, they hear, etc. better then he. And
as for the reasonable life, do we not see many reprobates has it, who shall
never see the face of God. Yea, Heathen Philosophers, has excelled Christians
in the use of reason. Oh, that men did consider this, who now know no life but
this to eat, and drink, and grow: why do thou place thy life in that,
wherein beasts and reprobates are thy companions. Let us seek that life which
none can have, but the sons of God. Let thy tender mercy come unto me, that I
may live, Psalm. 119. 77.
for thy law is my delight.

Sufficiency of eternal life.
IF one Sun set, by God in the firmament, gives, by course, sufficient light
to all the inhabitants of the earth, and yet neither divided, nor diminished in
himself. May we not think much more, how that glorious light shall
illuminate all, and comfort all the elect of God, not being the less to any
one, that many are partakers of it.

Pleasures of this world.
MAny things bewrayes the vanity of worldly pleasures, but this above all,
that if they did continue, they would turn into intolerable pains. Let the
worldling make his choice, what best pleases him, let him have it without any
exchange, a short time shall force him to confess it is a vexation.

Beginnings of sin, should be resisted.
IT is a notable precept ever to be remembered, in all our actions, keep your
selves in your spirit: Mal. 2. 15.
if the fountain be dried, the river decaies, and if sin be stopped in the
heart, the flux thereof is easily dried up, for out of the heart comes murder,
and adulteries, etc. As a cockatrice is most easily slain in the shell, so
sin in the first conception, before it gather strength: but here is our
folly, we fight not with it, when it is weak: and therefore cannot withstand
it, when it is strong.

Vanity of this life.
IT is strange that men should love to live here, where beasts are partakers
with him of all that he has, and not long to ascend where he shall live a
companion to Angels; where we dwell, the Spider builds in our most lightsome
lodgings, the Rats usurps a residence, in our carved seelings; the flies
partakes of our meats and drink: yea, the worms with in us, feed upon our
selves and yet it is strange, that man called to a lively hope of a better
life, should not long to enjoy it.

The cursed condition of the wicked.
IN the same field, wherein Absalon raised battle against his father, stood
the Oak that was his gibbet: the mulet whereon he rode was his hangman, for
the mulet carried him to the Tree, and the hair wherein he gloried, served for
a rope to hang. Little know the wicked how every thing which now they have,
shall be a snare to trap them, when God begins to punish them.

An evil conscience.
THere are many evils flowing from an evil conscience, this is one, it binds
up the mouth of the soul, that it dares not cry for mercy, 1. Pet. 3.
for it is, says S. Peter, a good conscience that makes request to God. Even
among men amity makes liberty, and man dares not speak to his brother
offended, before reconciliation: with that boldness then shall he that stands a
rebel to God, make supplication to him. If we ask not, how shall it be given
us? If we repent not, how shall we ask? Let us therefore by daily repentance,
purge our heart from an evil conscience, that so in our need, we may find
access to God.

As the defects of a ruinous house, that is not water-tight is not known in
fair weather, but in foul: so an evil conscience seems oft-times to be good
enough, till the day of trouble come. Jacobs sons counted little of the
selling of Joseph, till twenty years after it, they were hardly handled in
Egypt. Let us try our self entirely, and be loath to harbor this guest, which
will not fail to trouble us within, so soon as trouble shall arise unto us
without.

Men of honor.
AS finest garments are consumed by mothes and gold, if it rest, by rust, and
most excellent trees, want not their own worms, which by time destroy them: so
honorable men, has their own corruptions, but this for common is the disease
of them all, that they look more narrowly to that service, which their
inferiors are bound to do to them, then to their duties which they are bound
to do to their superiors, looking down to take from men, and not up to give
to the Lord, that honor, which is due unto him.

The profit of spiritual exercises.
He who would entertain fellowship with God, should above all delight, in the
spiritual exercises of the word and prayer. The word is as the Mother, and
prayer as the nurse of every grace in Gods children; by the one God speaks
unto man, by the other, man speaks unto God: and therefore is it, that Satan,
who enuies the fellowship of man with God, troubles man especially in these
two, tempting him most craftily then, when he goes to the word, and prayer.

Bodily exercises.
BOdily exercise, says the Apostle, profits little, and therefore should be
sparingly used. Many under pretense of the recreation of their bodies, if they
quench not the spirit, at least grieves it, like as if one to cool his body of
vehement heat, should run so far in the water, that he drownes himself.
Experience may tell such, as make conscience of their actions, that immoderate
external exercise, increases guiltiness, and diminishes grace. It is a point
of great wisdom, here to keep moderation.

Friendship of the world.
IT is the surest estate, suppose somewhat sharp, to live contemned of the
world, wanting her friendship and allurements: it makes us more humble in our
self, and more wise toward others.

The deceit of sin.
HE who will look to the fruit of sin, shall not easily be snared with the
deceit of it, that for which a man sins, bides not with him, only the
guiltiness remains, which he contracted, to obtain his apparent good: If a
man remembered this, he would be loath to make his guiltiness greater for a
good, which will not bide with him.

Mother-sinnes.
EVery sin would be resisted, but especially Mother-sinnes, professed enemies
to virtue, Vipers, which can not live, but upon the life of him that
entertaines them: such as Pride, Passion, and Pleasure. Every one of these
Captains is like Goliath, in Satan's army: unless a man come against them, in
the name of the Lord, armed with his grace, he can not stand before them.

Pride.
PRide (said Augustine) is grandis in oculo trabes, a great beam in the eye,
which neither lets a man get a right sight of his God, nor of himself, nor of
his neighbor. It is Primogenitum diaboli, satan's first borne: by it, the
Serpent lurkes at the root of every high Cedars, to vnderdermine it, for he
knows there is nothing so high, which by pride is not easily brought low,
Lucifer falling from heaven, and Nabuchadnezzars golden head, for his pride
soon turned from his throne, to the fields; and manners of beasts, among
innumerable more examples, may serve to prove it.

Antidote for Pride.
THe best Antidote for this poison is Humility, Superbia tumor est non
magnitudo: Pride is a swelling, but no greatness, but this makes a man little
in his own eyes: yet in very deed, great both with God, and Man. It is a
virtue in any man, but most of all in a man of honor, Aug.
Magna prorsus virtus humilitas honorata, the highest buildings, has the
lowest foundations. Magnus esse vis? a minimo incipe. Cogitas magnam fabricam
construere? celsitudinis de fundamento prius cogita humilitatis. Will thou be
great? begin at the lowest degree. Do thou think to rear a great building
of height? think first upon the foundation of humility. Nazian.
(...). This is the beginning of all Philosophy.

Passion.
PAssion, or inordinate commotion of the mind, is an unruly evil, De ira cap.
5.
said Lactantius: it makes a man rage without moderation, more turbulent then
the raging sea; it defaces his countenance, were it never so pleasant, it
felters his tongue, were it never so eloquent; it fiereth the eyes, which are
conduits of water; it captives the understanding, which is the ruler of the
whole man, Perit omne iudicium vbires transit in affectum: all judgment is
lost, when the matter comes to passion.

Remedy of Passion.
THe best remedy for it, is that heavenly grace of patience, flowing from
faith, and love, three of the most rich, and rare jewels, wherewith a Christian
can be adorned: for by faith we possess Christ Jesus, and have right to all
his benefits; by love we possess our neighbor, rejoicing in their good, as if
it were our own: and by patience we possess our selves, and becomes Masters
of our own wits, senses, words, actions, and all: this is Christian fortitude,
and in very deed, the highest point of manhood: fortior est qui se, quam qui
fortissima vincit: He that conquereth himself, is stronger than he which
vanquisheth most strong things.

Pleasure.
PLeasure is a Pest, so much the more perilous, in that it is more plausible
then others, spreding out it self into as many branches, as there are in men
affections: for all are not miscarried after one sort. Trahit sua quemque
voluptas: Every man as his pleasure leads him. Invincible Alexander vanquished
in peace, with the pleasures of his mouth: Wise Solomon, temperate of his
mouth, overcome with the pleasures of his flesh: yea if they be not ruled by
grace, the conceit of their honor makes them all generally dream of this
privilege, and imagine it to be their own, that quod lubet, licet, and in
this pit has perished many a worthy man.

The remedy of inordinate pleasure.
THe remedy of this evil, is the fear of God, and therewithal fervent and
continual prayer, that the grace of God, which has appeared, and brings
salvation to men, may teach us to deny all ungodly lusts, and to live holily
(toward God) soberly (in our selves) and justly (toward men.)

A meet answer for David's question, PSALM. 119.
THere is a question propounded by David, and it were good for us to consider;
that we might provide in time an answer to it: whether shall I go from thy
presence, or where shall I flee from thy spirit? If I ascend to heaven thou art
there: if I lie down in hell thou art there: what then, if there were a way to
go from him, yet is there not a way to live without him: all that go a
whooring from him shall perish, where away Lord shall we go, seeing thou have
the words of eternal life. Shall we then bide with thee, because we cannot
do otherwise: Nay Lord, albeit we might, which is impossible, flee from thee,
yet is there none worthy to be loved like unto thee; as we cannot flee from
thee for thy power, so we will not flee fro thee for thy mercy. The wrath of
man, may be eschewed by flying from him, as Jacob did flying from Esau, the
Lords wrath is only pacified by running unto him.

Achitophels heirs who they are.
THe men of this world are wise in things without them, but fools as
concerning themselves, like to Achitophel, who put his house in order, and
hanged himself: what greater folly then this, he ordered his house, and
ordered not his heart: and therefore in the perturbation of his mind, went he
to the place of confusion. Many heirs has he left behind him, who orders
wisely all things concerning their bodies, but suffers, yea, praecipitates
foolishly their souls into perdition.

Selfe-murther.
AChitophel and Judas, who hanged themselves, were both worthy to be hanged,
yet were they twice miserable, because they died twice guilty: the one of
David's blood and his own: the other of the blood of Christ, and his own also.
He that is slain innocently, by an other, leaves his blood behind him, that
cries for vengeance on him that shed it: but the murderer of himself caries
the guilt of his own blood with him, and so goes away both a murderer, and a
murdered.

Desertions.
I Think a twofold disease may befall a godly man: one, wherein the spirit of
God relents in him his former operation, whereof ensues a decay of the sense of
mercy, trouble of mind, and great inability to any spiritual good: the other,
when by extremities of bodily diseases, reason, and memory deserts him, but
sure I am, neither of these can be prejudicial to his salvation, which is
grounded not in man, but in the unchangeable God. Because thou art not changed,
therefore we are not consumed.

A Christians answer to Satan's accusatious.
Why troubles thou me by laying my sins to my charge? I know I have many
ways offended my God, but this comfort I have, that what ever I have done to
offend him, through his grace, is the matter of my grief, but what I have done
against thee, to the hinderance of thy kingdom, I allow it, and rejoice in it,
wishing from my heart I were able to do more for the destruction of thy
kingdom, both in my self, and others.

Satan enemy to prayer.
When the Apostles were going to pray, then the Pythonisse perturbed them: and
no marvel that Satan who interrupts not men in other actions, interrupt them
in Prayer: for as hearing of the word preached is the mother, so Prayer is the
nourisher of all Christian virtues in us.

A preachers comfort.
LYdia converted, entertained the Apostles into her house, and the Iaylor, who
before straited them with iron bands, being converted, ministered to their
necessities: such as get grace by the Gospel, will not fail to give comfort
to the instruments, by whom they received it. It may content a Preacher that
he shall want comfort of none but those of whom GOD wants his glory: where
the Lord gets not his part, what marvel thou get not thine?

After great comfort, look for temptation.
TWo sundry times was Christ proclaimed the Son of God, by an audible voice
from heaven: first, when he was baptized at Jorden, and then immediately was
he tempted in the wilderness: Secondly, when he was transfigured on the
Mountain, and then shortly after, was he troubled in the garden. As Elias
after he had gotten a double portion, got forty days fasting: so Gods
children, when they receive double comfort, are to prepare themselves for
double temptation.

How the wicked run post unto hell.
AS they who run post change their horses, when one is weary they mount upon an
other: so the wicked, when they are weary of one sin, fall to an other: weary
of one beastly affection, they make have in their madness to mount upon another,
as if riding upon one were not sufficient to bring them soon enough thither.

Their miserable end.
But if they were wise, they would draw the bridle, consider their course, and
think upon their end, they think not in their life, that sin is terrible,
they fear and abhor nothing but death: but how far they are deceived, the
end shall declare, then shall their sins in such sort terrify them, that to
be quit of the sight of sin, they shall seek death, but shall not find it:
there will be their last, and desperate voice, Oh that the hills and mountains
would fall upon us, and smother us!

Against sinful lusts.
ABraham was content for the love of the Lord, to slay and sacrifice his son
with his own hands, and the Lord accepted his will for a deed, and a clear
declaratour of his love. Now said he, I know thou love me. But alas, O my
soul, wherein will thou show thy love to the Lord thy God, if thou be not
content to forgo a unlawful pleasure for the Lords sake, and to slay the
life, not of thy lawful son, but of thy unlawful affection? If thou do it
not, how shall the Lord say of thee, as he said of Abraham? Now I know thou
love me.

The patience of God should not be abused.
LEt men remember, that suppose the mercy of GOD be everlasting, yet his
Patience is limited: it is called a long patience, and long suffering, but
never a everlasting patience: happy therefore is he, who before the time of
Gods long patience be finished, gets within the compass of his enduring mercy.

Pride.
AS Pride was the first sin powered into our nature, so it is last in departing:
for pride is such a sin, as rises of the ashes of other sins.

The love of Christ.
IT is not a great thing to love that which is seen, whether truly good, or
apparent only; but to love him, whom yet we have not seen. 1 Pet. 1. is the
work of a great Faith: yet great reason there is, why we should do so, what
visible thing should be loved comparable to him that made it? and the more
should we love him, that for love of us, he became like us, but so that he is
the fairest among the children of men. When he was transfigured, his face
shined like the Sun, but now the brightness of his face far surmounts the
glory of the sun: among all the creatures none in beauty comparable to him.
Alas that we long not, more then we do to see him.

A soul stretching out her wings to the Lord.
O My soul, what have thou to do here in this earth? thou came from above.
Shall these visible things snare thee, and detain thee from the invisible God,
from whom thou came? Except it be to fight, for a time, the Lords battles, that
thou may be crowned, and so lead so many as thou may captives up unto him,
that so thou may follow the Lord who ascended on high, and for thy sake, led
captivity captive.

Circumspection needful.
EVah looking where God forbad her: Dinah wandering: David intermitting
spiritual exercises, became a ready pray to the enemy, the corrupt nature of
man not kept with a narrow circumspection, is easily carried into captivity,
but not so easily recovered. The evil may be contracted in one day, which in
many days can not be amended. O my soul therefore learn to walk the more
circumspectly.

An awe-band for the heart.
AS the Lord is omnipotent, so is he omnipresent, he is secret in his ways,
and when he goes by us, we see him not. Job 9. 12: but go where we will, he
is always with us, to see us when we see not him, no more then Gehazi, when he
took the bribes of Naaman, saw the spirit of Eliah that went with him. Oh,
that we could remember this, that what ever we do, we are under the eye of
God, that so with Henoch we may walk with God in all that we do, seeking to
please him, and be approved of him.

The desire of a godly soul.
When the Lord came to the grave of Lazarus, he wept, and cried with a loud
voice, Lazarus come forth, and as he commanded so was it done: Oh Lord, that
thou would come with the like affection to me, and visit this grave, and
monument of my corruptible body, wherein my soul is imprisoned, yea, buried
after a sort, that it can not mount up to walk after thee. Cry upon me Lord
with thy powerful voice, that I may come out; let me notlye any longer in this
grave; command them to loose my bonds, that even while I am in the body, I may
go out of the body, and follow thee.

Three ranks of sins.
Our sins may be reduced to three ranks. 1 Defections. 2 Transgressions. 3
Rebellions. by the first we fail in doing the good, we should do: by the
second we pass our bounds, and do the evil we should not: by the third, men
coming to the deep of sin, fall into the contempt of God, and at length to
rebellion, of the first and second we are guilty. The Lord deliver us, that we
fall not into the third.

A precept never to be forgotten.
TAke heed to thy self. This is a precept most necessary to be practiced: The
Lord is said to number our steps, to ponder our paths, to weigh our selves:
and Satan is said to winnow us, and to consider us: what great need have we
then to consider our selves?

The fruitless care of worldlings.
Worldlings take pains in their life to provide for others, who will not so
much as remember them when they are gone, for his place shall know him no more.
Where is the fruit of thy labors, O wretched worldling, in the heaven? Thou
have laid up no store for thy self there, for thou never had a care to make
thy self friends there of the riches of iniquity: what hope then can thou
have to be received into those everlasting mansions? for comfort of the earth
where is it? all the fruit of thy labors thou must leave to another, who will
be blythe to bury thee in the earth.

Oh that men could remember this. Or it belong the earth will refuse to bear
thee, thy body will refuse to lodge thee, thy friends will no longer retain
thee, and who then shall receive thee? If the Lord also refuse thee and bid
thee depart from him, where away will thou go for comfort? O man, make peace
with thy God in time!

Couerings of sin.
AS Adam after his transgression covered his nakedness with fig tree leaves,
so is it Natural to his sons, to seek couerings to their sins; but of all
it offends the Lord most, when men seek to cover their sins, under the
garment of God, this was objected to the Jews, Mal. 2. 16. who covered their
adulteries with a shadow of diuorcements allowed, as they thought, by Moses,
and is yet practiced by the Atheists of our time, who bring defenses for their
sin out of the word of God: for such mockers heavy judgments are prepared.

Knowledge and Devotion.
AS a Bird that has but one wing cannot fly the right way: so a Christian
wanting any one of these two, cannot serve God in a right manner: yet seldom
go these two together, for some have Knowledge without Devotion, and others
have Devotion, but without Knowledge. None of these are good, but the first is
the worst of the two: for the servant that knows his Masters will and does it
not, is worthy of double stripes.

A discovery of the vanity of worldly honor.
MAn in his best estate is altogether vanity; his highest honor is like the
vanishing shadow on the tops of mountains when the sun goes down. Put him
in his chariot of triumph, let it be drawn with horses of price, yea, if he
can, with stately Lions; let him be decked in most gorgeous manner, as Herod
was on his birthday, these two interrogators shall soon discover his vanity.

First what has he upon him, or about him which is his own: has he not
borrowed from every creature to make up himself a begged glory? garments from
beasts of the earth, feathers from fowls of the air, pearls from fishes of
the sea, silks from creeping worms, and beasts: and worms, and fishes, at
length shall devour his flesh, in a recompense of that, which they have lent
him.

And Secondly, that which he has, how long shall he have it, the Samaritane
Prince, who this day leaned on the kings shoulder, and the next day was
trampled under the peoples feet, stands up among innumerable examples to
witness how mutable, and vain, the glory is of flesh. Surely, as
Nabuchadnezzars image had a head of Gold, but feet of Clay, so is it with all
worldly honor, glorious in the beginning, but it ends in dust, and ashes.

Every day should shadow our death.
THe end of every day is a shadow of the end of our life: our lying down in
the bed under couerings of clothes to rest us, till the morning, should
remember us of our lying down in the grave, under the covering of moulds. The
sting of sinful pleasure not perceived in the day, does sting more lively the
conscience of men in the night, when they examine themselves on their beds, and
all are at quiet, no sight presented to the eye, nor sound to the ear to
distract the mind, then conscience speaks the more loudly, to warn a man of
his sins: and this may forewarne us, that if we do not unfeignedly repent us
in time, our sins will much more trouble us in the end of our life: let us
not keep such a serpent in our bosom.

Contentment to dye.
I Desire not to out-liue the time, whether it be long or short, appointed to
me of the Lord. I know he is permanent Iehoua, death cannot take me from him,
but restore me to him. Prophets dye, and people to whom they speak, die also,
but the word of the Lord endures for ever: and no word spoken in his name,
shall fall to the ground. I know it shall not be well with the wicked, though I
see not their end, and thy Saints shall have cause to praise thee, and say
there is fruit for the righteous.

Glory be to God.
Si quid feceris honestum cum labor, labor cito abit, si quid turpe cum
voluptate, turpitudo manet, voluptas abit. Aul: Gel.
FINIS.
THE BAPTISM OF CHRIST:

Wherein the typical Goel is compared with the true, and is showed how
CHRIST, our kinsman, is made our right REDEEMER.

MARK 1. 9. And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazaret,
a city of Galile, and was baptized of of John in Jordan. LONDON: Printed for
John Budge. 1612.

A TABLE OF THE Principal points contained in this Book.
A
A Ccusations of Satan, and the Christian man's answer to them. page 306 Adam
the first son of God among men, and the first father of Christ according to the
flesh. page 8 The evil that Adam brought on himself, and his posterity. 59
How the second Adam has the same similitude of generation with the first. 13
What course the second Adam takes in our Redemption, 58. the effect and comfort
thereof. 59 Our spiritual Adoption how confirmed. 14 Our Election and Adoption
impugned by Satan. 170 How we should confirm our selves in the assurance of
our Election, and Adoption. 175 Atheists convinced, 182 Professors of Atheism.
170
B
Baptism of Christ among sinners shows his love and humility. 57 Christ
baptizing with the spirit, seeks the Baptism of water from his own servant,
60. to what end he did so, 61. the reasons thereof. 62 Christ baptized to
sanctify Baptism, 66. and to seal up his fellowship with us. 68. he received
it with prayer. 64 The seal of Baptism, with the promises thereof. 65 Why
Constantine deferred his baptism. 67 The order of Satan's threefold Battle.
162 How a Christian should order the Battle against him. 163 Desperation
fights in the left wing of Satan's battle, 167. and Presumption in the right
wing. 192 A warning to Battle. 277 Glory of Britains I Will. 265 A warning to
Britains I Will. 267
C
THe fatherly care and providence of God to his children. 223. Christ's glory
manifested, in that he took no holiness from his parents. 27 Christ's Line
from whence deduced. 34 Christ never called the natural son of Solomon. 35
Christ, as man, was borne a Noble man. ibid. Christ the companion of Jehovah.
39 Christ our kinsman. ibid. Why Christ is called Shiloh. 40 Christ the true
Redeemer, and auenger of his brethren. 40 Christ most solemnly consecrated
King, Priest, and Prophet. 50 Christ willingly makes himself debtor for us.
51 Christ how become ours in most sure manner. 53. 54 What comfort Christ has
brought us. 59 Why Christ prayed for himself. 69 How Christ teaches us to
sanctify all our actions by Prayer. 71 How Christ cures his Patients by
anointing them. 86 Christ endues his children with meekenes. 87 Christ, how
the Son of God. 97 Christ, his life and doctrine, etc. confirmed unto us, by
diverse notable testimonies. page 99. 100. etc. to page 110. Why Christ is led
into the Wilderness, by the motion of the spirit. 124 The Actions of Christ, how
received. 150 Christ's transportation, whether mental, or corporal. 195 Christ
tempted at the eye, with a fair show: at the ear with fair offers. 229. 231.
241 Christ his love. 313 Warning for careless Christians. 153 Carnal men in
words despise Satan, but in deeds do serve him. 121 Circumspection needful.
315 A Comfort in that we be come of Christ by grace. 18 Comfort for poor
distressed sinners. 25. 26 Comfort arising from the consideration of Christ's
person. 39 A strong Bulwark of Comfort. 77 Comforts against the fear of
Satan's power, and our weakness. 90 Comfort against the want of worldly
things. 174 Comforts when ordinary means fail. 191 Comfort for a Christian
exercised with unaccustomed temptations. 119 After great Comfort, look for
temptation. 308 An evil Conscience, what it is. 287 Consecration of Christ, to
the office of a Redeemer, considered: 51. the solemnity thereof unmatchable.
50 Warning to such as are within the Covenant. 23 Two parts of the Covenant of
Grace, and both sealed by Baptism. 64
D
DEath of Christ abused to the nourishing of sin. 205 Every day should shadow
our death. 324 Contentment in Death. 325 Desertions Spiritual. 305
E
THe agreement of the four Evangelists confirms the truth of the Gospel: 2
The different courses of the two Evangelists, Matthew, and Luke. 55. Their
harmony in the Genealogy of Christ. 43. 44. etc. they agree, where they seem
most discordant. 37 Exercises spiritual, and their profit. 289. Bodily
Exercises, how to be used. 290
F
Christ's miraculous Fasting confirmed his doctrine. 149 Christ's Fast, abused by
Papists. 150 Fasting how manifold, 152 The end of Religious Fasting. 154 Rules
in Fasting. 155. 156 etc. Blind Folly of men, bewitched with Satan's offers.
250. Friendship of the world. 291
G
Genealogy of Christ, why registered. page 1 The whole Genealogy divided into
Sections. page 5. 6. to page 37. etc. and described according to the consent of
the Evangelists. p. 43. 44. etc. Gentiles have their part in Christ. 30 Why the
Holy Ghost descends in the similitude of a Dove, etc. and not of fire. 84. 85
Never any full of the Holy Ghost, as Christ Jesus was. 127 God being become the
son of man, it is not impossible, that man may become the Son of God. 14
The gain of Godliness. 275 Gospel an heavenly doctrine. 94. the Majesty and
Dignity thereof. ibid. No way to bring a man to heaven, but by the faith of
the Gospel. 95 A short sum of the Gospel. 97 Gospel, how it should be
preached. 92 The course of the Gospel. 270 The trial of a true Gospeller. 271
Time of Grace, how dispensed by the Lord. 268
H
TO infect the Heart by the Eye, one of Satan's policies. 232 To keep the
Heart, we must first have a care to keep the Eye. 233 An Awe-band for the
Heart. 315
I
Arrogance of the Jews, glorying of their progenitors, repressed. 24
Watchword for Impenitents under Grace. 280 Incarnation of Christ, a great
token of Gods favor to man, p. 10. how we should be thankful for so great a
mercy. p. 11. The Article of Christ's Incarnation confirmed. 12. 13 A Rule, for
the use of things indifferent. 273
K
Satan speaks of earthly Kingdoms, not of heavenly, 235. his subtlety in
showing the glory of them. 236 Earthly Kingdoms may be represented, not so the
heavenly. 237 Religious bowing of the Knee to Creatures, a note of Idolaters.
257 Knowledge, and Devotion. 321
L
THe Gospel should be preached in a language, the people may understand. 92
Wherefore, Christ endued the Apostles with the gift of Languages. 92 The Law
was proclaimed with terror, the Gospel was not so. 86 Spiritual Life, helped
by Fasting and Prayer. 147 Three helps to a spiritual and godly life. 273
True life, what it is. 281 Sufficiency of Eternal Life. 283 Many care for
this earthly Life, as if it were eternal: and for eternal, as if it were to
be obtained in a moment. 178 Vanity, of this earthly life. 285 Carnal lusts
nourished by intemperancy. ^48 Meditation against sinful lusts. 311
M
THat the Virgin Mary was conceived, and borne without sin, an erroneous
doctrine, 28. and long ago condemned. 29 Means ordained of God, not to be
despised. 184. 185 We must not trust in the Means, but in God. 186 God works
without Means, by small Means, and sometimes against Means. 187 What to do,
when ordinary means fail. 191 Mercy of God toward us, to be marked. 215
Public Ministration of Christ, how long it continued. 49 Murdering ones
self, or selfe-Murther. 304
P
PApists convinced, for taking the word from the people. 181 Such as glory of
their Parcntage confuted. 25 Passion, what it is. 298 Remedy of Passion. 299
Patience of God; should not be abused. 312 Pharisees, whether more then one
converted in the Gospel. 55 Good actions without Prayer, are like bodies
without Spirits. 71 Continuance required in Prayer. 72 Feruency and attention
in Prayer. 73 Comfortable effects of Prayer. 74 Prayer, is the first step of
our ascension to God, with Jesus Christ. 75 A Preachers comfort. 307 Temptation
of Praesumption, prevails in this age. 209 Wherein the greatest happiness of
Christ's progenitors consists. 19 Jews such as glory of their progenitors
answered. 24. 25 The promises of God can be no comfort to us, if we neglect the
conditions. 220
R
BLockishnesse of men that rebel against God. 190 Christ our Redeemer. 80 How
the three persons of the Trinity concur to the work of our Redemption. 89
The mystery of our Redemption explained for our greater comfort. 163 A spur
to Repentance. 274 Revenge of Thamar. 91 A soul filled with conceit of it
own Righteousness, incapable of grace. 57
S
TWo sorts of Satan's operations. 142 Satan expressed by many names for the
great wickedness of his nature. 144. 145 Satan a Tempter, an Accuser, a
Tormenter. ibid. Satan restless in Temptations, 160. he observes time and
occasion for temptation. 164. What a false and crafty Calumniator he is, 165.
of his great malice he fights against the known light, 169. his scholars
profess points of Atheism. 170 We should do nothing at Satan's command. 182
Satan's Temptation to make us earthly minded. 177 Satan cannot hurt us,
unless we help him, 206. he still seeks man's destruction. 208 Why he is
called a Tempter, 129. he is commander of the wicked, a tempter of the godly.
141 Satan seeks to remove godly fear, that he may bring men to a most
remediless, and most fearful estate. 210 Satan fell by Presumption, and by
obstinacy cannot rise again, 214. he should always be resisted, 224. the
best weapon wherewith we may fight against him. 224 Satan seeks vantage of
the place. 229 How Satan is called the God of the world. 242 His lies, 243.
his promises. 244 Satan frames his temptations, according to the estimation he
has of men, 246. he bids but a small price, for such as he knows may be
easily conquered. 246 A shame for men to serve Satan for small rewards, 247.
he seeks more from men, then he is able to give unto them, 249. he offers
earth on condition to forsake heaven. 249 Satan's defiance. 277. 306 Satan an
enemy to Prayer. 307. he raises up, that he may cast down. 202 Scripture
abused by Satan, and by Atheists. 210 211. to page 219. Scripture must be
expounded by Scripture. 225 Beginnings of Sin should be resisted. 284 The
deceit of Sin. 292 Mother-sinnes. 293 Reproof of such as hear their Sins
condemned, and are not moved. 216 Three ranks of Sins. 317 Couerings of
Sin. 320 Dignity of the Sons of God, stands not in the abundance of
worldly things. 173 A Soul stretching her wings to the Lord. 314. The desire
of a godly Soul. 316
T
TEmptations of Christ, with the circumstances thereof. 115. 116 Persons in
high callings, subject to the greatest Temptations. 117 Christians must look
for Temptations. 118 In every place, Satan has his snare for Temptation. 121
Temptations are ordered by divine dispensation. 124 Three notable comforts in
Temptation. 125 Sundry sorts of Temptations. 128 God tempts man, and is
tempted of man. 129 How one man tempts another. 129 How Satan tempts a man.
130 How Adam and Eve were tempted. 131 Our Temptations are not external only
but chiefly internal. 133 Why we should not faint at Satan's Temptations. 142
A singular preservative against Satan's Temptation. 146 It is a great
Temptation not to be Tempted. 143. After one Temptation, let us look for
another. 160 Temptations, how distinguished. 161 Satan's temptations from our
wants both spiritual and worldly. 171. 172 He changes Temptations for
advantage. 192 After victory in any temptation, let us stand ready for a new
battle. 194. 195. etc. Gods invincible power made manifest in temptations. 196
No place on earth free from the temptations of Satan. 199. 200 Satan's
temptations to vainglory customable. 206 How many ways men tempt God. 226.
227. etc.
V
THree most excellent virtues 279 Two things considered in the unction of
Christ. 80 Christ's unction in regard of his divine and humane nature, 81. 82
The manifestation of Christ's unction. 83 A comfortable union made between God
and man, by Christ Jesus. 9
W
Wicked, their cursed conditions, 286. how they run post into hell, 309.
their miserable end. 310 God the Father bears witness to his Son three
ways. 78. 79. 80 Three things considered in this witness. 88 The place from
which this witness is given. 93 The Word is the sword of the Spirit, whereby
we fight against Satan. 181 Such as hear their sins condemned by the word,
and are not moved, are convinced: 216 How Gods Children tremble at the rebukes
of the word. 217 Miserable Worldlings have heaven opened, but they love the
earth better. 96 Worldlings by their talk declare that they are earthly. 235
Blind Worldlings follow Satan, as if the world were at his donation. 244
Fruitless care of Worldlings. 319 Many abhor to be called Satan's
worshippers, who abhor not to so be indeed. 251. 252. 253 In his worship the
Lord can suffer no Companion. 253 Papists worshipping others with God, guilty
of Idolatry. ibid. Their distinction of worshipping God. 256
FINIS.

