THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE REVEREND FATHER, and faithful Servant of GOD, Mr.
WILLIAM COWPER, Bishop of Galloway, who departed this life at Edinburgh, the 15
of February, 1619. WHEREUNTO IS ADDED A RESOLVTION penned by himself, some few
days before his death touching the Articles concluded in the late general
Assembly holden at PERTH 1618.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1619.

THE PREFACE.
IT is profitable, and considering the times we now live in, very necessary,
that the lives and deaths of Gods faithful servants, (such as was this worthy
Person) be registered, and commended to Posterity (as well for examples to the
living, that they may know how to walk in a good Conscience before God, as to
preserve the fame of the righteous after their death, from the reprochful
detractions of the wicked. And this last, charity toward our Brethren
departed, requires of us then especially, when the wrong done unto their
memories, tends to the discrediting of the service, wherein they were by God
employed in the time of their life. For though it be true, that lies and
calumnies can never long prevail, and that Truth, by some rightly called the
Daughter of Time, will at last break forth, as the light, and shine as the
noone day, to the justifying of them that have feared the Lord, and been
careful to approve their courses unto him: yet in the mean while, preiudices
may possess the minds of many not evil affected: and while they lack better
information, by mis-reports they may be made to think and speak of persons
and matters otherwise then they should. Neither can we be excused, if we shall
keep silence, and forbear to give witness unto the Truth, when perverse men
take such liberty, as we see, to vent lies both by speech and writing, only
to confirm others in wicked and rebelli^us courses. This respect, albeit there
had been no other, is a sufficient reason for the publishing of this Discourse;
written by that faithful Servant of God, of himself, some two years before
his departing, and since found amongst his papers: for as in his life there
wanted not enemies to charge him with many false imputations, whereof himself
did often complain; so yet after his death, when humanity it self might
teach them not to disquiet the ashes of the dead, they forbear not to lay upon
him and the manner of his death, false and foul aspersions, albeit no man,
while he lived, did walk in all his ways with a b^tter conscience; nor any of
the Saints of God did ever conclude his days more peaceably, and with better
Resolution.

Concerning his life, which was not idle or fruitless, as his writings already
come forth, and others that shortly will see the light, may sufficiently
witness; we remit you to this Discourse penned by himself, as it seems,
when he found his sickness beginning, which put an end to his days: And for his
death, whereof there were many witnesses, the form and manner thereof we have
annexed, to stop the mouths of ungodly men, and give all that fear the Lord,
an example of dying, and occasion of thankefulnes to Almighty God, who
vouchsafed so mercifully to rid his servant of the miseries of this life, and
receive him to his joy, and that place of felicity, where we are persuaded now
he rests.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF W. COWPER, BISHOP OF GALLOWAY.
This Discourse was penned by himself on the first of January. 1616.
MY life has not been such, that I am ashamed to live longer, if my gracious
God have any further service to employ me withal in his Church: Neither am I
so desirous to live; but yet I am willing, and heartily content to remove out
of this body, that I may be with my Lord, freed from these restless
tentations, which on every side have sore pressed, but, through his grace,
never oppressed me.

In my younger years I was trained up with the wrestlings of God; from my
youth I have borne his yoke, exercised with his terrors; yet, so that many a
time his sweet consolations have refreshed my soul. In my old days men have
risen against me, but without a cause: betwixt these two my days are spent: my
Witness is in heaven, He knows that in every state of life, my heart was
ever toward the Lord; it was my joy to serve him, and my grief when I sinned
against him.

Being of the age of eight year old, about Martimas I was carried by my father
from Edenborough to Dunbar School, I could not write, nor read any Latin
then. I tarried there till my twelft year; even then did the Lord begin to
acquaint my heart to seek him: we went two and two to the Church; he put then
this prayer in my heart every day in the way, Lord, bow mine care, that I may
hear thy Word. In the School many a time have I turned on my face, seeking
from God knowledge and understanding. In the space of four years and less, I
learned the whole course of Grammar, wherein God made me to prosper, not
inferior to others in the company with me.

From thence I was called by my Parents to Edenborugh, and in the entry of my
13. year, sent over to S. Andrews, and passed in course of Philosophy there
in the 16. year: there made I not such progress in knowledge, as I had done
before in my other Studies, either mine age not being capable of it, or my wise
and merciful Father not thinking it expedient for me; yet even there was the
seed of grace still working in me, inclining me to a careful hearing and
penning of Sermons, and Theological lessons, as I could have occasion to hear
them. And here Satan working in corrupt nature, sought many a time to trap me
in his snares, intending in my young years to give me that wound, that night
have been a mark of shame to me in my old age, when the Lord should call me
to do his Work: but as on the one part I felt my weakness compared with the
strength of corrupt nature; so though then I could not discern it, afterward I
had proof it was the Lords preventing mercy, that kept me from being an
offense unto his Church. It is his mercy that he pardoned the vanities and
ignorances of my youth, and his mercy also that he preserved me in all my life,
from any that could make me a shame to his Saints, or a scorn and reproach to
his enemies.

Having passed my course in S. Andrews at the age of sixteen years, I
returned to my Parents in Edenborough, I was pressed by them to enter into
sundry sorts of life I liked not; for my heart still inclined to the study of
holy Scriptures: whereupon I resolved to go into England, where I evidently
perceived the Lord going before me, and providing for me at Hoddesdon, within
eighteen mile of London, my mean portion which I had being all spent (I
speak it to his glory that cared for me:) in that same place, that same day
was I desired by our kind countriman Master Guthrie, to help him in the
teaching of a School; with whom I remained some three quarters of a year, but
after did the Lord lead me further: for having occasion to go to London,
without my knowledge, or any suite of mine, I was called to the service of a
learned Divine Mr. Broughton, unto the which with good will of Mr. Guthrie I
entered, and there remained about a year and a half, daily exercised under him
in the study of Theology. To him under God, and some other learned Divines of
that City, do I acknowledge my self bound for these beginnings of knowledge I
then received.

In the nineteenth year of my life, I returned again to Edenborough, where
having the commodious occasion to be with my elder Brother, then one of the
Ministers of Edenborough, I still continued in the same study, and at length
was required to give a proof of my gift privately, which I did in the new
Church in presence of Mr. Robert Pont, and Mr. Robert Rollock, with sundry
others of the Ministry: then after that, I was required to teach publicly in
the new Church on a Sabbath in the afternoon. And the next week I was
command^d to teach publicly in the great Church, in time o^ a Fast, on a
Thursday in the afternoon. Thus did the Lord train me up, and these were the
beginnings of my Ministry, which I recount to the praise of his grace, who
counted me faithful, and put me in his service.

A little after that, in the beginning of my twentieth year, there ensued a
general Assembly of the Church at Edenborough and by their authority wa^ I
sent out and appointed Pastor of Bothkenner in Stirling Shire, for that Church
had been desolate ever since the reformation, and the people had given in
their supplication to the Assembly for a Pastor. This calling of God and his
Church I embraced and went unto them, where I found the desolation so great,
that except the walls, which were ruinous also, neither door, nor window, nor
seat, nor Pulpit, nor any part of a roof was there at all; yet pleased it God
to give such a blessing to the Ministry of his Word, that their hearts thereby
were stirred up cheerfully to build the Lords House, which most willingly they
fully resolved within half a year, not content to build their own part of the
House, but the Quire also, which of due should have been done by the Parson:
there needed here no letters of homing nor other compulsitories: neither
content to have built it only, they adorned it within and without it, not
inferior to any other Church of such quality round about it. This was my first
external seal, and confirmation of my calling to the Ministry.

In this service I remained seven or eight years, subject to great bodily
infirmities, by reason of the weakness of the Soil in Winter, and the
unwholesome waters thereof. And here did the Lord first begin to acquaint me
with his terrors, and the inward exercises of sundry sorts of tentations; so
that between these two, my life was almost wasted with heaviness; yet I
bless the Lord for it, it was unto me like the wilderness of Midian to Moses,
a School of tentation, whereby I learned daily more and more to know Christ
Jesus, gathering some store of knowledge thereby, inward exercises, and outward
studies, which the Lord afterward called me to give out in more publik places
in his Church, for the necessity of increasing, disease forcing me to bethink
of a transportation, the purpose of my mind was to another Church unplanted in
the South, some 8. mile from Edenborough, but the Lord still continued his
calling, and drew me another way Northward: for at the same time, there
interuented a general Assembly of the Church at Perth: there was I nominated,
and with consent of the Assembly and people was I written for to that
Ministry, as the letters of both, sent to me out of Perth, with my dear
Brother Mr. Patrick Simson, yet extant do bear. Thus did the Lord clear my
way before me, and lead me there, where I thought never to have gone; yet two
or three days before, did the Lord give me some signification of it, but I
understood it not, till the event did teach me: for in my thoughts in the
night, there seemed a man to lead me by the hand to a little pleasant City, in
a plain valley on a rivers side, having some banks lying at the shore
thereof (as indeed it had the first time, that after this I was brought to it,
such a sight got I of it, in that vision, as afterward I saw with my eyes) he
led me a long time up and down the streets of that Town from one to another,
at length carried me over the water to an hill, and led me up unto it, by many
turnings and windings from one earth to another, very near unto the top
thereof. Then did I awake, my face looking to the South-west. This made such an
impression in my mind as after that I could never get forgotten. Let no man
here impute to me, the superstition either of Papists or Anabaptists. I know,
there is no revelation now of doctrine, or new article of faith, to be sought
out in dreams. The Lord has spoken once for all now unto us by his Son in
the Word; but that the living Lord who sleeps not, can give warnings to the
souls of his servants, when their bodies are sleeping, no man acquainted with
his working, I trust will deny it.

After this, three or four days, as I said, returned Mr. Patrick Simson from
the general Assembly at Perth, to Sterling, and delivered me Letters from the
Assembly and the town, containing my calling to that Ministry. The town
shortly after sent their Commissioners, to transport my self and my Family.
There I continued doing the work of God, for the full space of nineteen
years. How I did carry my self in my open conversation, living amongst them
not as one separate from them, but mixed my self in all their fellowships, as
a comfort to the best, and a wound to the worst inclined sort, this Age will
not want loving witness to record it. My diligence in like manner in the
Ministry, not only on the ordinary days, but on others, which I
voluntarily chose thrice a week in the evening: to wit, Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday, for a preparation to the Sabbath, (for these days they had no
preaching in the morning;) It would have done a Christian heart good, to have
seen those glorious and joyful Assemblies, to have heard the zealous cryings
to God among that people with sighings and tears, melting hearts and mourning
eyes. I speak the truth in modesty, and not all the truth. It is not
vaine-glorying, I abhor that; not I, but his grace in me. Why shall it offend
any man, that I eat the fruit of my labor, and that my conscience this day
enioyes the comfort of my former painfulnes, and fidelity? My witness is in
he^uen, that the love of Jesus and his People, made continual preaching my
pleasure, and I had no such joy, as in doing his work. Some witnesses also I
want not to remain: For albeit my charge was to teach five times in the week,
yet this was more, that I penned thereafter, whatsoever I preached, whereof
some are already extant, others, by Gods grace, if the Lord spare my days,
shall come in their time. And in outward things, what care I had to see the
House of God there honored, the welfare of that people every way, there are
monuments standing to witness for me, when I am dead.

All this time, except some little intermissions and breathing times, did the
LORD still exercise me with inward tentations. O what a vicissitude of
estates! O what a variety of combats! It were tedious here to set them down
all, as they were done and fought: but this I must say, the end of all and
every one of them were unspeakable joy. And once for all, in greatest
extremity of horror, and anguish of Spirit, when I had utterly given over,
and looked for nothing but confusion, suddenly did there shine (in the very
twinkling of an eye) the bright and lightsome countenance of God proclaiming
peace, and confirming peace with invincible reasons. O what a change was there
in a moment? The silly soul that was even now at the brinke of the pit,
looking for nothing, but to be swallowed up, was instantly raised up to Heaven,
to have joyful fellowship with God in Christ Jesus; and from this day forth my
soul was never troubled with such extremity of terrors. This confirmation
was given me on a Saturday in the morning; there found I the power of Religion,
the certainty of the Word: there was I touched with such lively sense of a
divinity, and power of the Godhead, in mercy reconciled with man, and with me
in Christ, as I trust, my soul shall never forget: Glory, glory, glory be to
the joyful Deliverer of my soul out of all adversities for ever.

In the midst of these wrestlings with God, all this time wanted I not
combats with wicked men, like those Beasts at Ephesus, with whom Saint Paul
did fight. All the time of my residens year continued this battle; as one
left off, another still renewing the battle: but the greatness of my inward
conflicts made me regard lightly all their outward contradictions, and I
esteemed them but like the bitings of a Flea. I resolved with my self, It was
no marvel to see Satan stir up his wicked instruments to disquies me, since
I professed my self a disquieter of him, and his Kingdom: yea my comfort was,
that I had never a controversy with any of them but for their sins: God
knows I loved their persons and estates; therefore did the Lord assist me, the
power of his Word hammering down their pride, they were al of them by course
brought to the acknowledgement of their sins.

But at length, as God turned the heart of Pharaoh and his people from the
Israelites, when the time came that he would have them to remove out of Egypt:
so by little and little did the zeal and love of the most of this people, at
least, in my sense, fall away; so that at last, my battle was not with such as
were like the Publicans and sinners, (for these now were turned my favorers
and comforters,) but with such as seemed before Iusticiars, I mean,
unrebukable men for outward offenses: These men found I stuffed with such
pride, self-conceit, disdain, and intolerable contempt, as carried them
further from their duty, then any of the former: yea, such as above others
should have been my comforters, were my crossers: That I had cause to say with
Micah, The best of them are Briars. But I trust it repents them ere now: And
therefore pray I God not to lay it to their charge. I will have none of my
words extended to that handful there, which truly scare the Lord.

Now about this time God had opened to me a door, and called me to the charge
of the Churches in Galloway, in the South-west part of this Kingdom: for being
named with others, by the general Assembly of such as they thought meet to be
preferred to the Episcopal dignity (whereof I ever acknowledged my self not
worthy) and recommended by the Fathers of our Church; it was his Majesty's
pleasure to present me to that Benefice, due to the office whereunto the
Church had called me. God knows, this was done without my knowledge, or
seeking, directly or indirectly. For I could have been contented all my days
with a private life, resolved to give honor and obedience in God to such as
were called to these places; after that once it was established by order in our
Church, and I had considered the lawfulnes, antiquity, and necessity of it
among us.

Here was I neither guilty of Ambition, not of any precipitate embracing of
it; for between the date of his Ma: presentation, and my acceptance, there
interuened eighteen weeks.

Yet as the Calling to this Work was greater, then any other whereto I had
been led before, so greatest opposition was there made unto me by men, whose
lying Libels, and carnal contradictions forced me to spend more time
unprofitably, then I had done before since my entry to the Ministry. The Lord
forgive them, and me also where, in the manner of my answering, I have been
sharper then became Christian meeknes. For as to the matter it self unfeignedly
I followed my light, I esteem it a lawful, ancient, and necessary
government; I see not, nor have not read of any Church that wanted it before
our time: Only the abuses of it by pride, tyranny and idleness, have brought it
in misliking. From these evils I pray the Lord preserve his servants, that now
are, or hereafter shall be called to those places; but there is no reason why a
thing good in it self, should be condemned or rejected, for the evil of
abuse: for so no good thing at all should be retained in the Church. And in
this Calling how I have walked, and what my care was to advance the Gospel
there, I trust I shall not, nor yet do want witnesses.

In this estate do I now live; my soul always in mine hand, ready to be
offered to my God; where, or what kind of death, God has prepared for me, I
know not: but sure I am, there can be no evil death to him that lives in
Christ, nor sudden death to a Christian Pilgrim, who, as Job says, every day
waits for his change, yea, many a day have I sought it with tears, not out of
impatience, distrust, or perturbation, but being weary of sin, and fearful to
fall into it. Concerning those who have been my enemies without cause, and
charged me with many wrongful imputations, from which my conscience cleares
me, excusing me of these things, love of gain, and glory, or such like whereof
they accused me: The Lord lay it not to their charge. I go to my Father, and
wish his blessing to them, to rectify their judgments, and moderate their
affections with true piety from faith and love.

AMONGST THE SAME Papers, we found three short Meditations, whereby he
comforted himself, whilst he found his death approaching, written also with
his own hand, and bearing date the seventh of December. 1618.
NOw my soul be glad: at all parts of this prison, the Lord has set to his
Pioners to loose thee, Head, Feet, Milt and Liver are fast failing; yea the
middle strength of the whole body, the stomach is weakened long ago. Arise,
make ready, shake off thy setters, mount up from the body, and go thy way.

Let me tell you that which I know, yea foreknow, yet I, after others have
foretasted before you. Death is somewhat drieric, and the streams of that
Jordan between us and our Canaan, run furiously; but they stand still, when
the Arc comes. Let your Author be cast within the veil, and fastened on the
Rock Jesus: Let the end of the threefold cord be buckled to the heart, so
shall ye go through what threads the cord is made of. I cannot now tarry to
tell you, who knows: but if ye ask, God will teach you.

I saw not my children when they were in the womb; there the Lord fed them
without my knowledge: I shall not see them when I go out of the body; yet
shall they not want a Father.

This faithful Servant of God, who from the time of his entry into the
Ministry had always showed himself diligent and painful in his Calling;
notwithstanding that his Sickness grew daily upon him, was no way deficient in
his duties of ordinary preaching, taking great pains also to perfect his Work
upon the Revelation, which he had begun, and desired greatly to finish it
before his dying. Besides which studies, the grief he conceived for the
backwardnes of unruly spirits, in giving obedience to the Articles concluded in
the late Assembly, and ratified by authority, to the great disturbance of the
Peace of the Church, which he labored carefully in all his life to procure,
did hasten him not a little to his end. So as in the beginning of January 1619.
his infirmity increasing, he was compelled to keep at home, and not to go
any more abroad: yet as his weakness did permit, he gave himself to reuise
his writings, and dispose of his worldly affairs, that he might be ready for
his passage, which every day he expected. And some ten days before his
departure, having his mind freed of all earthly business, to those that
visited him, he manifested a great contentment he had in his approaching
death. The Wednesday before, which was the tenth of February, The Bishops and
some other Brethren being assembled at Edenborough for certain affairs of
the Church, took occasion to meet at his house because of his Sickness,
which he took most kindly, and continued with them that whole afternoon,
giving very wholesome advice in matters propounded, and showing himself as
pleasant and iocund in speeches as ever before. Howbeit, even then he
signified to them that his death was drawing near, and declared his mind
somewhat disposedly, concerning his Successor. The days following, he kept
with all that came to visit him in most holy and Divine conferences, expressing
a great willingness of exchanging this life, with that better. And upon Monday
which was the fifteenth of February, at one of the clock in the afternoon,
feeling his strength and spirits to decay, after he had conceived a most
heavenly prayer, in the company of those that were by him, he desired to be
laid in bed, (for the days before he arose always, and either walked or sat
in his Chamber:) which being done, after he had again commended himself most
devoutly unto Almighty God, he took some quiet rest: after which he spoke not
many words, but those that he uttered show his memory and other senses to have
been perfect, his tongue only failing him; and in this sort about seven of
the clock at night, he rendered his soul to God in a most quiet and peaceable
manner. His body the seventeenth of February was interred, according to his
own direction, in the Churchyard, called the Blacke-Friers at Edenborough, in
the South Side of the new Church, and was conveyed to the place by the Earl of
Dumsermeline, Chancellor, and the rest of the Honorable Lords of Council,
with the Magistrates of the City, and many others. The Funeral Sermon being
preached by the most Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of St. Andrews.

THE BISHOP OF GALLOWAY HIS answers to such as desire a resolution of their
scruples against the Acts of the last Assembly holden at Perth in the month of
August, 1618.
Mercy, grace and peace be unto all them that love the Lord Jesus.
We are commanded by S. Peter to give a reason of that faith which is in us,
and so will I: No good Christian differs one from another in any Article of
faith: for our belief is a short compend of the Scripture, and I have preached
all the Articles thereof, I believe all.

As for Papists; where they differ from us, see what I have professed in my
writings, published in Print, and I am resolved to dye in the same mind: what
that is, they may perceive by the seven days conference betwixt a Catholic
Christian, and a Catholic Roman.

By that threefold Treatise upon the 8. to the Romans.

By that Anatomy of a Christian.

By that Alphabet for Sious Scholars.

By that Treatise of Jacobs wrestling with God.

And that of Christ's Genealogy.

And another, of his Baptism.

And the third of his combat with Satan in the Wilderness.

By that which I entitled, A defiance to Death.

By that Preparatiue to the new Passover.

By the Treatises of good news from Canaan, on the 51. Psalm.

By the Heavenly Mansions, and the Praise of Patience.

By the Conversion of the Prodigal Son.

By that comfortable Dialogue betwixt God and a troubled Soul.

And that begun Commentary upon the Apocalypse; beside many others.

These have done good to many good Christians, and I hope, shall do when I am
gone. And as for these needelesse controucrsies that make diverse voices among
us: I say, some conscientious with little knowledge, these I love, others
contentious with less knowledge, these I pity, willing them always to
remember, that to them who are countentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath, Romans 2. 1. yet wishing to
them mercy and light to illuminate their minds.

OF DAYS.
IN my mind, no King on earth, no Church may make an Holy Day, only the Lord
who made the day, has that prerogative, and he has sanctified the seventh
Day, yet either a Christian King or a Church may separate a day by preaching;
and that either ordinary as we have Tuesday, or extraordinary for fasting and
humiliation, or then for solemn joy and thanksgiving. This is, and has been
ever the lawful practice of our Church, and continual, who at such times has
commanded cessation from ordinary trades, both before and after noone, that so
the people might frequent the Assembly, I hope, no other purpose be in our
Prince's Proclamation, whereat so many are offended: and if any cause of
offense be, it is to be mended with humble supplication, not with rebellious
contradiction. Brigh^man on the 11* of the Revel. records, that the day wherein
Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, after the Maria^ persecutions, was observed
with anni^ersary or yearly Sermon, even by those who in that country are
enemies to Episcopal government, of which number himself is one. So we have
preaching and public rejoicing the 5. days of August and November, for that
double deliverance of our gracious Soueraign, whom the Lord may long continue a
comfort to his Church: and I am sure, we have greater cause to rejoice at the
remebring of Christ his Nativity: Albeit, Herod and Herodians in upper
Jerusalem were against it, when Angels, heavenly Soldiers, and Saints redeemed
were singing in Bethlehem, Glory be to God in Heaven, and peace to men on
earth, I will rather sing with the one, then startle with out cause with the
other. O but this is not the day of His Nativity. I answer, Let it be for it
is not the day; but the benefit we remember, which no good Christian will
cle^y should be done: sure it is, he was borne, dyed upon Good Friday, and the
3. day he rose, the 40. day after he ascended, ten days after his Ascension,
he sent the Holy Ghost, which from his resurrection is the 50. day, called Acts
2. the Pentecest: all this is according to the Articles of our faith, expressly
set down in Scripture: and why do then men make such scruple to remember our
Lords Nativity, in such a day as Christian Catholics, in all ages have
remembered it? But here they say, We remember his Nativity every day. I
answer, This is like that presumption of the young man who spoke to Christ in
the Gospel, All thse* (says he) have I done from my youth. He spoke out of
ignorance, affirming he had done the thing he did not: And so do they Lappeale
to their own consciences, how many days of the year will pass, wherein they
have not so much as mind of his Nativity? But if it were as they say* that
they remember his Nativity every day, why make they it strange to remember it
on this day also? Yet (say they) ye remember it this day more then another. I
answer, And why every good Christian has his own days chosen by himself;
some for fasting, some for thanksgiving for particular benefits; what a private
Christian may lawfully do, ye make it unlawful, a Christian Church to do
specially; where we go in the Communion of Saints, with all the present
Reformed Churches in Europe. In France there most notable Preachers give the
Communion on that day, as did also the ancient Primitive Churches throughout
the world, as testifies S. Augustine in his Epist. 118. 119. So did our own
old Scottish Church also, for 800. years after Christ, before ever it was
polluted with Papistry, as I have proved in my forenamed Conference; whosoever
likes to read it. But (say they) we have no commandment in the Word to do
it. For answer, Let them distinguish betwixt that which is substantial or
real, in Religion, and that which is circumstantiall or rituall. A point
substantial, must have an express warrant in the Word commanding it: For that
which is circumstantiall it is sufficient, if it be not against the Word, it
being left to be ordained by Ecclesiastical authority. As for example to
preach in season and out of season, is a substantial point: For it, we have an
express command in the Word: what day of the week ordinary preaching should
be beside the Sabbath, that is circumstantiall, and left to the determination
of the Church, who by the same authority, that they may ordain preaching such
a day of the week, may also ordain preaching such a day of the month in a
year. Again, he that sins openly, shall be openly rebuked. This is
substantial in Religion, and we have an express command for it. But to set
him on a Pillar three days, or more, or fewer, is circumstantiall: such as our
Church, without doing wrong against the Word of God, has determined, I
acknowledge it to be a good order. And will any of these men condemn it,
because it is not an express command in the Word? Marriage is honorable among
all men; for man and woman to join without Marriage, is Fornication: this is
substantial, and has the warrant of the Word: But that first they must be
three days publicly proclaimed, that is circumstantiall, done by the Church
for good order, which I acknowledge sufficient, because it is not against the
Word.

Evil day, say they, was cast out of our Church: For answer, what they call
evil day, I know not: but a day reputed for the day of Christ's Nativity, and
observed for remembrance thereof, that I know. I find no Ecclesiastical Law in
all the books of our Assembly standing to the contrary* But if it have been
cast out, yet a thing not against the Word of God, upon good considerations may
be brought in again, albeit it had been cast out. Instances of this I might
bring from the Church of Geneua. One I bring from our own; since Baptism, not
upon a preaching day was cast out by act and practice, and yet is now received
again: Why may not preaching of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and sending of the holy Ghost on such days be received again,
albeit it had bin cast out? We were well, say they, before: what needs this
nouation? For answer, Conformity with the ancient and recent reformed Churches
requires it, except we will be singular. Beside this, the question here is
betwixt a Prince and his People, They will be nourished in their humors, not
remembering that a Christian Prince is also to be regarded, who finds himself
bound in conscience to see duties in Religion performed: what is evil in their
eyes, seems good in his. And here the debate falling betwixt their will and
his, about a matter not against the Word of God, let any indifferent man give
sentence who should be followed.

OF BAPTISM to be ministered in due time and place.
NOw for Baptism; Our Commission is to baptize, without limitation either of
time or place, decency always both for time and place being observed: so far
as may be: where the public order of the Church is not contemned, Baptism
should not be refused. It is not, will they say, necessary to salvation. I
grant that: I abhor that blind and merciless sentence of Papists, that
Infants dying without Baptism, go to any house of Hell. But albeit it be not
necessary to the childs salvation, who will deny, but it is a necessary, at
the least, a profitable help of the Parents faith? For our Lord has not
ordained it in vain. Where then a Christian parent requires it to his child,
either upon a preaching day, or other day, with what warrant a Preacher can
deny it, I know not.

OF PRIVATE COMMUNION.
THe same is my judgment of Private Communion. Here are two words would be
well understood. Private I call it, in respect of the public assembly, not of
a private person; Communion it is, in respect of many Christians partaking it.
Where a man has been a reverent hearer of the Word in the public Assembly,
and a reverent and careful receiver of the Sacrament there, if God suspend him
by sickness from doing of that duty, may we not sit beside him, and comfort
him by the Word? may we not pray together for him, and for our selves, even in
a private Family? And why also may we not give to him, and take to our selves
the Seals of the Covenant of mercy? The particular precepts hereof, both for
the person and place, I take not upon me to determine, but leave it to the
wisdom of the Preacher.

OF KNEELING AT THE COMMUNION.
THe hardest point of all, is Kneeling at the holy Communion, which is the more
misliked, because it was, and yet is abused by Papists, to Idolatry: that vile
error of transubstantiation, and worshipping of Bread, my soul abhors it.
But it is hard to condemn a thing lawful in it self, because it has been
abused: For what is so good, that has not or may not be abused? Shall not S.
Paul bow his knees to the Father of the whole Family in Heaven and in Earth,
God the Creator; because Idolaters bow their knees to the Creature? he was not
so scrupulous. If I should condemn Sitting at the Table, should do wrong to
my Mother the Church of Scotland. If I should condemn Standing, I should do
wrong to that Sister Church of France, which has stood for the Truth to the
blood. If I should condemn Kneeling, I should do wrong to the Church of
England, glorious with many Crowns of Martyrdom, and many other Churches
also. I like well that modest judgment of Peter Martyr, who thinks any of
these, Sitting, Standing or Kneeling, lawful. Our Church has determined, that
Kneeling seems the most reverent form, for receiving so great a benefit: and
the rude gesture of many of our People, in many parts of the Land, requires
that they should be led to a greater reverence of that holy Mystery, and
taught that by humble Kneeling, we shall at length be brought to a joyful
Sitting with Him for ever. But here it will be objected to me* that our Lord
and his Disciples sat at the Table. I answer; The Evangelist says, that as
He sat at the Table, he took Bread, and gave thanks. This seems to note the
time of the Institution; to wit, after he had done with the natural and
Paschall Supper, not the gesture: For why? S. Paul prescribing all that is
essential in the Sacrament, makes no mention neither of Sitting, Standing, nor
Kneeling: Yet he says, What I have received of the Lord, that I deliver to
you. If he received it, and delivered it not, he was not faithful. Which I
abhor to think. If he delivered it not, then sure he received it not. This
is the soundest and most safe course: It keeps all the reformed Churches free
from doing against the Word of God. For we must think, that S. Paul knew
certainly the mind of Christ: such as are conscientious, let them ponder this
well, the contentious I am not able to satisfy. If the expediency be set
aside, and the question be only of the lawfulnes, my Argument sta^ds yet
unanswered. Whatsoever spiritual benefit I may lawfully seek on my knees with
Supplication, that same I may receive lawfully upon my knees with thanksgiving.
But I may lawfully with supplication seek salvation by Jesus on my knees:
Therefore I may lawfully receive it on my knees. They answer nothing, who say,
I may not kneel to an Idol: For to Christ I kneel, praising him when I
receive the holy Symbols, and exhibiting instruments of his Body and Blood: and
it is madness either to make them Idols, as Papists do, or call them Idols, as
Male contents do.

Great murmuring is now against Pastors, who ply not their tongues to pleasure
the humors of people. God has opened their mouths to preach his Gospel; woe
will be to them that open their mouth to prattle against Pastors. He that
rewards evil for good, evil shall never depart from his house, says
Solomon, My son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with the seditious:
It is Salomons also. Let seditious Prattlers, or Libellers, whom though I know,
I spare to name, pause upon this. When unthankful Israel murmured against
Moses and Aaron, they both ran to the door of the Tabernacle, and the Lord
failed them never. He came down in the Cloud, to protect and comfort them.
Let all the servants of the Lord do so, when an ungrateful people renders them
evil for good; remembering that which the Lord said to Jeremy 15. 19, 20. Let
them return to thee, return not thou to them. They shall fight against thee,
but shall not prevail against thee for I am with thee. Blessed are ye when men
revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against ^ou falsely
for my sake: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven* for so
persecuted they the prophets, which were before you, Math. 6. 11.

I have opened my mind according to my light. To the^ that ask, Where was
this light before? my answer is, Remember what is said of our blessed Lord,
the Latchet of whose Shoo I am not worthy to loose. He increased in wisdom,
Luc. 2. 52. Shall it then be an imputation to his silly, weak, unworthy and
infirm servants, that they increase in wisdom, and grow in knowledge, as
they are commanded? Such as are contentious, I leave tumbling in the tumultuous
thoughts of their perturbed minds, raging like the waves of the Sea, forming
and casting out their own dirt and shame. For me, I rest in the peace of my
God, through Jesus Christ, which, blessed be God, I enjoy. A sore famine of the
Word of God is at hand, for the loathing of (...) and murmuring against Moses
and Aaron: there may be bread, but God will break the Staff of it preaching
of the Word in many parts, but without life or power, Prattlers, and lying
Libellers, Papists, or Atheists, I commend them to the mercy of God, that they
may be brought to repeutance. Let them read these words of our Savior, Math.
7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls
before Swine: Be not of that number, if ye mind to enter into that heavenly
Jerusalem. I will have nothing spoken here, extended to peaceable and truly
religious Christians, of which number God has a flourishing Church, both in
this Town, and in other parts of the Land: The Lord increase them. The Lord
grant peace to his own Jerusalem, and have mercy upon us, that we may prevent
these, and other immiuent judgments upon great and small, with unfeigned
repentance.

FINIS.

