THE SERMON PREACHED AT the Cross, Feb. xiiij. 1607.

By W. CRASHAWE, Batchelour of Divinity, and preacher at the TEMPLE;

Justified by the Author, both against Papist, and Brownist, to be the truth:

Wherein, this point is principally followed; namely, that the religion of
Rome, as now it stands established, is worse then ever it was.

2. TIM. 3. 13. The evil men and deceivers shall wax worse, and worse,
deceiving and being deceived.

Imprinted at London by H. L. for Edmond Weauer: and are to be sold at the
great North-gate of S. Paul's Church. 1608.

Academiae Cantabrigionsis Liber



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, ROBERT, Earl of Salsburie, Vicount Cramborne,
Lord High Treasorer of England, principal Secretary of Estate: Master of his
Majesty's Court of Wards and Liueries: Knight of the noble order of the Garter:
and most worthi^ Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, GRACE and PEACE.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe controversies betwixt G^^s Church and the Romish, have been on both sides
sufficiently debated heretofore: on our side with that plainness and
pourefulness that beseemes the truth; on the other, with such cunning and
shifts of wit, as falsehood needs: but on both sides with learning enough On
our side by Luther. Zuinglius. Oecolampadius. Calvin. P. Martyr.
, especially in these later times. By this means the particular points in
question, are now either opened sufficiently, or never will be: for when two
men go to law, (as we and the Papists do for our freehold, and title to the
truth) if one declare, the other answer, he again reply, and the other reioin;
it is not possible but the matter will be brought to a clear issue, if it can
have a full hearing and an indifferent Judge. Who should be the Judge herein,
but Gods Church, by the holy Scriptures? but Bucer. Melanct hon. Jewel. Fulke.
Whitaker. Reinolds. Zanchius. Beza. Iunius. Sadeel. etc.
those the Pope refuses. And then, how the Church, rather then in a free
general council? but that the pope fears, as a thief the Assizes See his
Bulla coenae which ye Pope himself denounces in his own person on the evening
before Good Friday: where he excommunicates, first, all heretics, as
Caluinists, Lutherans, etc. Next, all such as appeal from the Pope to a general
Council, vid. Co^stit. pont. Romans per Pet. Mathaeum. page 883.
. Til then, it is reason that every man, as far as it co^cerns his salvation,
be a judge herein according to the measure of his knowledge: for man is a
reasonable creature, and can judge of reason, when he hears it: so that
undoubtedly if the particular points (debated as they have been) had but a full
hearing, and an equal Judge: the differences betwixt us would soon receive an
end.

But our english papists are too blame in both: for first, they will On theirs,
by Eccius. Pighius. Clictoueus. Hosius. Harding. Bellarmine. Greg. de Valentia.
Genebrarde. Stapleton. Heskins, etc.
not hear both parties, nor read our books, but only theirs: (Here wants
the full hearing). Secondly, if they do, it is with a preiudicate conceit, that
whatsoever we say, the other are in the right; and here wants an indifferent
Judge. W^ilst it is thus, there will be no end of controversies.

Hereupon, wise and godly learnedmen, have upon great and mature deliberation,
thought it fit to spare the labor, (so often formerly spent in vain), and to
supersede for a time from arguing any more, the matters so sufficiently already
debated, but so insufficiently heard and judged: and have held it a better
course, (both for their conversion, and settling of our own) to discover the
fouleness and manifold abominations of popery, both for doctrine and
practice: which if many that be seduced, did but see in the true colors, surely
they would strike themselves on the breast, and be ashamed; and hating this
darkness, would long and look for light.

At this end have I aimed in the course of my poor studies: and that I might be
furnished with their own records, I have spared no cost to get them, nor time
to peruse them; and do protest unto your Ho. and the world, the reading of
their own books (especially the latest of all) has driven me into a deeper
detestation of popery, then any thing that ever I heard or read of it, out of
our writers. whereof whether there be cause or no, I dare refer my self to be
judged by your Lp. or any of indifferency, upon sight of these exceptions I
here make against them; which were for the most part delivered at the Cross
before a reverend and honorable audience: where having first discovered in the
body of that religion xx. wounds, wide, and deep, and deadly, even such as
strike at the heart and life of a Church; the end I then drove at was to prove,
that the Romish Babylon is not healed of these wounds, to this day.

This being done, it is strange to see how they spurned at it, and me for it;
affirming openly, it was nothing but a heap of lies and slanders, that I am
not able to prove what I said, nor dare stand to it, that we are set up to
rail on them, and have licenses to lie on them, and make them odious before
our people: and in the country they dispersed, I was called before authority
for it, and censured, and silenced for slandering and railing on the catholics
and that I was stricken by Gods hand, with a strange hoarcenesse after I began
to rail on them; and could not speak, etc.

Therefore to honor the truth, and to clear my self, but much more to show
that it is no trick nor policy of our State (as it is in popery A book was
printed in english in the college at Rome, wherein it is affirmed that we take
Catholics, and draw upon their legs boots full of hot boiling liquor, and
upon their feet hot burning shoes: and do put them into bears skins, and cast
them to the dogs to be pulld in pieces: all this and many such other set down
in pictures.
), to set up men with authority to rail and lie, thereby to make our enemies
odious; I have bin induced to publish what was said and so to justify out of
their own records what was affirmed of them. I ask them no favor, I seek no
corners, I refuse no trial; but let me be heard, and then judged and spare
not. If the particulars Feuardent a learned Friar, yet living at Par wrote in
latin 7. years ago, that we revile and reject that prayer to the holy
Trinity; Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus miscrere nobis. Thus writes he in his
Comment on 1. Pet. cap. 1. What will not he say, that dare say this? for, all
our common prayerbooks, now, and those in Q. ELIZABETH'S, and K. EDWARDS times,
do testify the contrary.
I lay to their charge be true, then how can they be the true Church? if they
be false, I refuse no censure: and will further say that if these 20. wounds be
yet healed, or if they can find such in our religion, he that can show me
either of these I will be his Convert.

To this end I have presumed to present it first to your Honor, and under your
honorable name, to the worlds view, not only as a testimony of the loyalty,
love and duty I owe your Honor for your many particular honorable favors;
but especially, for that we to our joy do find, and the Papists to their grief
do fear, that God has has raised up your Honor, in these declining and
desperate times (for so has Popery made them) to defeat their devises, to
countermine their plots, and to make them the instruments of their own ruin;
fit therefore and worthy to be the patron of that Treatise, which is a
discouerer of the^r spiritual impieties.

And surely (right Honorable) the churches hope over the Christian world is,
that God has ordained his Ma. of England to be the means (by the advice and
assistance of your Hon. and others like you whereof God send us more) to give
the whore of Babylon her last blow, whereof she shall never recover: which most
worthy work as God raised up your honorable Father (of happy memory) to
begin: Gretserus a Jesuit was suffered to write within these 2. years that we
rackt and tortured Garnet, even near to death to make him confess himself
guilty of the powder treason, but he did not, and so we having no proof ha^gd
him only for being a priest, and not for it. And that Oue^ (his man) was pulled
in pieces on the rack, and when we had so killed him, then we gave out he
had killd himself with a knife: But for the 1. we appeal to public records
and the worlds knowledge: and for the second, there yet live witnesses whose
eyes saw the wounds and bloody knife, and whose ears heard him freely and
penitently confess he did it with that knife, to escape the rack which he
said he feared but had never tasted.
So has he your Lordship, (paternarum virtutu^, (cur non etiam and
dignitatu^?) ex ass haerede^) to accomplish and bring to perfection. The
Father of mercy, and the Son of consolation, be praised for ever, for
sending such a father, and such a son, to be the Children of the Church of
England. Go on, noble Lord with courage and constancy, and this work of God
shall prosper in your hand. To this end, the same God assist, strengthen, and
protect your Lordship: and the blessed Father, for the blessed Sons sake,
double upon you his holy and blessed Spirit: whereto I am sure all good
Christians will say, Amen, With

Your Lordships devoted servant in Christ, WILLIAM CRASHAVVE.
Magna est veritas and praeualet.
The XX. Wounds found to be in the body of the present Romish religion, in
doctrine and in manners: and Proved in this Sermon not to be yet healed.
1. THe Pope is a God, and the Lord God, and such a head of the Church, as
infuseth spiritual life and heavenly grace into the body of the Church. page
53. etc.

2. The Pope has done more then God: for he delivered a soul out of hell.
page 57. etc.

3. God has divided his kingdom with the Virgin Marie, keeping Justice to
himself, but committing and giving up his mercy to her; so that a man may
appeal from him to her, page 60. etc.

4. The Popes decrees be equal to the Canonical scripture. page 69. etc.

5. The Christian Religion is founded rather from the Popes mouth, then from
Gods in the Scripture. page 71. etc.

6. The holy Scriptures are therefore of credit, and to be believed, because
they are allowed and autorized by the Pope: and being by him authorized, they
are then of as good authority, as if the Pope himself had made them. page 73.
etc.

7. Images are good books for lay men, and better and easier then the
Scriptures. page 80. etc.

8. An Image of God or a Crucifixe, or a Cross are to be worshipped with the
same worship as God and Christ, with latria that is divine worship. page 82.
etc. and that we may speak and pray to the Cross it self, as we do to Christ.

9. Friar Francis was like to Christ in all things, and had 5. wounds as
Christ, that did bleed on good-Fridaie; yea, he did more then Christ ever did.
page 96. etc.

10. The Pope may and does grant Indulgences, for a hundred thousand years,
and give men a power to redeem souls out of Purgatory. page 103. etc.

11. The Pope may annexe Indulgences for many thousands of years, to such
beads, Crucifixes, pictures and other like toies, that are hallowed by his
hands. page 107. etc.

The popish Church baptizeth bells. page 115. etc.

12. The Pope denies the Cup in the Sacrament to the Laity, tho Christ
ordained the contrary. page 120. etc.

13. The popish Church allows many sorts of sanctuaries for wilful murder.
page 122. etc.

14. Romish religion publicly tolerates, and permits Stews, and takes rent
for them. page 132. etc.

15. By the Popes law, he that has not a wife may have a Co^cubine. page 141.
etc.

16. Some men had better lie with another man's Wife, or keep a whore, then
marry a wife of his own. page 143. etc.

17. Priests in popery may not marry, but are permitted to keep their whores,
under a yearly rent. page 147. etc.

18. Such Priests as be continent, and have no whores, yet must pay a yearly
rent, as they that have, because they may have if they will. page 150. etc.

19. Their Liturgy is full of blasphemy, their Legend full of lies, their
Ceremonies of superstition. page 153. etc.

20. A general corruption of manners in all estates. page 156 etc.

To the Christian Reader whosoever, be he a true Catholic, or a Romish.
TO prevent all misconceits that might arise upon the so late coming forth of
this Sermon, so many weeks expected, I desire thee good Reader be satisfied;
the cause thereof, was a long and unlooked for journey. And now that you have
it, let me desire all men in the reading and judging thereof, to deal with that
ingenuity and sincerity, as I have endeavored in the writing of it. My
conscience speaks for me, I have forged no new Author, I have falsified none,
I have corrupted none, I have to my knowledge misalledged none: I have taken no
proof upon bare report, nor have I produced our men to prove what I lay
against them: nor is there one quotation of any Author of theirs, which I have
not diligently perused aforehand, and the whole scope of the place. If any
should think of answer, I desire him let pass all personal railing, and
by-matters, and come directly to the points in issue: which be these;

1 Whether the Church of Rome teach and practice in these xx. or xxi. points,
as I have charged her withal, or no.

2 If she do, whether they be healed of these wounds as yet, or no.

3 If she be not, the^ how she can be the true Church, which is so wounded, and
will not be healed.

If they do not teach and practice so, I will yield the Cause. And he that
can show me that either she is healed since, or being not healed, how she can
be the true Church, I shall willingly hear him, and thank him. I desire all
that profess themselves Papists, or their favorers, not to be so wilful as
to condemn what they know not, but only to give it reading, and then judge as
they see cause. Wright, in his Articles, lays to our charge many strange
Paradoxes: as, that we are all Atheists, and Infidels by our doctrine; that
we are bound by our doctrine to do no good works, and many such. And
Kellison in his Survaies, thrusts upon us that we deny Christ to be the only
Savior, and Judge of quick and dead, and many such abominations; all which
we renounce, and detest: yet, do what we can, we must have them laid upon us;
and our Writers and teachers have their speeches wrung and wrested, beyond
their meaning to make them sound that way. I dare appeal to the judgment of
Gods Church, and all Judicious Readers hereof, that I have not done so with
them, nor taken vantage of their words, when it is apparent they meant
otherwise; but charged the^ only with such points of doctrine and practice, as
themselves cannot deny but to be their own: and that not of one or two, but
(for the most part) generally received. Commending it to thy reading, and my
self to thy prayers, I leave us all to Gods blessing. At the Temple. May, 21.
1608.

Thy brother in the Lord, W. Crashawe.

The names of the Popish Authors produced in this Treatise; together with the
impressions here used.
A.
AQuinatis summa. Ven. 509 Idem, Antuerp. 85. Fr. Agricola de verbo dei etc.
Leod. 97. 8 Cor. Agrippa, de vanitate scient.
B.
BReuiarium Romanu^ vetust. Idem. 92. 4 Bernardini de Busto Manuale. Lugd. 511.
4 Idem, Colon. 607. 4 Bellarmini opera. Ingolst. 601. fol. Bernardi Morlanensis
poemata. 607. 8 Brigittae reuelationes. 517. Nuremb. fol. Bonauenturae opera.
Romae. Cl. Bonarscij Amphitheatrum honoris etc. 605. 4
C.
Geo. Cassandri Consultatio. Covarruvias variarum resolutio number. Corpus Iuris
Canon^ci per Greg. 13. Lugd. 91. 4 Idem cum glossis. edit. vetust. 507. and 510
Constitutiones Pont. Romans per Pet. Mathaeum. Lugd. 88 Caeremoniale Romanum.
Aug. Taur. 602. 4 Capella in Ieremiam. Tarracon. 86. 4 Coccij thesaurus
catholicus. Col. 99. fol. Costeri Enchiridion controuersiarum etc. Col. 600. 8
Alp. Ciaconus. Apologia pro Traiano etc. To. Caietanus, in Aquinatis summa^.
Ant. 68. fol. ^h. de Combis compendium theologicae verit. Lugd. 79 B. Corradus.
Quaestiones cas. cons. Ven. 600. 4 H. Cuickij speculum concubinariorum etc.
Lov. 600. 8.
D
Decretalium sextus. St. Durantus, de ritibus ecclesiae catholicae. To. 918
E
D. Erasmiopera. Bas. 4. fol. Espencaeus, in Titu^. Par. 68. Idem de
Continentia. 4.
F.
Io. Ferrariensis Practica Papiensis. Feuardentius in Petrum. 600. homiliae.
Par. 605 Firmamenta trium ord. S. Fra^cisci. Par. 512. 4
G
I. de Graffijs decis. aureae cas. cons. 604. 4 Ado. Gualandus de morali
facultate. To. 603. fol. Gregorius de Valentia. Ingolst. 98. fol. Ia. Gretserus
de Cruce. Ib idem 60. 4 Anas. Germonius de sacroru^ immunitatibus. To. 91 Io.
Gersonis opera. fol.
H
D. Hessi Synodus protesta^tium. Graeciae. Stir. 93. 8 Heskins his parliament.
Ant. 66. fol. Hosij. opera. Col. 84. fol.
I
Io. Chrysostom. a visitatione, de verbis dominae. Ven. 600. 4 Index librorum
prohibitorum. Clem. 8. 97
L
Liber Conformitatum beati Fra^cisci etc. Bon. 90. fol. Litaniae and preces pro
fide Catholica in Anglia etc. To. 603 Liber voc exercitium Christianae piet.
etc. Col. 92
M
Missalia vetust. and noua edit. 905 fol. Magnum speculum exemploru^. Duaci.
605. 4 Monumenta ordinis Minorum. Salmant. 511. 4.
N
Nauarri Enchiridion. Wirce. 93
O
Onuphrius de praecipuis vrbis Ecclesijs. Col. 84 Oleaster in Pentateuchum.
Ant. 68. fol.
P
Posseuini Apparatus sacer. Ven 603 fol. Pontificale Romanum vetust. Ven. 520.
fol. Idem, Romae. 1595. fol. Proctor his way home to Christ. 8 Pistorius contra
Mentzerum. Peraldi summa virt. and vit. Ant. 71. 8 Alb. Pighius de controv. in
Com. Ratispon. 42. and 49. 8
R
Rhemes testament: at Rhemes. 82
S
D. Stapleton. doctrine. princip. Par. 79. fol. Simancae Institutiones cathol.
Vallisol. 55. fol.
T
Tolleti instructio sacerdotum. Ant. 603. 8 H. Tursellinus de virgin
lauretana. Mog. 601. 8
V
Viualdi Candelabrum aureum. Brix. 95. 4 Vincentij ferrariensis prognosticon.
4. Vasquez, de cultu adorationis. Mog. 601. 8
W
Watsons quodlibets. 4
Z
Lae. Zecchius. Summa moralis theologiae: de casibus conscie^tiae. Brix. 98. 4
Ludouicus Viues de causis corruptionis artium. Catalogus reliquiaru^ and
Indulgentiarum in 7. Ecclesiis vrbis: Manuscript.
Other Authors alleged, not popish, or but in part.
Augustinus. Concilia per Crab. Col. 57. fol. Eadem per Bininum. Col. 606. fol.
Ca^bedeni Britannia. Land. 607 Colloquium Ratisbone^se. 4. 600 Epistolae
Iesuiticae. 601. 8. Euangelium Romanum. 600. 8 Centum grauamina Germanorum. 4.
Hospinianus de Templis. Tig. 603. fol. Harmony of confessions. 4. Zuinglius.
Cyprianus.
A SERMON PREAched at the Cross.
JEREMIAH. 51. We would have cured Babel, but she would not be healed: let us
forsake her, and go every one into his own country: for her judgment is
come up into heaven, and lifted up to the clouds.
THis is not spoken in person of the Angels that were set over Babylon (as
some think) Dion. Carthus. in hoc cap Hoc secundum Glossa^ est verbum Angelorum
sanctoru^ qui ad custodia^ Babylonis fuerunt delegati: quasi dicerent curare
voluimus Babylonem, sed non* est sanata etc. Et idem ipse Carthus. tenet in
moralitate eiusde^ capitis.
; for Angels have no charge of curing men's souls: they mourn for men's sins,
and rejoice at their conversion Lu 15. 7. 10.
; they guarde their bodies, Psalm. 34 7
and carry their souls to heaven Luke. 16. 22
but the curing and converting of the soul has God delegated to his Prophets,
being men like our selves; that so he might make man to love man, seeing he
has made man a sauer of man.

Neither is it the speech and protestation of hypocritical and fained friends,
who say thus to Babel, to make a great boast of their little love (tho some
hold so, whose judgment otherwise is of great respect Zuinglius in annot.
suis ^uper complan. in Ierem. super haec verba.
for the reason here given is too good, and the cause too divine, to proceed
from a profane heart. Her judgment (say they) is come up to heaven, etc.

But rather, it seems to be the voice of the true Oecolampadius: Tremel.
Iunius Calu. et fere omnes: and ex. Pap. Andr. Capella in suis Comment: and
plerisque ex doctoribus.
Church showing their love to Babell, and their longing desire to have done
good to their souls: Bring balm, (says the former verse) if she may be
healed. Heereunto, the Church answers: For our parts, We would have cured
Babell, but she could not be healed: we did our endeavors, but found her
incurable; therefore now, seeing we can do her no good, let us look to our
own safety, let us forsake her, and go every man to his own Country. For
now we see God will take the matter into his own hands; seeing man cannot
heal her, he will destroy her. Her judgment is come up into Heaven, and
lifted up to the clouds.

The particulars, considerable in this Text, be 4.

1. The Churches love to her very enemies, manifested in her desire to have
healed them: We would have cured Babylon.

2. The malicious nature and incurable state of Babell, causing a comfortless
issue of the Churches labors: She cannot be healed.

3. The Churches duty, upon consideration of her obstinacy and
incurablenesse: namely to lose no more labor upon her, but to abandon her and
look to herself: Forsake her, and let us go every man to his own country.

4. What becomes of Babylon being incurable, and forsaken of the Church? what
further remains for her? vengeance and destruction from God: her judgment is
come up into Heaven, etc.

All these are true in a double sense: namely, both

in the literal Babylon. and in the mystical

There is a Babell spoken of and literally understood in the old Testament:
there is a spiritual Babylon, mystically meant in the Old, and literally
spoken of in the New Testament. Both are spoken of in this place: the one
historically and literally; the other allegorically, and in a mystery: and
this interpretation is not without warrant; for it is ordinary with the
Prophets in the old Testament, when they speak of matters literally true at
that time, in and under them to point at further matters, of a more spiritual
and higher nature. For howsoever to destroy the literal and historical sense
of the old Testament (with some old, and many late writers that be Papists) is
worthily condemned by the Church as injurious to Gods word: Yet the literal
sense once laid, we may then warrantably extend the text to the allegorical
sense, as far as we see the holy Ghost in the New Testament, to go before us,
or to give us leave. Thus Peter makes an allegory, of Noah's Ark, and makes that
business a type of Baptism Pet. 3. 20. 21
: and Gal. 4. 24. etc.
Paul of Sarah and Agar, says by them another thing is meant: and ^o less
says S. John, of Babylon, as we shall see hereafter.

Touching the old and literal Babylon, all those points have been long ago
verified upon her, since the Prophet vttred them: The Church of the old
Testament 1 would have cured her: But she 2 could not be healed: therefore she
3 forsook her: and God 4 has destroyed her. And touching the mystical
Babylon, the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist, partly they are and partly
shall be made good upon her. The Church of the new Testament, 1 would have
healed her: But 2 she is found incurable: therefore when Christendom 3
forsakes her, God 4 will destroy her: the two first are already performed: the
third is a doing, and the fourth is sure to be fulfilled in Gods good time.

Of all these in their order:

Of the old and literal BABYLON.
Touching the old and literal Babylon, the The first Point.
first point is the Churches love and care of her good, in these words;

We would have cured Babylon.
COncerning which point and all the rest, we will not pursue the particular
historical matters: considering that the history of Babylons carrying Israel
captive, of their usage in their captivity, of their forsaking Babylon and
returning home again, and lastly, of Gods just vengeance and destruction of
Babylon, are so notoriously know^n. Therefore we will pass by the story, and
stand rather upon matter of doctrine.

First therefore let us observe this general doctrine, namely, that a good man
loves his very enemies, and not desires only but even seeks their good:
this did the Church of Israel to their enemies and persecutors. For these
Babylonians had done the greatest hurt to the Church and kingdom of Israel,
that ever one nation did to another: for first they invaded their land
unjustly; then they besieged and took Jerusalem, the seat of the kingdom,
took and slew their kings, overthrew their Kingdom, ruinated their State,
burnt their Temple, defaced their Religion, killed whom they would, carried
captive whom they would, and so left their land a heap of desolation Read for
this purpose the last chapt. of this prophecy together with the ends of the books
of kings and Chronicles.
: And yet worse then all this; being their Captives at Babylon, there they
mocked them in their misery, and scoft at their Religion. Come, (say they) you
that are these singers, and have had your Kings to be singers 2. Sam. 23. 1*
David etc.
: you that are these great Psalme-men, and have had your Kings such base
fools, as some of them to be Prophets, some Preachers Solomon. ^^. 1. 1. 2.
12.
, some song-makers David, Solomon, Hezekia^ etc.
: Come make us merry with one of your Psalms; let us have part of your Hebrewe
music: Sing us one of your songs of Syon Psalm. 137. 3
. Psalm 137. The least of these wrongs is heavy to be borne: but all put
together, and especially, for a Christian after all these miseries to be mocked
for his religion, and to see his God dishonored, oh how bitter is it to the
spirit of a man! Yet, after all this what do Gods people? not only pardon it
and put it up; but further, do both wish and seek their good; We would have
healed.

Thus to do is a mark of Gods child, and a sign of a true Church. For to do
evil for evil, and good for good, is no more then nature; even the publicans,
(says Christ) do so much Mat. 5. 46
: to recompense evil for good, is worse then nature; it is malice, and
perverse corruption: and therefore (says Solomon); He that does so, evil
shall never depart from his house Pro. 17. 13
. But to do good against evil, that is above nature, it is grace, and a god
evidence of Gods spirit: thus doing* says Christ, you are the children of your
heavenly father Mat. 5 44. 45
.

Hereupon for the use of this doctrine, we may see a comfortable evidence,
that our Church is the true Church of God; seeing that we pray daily for the
Church of Rome, which curses us: and it is very obseruable, that whereas the
Pope, with all solemnity excommunicates and curses us all to hell, on the
evening before good-Fryday Vide Bullam Coenae inter Constitutiones Pontificu^
Roman. page 883. In Constit. 13. Sixti 5. Consueuerunt Romans Pontif.
praedecessores nostri etc. Nos igitur vetustum and solennem hunc morem
seque^tes, excommunicamus and ana thematizamus exparte Dei omnipotentis, etc.
quoscunque Vssitas, Wiclyfitas, Lutheranos, Zuinglianos, Calumistas, and omnes
alios haereticos ^orumque fautores, receptores, libroru^ lectores, etc.
; we, for recompense, the next day morning in every Church and chapel of this
kingdom, and many places more, pray for the conversion and salvation of him and
al his sect See one of the prayers appointed by public authority in the
common prayer book for good-Fryday.
: and so by Gods providence it falls out that our public prayer for them, is
the same or the next day, when they have publicly cursed us: and this is the
fact of the whole Church in the public liturgy, appointed of old, and still
confirmed by authority. Therefore if Christ's argument be good, that private
men blessing their cursers, are the children of God; then sure this is not ill:
the church that blesses their cursers is y^ church of God. Let them therefore,
still go on in cursing, if they needs will: but let the^ take heed, least as
they love cursing, so it come unto the^, and as they clothe themselves with
cursing like a garment, so it come into their bowels like water and like oil
into their bones Psalm. 109. 17. 18
: we, contrariwise, let us not be weary of well doing: let us follow that
blessed Peter, whom they pretend to follow but do not, unless it be in denying
Christ) whose blessed counsel is; Render not evil for their evil, nor curse
for their curse; but contrariwise bless, knowing that we are thereunto called,
that we should be heirs of blessing 1. Pet. 3. 9
: thus doing we have Peter's own testimony against them, that we are a Church
of blessing, a blessed Church: and the Father of blessings, bless it more and
more, and all that seek the peace of it, Amen.

Thus we see generally, they wished her well: But what is the particular good
they wished her? namely, her healing and conversion. We would have healed her:
here many things might be pressed, I will but point at them. 1. That it is the
property of a holy man, to wish above all things the spiritual good of them
with who^ he lives: the wicked man seeks the spiritual hurt of men; the
natural man the carnal good: but the holy man their spiritual and eternal
good. Worldly matters have their time and place in his thoughts: but that that
takes up, and possesses his desires, is the spiritual good of them he loves,
namely, their conversion, their repentance, their salvation: these things be
worthy their prayers, and worthy of their pains. Heerin Gods children are like
to God their Father, who wishing good to his people, cries out: Oh that there
were in them (not the skill to rise in this world, and attain the honors and
ease of this life, but) a heart to fear my Commandments, that so it might
go well with them and theirs Deuteronomy. 5. 25
. God wishes no trifles to his children: But oh (says God) that Israel were
healed: and oh says Israel that Babylon were healed! Thus do God and good men
accord in their wishes. Learn thou, here, thy duty, if thou be Gods: thou
wishest for, and prayest for, and seek for many things for thy children, and
thy friends, thy wife and family. Thou clothest them, and feedest them, and
prouidest for them (else thou art worse then an Infidel) and preferrest them,
and much more: but all this is for the body. But, can thou say, from a good
conscience, I would have healed their spiritual diseases: I have heartily
wished, and faithfully endeavored their salvation. This is to be a true friend,
a true father, a worthy husband, and a good wife: happy they that have such
friends near them. 2. Observe further, they seek the salvation even of their
persecutors: so does always the holy man. Paul was put in prison, the gayler
tormented his body, and Paul healed and saved his soul Act. 16. 24. to the 35.
. Many a sinner, is made a happy man, by his prisoner: and the Martyrs often
times by their patience, their prayers and holy instructions, converted their
executioners and tormentors. As in the former point, a holy man is like to God:
so herin, to Christ, who when Judas and the Jews were conspiring his
destruction, the same hour was ordaining the holy sacrament, and establishing
the means of their salvation 1. Cor. 11. 23. etc.
.

Thirdly, Israel lives in Babel, and would gladly have her as holy as
themselves; we would have healed her. It shows the excellency of the nature
of holy things: they are fire, not in the flint, hardly bet out; but, in the
bosom, that will not be concealed. A man is not covetous of them: He is
indeed greedy to gain them; but not to keep them secret and to himself, as
in worldly things we are: nay he desires and joys to impart them to others;
and it is the joy of his heart to see others as good or better than himself.
Would God (says Moses) all Gods people were Prophets: and Paul wished from
his heart, not Felix the president and Agrippa the king alone, but that all
that heard him, were like him; not a prisoner and in bonds, but in grace and
goodness Act. 26. 29
. Hardly shall a man hear such voices in the world; I wish others were as rich
as I, as high as I, as learned as I, as much in credit and favor as I. No:
these things make men base and servile, selflouers and privately minded: but
grace and holiness is of a royal and excellent nature, and inlargeth the
heart wherein it is, with such love to other men, as nothing more contents him
that inoyeth it, then to make others as good as himself. Lastly, where it is
said, they would have healed the Babylonians with whom they lived; see what a
good neighbor, a holy man is: he comes, he dwelles, he soiournes in no place,
but he seeks the good of it. Lot would gladly do good in Sodom: if he can
do none, at least his righteous soul shall be vexed, for their sins 2. Pet.
2. 8
. Israel soiournes in Babel, and had rather be away; yet while they be there
they will cure her if they can: and if she cannot, yet Babell shall thereby
know that Israel was amongst them. Thus the whole shyre and parish shall fare
the better by one good man dwelling among them. He comes no where but
presently he considers what that people wants, what is their disease, what he
may do to heal them, or any way to help them: he comes no where but he leaves
behind him signs of his goodness, monuments of his holiness, and a sweet
savor of his virtues. Thus every place is better for him where he comes: and
when he is gone, his memory is blessed, his virtues praised, his name honored,
and his person loved. Contrariwise, the wicked Extinctus amabitur idem.
leaves behind him the stink of his ungodliness, and momuments of his pride,
his cruelty, his wantonness: Come (say they) let us leave some token of our
pleasures in every place Wisd. cap. 29
. Thus every place is worse for him, while he stays, and his memory rots when
he is gone. Let us learn of Gods Church here, so to behave our selves in all
places, where we live, or where we come, that the good may be helped, and the
evil healed by us, that we may be able to say; Them I found good, I
encouraged: whom I found sinful, I would have healed. Thus shall we be
honored while we are there, praised when we are gone, and ever loved and
blessed both of God and good men: and the mouth of wickedness shall be
stopped. And thus we have the particular good they wished to Babylon, namely,
her curing, that is her conversion and salvation.

Touching which healing of Babylon, there be three particular circumstances,
implied in these words;

namely, who they would have healed. how whom

The first is Who they be that would have cured Babylon: the Text says, We
would, that is not the Prophets alone, or the people alone, or the Princes
alone, but We, that is all together: the Prophets would, as we may see in
Daniel and Ezekiel See their prophecies.
: the Princes would, as we may see in SHIDRAK, MISAK, and ABEDN^GO Dan. cap. 3.
. Noble young Gentlemen of Israel, and the people would have cured her, as is
plain both here, and in the 137. Psalm.

Where we may learn, that howsoever properly, and peculiarly, and more
principally it is the office of the Minister: Yet it belongs also to every
Christian, to perform the duties of holy and spiritual edification, to them
with whom he lives, for their spiritual good. Not only the Prophets here
would have cured Babylon, but even those three young gallants, being noble
Courtiers, gave a worthy example, to all of their age and rank, of admirable
courage and constancy in Gods cause, choosing rather to die, then deny their
God and worship an Idol, checking the Kings impiety, and condemning his
idolatry to his face, rather like Prophets then Courtiers. Such were their
speeches, and such their sufferings, their words so wise, their sufferings, so
valorous, and all for their God, that this alone had been sufficient to have
cured Babell, had she not been incurable. Oh happy kingdom where be such
Nobles, and blessed that Court, that cherishes such Courtiers: the devil
should never have his church, where God has but his Chapel, if it were thus
in Christian kingdoms. The people also had their hand in this good business,
they ceased not in all the time of their captivity, to use all the means they
could to bring Babel from her gentilisme, and Idolatry; and therefore here are
bold to affirm when she is at the point of her destruction, We for our parts
are no way guilty of it: nay, if she would have been ruled by us, she had
never come to this, for* We would have healed her.

But how would they have healed her (may some say) what means used they? it
is soon said, We would: words are cheap. But gave they Babell nothing but
sweet words? Certainly, they were careful to use all good means: which
especially are

these 3. Instruction, Example, Prayer.

1. By continual instruction, laying open their errors, discovering their
impyeties, and laying before them the excellency of true religion.

2. By their continual example, practicing their own religion even before
their very faces, not fearing their scorns, and rebukes, no not the contrary
laws made purposely against them; as we may see in the example of Daniels
thrice a day praying to his God toward Jerusalem Dan. 6, 10.
: the people also in midst of their mirth would weep when they remembered Syon
Psalm. 137. 1. 2
, and would cast away their music and deprive themselves of all comforts,
when they remembered the desolatio^ of their religion. Which practices did no
doubt amaze the Babylonians, and had bin sufficient to have driven them into
deeper and better considerations (had they not been incurable) and it is to be
hoped that the sight hereof did good on some of them.

3. They endeavored to heal them by their prayers, praying continually and
desiring God to heal them: for as the Parent is said to bless his child, by
praying to God to bless him Genesis 27. per totum. and 48. 15 etc. to 21.
; so one may be said to heal another, by praying that GOD may heal him. And
that they did this duty, is no question: for it was so commanded them by the
Lord; Seek the prosperity of Babylon, and pray to the Lord for it, Ierem. 29. 7
. By these means, they endeavored the curing of Babylon, tho they were no
Prophets: and by these means, may one private man further the salvation of
another. Thus every good man is as it were a little pastor to his neighbor: and
happy were it for the Church of God, if all private persons would perform
these duties, one to another.

The third and last circumstance is, whom they would have healed: the Text
answers; Babel: where we observe two points.

First, that the Israelites aimed not at the conversion of the great ones, and
men of State only, but even at all the people of Babell. Whereby, it is
apparent they sought not themselves: for then they would have fisht for the
great ones only, or especially (as do the Jesuits, and craftier sort of
Friars at this day See Watson in his Quodlibets often.
; but they sought the salvation of souls, which they knew to be all alike
before God. For they had learned, before they came at Babel, that every soul is
Gods, the soul of the son, as well as of the father Ezech. 18. 4.
, and consequently of the subject and servant as well as of the king and
Commander, and the meanest man's as well as the mightiest: and therefore they
endeavored the conversion of all.

The godly and conscionable Minister, must here learn to have care of the
least and poorest soul in his parish, considering it is as dear and precious
as the best. For, as good hands made it, as the best Pro 22. 2.
: as precious blood was shed to save it, as for the greatest man's on earth Gal.
3. 28. 14
. Therefore, let them not be like those proud spirits, and carnal minded men,
that think ordinary parishes not worthy of them, and therefore will preach no
where but at the Court, or in great and solemn assemblies nor like those who
in their parish, will be acquainted with none, converse with none, co^fer with
none, visit none, but the rich and mighty; but as for the poor, they may live
and die as they can for them. Such men might remember the blessed Apostle who
kept back nothing, but taught (not in Courts and Palaces, and great house (...)
but) through every house, n Acts. 20. 20. ver. 31. ver. 26
and that he ceased not to w(...) every one, and stood upon it boldly, that he
was clear from the blood of all men (see: not some, but all): and in another
place expounding himself says, his continual course is to witness Gods will
both to small and great Act. 26. 22
. He that looks for Paul's reward, at Gods hand, must thus behave himself to
Gods people, remembering his account is not for trifles, but for souls, and to
that God who has told us before hand, Every soul is mine Ezech. 18. 4
.

The good father of the family must learn here, not himself, and his wife only,
but to see that his children, and servants, and those not some of the chief,
but all, even the meanest may know and serve God. Such a man was Abraham, he
was not careful for Isaac alone, his dear son, the son of the beloved:
but oh (says he to God) that even Ishmael might live in thy sight Genesis 17. 18
: and therefore God becomes Abraham's surety, he gives his word for him; I know
Abraham that he will (not look to some of his principal officers, but)
command not this son or that daughter, but his sons and his family to keep
the way of the Lord Genesis 18. 19
: and yet in Abraham's house were 318. persons born and brought up, etc. Genesis
14. 14
. More shame for the great men of this age, both in City and country (who
though they be great, and daily plot to be greater, yet keep they not so great
houses and families as Abraham did); in whose families, many of their inferior
officers, and servants, do scarce ever come to Church: and much more shame to
some parents, who being blessed of God with many children do partially respect
some of them, and seek their good of soul and body, and neglect others, who
it may be are more worthy: what would they do if they were profane and
undutiful Ishmaels, when they are so unmindful, and respectless even of such as
be holy, and dutiful Isaacs: but let such children comfort themselves in this,
that God their better father and best friend is no respecter of persons. These
are the ordinary faults of fathers and mothers in these days: but assuredly,
those that be heirs of Abraham's faith Gal. 3. 7
, will distribute their love to every one and care for the soul of their
meanest servants, and take order in their families, that all their officers,
every day (at least in their course) may go to Church, and their very
kitchinboies, and horse-boyes, may learn to know the God of their salvation
1. C(...) ^. 9
; that so he may be able to say with a good conscience, I found my family a
confused Babell of disorder and profaneness, but I have heartily endeavored to
make it a little Church: and tho my family be great yet there is not one who^ I
would not have healed. Thus they would have healed al: but where began they?
whom did they desire to win first and principally? certainly the greatest: as
namely, the K. and Counselors of State. This course took Daniel, in who^ (more
then in any one) this prophecy was fulfilled: who after he had done the
business for which the K. sent for him, then fell he to the business of God,
whereof is spoken in this text, namely to see if he could heal the king: o King
(says he) thou art a king; but there is a higher; know, know, that the heavens
bear rule. Wherefore o King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, break of
thy sins by repentance, etc. Lo, let there be a healing of thine error Dan
4. 24.
. Well knew Daniel, that if once the King would abandon his Idolatry, and
embrace the truth, easily would the people be induced to follow him: So, where
ever is true reformation either of errors in doctrine, or corruption in
manners, it must begin at the highest; else it will be to little purpose. To
little effect, were it in the natural body, to heal the hand and foot, when
the head is deadly sick; but heal the head first, and then more easily the
body will be cured: So in the spiritual body, how should Babel be healed,
when the King will not? how should they become Christian, when the king
persists a heathen: even so in our State, how shall popery be extinguished? how
shall vain swearing, wantonness, profaning of the Sabbath, bribery, and other
the sins of this age be reformed in the body of the people, if they be suffered
to harbor in the court, and to creep into the Kings privy Chamber? Private
persons will hardly be brought to esteem those to be sins, that are the
common practices of great persons. Therefore we have cause to bless God for
giving us such a King, as has care of religion, and who in his own person, is
an enemy to popery, a detester of wantonness, and injustice, and many vile
sins too commonly found in persons of his place. And let us not cease to
pray, that GOD would confirm him in all goodness, and that he may still go
on with David to reform the sins of the greatest* and them that are nearest
him: for when a King says, No wicked person shall serve me, nor abide in my
sight; then all wicked workers will easily be destroyed out of the land Ps. 101.
see the whole psalm.
. If this had been in Babel, she had been cured: but the want of this was the
cause of that that follows.

But she could not be healed.
The 2. point.
HItherto we have spoken of the first general point; namely, the loving and
holy care of Israel, They would have cured Babell: Now follows the second,
that is, the ill issue of their labors, caused by the obstinate malice of the
Babylonians, She would not be healed; some read, she could not be healed, some
she is not healed, all to one end; for he that will not be healed, is not, nay
cannot be healed: for God heals no man, conuerts no man, saues no man against
his will: therefore, he that will not be healed, cannot be healed; and so Babel is
incurable because she contemned the mean, and would not be healed. The godly
Israelites did all they could: but the Babylonians had their answer, (as ready
as now have the papists) Think you, you (seely Israelites) that you are able to
teach Babylon a better religion then it has? is not hers of so many, and so
many years continuance? was it not the religion our forefathers lived and dyed
in? and is it not general and universal over the world, and yours but in a
corner? and is not ours visible? and does it not prosper and flourish? and is
not yours condemned by the consent of all the world? and you for holding it,
justly overthrown and conquered by us? is not your visible Temple now defaced?
your public daily sacrifice ceased and your succession cut off? and if you
have any thing left is it not invisible, and in secret corners? and what can
you allege for your religion? That you have many learned men. Alas poor
men, for one learned Rabbine that you have, have not we twenty? are not the
Chaldeans the famoust learned men of the world, renowned for their high
wisdom, their skill in Astrology, interpretation of dreams, and other the
most secret and supernatural Sciences of the world? and do you think it
possible that so many learned Doctors can be deceived, nay all the world be in
an error, and only you that hold a particular faction, and a singular new
found religion, by your selves, should have the truth amongst you? Go, go,
poor souls, and sing the Hebrew songs by your selves: but meddle not with the
high mysteries of the Chaldeans religion. And what will you have more? Show if
you can one nation of your religion, but your selves: but all the world is of
ours. You will say you have a succession from Noah, and have not we so too? you
came from Shem: and came not we also from him, or at least from some other of
Noah's sons? You are but one poor branch of Shems root: there be many others
lineally descended from him, greater nations then you are; and do any of them
follow your faction? Look into the world at this day, and see if any nation
of all that came from all the sons of Noah be of your religion: all that came
of Cham are of ours, all that came of Iaphet are of ours, and all that came of
Shem, but only your selves. See then what fools you are to strive against so
strong a stream, and to forsake the a^ntient and known high-vvaie, so long,
and so well trodden and to take and choose a singular by-waie of your own. For,
did not all Nations walk in our way, and was there any one Nation of your
Religion, till one MOSES, and after him one SAMVEL, and DAVID, and a few
others (to make themselves great and to bring to pass their own purposes)
made a public reuolte from the Religion of all other Nations, and set you up
first a Tabernacle, and then a Temple of your own? Therefore you are to be
deemed and condemned for Schismatickes, who have cut your selves off from the
ancient and universal Religion of the World. And what though you can plead
continuance of some hundreths of years, yet what is that to our time? for
when you can scarce show three poor householdes in all the earth of your
Religion, (as namely, in the days of ABRAHAM and long both before and after)
then can we prove that all the Kingdoms and Nations of the whole earth were
of ours.

Never brag that Abraham is of your religion, and therefore you are ancient:
for his Father and his Grandfather were ours, and therefore we are elder.
During the time that you have had your Kings and Priests, show one nation by
you converted, or one that came and joined with you of all that time: and tho
God suffered you for a time, yet see how at the last he has brought you down;
and as you forsook us and the ancient religion, which we still keep and
maintain, so he has now given us power over you, to conquer your kingdom and
deface your religion, as it has deserved: therefore never labor to bring us
to your novelty and new fangled religion, but rather come home to us and to
the ancient religion of our forefathers: never endeavor to seduce us into your
secret and schismatic, and invisible; but rather come you into the light and
sunshine of our glorious profession: never tell us, of healing us: heal your
selves seely fools, for you have need; as for us, we are well, we are far
better then Israel can make us.

Thus did Babell cast away the good counsel that the Israelites gave them, and
pleased themselves in the like carnal arguments, and fleshly conceits, as
Papists in their popery, and other profane men in their carnalitie, do at this
day; setting these and many more fair glosses on their religion, and think
themselves in far better case then the Israelites: and when God coms to give
the verdite, they are sick, and which is worse are past healing. Here we may
learn: 1. First the pitiful estate of wicked men, They are wounded; nay, they
will be wounded, but will not be healed; they will wound themselves, but
neither can heal themselves, nor will let others heal them: are not they
worthy to perish? they are in the fire and neither will come out, nor let
others pull them out: are they not worthy to burn? being in prison, the door
set open to them, and they will not stir to come out; are they not worthy to
be slaves for ever? they are deadly sick: the Physician comes to them that is
able to heal them, and they will not hear him: are they not worthy to die? O
deaf adders that stop their ears against the voice of the best and wisest
charmers! and yet these men are the mockers, and scorners of them that be
godly, and the discouragers of many a man in the ways of God. Some seeing their
worldly prosperity, stand amazed, and envy their estate: but alas, why should
any man do so? for if their estate be rightly considered, they deserve rather
to be pitied, then either envied, or any way regarded.

Further, here we may see how it fares with Gods children in this world; often
times they must lose their labor, when they have sincerely, and zealously
endeavored the conversion of sinners. Israel would have healed Babel: but when
all is done, she will not be healed. So says Solomon, Rebuke a scorner and
he will hate thee Prou. 9. 8
. No marvel, if this be so with private men, when the Ministers and Prophets
of the Lord, find oftentimes so little profit of their great labors, that
they cry out; I have labored in vain, and spent my strength in vain Esaias.
49. 4
. And Ministers may not think much hereat: for the Prophet makes that
complaint, not in his own person only, and his fellow Prophets, but even in
the person of Christ himself, whose labor was much of it lost in this respect.
For it is apparent in the Gospel how little he prevailed with many of his own
nation, yea with the learned Rabbines the Scribes and Pharisees Luke. 7. 30
: And after all the excellent sermons made all the time before, went not Judas
away fuller of Satan then he came Ioh. 13. 27
? And to conclude, did not God himself preach from heaven, a notable sermon to
Cain? and was he not worse for it, and being hellishly enraged, instantly after
the Sermon ran out and slew his Brother Genes. 4. 7
? Thus howsoever Gods word never returns in vain, but prospers in the work
whereabout the Lord does send it Esaias. 55. 11.
: Yet, it is here apparent, that it is not always the savor of life to life,
but often of death to death, in whose mouth soever it is spoken.

We must here learn, not to be discouraged in our courses of seeking men's
conuersions; Private men to practice the duties of admonition, exhortation,
etc. unto their neighbors that be out of the way: Nor Ministers, to preach
the word, with all diligence. For howsoever thy labor may be lost to some, yet
know thy labor is never lost before God: for be it the sa^^our of life, or of
death, it is a sweet savor to God, (says the Apostle 2. Cor. 2. 14. 15. 16.
): and tho in regard of men that will not be cured; thou have labored in
vain, and spent thy strength in vain, yet, says the Prophet, My judgment is
with the Lord, and my work with my God Esaias. 49. 4
. And let not the good man of God be too much cast down, tho he see little
fruit of his great labors; remembering that JESUS CHRIST and God himself have
lost their labor upon many men: and here the Church have many years
endeavored to cure Babel, and all is in vain. For she will not be healed:
And will she not, what then remains but this that follows?

Let us forsake her, etc.
The. 3. point.
FOr, after all means used and all in vain, then what should we do but
forsake them that needs will be forsaken of God, and have nothing to do with
them, who will have no fellowship with the Lord? This is the third point, and
touching it there be three points

examinable; namely, 1. how Babel is to be forsaken. 2. why 3. when

For the first, how is Babel to be forsaken when there is no more hope of
curing her? the answer is, not in love and affectionate desire to do her good:
but still the wicked man is to be pitied, still to be loved, still to be
mourned for, still must the godly man wish well to him, tho he care not for it,
but scoff at all. Thus when the Prophet had called upon the people, Ier. 13.
16. 17
Hear and give ear, be not proud, but yield and turn and repent, and give
glory to God before he send darkeness, etc. He then adds: But if you will
not hear and obaye, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and mine
eyes shall drop down tears, etc. Thus the good man sends up many a sigh, and
sheads many a tear for the wicked, that never gave one groan for themselves.

Nor must we forsake them in prayer; but tho they seem to us never so
incurable, we must still pray without ceasing to GOD for them: for that that
is impossible to us, is possible enough with the Lord (h). God forbid (says
Samuel) that I should cease to pray for you 1. Sam. 12
: and so must we say of all, even the greatest sinners; save only them that
sin against the holy Ghost, which no private men, but only the whole Church
can discern and judge of: God forbid that I should cease to pray for them.
Neither must we forsake them by a final separation, never to come at them, nor
to assist them any more: but still we must be willing to go again, and do our
endeavor, if ever there be hope that they will be healed. Forgive (says Christ)
not seven only, but 70. times 7. times. When a sick man is froward and
impatient, then the good Physician must be the Patient; and tho he have come
often, and to no purpose, yet if at last he will be healed, he must not forsake
him; so must Gods children rejoice, if after never so many repulses, the wicked
will be content at the last to hear and to be healed. Thus we must still love
and pity them, still pray for them, and still be ready to do them good: and
in these three respects we must not forsake them.

But we must forsake Babel. First in regard of conversation: we must separate
our selves* from the wicked man's company and society, as far as lawfully and
conveniently we may, after we see him obstinate and incurable: it is Gods
commandment, Flee from the midst of Babel; depart out of the land of the
Chaldeans Ierem. 50. 8
: and do not this slackly and slowly (like Lots wife Genesis 19. ^6
but be as the he Goats before the flock. Secondly, in regard of the means:
for after that by her often and obstinate refusal, (joined with spightfull
contempt both of the means and the men that brings them) she has showed her
self to be a filthy swine, then pearls are no longer to be cast before her,
holy things must no more be given to such Dogs; but they are to be left to
their vomit and mire, till God show either his mercy, or justice upon them,
either in their conversion or confusion.

Thus must she be forsaken: and the reason why (which is the second point) is
double.

First, in regard of our selves: we must forsake the wicked when they are
incurable, least in steed of doing good to them, we take hurt our selves, by
being polluted by her contagion, or made partaker of her sins; and
consequently, of her punishment. God gives this reason himself: Flee out of
the midst of Babel, and deliver every man his soul, be not destroyed in her
iniquity Ierem. 51. 6
. Therefore, after that a christian man perceiues there is more danger to get
hurt from them, then hope to do good to them, he is bound no longer to stay;
nay, he is bound to leave them and look to the safety of his own soul and
body.

Secondly, in regard of the means used to heal them: which because they be the
holy ordinances of God, and precious pearls; therefore are they not to be
exposed to the contempt of wicked men, nor to be trodden under the foul feet
of their perverse and scornful spirits: Both these reasons does Christ couple
together, Give not that (says he) that is holy to dogs, neither cast your
pearls before swine, least they tread them under their feet, and turning
again all to rent you Mat. 7. 6.
. Christ would neither have his ordinances abused, nor his children hurt by the
wicked men.

Thus we see the manner how, and the reasons why: Now let us see the time when
Babel must be forsaken; when she is incurable, but not til then: first, long
time is to be spent, all means to be used, all ways to be tried, all patience
to be practiced, and all wisdom to be exercised, all occasions to be taken,
that probably may prevail to do them good. But if after all this, they be
incurable, and out of hope; then must we forsake them, but not till then, not
till there be no hope at all: he that forsakes Babel till then, is wanting in
his duty, and has much to answer for before God. For if the Physician may
not forsake this vile body Phil. 3. 21
as long as there is any hope of life; then how may any man forsake the soul
that is precious, and that cost so precious blood 1. Pet. 1. 19
? Surely, the spiritual Physician must never forsake a Church, a people, or a
man, as long as there is any hope of curing and converting him.

Here is condemned the practice of two sorts of men amongst us. First, such as
be now termed of the separation, formerly and usually called Brownists; who
forsake our Church, and cut off themselves from our congregations, and separate
themselves to a faction, and fashion, or as they call it, into a covenant and
communion of their own devising; these men have made a grievous rent, and
given a deep wound into the peace of our Church: they use this place and
others like against us, and say; We would have healed you, but you will not be
healed, therefore we forsake you: but they abuse the place; therefore, I will
turn the point of this their weapon against themselves: I mean against their
errors, and this their bitter and schismatic separation. To this end I would
ask these men but 4. questions: whereunto if they can give me satisfaction, I
will be one of them.

First therefore, whereas you say that We are wounded incurably, and will not
be healed, I ask: Wherein are we deadly or incurably wounded? what
fundamental wound is in our doctrine? what deadly corruption is in our
discipline, such as eats out the heart, and life, and being of a Church? what
book of Canonical scripture receive we not? what hold we for Canonical,
that is not? what sacrament that Christ ordained do we want? and what have we
more then Christ ordained? what article of faith deny we? or what hold we for
an article of faith that is not? what fundamental heresy does our doctrine
maintain? what have we in our Church, that overthrows the being of a Church?
what is necessarily required to make a Church, that we do want? Do not say,
These be many questions: for if you will have them all in one general, I will
end it as I began; Wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded? If I should
walk a while on your own grounds, and grant you that which you can never
prove; yet will it not follow that we are incurably, or deadly, wounded. A man
may want a finger, or have some blemishes in his face, and yet be a strong and
perfect man, sound, and heart-whole, and able to overthrow his enemies: so,
tho there were in our Church, those wounds you speak of, yet do they not come
near the heart, they be not deadly, they may blemish the beauty, but endanger
not the life of our Church. The Churches of Corinth and Galatia, had other kind
of blemishes then ours has; blessed be God. Corinth doubted or erred in the
great article of the Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. The Galathians erred foully in
the high and maine point of Justification, and yet Corinth a Church of God
sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1. Corinthians. 1. 2. And Galatia, though almost
removed to another Gospel, Galathians. 1. 6. yet not withstanding a Church
for all that. Galat. 1. 2. And if you will add to these fundamental errors
in doctrine, corruptions in manners, and disorders in Gods service, you can
with no show of truth lay such to the charge of our Church, as is apparent
were rife in the Church of Corinth: and then shall Corinth be a Church, and
not England? Let the Lord be Judge betwixt you and us. Therefore, if we
should grant unto you that our Church were blemished or wounded; yet not being
deadly wounded, your separation from us is schismatic and unjust: and more
cruel and vnchristianlie deal you with our Church, then did Gods Church with
Babell; who forsook her not til she was deadly wounded, and past life. To
conclude, if Israel might not forsake Babel til then; then what are you that
dare forsake a Church of God, wherein they have found God, if ever they have
found him yet, and wherein the devil himself cannot show one deadly wound:
Blessed be the Lord that has so healed us.

Secondly, seeing they say that we are wounded, but as for themselves they be
healed, and therefore they must separate, and so keep the sound from the sick;
I ask them this question: Are they healed? then where were they healed? where
were they called? where were they regenerat and begotten to Christ? was it not
in the womb of this our Church, and by means of the immortal seed of Gods
word, that is daily sown in our Church, and by the ministry of those men that
were called by our Church, and yet cleave to our Church, and mourn for their
separation; and by the dew of that blessing from above, which is daily poured
upon our assemblies, from Gods merciful right hand? Then how can they deny that
to be a true Church, a holy church, a Church of God, wherein ordinarily men are
called, and brought to God? And how unthankful and undutiful are they to
their spiritual mother, to forsake her and cast the dust of contempt in her
face that bore them in her womb, and brought them forth the sons of God? To
avoid this, what can they say, but one of these two things: either that there
is indeed a true Ministry of the word amongst us; but it is not powerful to
any but themselves: that we have the word truly preached, and so as it may
convert a man; but it is not the savor of life to any, but such as come into
their covenant: (but from this horrible, and hellish pride, good Lord deliver
them; or else let them be assured such a height of pride, is sure to have a
fearful fall.) Or if not this, then must they say that they were not called, in
our Church, but since they left us: But they have bard themselves already from
that plea. For, it being objected to them that they have left our church, not
out of conscience, but out of carnal discontents, and upon fleshly reasons,
worldly grounds; they all stoutly answer and stiffly stand to it, that they do
it not upon any such grounds, nor for any reasons of flesh and blood; but
merely and only out of conscience and for their salvation, and that gladly
they would have stayed, but with a good conscience they could not. If this be
true, then they had conscience before they left us: then where came they to
that conscience and care of their salvation, but in our Church? Now, a good
conscience cannot be severed from regeneration and an effectual calling:
therefore, they cannot deny, but they were regenerate, and called in our
Church; unless they will say, they had no conscience when they forsook us:
which if they do, then I will yield that my question is answered.

If they grant they were called a fore they went, and that still they who fall
from us to them, are called; then how can that be but a true Church, wherein by
their own confession, men are ordinarily begotten to God? and how can that be
but a lawful and holy ministry, which brings men to salvation? therefore,
(upon their own grounds) they have no just cause to leave us. For that Church
and Ministry that brings a man to grace, and to faith, is able to bring him to
glory and salvation: and that which is able effectually to begin, is able
effectually to finish the good work of God in any man.

Thirdly, if they be healed, and we still deadly wounded, then I ask them: How
have they sought, and sufficiently endeavored our healing? and till they have
done all that possible can be done for our healing, how dare they forsake us?
For if the Israelites might not forsake Babel till then; shall they forsake us,
before they have put all means to the farthest? if they be healed already, why
do they not more seriously labor the healing of others? They cannot but
know, there be many in our Church curable enough, if they could show them
to need their healing: why then do not they stay amongst us, to heal and
help us? He is no good Physician, that flies and forsakes his Patient: they
therefore, if they be healers, and would heal us as they pretend, why do they
not stay with us, and show us our wounds, and apply the means to heal us? But
contrariwise, they forsake us, and run into corners and rail on us, and call
us Babylon, Antichristian, and the synagogue of the wicked, and that we are no
Church, and CHRIST is not amongst us. Are these the plasters with which you
will heal us? is this the way to heal, to make wounds wider and deeper then
indeed they be? He is a pitiful Physician that makes his Patient worse then
he finds him: but he is not tolerable, that makes him worse then indeed he
is, or will make him believe he is hearte-sicke and deadly, when his finger
aketh. They allege persecution, and that therefore they cannot stay with us but
are constrained to leave us: but assuredly (were it true that they say, that we
were deadly wounded, and they able to heal us) then, seeing they cannot say
that all amongst us are incurable, they would care for no danger that could
befall their bodies, so that they might heal our souls and gain them to God.
Therefore I conclude, that if we would grant them their own grounds, that they
are as good as they pretend to be, and we as ill as they would make us; yet
notwithstanding, their separation is unchristian, because its certain none of
them can have assured testimony to his conscience, that he has done all he
can possibly for our healing: till which time no man may forsake another;
especially no Christian forsake another: and least of all a private man forsake
a Church. Fourthly, and lastly, if they will needs leave our Church, whither
will they go? To leave one thing, for another no better, is seely; but for a
worse, is folly and madness. But they will say they leave us to take the better:
then show me a better religion, and a better Church then the Protestant
Churches of Europe are, and the religion amongst them. You will not go to the
Lutheranes, for they (you say) are worse then we: much less to the Papists,
for they apparently are worst of all: whither then? will you go to the Church
of the Low* Countries? but they are of our confession. will you go to the
Churches of France? but they are of our confession? will you go to the Church
of Geneua, or the free Cities of the Empire? but they are of our religion. will
you go to the Church of Scotland, to the Cantons of Switzerland, to the
States, and Princes of Germany? but they are all of our confession, and so
profess themselves to be See the harmony of confessions.
. Look over all Christendom, and you shall not find a Church that condemns
ours, nor any that is not of our religion, nor any one but that professes it
self to be of the same confession with us, and not to differ from us in any
substantial or fundamental point. Whither then will you go, or what remains for
you to go unto, but unto your corners and conuenticles, where you are your own
caruers, your own Judges, your own approuers, but have not one Church in
Christendom to approve you.

So that the^ it remains, it must either be granted you, that you are better
then all others, and that (notwithstanding the Gospel preached thus long,
since the revealing of Antichrist) there is not one true Church in ye world
but your selves: or else you must grant that there is no better Church for you
to go unto, if you forsake us. Therefore play the wise men's part; forsake not
our church, til you can show a better. And tell us not of France, Scotland,
Geneua, Zurick, Basil, etc. for they be all ours, and not yours: they will and
do all approve us as a glorious Church, and condemn you, as factious, and
schismatic. And seeing you can find none better (all things considered) and
have none to fly to but your selves (who are the parties now in question, and
therefore no fit Judges of the matter) look well about you; and if unadvised
zeal have caused this bitter separation, then by your return make up that
b^each again, which by your revolt you made in our Church: Return again into
the bosom of the Church, ask pardon of that your Mother, who brought you
forth children of light: Come, and join with us against the Papist, the common
enemy; who, by our division has gotten ground upon us all.

Remember Peter's answer, when Christ asked the Apostles, after so many fell
from him, what (says he) Will you also go away? Alas Master, says Peter,
Whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life John. 6. 61
. So will you say, if true humility and saving grace possess you, when your
dear Mother in whose womb you were conceived, and with whose breasts you have
been fed, shall ask you (after so many reuolters to popery) what, Will you
also go away? Alas! whither should we go from thee? Thou have the words, and
thou have the Sacraments, of eternal life. Yea, malice it self cannot deny
but we have them; and he who gave them us, grant we may long enjoy them, Amen.

And as for you, my brethren (Brethren I call you, because I am sure we had
both one mother) look well about you, and consider of the bitter effects like
to follow, upon this your separation: remember that they will all lie heavy
upon you. And do not say, you are driven out: for if it be the Church, and if
the words of eternal life be here, nothing in the world ought to drive you
from it. Nay, your separation was wilful: therefore, let your return be
voluntary: and till then, esteem as basely and censure as sharply of us as
you list; but know, that for this division of Ruben, are great thoughts of
heart Judge. 5. 15
.

The second sort of men, whose practice is reproved by this doctrine, be such,
as refuse public places in the Church, and Commonwealth, and retire
themselves into private and discontented cours^s, and will not be employed for
the public; because they pretend the days are evil, and many sores in our
body incurable, unless there be other order taken for their healing. To
these men I would say but two words.

1. Are the days evil? the more need have they to be amended by each ones
helping hand. And if we have any wounds in Church or State, more cause has
each one that loves the peace and health of Jerusalem, to endeavor the present
healing thereof, least they fester and grow worse.

But secondly, are the times evil? Nay, are they not made evil by thee? at
least, are they not the worse for thee and thy sins? Who can show his face
and say; I have committed no sins, that may be in part a cause to bring down
the spiritual and corporal plagues that are amongst us? Then what are they
that are so busy to complain of the times, and so slack to complain of their
sins? But it is a trick of hypocrisy, to be so eagle eied in prying into the
illness of the times, and so blind and dull in considering his own sins,
the cause of all that ill. Thou therefore, contrariwise, out of a holy and
humbled heart confess, that seeing thy sins have made the times worse then else
they would have bin, therefore thou have cause to endeavor for thy part to make
them better. Then set thy shoulder to the burden, and put thy neck to the
yoke, remembering that even Babel it self is not to be forsaken, till it be
altogether incurable, and past all hope: But being incurable (as here the text
says) she is; therefore, says the church, Let us forsake her.

And now Babel being forsaken of the Church, what remains to be expected?
nothing but vengeance and destruction.

For her judgment is come up unto heaven, etc.
The 4. point.
IN these words is laid down the last point; namely, what becomes of Babel,
when being incurable she is forsaken by the Church: she is made ready for
judgment and destruction. Here we may learn (amongst many others) 2. most
worthy doctrines.

First, what the wicked get by persecuting, and banishing, and seeking to root
out Gods children: surely, eue^ nothing but the hastening of their own
destruction. The Babylonians cared not for the Israelites company: but as soon
as they were gone, destruction came upon Babell. Whilst they stay, the wicked
are spared: but when they are gone, vengeance breaks out. Whilst Lot was in
Sodom it perished not: Nay, (says the Angel to him) haste thee away, for I
can do nothing till thou be safe from amongst them Genesis 19. 22
. See, God the good King is more careful to save one of his own servants, then
to destroy a thousand enemies: but see their madness, they mocked and flowted
this Lot, scorned him as a stranger, and many ways grieved his righteous
soul, were weary of him, and his company, and tried every way, to make him
weary of the Town; for they held it worse, as long as he was in it: at last
they have their wills, and he forsakes them; but with him their protection is
gone, and now fire, and brimstone, falls from heaven on them. So, at this day
do the wicked and worldly men: whom hate they, whom accuse they, whom abuse
they, whom lie they in wait for, whom persecute they, whom would they
destroy, whom banish they, whom are they weary of, but of the godly men? When
they die, they bid them be gone, and wish that all were gone after them; not
knowing (poor fools) that if these men stood not in the gap, the fire of Gods
wrath had long since broken out upon them; and when they are gone, then they
are well apayed, and are glad: But alas! what have they gained? even as much as
Sodom did when they had cast out Lot.

Secondly, we may here learn what a fearful and dangerous thing it is not to
be healed by spiritual Physic (that is) not to profit by the word of God, nor
to be converted from sin, when God gives means. For what is this but an
evident testimony of Gods heavy wrath, and a certain foreru^ner of damnation?
Will not Babylon be healed? then what follows but destruction? So in the new
Testament, if our Gospel be hid, (says Paul it is hid from them that perish
1. Cor. 4. 3
. For as if at noon day any man say the sun shines not, it is because he is
blinded and cannot see: so, if in the sunshine of the Gospel, some see it
not, but in the midst of that light live in darkness, its certain they are
blinded by Satan, and if they continue so are marked up for just damnation. A
fearful example we have hereof in the sons of Eli, of whom the Text says,
their Father hearing of all the evil they did, called them and reproved them,
and gave them good and ghostly counsel, able (a man would have thought) to
have turned their hearts; especially coming from a Father, and from him that
was the Judge and Prophet of the Church: But all in vain; for,
notwithstanding, they obayed not the voice of their father: and mark the
reason; because the Lord would slay them. Whereby its apparent, that there is
not (ordinarily) a surer sign of a reprobate, then not to obey the voice and
word of God, nor to profit by those means that God gives a man for his
conversion.

A matter of special use to our Church, which has so long enjoyed the
Gospel: but to you of this City especially, who have long and liberally been
fed from heaven, with abundance and variety of spiritual food. Therefore, every
one look to thy self how thou profitest by these good means. For be assured,
if any congregation or particular man have use of the means and profits not,
but runs on hardened in his sins; it is because he is a vessel of Gods
wrath and prepared for damnation: but contrariwise, he that hears and
yields, and obeieth, and repents, it is an undoubted pledge to him of his
salvation, laid up in heaven assuredly for him. Therefore, let every one take
heed: for otherwise his lot will be like Babylons; of whom we here find that
because all means used to convert her were in vain, therefore she is now
justly destroyed, and remains a monument of misery, and a spectacle of Gods
justice, to all posterities Read, for this end, the 50. and 51. Chapt. of
Jeremy, and other places of the Prophets.
.

Thus concerning the literal Babylon we have heard, 1. How Israel would have
cured her. 2. How she will not be healed. 3. How therefore she is forsaken of
the Church. And 4. How being past cure, she is therefore destroyed. And having
thus performed the first part of my task, namely touching the old and literal
Babell: it now remains that we come to the Mystical Babylon; in and
concerning whom, all these 4. are as true as in the former.

The Second Part, touching mystical Babylon.
THat which we have heard of the literal, is also true in the mystical Babylon.
Mystical Babylon is the spiritual kingdom of darkness, the kingdom of
Satan. And this kingdom is partly temporary; which is the kingdom of
Antichrist: and partly permane^t, and perpetual; and that is the kingdom of
Sin. That the kingdom of Antichrist, namely, the Church of Rome, is mystical
Babylon, I will not stand to prove, seeing it is granted by Bellarmin Bellar.
de Romano pontif. lib. 3. cap. 13. in resp. ad argu.
, compelled thereunto by the clear authorities of some Fathers, but especially
by the evidence of the holy Text in the Revelation; where, by two notable
arguments it is ineuitably concluded. For first, if the mystical Babylon be
the City seated on 7. hills Revel. 17. 9
(as the Text says) then Rome is Babylon, which above all or any City in the
world, is so: and that not on seven obscure or little hillocks, but seven
hills famously and notoriously known by name Mons Coelius. Exquilinus.
Palatinus. Viminalis. Quirinalis. Auentinus. Capitolinus.
. Nor is it any thing worth, to say that old Rome was indeed so seated, but
that now it is shrunk into the plain of Campo Martio. For notwithstanding that
it be true for the body of the town; yet diverse public places where
Antichrist exercises his authority and tyrannical jurisdiction, are yet to
this day on those hills; as namely, and especially, the Lateran Church and
Palace: which Church one of their Popes has by Bull and Charter made the head
of all the Churches of the world; to wit Gregory the eleventh Gregorius xj.
vide constitut. pont. Romans per Pet. Mathae um, inter constitut. Greg. xj.
constit. 1. p. 61
almost 250. years ago: and after him Pius the fourth Vide eundem inter
constitut. Pij. 4. constit. 19. page 454.
, and of late, Pius quintus Vide eundem inter constitut. Pij. 5. constit.
(...)g. 618. (...)de eiusde^* Mathaei commentaria in illam constitutionem Pij.
5. page 621.
have by public constitution confirmed the same: and in which Church or
palace there have been held by several Popes, some xxxiij. provincial or
national, and 5. general Counsels ( g) all or most of them for the raising
up and establishing of Antichrists Throne: and in which the most horrible and
heinous canons were concluded against God and his Church that ever were before:
as (to name but 2.)

1. That monster of transubstantiation, that the substance of bread and wine
in the sacrament cease, and is turned into the substance of Christ's body and
blood Vide Council. Later. sub Innocentio. 3. c. 1


2. That a King, an heretic, not reforming himself and his land, meaning to
popery, is to be deposed by the Pope, his subjects to be discharged from his
obedience: and his land to be given to Papists; to whom the popes gift shall be
good and effectual Council. idem cap. 3.
.

This Church and palace, besides many of inferior note, stands to this day on
the hill Coelius Vide Onuphrium in lib. de Ecclesijs vrbis. Et eunde^ Mathaeum
in loco cirato.
: and tho now the Pope for his pleasure has removed himself over the River to
the Vaticane, yet in former times, for many hundred years, (as Blondus himself
confesses) it was the principal seat of the Popes: which appears also by
the verses written up and down the church: especially those that are graue^
over the marble chair, which is hard by the high altar where the Pope sits
at mass.

Haec est Papalis seeds and pontificalis:
Praesidet and Christi de iure vicarius isti:
Et quia iure datur seeds Romana vocatur:
Nec debet vere nisi solus Papa sedere:
Et quia sublimis, alij subduntur in imis.
Thus its apparent, his chief throne is upon one of the 7. hills: and it is very
obseruable, that howsoever they make their succession from Peter; and that
therefore in reason his Church should have bin chief yet that God may show to
the world that their City is the Whore that sits on seven hills;
therefore, by Gods just judgment they are so blinded, that they have made a
Church and Palace, that is on one of the hills, superior to that they call S.
Peter's, and have given it not only prioritie, and precedence, but even
privilege and pre-eminence above S. Peter's.

Another answerable reason out of the Text is; That City (says the Text is
Babylon) which reigns over the kingdoms of the earth Reu. 17. 18
; but Rome and no other City, at that day and long after, reigned over the
world. Therefore Rome is that Babylon.

Seeing then the holy Text cleers it, the Fathers approve it, Bellarmine
himself grants it; and the Rhemists also (upon condition we will yield that
Peter was at Rome) do willingly yield it Rhemist in 1. Pet. cap. 5.
: therefore we will not stand upon further proof. And as for their
distinction that Rome heathen is BABYLON, but not Rome Christian: I answer
briefly, that if heathenish Rome be BABYLON in regard of her sinfulness and
persecution of the Saints; then this Rome is Babylon also, seeing in her
sinful abominations and cruel persecutions, she is nothing inferior to old
heathenish Rome, as may be easily proved and showed at large, if this time
and place required it, and as has been already showed by diverse learned
writers, and (in good part) confessed by many of their own. Now then to go
forward touching this mystical Babel, I propound these 4. points to be
considered.

1. That we would have healed her. 2. That she will not be cured. 3. That
therefore we ought to forsake her. 4. That God will take just vengeance on her.
The 1. and 2. is past, the 3. is in hand, and the fourth is sure to come: its
true we would have healed her; its most true she is past cure, I hope it
shall be as true that we shall quite forsake her; and the last hastens fast on,
her destruction is at hand and sleeps not.

For the first. That we would have cured the Papists, we dare call the world to
witness, and appeal even to God himself; and this not only desired but
endeavored it by all good means, both in the days of that renowned Q.
Elizabeth of happy memory, and in the present government of our Sovereign
that now is.

The means we have used for their healing be diverse. 1. By instructing, and
informing them in the truth, and discovering their errors both by holy
Scriptures, and by the ancient Fathers of the best and purest times. Jewel,
Fulk, Whitakers, Rainolds, Perkins, and many other, who now sleep in Christ,
have left behind them such testimonies of this truth as shall live whilst the
world lasts, and never can be confuted, as appears in that they have not
dared to answer most of their books to this day. Secondly, our continual
prayers for them, both public, and private; in performance of which duty,
both our Church in general, and all amongst us (that use to pray for
themselves) have the testimony of a good conscience, that they have not failed
to endeavor their healing by this means. This our diligence in this duty, so
shamed them for their negligence in ye same for us, that 4. years ago they
published at Rome a form of Litanie, and public prayer, for the perverting of
the Realms of Eng. and Scotland, to Popery Vide libellu^ inscriptu^ Litaniae
and pre^recitandae p^ fide catholica Romana in reg nis Ang. and Sco.
restituenda and propaganda, and eorundem vnitate cum eade^ To. eccles. Romae.
and duaci. 1603
. But by the way let it be observed, that as when Cain left his frowning at
his brother, and began to make show of friendship with him, and entised him by
fair words into the fields, then he harbored the heauiest malice in his heart,
and there slew him Genes. 4. 7
: So when these men had conceived, and hatched at Rome the powder treason; then
to make us secure, and believe they loved us, they framed prayers for us, as
tho the worst thing they wished us were our conversion; when as indeed they
plotted the subversion of us all. He that sits in heaven, and laughed both
them and hell to scorn, for that their devise, knows we have not dealt so with
them. Well, if their prayers herafter come so accompanied, let us have their
curses, and let their prayers turn into their own bosoms. Thirdly, we have
endeavored to heal them by our example, professing and practicing our own
religion, daily in their sight: and many of our fathers professed it openly,
even in the times when they prevailed, and gave their lives in the fire for it.
And heerin the example of noble Queen ELIZABETH is worthy of eternal memory,
whose constant zeal to the truth was such, as that all her days they could
not by their brags, and treasons, and curses, cause her once to fear them; nor
by all their sleights, could ever win the least estimation with her, nor gain
an inch of ground in her heart: nay, her last Proclamation, not two Months
before her death, wounded them as deeply, or rather more then ever any one
before. See the proclamation published in Feb. before her death.


Fourthly, and lastly; we endeavored their healing, by devising and enacting
good and wholesome laws against their errors, superstitions, impyeties, and
seditious courses: sometime in justice executing them, oftentimes in great mercy
suspending them; thus trying all means that might possibly persuade or work
upon them: and in this course (our State by wise foresight, and discreet
managing the laws; our Ministry by instruction and confutation, and all by
their prayers and example) did we continue to endeavor her healing, all the
happy days of Q. Elizabeth.

But especially dare we call the Lord to witness, that we have endeavored
her healing since the happy coming of his Majesty to this crown; wherein
all the forenamed means have been used and one more: their errors have been
most learnedly discovered and confuted, their books and libells answered; and
if I may give my judgment of these days, the skirtes of the Romish Whore were
never better discovered, her grossest absurdities and fowlest impyeties never
so cleerlie displayed, as have been by the Divines of this present age. I
spare their names, in regard they be alive: and long may they live, to the
happiness of this CHVRCH.

And beyond all means then used, and now continued, his Majesty has used one
more; namely, admirable lenity, and extraordinary patience toward them,
notwithstanding all their ill deseruings: which as it was always great; so,
since the hellish powdertreason it is incredible: for he whose patience is not
provoked, and whose just anger is not wakened by such an attempt, sure there is
something more then ordinarily humane, in that man.

Neither do I think is there a King in Christendom, that after such a treason
would have left one of that faction in his kingdom, but only his Majesty. Oh
mirror of mercy! how famously in future ages shall this princely bounty be
renowned! and how fit is he to be the Lords anointed, and to be the Lieutenant
of that God whose mercy is over all his works; seeing his mercy is so
largely extended even over his worst deserving subjects. Thus Heaven has seen
it, even the Lord himself will witness with us, that as all his Church every
where over the world, so we in England for our parts, would gladly have healed
Babylon, and have done our full endeavor to that end: But now alas see the
effect of our labors, all is lost; for she is Babylon, and therefore past cure:
She will not, and therefore cannot be healed.

Some will say this is harsh and bitter: but I say it is true, and therefore is
not to be co^cealed: let her blame them that have made her incurable, and not
them that discover it: and for me that affirm it, I crave not to be believed,
but rather to be reproved, if the evidence of the fact do not fully prove what
I have said.

To this end I will first lay down a ground or two.

First that in former times there have been great complaints of foul
deformities in the Romish Church, made by men of great learning, and such as
either are, or at least whom they say are, their own: and these deformities
not only in private persons, but in the public body; not in the members
only, but in the head of their Church. I will not stand to prove this, it being
c 48. and 56. and lib. 3. cap. 27. and lib. 4. cap. 33 Et Bonauent. in
Apologet. pro Franciscanis. and in reg. Fra^cisci. quaest. 2. and 27. Et
Bernardum ^^ diuersis Epistolis. E^ Vincentium Ferrar in suo prognostico cum
mult. al.
not the end of my purpose at this time: they that look into the monuments of
elder ages do know this to be true; and whosoever will but look into the
Authors here in the margent named, will soon acknowledge it Reuelat. Brigittae
passim. maxim. lib. 1.
.

Another ground: these deformities were so foul and so apparent, that the
Councels of Constance, and Basil, and (of later times) that of Trent, were
called to this principal end, for the reformation of the Church both in the
head, and in the members. For that of Constance, the Council it self
confesteth it in the public acts thereof more then once Council. Constant.
ses. 1
: and ^^r that of Trent, howsoever they pretended it against E^ther and his
doctrine; yet it is confessed by a learned Bishop of their side Espencaeus in
Titum, cap. 1.
, that it was wrought out and brought to pass at last, and after much
resistance, for the reformation of the Romish Church, and even of the Popes own
Court, wherein there reigned at that time many abominable things, as one of the
better sort of Popes himself freely confessed Adrianus 6. In orat* per nuntiu^
suum facta ad Comitia imperialia anno. 1522.
. Upon these grounds I proceed to lay down 3. propositions, touching the
incurablenesse of Romish Babel.

1. That these Councels, assembled to reform and amend, did contrariwise
establish diverse impious errors never be fore decreed in the world.

2. That those foul deformities in the Romish Church, both in the head and
members, and both for doctrine and manners, that were in that Church before
those Counsels, and for the redress whereof, those counsels were called, did
nevertheless, and yet do, continue unreformed.

3. That since then, in steed of redress and reformation of the evils then
found, there have contrariwise grown up in their Church more horrible and
heinous practices, and more erroneous and impious doctrines then ever before;
and at this day stand unreproved and maintained by their Church. And these
three propositions being proved, I hope there is none but will confess that the
Romish Church, for ought that man can see, is past cure.

Touching the first, I prove it by a few particulars in steed of many: and
first for the Council of Constance, that Council decreed* 2. such decrees, as
tend rather to the ruinating of all religion, and overthrowing all humane
society, then any whit to the curing of diseases either in the one or other.

For first, whereas it is known and granted, that Christ at his last Supper
ordaining the holy Communion, did consecrate and give it both in bread and
wine, and commanded his Ministers after him, Do this See all the Evangelists,
and S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11 23. etc.
: and tho it cannot be denied but that the primitive and ancient Church did so
receive it, as Christ left it; yet for all that comes the Popish Council of
Constance, and calls it a perverse fashion, and an ill order of those that give
their people the sacrament in both kinds: and do further decree, that,

Notwithstanding Christ ordained, and the primative Church practiced it in both
kinds: yet now to say that it is necessary to receive it in both, shall be
heresy, and punished as heresy; that is, with death, and loss of lands, and
goods, etc. And howsoever Bellar. Bellar. de Sacram* Euch. lib. 4. cap. 26
much ashamed of the matter, will needs that the Non-obstante is not referd to
the institution in both kinds, but to the celebration after supper (and
therefore accuses Luther and others, as liars for so reporting of the Council)
yet many others of his fellows make no bones to grant it: and if they all
denied it, the very words themselves of the Canon are plain enough.

Now, thus to decree and make a Canon contrary to the direct institution and
commandment of Christ; what is it but to control Christ himself, and to
weaken the certainty of all truth and religion? Secondly, whereas there can be
no firm society amongst men, if other and covenants (especially made by
public persons) be of no force, and therefore God himself would have the
Israelites oath to the Gibeonits, performed, though it was craftily extorted
Josh. 9. 19
; and after severely punished Saul in his posterity, for the breach of it 2.
Sam. 21. 1. 2.
: yet the Romish Council in this latter age has decreed, that Council.
Constant. sessione. 19.
Though the Emperor or King give a safe conduct, to one accused of heresy, to
come to a Council or Disputation, etc. and tho he bind and confirm that safe
conduct with any bond whatsoever; and tho he would not have come, but upon the
assurance of the safe conduct: Yet ( hoc non obstante) this notwithstanding,
he may be taken and proceeded against and burned as an heretic, without
any prejudice to the Catholic faith, etc.

If this be good divinity, that Oaths and Covenants to heretics are of no
force, and bind not the makers; then it is in vain for men to have any
dealing one with another: for if oaths be once of no force in any one thing,
they will in time be weakened in all things.

Thus this Romish Council that should have amended, has contrariwise decreed
two conclusions of monstrous impyetie: and such, as (for ought I could ever
see) were never till then decreed nor received; no, not in the Romish Church it
self.

But is this reformed since? No, says a great Spanish Bishop Simancha.
Institut. cathol. cap. 45. art. 14. edit. Hispan. Fides data haereticis a
priuato non est serua^da, nec a magistratibus data serua^ da est haereticis:
quod exemplo Concilij Constantiensis probatur: na^ Ioh. Huss. and Hieronimus
eius discip. legitima fla^ma concremati sunt, qua^uis promissa illis securitas
fuisset.
, (more then a hundred years after this Council); it is so far from being
altered, that contrariwise, by the authority of this decree, it is now a rule
in our Church that faith made to an heretic, by a private man, is not to be
kept; no, nor if it be made by a Magistrate, as (says he) is proved by the
practice of the Council of CONSTANCE. Mark how they are healed: before it was
true in public persons, now it is true in private men also: before it might
be broaken without any fault; but now it may not be kept. See how Babylon
is cured.

But the Council of Trent is of latter times: has not it done much good and
reformed much ill? Nay on the other side, it has decreed and made 2. Canons to
the high disgrace of holy SCRIPTVRES, and much derogating from the sovereign
authority thereof; which til then were never decreed, not in the darkest times
of popery, when her ignorance and superstition was without all control: As
namely, first Council. Trident. sess. 4
,

That the Apocriphall Books of Tobiah, Judith, and the rest, shall be held and
received, of as authentical and Canonical authority, as any parts of holy
Scripture, whose authority was ever sacred. This wrong was never offered to
the holy Scriptures before: neither was there ever any Popish general
Council, so presumptuous before this of Trent, that ever durst add more books
to the sacred Canon, then we received from the Church of the old Testament.
Some bold Papists say, that the Florentine Council, before Trent, did make
them Canonical: which if it had, it had bin little material, seeing it was
but a small time before Trent, scarce 100. years: but the truth is, it did
not; and therefore Bellarmine and Coccius are more careful of their credit, and
will not affirm it Bellar to^. 1. lib. de verbo dei. Coccius in the sauro
cathol. tom. 1.
. So that its clear, there never was general Council that made them
Canonical before Trent, nor any provincial but one Council. Carthag. 3.
: and they are not able to bring one Father that held them so within 400.
years after Christ, nor very many after till of late; and contrariwise we are
able to prove, that all the Fathers for 400. years did reject them, and many
after; yea, the greater part of all learned Papists themselves till the
Council of Trent. And thus we see how Romish Babylon is still the elder the
worse: But this is not all: a Romish Council will never meet for one evil.
Therefore secondly they decree Council. Trident sess. 4.
,

That in all Disputations, Sermons, Lectures, and to all other purposes, that
Latin translation called the Vulgar, shall be held the authentical Text, and
that no man presume under any pretext to refuse it. Here is a strange decree,
that the stream shall be of more virtue then the Fountain, a translation of
more authority then the Original. The former ages never heard of this
indignity: but whenever doubt was made, or difference found, recourse was
forthwith had to the Originalls for the determining of the matter. Many learned
Papists are ashamed of this, if they durst utter it. Bellarmine and Coccius do
bewray it by their slight handling of the matter; for they would gladly prove
if they could, that Hierome was the author of that translation: but as for the
magnifying of it (whosoever was the translator) above the Originalls, they are
wiser then to venture their credits upon so false a matter, and therefore do
wholly leave it upon the credit of that Conuenticle that concluded it. Neither
do I wrong, to call it a Conuenticle: for tho I should grant the whole to be a
Council; yet the number that past this bill was so small, that I may safely
call it a Conuenticle. For as an ill motion may pass in Parliament betimes in a
morning before all the house be set, so was this bil carried at Trent. For
whereas the Council in his fullness consisted of 300. or more that had voice of
decision, they took the advantage at the beginning of the Council, and carried
these two bills when there were scarce 60. in the house (whereof how many went
against them is uncertain) for the Pope durst not (for one of his Crowns) have
p^^ th^^e two bills, especially the latter, to the full house: for how would they
have entertained it then, when as they had liberty of speech against it, who
since their tongues were tied and the bill passed, yet have dared (and Arias
Montanus, Sixtus Senensis, Olea^^er, etc.
some of them who were of the Council themselves) even to resist the decree,
and have taken so contrary a course themselves in expounding the Scripture,
that howsoever they were tolerated for their learning whilst they lived; yet
being dead, their books are either purged, that is altered, or else reproved: So
that its apparent to all that will understand, that this decree was so far from
being established in any former ages, that it is even misliked of many of the
better sort of themselves now that it is made.

And thus I hope we have cleared it, that these two Counsels, called in the
corrupt and declining times of the Popish Church, in show to have reformed it,
have been so far from that, that contrariwise they have concluded diverse
enormous impyeties that were not before: Then is not the Romish Babylon well
cured?

I hasten to the second Proposition: which is, that the deformities that were
before, both in doctrine and practice, both in head and members, and many
whereof were complained on by some of themselves, do yet remain without
redress or reformation.

For the demonstration of this Proposition, I might enlarge my self into many
particulars; but I will insist but upon few: and those I shall produce shall
not be trifles, nor triuiall, but of great moment, even touching the main and
moral duties which a Christian man owes to his God; and which to deny, is to
deny God, to falsify his word and nullify his law. And to this end, it
were no hard matter, to pass through the most of the ten Commandments of
the Moral and eternal law: But I will stand upon some few of the
principal.

In all which, my course shall be fairest for them, and safest for my self:
for I will not rely upon the credit of any reporter nor other writer, how
great soever his authority be; but produce the records themselves, and the
authentical originalls of their own books, as they stand at this day allowed
by authority.

Now, therefore whether the Romish Babylon be yet cured or no, let the
Christian world judge by these particulars:

The pride of the Romish Antichrist in times past, was such, that he exalted
himself, at least suffered himself to be set in the throne of God; yea, and
to be called of men God, and their Lord God The first wound; The Pope is a God,
and their Lord God.
: and this not only in private Authors, but even in his own Canon law: these
be the words in the gloss upon the extrauagants Extrauag. Ioha^nis 22. tit.
14. cap. 4. Cu^ inter. in glossa Credere aute^ Dom. Deum nostrum Papam
conditorem huius Decretalis no^ potuisse slatue* reprovt. statuit, haereticum
censeretur.
;

To believe that our Lord God the Pope, the maker of this Decretall, may not
decree it as he has; may be judged haereticall. The words are plain
inoughe. But if any man say this is but the gloss, and not the text: I
answer; first, that the gloss is of greater authority amongst them then any,
or then many Doctors. But further, what if we find as much or worse, out of
the Decret. did. 96 cap. satis evident ostenditur a seculari potestate nec
solui prorsus necligari pontifice^ posse, quem co^stat a Constantino Deum
appellatum, cum nec posse Deum ab hominibus iudicari manifestum sit.
very Text of the Popes law it self? Look in the Decree the 96. distinction,
there the Pope himself frames this argument, writing to the Emperor against
them that would call his Holiness to account.

Its certain that the Emperor Constantine called the Pope God.

But its as clear that God may not be judged of men. Ergo the Pope may not be
judged of any man.

Thus the Pope that canonizeth so many men and women Saints, has here taken
pains to canonize himself a God, both in the Text and gloss of his own law:
his glossers call him their Lord God, and he is content to take it to
himself. Constantine (he says in the text) calls him God, and he is content
both to take it, and make good use of it. Whether this be not Herod's sin
Acts. 12.
at least, let him look to it, but let us go forward. Here Babylon is sick
of a deadly evil: but is she healed? I wish she were: but I cannot show it.
The first wound not healed.
If any say she is, then let him show me that Pope, or name me that Writer,
Doctor, Inquisitor, Bishop, or any other, who by commandment or authority, or
but with the approbation of the Pope, has confuted, or but as much as
reproved this blasphemy; or show any that has reproved it, whom they have
not blamed or condemned. But that she is not cured in this point, I can make
it apparent. For look in the Canon law revived and as they pretend (c) Vide
Corpus iuris Canonici, iussu Gregorij 13. emendatum and editum, anno 91. did.
96. cap. 7.
reformed and reprinted of late ( b) by the authority and with the approbation
of the Pope under his bull* where though many things be altered, or taken out
that made against the Popes primacie: yet this that makes so much against Gods
holy Majesty is not in one point helped, nor in one word altered, but still
this is good and Catholic Divinity in the popes law, that

The Pope is God, and therefore may not be judged of men. But will you have yet
better evidence, that She is not cured? Hearken a little: A great Italian
Doctor, no less then a Bishop, writes thus to the Pope himself (for to the
Pope either the Author or his Nephew does dedicate it) some three or four
years ago Vide Adoardum Guala^dum Episcopu^ Caesenatem, de morali and civilly
facultate, lib. 14 cap. 3. A Papa tanqua^ a Capite in vniuersum Eccle siae
corpus, hoc est in omnem Christiana^ Remp. spiritus influunt. caelestium
gratiarum sensum fructumque praestantes, and efficicem mo^^ ad sempiternam
^eatitudinem. Merito igitur sanctissimus and beatissimus appellatur and (...)
Christianam (...) quasi quidam Deusad oratur and coli^^t. Liber impressus est
Romae. 1604. and Clementi 8. Papae dicatus.
.

From the Pope as from the Head there do flow into the whole body of the
Church, that is, into the whole Christian world, spirits or spiritual life,
yielding the feeling and fruit of heavenly graces, and effectual motion to
eternal happiness: therefore he is worthily called (as God is) most holy and
most blessed, and is worshipped and adored as a God of all christian men. Lo
here as bad or worse then the former: the Pope is such a Head of the church,
as infuseth spiritual life and heavenly grace into the body of the Church (Does
Christ himself any more?) and he is worthily worshipped as a God. And this
does Pope Clement the 8. suffer to be spoken and written of him, and not 4.
years ago to be printed under his nose at Rome; and thence to be sent over
the world: and now judge, is not Romish Babylon well healed? nay, rather
alas, does not her wound fester and rankle more and more? Well then seeing
this is the Romish doctrine and practice, both old and new, both long ago
and now present, let us make a little use of it.

First, we see here good reason, why a Papist should hold the Pope above a
Council, and even the holy scripture it self: for the Pope is God; and we
know that GOD is above the scripture.

Secondly, why also the Pope holds himself above kings: for he is God, and
GOD is King of kings: in a word, no marvel why he should take appeals from
all the world, we are a triple Crown, be carried on men's shoulders, give his
foot to be kissed, dispose of kingdoms and kings at his pleasure; for he
that is God may do more then all these. And surely, we Protestants must needs
grant, that as truly as he is a God, so lawfully may he do all these. All
these uses are as good as that is the Pope himself makes, when he says: God
may not be judged by men; but I am God, and therefore may not be judged by
man: these be his arguments: but now he shall give me leave to make but one
for him and his fellows.

The God that admits another Lord God, and to be worshipped as God; is not
the Lord Jehovah, the true God: for the true God, is God alone Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
: but the Papists God admittes of another Lord God, and to be worshipped as
God, therefore he is not the true God. If they deny the Mayor, they deny
scripture: if the Mi^^r, they deny their doctrine, and their own books: if
they grant both, they are worthy of the conclusion.

I would end this: but I cannot omit to make one use more of this their
doctrine. It has been made a question amongst them, whether the Pope might no^
empty all Purgatory, if he see cause; and no maruell^ for he being God,
surely (if there be a purgatory) God can empty it. Now to conclude, all these
do but equalize the Pope with God: but what if he have made himself greater
then God The second wound; The pope has done more then God.
? I will be but the relatour, let the Reader judge. Almost two hundred years
ago, he did with public authority and after long examination, by a great
Cardinal This Cardinal was Ioha^nes de turre cremata: as appears in the
prefaces before the book of the Revelations of Saint Brigit.
and other Commissioners, approve Posseuinus, in apparatu sacro. lit. B. to. 1.
Brig. Reuelationes dilige^ter examinatae and approbatae a viris doctis fuerunt.
and after suffered to be published to the World, a book in latin, called

The Revelations of Saint B^IGITE. Where it is dogmatically delivered and as a
matter without question, That Pope Gregory by his prayers lifted the heathen
Emperor Traiane out of hell Reuelationes Brigittae lib. 4. cap. 13. Bonus
Gregorius, oratione sua, etiam infidelem Caesarem eleuauit ad altiorem gradum.
: and another long before, (whom they pretend also to be theirs) delivers it
more amply, adding further that God answered the Pope thus: I have heard thy
prayers, and I grant mercy and pardon to Traiane; but see that thou hereafter
offer me no sacrifice, for an ungodly man Damascenus in ser. de mortuis
adiuuandis: Cum enixe Deum precaretur Gregorius pro salute Traiani, annis ante
sua tempora fere 500. defuncti audiuit vocem diuinitus allatam, dicentem,
preces tuas audiui, and veniam Traiano do: tu vero deinceps pro impio hostiam
mihi ne offeras.
. From hence I offer them this argument to think on; The true God never
delivered a damned soul out of hell: but the Pope has delivered a soul out
of hell: therefore he has done that, that GOD never did, nor for ought that is
revealed ever will do.

Here is a soul wound, but is this healed up? No, The second wound not healed.
this book stands allowed by the Pope: and in his Catalogue of the books
which he forbiddes to be read Vide Indice^ lib prohib per Clem. 8.
, where many a learned and godly book is condemned, this is not touched; and
therefore, as Posseuine himself (a Jesuit) grants Posseuinus loco citato.
not 2. years ago, not only the book stands uncondemned, but this foul
blalphemy uncontrolled: and to show that the head of Babylon, namely the Pope
is incurable, let it be observed, that tho many particular learned Papists Mel.
Canus. lib. 11. c. 2. Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 8. Blas. Vieg. in Apoc.
c. 6. comment. 3. sect. 3. Baronius annal. circa temp. Traiani.
have misliked, and condemned it as far as in them lies; yet to this day was
it never condemned, nor the book forbidden or amended by the Pope: so unwilling
is BABYLON to be healed of her wounds.

Yea, the Pope is so far from healing it; that contrariwise, he suffered a
Spanish Dominican Friar to defend it, and that not in word, but writing, not
privately, but openly: not in a corner of the World, but to come to Rome within
these few years, and there even to write and publish under his nose, and by
his authority, an Apology of this blasphemous fable, endeavoring to prove it
by many arguments; That Gregory did deliver Traian out of hell Alphonsus
Ciaconus Romae edidit.
.

Thus tho it contain never so great an impiety against God; yet, because it
tendes to the magnifying of the Popes power and prerogative (let as many
learned men as will speak against it, Hanc Apologiam vti and historiam validis
refutat argum. Bellar. lib 2. de purgat. cap. 8. vt and Mel. Canus eandem antea
improbauerat historiam, etc. haec them Posseu. ^ pr^.
it shall stand and be maintained: so true it is that Babylon will not be
healed of her deadliest wounds. And wonder not tho I call them deadly; for
consider of these consequences: The Pope delivered a soul out of hell,
therefore he did that which God never did. Again, therefore there may be
redemption out of hell. Again, therefore the Popes prayers did that which
Christ's prayers never could do: again, Christ says, I pray not for the world
John. 17. The world, that is for the wicked and damned. Apologia^ pro historia
Traiani quem precibus Sancti Gregorij ex inferno aiunt quidamin caelum
ascendisse: haec Possev. Ies in apparatu sacro t^m. 1. litera A.
: the Pope says, but I do; Ergo the Popes pity and charity is more then
Christ's: Alas, alas, is Rome the holy Church, and sees not these blemishes? Is
she the living Church and feels not these wounds? nay rather, is she not that
Babylon that will not be healed?

But to conclude: all this is the worse because he has razed out many
sentences, and passages out of many Authors, wherein he thought himself and
his seat to be wronged Ludou. viues: Ferus, Erasmus, Stella, Oleaster
Espencaeus and infinite others.
; but this that so highly dishonoreth God himself, he can patiently suffer:
but had he been as zealous of Gods glory as careful of his own, then he that
forbids Espencaeus his commenta^ies on Titus till they be purged, and the book
called Onus Ecclesiae (absolutely without any limitatio^) because they touch his
freehold too near, would also have forbidden the Revelation of S. Bridgit, til
this foul blasphemy had been purged out: which, seeing he has so carelessly
and wilfully neglected, (tho his Catalogue of forbidden books has so often
been renewed It was first made by Pius 4. and so si^ce continued renewed and
augme^mented til Clement the 8.
; it appears what an unworthy Vicar of God he is, who looks only to
himself, but suffers his master to be dishonored before his face: Therefore,
Arise, O Lord, maintain thine own cause.

Well then, seeing this wound is incurable, let us leave it rankling and come
to another. Some 120. years (^) The third (...) God has divided his kingdom
with the Virgin Mary: And that a man may appeal from Gods justice to the Mercy
of the Virgin Mary* because God has kept justice to himself but committed his
mercy to his Mother.
ago, an Italian Friar witty and learned, as the most in those days, a
principal Preacher and as famous in his time as Mussus, or Panegirola in these
latter, by name Bernardinus de Busto Bernard. de busto Marial. par. 3. ser. 3.
page 96. editionis Lugd. anni. 517 Licet ad Maria^ appellare a diabolo, a
Tyranno, imo a Deo, si quis a Dei iustitia grauari se sentiat. quod
significatu^ fuit H^ster 5* vbi dicitur quod cum Rex Assuerus Iudaeis esset
iratus, Regina Ester ad ipsu^ placandum accessi^: Cui Rex ait, etiam si
di^idiam parte^ regni mei petieris dabitur tibi: ista ergo imperatrix figurauit
imperatricem coelorum, cum qua Deus regnum suum diuisit. Cum enim Deus habeat
iustitiam and misericordiam, iusticiam sibi reti^^it in hoc mundo exercendam;
Misericordiam vero matri concessit: ideo si quis sentit s^grauari in foro
iustitiae Dei, appellet ad forum misericordiae Matris cius.
preached this doctrine publicly, after wrote it, and sent it to Alexander the
6. and under his name published it,

That God has divided his kingdom with the Virgin Marie. (5). The impiety is
so execrable and seems so incredible, that I will put down the words out of
the book it self, as it was dedicated to the Pope.

A man may appeal to the Virgin Mary not only from a Tyrant, and from the
Devil, but even from God himself. Namely, when he feels himself grieved or
oppressed of Gods justice: which was signified in the 5. of Ester, where it is
said that when king Assuerus was angry at the Jews, Queen Ester came in to
please and pacify him: to whom the king answered; whatsoever thou ask me,
tho it be the half of my kingdom, I will give it thee. Now, this Empress
prefigured the Empress of heaven, with who^ God has divided his kingdom: For
whereas God has justice and mercy; He has reserved Justice to himself to
be exercised in this world: and has granted Mercy to his Mother: therefore
if any man find himself agrieued in the Court of Gods justice, let him
appeal to the Court of the mercy of his Mother. What is this we hear? do
there lie appeals from God? and from God to a creature? is Gods Justice such,
as a man may justly be agrieued at it? and further, is God kingdom diuisible?
and has God indeed divided his kingdom? and divided it with a creature, yea
with a woman? and has God granted his Mercy from himself to a creature? we
may say with the Prophet, Oh heavens be astonished at this: and let all Christian
hearts tremble to hear such blasphemies: and yet these be good doctrins in
Popery, fit for their pulpits, and their people, and after they be preached
worthy to be published to the world. Surely, if they grant these be false
doctrines, then blame and shame belongs to the papists that preach the^, write
the^, publish them, and allow the^ for Catholic doctrine: but if they stand to
the^ as true, then mark what consequences will follow upon them: first it is
here taught, that a man may appeal from God. Herupon this argument is easily
framed, but I believe not so easily answered;

Popery teaches there lies no appeal from the Pope Co^m^^i^ opinio
ca^o^istarum, and doctorum.
: and here teaches that their lies appeal from God.

But in reason, he and themselves grant, he from whom no appeal can lie, is
greater then he from whom one may Decret. cause. 2. quaest. 6. cap. 9.
prouocandum est ad eos Iudice^ vbi est autoritas mayor.
.

Ergo, by popish doctrine the Pope is greater then God*

This conclusion is inevitable, if their doctrine be true. Again, here it is
taught that we may appeal from God to the Virgin Marie: If that be true, let
them answer this argument;

He unto whom appeal does lie from another, is greater then he from whom it
is made; this is their own doctrine Pet. Mathaeus in comment. suis super
constitut. 2 Pij. ^. page 120. lege tum pontificia tum civilly decretum esse
scimus appellationem non deuolui ^isi ad superiorem. l. praecipimus. C. de
appellat: and appellationem illam ratam haberi, qua a Minore ad Maiorem
appellatur ergo appellamus a Concilio ad papam, no^ ^contra.
.

But from the Lord God appeal does lie to the Virgin Marie. Ergo, she by
popish doctrine is greater then God.

If this conclusion be heresy and blasphemy; then Bernar^ine de busto his
books are to be burnt, and yet they are both allowed and commended by the
Romish Church Bernardinus de Bustis, scripsit de excellentijs Reginae Caeli
Co^mentarium sieve vberrimum and cruditissimum rosarium and complures alios
sermones plenos pietatis and bonarum rerum: sic Posseu. in apparatu sacro to.
1. Litera. B.
: But let us go forward.

Thirdly, here it is taught, that God has divided his kingdom with a
creature, even with a woman: This being true here we learn many points.

First, the reason why they call her in their Service book allowed by supreme
and sovereign authority, Reginam Coelorum, the Queen of heaven Vide
Missalia, Breuiaria and officia vltima and correctissima.
; for she that has got possession of the half of Gods kingdom, may well
and worthily be held the Queen of heaven.

Secondly, here is a very good reason, why the Church of Rome keeps the
Bible from the vulgar people, and will not have it divulged in their Mother
tongues: for if they had it in their own tongues, they would startle at this
doctrine, and when they heard it delivered in Pulpit, that God had divided his
kingdom, would soon have said, that is false doctrine: for the Psalm says,
The kingdom is the Lords Psalm. 22. 29.
: and David in his thanksgiving, at the preparation for the Temple building,
confesses to God; Thine O Lord, is greatness, power and glory, aeternitie
and Majesty: Thine O Lord is the kingdom, and thou excellest over all 1.
Chron. 29. 11.
: and if the Friar had objected, that the kingdom indeed is Gods, yet not so,
but he may divide it to another: then they would have answered, that cannot
be: for he himself says, I am the Lord, etc. My glory, I will not give to
another Esaias. 42. 8
: and if he still objected, that was true in the old Testament, when there
was none capable and worthy of this honor, because then the Virgin Marie was
not; they would readily answer, that in the new Testament after the Virgin
Marie was, and after she was the mother of Christ, Christ her son speaks to
God his Father, (but not to her his Mother) Thine is the kingdom, power and
glory Matthew. 6. 13
. The kingdom is Gods: and how long? (not till she be assumed and crowned
in heaven, as they say, but) for ever and ever.

And whereas they further teach, that he has kept Justice to himself, but
committed mercy to his Mother: they would cry out upon that doctrine and him
that taught it; and tell him that they find it six and twenty times in one
Psalm, that Gods mercy indureth for ever Psalm. 136, in every verse.
, and that his mercy is over all his works Psalm. 145. 9
: if over all, then over her also, or else she is not of his making: and if
his mercy be upon her, without which she could never have been saved: then
how dare any say, that Mercy is Hers, and not Gods? and if mercy be Gods,
and that mercy of his endures his, (not for the time of the old Testament
one^y, but) for ever: Then it is foul and false doctrine to say, that now
since Christ, God has resigned up mercy from himself to a creature: thus
would the people come upon him that taught this doctrine, and upon the Romish
Church that allows it: and therefore does not that Church wisely, to keep
the people from reading the holy Scriptures?

Thirdly, seeing it is doctrine current in the Romish Church, that God has
given up mercy from himself to the Virgin Marie, here is a good defense of
their Ladies Psalter Vide officia, and Psalteria beatae Mariae Virgin is
cuiuseun que generis seu impressionis.
: wherein they turn the Psalms from Dominus to Domina, from GOD to our Lady:
and when David says, Lord have mercy on me; they say, O Lady have mercy on
me: and in thee O Lady is my trust. They say this was compiled by Bonauenture
Bonauenturae opera omnia excusa fuere Romae in Vaticano: in part 2. (inter
alia) est Psalterium beatae Mariae virginis ab ipso co^pilatu^. haec Possev. in
apparatu sacro, litera b. 10. i.
: but tho he lived in ill times Circa annu^. 1272. in concilio Lugdunensi sub
Gregorio 10 Bonauentura obijt. Possev. in loco citato.
, yet his other writings give cause to hope he made it not: for he says,
that we must take heed we so enlarge not the excellency of the Mother, that
we diminish the glory of the son Ex Perkinso in suo problemate, page
. Sure he that said so, would not be so lavish and careless of Gods glory,
as to turn the Psalms from him to a creature.

Fourthly, here we see the reason why the Popish Synagogue do maime the Lords
prayer, leaving out the conclusion, For thine is the kingdom and power and
glory for ever and ever See the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 6 and Luke the 11
and al their Mis^als and breuiaries, Ma^uals and allowed pri^ers: in all which
they cut short the lords prayer, leaving out the words of the conclusion, for
thine is y^ kingdom etc.
. For if the kingdom be divided, then it is not all his for ever: no marvel
therefore, though they will have their Pater noster in Latin for their common
people; for if it were in English, there is none so simple but would see their
ungodly dealing.

But to conclude, (leaving this robbery and sacrilege in cutting off part of
the Lords prayer, for another place and purpose) it is here evident that no
Papist in the World can with a good conscience say the whole Lords prayer. For
if God have now divided his kingdom, then how can he say with David in the
old testament 1. Chr. 29. 11
, and Christ in the new Math. 6.
: Thine O Lord is the kingdom for ever: therefore he must either alter the
Lords prayer and say, Thine is half the kingdom, etc. or never say it at all:
or else curse and detest his own teachers that write, and his Lord God the
Pope that allows such doctrine. Alas, poor souls, what should a simple
honest hearted Papist do in this case! See therefore in what pitiful state
they live, who have subjected themselves to such teachers.

Lastly, let it be observed that here they teach, that there be in spiritual
matters touching the soul 2. divine Courts: the one of Justice, and that is
Gods; the other a Chancerie, a Court of Mercy, and that is Mary's; these be
their very words: and further, that if any man feel himself agrieued in
Gods Court of Justice, let him appeal to the Court of mercy of his Mother:
Oh-strange divinity! Can Gods judgments be unjust, or his proceedinges
erroneous and unequal? If they be not, then why do they talk of appealing to
a higher Court? for why do writtes of error lie from one Court to another, but
that it is presupposed that they may err? and why is there a Chauncerie, but
that the rigor, and extremity of the Law may be mitigated? But if the
Scripture say true in the text, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just in thy
judgments; Psalm. 119. 137.
then this is blasphemy of a high nature, that there needs a Chancerie to
rectify his proceedinges and mitigate his Judgments. But as for this
doctrine, that the Chauncerie or Court of mercy is not Gods, but his Mothers,
and that therefore Gods judgments are to be mitigated by another, and therefore
that she and her Court are in this respect(...) rant she is not healed.

And yet for the better satisfaction of all men, that as she is not yet, so
she purposes never to be healed, nor to reform any thing, and that this is
not the private opinion of that or any other one doctor; I desire all that love
the truth to take knowledge, that of late within these seven years, an
Italian doctor a Jesuit, and an approved writer, writing a story of the
miracles of our Lady of Loretto teaches even the same doctrine, and makes no
bones to bluster out almost the very same words: which for better assurance I
will put down. Horatiu^ Tursellinus: hist. virginis lauretanae in Epistola
dedic. virgo Maria salutem vndique cinctam periculis expedire, vitam veris and
salutaribus bonis cumulare and vult and potest* Matrem quippe suam omnipotens
deus diuinae potestatis and Maiestatis sociam (quatenus licuit) asciuit.


The Virgin Marie both will and can, is both willing and able to deliver such,
as be compassed about with dangers on all sides, and to heap upon them all
good blessings: for Almighty GOD, (as far as it is lawefull) This clause,
as far as it is lawful, is a strange word to be spoken of God; for what can
be unlawful to God, that is good, whose will is the holiest law? if therefore it
be good to make a creature fellow with him in his deity, it must needs be
lawful, and so the clause is idle. If it be not good, but impious and contrary
to the nature of God, then to think it any way lawful, or possible to be done,
is no less then to think it any way lawful for God to lie, or sin, or deny
himself: so that take it any way, this limitation of the Jesuit both grossly
abuses the reader, and contains horrible impiety against God. So far is it
from being any shelter to the blasphemy that is delivered in the whole passage.
has made his Mother fellow and partaker of his divine Power, and Majesty,
etc. See here the new and refined divinity of the Jesuits: what is this, but
the same with that before? for if she be made partaker and fellow with God in
his divine power and Majesty, it is no marvel, that God has committed his
mercy to her: and if from these words we look into the body of the book, we
shall find he ascribes such works and miracles to her as can belong to none but
him or her that is a fellow with God, or rather God himself. It cannot be
said, the book wants authority: for it is formally allowed, dedicated to the
Cardinal Aldobrandino, printed at Rome, and since often elsewhere; and of late
both the Author and his book highly commended by the greatest Romish
censurers Posseu. in apparatu sacro. to. 2. litera. H. Horat. Tursellinus
Romanus e societate Jesus, lauretanae historiae 5. libros latinos and elegantes
ad fide^ historicae veritatis conscripsit Romae excu^os: quos qui legerit, vt
miranda beatissimae Virginis opera suspiciet, sic lauretanam illam domum
percupide curabit inuisere. Vlterin^ autem de eodem Tursellino vide C.
Bonarscij Amphitheatrum honoris Libro 2. cap. 13.
. So that now I will end my evidence, for this point, and dare put the matter
to a Jury of any conscionable men, whether this wound be healed yet, or no.

Now to go forward: from the Person and Majesty of God, let us proceed to his
Holy SCRIPTVRES, and see how the Romish Church held of old, and yet holds
and teaches of them. I will not stand upon those v^le and base speeches
uttered and written of them by Eccius, Pighius, Hosius, and many other of that
generation, for that they have been both detected, and with shame enough
re^ected by many reverend men of our nation, both in Latin and English
Whitaker Fulke, Jewel, Reinolds, and others.
; but upon some that often have not bin touched by many, nor ever can be
sufficiently condemned by any.

In the Canon Law, the Pope spares not to disgrace the holy Scriptures in
express terms; sometimes equaling his own Constitutions with them, sometimes
preferring them.

In the Decree he shameth not to affirm that The fourth wound; The Popes
decrees be equal to the Canonical Scriptures.
his decretall Epistles are numbered amongst the Canocall Scriptures Vide
decretu^ cum glossa. Lugd. 1510. In fol. did. 19. cap, 6. Inter Scripturas
canonicas Epistolae decretales connume^antur.
, and impudently alleges Saint Augustine to prove it, who never spoke nor
meant any such thing; as in the later end of the decree they cannot but confess
with shame enough: this was his doctrine in the old impressions of the Canon
law, a hundredth years ago. But some will say, this wound is now healed: No,
look in the new impression reuiewed at the Popes commandment, and printed by
his authority within these few years Vide Corpus Iuris Cano^ici iussu
Gregorij 13. recognitum and editum Lugduni. 1591.
, and there stand the very same words without the least reformation in the
Rubricke or title of the Chapter;

The decretall Epistles are numbered and reckoned amongst the canonical
Scriptures The fourth wound not healed.
. Which is the more shameful in it self, and shameless in the doers, in as
much as in the same new edition they are forced to confess, that Augustine
(out of whom they cite the whole Chapter) did not at all mean the Popes
decretall Epistles, but the holy and Canonical Scriptures Quae quidem
sententia beati Augustini non ad decretales To. pontificum, sed ad Canonicas
and sacras Scripturas referenda est: Corp. Iur. Ca^. edit. 91. in additione. ad
did. 19. cap. 6.
: and no marvel, for the name of decretall Epistles of the Popes, was to get
and to bear, many a fair year after his days.

To conclude this point, let wise men observe here this point; how unwilling
the Romish Church is to amend or alter any thing, especially if it concern Gods
honor and not their own freehold: else why should they maintain that
blasphemy in the Rubric and title of the Chapter, which in the body of the
Chapter they condemn? But well do they know, that many a man reads the
contents of books and chapters, which never read more. Therefore, because the
words of this title give honor to his decretalls, tho they be never so
dishonorable to Gods holy Scriptures, they are suffered to stand, whereas they
have put out many things disgraceful to themselves: Thus unwilling is Babylon
to be healed in any thing.

This does but make them equal, and that may be thought no great wound in
that Church: but shall we see a deeper and more deadly; namely, where the
authority and determination of the Pope is made higher, and of more respect
then the holy Scriptures themselves? In the same book the XL. Distinction, the
Pope alleges for good doctrine, and canonizeth for a law, these words taken
out of one Boniface; The fifth wound. The religion of Christianity is to be
founded rather from the Popes mouth then from the ^oly Scriptures, that is from
Gods mouth.
Vide Decret. did. 40. in appendice ad cap. 6. Et reuera ta^ta reuerentia
apice^ praefatae Apostolicae sedis omnes suspiciunt, vt nonnullam sanctorum
Canonum disciplinam and antiquam Christianae religionis institutionem magis ab
ore praecessoris eius quam a sacris paginis and paternis traditionibus
expetant: Illius velle, illius nolle tantum explorant, vt ad eius arbitrium
suam conuersatione^ and ipsi remittant aut intendant. Haec in Corp. Iur.
Canonici, editionis Lugdun. 91. in 4.
.

And certainly allmen do yield so much respect and reverence to the Pope of
Rome and his chair, that they require and seek for much of the discipline of
the holy Canons, and the ancient institution of Christian religion, rather from
the mouth of the Bishops of that Sea, then either from the holy Scriptures, or
the old traditions: all they care for or seek after, is what he will and what
he will not, that so they may conform themselves, and frame their conversation
this way or that way, according to his will and pleasure. Lo what doctrine
is here: the discipline, nay the religion it self of christianity is sought
for rather at the mouth of the Pope, then at Gods mouth in the 10 The fifth
wound not healed.
holy Scriptures: and all that a Christian man cares for, is (not what God,
but) what the Pope will, and what he wills not; and according to that are they
to frame themselves: Is this a doctrine ^it to be inserted in the popes law?
Is this the holy and the only true Church that teaches this? If to be a
Catholic be to hold this, and to deny this to be an heretic, I am content
to be an heretic, let who will be the Catholic: but if a true Catholic
ought to hold the doctrine of the Scriptures, and to depend upon the mouth
and revealed will of GOD, then woe be to that Church and religion that
reaches, we may rather depend on the Popes mouth, then on Gods. But some
will say, this is healed. Nay alas, they be so far from that The fifth wound
not healed.
, that contrariwise for ought that I know, this is not be found in the elder
editions: but I am sure it is in the latter and last of all, set forth by
special authority from the Pope; from whence also I cite it at this time.

Thus I have showed, First, that the Pope makes his Decrees equal with the
Scriptures; Secondly, that they are of greater authority then the Scriptures:
Is it possible to have a worse? Yes: for the measure of her iniquity will
never be full; and therefore she goes one step higher in this impiety, and
teaches that the holy Scripture is so far inferior unto the Popes decrees,
that unless he by his authority give them strength they are not of credit, nor
necessary to be believed.

Let me be of no credit nor worthy to be believed, if I repeat not their
words truly out of their own book; namely, their authentical gloss upon
the Popes Decretalls: where the Text of the Decretall being no more nor less,
then only one verse of the 26. Chapter of the Proverbs, the gloss (that is the
approved Commentary) upon that decretall is in these words; Vide Decretal.
lib. 2. tit. 23 de praesumptionibus, cap. 1. sicut. Aduerte quod verba textus
non sunt verba Papae sed Salomonis in Parabolis, and habentur originaliter in
c. 26. Sed quia textus hic est canonizatus, facit fidem, and inducit
necessitatem, sicut si editus ^ui^sset a Papa, quia omnia nostra facimus,
quibus nostra^ autoritate^ impertimur. Glossa.


Observe here, that the words of the Text are not the words of the Pope, but
of SOLOMON in the Proverbs, the six and twentieth Chapter: but because that
Text of SALOMONS is here canonized by the Pope The 6. wound; The holy
Scriptures are therefore of credit and to be believed because they are allowed
and authorized by the Pope: and being so by him authorized, they are of as much
authority as if the Pope himself had been the Author of them.
. Therefore it is of credit and implies necessity of being believed, or it
binds as strongly as if it had been pronounced or vttred by the Pope,
because we make all those things as good as our own upon which we bestow or
impart our authority. The high and holy God, that is the Author of the holy
Scriptures, be merciful unto us, in having any thing to do with this
unchristian blasphemy; and grant that we may not any way communicate with
their sins, not have fellowship with this wicked work of darkness. The
Impiety and Atheism that lies in it is such, as if it had but crept into
some secret pamphlet, I would never have brought it into light: but being that
it is registered in the Gloss upon their law, a book of so great authority,
and so common in the hands of all the learned, I cannot but discharge my duty
to the truth, tho it may give vantage to the Atheist and Libertine. For what
can such men think, when they hear him that pretends to be Christ's Viker and
Peter's successor, teach that Salomons words are not of as good authority as
his be; when as Christ himself did approve and justify himself, and all
his words, and deeds, and doctrines, by the old Testament; and that the words
of God in the old Testament do therefore bind, and are therefore to be
believed, because the Pope pleases to insert and canonize them in his law;
and that being by him so canonized, they be therefore as good as if the Pope
himself had spoken them. What I say can they judge but that the Pope is one
of their religion, a plain Atheist, that holds the Scripture and all
religion, as far as pleases his humor and serves his turns.

And if any of his faction hold this too hard a censure, I would entreat him
to answer me but this question (grounded upon these words of his);

Whether is God the Author of the old Testament, 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21
or no? If they say no, Saint Peter answers; that Prophecy in old time came
not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were inspired by the
holy Ghost: If he be, then the Proverbs of Solomon, being a Canonical
Book of the Old Testament, is Gods Book, and the words of this Text are
Gods words, and not Salomons. This being so, let us then take the words as
they are in their true and full meaning, and see what a piece of Popish
divinity here is; A strange piece of popish doctrine, that Gods word if it be
authorized by the Pope, is then of as good credit, as if the Pope himself had
spoken it: therefore if the Pope please not to canonize it, then it is not. So
that either Gods word must be beholden to the Pope for the authority of it, or
else it has none.


Observe that the words of the Text are not the words of the Pope but of God:
but because these words of God are here canonized by the Pope, therefore they
are of credit and worthy to be believed, as well as if they had been spoken
by the Pope himself. Lo here the Pope in his own colors: this is Divinity
fit to be hatched at Rome, and to be coined in his mint. Let the words be
examined, and see what can follow of them but that either the Pope holds not
the Proverbs to be Gods book, but SALOMONS (which is horrible Atheism) or else
if he hold them Gods, that the words of God bear no credit, nor have
authority to bind men's conscience till the Pope do canonize them; and that
Gods word, in a book known, received, and granted to be Canonical, is not
of as good authority in that book, as being translated into the Popes Canon
law: if he refuse both these, then let him refuse his own law, and burn his
gloss upon his decretalles, as containing Atheism, and Heresy in a high
degree. The sixth wound not healed.


But to go forward; is this wound healed? Surely, if they have left it out, or
reformed it in any later impression, so it be with open confession and
detestation of the fault, it is well: But sure I am, it is in the impression I
have, and in all other which I could borrow. And further I do not know any
Pope, or popish writer that has with authority and allowance condemned or
reproved this Atheism: if they know any, they may do well to produce them:
Mean time, I am also sure of this, that in stead of healing it, they have
suffered their Doctors, and Writers continually since to speak and write
almost as ill, if not worse. In Queen Mary's time, an English Papist wrote
thus Proctor. in his book called the way home to Christ, printed at London in
8.
,

Religion is occasioned by Scripture; but perfected, and authorized by the
Church. See, we are more beholden to the Church then to the Scripture, for our
Religion. About the same time Cardinal Poole out of his Pope-holy devotion is
said to have affirmed, that

The written word of GOD is but a seed of Turcisme Scriptura scripta est semen
turcicu^^.
. And certain Popish Doctors in Germany, being pressed in a disputation with
the evidence of Scripture, boldly answered,

We are not tied to the Scriptures: those goose quilles do not tie us Nos
pennis illis anser inis minime sumus alligati.
. I will not affirm these two upon my own credit: but they have been charged
with them both, many years ago, and never yet disproued them. But that that
follows I speak upon knowledge.

A little after, a great english Papist pretending to summon a Parliament for
Popery, in his book so called, tells a story of one whom he heard, upon
reading the Book of Ecclesiastes, earnestly say, that

The Book of Ecclesiastes is a naughty book Heskins, a Doctor of divinity,
in his parliament of Christ, lib. 1. cap. 2. printed at Antwerpe 1566. in folio.
. He voweth to God, and calls him to witness, that this he heard him, himself:
but what was he that spoke it, a Protestant? no, a Papist: and no mad fellow,
nor ignorant fool, nor profane scoffer; but (says Heskins) he was a man of
worship, of gravity, of wisdom, of godly life and competent learning, able
to understand, and likewise exercised in the Scriptures: and this is all the
censure he gives of him that spoke these words.

He adds further (a little after in the same Chap.) that a popish
Gentlewoman hearing a text (out of a boooke that papists hold to be
Scripture) which she misliked: and being told by him (for he heard her speak
the words) that the book was Scripture; she answered, that if the Scripture
had such ( I will not say what she said) words in it,

She would no more believe the scripture, for it was naught Heskins in his
parliament, the next page after.
:

And what was she that said this? a virtuous Catholic gentlewoman and one
that feared GOD Observe well, how a great popish doctor comme^ds that man and
woman, for devout and zealous papists, who blasphemously said, that the
scriptures were naught and not to be believed, and does not reprove the
parties for their blasphemy. So little does it touch a papists heart to hear
Gods word abused in the highest kind.
. (Lo, what tokens Popery gives of a virtuous Catholic woman, and that
fears God). And tho Heskins cannot but grant that these are blasphemies: Yet
did he not reprove the one nor the other; But contrariw^se, commends them
both, and turns it to the advantage of the Romish cause, and says that hereby
we may see, what a perilous thing it is for Lay people to read the
Scriptures. But (with his lea^e) hereby we may see, what a filthy heart and
vile estimation popish doctors have of the holy Scriptures, who hearing their
disciples thus horribly blaspheme them, and God in them, do not reprove it, but
make use of it; nor bury and quench them, but write and publish them, rather
with an approbation, then any detestation of them.

But will you hear his own words, and his own judgment, not related from
others (as these) but uttered out of his own heart: How little incitement to
virtue appears to be in the songs of Solomon? yea, rather how ungodly and
wanton seem they to be, in the outward face, rather teaching and provoking (I
crave pardon of all Christian cares) Wantonness then godliness: and what can
the unlearned find, or understand in many sentences? any thing to edification
of godly life? or rather a provocation to wanton life. And* after certain
sentences alleged, he concludes: The whole book is no better: like unto
these, says he, is all that book.

You have heard how the proue^bes were disgraced in the gloss upon the
decretalls, and here the Canticles: Now that Solomon may not have one book left
in credit, Heskins Vide approbationem and laudem huius autoris and libri apud
Possev. in appar. sacro to. 3. lit. T. verbo. Thomas Hardingus.
adds touching Ecclesiastes;

What may appear more vehement to dissuade a man from wisdom, then the book
of the Preacher? how much is wisdom, the goodly gift of God, abused to
appearaunce in this book Heskins in the same book and Chapter.
? And to conclude, of another book which they hold also to be canonical
scripture, and some of them to be Salomons, he says, that

The book of Ecclesiasticus, seems to have such unseemly words in it, as
an honest man would be ashamed to speak them: and I also (says he) would
be ashamed to write them, if they were not Scripture Heskins a little after in
the same chapter.
. If the words be as immodest as he pretendes they be: then why do they
hold such a book to be Scripture? and if they hold it to be Scripture, then
how dare a Christian man say, that it has such speeches in it, as an honest
man would be ashamed to speak or write? I leave this for them to answer; in
the mean time I go forward:

Not long after, comes Hosius, a great Doctor of theirs, and after a
Cardinal, and writes thus Hosius editionis vlt. tom. 20. lib. de expresso dei
verbo. page 5. Pronuntiamus (non verbum dei sed) scripturam pendere ad
authoritate testimonio and approbatione Ecclesiae: quae non aliter verbum esse
dei censeri debet nisi quatenus ecclesiae fuerit autoritate co^probata.
;

The word of God (of it self does not, but) as it is written in the
Scriptures, it depends on the authority, testimony and approbation of the
Church: and it ought no otherwise, nor no further to be esteemed the word of
God, then as far forth as it is approved by the authority of the Church. Lo,
what doctrine here is: for hence it follows, that therefore if the Church
should not allow the new Testament, it were not scripture.

Put all these together, and then it will soon appear, how pitifully this
wound is healed. Nay further, if the time and present occasion would give leave
to look into their latter and modern writers, we should see by the last, and
latest of all, this wound is so far from being healed, that it rankles
further and deeper, even like an incurable leprosy, that cannot be healed:
but let it suffice to name some of the Authors, and refer the learned Reader
to them Pistoriu^ cont. Mentz. disp. 1. Stapleton, lib. 9. doct. princip. cap.
14. Bellar. tom. 1. Controv. 1. lib. 4. cap. 4. Fran. Agricola de verbo dei
scripto and non scripto. cap. 7, and cap. 9. Perouu. de incertitudine etc.
scripturaru^.
. And let us go forward to another wound.

They taught the People in old time, namely, for two or three hundred years
past, that Images were good lay men's books: and even then, when they denied
them the scripture as unfit for them, and obscure, and dangerous for seducing
them to heresies, were Images allowed and commended unto them as good means of
Instruction The seaue^th wound; Images are good lay men's books.
.

Some three hundred years ago, lived a Friar called Gulielmus Peraldus, learned
(for that time) and well approved Guliel. Peraldus ord. praed: and postea
Epistola Lugdunens. scripsit (inter alia) summa virtutu^ and vitiorum pervtilem
illa^ quidem and co^modam concionatoribus: quae saepius est recusa: haec
Possev. appar. sac. to. 1. lit. G.
of their Modern Censurers: he writes thus:

As the Scriptures are the books, and contain the learning of the Clergy: so
Images and the scripture are the learning and books of lay men Guliel.
Peraldus Summa. virt. and vit. tom. 1. cap. 3. vt scripturae literae sunt
Clericorum, sic scriptura and sculptura literae* sunt laicorum.
. Lo here, how Images are associated and joined with the Bible: Search the
scripture, says Christ: look on them; and on* Images says the Pope* how
read thou, says Christ: what see thou, says the Pope: It is written
says Christ: it is painted and graven says the Pope: thy word (says
David) is my light, (not the golden Ch^rubins): but now says Popery even in
the new Testament, the scriptures and Images are lay men's lights: What a
wrong is this to GOD, and what an injury to his word?

But is this healed? Oh that it were! but let the reader judge, by that that
follows The seventh wound not healed, but made worse and worse.
.

One of their greatest Casuists, Laelius Zecchius, a great Divine, a famous
Lawyer, and of late years Penitentiarie of Bresse, writing a great volume of
Cases of Conscience dedicated to Pope Clement the viij. amongst many other
strange doctrines touching Images, teaches, that It is not lawful only, but
profitable to have Images in Churches, to cherish and increase charity toward
God and men, etc. and to preserve faith; seeing Images are to be held as
books for them that be unlearned, to draw them unto knowledge, memory, and
imitation of holy and divine matters, etc. Laelius Zecchius Summa moral.
theolog. and casuum. consci. tom. 2. cap. 90. art 18. page 609. Imagines poni
^n Ecclesijs, vtile est ad charitatem erga deum and sanctos fouendam and
augendam etc. and ad fidem conseruandam, cum Imagine, babeantur pro libris, his
qui* literas ignorant, ex quibus ducuntur in cognitionem memoria^ and
imitationem diuinorum etc. Brixiae. 1598.


Lo here, this doctor, who heing Penitentiarie, is by his place and calling to
heal wounds and satisfy Consciences, coming to touch this wound, handled it
so roughly, that in steed of healing it, he makes it sorer then it was. For
whereas Peraldus gave Scripture so much honor, as to be joined in commission
with Images, they two to be joint teachers of the Laity; Now comes the great
Penitentiarie, and is well allowed by the Pope to leave out the scripture, as
needless, and to give all the power to Images, not only to put men in mind,
but even t^ cherish and increase faith and charity. And certainly, if Images
can do so, it is no marvel that Popery cast ou^ the scriptures, and in room
thereof, do bring Images into the Churches.

But to make up the measure of this iniquity; Feuardent the famous Franciscan
friar, yet preaching at Paris, and to whom Possevine wishes a long life (r);
goes one step further, and to heal up this wound perfectly, teaches this
doctrine Fran. Feuardentius in lib. homiliarum. page 16. and 17. hom. 2 Ex
^aru^ (.i. imaginum) contemplatione, discunt and facile and breuiter simplices
ac Idiotae illa diuina mysteria, miracula and opera, quae ex sacris libris aut
vix aut nunquam percipere valiant.
; Possev. app. sac tom. 1. lit. f.


By sight and contemplation of Images, the common and ignorant Layemen, do
easily and in a short time learn those divine mysteries, miracles and works,
which out of the holy books they shall very hardly or not at all be able to
perceive Strange and fearful doctrine of popery; Images are better and
easier books for the lay people then be the scriptures.
. Here now is Popery grown to his full ripeness. And mark the degrees how
this wound has been made still deeper and wider.

First, they taught, the Scripture and Images together were good books for
Laymen Peraldus.
.

Then that, Images without the scripture were to be accounted books for Lay
men Laelius Zec chius.
.

Now at last, Images are readier and easier, and therefore better books for
Layemen then be the scriptures Feuardentius.
.

So then seeing this wound is so well healed, let us leave it and search
another.

In former ages, as superstition grew, and religion decayed, so Images began to
be worshipped more and more; and ceased not till at the last they came to
this, that every Image was to be worshipped with the same worship that was
due to him whose Image it is: so that some three hundred years ago, or
somewhat more, it seemed by Aquinas to be their general and received
doctrine, that The eight wound; That an Image of God or a Crucifix are to be
worshipped as God and Christ, that is, with divine worship.


An Image of Christ, and the cross whereon Christ died, and a Crucifixe, are
all to be worshipped with the same worship due to God and Christ Jesus, that is
with (...) Aquinas Summa par. 3. quaest. 25, art. 3 Eadem reuerentia exhibetur
Imagini Christi ac ipso Christo: cum ergo Christus adoratur adoratione latriae,
consequens est quod eius Imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda: and art. 4.
Crux Christi, and ipsius crucis effigies, adoranda est Latria.
. A fearful doctrine, maintaining horrible Idolatry; for nothing, but GOD,
may be worshipped with divine worship: but they teach that those creatures
may be worshipped as God himself is, that is, with divine worship:
therefore they make those creatures God: and by this argument it is apparent,
that the present religion of the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous religion, as
long as this doctrine stands unrepealed.

Let us then see, if this be healed: The eight wound not healed, but made
vvider and deeper and deadlier every day.
But alas, it is so far from being in any part reformed, that it is rather
the general and common received doctrine of all their approved writers. I
will not stand (as I could) to show it successively through all ages since
the days of Aquinas, till these times: but sparinge that labor, till better
leisure, I will refer the Reader to most of the elder Authors Alexander
Hallensis 3. par. quaest. 3. memb. 3. art. 3. Albertus in 3. sent. did. 9.
art. 4* Bonauentura eadem distinct. art. 1. q. 2. Richardus. art. 2. q. 2.
Capreolus ibidem art. 1. conclus. 2. Waldensis to^. cap. 156. nu. 6. Caietanus
in par. 3. q. 25. art. 3. hoc modo citantur hi Auctores apud Greg. de vale^t.
tom. 4. disp. 1. q. 24. Et multos alios addit Bellarminus, lib. de Imag. sanct.
2. cap. 20. etc.
and insist only on some few, and those of the latest: it being my special
purpose at this time to show that the Romish Babylon is even now not healed of
her deadliest wounds. Which in this particular I will labor a little the more
fully to demonstrate out of the modern authors, now extant and approved,
because this imputation is generally cast off with this answer; It is not so,
it is but an ignorant or malicious slander: for the Romish Church gives only a
certain reverence to holy Images; but does not worship them, at all, at
least with no divine worship. And some of our own profession are either so
ignorant they know it not, or so malicious, they will not confess it, or else
so hollow hearted to us, and such secret friends to them* they would not have
it discovered tho it be so: for my part, I pity the Ignorant, (knoweinge my
own weakness) I care not for the malicious, and I hate the hollownesse of
all dissemblinge professors. And therefore let others come and conceal her
shame, and hide the whore of Babylons filthiness, as they will; I say for my
self, let the tongue clean to the roof of my mouth, if I spare to discover
her skirts, and lay open her filthiness to the world; that all men seeing her
as she is, may detest and forsake her. Therefore in the words of truth and
soberness, I do here offer to this honorable audience, that I will willingly
come to this place and recant it with shame, if I prove not apparently to the
judgment of every reasonable man, that this is the common and general
doctrine of the greatest number of their best approved authors that have
written in these later days; namely,

That an Image of God, or a Crucifixe, especially one made of the wood whereon
Christ died, or that cross it self, are to be worshipped with (...), that
is, with the worship due unto God. And first of all, I will in this case
spare Bellarmine, Vide Bellarminu^ to 2 lib. de Imag. sanctorum 2. cap. 20. 21.
22, 23. 24. and de Council. lib. 2. cap. 8.
seeing he (as having some grace in him) seems somewhat ashamed of the
matter, and therefore plays fast and loose: and betwixt God and his
conscience on the one side, and the Pope and his allegiance to him on the
other, he cannot tell what to say: and therefore winding himself into a
labyrinth of general and confused distinctions of per se and per accidens,
primario and secundario, proprie and improprie, and such other which may serve
for all purposes; at last he leaves the matter as doubtful as he finds it:
yet must it be confessed, if he incline either way, it is to the worse:
which, by conference of his other writings, I think he does rather for fear,
or to please the Pope, then out of his own judgment and conscience.

Therefore leaving him, I begin with Gregory de Valentia a Jesuit, and a
Professor of divinity as Bellarmine is, of his own sect, of his own time,
and accounted by some papists more learned, but approved Vide approbationes
praefixas 4. tom. disputat. Greg de Valent.
of all: he writes thus;

Gregor. de valent. tom 4. disp. 1. quaest. 24. punct. 2. p. 467. Sic quidem
sunt venerandae Imagines, vt ipse quoque prop^ie suo quodam modo sint terminus
venerationis, licet non per se quatenus tali materia and figura continentur,
sed per aliud, scilicet ratione proto^ypi: Hoc autem modo, eodem ho^ore quo
prototypus, Imagines sunt honorandae, atque adeo hominis Christi Imagines
latria sunt venerandae per aliud: hoc adeo certum etc.
It is certain that Images are to be worshipped, so as properly the worship
shall rest in them, not for themselves, nor for the matter nor forms sake, but
for his sake they resemble: and in this sense they are to be worshipped so, as
they be whom they resemble; and therefore the Image of Christ, as man, is to
be worshipped with the same worship due to Christ himself. He cannot deny,
but many learned of his own side teach the contrary: but he reproues them
all, and embraces this as the commoner and truer opinion, and confirms it and
concludes it for truth.

Next to him I produce another Jesuit, Gretserus, of the same university, and
either succes^or or fellow to Gregory de Valentia in the same place and
profession, he who was chosen for the papists Champion, in the famous
disputation holden at Regensperg 1600. Vide collo. quium Ratifbonense. anno 600.
; and whom Posseuine the Jesuit calls the very hammer of heretics Iac
Gretserus: in Acade^. Ingolst. professor. theol. haereticorum malleus: sic
Posseu. tom. 2. lit. I.
: Thus he writes Gretserus de Cruce, tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 49. At quo genere
cultus colenda est crux? asserimus cum communiori sententia and in scholis
magis trita, crucem ipsam and omnes Imagines and signa Crucis adoranda esse
(...) hoc est cultu diuino.
;

Thus we have taught that the Cross is to be worshipped: But now with what
kind of worship is it to be worshipped? We answer and affirm, according to
the more common opinion and more received in schools, that the Cross and all
Images and signs of the Cross are to be worshipped with (...), that is with
divine worship. Can any speak more plainly then both these do? Now, these
be Jesuits, and to these two I could add more Vide Pos. Bib. select. tom.
1. lib. 8 c. 7. ex. Thyraeo l^s. Gab. Vazquez de cultu adorationis. lib. 1.
disp. 8. c. 2. and 3. and disp. 9. cap. 1
: but let us see what their Summists, and Casuists say to this matter; which
are the more to be regarded because they pretend to write such resolutions as
may settle unquiet and doubting consciences. If therefore any poor Papist ask
the Romish Confessors and Casuists, How far may I worship a Cross, and with
what kind of worship; hearken how they answer.

And to let one speak for all, Iacobus de Graffijs, a Monk of great name, and
Graund Penitentiarie at Naples, writing (as he calls them) his Golden
decisions of cases of conscience, some 3. years ago, answers thus Iac. de
Graffiis decis. aureae. cas. conscientiae. tom. 1 lib. 2. c. 2. art. 3.
Imagines sacrae, si vt res quaedam co^sidera^tur, nulla eis tribuenda est
reuerentia; sed in illis ima go ipsius, cuius sunt attenditur, non materia ex
qua formatae fueru^t: vnde quae reuerentia illi cuius est imago debetur, ^ade^
and imagini iure im pertitur Et postea ibidem, art. 15. Mand at primu^
praeceptu^, vt vna^quamquamque imaginem eodem cultu quo ille cuius est imago,
veneremur; vt imagini dei vel Christi, vel etiam crucis signo, prout dominicam
passionem ad mentem reuocat, latriam impertiamur: Sacrae Virginis hyperduliam,
and sanctorum imaginibus duliam.
;

Holy Images, considered as they be pieces of wood, or metal, or some such
things, are to have no honor given them: but in them another matter is looked
at; namely, the image of him whom they resemble, and not the matter whereof
they are made: in which respect look what reverence or worship is due to him
whose Image it is, the very same by good right is to be bestowed on the image.
And to speak more fully and plainly, if it be possible: a little after he
adds;

The first Commandment commands, that we worship every image with the same
worship as we do him whose Image it is: for example, that we give latria,
that is divine worship, to the Image of God and of Christ, and even to the
sign of the Cross, in as much as it brings to our mind the passion of
Christ: and hyperdulia to the image of the blessed Virgin, and Dulia to the
Images of the Saints. How now? is not Babylon well healed? what can be said
against this? that these be private men? no, they be public professors, and
their books allowed with as great authority as can be: But will you have that
that is of sovereign authority, and that may not be questioned? Then look
in their public liturgy, which is of more credit and account then a 100.
Doctors, and there you shall find the cross saluted and prayed unto in these
words, Vide Breuiar. Romans par. hyemal. in fine. Ara Crucis. lampas luci^, vera
salus hominu^ nobis pronum fac patronum, quem tulisti dominum. Salve lignum
vitae, dignum far mu^di pretiu^: Confer isti plebi Christi crucis beneficiu^.


Thou altar of the Cross, thou lamp of light, thou true salvation of men: make
thou that Lord, whom thou did bear, a loving and merciful Patron to us.
All-haile thou wood of life: thou that were worthy to carry the price of the
world, do thou bestow upon this congregation of Christ the fruit and
benefit of his passion. Oh admirable doctrine! First, here is a prayer to the
Cross it self (but of that hereafter): then the Cross is made a mediator to
Christ for us. And surely we shall less wonder hereafter that they make
Saints Mediators to CHRIST; seeing here they shame not to send the wodden
cross to him, to make intercession for them: but as for that, where they give
a power to the Cross to procure Christ to be good unto us, how it can be
spoken without Atheistical blasphemy, let them answer that made it.

Further, observe how the Cross is said to have deserved to bear Christ:
surely no marvel tho Saints can merit, when a piece of wood can merit at Gods
hands. Lastly, let all reasonable men judge what the Romish Church holds of
Christ's death; seeing they pray to a wodden Cross, to bestow the fruit and
benefit of it upon them.

But sure (will some say) this is healed: I will not deny but that in some of
their new and latter Breuiaries this is left out: but thereunto I answer;

First, that it is not reformed, but covered: for to the healing of a
spiritual wound, there needs confession and public satisfaction to the
Church offended by the fault: but here is no confession of any fault nor
evil, in these words to the Cross; only they be cunningly kept out in the
newer books: so that they are ashamed of them, and yet have not the grace to
confess it, and therefore will leave it out and yet show no cause why. Now if
it be naught, why do they not say so, and therefore put it out? if it be good,
why do they put it out? So then it may be covered, but is not cured.

Secondly, I answer that though they have left out that, yet they have kept in
as bad or worse: for even in their newest editions, and as they say most
reformed, there is prayer to this Cross. Breuiarium Romans autoritate Council.
Trident. and su^morum pontificum, Pij 5. and al. restitutum. and editum:
Sabbato infra hebdomadam passionis, in Hymno page 302. editionis in 4. O Crux
aue spes vnica hoc passionis tempore: auge pijs iusticiam reisque dona veniam.


All hail o Cross, our only hope: we pray thee in this holy time of Lent,
increase justice or righteousness in godly men, and grant pardon to the
guilty. Here the very wodden Cross is called upon, and prayed unto, to do
that which Christ himself could never have done, if he had not been God.
Some will say, Surely they speak to Christ, howsoever the words seem to be
spoken to the Cross: I answer, if they direct their hearts to Christ, why
then direct they the words to the Cross? Verily Christ is worthy of both, as
well as one: But I answer further, it is a clear case that they make and
direct this prayer not to Christ, but to the very Cross it self: else let
Aquinas be Judge, who makes this argument Aquinas summae par. 3. q. 25. art.
4. Illi exhibemus latriae cultu^, in quo spem salutis ponimus: sed in Cruce
Christi ponimus spem salutis, cantat enim Ecclesia, O Crux aue ^pes vnica hoc
passionis tempo^e auge pijs Iusticia reisque dona veniam: (In dominica de paff.
in Him.) ergo crux Christi est adoranda adoratione latrie.
;

That is to be worshipped with divine worship, wherein we put and place the
hope of our salvation: but we place the hope of our salvation in the Cross
that Christ dyed on, for thus singes the Church (and then he alleges this
place and these words) All hail o Cross, our only hope, in this time of
Lent, do thou increase righteousness in holy men, and grant pardon to
sinners: therefore the Cross is to be worshipped with divine worship. These
be his own very words, and are spoken of the Cross, and not of Christ; as
any man may see that will but look on the book it self: for the question in
general, being concerning the adoration of Christ Quaest ^ 25. de adoratione
Christi in sex Articulas diuisa.
he diuides the general into six particular questions, which are these
Aquinas ibidem circa adorationem Christi queruntur sex:
,

1. Whether Christ's humanity be to be worshipped with the same worship as his
divinity. 1. Vtr(...) vna and eadem adoratione sit adora^da diuinitas Christi
and eius humanitas.
2. Whether Christ's humane flesh be to be worshipped with latria. 2. Vtru^
caro Christi sit adoranda adoratione latriae.
3. Whether the adoration or worship of latria be to be given to the Image of
Christ. 3. Vtrum adoratio latriae sit exhibenda imagini Christi
4. Whether to the cross of Christ. 4. Vtrum sit exhibe^da cruci Christi.
5. Whether to the Mother of Christ. 5. Vtrum sit exhibend Matri eius.
6. How the Relickes of Saints are to be worshipped. 6. De adoratione
reliquiarum sanctorum.

So that we see, here is Christ and his Cross, and his Image, and his Mother
are made 4. several matters and of several and distinct consideration: then
falling into the particulars, for the 2. first questions, he argues them
negatiuely, but concludes them affirmatively; touching which two we have no
controversy with them at this time: then coming to the 3. and 4. which be
these in question; touching the Image of Christ, whether it be to be worshipped
with latria or no? he answers, that it seems no; and gives such reasons as
he nor the world is able to answer, but concludes affirmatively that it is
Artic. 3. vtrum Imago Christi sit adoranda adoratione latriae. Videtur quod non
etc. sed contra est etc. Conclusio, Cum Christus latriae adoratione sit
adorandus, Imago quoque eius eade^ adoratione est adoranda.
as I have set down: namely, that

Seeing Christ himself is to be worshipped with the worship of latria:
therefore his Image is also to be worshipped with latria. So coming to the
fourth question, which is of the Cross, demanding whether it be to be
worshipped with latria or no; He answers that it seems no: but concludes
affirmatiuelie that it is Aquinas ^bidem art 4. vtrum crux Christi sit adoranda
adoratione latriae? videtur quod non: sed contra est, etc.
; and then gives his reason as I have before set it down, and from thence
draws his conclusion in these words Conclusio: Crux Christi in qua Christus
crucifixus est, tum propter representationem, tum etiam propter membrorum
Christi contactum, latria adoranda est: Crucis vero effigies in alia quauis
materia priori tantum ratione adoranda est latria.
;

(p) The Cross of Christ, namely that whereon Christ was crucified is to be
worshipped with latria, for 2. causes; both for the representation o^
resemblance it has to Christ, as also for that it touched the body of Christ:
But the sign of that Cross, or a crucifixe, of what matter soever, is to be
worshipped with latria, only in the former respect. These be his very words.
And here by the way, observe how ridiculous and absurd popery is, in this
point: for it gives greater worship to the dead image and wodden cross, then
to the blessed Virgin Mary the mother of Christ; of whom he concludes in the
next article, that she is by no means to be worshipped with latria, but
only with an inferior worship called hyperdulia Ibidem art. 5. videtur quod
matter Christi est adoranda latria: sed co^tra est etc. Conclusio: matter Christi
cum sit creatura rationalis, non latria sed in quantu matter Dei est hyperdulia
adoranda est.
; and mark what wodden arguments are given for it: One, She is a reasonable
creature* and therefore must not be worshipped with latria: Lo, she must not
because she is a reasonable creature, and yet the Cross shall which is
unreasonable and dead. Another; A Crucifixe is like to Christ, therefore it
shall be worshipped with latria Crux Christi propter representationem adoranda
est latria. ibid. art. 4.
: But is not she liker to Christ then any Cross can be?

A third; the Cross did bear CHRIST, and did touch his body: therefore it
must be worshipped with latria Crux Christi ex co^tactu ad me^bra Christi and
quia eius fuit sanguine perfusa, est adoranda latria ibid. art 4.
. But did not she bear him, and touch him and his blessed Body in a far
more excellent manner then the CROSS either did or could? See what pitiful
arguments be here brought to fortify this damnable Idolatry: Who could think
that so great learned Doctors should thus childishlie dally with holy things,
and be so blinded in their understandings? but this it is to be drunk with
the wine of the spiritual Babylons abominations.

But to return to the matter: by these words of his, Aquinas has cleared
that doubt and answered that objection made before; that these words are not
spoken to the Cross or image, but to Christ: No, says Aquinas; they are
spoken to the Cross.

What can be said to all this? but one thing more, that in the time of
Aquinas it may be this was holden, but since then it is reformed, and now it is
not so. But I answer; this wound is not healed: for as it is thus as I have
reported in the old copies of Aquinas both Manuscript, and printed; so is it
also without the least alteration in the new and later editions Vide editionem
Antuerp^ensem: summa Aquinatis anno 1585. and sequentibus.
reformed and purged as they pretend: and printed within these few years.
And (which is more evil) whereas, some thirty years ago, all Aquinas was
reuiewed at Rome by commandment of Pope Pius Quintus, and purged and altered
Opera omnia D. Thomae, P^j quintj Pont. Max. autoritate, in locis plurimis tam
in textu, quam in commentarijs restituta sunt: and Romae excusa 1570. and
expuncta sunt varia ex eisde^ commentarijs etc. Haec Posseu. in apparatu sacro,
tom. 3. lit. T.
as they thought good, and so printed: yet had not the Pope so much grace in
him, nor so much zeal of Christ's glory as to amend this horrible impiety,
but to the perpetual blemish of Aquinas, and everlasting shame of their Romish
synagogue, lets it stand for good current Catholic doctrine, even at this
day, that

A Cross to be worshipped with the same worship as Christ himself.

Yet if any will stand upon it, that this wound is healed, then let him show us
what Pope has condemned this doctrine; nay what popish Doctor approved by
their Church has reproved this doctrine, or taught and written the contrary.
Which when they or any other that take their part, can never be able to show:
I contrariwise to make it manifest to all the world that this wound is not
healed, but rankles deeper, and spreds further, will show out of their latest
and modern writers, that this their doctrine is rather made worse then any way
reformed. To this end, let the Reader be pleased to mark the words of a
great Doctor of theirs well approved amongst them Ioh. Chrisost. a visitatione,
Lu^itan. theologus and professor Cistercie^si^ scripsit libros 12. de verbis
dominae, hoc est quae Maria, etc. locuta est Venetijs 1600. Posseu. apparat.
sacro, tom. 2. lit. I.
and a spanish professor of divinity for the order of the Cistercians: who not
7. years ago writing 2. volumes of Commentaries, which he entitles de verbis
Dominae, Of the words of our Lady. and dedicating his book unto the Pope
himself CLEMENT the viij. has these words, Johan. Chrisostomus a visitatione,
de verbis dominae, tom. 1. lib 6. cap. 7. in fine* Verum de cruce cur tantum
loquimur, vbi nihil fuit in passione Christi quod sine suo honor remaneret.
Cum honor remanserunt claui, lancea, corona, vestes, and huiusmodi alia: Et in
tali honor remanserunt, vt propter Christi contactum ab hominibus adorentur;
sed tamen non eade^ adoratione qua ipsam crucem adoramus: quam in quantum nobis
representat figuram Christi in ea extensi, and in quantum habuit contactum ad
membra, and in quantum etiam eius pretiosissimo sanguine fuit persusa, eadem
adoratione cum Christo adoramus; nempe adoratione latriae: propter quod etia^
ipsam Crucem alloquimur and deprecamur quasi ipsum crucifixum and in ipsa spem
salutis ponimus: vnde de illa canit Ecclesia; O Crux aue spes vnica, hoc
passionis tempore, auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona veniam etc.
(x) But what do we speak so much of the Cross, seeing seeing there is
nothing used in the passion of Christ that is without honor: the nails, the
spear, the coat, the crown, and all such other things, are honored so much,
as that (in regard they touched Christ) men do therefore worship them, yet not
with the same worship with which we worship the Cross it self: which,
inasmuch as it represe^ts unto us the figure of Christ extended upon it, and
inasmuch as it touched the several parts of his body, and inasmuch as it was
died with a good part of his most precious blood: We do therefore worship it
with the same worship with which we adore Christ himself; namely, with the
worship of latria. For which cause it is, that we speak to the very Cross it
self, and pray unto it, as unto him that was crucified on it, and do repose
the hope of our salvation upon it: heerupon the Church sings in the liturgy,
these words of the Cross; All hail o Cross our only hope: in this time of
Lent do thou increase righteousness in good men, and grant pardon to sinners,
etc.

Lo, here is a piece of refined popery indeed: we worship the Cross says
he as Christ, we speak to the Cross it self, we pray to the Cross it
self, as well as to him that dyed on it; and he confesses freely, that the
prayer in the liturgy or mass book is not made to CHRIST, but to the Cross
it self. From hence I gather these two conclusions;

1. by Popish religion the Cross is a God. This I collect thus: Latria (says
Augustine August Epistola 49. vni and soli deo debetur seruitus illa religionis
quam vno nomine Graeci latria^ voca^t: Et in Faustum l. 15. latria est seruitus
illa qua tantummodo Deo seruitur.
is that worship of religion, which is due only and solely to God himself:
and popery it self confesses with one consent, that prayer is a part of
latria Ioh. de Combis Compendiu^ theologicae verit. c. de dulia and latria
Latria continet. 5. fidem, spem, sacrificium, orationem, etc.
: But popish religion prays to a wodden cross, even to the cross it self;
therefore by popish religion the wodden Cross is a God.

2. That the Cross is made a God, not by the doctrine and judgment of their
private Doctors, but of their Church and religion. This I collect thus: their
Missalls and Breuairies which contain their Liturgy are confirmed both by the
Pope and the Council of Trent Vide Missalia and Breuiaria omnia ab anno. 70
and deinceps.
: but the Popes determination, especially together with a Council is the
public and uncontrollable act of their Church None acknowledging himself a
papist can deny this.
: Therefore the doctrine and practice in their Liturgy is not private, or such
as may be questioned, or doubted of, but public and general, and may not be
called in question. But in their late and reformed Breuiarie allowed and
confirmed by the Pope and Council, they pray to the Cross and call upon the
Cross, as we heard before, and their own Doctors do expound it that it is
not to Christ but to the Cross Aquinas of old, and Chrisostomus a visitatione
of late.
. Therefore by the doctrine and religion of the Church of Rome the Cross is a
God.

Bellarmine would gladly heal this wound, or at least cover it over, and says
Bellar. in tom. 2. de Imag. sanctoru^. lib. 2. c. 24. in resp. ad argu^.
Respondeo vbi eccles. canit, O Crux aue, spes vnica. etc. vel ibi accipi cruce^
pro Christo ipso: vel illam esse prosopopoeia^ rhetoricam. etc.
; that whereas the Church prays so, surely either the Cross is taken for
Christ, or else it is but a figure; as Moses says, Hear O Heavens, Deutero.
32. No, no, say the Romish Doctors, (that wrote since Bellarmine) there is no
such matter: that prayer is to the Cross it self.

And his brother Ga. Vazq. Ies. de cultu adorationis li. 2. disp. 3. cap. 4
Jesuit, Gabriel Vazquez, being also much ashamed of the matter, would gladly
help it, and to that end is constrained to confess, that there is not (as
Bellarmine says) one alone, but two figures in that prayer: which (says he)
unless they be admitted, it is an unapt and absurd prayer; for it speaks unto
the Cross as unto our God and Savior. He therefore for his part says, he
should think that by the Cross they mean Christ, and pray to him, not to the
Cross: and further says, that many others think so, but he names not one;
(tho in other points he is a plentiful citer of other Authors): but against
him or who-euer else think so (being papists) I produce the Cistercian Doctor
Chrysostom a visitatione, who writing since them all For Vazquez wrote since
Bellarmine: namely, about the year 92. but this Chrysostom wrote since
Vazquez some seven years ago.
, and whose book is of more authority then his For Vazquez is dedicated but
to a spanish ordinary Bishop, but Chrysostom to the Pope himself.
, answers all these doubts, and preuents all other objections; saying
plainly that in that prayer of the Church,

We speak to the Cross it self, we call upon and pray to the Cross it
self. And no more, nor no worse, says he, then Aquinas himself, totidem
verbis, spoke before him Aquinas summa par. 3. q 25. art. 4.
. Therefore (to conclude) till this doctrine of Aquinas be condemned for
heresy, and till this fellow that calls himself golden mouth, be adjudged as
he is, a leaden mouthed and blacke-mouthed blasphemer, and his book burnt as
heretical, and til the Romish Church have satisfied the World for this great
wrong, till then (I say) it is apparent to all men, that in this wound She is
not healed.

This wound has been deep and wide, and therefore long in searching: and
seeing it is found incurable, let us proceed. Not many hundred years ago,
lived a Friar they called S. Francis, an ignorant man for learning, but witty:
he being the founder of the Franciscans, the Pope has suffered his favorites
and followers to set him up as another Christ The ninth wound; An Italian Friar
Francis was like to Christ in all things, and in some things did more then he,
and bare 5. wounds in his body as Christ did.
and blasphemously to compare him, and oftentimes to prefer him before Christ
himself. And to this end amongst many other vile ones Vide monume^ta ordinis
fratru^ Min. Salama^cae. 1511 in 4. Et firmamenta trium ordinu^. D. Fra^cisci
Paris. 1512 4 and mult. al.
, he suffered to be published a great volume called, The golden book of the
Conformities of the holy father S. Francis with the life of our Savior Jesus
Christ Liber aureus, inscriptus liber co^formitatu^ vitae beati ac seraphici
patris Fra^cisci ad vitam Jesus Christi Domini nostri, correctus and illustratus
a Jeremiah Bucchio ord. Min. doctore theo^. Bononiae 1590.
. In which book with strange impiety first they paint in the first lease
Christ bearing a Cross and Saint Francis following him with one as big as
his, where Christ has nothing but precedence: but after thinking that too
much, they paint one Cross, and upon it one of Christ's arms, and another of
S. Francises, one acrosse over the other: then begins the book; In the name of
Jesus Christ and of S. Francis In nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi etc. and
beati patris nostri Francisci, etc.
: where, Jesus Christ is called our Lord and S. Francis our blessed Father; and
the Author says not, that he compiles the book to the honor of God, or
Christ, but of the foresaid holy father S. Francis.

Then he salutes Saint Francis with a prayer Francisce Jesus typice dux formaque
Minorum, per te Christi mirifice sunt gesta* and donoru^. Mala pater egregie
propelle animorum sede^ nobis perpetuas da regni supernorum.
fit for none but God himself: First, blasphemously calling him typical
Jesus; then desiring him to cure the sins and drive away the spiritual
maladyes of their souls, and to give unto them place in the glory of heaven.

Then he comes to the point of Conformity* and to show this the better, he
paintes a tree at the top whereof is Christ, and at the root Saint Francis:
the tree has twenty branches on the right, and twenty on the left side, and
every branch has four particular fruits; in all eighty: these are equally
divided betwixt Christ and S. Francis, 40. to the one, and 40. to the other:
and each couple or pair of these is one point of conformity betwixt Christ
and S. Francis, consisting in all upon 40. particulars; wherein they begin at
the birth and conception, nay at the very prophecies and promises made of
Christ, and so proceed to his life, his death, resurrection, and ascension:
and in all and every of these, and in every thing else whatsoever may be said of
Christ, the very same do they not shame to affirm of that man Francis. For
example, thus Jesus Prophetis. cognitus, Franciscus declaratur. Jesus emissus
coelitus, Franciscus destinatur etc. Vide libru^ conformitatum. page 6.
: Christ was foretold by the Prophets. So was S. Francis: Christ was sent from
God, so was S. Francis. Thus go they over all his life, in such a manner as
there is nothing given to Christ, but bare precedence. And which surpasses all
admiration, those two things wherein Christ did most apparently, as God declare
his power, and his love as Mediator; namely, his miracles and his passion,
even in these two is this Francis matched with Christ our Savior: nay rather in
his passion he is matched, but in his miracles advanced far before Christ.

And first for his passion, whereas by their doctrine Christ had 5. wounds in
his body, (tho indeed he had more) they make S. Francis nothing his inferior
in that point: for they say that he had five wounds in his hands and feet,
proportionable to Christ's Vide librum conformitatu^: lib. 3. conformit. 31.
par. 2. page 298. Franciscus consignatus erat a Christo suae sacrae passionis
stigmatibus: ita vt in manibus pedibusque eius erant clauia carne diuisi,
grossi, solidi and obtusi, inter quos and carnem erat apertura, vnde semper
sanguis exibat, ad cuius repressionem, excepto a vespere diei Iovis vsque ad
sero diei Veneris sequentis, semper paeciae interponebantur: habuit etiam
vulnus laterale, ad instar vulneris lateris Christi.
, and had certain things like nails in his feet and hands so divided from
the flesh, that they would open from it, so as his wounds did continually
bleed; insomuch, as he was feign to puttents into them to keep them from
bleeding: which he continually did, saving on good Friday, when always this
popish Jesus did pull out his tents, and let his wounds bleed, as the true
Christ's that day did for our salvation; and this not only in hands and feet,
but that he had a wound in his side like to that in our Savior Christ, and all
this (says the book) was not fained nor imaginary, but truly and really
imprinted in his body by the power of God, that so he might make his friend
Francis like to his son Christ in all things Vide Ba^tholomei de pisis
Epistola^ ad Generalem and capital. ord. Min. Christus ipsum Patrem Franciscum
sibi per omnia similem reddidit et conformem.
. And all this was not the superfluity of idle and superstitious Monks brains;
but the public act of their Church, and many Popes one after another have
allowed it, and by their bulls and charters confirmed and avouched the truth
of this story, concerning the wounds of S. Francis Vide libru^ conformit. lib.
3. confor. 31. par. 2. page 308 Apparet ergo 8. bullis summorum* pontificum.
scilicet tribus Gregorij 9. tribus Alexa^d. 4. vna Nicholai tertij and alia
Benedicti 12. quod beatus Franciscus stigmatizatus fuit.
; and in monument and memory thereof they have their holy day of the 5. wounds
to this day established by all authority Dominus papa Benedictus 12. b^llam
dedi^ ordini vt festum celebraretur de stigmatibus beati Francisci.
.

Thus Christ, touching his passion, is made equal with a mortal man, and an
ignorant Friar (by the Popes divinity) is made equal with Christ in the
manner of his suffering; not in that fashion as every Christian may be, but so
as none at all, no (says this book) not S. John the Evangelist, nor the
Virgin Marie her self could be.

But if we come to his Miracles, then surely Christ must come after him; for
whereas Christ* wrought a miracle, he they say wrought ten, and those that
Christ did are nothing to his. Christ never showed that humility and charity
and patience that S. Francis did. Christ never gave away all his clothes till
he was stark naked, as S. Francis did For all these being too long to write in
the marge^t I must refer ye Reader to the book it self, if he will not believe
me: or else let him suspende his judgment till I have leisure to exemplify
these at large by themselves.
: he never preached to beasts and birds, as Saint Francis did: he never by his
words and the sign of the Cross tamed and converted wild beasts as Saint
Francis did. All this may easily be showed and much more; but I will insist
only in one, and on that the rather, least they should take it in snuff that I
say their father FRANCIS converted beasts: harken therefore to the story, and
then judge and spare not.

S. Francis on a time coming to preach at the city of Eugubium Vide libru^
conformitatu^ lib. 1. conformit. 10. pa^. 2. page 140. Francis preaches to a
wolf. Francis calls the wolf brother: a couple of ravening Wolves well met.
Francis offers the wolf his brother to make peace betwixt him and the rowne.
The Wolf is content.
found that the said City was much troubled with a great and cruel Wolf,
that killd not their cattle only* but their people if they were unarmed.
Francis* would needs go to him, to turn him from his rauenousnesse: and
seeing the wolf come against him with open mouth, he made the sign of the
Cross upon him, and commanded the wolf to shut his mouth and hurt him not:
the wolf presently obeyed and fell down, as tho he had been a meek Lamb:
then spoke Francis to him and said; Brother Wolf thou have shed much blood
and done much hurt, and therefore art worthy to die, and all this City justly
complains of thee: but brother, if thou will be content I will make peace
betwixt them and thee: the wolf by wagging his tail, and moving his ears,
showed that he was very glad. Then brother Wolf* (says S. FRANCIS) seeing
thou art content to be at peace with them I, will take order that they shall
give thee daily allowance of meat, if thou will promise me hereafter to hurt
no hodie: the wolf bowing his head answered by signs that he would. Yea,
but then (says Francis), Brother Wolf, give me thy Francis bids his brother
wolf give him his hand and faith that he will perform his order.
faith and credit that I may believe thee: and the wolf presently lifted up
his right fore-foote and laid it in Francis his hand, thereby giving his faith
that he would perform it. Then Brother Wolf (says Francis) I command thee in
the name of the Lord Jesus that thou go with me into the City, and there fear
not to make peace, in the name of the Lord: the wolf forthwith followed him,
as meek as a Lamb. So coming into the City, all the people, together with
the Magistrates being assembled, S. Francis made unto them an Brother wolf
stands by, whilst S. Francis preaches to the people.
excellent sermon, the wolf being by: which being done he said to them these
words;

This brother of mine, this wolf that stands here, has promised me, and
upon his promise has given me his faith that he will be friends with you, and
do no more hurt; provided that you shall daily give him an allowance, and
portion of meat: which if you do Francis is surety for his brother wolf to
the town.
for your parts, then I will be surety for my brother Wolf that he shall
perform the conditions on his part required. Then said S. Francis; Brother
Wolf, it is reason that as thou did before, so here before all this people
Brother wolf gives his faith again.
thou give me thy faith again, that thou will keep the covenants on thy part:
and the wolf immediately lift up his right fore-foot, and laid it in the hand
of S. Francis, his surety, in the sight of all the people, and so gave his
faith again: and then all the people shouted and wondered, and praised Christ
for sending S. Francis amongst the^, by whose merits they were delivered from
the cruel wolf. And from that day forward, the people Brother wolf lives in
the town, and takes his meat at the doors.
to the wolf and wolf to the people, performed their covenants made by S.
Francis: and the wolf lived 2. years after FRANCIS was gone, and went up and
down the streets, and took his meat, from door to door, hurting no man, and
was well and daintily fed; and there was never so much as a dog that barked at
him. And at last, after 2. years, Brother Wolf being stricken in Brother
wolf dies, and is lamented.
years dyed, for whose death the Citizens did very much lament.

Here is a miracle worth the marking. Now let all Huguenots, and Heretics
show such a miracle in their religion; no, no, they never can do it: And no
marvel; for Jesus Christ, who is the King and Captain of their religion, never
did the like in his time to this which S. Francis the king and captain of the
Franciscans Francisce Jesus typice dux formaque Minorum.
has here done.

If the time would give leave, I could bring 20. more as impious, as
incredible, and as absurd in their kind as this: but leaving it to a further
opportunity, and referring the learned to the book it self, I proceed.

What may be said to all this? are not these wide and woeful wounds? Oh! but
they are healed; I may answer as the Prophet does: Were they ashamed when
Ierem. 7. 12
they had committed abomination? Nay, they were (18) The ninth wound not
healed.
not ashamed. For whereas this book was written above two hundred years ago
by Bartholomeus Pisanus, a Franciscan Friar; it was not then only suffered to
pass to public view in those days of darkness and superstition, but now
of late within less then 20. years when one would have thought they would
(if not repented of the impieties, yet) have been ashamed of the absurdities;
they contrariwise have reprinted the Book The new edition is at Bononie in
Italy. 1590. and is dedicated to a Cardinal: in this editio^ is all that I
have alleged.
, and have not taken ou^ nor reformed one word of all these euilles, nor of
many more, which do so directly disgrace the merits of CHRIST JESUS: only some
things have they altered, which they thought might make against themselves, but
not one of these which do so far dishonor God and Christ and all religion.
Compare together the old and new books, who will; and he shall find this to
be true: wherefore the conclusion is, that this wound is far from being
healed. Let us then go forward, and see if we can find one wound healed (19)
The tenth wound; The Pope may give Indulgences for 20000. years and grant men
power to redeem souls out of Purgatory.
in the Roman Church.

Two or three hundred years ago, the Popes Indulgences did grow to that
height of rotten ripeness, that all men of understanding, even of his own
brood were ashamed of it, and many a one of the wiser sort, even in these
mystie times, did see and laugh at the nakedness of Popery in that point; the
excess whereof grew so great, as they cannot deny but it gave at last an
occasion of LVTHERS reuolte from them. There is a Manuscript extant, written
some two hundredth years ago, and another not much differing from it, some
130. years ago printed at Rome, containing a catalogue only of those
Indulgences belonging to the parish Churches of Rome, amongst which (they say)
are 7. principal: let us but consider of some few He that wa^ts this book
let him look in Hospinian de Templis. lib. 2 c. 28. page 348. edition is
Tigur. 603. where he shall find both mention of the book and a particular
recital of a great part of it.
.

In the Laterane Church, it is granted thus by Pope Boniface.

If any Pilgrim come for devotion to this Church, he shall be absolved from
all his sins.

And in the Chapel there called sanctum sanctorum, there is full and true
remission of all sins.

And one day in the year, which is the day of the dedication of the Church,
there is full remission of all sins both a poena and culpa: and this
Indulgence is so certain (says the book) that when the Pope first pronounced
it, the Angels Angels say Amen, to the Popes Indulgences: but they should first
prove, y^ God says Amen to them; for else the Angels will not, unless it be
the evil Angels.
in the hearing of all the people said Amen.

If these things be true, then it is strange that all Papists in the world are
not saved: for he that has full remission of all sins, both a poena and
culpa, dying in that state cannot be damned. And certainly, he that for the
obtaining thereof, will not take the pains to visit that Church one day in a
year, is not worthy of salvation.

In Saint Peter's Church, there be every day eight and forty years of
pardon, which is in one year above fifteen thousand years: Every day of
the Annuntiation there be one thousand years; and he that with devotion goes
up Saint Peter's stayres, has for every step seven years of pardon. Surely
purgatory pains are not so fearful as they bear the world in hand; if
going up two and twenty steps may purchase releasement of a hundred and fifty
years thereof. And if these seem too little Alexander the Pope like a liberal
Lord opens his treasure, and gives to every step a thousand years: So that
now there is not a Papist in the world that needs to be in Purgatory one day
except he will: For, for going up XXij. thousand years of pardon granted for
going up 22. steps If the Pope say true in this no Papist need to come in
Purgatory.
twenty two steps with devotion, he may be released out of Purgatory, for
two and twenty thousand years: and I hope they do not think the World will
last so long, and Purgatory (they say) ends with the World.

Further, whosoever will go through the 3. doors Three doors of one Church in
Rome of so great virtue that whosoever goes through them shall be as free from
sin ^^ when he was newly baptized. Oh what a great power the Pope has, who
can give power to another so easily to deliver souls out of purgatory. How
easy purgatory might be emptied by Popish doctrine.
of the Laterane Church* shall be as free from all his sins, as he was the
hour he was baptized: Likewise at the Altar in Saint Peter's Church, there be
xiiii. thousand years of pardon and deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory.

And in the Church of Saint Lawrence, whosoever visits that Church every
Thursday for a year, and ^ittes upon the stone whereon Saint Lawrence was
broyled, shall deliver one soul out of Purgatory.

And in the Church of Saint John, at the gate called Porta Latina, a man by
either saying a Mass, or causing it to be said, may deliver one soul out of
Purgatory.

Are these true? then why is there one soul left in purgatory? or else where
is the charity of the Papists (which they so much brag of) seeing so
easily they may deliver so many thousands souls out of purgatory in one
year? Certainly, if these be true as they be written, then granting that
there is a purgatotorie, it might soon be emptied.

But if it be false and fabulous and frivolous, and has no other end but to
mock poor people and to suck out their silver: then what a religion is that
which maintains such dealings? especially seeing this is not the deed of any
private men, but of the Popes themselves: nor of a few, but even all since
Boniface the eight.

Thus we have searched deep, into a foul and filthy wound. Now what
remains? but to see if it be healed yet or no The tenth wound not healed, but
grows more desperate and deadly to this day.
,

But alas, Babylon will not be healed: for as they feared not to put these
tricks upon the people 100. and 200. years ago, in the times of
superstition; so have they presumed even still in these days of light to do
the like. And as the whore is shameless in her sin, so is this whore of
Babylon in her impiety; for she has not at all amended this enormitie, nor
in any sort reformed it, but rather lets it grow from bad, to worse. For
evidence whereof, let any man read Onuphrius Pauvinius Vide O^uphrium Pauuinium,
de praecipuis vrbis Romae sanctiorious basilicis quas septem Ecclesias vulgo
v^cant. Colon. 1584. passim.
, who not past 24. years ago, has written (with public authority) a book
to this very purpose of the seaue^ principal Churches of Rome, and of the
Indulgences belonging to them; wherein all that is delivered before is auerred,
and much more added: some part whereof I would put down, save for that it may
be reserved to a further purpose and fitter opportunity. And for better
evidence, that as she has not, so she purposes never to heal up this wound*
within these two years they have allowed and published with authority, the
pilgrimage or voiages of Seigneur Villamont, Les voyages du St de Villamont
diuisez e^ trois livres: der^iere edition, reueuce and augmentee etc. A. A^ra^.
16^5. vide (inter alia) librum 1. cap. 12. etc.
, one of the Gentlemen of the French Kings Chamber; wherein the poor deceived
Gentleman, out of his superstitious devotion having visited all those Churches,
and made himself (as he says) blessed by being partaker of all the
Indulgences thereto belonging; and having ascended those holy stairs to every
step whereof belong so many thousand years of pardon: after all, returning
home at last much poorer, but nothing wiser then he went, he wrote a book of
his voyage and pilgrimage to Jerusalem: and taking Rome in his way, he
describes at large the Indulgences granted of old, and at this day in force to
the Churches in Rome. Which book (being written in French) whoeuer list to
read, will soon confess, that in this wound the Romish Babylon is not yet
healed. The eleue^th wound; Granting of Indulgences and thousands of years,
and deliverance of Souls out of purgatory, to Beads, Meddalls; Crosses,
Pictures and such like toys being blessed and hallowed by the Popes holy hands.


And hereunto I will add another wound, because it is so near to this, in
popish consanguinitie.

The wiser sort of Popes, and the rest of the craftier politicians in that
hierarchy, perceiving that all the Nations of the earth, (many of them being
so far distant) could not come to their market of Indulgences being kept in
Rome, therefore least they should lose their traffic into those parts, they
devised away, that seeing a great part of the world could not come to Rome,
Rome should send to them: To which end, out of his bounty and spiritual
liberality, for the incredible good of men's souls, the Pope ordained that
certain Crucifixes, and Meddalls, and Agnus dei The principal of all these
toys is the Agnus dei, which every one may not make, but only the Pope: nor
he always, but only at Easter: nor at every Easter, but the first next his
entrance, and every seventh Easter after: nor of any matter, nor in any
manner, but preciselie of such simples, and with such ceremonies as are
prescribed for that purpose; which together with the prayers (or rather
coniurations) then to be used* are to be seen in the book called
Caeremoniale pontil. lib. 1. And he that has not that book, let him look in
the Commentaries of Peter Matthew upon the Constitutions of Gregory the 13.
Constit. the 1.
and holy Grains, and beads and other such Jewels, should be first consecrated
and hallowed by the hands of his Holiness, and have all the holiness powered
upon them that he can spare, and further should have annexed unto them all
those mighty Indulgences, or the like, that are granted unto the Churches and
stations at Rome: and by this means they could sell an Agnus dei, that is, a
little piece of white wax, or a Crucifixe of a little metal, it may be brass
or copper (such as the Jesuits of late sent into England by thousands at
once, as good inoughe to serve the English Catholics), or a little meddall,
or a little beade or bugle, or other matter of no more value: these toys and
trinkets, I say they can sell by this means, and every day do utter, at a
higher rate then the Ieweller can his pearls or his diamonds.

Thus did not only the former Popes gull the people of elder ages in those
times of ignorance, making them believe that these toys so hallowed and
blessed by them, were of such virtue as Christ's blood it self could be of no
more; as one of them sending an Agnis dei to an Emperor, shamed not to write
to him, that Vrbanus. 5. circa annum 1368. mific ad Imperatorem Graecorum tres
agnos dei. cum his versibus, Balsamus and munda Cera cu^ Chrismatis vnda,
Conficiunt agnum quod munus do tibi magnum, etc. Peccatum frahgit, vt Christi
sanguis and angit. Fulgura desursum depellit and omne malignu^: Praegnans
seruatur simul and partus liberatur: Dona confert dignis; virtute^ destruit
ignis: Portatus munde, de fluctibus cripit vndae. vide Petrum Mathaeum,
Constitut. Pont. Romans in Constit. 1. Greg. 13. Page 685.


This Agnus dei breaks off sins even as the blood of Christ: But even in
these times of light and knowledge, these owls dare still fly abroad: and
even of late, nay every year, the Pope shameth not to set his trumperies to
sale, annexing unto them such large and liberal Indulgences, as Christ's own
blood can have no more The eleventh wound not healed.
. I could insist upon late and notorious examples, practiced even at home and
upon our own Nation: but I spare them at this time, because the proofs
thereof, tho never so certain to us, are not so authentical as yet, as be
these two examples, I shall now produce; one of them touching Poland, the other
France.

For Polande: Not many years ago, Pope Clement the eight granted as
follows, as is to be seen in printed coppies,

Vide libr^ inscriptum Euangelium Romanum, edit. anno. 1600, Indulgentia
concessa a sanctitate nostri S. patris Papae Clementis octaui, Instantia
illustrissimi and reuerendissimi Cardinalis Radzivillij, Episcopi Cracouiensis
and legati in Polonia, Granis, Crucibus, Medallis and Imagimbus etc.
Indulgences granted by the Holiness of our most Holy Father, Pope Clement
the eight,

At

The Instance of the most Illustrious and most reverend Lord Cardinal Radz
iuillius, Bishop of Cracowe and Legate in Polande,

Unto

Certain Holy Beads, Crosses, Medals and Images.

Quicunque habens prope se vnum ex hi^ granis, Crucibus, Medallis, aut
Imaginibus benedictis, ^otie scunque recitauerit Corollam, confessus, aut cum
proposito confitendi saltem semel in mense, acquiret sibi singulis vicibus 5.
annos Indulgentiae.
. Whosoever having one of these holy beads etc. shall say over the Rosarie,
being confessed, or having a purpose to confess once a month, shall for every
time he does so obtain v. years of pardon.

Is cui moris fuerit singulis diebus facere examen suae conscientiae ad finem
recitando 3. patres nostros et tres aue Marias orando etc. acquiret sibi 10.
annos Indulg.
. But if he do every day after examination of his Conscience, say three
Pater nosters and three Aue Mary's etc. shall have x. years.

Is cui moris fuerit recitare singulis diebus officium nostrae dominae,
singulis diebus sabbathi, acquiret sibi Indulgentiam centum annorum.
. But if he use every day to say over the Psalter of our Lady, shall for
every Saturday weekly obtain a hundred years.

Is cui moris fuerit recitare ter in hebdomade: Corolla^, and confessus fuerit
et communicauerit and precatus fuerit vt supra, acquiret sibi plenariam
Indulgentiam.
. He that shall thrice in a week say over the Coronet of our Lady, and
confess and communicate, and pray, shall obtain a plenarie, that is, a full
remission of all sins.

Quicunque in articulo mortis, dicet in cord Jesus cum non possit proferreore,
acquiret sibi plena^iam Indulgentiam: modo habuerit vnam ex Corollis, Granis,
Crucibus, aut Medallis supradictis.
. And whosoever in the hour and point of death shall but say in his heart,
when he cannot speak with his tongue, the name Jesus, shall have a plenarie and
full forgiveness of all his sins: provided that he have one of these
blessed and holy Grains, Meddalls, Crucifixes or Pictures.

Hae omnes Indulgentiae acquirantur habendo prope aut ante se vnam Medallam,
Crucem, Imagine^ aut Gra^um huiu^ benedictionis, obseruando quae supra dicta
sunt, ^^ ^^leant (...)ibus and ^ ^mni loco. Impressum Romae a Paulo Blado
Typographo Camerae. 1592.
All these Indulgences may be procured and obtained, by having either about a
man, or lying before him one or more of these holy Medalles, Crosses, Grains,
or Images, and observing what is before appointed: and his Holinesses will is,
that they shall be of force to all kind of men and in every place.

Printed at Rome by the printer of his Holinesses privy Chamber, Paulus
Bladus, 1592.

Lo here how Babylon is healed: If a man at the point of death, can in his
mind but think of Jesus, he shall have full forgiveness of all his sins,
if he have one of these holy Crosses, or Grains about him. And is this the
Divinity of the Romish Church? is this procured by a Cardinal and granted by
the Pope? then answer me but one word: Shall the thinking or naming of
Jesus, without true faith and repentance save him tho he have a hundredth of
these holy Grains about him? or if he do truly repent and believe in
CHRIST, tho he have not one of these, shall he not be saved?

If those both be true, (as who dare deny them?) then phie upon these
Impostors and deceivers, who by these their Atheistical mockeries expose
religion to all contempt: and these things being so common and notorious, noe
marvel tho Italy, where (these are rifest) have, beside some privy
protestants, few but that are either Atheistes or fools.

Concerning France: Of late years Peroun the French Cardinal, having made a
costly Journey to Rome, coming home, procured of the Pope (for the bearing of
his charges) to be the bearer of certain hallowed and holy matters
consecrated and blessed by the Pope, in such a fashion, as if that were true
the Pope says, he were more then mad that would not (as the wise Merchant)
sell all he has to buie one of them.

Indulgentiae concessae a nostro S. Patre Papa Clement 8 Corollis Granis
Cruciculis, Rosorijs Crucibus Crucifixis Medallis and Imaginibus benedictis,
Instante Reuerendo Patre in deo domino Iacobo Danie Episc. Ebrodunensi,
Consiliario regio in ipsius Consilijs summa et pietate and ipsius prim^
Eleemosynario. Grana benedicta sunt tantum in vsum regni Galliae.
Indulgences granted by the Holiness of our most Holy Father Pope Clement the
eight,

Unto

Holy Beads, Graynes, Rosaries, Crosses, Crucifixes, Medalls and Images, being
hallowed and blessed by his own holy hands,

At the Instance of the Reverend Father and Lord, James Dauie, Bishop of
Eureux, Counselor to the King in his Counsel of Estate, and also of his
private Counsel and principal Almoner to his Majesty.

Quicunque habuerit ex Corollis aut Rosarijs vnu^ aut etiam Corollam vnam in
quam insertum sit vnum ex his granis etc. quotiescunque fecerit aliquid opus
misericordiae, corporalis aut spiritualis, aut audierit Missam, aut sermonem,
aut veneratus fuerit sacramentum aut Cruceia, aut aliam quandam sanctam
Imaginem, acquiret sibi veniam centum annorum.
Whosoever having one of these beads etc. shall 1. A hundredth 1. years of
pardon, at an easy rate.
do any work of mercy corporal or spiritual, or hear a Mass or a Sermon,
or shall but do reverence to the Sacrament, or to a Cross, or to a holy
Image, shall obtain a hundredth years of pardon.

See what a bountiful father, the Pope is. Who would offer less for a hundredth
years? surely he that will not do thus much, he is worthy to lie and fry in
purgatory.

Quicunque confitebitur aut co^municabit, aut si Presbyter sit dixerit missam
recita^s deuote praeter confessionum co^munione^ aut missam, vnum patrem
nostru^ aut vnum aue Mariam, aut aliqua alia ratione orans Deum pro sancta
Ecclesia Catholica, aut pro nostro sancto Patre, aut pro Rege Galliae, aut pro
pace huius Regni, aut pro conuersione Haereticorum, aut pro conuersione
peccatorum, acquiret sibi singulis vicibus Indulge^ tiam plenaria^ and
remissionem omnium peccatorum suorum, Modo super se habeat supradictarum rerum
aliquam.
Whosoever shall confess and communicate, or being a Priest, shall besides his
mass, say deuoutely one Pater noster, or one Aue Mary, for the Catholic
Church, or for the holy Father, or for the King of France, or for the peace of
France, or for the conversion of Heretics, or other sinners: shall have for
every time he does this a plenarie Indulgence, and remission of all his
sins, so as he have about him one of these holy beads grains or Crucifixes.

And what if one want all these trumperies, shall he not have forgiveness, if
he do truly believe and repent? Oh when will Babylon be ashamed of such
abomination?

Quicunque exosculatus fuerit, cum deuotione, etc aliquam eiusmodi medallorum,
etc. acquiret sibi singulis vicibus 10. annos Indulgentiae.
Whosoever shall kiss one of these beads etc. with devotion, shall have for
every time he does so, ten years of pardon.

Habens super se vnam ex supradictis rebus orans pro conseruatione, etc. aut
pro Rege Galliae, etc. particeps erit singulis diebus etc. omnium
sacrificiorum, Ieiuniorum, precum and aliorum operum quae fiunt in coenobijs,
ac si esset membrum particulare eorum.
Whosoever has one of them about him, and prays for the success of the
Catholic Romish religion, or for the K. of France, shall be (so often as he does
so) partaker of all the Sacrifices, Prayers, and Fasts and other good works
done in any Abbie, as well as if he were a particular member of the same
society.

Habens super se vnam ex supradictis rebus in periculo mortis in bello aut alio
in loco, vbi non fuerit illi commodum, recitans, cum contritione, Domine Jesus
suscipe spiritum meum etc. aut proferens sanctum nome^ Jesus, acquiret sibi
Indulgentiam plenariam, and remissionem omnium suorum peccatorum, tam culpae
quam poenae, etc.
He that has one of these about him, if he be in danger of death, or in the
battle, or in any place where he cannot go to confession, and shall with
contrition but repeat these words, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, or name the
holy name Jesus, shall have forgiveness of all his sins, and be discharged
both a a poena and a cu^pa.

Sua sanctitas concedit vt valiant pro omnibus and in omni loco (exceptis
granis) ea condition, vt qui non sint Galli precentur pro Rege and Regno
Galliae etc. Impressum Romae cum permissione superiorum, etc.
His Holiness graunts that these Indulgences shall be good for all men, and in
all places; but conditionally, that those that be not Frenchmen, shall pray
for the King and Realm of France: Except always the holy Graynes; for those
are limited to belong only to France, and to be good to none but only French
men.

Imprinted at Rome with license, etc.

I have named some, but not all; look for the rest in the book: but in them
all let it be observed, that there is not the least mention of faith in Christ,
nor once so much as the name of it, nor any relation to Christ, nor his holy
merits: No, these are well if they may be understood; and yet these men (if
they be not Atheists) do know that all these their large promises are but
wind, and their Indulgences but foam and froth, if there be not lively faith
and true repentance: and if these be in a man, then let us see that Pope,
Cardinal, or other Papist, who dare say that he shall not have full remission
that never saw nor touched one of they blessed beads nor hallowed Grains.
Thus we see how far Babylon is from being healed in this point.

The twelfth and last wound, concerning the first Table, shall be concerning the
Sacraments: both which are horribly perverted and profaned by Romish doctrine
and practice. The 12. wound; The Popish Church baptizeth Belles.


First, Baptism is profanely applied, not to reasonable creatures only, men
and women, according to the Institution Mat. 28. 19
; but even to unreasonable and dead creatures. I will insist only upon one:
they use to baptize bells, in most points so as Christians do Children, and in
some points with much more ceremony and solemnity.

Bellarm^n is ashamed of it, and would willingly hide and cover it, tho he
cannot cure it: but if he were not a Cardinal and a Jesuit, he would be
ashamed to cloak it with so loud a lie, as he does: for (says he) Bellar. de
Ro^ Pont. Tom. 1. lib. 4. cap. 12. Si rem reprehe^dunt, aperte decipiuntur aut
me^tiu^tur: non enim ca^panae reuera baptizantur, sed solum benedicu^tur, etc.
vt altaria, etc. Vt patet ex po^tificali, etc.
it is a false slander of the Heretics; we do not baptize bells, neither in
respect of the name, nor ye matter of baptism: look says he the book of the
Pontificale there is no such matter: only (says he) we bless them as we do
Churches, Altars Crosses, and other things, etc.

Is it true? then let us follow Bellarmines advise, and look into the
Pontificale, and omitting the name or word, let us stand upon the matter of
Baptism. Compare therefore their baptism of a child and a Bell together, and
see then whether it may not be truly said they baptize Bells. Vide librum
inscriptu^ Pontificale Romanu^ autoritate pontificia impressum Venetijs 1520.
^ib. 2 cap. de Benedictione signi vel campanae. Ca^pana debet benedici antequa^
ponatur in campanili: para^da sint i would o vas aquae b^nedicendae, aspersoriu^,
vas cum sale, lintea munda, oleum sanctum, sanctum Chrisma, thimyama, thus,
myrrha, thuribulu^ cum igne: Pontifex and diaconus etc. sint in tuis
vestime^tis: precibus peractis Pontifex lauat campanam cum dicta aqua, and cum
pollice dexterae manus facit cruce^ supra campana^ ab extra, cum oleo
infirmoru^, and intus cum chrismate, and profert interim haec verba;
Sa^ctificetur and co^secretur (Domine) signu^ istud in nomine Patris and Filij
and spiritus sancti. In honore^ sancti talis Pax tibi etc.


1. The Child must first be baptized, before it can be accounted one of the
Church. The Bell must first be blessed, before it may be hung in the steeple. 2.
The Child must be baptized by a Minister, or a Priest. The Bell must, by a
Bishop; or his deputy. 3. For a Childs baptism must be used holy water,
cream, salt, oil spettle, and many such. The Bells baptism or blessing must
also be in holy water, oil, salt, cream, tapers for light, etc. 4. They give
the Child a name. So do they to the Bell. 5. The Child must have Godfathers,
etc. So must the Bell; and they be persons of great note. 6. The Child must
be washed in water. So must the Bell; and that by none but the Bishop and
Priests. 7. The Child must be crossed. So must the Bell. 8. The Child must be
anointed. So must the Bell. 9. The Child must be baptized, in the name of the
Trinity. So the Bell is washed and anointed in the name of the Trinity. 10.
They pray for the Child. So do they for the Bell. 11. At the Childs
baptism the Scripture is read: So at the washing of the Bell, more Psalms are
read, then at a Childs baptism, also a Gospel: and more prayers are made*
and (excepting salvation) greater things are prayed for, and more blessings on
the bell, then be for a child. 12. And public prayers made

For better evidence hereof, and because the book is not easy to come by,
take here a part of the prayers they use to that purpose.

Pontifical. ibid. Benedic Domine hanc aquam benedictione coelesti, and
assistat super eam virtus spiritus sancti, vt cum hoc vasculum etc. in ca
fuerit tinctum, vbicunque sonuerit hoc tintinnabulum procul recedat virtus
insidiantium, vmbra phantasmatum, incursio turbinum, percussio fulminum, laesio
tonitruorum, calamitas tempestatum etc. and cum clangorem illius audierint
filij Christianorum, crescat in eis deuotionis augmentum, etc. et postea Presta
quaesumus vt hoc vasculum sanctificetur a spiritu sancto etc. vt cum melodia
illius auribus insonuerit populorum, crescat in eis deuotio fidei, procul
pellantur omnes infidiae Inimici, fragor grandinum, etc. aereae potestates hoc
tintinnabulum audientes contremiscant.
Lord grant that wheresoever this holy Bell thus (baptized, or) washed and
blessed shall sound, al deceits of Satan, all fantasies, all danger of
whirlwindes, thunders, lightnings, and tempests, may be driven away, and that
devotion may increase in Christia^men when they hear it: O Lord sanctify it
by thy holy Spirit, that when it sounds in thy peoples ears, their faith and
devotion may increase, the devil may be affrayed, and tremble et postca,
Omnipotens Deus, qui, etc. tu hoc tiatinabulu^ coe esti benedictione perfunde,
vt ante sonitu^ eius longius effugentur ignita iacula diaboli, percussio
fulminum, etc. and quicu^que ad sonitum eius conuenerint ab omnibus Inimici
tentationibus liberi sint, etc. and paulo post, Omnipotens Christ, qui etc. tu
hoc tintinnabulum sancti spiritus rore perfunde, vtante sonitu^ eius semper
fugiat bonoru^ inimicus, etc.
and fly away at the sound of it. O Lord pour upon it thy heavenly blessing,
that the fiery darts of the Devil, may be made to fly backward at the sound
thereof, and that it may deliver from danger of wind, thunder, etc. And grant
Lord that all that come to the Church at the sound of it, may be free from all
temptations of the Devil. O Lord infuse into it the heavenly dew of the holy
Ghost that the devil may always fly away before the sound of it, etc.

Thus at Bellarmines request we have looked into the Popes Pontificale, and let
the Reader judge what we have found: he rebukes us for laying it to their
charge that they baptize bells, and for proof that they do not, sends us to the
Pontificale; but surely he thought that we could not have seen the book, else
he would never have referred us thereunto: for upon sight thereof, it is apparent
to be a more solemn baptism then that of the child is; for the solemnity is
longer, the Ceremonies more, the prayers to greater purpose, the minister of
greater place, then be required to a child's baptism; and every thing does so
concur in it that is in baptism, that Bellarmin himself confesses that tho the
pope does not, yet others generally do call it the baptizing of belles, because
they see them sprinkled with water, and have names given them Bellar. tom. 1.
de Romans po^t. lib. 4. cap. 12. Nomen Baptismi non a Pontificibus sed avulgo
campanarum benedictioni accommodatur etc. quia vide^t eas aqua aspergiet eis
nomina imponi, etc.
.

But it is not the name we stand upon, but the matter: concerning which,
whereas they pray that the sound of that bell so washed and sanctified as before
may drive away the devil and all his fiery darts, I would ask Bellarmine,
or any of his Chaplains, whether this be spoken in jest or in earnest, in
formalitie as words of course, or in faith as a holy prayer. If they know the
prayer to be impossible, not to have any warrant, but meerelie to be a state
Ceremony, and done to amaze the poor people etc. then it appears they be
Cozeners and Atheists that make Religion a pretense to all their purposes: But
if it be in earnest, and they know it to be a prayer of faith, and have
warrant from Gods word for it, then it were possible to drive away the devil
and all his temptations out of a kingdom: for so many Belles might be
hallowed and washed, as might hang, one within the reach of another sound; and
so if the words of this prayer be true, a Devil might not stay in the realm:
and that Realm were very worthy to have the Devils company, that would not
willingly be at the cost to have so many bells though they were of silver, and
to have them baptized though it were in costly water.

To conclude, Bellarmine pleases to sport himself a little with us and says;
The Heretics object to us that we baptize Belles; but its marvel (says
he) that they do not also say, we catechize and instruct them, that so they
may sound out the Articles of Faith Obijciunt nobis haeretici quod baptizamus
Campanas. Mirum vero est quod non etiam dicunt campanas a nobis antea
catechizari et instrui, vt possint fidei symbolum resonare. Bellar. ibid. 24. 4
: But it is very likely the Jesuit had not seen or not well perused the
Pontificale: for if he had, he might have found that they pray to GOD to give
the HOLY GHOST to the Bell, to bless it, to sanctify it, to puri^^e it, to
pour heavenly blessings upon it, and the dew of Gods grace. Certainly if
this be a lawful an apt and fit prayer for the bell, they may also catechize
it: for it is doubtless as capable of instruction from man, as of any
spiritual and heavenly blessing from God.

Thus it is proved, I hope, that the Romish Church (in some sort for the name,
but especially for the matter) does baptize Bells.

It remains but to see The twelfth wound not healed; for the Romish Church
still baptizeth belles.
if this wound be healed, or no.

But I answer, this was not the superstition of the old and ignorant times
only, but is even the present impiety of that Church: for, of late, Clement
the eight, pretending to have the Pontifical revived and reformed, caused it
to be printed at Rome before his face Vide Pontificale Romanum Clementis 8.
Pont. Max. iussu resti tutum atque editum Romae 1895. et legatur eiusdem
Clementis Constitutio. ibid. praefixa, pro eiusdem libri autoritate and
approbatione.
by his authority, in a fair letter, and with most goodly pictures: and
indeed many things are left that might make against the Pope, and many added
that may make for him.

But as for this blasphemy and abuse of Gods holy Sacrament, it stands
untouched, unaltered, and allowed for a good and Catholic practice in every
particular as I have before set it down, and in many more: Oh BABYLON,
BABYLON, when will thou be healed?

The other sore of this wound is touching the Lords Supper The other sore of
the 12. wound; That though Christ ordained the contrary; yet it is not
necessary for Christians of the Laity to have the sacrament in both kinds, but
only the bread and not the Cup.
which they maime and mangle, sacrilegiously taking the Cup from the whole
Laity. This wound is not very deep, for it is not old: but it is wide, for
it is general: and it is a foul one; for it maymeth the Sacrament, and
crosses Christ^ own Institution. They were a hatching it sometime before, but
at last the monster was brought forth in the Council of Constance when they
decreed thus, Council. Constant. sess. 13. Synodus declarat decernit and
definit, quod licet Christus instituerit et suis discipulis administrauerit sub
vtraque specie panis et vini; et similiter quod licet in primitiua ecclesia hoc
sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie: tamen haec consuetudo
est rationabiliter introducta, quod a conficientibus sub vtraque, a laicis
tantummodo sub specie panis suscipiatur. Et habenda est pro lege haec
consuetudo, etc. et pertinaciter asserentes oppositum tanqua^ haeretici arcendi
et puniendi sunt: et quod nullus Presbiter sub poena excomunicationis
co^municet populum sub vtraque specie panis et vini, etc.


That notwithstanding Christ or dained the Sacrament in both kinds, and tho the
eldest Church did so receive it, yet for all that, this custom is lawfully and
laudably brought into the Church, that the laity shall receive but in one kind
only; and that whosoever shall hold the contrary, shall be proceeded against
as heretics: and all Priests are commanded under pain of excommunication,
that they give not the Cup to the laity: and they that do and recant not
shall be punished as heretics.

This wound has Bellarmine, and other of the craftier sort of them sought to
cover, but not to cure: and it would satisfy a man in this point tho he
wauered before, to see how slily and superficially he deals in this question
Bellar. de sacram. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 26. tom. 3.
: This abuse is so horrible, the injury to the sacrament, and the wrong to the
laity so notorious, the absurdity and impiety of the practice so without all
color of defense, that if they were not without grace and past hope of
recovery, and such as have resolved to amend nothing, they would have reformed
this long ago.

But heerby it is apparent they are plain Statesmen and Politicians, who have
nothing else in their head, but to maintain the height of their hierarchy, and
Majesty of their Monarchy. Even this one particular is sufficient to make
demo^stration hereof; seeing they will not amend that which they see and know
to be contrary to Christ's Institution; and whereof many of the better sort of
themselves are utterly ashamed.

But it is so far from being healed at all, that it is rather worse and worse
The latter sore of the 12. wound not yet healed, but spreades further.
. Look in their new edition of the Counsels this last year, and there is no
reformation of this evil Vide postre^am edit. Council. per Bininum. Colon.
1606. Council. Constant. sess. 13. in. 2. part tomi tertij. p. 1589.
, no plaster laid upon this sore, not so much as a marginall note to qualify
the Non-obstante to Christ's Institution; but rather all is made worse then it
was before in the former and elder impressions.

Nay, it is so far from being healed, that contrariwise, it is made daily a
wider and deeper wound: For now it is made in that Church a sin against the
first Commandment of the moral law, for a man to receive the Sacrament in
both kinds Vide libru^ inscriptu^ Excercitium pietatis, in gratia^
studiosorum, autoritate Cardinalis Radzivilij, scriptum and editum. Colon. 92.
In cap. de methodo recte confitendi, Circa primu^ praeceptum inquiratur an
fecerit alique^ exteriore^ actum infidelitatis vel haeresis etc. vt sub vtraque
specie communica^do, etc.
. So then seeing we know Christ appointed it in both kinds, and now the
Romish Church prohibites it under pain of mortal sin; alas what hope is there
that this Church will ever be reformed, that condemns the obedience to Christ's
institution and commandment, as a deadly sin?

Let us now proceed to such wounds, as may be more properly referred to the
second Table of the moral law.

Touching wilful murder, it has been their doctrine and practice since the
mistie times of ignorance, that The 13. wound; That it is lawefull to have
sanctuaries forwillfull murder.
Churches and Churchyards, and Bishops houses, and some such other places be
sanctuaries, that is, places for refuge for the offender; unto which if he do
fly, and settle himself, he cannot, nor may not be prosecuted by course of
law and justice, but is there safe, as long as it pleases the Clergy to
retain him.

Thus writes Pope Innocent the 3. in his Decretalles to the King of Scotland,
who in those evil days (poor man) held himself not of power to punish
malefactors of his own kingdom that had taken sanctuary, until he had sent
to the Pope for his advise.

Corp. Iuri^ Can^nici Decretal. li. 3. tit. 49. cap. 6. Si fugiens ad ecclesia^
liber sit quantumcunque grauia maleficia perpetrauerit, non est violenter ab
ecclesia extrahendus, nec inde damnari debet ad morte^, vel ad poena^; sed
rectores ecclesiaru^ sibi obtinere debent membra and vitam, etc.
To your question, Sir (says the Pope) I answer thus; If he that has taken
sanctuary be a freeman, then is he not to be taken violently out of the
Church, not tho he have committed never so grievous crimes, neither may he be
condemned thereupon either to death or other punishment; but the Clergy, and
governors of that Church are to obtain for him liberty and safety of life and
limme etc.

Some may here object that afterward in the decretall he makes exception of
some crimes: true, of night robbers, but not of murderers. Neither was this
proper to Italy or to Scotland, but the general sore of all nations. In
England we had many, but especially 3. most famous sanctuaries:

One at Beuerley, in Yorke-shire, erected by K. Athelstane, where in the Church
was set a chair of stone, and this inscription written over it;

This stone chair is called Freedstoole, that is the chair Vide Brita^nia^
Camdeni in Com. Eboru^. Haec seeds lapidea dicitur Freedstool id est p^cis
cathedra, ad quam reus ^ugiendo perueni^ns omnimodam habe^ securitatem.
of peace, whereunto if one that is guilty do fly and sit in it, he shall have
all sufficient security.

Another at Battle Abbie in Sussex, where the Conqueror won the victory, and
in memory thereof, building that Abbey he endowed it (with the popes consent)
amongst others, with this privilege Vide eundem Camdenu^, in com. Sussex haec
sunt verba diplomatis; Si quis latro vel homicida, vel aliquo crimine reus,
timore mortis fugiens ad hanc ecclesiam peruenerit, in nullo laedatur, sed
liber omnino dimittatur: Abbati vero ipsius Ecclesiae liceat vbique latronem
vel furem de suspendio liberare ^i forte superuenerit.
;

If any thief or Murderer, or any other malefactor (what soever his fault
be) for fear of death do fly and come to this Church, he shall not be hurt
by any means; but shall be dismissed, and let go again with safety and
freedom. And further it shall be lawful for the Abbot of the said Church, in
all places wheresoever he shall hap to come, to save one thief from the
gallows. These be the very words of the Charter it self. The third and not
the least was at Westminster: whereof there is often and famous mention in our
Chronicles, as being a place of frequent and ordinary refuge for great
Malefactors, and the name remains there to this day. And these were not so
much the facts of ignorant and superstitious Kings, as the general received
doctrine of the Romish teachers, and the public deed of their Popes themselves
Vide decretal, Sext. and Clement: in tit. de ecclesiarum and coemeterioru^
immunitatibus, etc.
.

This was so in the old time (will some say) but now it is otherwise. I
answer: Nay, this is not healed, but rather is much worse. To this end, let us
consider a little of some of their latest and principal writers in this case
The 13. wou^d not healed; for Popery allows sanctuaries for wilful murder
still.
. A great Clarke of Rome, a favorite of Pope Gregory's the xiiii. and one of
his principal Secretaries, some 12. years ago writes a great volume of this
and other Immunities, which he says by their religion belongs to holy persons
and places; let us observe a few of his words Vide Anastasium Germoniu^ de
sacroru^ immunitatibus. lib. 3: cap. 16. art. ^. etc.
.

Not Clergy men only, but even the very Churches Habent et ecclesiaru^
aedificia, suas immu nitates. Na^ qui ad eas co^fugiunt, quodammodo sacrosancti
effecti, nequeu^t inde extrahi, nec in vincula co^ijci vltimoue supplicio
affici, aut aliqua membrorum detru^catione plecti, sed veluti in arce tutissima
positi ab inquirentibus inuiolati remanent.
themselves have their privilege: for Malefactors flying to them, are in a
sort made holy thereby, insomuch as they may not be taken away thence, nor
be cast into prison, nor be touched in life, nor limme, but shall there be safe
from all pursuers, as in a Castle or most strong hold, etc.

And not only puts he down this for Catholic doctrine, but he will also
needs have it to be ex iure diuino: and whereas Couarruvias (as learned as
himself at least) disproues it very sufficiently Didac. Couarruvias. variarum
resolut. lib. 2. cap. 20. Number. 2. v. 2. and 3.
and concludes it to be but de iure positivo, this darling of the Popes will
not suffer so much amendment as this, but condemns Couarruvias, tho he cannot
confute his reasons, and concludes it to be de iure diuino. Idem Germonius
ibid. art. 7.
.

And whereas one Johannes Ferrariensis, a famous and learned Lawyer, argues
foundly and truly that Churches should not receive murderers not be
sanctuaries for thieves, seeing Christ cast out even buyers and sellers which
are not so ill Ioh. Pet. de Ferrar. practica Papiensis, cap. de forma inquisi.
verse. ex his potest.
; The Popes Secretary, scornfully casts away both his opinion and his reason
Germonius ibid. art. 15.
; yet is he never able to overthrow either the truth of his opinion, or
strength of his reason: but so unwilling are they to be healed in any thing,
that if any one of them do but begin to see the truth, and do but glaunce at
it or incline to it, presently he is nipt in the head and condemned, as here
the old Lawyer is reproved by the later; and when as he would have had this
wound healed, this darling of the popes will not suffer him, but answers that
his reason is naught and not worth a rush.

And yet not content, he goes further, and says; that not only Churches
consecrated, but tho they be not as yet consecrated Ide^ ibid. art. 23. 24.
, yet they be sanctuaries: and not the Church only, but even the Churchyard,
yea tho it be disioined from the Church Ide^ ibid. art. 30. and 34.
.

Nay further, that even hospitalls Ide^ ibid. art. 27
, yea private Chappells in men's houses, if they were built by the Bishops
authority Ide^ ibid. art. 29.
, have privilege of sanctuary to receive a murderer flying unto them. And
least murder should not find sufficient shelter in Romish religion, he tells
us further, that even the Bishops Palace is a sanctuary, if a murderer fly
unto it, if it be within 40. pases of the Church; or (tho it be more then 40.
pases off) if it have a Chapel in it Ide^ ibid. art. 43. etc.
. And yet further, if a murderer going to execution, after a just sentence, or
before trial, being pursued, do meet a Priest carrying his breaden God, and
do fly to him, he is privileged from the power of the law Ide^ ibid. art. 52.
.

And least we should think it strange, to give this honor to the church that
is Gods house, or to the bread which they say is their God, he goes yet one
step further, and tells us that Idem Germonius ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6. art. 51.
etc. Ta^ta est huius dignitatis Maiestas, vt non Cardinalis solum velut
sacrosanctus absque sacrilegij culpa ta^gi non possit, veru^ nec ille quiad
capitale supplicium ducitur, si Cardinali ob^iam factus ciusque pileum aut
vestem attigerit etc. occidi nequeat: sic Baldus and reliqui; vnus tantum
Cor^etus tenet i^ contrarium: sedeius argumentis excellenter satisfacit
Cardinalis* Albanus.
,

A Cardinal of Rome not only is so holy a person in himself, that he may
not be touched without sacrilege; but if a murderer or malefactor, that is
carrying to execution, if he have the good hap to meet a Cardinal, and can
touch either his hat or his robes, he is discharged from the sentence of the
law. Lo, here is a holy person indeed; a Cardinals coat, or hat, shall
have more privilege then had either the coat or the flesh it self of Christ
Jesus: he would not deliver any murderers from death, only one he
delivered; namely, Barrabas, and he himself died in his room See the story of
the passion.
: and if my Lords the Cardinals should do so, surely they would meet no
murderers in the street.

But to go forward; the law says, the Murderer shall die Genesis 9. 6
; and Christ says, he came not to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it Matthew.
5. 18
: but the Cardinals will not fulfill the law, but dissolve it. The Murderer
shall die, says God: true, says the Pope, unless he hap to touch the hem
of one of my Cardinals coats, for then he is acquitted.

But is this healed and reformed? nay alas, one Antonius Corsetus, a learned
Lawyer, misliking this, because as he says truly Hoc stante, daretur materia
delinque^di, propterea quod homines audaciores fiere^t and delicta remanerent
impunita: sic Anto. Corsetus in suis singular. in verbo Cardinalis.
; this being so, there will be an occasion given of much evil, and bloody men
will hereby take liberty to offend: He is not suffered to make any motion for
reforming of any thing, but is contrariwise turned away with this censure,
that his reasons are slender and nothing worth. And thus, when he is dashed out
of countenance, who would have healed this wound, then comes the Popes
Secretary (a true child of Babylon that will not be healed) and to make the
wound wider and deeper, brings a reason for this power of Cardinals, worthy of
himself Idem Germonius ibid. cap. 6. art. 51. Non sunt hodie Cardinales
deterioris co^ditionis quam olim fuerunt Virgins vestales: quarum autoritas
apud Romanos tanta fuit. vt si ad capitale aliquis supplicium duceretur, and
forte fortuna transisset Vestalis, is necari non posset.
; If (says he) the Virgin-vestalls in Rome healthenish had this power, that if
a person condemned met one of them in his way to execution, and could get to
touch them, he was thereby delivered from death; as he proves out of Aul.
Gellius Aul. Gellius, noct. At. lib. 10. cap. 15.
: Then much more ought the Cardinals to have this honor in Rome being now
Christian.

Yea, but is there not danger to multiply murders, and defeat the law by this
means? for may not a Cardinal come for favor, and on set purpose? may he not
be entreated, may he not be corrupt and be hired to come? There be now also
many Cardinals, about 60. or 70. if any of all these be in the streets,
murderers may escape; and there be few days, wherein some of these stir not
abroad: To all these material objections, what does he answer? surely an
easy answer has he for all:

Germonius ibid. art. 52. Ne detur occasio delinquendi, et vt omnis praua
suspicio tollatur, damnatus gaudet hac immunitate, si Cardinalis non data opera
sed casu transeat.
This privilege belongs, without all question, to the Cardinals person, if
he come by chance, and not on set purpose: for so it was also in the case of
the Virgins Vestall. But how shall it appear, that he comes not purposely? In
that case the vestall Virgins, that never might swear, were put to their oath
Aul. Gellius ibid.
.

But for all that (says this Popes dearling) my Lords the Cardinals may not
swear, they may not be so disgraced as to be put to their oaths: How shall
it then appear? he must (says he Licet Vestalis nunquam iurasset, hoc tamen
casu eas iurasse, certum est. At Cardinalem deuinci Iusiurandi religione minime
vel lem: itaque non iuranti sed assere^ti se forte fortuna in da^natu^
incidisse credendum est, cum ei in grauioribus negotijs fides adhiberi solet:
vt si sedis Apostolicae legatum se esse dixerit, fidem ei habendam volunt
nostri Ioh. Andr. Bal. Alb. etc. Idem Germonius ibid. art. 53. etc.
be believed upon his bare word. So then if a Cardinal have but the
conscience to tell a lie (which, how small a thing it is in popery, and how
many excuses it has, who knows not?) then it is here apparent that the
vilest thief, and murderer in a country, may easily escape the halter at Rome.

Now to conclude, see how many helps there be for a Murderer in Romish
religion; first by places, then by persons privileged. Places privileged be,
1. a Church, 2. a Churchyard, 3. an hospital, 4. a Bishops house, 5. a private
Chapel; all these shall deliver a man from trial (were this so in London,
how should any murderer be brought to the Bar? no street could he pass
through, but he shall find one of these 5. places): then by persons
privileged; which be, first, a Cardinal riding by: which because it is but in
few places; therefore the second is a Priest carrying the Sacrament, and that
is in every town: To touch either of these, does deliver from death a
murderer condemned by law.

Thus we see, a bloody Church is a defender of blood and murder; for let any
wise man consider, how many thousand murders in a year, may be sheltred and
shuffled over by these means. And yet sanctuaries are but one means to cloak
murder, they have many more (not so fit to be stood upon at this time): but
the end and effect of them all is this, that poisoning, stabbing, killing, and
all kind of bloud-shedding is so rise in popish States, that the better sort of
themselves do bitterly complain of it. Oleaster a spanish Inquisitor (and
therefore not partial on our side) has these words; Vide Hieronimum ab
Oleastro, inquisitorem vlissiponens. in suis Comment. in Pentat: In cap. 4.
Genes. page 17. Video (in quit) homicidia fieri, netamen video homicidas
puniri: sunt enim hodie mill modi excusandi homicidam; quoru^ vnuus est
ecclesia^ appellare, Clericum se dicere, and statim Iudices quos volunt a summo
po^tifice impetrate, qui eos absoluunt, parua aut nulla poena imposita; and sic
homicidia multi plicantur.
I see daily (says he) murders are committed: but I do not see the murderers
are punished: for we have at this day a thousand ways to excuse murderers;
whereof one is to appeal to the Church, and to say he is a Clergy man, and
presently to get from the Pope such Judges or Commissioners, as themselves
will, who by and by discharge and absolve them, upon a little punishment or
none at all, and thus murders are multiplied every day, etc.

Let these words be well observed, and what he was that spoke them; and if this
be so, so fa^re from Rome as Portingale is, the^ we may easily judge how the
world goes at Rome and near unto it.

Against all this what can be said? that this Anastasius is an Author suborned
by us? Nay, Posseuine the Jesuit will for that answer for us, having canonized
him in his catalogue of catholic Doctors Possev. Ies. appar. sac. tom. 1. lit.
A. Anastasius Germonius Archidiaconus Taurinensis edidit libros de
immunitatibus ecclesiasticis, inter al. etc.
: what then? that he is but a triuiall fellow, and of no credit nor authority?
Nor so: for he was public professor of the Popes law, at Turin, and in great
office and authority both with Gregory the 14. and Clement the 8. Idem Posseu.
ibid. Augustae Taurinorum public Canones interpretabatur and nuper orator ad
Clement 8. pro sereniss. vrbini duce and vtriusque Romanae signaturae
referendarius.
and his books be dedicated to the Popes and Cardinals, printed at Rome with
sovereign authority, and special commendation ( u). Nay the Pope himself
with Anastasij Germonij, Ciuit. To. Archidiaconi Taurine^sis and protonotarij
Apostolici de sacroru^ immutatibus lib. 3. ad Gregorium 14. Romae. 1591.
his own mouth commended the book, to the Cardinals, and said that the whole
Clergy, and the Council of Cardinals by name were greatly beholden to the
Author for it Vide eiusdem Anastasij Epistolam dedicat. ad Gregorium 14. Pont.
Max.
: So that it is more then impudency for any Papist, to make question of the
authority of his doctrine.

What then can be said? that these sanctuaries stand indeed allowed for some
faults, but not for murder? If it were so, the fault were less: but the truth
is otherwise.

For tho it be certain and confessed by themselves, that by the civil law,
Murderers, and Rauishers, and Adulterers are excepted In. Quod si delinquentes
Authent. de mand princip.
: Yet Germonius shameth not to answer that the Civil law is corrected in
this point by the Popes law, and that therefore we are to stand to it Iure
Civilly, adulteri, homicidae, raptores ex eccl. abduci possunt: sed Ius Civil
per pontificiu^ hac in part correctu^ est; and ideo standu^ est huius
dispositioni etc. sic Germonius de sacrorum immunitatibus, lib. 3. cap. 16.
art. 57, etc.
and not to the Civil law: Now who are excepted by the popes law? only
night-robbers, and setters of high ways Germonius ibid. art. 56. ex Iure
Canonico and communi sententia.
: but as for murderers, adulterers, and rauishers, these find favor in the
Popes law; for they be Amici Curiae: but thieves, and robbers are not so: and
therefore this Germonius co^cludes that tho the Scripture be plain and many
Doctors; yet, a murderer is not to be taken out of sanctuary, unless there
be more then murder, as deceit, and treachery. What then may be said? that
this Germonius is but one Doctor, and his opinion is not to be taken for a
doctrine? I answer, his judgment is allowed by the Pope himself, and his
opinions are fortified with consent of other popish Doctors: But that we may
see he walks not alone in this way; one Stephanus Durantus, writing also of
late, of the rites of the Romish Church, delivers y^ same for a general
doctrine of that church, tho he being a Frenchman, is therefore the bolder and
says that neither in France nor in England they have been permitted by the
kings with such absolute allowance as elsewhere. Stephanus Durantus de ritibus
ecclesiae catholicae Romae 91. ad G^^gor. 14. vid. 1. ca. 26. art. 10. Ea erat
ecclesiae religio and immunitas, vt ad eam confugientes non liceret inde
extrahere, vel eis aliquam vim infer.


Such says he is the honor and immunity of Churches, that malefactors flying
to them may not be taken out, nor have any violence offered them. This book
also is of special authority, dedicated to P. Gregory the 14. and by him
accepted with special allowance: and in a Bull or constitution of his, he
affirms it is a work, serving greatly for Gods glory and the edification of
Christian people, and that it is approved and allowed by the great M. of his
palace Vide bullam Gregorij 14, Duranti libro praefixa^: hoc opus etc. ad
gloria^ Dei and totius populi Christiani aedificatione, etc. and a Magistro
sacri palatij nostri visum and approbatum.
, to whom belonges the sovereign and highest authority to censure all sort of
books.

And last of all, Iacobus de Graffijs, the great Casuist, and Grande
Poenitentiarie, within these 7. years has determined this question; affirming
that the murderer may not be taken out of the Church, no not tho he broke
prison and fled thither, unless it were murder joined with treachery and
treason Iacobus de Graffijs decis. aur. cas. cons. to. 1. cap. 48. libri
secundi: art. 5. 6. 7. reus in causa civilly and criminali gaudet immunitate
ecclesiae etiamsi carcerem co^fregerit, and ad ecclesiam confugerit: Et non
ex^pitur homi^idium nisi proditione co^missum aut ab Assasinis.
.

Thus we see how Babylon is healed in this wound. And hereby it is apparent to
all that will see, that she is a bloody Babylon: and as in many other respects
for her cruelty, so this way also, for this doctrine and practice she is a
bloody synagogue: and no marvel tho the holy Ghost say, that in her is found
the blood, not only of the Saints and Martyrs, but of all that was shed upon
the earth Revel. 18. 24.
. For as she has made her self the principal agent in shedding the blood of
Saints and Martyrs: so has she made her self accessarie by this her doctrine
and practice to all the murders and bloodshed upon the earth: for, to maintain
so many refuges and defenses for a sin, is to maintain the sin it self.
Therefore leaving this bloody Church weltring, and wallowing, and bathing her
self in blood, let us proceed to that remains.

Touching the honorable estate of marriage, and the dishonor of it, which is,
adultery, and fornication; it is lamentable to see what is the doctrine and
practice of the Romish Church. For first, they give a public and open
toleration of the stews, wherein whoredom is practiced as daily and commonly,
as other civil and lawful actions The 14. wound; Romish Religion permits
stews publickelie.
: nay their rent is taken, and duly paid, (a part of it) to the Pope, or as
he shall appoint it: Thus complains and cries out Agrippa, a man of no mean
place, nor ordinary understanding; Cornel. Agrippa de vanitate scient. cap.
64. Corinthij, Cyprij, Babylonij alijque Ethnici Graeci, nonnihil a meretricio
quaestu aerario suo addiderut, quod quidem in Italia non raru^, vbi etia^
Romana scorta, in singulis hebdomadis Iulium pende^t pontifici: qui census
annuus saepe excedit viginti millia ducatus.


The Corinthians (says he) and Cyprians, and Babylonians, and other heathen
Graecians did increase their revenue, by the gain of the stews, which in
Italy also is at this day no rare nor unusual matter. For the whores of Rome
do pay weekly to the pope a Iulio a piece (about six pence sterling) the
whole revenue whereof in the year, does often exceed the sum of twenty
thousand Ducats, etc.

Alas! will some say; the Pope cannot hinder this: therefore seeing he cannot
help it, he has used, (such was the wisdom of elder ages) to make the best
use he can of an ill matter.

But I answer; first, the holy Ghost commands us to have nothing to do with
an ill matter, but keep us far from it Exodus 23. 7 Ephesians. 5. 11
, though we cannot hinder it: Again, if the Pope cannot hinder it, yet he
can refuse to have any gain from it; and so he would but that he thinks
it sweet: but if he were of David's mind who would not drink that drink, that
cost men the venture of their lives 2. Sam. 23. 14.
, surely he would not take that gain that costs men and women their souls.

But I answer further, he could and might hinder it, and will not. If he
himself and his favorites speak truth, he wants no power for nothing that he
will do: therefore for reforming the stews, it is clear he wants will, but no
power. Against Gods truth, and us the Professors of it, whom he calls heretics,
he wants no will, and therefore he wants no power. Let him punish whoredom, as
he does that, that he calls heresy (tho it be the truth): let it be as
unlawful in Rome to keep a stews, as to have a Protestant Church, and then we
should soon see as few, and fewer whores in Rome, then there be good
Protestants. But whoredom is none of the underminers of his State, nor enemies
of his Crown as our religion is: therefore our religion must down when stews
must stand. But some will further object, If this have bin so, it is the fault
or corruption of his officers, and not to be imputed to his Holiness. But I
answer, the pope uses not to be so negligent of his estate, as not to look
at a revenue of 20000. duckates a year. And to take away all cause of this
cavil, and to make it more apparent that the Pope is the head of the whoreof
Babylon; Pope Sixtus 4. scarce 120. years ago, built a stews in Rome, of his
own erection and foundation, so says the same Agrippa. Cornel. Agrip. de
vanit. scient. cap. 64 Lycurgus and Solon lupanaria aedificauere, etc. sed and
recentioribus hisce temporibus Sixtus po^tifex Max. quartus, Romae nobile
admodum lupanar exstruxit.


Licurgus and Solon, heathen law-giuers, erected public stews: but that is no
marvel; for of late years, Pope Sixtus the fourth builded a goodly stews in
Rome.

Lo here, the Popes Holiness, the founder of a College of devils, a stews
for whores: surely because he scorned ordinary company, he built that for
himself, and his Princes and peers, the Cardinals. Thus we see it confessed
and proved by a learned Papist, that a 100. years ago stews were maintained,
nay erected by the Pope: and that he takes gain and rent of them. If any man
object against Agrippa, as no competent witness: I answer, the Pope indeed
has prohibited Vide indicem lib. prohibit. Clementis 8. in litera H.
his books to be read; but it had been more reason to have disproued and
confuted his assertions: but let the Pope condemn him as he will, for his bold
speaking of truth; it is known to all that know him, or his books, he was a
Papist for the most part: and whatsoever he was, he had no reason to belly the
Pope; we hired him not, we thank him not for any thing but truth: yet for
more certainty hereof, hearken to another, who being an Inquisitor, is beyond
all exception that way.

Thus complains Oleaster (a Spanish Doctor), upon that Text of Deuteronomy
Deuteronomy. 23. 18
thou shall not bring into my house the hire of a whore, for it is abominable.

Oleaster in Comme^t. suis in Pentateu. In Deuteronomy. cap. 23. fol. 270.
Displicuerunt semper Deo turpia lucra, ideoque vetat ne merces meretricu^ ei
offeratur: at nunc cum ecclesia and ministri mu^diores esse deberent, omnia
haec acceptantur, qualiacunque sunt and vndecunque venerint.
Filthy gains, says he, were ever abominable to God, and therefore he forbids
to bring into his house the hire of a whore. But now in the new Testament, when
the Church and Ministers thereof should be much more clean and pure then
before, all manner of filthy gains are accepted and taken, how vile soever they
be, and whencesoeuer they come.

Thus all gain is sweet, and all rent welcome to the Pope, tho it come from
whores: so true a friend to stews and whores, is the whore of Babylon.

But will some say, this might be so in the elder times, that were of more
liberty, because all was quiet: but now since Luther rose, and the Church has
been wakened by heretics, this wound is healed.

No, this wound is not healed, as I will prove by their late and modern
writers. The 14. wound not healed: for the Romish religion, doctrine and
practice tolerate stews still.


Navarrus one of their greatest Canonists of this last age, and one whom the
Popes held worthy to be called to Rome, for his continual advise and direction
Martinus Azpil. Nauar. Hisp. Iuris cononici scie^tis. ideque theolog. insignis
etc. Haec Posseu. in apparatu sac. tom. 2. lit. M.
, deals very plainly in this matter, and says, that Nau. Manual. c. 17. nu
195. pa. 433. edit. Wirceb. in 8. 1593. Licet potestati publicae permittere
meretrices in aliqua part ciuitatis: et postea, alicubi constituuntur eis
patroni, and domus eis loca^tur carius qua^ honestis locarentur: et in hac vrbe
Romana, sciente and patie^te papa locantur et semper consueuerunt locari domus
meretricibus: et confessarij absoluu^t et semper absoluerunt locatores eoru^
sine proposito abstine^di a tali locatione, etc.


Kings, Princes, States, and Magistrates of Cities, appointing stews, and
setting out places for them in some convenient place of their Cities, wherein
whores may exercise their whorish trade, it seems (says he) to be no sin in
them. See here a piece of spanish devotion and modesty. Surely, no marvel tho
this man were sent for, from Spain to Rome: for it seems by this doctrine he
was for the Popes tooth, and much more for his Cardinals.

Alphonsus Viualdus, another learned Spaniarde, wrote a book of matters of
conscience not long ago, of so great account amongst them that they call it
the golden Candlestick. It has been often printed, and within these 7.
years was by the Popes special Commission purged, and reprinted: he writes
thus Martinus Alpho^sus Vivaldus, theol. and Iuris canon. professor and
poenitentiarius mayor, etc. In Candelabro aureo. tit. de Confessione, numero 60
Vtrum hae meretices censeantur excommunicatae, per synodales co^stitutiones,
quae nec consitentur, nec co^municant? respondeo, etc. Meretrices nu^ qua^
publicantur nec denu^tiantur pro exco^municatis in ecclesia: nec visum vnquam
fuit, aliquem hac de causa ab earu^ participatione fugisse, etc. Pro
resolutione dico, quod si non co^fitea^tur nec communicent per 10. aut 20.
annos, non ideo incurru^t poenas ecclesiae in detestationem sui pessimi status,
quia meretrices non sunt dignae laqueis legum. page 81. editionis Brixiensis
1588.
.

First, he makes a question, whether in the yearly excommunication pronounced
by the Bishop, against them that do not confess and communicate, whores in the
stews be comprehended, or no: and he resolves that they be not, tho they
neither confess nor do communicate; and gives his reasons. 1. For that whores,
in the Romish Church, be never published nor denounced excommunicate. 2. No man
refuses their company, notwithstanding that yearly excommunication: and
concludes further that though one continue a whore for twenty years long,
yet does she not incur the Censures of the Romish Church. Oh excellent
doctrine, and fit for the Romish Church: but all this will some say is salued
by this that follows. Nay, contrariwise say I, the wound is made worse; and
by the craft of that that follows, observe the subtlety and iniquity of
Romish teachers: for this is done (says he) in detestation of their ill life:
the Church does so detest their manner of life, that she will not think them
worthy of her censures: oh notable shift! are they too bad to be punished, and
not too bad to be suffered? does the Romish Clergy think them so vile that
way, and yet allow them? see the iniquity and filthiness of this religion.

Thus its apparent by the great Confessor Vivaldus, that the Romish Church
exco^municats not common whores, nor them that go to them: and another as great
a Clark as himself, says it is the common opinion Iac de Graffijs. tom. 1.
lib. 1. cap. 9. art. 8. and 9.
.

But yet to show better that this wound is not healed, hark a little what the
grand poenitentiarie, Iacobus de Graffijs, says; Iacobus de Graffijs decis.
aur. cas. cons. tom. 1. lib* 2 cap. 75. art. 3. et 4. page 348. Sed quare ipsa
ecclesia lupanaria permittit and per consequens fornicar. quod est mortale
peccatum. Respondeo quod ecclesia quandoque tollerat minus malum praesens, vt
euitet maius malum futurum, quod verisimilibus coniecturis speratur: sic ca^
etc. vbi ecclesia tolerat meretrices ad euitandas promiscuas luxurias et
foedissimas coiunctiones: and sic non illud peccatum approbat, sed dissimulando
tolerat, vt eo medio adulteria, Incestque atque alia luxuriae crimina
compescat. Hinc etc. Et in tantum tolerat lex huiusmodi fornicationes, vt etiam
cogat publicas meretrices ad fornicandum cum quocunque iuxta tamen mercedem.
But if fornication be a sin, then why does the church her self permit stews,
and consequently fornication, which is a mortal sin? I answer (says he)
that the church sometime tolerateth a less evil present that she may avoid a
greater evil to come, that is probable to fall out: and this he proves out of
the Canon law; and so concludes that the church does tolerate stews and
whores, to avoid greater sins not approving the sin of fornication, but by
co^niuence, or dissimulatio^ tolerats it, that so she may restrain and keep
young men from adulteries, incests, and other crimes of that kind: then he
goes further to prove his conclusion; which he does out of the practice of
heathen lawegiuers, and by the civil law, and would prove it out of the
Fathers: and then to make up the measure of his iniquity, he adds that the
law does so far forth tolerate fornications in stews, that it takes order to
compel the whores to refuse no man, if he offer her, her pay: the words are
too bad to be repeated in english.

And to show that he is a true child of that Babylon that will never be healed,
and that he is as graceless in this point as his mother, afterward in his 2.
tome (which he put out in his more mature years) he has again the same
doctrine in as ill or worse words; Idem Graffius ibid. tom. 2. li. 3. c. 28.
art. 3 6. Ad meretrices accedere, qua^uis sit peccatu^ mortale, tame^ ecclesia
illud peccatum tolerat, ad euita^du^ maius malum, etc. et in hoc casu ecclesia
censura^ restringit, ne forsan deteriores sint, etc.


And to conclude, for the better encoragement for women to be whores, and the
better to please their carnal and wicked minds, Cardinal Tollet a Jesuit,
out of his Iesuitical modesty, and his Cardinal like respect to the stews,
delivers this doctrine; Fran. Tolletus Ies. Cardinal. Instructio sacerdotu^.
lib. 5. cap. 17. art. 3. Mulieres accipientes pretiu^ pro vitio carnis, no^
obligantur ad restitutionem, (quia ista actio non est mala co^tra iustitia^)
quamuis sint Virgins et coniugatae, et cuiuscunque co^ditionis: et quamuis
accipia^t pecunias in excessu, vltra pretium actus turpis, si libere donetur
illis.


That whores taking money of men, for their sin, be they married or unmarried,
tho it be never so much above their due, are not bound to restore any of it
again, if it be once given them; and gives a reason for it, because, says
he, this action is not against justice, etc. Certainly the stews are much
beholden to Cardinal Tollet for this doctrine: but, what Justice and modesty,
and the Church, and the truth and God himself do owe him for it, he feels
before this time, except he repented. Obijt Tolletus. Romae. 1596


Thus it is the present doctrine of the Romish church that she allows stews
by public toleration, to avoid greater evils, and censureth not the whores
for it; nay, ties them by a law to refuse no man, and ties men by a law to
pay the hire; and for this end allows them Courts, Judges, and Officers, and
takes part of the benefit arising. Now, that their practice is according to
this doctrine, I appeal to all that have traveled in those parts where
popery reigns; as Spain, Italy* etc. And further, to give one evidence out
of my own reading for the practice, Iacobus de Graffijs tells us plainly in
these words, Iacobus de Graff. decis. aur cas. cons. tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 28.
art. 20. Sic licitum est dominis domoru^ locare eas meretricibus, non quide^ ad
meretricandum, sed ad alios fines bonos, id est vt ipsae vita^ sua^ seruent et
domini domoru^ lucrentur iustas pensiones, cum displicentia peccati, etc. ita
etia^ praxis Romana videtur seruare. page 105.


It is lawful for Lords and owners of houses to let out their houses to
whores, even whom they know so to be, so it be with this mind, not purposely
that they may sin, but with this that the women may get their living, and be
able to pay them good rents. Now tho they know they will get their own living,
and pay them their rent out of whoredom, yet if they have a dislike of the
sin, they may do it lawefully: and such, says he, is the common practice at
Rome. Thus both for Romish doctrine and practice, it is apparent that stews
are allowed to this day, and common whores not censured.

Against all this but one thing can be objected; namely, that all these be
private Doctors: I answer, the^ let us see what the Pope does. Does he supply
the negligence of other Bishops? they do not excommunicate them: does he? No,
no, he is as bad or worse then the worst. Princes tolerate them, so does he
Nay, by the places alleged before, it is manifest y^ it is not princes, but the
Pope and the Church that tolerates and permittes the^, and princes permit them,
because the Church does.
; they in their kingdoms, he in Rome: they build the^ houses, so did he: they
take part of their gain, so does he: the Bishops excommunicate them not, no
more does he to this day. For this end we are to know, that besides all
particular and personal excommunications, he uses once a year, that he may
meet with all his enemies at once, and pay them at one payment, to
excommunicate together all such sorts and kinds of people, as he holds his
enemies: but are whores any of them? no such matter: nay, these be they; Vide
Bullam Coenae in Co^stit. Romans po^t. per Petru^ Mathaeu^ed. inter Co^stitut.
Sixti quinti pa. 883. vbi Papa exco^municat and anathematizat in propria sua
persona,


Hereticos, vt Lutheranos, Caluinistas. etc.
. Caluinists, Lutherans, and such heretics.

Appellantes a sente^tijs papalibus ad futurum generale concilium.
. All that appeal from the Pope to a general Council.

Piratos in Mari suo and capientes bona naufragantiu^.
. Forgers and Falsifiers of the Popes hand, or seal.

Imponentes ^t exigentes nova pedagia.
. All that hurt and hinder Pilgrims that come to Rome.

Falsificatores literarum, etc. Apostolicaru^.
. All lay men that draw Clergy men to their Courts, or would bring them under
their jurisdiction.

Deferentes prohibita infidelibus.
. All that hinder the jurisdiction of the Clergy.

Impedie^tes eos qui victualia ad vrbem deferant. 8. Offendentes peregrinos ad
vrbem venientes. 9. Offendentes venientes Romam, aut ibi commorantes. 10.
Manusinijcientes in Cardinales, praelatos seu nuntios papae. 11. Causarum in
Curia To. cursum impedientes, seu literarum Apostolicarum executionem. 12.
Officiales et praelatos causas a curia To. auocantes. 13. Personas
ecclesiasticas ad suu^ tribunal trahentes, et statuta contra libertatem
ecclesiae facientes. 14. Impedientes Iudicum ecclesiasticorum iurisdictionem.
15. Ecclesiasticos aliquo modo vexantes. 16. Laicos se intromittentes in causis
contra Clericos. 17. Occupantes terras seu Iura, et rapientes bona palatij
Apostolici, etc.
. All that seize upon any lands belonging to the Pope, etc.

These and such other like to the number of 17. or 18. be the enemies against
whom the Pope has cause to plant his ordinance; but as for whores, and
stews, and such other heinous transgressors of the moral law, these never
hurt the Romish Church, and therefore she bends not her power against them.

So then, seeing popery and the stews are so linked, that (we perceive) do
what we can, man cannot separate those whom the devil has joined together:
let us then leave the stews in Rome, and the Pope in his stews; and mourning
for their misery, let us proceed.

The next wound is this: That whereas God has ever allowed and honored
marriage, in the old, and new Testament; and Concubines were never allowed in
the old, and absolutely condemned in the new: Now coms popery, and makes it as
lawful to have a Concubine as a wife The 15. wound; He that has not a wife
may have a Concubine.
and this is done by no private persons, but the Popes law it self. Thus says
the Canon; Decret. did. 34. cap. 4. Is qui non habet vxorem, and pro vxore
Concubinam habet, a Communione non repellatur; tamen vt vnius mulieris aut
vxoris aut Co^cubinae sit co^iunctione co^tentus.


He that has not a wife, but for a wife or in stead of a wife, a Concubine,
let him not for that be kept from the Communion; yet so as that he be content
with one woman, either a wife or a Concubine. Is not here a piece of good
licentious popery? I know they say they have this from the first council of
Toledo, which is ancient: true, but what if Spain, not long before converted to
the faith, was not purged as yet from these dregs of heathenisme, and Judaism;
are they therefore fit to be taken up by the Pope, and inserted in his law, as
a Canon to bind and direct for ever? If they think that poor prouincial
Council (but of 19. Bishops) be a sufficient warrant for this decree, then why
take they not all* and why put they it not down a wife or a Concubine, as it
pleases him; for so it is in the words of the Council Council. General. per
Binniu^. Col. 1607 tom. 1. pa. 560. In Council. 1. Tolet. cap. 17 Is qui non
habet vxorem sed, etc. tantum vt vnius Mulieris, aut vxoris, aut Co^cubinae (
Vt ^i placuerit) sit coniunctione contentus.
.

I know also, that they have coined a distinction, whereby they would cover
this wound, and say that a Concubine here is to be taken for a woman whom a
man has, and keeps with the affection of a Husband; only in outward fashion
and solemnity she is not a wife, nor publicly married: but I answer, the
best of it is naught if we did grant them all they say: but distinguish as
they can, the words are so plain, that the suttlest distinction they can
devise, will be too short a cloak to cover the shame of it: nay the shame of
this Canon is written in the forehead of it: for the Rubric or contents,
written with red letters, is worse then the text it self; Vide Decretu^ cum
glossa, editionis lugdun. in fol. 1510 did. 34. cap. 4. Is, qui non habet
vxore^, loco illius debet habere concubinam.


He that has not a wife, ought, or at least may have, a Concubine in her
room. These be the very words in the impression at Lions, 1510. tho I confess
the Divines of Paris, having a little more care what past their hands, ashamed
of the word debet (that is, ought to have), put it out, and put in liceat, that
is, he may have Vide decretu^ edit. parisiens. in fol. anni 1507. ibid. Is qui
non habet vxorem loco illius, concubinam habere liceat.
: but take the best of all, and is it not bad enough? well let us go forward;
this wound is old and wide, and deep.

But is it yet healed? No, not to this day The 15. wound not yet healed; for
still by the Popes Canon law he that has not a Wife may have a concubine.
; for the Popes Canon law was of late years commanded by the Pope to be
corrected and purged, as well the Text as the Gloss: and is this amended, or
left out as being false and filthy doctrine? No: other places indeed are
altered, for the greater vantage and honor of the Pope: but this dishonorable
Canon, so disgraceful to Gods law, stands untouched in this new and last
edition of all Vide corpus iuris Canonici, autoritate Gregorij. 13. pont. max.
emendatum et editum. 91. et 600.
: only the Rubricke, or title, or Contens, whereof we spoke before is altered
thus;

Ibid did. 34. cap* 4. Is qui non habet vxorem sed loco illius concubinam, a
communione non repellitur.
. He that has not a wife, but for a wife a Concubine, is not repelled from the
Communion. Thus it is amended; but in a poor fashion, as we may see: But what
may the Church of Rome mean to amend the Rubric or title, and not the Text?
Surely because they know many a one hastily runs over the Contents, and
titles of books and Chapters, who never look into the body of the books
themselves. But take this wound healed as it is: Is this good divinity at
Rome, that he who has no wife, but in a wives steed keeps a Concubine, shall
not for that be kept from the Communion? Is not this a holy table of the
Romish Sacrament, from which he shall not be forbidden, that openly keeps a
whore in room of a wife? Certainly this wound is notably healed: let us then
go forward to the next.

We have heard that a Wife is made equal to a Concubine: but what if she be
made worse then a Whore, an Adultresse, or a common Strumpet? None dare say
this, none dare undertake this, but the Whore of Babylon: but she dare. For
this is her doctrine, that it is a less sin for many men to lie with another
man's wife, or a common whore, then it is to marry a wife of their own The 16.
wound; Some men had better lie with another man's wife, or keep a whore, then
marie a wife of his own.
. Marriage, which God has made so honorable, has been of long time disgraced
in popery; but not in this high measure (I speak of) abused, that I know, till
these later and more shameless times that the whore has got her a brazen face.

In Luthers time, not yet a 100. years ago, lived one Albertus Pighius, one
of the Popes Cha^pions Albert. Pighius scripsit in Lutherum, Bucerum, etc. de
ecclesia catholica been meritus. Posseu. appar. sac. tom. 1. lit. A.
, who for the defense of that hierarchy and maintenance of that cause, amongst
other his bold and blasphemous assertions, teaches this hoggish and hateful
doctrine; Pighius explicatio controuersiarum: controu. 15. de Caelib. et
coniug. Sacerd. p. 215. edit. Parisi. 1549.
Go to (says he) suppose all that vowed continency, do not keep it so well as
they should: What then? had they better marry? Nay, assuredly: for we must
resist the temptation by all means we can: but if Sed esto, non faciunt
obligati voto omnes quod possunt and debe^t, etc. et proinde tentantur, and
fortasse vruntur eoru^ plerique: quid igitur an nubere his minus malum erit, et
minus damnabile? tu vide, etc. tentationi proinde quibus possimus remedijs,
resistendum est: in quibus si quando remissiores ex infirmitate carnis
ceciderimus, tolerabilius hoc peccatum est, quam si iugum in totum excutiamus,
etc. non quod hic probemus fornicationem, sed casum ex infirmitate ad
deliberatum immo perpetuum abiecto omni pudore Incestum, comparamus.
sometime we be too remiss, and so by infirmity of the flesh do fall (into
fornication, or etc.) Certainly this is a less sin and more tolerable offense
then it is to marie; for this is wholly to cast off Gods yoke: not that we
allow fornication (in it self); but here we compare a slip or fall of
infirmity to marriage, which in this case we account no better then a
resolved, or deliberate, or continual Incest, utterly without all shame.

Here is a piece of holy popery indeed: but it is pope-holy, that is,
beastly and profane; so filthy that I had rather the particulars were
considered of by a man's own discretion, then deciphered by me. But let us see
if this be healed or no: For the Jesuits may say, this Pighius wrote so
hoggishly in licentious times, and when we were in the egg and scarce hatched
For the Jesuits order was established by Paul the 3. and this book of Pighius
published within 3. years together, namely, about the year. 1540.
; for had we then been in that power and place as now, we would have restrained
him.

But the truth is, that contrariwise this impious and filthy doctrine was but
obscurely and timorously broched by Pighius; but has been since boldly and
plainly blustered out by the Jesuits The 16. wound not healed; for this is
still the doctrine of the Romish Church.
: he brought forth an imperfect heap, but they have lickt it and brought it to
form and perfection. Costerus a Jesuit of great name amongst them Vide Posseu.
appar. sac. to^. 1. lit. T.
writing a book, fit to be (as he calls it, and they esteem it) in every
Catholics hand, delivers this for sound and dogmaticall doctrine.

Costerus, Enchiridion controuersiaru^, etc. cap. de coelibatu propos. 9 p.
528. Sacerdos si fornicetur, aut domi concubinam fouear, tametsi graui
sacrilegio se obstringat, grauius tamen peccat si contrahat matrimonium, etc.
A Priest, if he commit fornication, or keep a whore at home, though he sin
grievously, yet sins he more grievously if he marry a wife.

This is one of his propositions or conclusions. But he wrote this many years
ago, is it not since healed? No, the book has indeed bin often printed, and
with many alterations Vide Poss^uinum ibid.
. But this stands in his last impression untouched, as a doctrine for the Pope
to glory in: which I speak not at randon, but upon too good ground. For this
doctrine, and the writer of it, have been often reproved by our Divines: but
in stead of reformation, Costerus has been defended, and the doctrine
justified by other of his learned brethren. I will name but one example:
Chamier a learned French Minister objected it to the Jesuits at Turrone; and
it is at large defended by Ignatius Armandus, the principal of the College
there, for Catholic and good doctrine. Vide Epistolas Iesuiticas, part. 2. in
epistola 1. Iesuitae Ignatii ad Chamieru^. page 33 etc. Vides igitur Chamiere
non esse contra doctrinam Christi, nec Apostolorum, nec Conciliorum, nec
Patrum, quod asserit Costerus, etc.
The Epistles on both sides are in print to be seen. And if these be not of
authority sufficient, let Bellarmine come to help them. Thus he teaches:

Bellarm. tom. 2. lib. 2. de Monachis, cap. 30. page 545. De ijs qui vouerunt
non recte dicitur, Qui non se continent, nubant, melius est nubere quam vri,
nam vtrumque est malum, and nubere and vri, imo peius est nubere, quicquid
reclament aduersarij, etc. Et postea. Quae nubit post votum simplex, vetum
matrimoniu^ contrahit, tamen aliquo modo magis peccat quam quae fornicatur.
That speech of the Apostle (They that cannot contain let them marry: for it
is better to marry then to burn) cannot be rightly said of them that have
vowed: for both are naught, both to burn and to marry: yea it is worse of the
two to marry, whatsoever the Protestants say to the contrary.

And a little after in the same Chapter: She that marries after a single vow,
contracteth indeed a true Matrimony, yet in some sort she sins more then
she that plays the whore.

Thus this Popeholy doctrine is now brought to ripenes and perfection, by the
diligence, devotion and modesty of the Jesuits. But they have a reason for
all this, so good and so strong, as they think, that thereby all is well
healed: for, say they, fornication or whoring we do not simply allow to be
better then marriage; but in respect that a man has before made a vow not to
marry, Bellar. ^bid. Costerus ibid. Ignatius ibid.
therefore to marry after the vow, is to break promise with God. A notable
reason, if it be well considered: for hereby it is apparent that Popery
teaches her people to vow against marriage, but not against fornication;
against wives, but not against whores. Alas, alas, what doctrine is this, does
marriage break their vow, and not fornication? God keep all Christians from
such vows. But that this is true, I say, let Bellarmine judge.

Bellar. ibid. Quae nubit reddit se impotentem ad seruandum votum, quod non
facit quae fornicatur. Ergo quae nubit magis peccat.
She that marries after a simple vow, in some sort sins more grievously
then she that commits fornication, because (mark his reason) she that marieth
makes her self unable to keep her vow, which she does not that commits
fornication.

Thus it is plain: Popery voweth against marriage, not against whoredom,
adultery nor fornication. And thus three great Jesuits have made good what
Pighius taught, and that more plainly and palpably then he did. And to make up
a mess of Jesuits, Posseuinus their grand Censor, coming to give his censure
of Pighius, Posseuinus in Appar. sac. tom. 1. lit. A. Vide quid dicat de
Alberto Pighio.
finds many faults and errors in his books: but as for this he has nothing
to say against it, but passes it over as good holy catholic Romish doctrine:
therefore seeing (as Bellarmine said before, say we what we can) they will not
forsake, nor amend this doctrine, let them keep it, and let it be one of the
sweet flowers of the Popes garland.

The next wound is near a kin to this, The 17. wound; Priests in Popery may
not marry, but are permitted to keep their whores, under a yeereli^ rent.
namely, that their Church having always forbidden marriage to their Clergy,
has notwithstanding either tolerated and permitted them concubines, or at
least not punished it to reformation.

Thus was it complained of almost an hundred years ago, by the Germane
nation, then being Papists:

Vide Cen tum grauami na Germanicae nationis: grauamen 75. and 91. In locis
plaerisque Episcopi and eorum Officiales sacerdotu^ tollerant concubinatum,
du^modo certa persoluatur pecunia and recepto ab eisde^ hoc annuo ce^su public
cum suis concubinis, pellicibus and alijs id genus meretricibus, illegitime
cohabitare, liberosque procreare sinunt, etc.
In most places (say they) Bishops and their Officials do tolerate and suffer
the Priests to have concubines, under the payment of a certain annual rent of
money, and further do even permit them to keep their whores openly, and have
them in their houses, and to beget children of them, etc.

Of these and certain other grieuances (one hundred in all) the Germane nation
complained to their Bishops and Clergy, in their own Diets or Parliaments
held at home. But having no redress they went further, and about the year
1522. complained to the Popes Legates and Nuntios at Noremberge, who gave them
good words, and promised they would make report thereof to his Holiness, and
procure them a gracious answer. But having long waited to no end, they
published their grieuances and sent them to the Pope, craving with much
humility, audience, redress and reformation; promising upon that condition,
they would still and ever show themselves dutiful and obedient children to the
Pope, and all whom he set over them: but if they had no redress, they assured
him they could not, nor would endure them longer. Hereupon the Pope, not
willing to venture the loss of so fair a child as Germany, pacified them for
a time with goodly promises. But what reformation followed in whole or in any
part, the stories of those ages make it apparent. But for the particular I have
in hand, The 17. wou^d not healed: for still in Popery to this day, their
Clergy are forbidden marriage, but whores and concubines are not taken from
them.
what notable reformation was wrought herein, let a Bishop of their own,
Espencaeus, as wise and learned as that age did yield, let him, I say, deliver
for me; who forty years after, writing of this matter, says:

Espencaeus de Continentia, lib 2. cap. 7 page 176. Pro praetenso puro mundoque
caelibatu, successit impurus immundusque concubinatus, vt latere nec prae
multitudine queat, nec p^ae impudentia quaerat: at haec tollerantia al^ius
radices egit permissis alicubi sub annuo censu Clericis at que laicis cum suis
concubinis cohabitare, quod vtinam and falso and immerito extaret inter
grauamina Germaniae, etc. Impress. Paris. 1560.
In stead of pure and honest single life, succeeded impure fornication, and
filthy keeping of concubines, in such sort as neither can they be concealed
for multitude, nor seek they to be, they are so shameless. Nay of later times
this tollerancie has spread further, insomuch as in some places, both Clergy
and laity have their whores permitted them, under a yearly rent: whereof
(says he) the Germane nation complained long ago too truly and upon too great
cause.

But was not this wound healed, and this abuse reformed upon this complaint of
Espencaeus? A man might have thought it would, and the rather seeing he was a
man of so great esteem in those days, not in France only, but even in the
Court of Rome. Espencaeus was in special favor with Pope Paul the 4.
insomuch as after much co^sultation had with him, he found bine so wise and
learned a man, as he had made him Cardinal if he had lived: this is appare^t
in his books de Continent, lib. 3. cap. 4. and in his Co^mentarie on Titus,
cap. 1. page 91.
But what amendment insued, let himself tell us in his Commentary upon Titus,
which he wrote many years after his former book.

Episcopi, Archidiaconi, etc. plae: unque dum dioeceses, and parociam
obequitant, non tam facinorosos, and criminum reos poenis and correctionibus a
vitijs deterre^t quo sine pere grina^iones huiusmodi olim iam sueru^t iure
Canonico ordinata, quam pecunia praesenti and numerata, titulo procurationis,
ne dicam ficticiae iurisdictionis ^mungunt and exugunt tum Clericos tum laicos:
turpissimum, quod and hos cum concubinis, pellicibus, and meretriculis
cohabitare, liberosque procreare sinunt, accepto ab eis certo quotannis censu,
etc.
Our Bishops and Archdeacons, etc. (in Popery) when they ride their
visitations, do not so much punish the evil doers, (for which end the
visitations were first ordained) as rake up silver, and suck it both from
laity and Clergy, under false and fained pretenses of jurisdiction: but it is
most filthy of all, that they suffer them to keep their whores in their
houses, and have children of them, at a certain annual and yearly rent, etc.

This is the healing and reformation wrought in those days. Oh but (will some
say) that is 40. years ago, sure it is better in these latter days. Indeed
this enormitie was so general and so scandalous, that even the Council of
Trent it self was ashamed, and made great ado for reformation of it. Vide
Council. Trid. sess. 24. cap. 8.
But what effect it took, how they executed it, and what is done in the
matter, let another Bishop of theirs tell us, who in these late days, scarce
seven years ago, Henricus Cuickius: Rutemundensis Episcopus scripsit speculum
concubinariorum, Sacerdotum, Monachorum and Clericorum: Colon. 1599.
found it to be so common and shameless a sin all over all the Low
Countries, (where Popery reigned) not only in secular, but even in Monks,
Friars, and regular Priests, that he writes a book against the sin,
bitterly but justly inueighing against it, and showing how dangerous and
damnable a sin it is: and so much the more (says he) because it is so common
and so little regarded, and so far are they from shaming with it, that (mark
how it is healed) they will take their concubines and whores, and carry them
up and down the country (as men do their wives) to feasts and meetings, and
challenge place and precedence for them (as for honest Matrons). And further
freely confesses (but with great grief and shame) that there be very few in
their Clergy, free from this crime. Idem Cuickius, in praefatione eiusde^
libri. Ad vos qui casti, etc. qui (dolenter dico) ra^i estis and vt Esai 24.
tanquam racemi, etc.


The 18. wound: Such Priests as be continent and have no whores, yet must pay a
yearly rent as they that have, because they may have if they will.
And no marvel though there be but few of their Clergy that have not
concubines, seeing they take that course they do with them, which is such as
though they would inuit, nay hire, or rather press and provoke men to the
sin. For was it not also complained on at the same time by the Germans, that

Grauamina 100. Ger. grau. 91. Sed and sacerdotes continentes and qui absque
concubinis degunt, concubinatus censum persoluere cogunt, asserentes Episcopum
pecuniae indigum esse, qua soluta, licere sacerdotibus, vt vel coelibes
permaneant, vel concubinas alant.
Not only those Priests that had their whores paid yearly rent for it, but
even those that were continent, and would have no concubines, yet for all that
must pay the rent? for, say they, my Lord the Bishop has need of it, and cause
to employ much money: therefore pay you must, and then be it at your own
choice, whether you will have a concubine or no.

What is this but even to try men's strengths, and as it were to press them to
the sin: for he that either by constitution is unfit, or out of moral
honesty will not, or out of conscience dare not keep a concubine, seeing he
must pay his rent as well as he that does, will not this make him say to
himself; I see this is done by my superiors, they have more learning and
knowledge then I: I am to follow them, and may rather trust them then my own
conceit: and certainly if it were so great a sin as I have imagined it to be,
our Bishops would not take a yearly rent to suffer it; and if they would, yet
his Holiness, it being so old and so notorious a practice, would have reformed
it long ere this. Therefore seeing the case stands thus, and that I must and do
pay, doubtless I will not pay for nothing, etc. Surely he must have a great
measure of grace, that living under popish subjection, can resist this
temptation and the like: and therefore no marvel though, as themselves
confess, not one of their Clergy of a great number that has not his whores
in corners, or else publicly in their houses. Erasmus living about that time,
or soon after, complains of it, and says:

Erasmus annotat. in 1. Tim. 3. Si quis perpendat horu^ temporu^ statum, quam
innumeri sunt Monachi publico incesti and impudici, fortassis iudicabit magis
expedire vt ijs, qui prorsus non continent ius fiat publici matrimonij, etc.
He that considers the state of these times how in numerable the number is of
such Monks and Priests as live in open whoredom and incest, would think it
perhaps more convenient to give leave to such as cannot contain rather to
marry then, etc.

And not long after him flourished Cassander, a man of great name and account in
his time both for wisdom and learning, and he finding the world still worse
in this point, confesses Cassander lib. Consult. art. 23. cap. 1. lam ^o res
redijt vt vix centesimum inuenias qui ab omni commercio foeminaru^ abstineat,
etc.


Now the world is come to this pass, that a man shall not find scarce one of
a hundred that keeps himself free from this fault. Thus we see the fruit of
this their practice to take rent for concubines, and to make them pay that had
none, that almost none of their Clergy, but are stained with this pollution.

But is this healed? The 18. wou^d not healed: for such as have no concubines
must pay their re^t, because they may have, if they will.
No, says Espencaeus, it is too horrible to believe. But it is too true that

Espencaeus de Conti. lib. 2 cap. 7. Adeoque etiam continentibus si credere
dignu^ est ad omnem censum persoluen dum coactis, quo soluto eis liceret vel
continentibus vel incontinentibus esse: O rem execrandam, etc.
Those that be continent and will have none, yet are compelled to pay the whole
tax or rent, and so have it lawful and in their choice, to have a concubine
or to have none: Oh execrable abomination, etc. Thus here was no amendment for
forty years after the villainy was discovered, and the grieuance complained
of: and that there was nothing done in the days of Espencaeus, which was for
some ten years more, we may see by his words in his other book.

Idem in Titum, c. 1. p. 67. Accepto ab ^is, atque adeo alicubi a continentibus
certo quotannis censu, habeat ( aiunt) si velit: and quoties quisque talis, cum
tamen tam multi sunt, hodie after punitur.
They take the rent not only of those that have concubines, but in some places
even of them that have none; for (say they) he may have if he will, therefore
let him pay for his liberty: and though there be so many of these Priests that
live thus, yet where is there any one of them punished otherwise then thus by
the purse? etc. Since the time of Espencaeus, whether this wound be healed or
no, I cannot tell: and therefore if any of that side can show me any good
authority that now it is reformed, and that either no Priests pay yearly rent
for concubines at all, or at least not those that have none; I shall be willing
to hear it, and to see that any thing at all is amended But whosoever will but
look into their latest Casuists and Summists, as be Tollet the Cardinal, Iac
de Graffijs, Loel. Zecchius, Baptista Corradus, Berarduccius, Raphael de
Caesare, Llamas and others, will find it more then suspicious (though now they
cover it more cunningly then formerly they did) that this wound is far from
being healed.
: Mean time I have proved it apparently that till that time it was not
amended: and whosoever reads the Low Country Bishop Cuickius his book
aforenamed, written but seven years ago, will judge it as ill in these days
still, as it was in the time of Espencaeus the French Bishop.

These Authors I have named, having some remorse of conscience and fear of
God, ingenuously and honestly wished that rather marriage might be permitted
then whoredom should so prevail over the world. But what has bin done? They
for their labor are ill spoken of when they are dead, their books partly
prohibited to be read at all, partly purged and altered as they list; Opera
Era^m^, Espencaei, Cassandri prohibentur donec expurgentur. Vide Indicem lib.
prohibit. per Clem. 8. and Indices expurgatorios Hisp. and Belg.
and for the matter it self, marriage is still forbidden, whoredom still
practiced and winkt at, if not permitted, stews still tolerated, and that
under the Popes nose, and no where so much as even in Rome it self: and still
this doctrine is Catholic and current,

They had better go to whores, then marry. And why (alas) all this, but
because Marriage has been an enemy to the Popes Crown and dignity; but
stews, adultery and fornication never were? Let us hasten forward.

I must needs say (if I say truly) I could discover many more of these
particular old festring wounds, not as yet healed, but this time will not well
permit it: therefore referring it to a further opportunity, I will stand but
upon one particular more, and so come to a general, which shall conclude all.

It has bin long ago laid to their charge The 19. wound: Their Liturgy is
full of blasphemy: their Legend full of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition.
that their Liturgies are full of idolatry and blasphemies, their Legends full
of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition: which I will not at this time (being
almost past) stand particularly to prove, seeing for their Liturgy and
Ceremonies, the Pope himself, Vide Bullas Clem. 8. de Pontificali, anno 95.
and de Ceremoniali anno 1600.
or else his Conuentibleat Trent Vide Council. Trident. Sess. vult. Dec. 4.
have granted it, and pretended that they should be reformed; and touching
their lives of Saints and their Legends, a great Doctor of their own long ago
found them so full of ridiculous absurdities, impieties and untruths, that he
affirmed him to be a man Ludouicus Viues. lib. 2. de Cause. corrupt. art. de
Lumbardica historia.
of a brazen face, and a leaden heart that wrote them. Now all these three sort
of books are in show reformed of late, but the truth is there is never a
material wound healed, but rather a number made worse.

1. For their Liturgy and service either public or private, it is contained
in their books called, Missalia, Breuiaria, Officia, Manualia, Portiforia, and
such other: all these have been reuiewed, and (as they say) corrected since the
Council of Trent. Vide Bullas Pontif. praefixas. Missal. and Breuiar.
editionis 70. and post.
But let them be examined and compared together, and I dare say, that for one
evil taken out there is another put in, and ten stand unremoved, and that
both in diverse pictures, as also for points of doctrine, they are as ill as the
former, Compare for this end the Missalles, Breuiaries, Manuals and Primeri,
printed before the Counsel of Trent, with those printed since.
at the least.

2. Their Ceremonies of state, or, as they say, of devotion, are contained in
the books called, Pontificale Romanum, and Ceremoniale Romanum, Add hereunto
also their Processionale, Rationale, and Sacerdotale Romanum.
wherein what apish toys there be, what absurdities, what superstitions,
sometimes ridiculous, sometimes impious, is incredible to them that see it not:
insomuch as some Papists, Vide Epist^lam Alberti Castellani ad Leonem 10.
praefixam Pontif. vlt. edit. Venet.
yea the later Popes, Vide Bullas praed. Clem. 8.
have not spared to confess that they need great reformation, and therefore
undertook that work themselves. But if a man did see how they have amended
them, they would out of this one (if there were no more evidences) conclude
that Rome is that Babylon that will never be healed: for look into the
Pontificale, and the Ceremoniale, which were reformed, and are indeed much
altered by the authority of Clement the 8. and printed at Rome within these
few years, and you shall find some small deformities taken away, but many
great enormities suffered to stand, and some put in that were not there before:
Compare for this end the Pontificale and Ceremoniale, new and old.
which I will not stand at this time to particularise, both because the
particulars are so many, and also for that seeing the books being so rare are
not for each man's reading, it may hap hereafter that the exact comparison of
them together, the old with 40 The 19. wound not healed: for all these are as
bad still, as before.
the new, may be a work of it self not unworthy of some men's labors.

3. Their stories, or tales, are comprised in the books called, Speculum
exemplorum, Vitae Sanctorum, Legenda, etc. These also are lately reformed, as
they pretend. But how? If any would know what is done herein, take but one
example. The Jesuits in the Low Countries pretending these Legends or stories,
needed much reformation, took the matter upon themselves, because it was of
great weight and consequence, and appointed it to some of their society to be
reformed, and now of late they have published it at Doway, some two or three
years ago, and would make us believe that it is amended in innumerable
places. Vide libru^ intitulatum: Magnum speculum exemplorum ab innumeris
mendis, etc. vindicatum per quendam Patrem e societate Jesus and pereundem
locuple tatum: Duaci. anno
But if any man have lost any time in turning over their Legends, and perusing
the prodigious stories there laid down, let him venture even a little more,
and compare this new reformed Speculum exemplorum, with the former, and if he
find as impious and ridiculous Legends, as improbable, and as impossible tales
in that, as in the other; then let him make report what good reformers the
Jesuits be, and how well the Romish Church is healed in this wound. To this
end compare the old Speculum Exemplorum, or the Legend with the new Magnum
speculum exemploru^^, set out by the Jesuits this last year.
The conclusion is, that the Missals and Breuiaries, though undertaken by
Trent: the Pontificale and Ceremoniale, though undertaken by the Pope: the
Legend and Speculum, though undertaken by the Jesuits, and all in show
reformed; yet stand all at this day as foul and deformed, and though some
things be taken out, yet (all laid together) as bad or worse then they were
before.

These straits of time hinder me from enlarging my self any further,
therefore to conclude, and wrap up all in one general exception:

The last point wherewith I will charge the Romish Church and religion, is not
so fitly to be called a wound, as a leprosy, or a general consumption; but
all to one end: for as it is no difference upon the matter, whether a man be
deep and desperately wounded, or have a leprosy over all the body, or a
general consumption, for both are deadly, and both incurable: so is it in this
case; wherein the exception I take against them, is, that their Church and
State declined long ago, into that general corruption and universal pollution
in all estates. The 20. wound: A general corruption of manners in all estates.
That the profaneness, licentiousness, and sinfulness of all sorts of
people in that Church, both head and members, is like a spiritual leprosy
without, or a general consumption within, threatening ruin to the whole body.
This point is worthy to be enlarged, but I must defer it, and refer the
Reader to the records of antiquity, I mean such as be their own men, but
having some remorse of conscience, and fear of God, did confess freely, and
bitterly deplore the misery that the sinfulness of the popish Church and
religion would bring upon all the world. Let them read (that have them,) these
books named in the margent, Vide Gersonis opera passi^. Reuelationes Brigi^tae.
Vincentij Ferrariens. prognostie. Perru^ de Aliaco de reformatione eccl.
Nicolai de Clemangi ^^ opera: in Bibliotheca Patrum, editionis primae. Poemata
Walteri Mapes. Maillardi and Menotti Sermones. Holcot in Sapient. lect. 182.
and passim. and Onus Ecclesiae passim.
and those that have them not, it may be shortly they may have some help
therein, and then you will grant with me, that the former and better times,
confessed that which I now lay to their charge.

I will insist particularly but upon two, the one of so great antiquity, the
other of so great authority, as both are beyond exception. Some 400. years
ago lived a Monk learned for those times, called (as Posseuine confesses Vide
Posleu in Appar. sac. In append. priori ad ^om. 1. lit. B.
Bernardus Morlanen^is: he wrote three books of the contempt of the world, in
an artificial kind of Poetry, but much more artificially describing, and
zealously deploring the sinfulness of the Romish Church, and state in those
days, from the head to the foot, describing particularly their adulteries,
Casta cubilia sunt modo v^^a, lata petun^ur etc.
drunkenness, Cura stat vnica luctaque publica carnis in esu: eb^ietas placet
and tua vox ^acet o bone Jesus.
ambition, idleness, dissimulation, deceits, cosenages, murders, Arcta
relinquitur and via carpitur ampla quibusque. Quae^imus in via, fluxa fluentia,
con fluit ansque. Archit^icl^^iu^, sceptra, sedilia rima petendo. Quisque
tumultuat, instat and aestuat, haec satagendo. Stat simulatio, dissimulatio,
crimen vt u^ que. Alea, crapula, fraus, facinus, gula flagitiumque. Ora
bilinguia, lis, homicidia Mars, tuba, terror. Vis, probra Iergia: quid moror?
omnia me docet error.
whoredoms I am meretricia (pene) cubilia ni^ reputa^tur. Et venialia, quod
genialia vocifera^tur.
of all estates: then particularly for their Clergy, their ignorance and
negligence, Grex flet amarius, est operarius in grege ra^us. Pontificum ^tatus
excidia datus, extat auarus, etc.
their Sodomie, Parcite credere quae pudet edere, sed tamen edam. Horrida
nomine, plus mala crimine, crimina quaedam. Heu male publicus est Sodomiticus
ignis and aestus. Nemo seelus tegit, aut premit, aut fugit esse scelestus.
Plangite saecula, plangite singula, crimine p^ena. Mas, maris immemor (o furor,
o tremor) est vt hyaena.
their Simonie and other corruptions in attaining places in the Church: Non
sine Simone, sed sine canone, dux animarum. Mox docet inscius and sibi n^scius
ipse praeesse. O mala saecula, vendi^u^ infula Pontificalis, Infula venditur,
nec reprehenditur empti^ talis. Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus, omnia Romae.
Cum pretio, quia iuris ibi via ius perit omne. Roma nocens nocet, atque viam
docet ipsa noc^ndi: lura relinquere, lu^ra requirere, pallia vendi.
and then at last coming to Rome it self, so lays open the filthiness of
the whore of Babylon, Roma ruens rora, foeda satis nota cante^iat te* Scilla
vorax rapis, and cupis and capis, and trahis ad te: Gurges es al^ior, area,
capacior alta lacuna. Insatiabilis, insociabilis omnibus vna. Si tibi det sua,
non repleat tua guttura, Croesus: Merca, vel aureus a modo, non Deus est tibi
Jesus.
as it is doubtful whether her sinfulnes be more hateful, then his boldness is
admirable. Let him that would be able to answer all their false slanders,
which they lay to the charge and disgrace of Protestant Churches; and to retort
upon themselves their objection of the lives of our Professors; and he that
would see the Church and state of Rome in her own natural colors; let him, I
say, read but that one Author, who beside that he is Manuscript in many
Libraries, he was also published at Amsterdam, or somewhere near therabouts,
this present year 1607.

And after he has discovered her corruptions, and laid open her sins from
head to foot, then he urges her vehemently to repentance and reformation,
Roma resurgito, te tibi reddito Romam. Cuius eras prius, ordinis illius exprime
formam. Quo modo corpora tu^^, ita pectora nune rege fracta. Fracta recollige
deuia di^ige, ^er lab^facta, etc. Sed facis haec secus, etc. Roma quid exequar,
imo quid eloquar, aut tibi promam? Vncia te ro^at, vncia te notat haud fore
Roman. Tu populos tibi, te rutilans sibi marca subegit. Semper e^im lucra
progenies tua, vult, agit, egit.
which because he sees no hope of, but that still she falls from evil to
worse; therefore he denounces Gods judgments against her, and assures her
that vengeance, ruin and destruction shall fall upon her. Fas mihi dicere, fas
mihi scribere, Roma fuisti. Ecce relaberis, ecce reuoluer is ordine tristi. Fas
mihi scribere, ^as mihi dicere, Roma peristi. Obruta maenibus, obruta moribus
occubuisti. Vrbs ruis inclita, tam modo subdita, quam prius al^as Quo prius
altior, hoc modo pressior est labefacta. Fas mihi scribere, fas mihi dicere,
Roma ruisti, Sunt tua maenia voci^erantia, Roma peristi.

Haec omnia, and multa huiusmodi, Bernardus Marlanensis, Monacus Cloniacensis
in libris sui^ de contemptu mundi, ante 400. annos scriptis, and 1607. editis.


Some part of his own words I have here put down in Latin, but not in
English, because the sins he lays against her are such, as some of them are
better unnamed then reproved. What can they say to it? is he some fained and
forged new found Author, devised by some of us, or was he some late writer
hired by Luther, or suborned by Calvin to rail on the Pope or Popery? Nay
Posseuine the Jesuit confesses in the place aforenamed (and if he did not, it
is well enough known by other good and ancient records) he was a professed
Monk, and lived above four hundred years ago: therefore his testimony in
this case is beyond exception.

Now whether these wounds and corruptions in the Romish Church and State were
healed, in the subsequent ages, or no, if any man doubt, let him look upon the
Authors named before, who lived in the ages succeeding one after another.
Gualterus Mapus, and their S. Brigid, not much more then a hundred years after
him: about 100. years after them, Bonauenture and Wiclieffe: about a hundred
years after them, Gerson, Clemangius, Vincentius, and others: these if any man
look upon he shall see that those wounds stood unhealed, and those corruptions
unreformed, until we come to the year 1500. namely to this last age of all:
and though Posseuine maliciously conceal the name of Gual^er Mapes, because
he is too plain, yet he cannot deny, but many, whereof some he names,
Posseu. Appar. sac. tom. 2. lit. I. Iacobus lunterbeck German. Carthus. anno
1460. scripfi^ auisamentum ad Papam pro reforma ione Ecclesiae, etc.
did in all ages write to the Pope for reformation, and told him plainly what
would follow if he did not reform the Church.

Now what good all these men could do, and what reformation followed at last,
let a Pope himself speak, one of the honestest hearts that ever had the
hindrance to be a Pope, Adrian the 6. the best that was these many years, and
of whom (if it be possible of any) there was expectation of some reformation
in the Church: for, as Peter Matthew in his life confesses, he was not so
proud, nor covetous, as most of them are Petr. Matthaeus in Comment. suis ad
papales constitut. de Adriano 6. Pauperrima familia exortus, se dedit studijs,
doctrina and morum integritate conspicuus: praeter omnem expectationem, Pont.
Max. renu^^iatus est: expectabatur Romae summa Cleri and totius populi
laetitia, parabantur triumphi and theatra, sed cessare fecit in medio opere
artifices: Gentilium haec ostentationes, non Christianorum esse insignia, and
Ecclesiastici ordinis homines parum decere ratus.
. How he found the Romish Church when he came to it, and how he left it at his
sudden taking from it, judge by his own pitiful and passionate speech, which
he commanded his Nuntio to deliver from him, and in his name to the assembly of
the States of Germany, in their Imperial Parliament, about the year 1522.
These be his words, as Espencaeus a learned Bishop of their own reports.

Tell them from us that we freely confess God has sent this trouble and
affliction upon the Church, for the sins of men, and especially of Priests and
Prelates, from whose sins (the Scriptures are plain) be derived the sins
of the people: therefore our Savior (about to heal and reform Jerusalem a
diseased city) first enters into the Temple, that first of all he may correct
the sins of the Clergy (especially concerning buying and selling) herein
playing the good Physician, who begins to heal a wound at the root and
bottom.

We know that for many years there have been many abominations even in this
holy Apostolic seat, abuses in the carriage of matters spiritual, excessive
enormities in our commandments, and in a word, all things turned topsie
turuie, and from ill to worse; and no marvel if the disease grow from the head
into the members, that is, from the Popes into common persons.

I confess, all we (that is, all Prelates of the Clergy) have gone out of the
way, each one into our own ways, neither has there been of a long time any
that did good: therefore there is good reason that we all give glory to God,
and humble our selves, even our souls unto him: let each one of us remember
whence we are fallen, and rather judge our selves, then stand to be judged of
God in his wrath and fury.

Wherein, for our parts, make promise in our name that we will give all
diligence, that first of all this our Court of Rome may be reformed, from which
it is likely all this mischief has proceeded: that so, health and reformation
may begin there to the good example of all, whence the corruption first bred,
and spread to the ill example and hurt of all. To the furtherance and effecting
of which happy reformation, we hold our selves so much the more straightly
tied, by how much the more earnestly we see the whole world to expect and
desire it.

Dices quod Deus hanc persecutionem Ecclesiae suae inferri permittit, propter
hominu^ peccata, sacerdotu^ maxim ac praelatorum, a quoru^ peccatis populi
peccata deriuari scripturae clamant. Ideoque saluator (interpret Chrysostomo)
curaturus infirma^ ciuitate^ Jerusalem, prius templum ingressus est, vt
sacerdotum peccata, ementium inprimis and vendentium, primo castigaret, instar
boni medici, morbum a radice curantis.

Scimus in sancta sede, aliquot iam annis, multa abominanda fuisse, abusus in
spiritualibus, excessus in mandatis, omnia denique in peruersum mutata, nec
mirum si aegritudo a capite in membra, a summis pontificibus in alios
descenderit.

Omnes nos, id est, praelati Ecclesiastici, declinauimus, vnusquisque in vias
suas, nec fuit iamdiu qui bonum faceret: vnde necesse est, vt omnes demus
gloriam deo, humiliemus ei animas nostras, videamus vnusquisque vnde ceciderit,
and se potius quisque iudicet quam a Deo in virga furoris iudicari velit.

Qua in re, quod ad nos attinet, polliceberis nos omnem operam adhibituros, vt
haec primu^ Curia, vnde forte malum hoc omne processit, reformetur, vt sicut in
omnes inde corruption emanauit, sic ab eadem etiam sede sanitas and omnium
emanet reformatio. Ad quod procurandu^ nos tanto arctius obligatos reputamus,
qua^to mundum, vniuersu^ huiusmodi reformationem auidius desiderare videmus.

Haec apud Espencaeum in Comment. in Titum, cap. 1. page 69. and 70.

These were the words of this good man, too good to be a Pope, at least too
good to be long a Pope: for after that he had so much forgot himself, and his
Papal dignity, and the honor of his Apostolical seat (which cannot err,
nor do amiss, as he like a fool confessed) as to grant that not the Church
alone, but the holy Court of Rome did need reformation, forthwith there was
order taken that he should not trouble the world nor disgrace his place any
longer, for shortly after he died: and for his sake, they provided that their
seat should never be so far abused and abased again by any plain hearted
Northren man, making sure from that day to this, that the Popedom should not be
trusted out of the hands of an Italian, lest he should ever have a thought of
reformation. For what followed after all this? Was there any reformation in the
Romish Church? were any of the evils and diseases confessed by Adrian
redressed? I had rather Espencaeus their own Bishop should tell, then I; which
because he does very largely, I will contract it into a compendium, and hope
that some will take pains to put all that wise and learned discourse of his
into our vulgar tongue: the rather for that it contains much matter of great
moment, and yet not vulgarly known to this day. Mean time the effect of it is
this:

Legatur Espencaeus in Comment. ad Titum. cap. 1. ^ page 65. ad 91.
That after all Christendom had complained of the enormous and intolerable
grieuances, sustained from the Pope and his Court of Rome, al which and more
the good Pope Adrian had confessed (but was taken away, lest he had redressed)
and after at their motion, he had intended a Council should be called for
reformation: all this determined by his death. His successor Clement the 7. was
not so idle to hearken to such toys, nor give way to such innouations, he
would have no Council, he saw no cause of reformation. But from his successor
Paul the 3. plain necessity did wring out an unwilling consent, and so after
many difficulties, the Council of Trent was called, wherein first of all this
point of reformation was so urged, that a Commit was chosen of nine
principal Divines, some of them Cardinals, to consider what reformation was
requisite in the Church; who after mature deliberation, plainly told the Pope,
that all these evils proceeded from the abuses reigning in the Court of Rome:
and concluding something for reformation of pluralities (one only abuse), the
Pope did so interpret it, and alter it, when it came to him, as it did no good
but hurt. He then dying, and the Council being intermitted, was set on foot
again by his successor Julius the 3: who also confessed there were innumerable
abuses in administering the Sacraments: but when it came to reform them, in
stead thereof he suspended the Council, though many Bishops, that desired
reformation, did protest against it, affirming confidently that they had not as
yet dispatched one of the businesses, for which they had assembled: but the
Pope prevailed, and so for ten years it was discontinued. And at last being
again assembled by Pius the 4. he made show he would refer the whole matter
of reformation to the Fathers of the Council: but when it came to trial, it
was with a prouiso, that, first, they should not meddle with the Court of Rome:
secondly, that in their reformation, laid upon other persons and places, they
should always enact it thus; Saving always holy and untouched the Authority
of the Apostolical sea: for which their courtesy to him and his seat, he
afterward gave them thanks in an oration in the Consistory at Rome, assuring
them (but it was in the word of a Pope) that he would be more rigide and severe
in purging his own Court, and house and offices, then they would have bin.
With these good words the Pope dissolved the Council. But from that day to
this (says this Bishop) through these so many years, nothing is done, nothing
is changed, nothing is amended in the Church: and no marvel (says he) for
nothing have they amended in Rome under their own nose, where they might
reform any thing if they had conscience and will to do it. So that now seeing
all is finally referred and reserved to the Pope, there is (says he) no more
hope of any reformation left, nor any thing else remains, but to see one
misery after another fall upon the Apostolical seat and the whole Church.

These and many more words to this purpose has this wise and learned Bishop.
Out of all which I conclude: therefore 30. or 40. years ago in the days of
Espencaeus, the Church of Rome, being found and confessed to be most fearfully
corrupt, is not healed nor reformed, nay that all hope of reformation is now
taken away. Since which time I shall thank him that will show me that there
has been any public and general reformation of the notorious abuses in that
Church: provided he prove it out of as good records, and with as fair
evidence, as I have done the contrary: which as I should rejoice in my heart
once to behold, so till For as for the third point I have undertaken, namely,
that in stead of being healed and reformed, there have contrariwise grown up
in the Romish Church, more horrible and heinous practices, more erroneous and
(...)us do(...) (...)hen e(...) (...)re were kn^^vne or heard of, and at this
day stand maintained, at least unreproved by their Church. This, I say, I must
be constrained to refer to a peculiar Treatise by it self.
then I must needs with grief of heart conclude, that

The Romish Church is that Babylon that will not be healed. And will she not?
what then remains? but as our text leads us,

Let us forsake her. But how? not in love or affection; let us never cease to
wish to her as to our own souls: nor let us cease to pray for her, publicly
and privately, yea let us bless her when she curses us.

But let us (as we have well begun) proceed to separate our selves from her
society, and empty our Church and kingdom of her and hers. And if they say
we be schismatikes for separating from her: we answer, nay; she is the
schismatike that has separated her self from Christ.

Now therefore you honorable Magistrates and Judges of this nation, set your
shoulders to the work of your God, rouse up your spirits to execute the good
laws your selves and your forefathers have enacted: our laws are enowe and
good enough, they want nothing but execution, and that belongs to you: unto
which duty we of the Ministry do exhort you in the Lord: execute our laws
against the^, yet rather against Popery then the Papists: remember the blessed
promise in the Psalm, though it was spoken of literal Babylon, it has a
mystical and true relation to spiritual Babylon: O Psalm. 137. 8. 9.
daughter of Babylon, worthy to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us, yea blessed shall he be that takes thy
young children and dasheth the^ against the stones. Oh pull this blessing on
your heads, kill her infants, that is, her errors, impieties, superstitions,
blasphemies, idolatries, equivocations, treasons, etc. these be her Impes, her
natural brood; but they are now of more age and grown to greatness, the more
danger is there of them, and more cause to kill them: which if you do with
diligence and discretion, you see you draw a blessing from heaven upon your
selves. If you do not, you do for a time maintain pricks in your eyes, and
thorns in your sides, and your negligence will provoke the great and just
Lord, to take the matter into his own hands, which as he has already, not
only threatened, but begun, so he will, (though he defer it till his own
time) bring it to full execution:

For her judgment is come up into heaven, and lifted up to the clouds. And
then when she has drunk up the dregs of the cup of Gods wrath, and by the
breath of his mouth is fearfully confounded, then I say, shall all her
Merchants and all her lovers, (whereof we have too many that lurk amongst us,
and even some that notwithstanding will needs be of us) be ashamed for their
loving of her, whom they see God hated; and for their laboring so basely to
cover her filthy skirts, which he would have to her shame discovered to the
view of the world: and then shall they shrink to bea^e a part of her
punishment, which so much delighted to wallow with her in her pollution.
Therefore let the holy Ghost make the conclusion, and give us our last lesson:
Go out of her Revel. 18. 4.
my people, and be not partakers of her sins, lest you receive of her
plagues. From both which good Lord deliver us. Amen.

And thus much for the kingdom of Antichrist.

There is also another mystical Babylon, and that is the kingdom of sin,
the throne whereof is in this world, for hell is the place of execution, rather
then of sinning: of this also is this text verified: for we do naturally
(without grace) so love this world, that though we find it miserable and
confused, yet by our sensuality, and daily devising and practicing new
pleasures, we endeavor to heal it, and to make it a paradise, and they that
are bewitched with it, would here set up their rests. But when all is done that
can be, it cannot be healed, but it is still a very Babel of confusion and
disorder, a miserable world, a vale of tears, and a sea of trouble and
turmoile to whosoever has the sweetest portion of it. Therefore though we be
in it, yet let us use it as though we 1. Cor 7. 31.
used it not, let us not set our hearts upon, but let us forsake it, and go
every one to his own country, that is, to our blessed inheritance the
kingdom of heaven, that is a Christian man's country: for as for this world,
her sins are so vile, that her judgment is gone up unto heaven, and God will
assuredly destroy it. But there is a better world, even an inheritance,
immortal, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
undefiled, and that fades not, which is reserved in heaven for us: hereof we
are borne heirs by grace in Christ. Therefore forsaking the wicked Babylon of
this world in our hearts and affections, (seeing it is past cure) let us aspire
after that, and long to have our parts in it.

Now there are also besides these two great Babels, certain other little
petty Babylons, namely, incurable sins amongst us, which are Babels, or at
least daughters of Babylon, and sprigs of that cursed root. As,

1. That great sacrilege and Church-robbing committed by Impropriations, (in
which case at this day almost half of this kingdom is) whereby it comes to
pass (above any other one means) that an ignorant and vnteaching Ministry
is set over a great part of our people, which is the sourse and fountain of
all other evils in our Church: this is a deep wound, yet once was it curable
enough, namely, when the Abbeys were first dissolved, and since was it curable
enough: but now (alas) how incurable it is, and by the crafty plots of the
devil how incurable it is made more and more, he observes but little that
sees not. Oh happy he that can say in his conscience, I would have cured this
daughter of Babel: and happy also he (though not so much) that has had no
hand in making this wound incurable: such plots and devices arise out of hell,
and heaven will confound them, though the earth for a time bear the burden of
them. Mean time, unless the Kings Majesty vouchsafe to take the matter into
his hands, and to heal the wounds that he never made; otherwise it is
incurable, or as the Kings evil, to be healed by none but by a King: till then
we may say with grief of heart; It is an impe of Babylon that will not be
healed.

2. The ungodly Plays and Enterludes so rife in this nation; what are they but
a bastard of Babylon, a daughter of error and confusion, a hellish device, (the
devils own recreation to mock at holy things) by him delivered to the Heathen,
from them to the Papists, and from them to us? Of this evil and plague, the
Church of God in all ages can say, truly and with a good conscience, we would
have healed her. The ancient Fathers in the time of the Primitive Church spared
no pains to discover the vileness and unlawfulness of them (...)tullian:
Cyprian: Chrysostom: etc.
: in these latter days many holy and learned men have labored by preaching,
writing, and conferring to have healed them, and never was there Divine of note
and learning, that I know, that durst so far prostitute his credit as to
write for them. They know all this, and that God accounts it abomination for a
man to Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
put on woman's apparel, and that the ancient Fathers expound that place
against them: Cyprian: Chrysostom. Sexta Synod. in Trull. Can. 62.
they know that Cyprian resolved, (being asked the question) Cyprian. in
Epistola 61. Oh that all Players would read that Epistle, and regard it!
that a Player ought not to come to the Lords table; and that he that teaches
children to play, is not an instructor, but a spoiler and destroyer of
children: they know they have no calling, but are in the State like warts on
the hand, or blemishes in the face: they know, that therefore they are feign to
shroud themselves under such shelters, as at the hour of death, and day of
judgment, will prove but fig leaves: they know they are defended with the
same arguments, as the stews in Rome be, and little better defense can be
made for them (being as they are).

All this they are daily made to know, but all in vain, they be children of
Babylon that will not be healed: nay, they grow worse and worse, for now they
bring religion and holy things upon the stage: no marvel though the worthiest
and mightiest men escape not, when God himself is so abused. Two hypocrites
must be brought forth; and how shall they be described but by these names,
Nicolas S. Antlings, In a Church in London, every day in the week prayers,
and a Sermon at six (...)e in the (...)ning: a ^^^ssed and rare example.
Simon S. Maryoueries? Thus hypocrisy a child of hell must bear the names of
two Churches of God, and two wherein Gods name is called on publicly every day
in the year, and in one of them his blessed word preached every day (an
example scarce matchable in the world): yet these two, wherein Gods name is thus
glorified, and our Church and State honored, shall be by these miscreants
thus dishonored, and that not on the stage only, but even in print. Oh what
times are we cast into, that such a wickedness should pass unpunished! I
speak nothing of their continual profaneness in their phrases, and sometime
Atheism and blaphemie, nor of their continual profaning of the Sabbath,
which generally in the country is their play day, and oftentimes Gods divine
service hindered, or cut shorter to make room and give time for the devils
service.

Are they thus incurable? then happy he that puts to his hand to pull down
this tower of Babel, this daughter of confusion, happy he that helps to heal
this wound in our State: but most happy that Magistrate, who, like zealous
Phinehes, takes some just vengeance on that public dishonor laid upon our
Churches. But if we be negligent in this cause of God, then he himself will
take the matter into his own hand, whose Church, whose religion, whose holy
ordinances and most holy name are daily profaned by them: for as their
iniquities are heinous, and their basphemies against heaven; so doubtless
their judgment is gone up unto heaven and lifted up unto the clouds. So
wishing their repentance, I proceed.

3. The horrible abuse of the Sabbath day, in this city, and over this
kingdom: in some places by Faires and Markets, by May-games and Moricedencers,
by Wakes and Feasts: in all places (almost) by buying and selling, and
bargaining: in this city by cariages in and out, by selling betimes in the
morning and after dinner: by playing in the streets, and in the fields.

Often has this bin complained of, and some have endeavored to heal it, but it
is an Impe of Babylon that will not be healed, but rather it creepes as a
canker through our whole State, from the foot to the head. But let us take heed,
for it will eat out the heart and life of a State, even this one sin. Did
not our fathers Ierem. 17.
thus (says noble Nehemiah) and therefore God brought Nehem. vlt.
all this evil upon us? See captivity, destruction, and desolation of a
goodly and flourishing settled kingdom, for the public profaning of the
Sabbath: O therefore happy he that puts to his helping hands to heal this
wound, which yet is curable enough, if we would do our duties: for the
Commandment The fourth Commandment.
is, thou and all within thy gates, keep my Sabbath. Now who is there within
this Realm, but is within the gates of the Kings house? who within this City,
but within the gates of the L. Mayor? who any where, but is of some man's
family, and within some man's gates? If then Fathers and Magistrates would
look to all within their gates, this sin could not be so grievous, this
wound not so wide and desperate as it is. Therefore you my L. Mayor be
exhorted to attempt the healing of this wound, in your year; set before your
eyes, the noble example of worthy Nehemiah, it will excite you to this holy
duty; and Nehem.
then at the end of your year, you may with the comfort of a good conscience
say with him; Remember Nehem. vl^. 19
me O my God in goodness, according to all that I have done for this people.
But if we still neglect this cause of God, and suffer his Sabbath daily thus
to be profaned; then let us look for nothing but continuance and increase of
these grievous plagues that have so long lien upon us: and let us be assured
God will take the matter into his own hands, and some way or other get himself
glory upon us, for he will lose his honor at no man's hand, but whosoever will
not glorify him in his conversion, he will glorify his own name upon him in
his confusion: which heavy judgment that God may turn from us, let us turn
to him, etc.

FINIS.

