THE DECLARATION OF Mr. PATRIK CRAWFVRD HIS RETVRNE FROM POPERY TO THE TRVE
Religion, which is according to the Word of GOD, in holy Scripture.

Psalm. 40. verse 2. He has brought me up out of an horrible pit, out of the
myrie clay, etc.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wr cittoun. Anno Dom. 1627.

To the right Honorable, the right Reverend, and worshipful, THE LORD
PROVEST, BAILYIES, MINISTERS, AND remanent Counselors of EDINBVRGH, all
increase of grace here and glory hereafter.
Being obliged in conscience, for the glory of God, and edification of his
People, to publish this my declaration of my returning to the true Religion,
these reasons amongst others moved me to dedicate the same unto you,
honorable and Christian People, and to you their reverend Pastors. First,
because my sin in revolting from this Religion in my youthlynesse is so
grievous, (howsoever the Lord has shown mercy to me, knowing that I did it
in ignorance) that it becomes me, as publicly as I can, to declare my
Repentance: and this I have thought the readiest mean for that purpose. Next,
because I have done wrong to my native Country, and the Church in Scotland, so
far as I was able, in the matter of Religion, and specially I have done my
uttermost endeavor to have weakened the hands of sundry professing the doctrine
of the said Church, and drawn them to the Romish Religion, wherewith for the
time of that my ignorance, I was in conceit. And now being sensible of my
error in some measure, the shortest course which I could see to repair this
wrong, was, that so to you some sort of satisfaction might be given, and by
you who are the most eminent and conspicuous and large Church in this Land,
others who from all parts resort unto you, might receive the satisfaction in
like manner. Thirdly, because your Pastors been the special Instruments of
GOD of my satisfaction in such scruples and doubts of Religion, as I had and
propounded to them, before I could renounce the groundless Religion of
popery, and the men who met me, when I was seeking home as a forlorn Son
to my Fathers house again, as justly I may now call my self. You I say, right
reverend, were the men that met me, and mecklie poynted out the way, and
went along with me, convoying me on my way: in whose dealing with me I might
have seen my heavenly Fathers readiness to meet and embrace me* sometimes I
grant, I have spoken of you, as others of the Romish Religion do of you, and
of all faithful and learned Ministers, only for the Religions cause. But then
I knew you not. Now I have found that you have both learning and Love, and if
you and others of your Calling were known, as I know you, I put no question
many should be nothing ashamed, but glad at their heart to forsake the puddle
of humane Doctrine, and take them to the fountain of the divine Scriptures.
Now then seeing you are Pastors to me, and I by this means as one of your
Flock, if so it may please your flock and you, to account of such a wandering
sheep as I have been. To whom could I offer this testimony of my Repentance
rather than to you Honorable and Christian People, and to you their vigilant
and reverend Pastors, whose Christian disposition makes me to hope that this
my offer shall be accepted in good part.

Yours in Christ Mr. Patrik Crawfurd.

GENTILI CHARISSIMO Patricio Crafordio, a Cassilton, ex Synagoga Romana ad
Ecclesiae Evangelicae societatem reduci.
(...).
QVod Latii illecebras scorti evitaris, and astum Apoc. 17. ibid. 19. 9. ibid.
18. 4. ibid. 21. 2.

In sua quo incautos retia dira trahit:
Quod thalamos sancti sis invitatus ad agni,
Dum venit in castos sponsa pudica thoros:
Quod Babyloniacam, Domino suadente, ruinam
Effugis, in Solymae tecta nouata redux;
Gratulor, immensumque Dei miserantis amorem
Miror, inexhaustas and bonitatis opes.
Tu quoque quod, lubrico erroris de tramite caeci
Conversus, fratres sic stabilire paras,
Laudo piumque animum, gratamque in pectore mentem,
Et cum candenti simplicitate fidem.
O vtinam surdis aures, and lumina caecis
Assidue Dominus sic tribuisse velit.
Thomas Crafordius.

THE DECLARATION OF Mr. PATRIK CRAWFURD HIS RETVRNE FROM POPERY, TO THE true
Religion, which is according to the Word of God in holy Scripture,
He has brought me up out of an horrible pit; out of the myrie clay. etc.
Psalm. 40. Ver. 7
CHAP. 1.
The mercy of God to a Sinner.

THese six years bygone I have been a stranger to God and his Word, and have
lain in darkness of Popery, never reading the Scriptures for the right end,
but only to pick out something of them for contraversie, whereby I might
brangle with some color and appearance these who makes the Lords Word the only
rule of their Religion: even as many more Scholars than I, do read them still,
who sets themself to maintain Popery, and oppugn the reformed Religion. But
now the Lord God who is gracious and merciful to many that deserves wrath, who
is found oftentimes of them who seeks him not* or seeks him not the right
way, has opened my eyes by the power of his own truth and light, which I in
my ignorance smothred down, and kept under in unrighteousness, and has
made me understand now, that there is no Rock whereon to rest that* Soul
that seeks certainty either of Religion, or of Salvation, but the holy
Scripture, and that learned men's judgment, and writings, and the testimony of
the Church and public Preaching, and conference, and reading, and meditation,
and prayer to God for the Spirit of Wisdom and grace, are all but means to
point out the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, and to
find out his will set down in his Testament. So that I may now say truly,
the Lord has brought me out of an horrible and dark Pit, where the light of
the Lords Word is hid, and put under a Bushel, and out of the myrye and teugh
clay of their errors, which defiled me and held me fast, wherein J found no
ground to rest on, but sunk deeper daily, and should have drowned at last, had
not the Lord pulled me out, and set my feet upon a Rock, and ordered my
goings. The sum of which work of God, as I have declared to sundry
privately, and now of late publicly, in the Church of Irwing, before my
admission to the Lords Table there, the 26. of August, 1627. so J found my
self oblidged to declare the same by write to all men if I could, and that so
much the more, as I have been more wicked in the wrong way than many others,
who have been seduced and drawn away from the truth as I was, for J having
drunken in the errors of Popery as fast as I could at home, went over to
France and Italy, and other parts; and by the space of four years, what by
trauells, what by conference, what by studying in the Colleges of Jesuits,
made my self as able as I could to defend Popery, and oppose true Religion:
and when I returned home did what I could to pervert others, and to confirm
them that were seduced: and convoyed Jesuits oftentimes where their purpose was
to further their designs, sometimes being disaguised with them for fear of
discovery, to the hurt of many Souls (the Lord forgive me) for whose cause I
do write this my declaration, if possibly it coming to their hands might
be a mean to cause them considder their ways, and repent, and forsake their
Idols, and turn to seek the Lord Jesus, who will teach all them James 1. 5,
John 14 16.
the true way, who seeks the same by prayer of God through Christ alone, and
so the wounds might be healed in Gods mercy, which I helped to give these
Souls in my blind zeal: the recovery again of whose Souls without any
detriment to their bodily estate worldly, is and shall be ever my desire:
only the Lord give them Repentance, and make my Repentance daily more
fruitful, that J may be as truly zealous for the truth, as ever I was
blind forward against the same.

CHAP, 2.
The Justice of God, giving those over to believe lies, who will not learn the
truth.

TO show then the whole matter from the beginning to the glory of God, and
edification of all who pleases to peruse these presents without prejudice, J
was brought up in the College of Glasgow, and did pass, my course under
learned godly Masters, who did their diligence to instruct both me and others
in human Learning and Religion, as time would suffer: but I in my youthlinesse
did not lay Religion to heart, and therefore was justly punished thereafter: for
within half an year after I ended my course in the College, I was infected
with the errors of Popery, (so just a thing it is with God to punish the
neglect of truth with giving over to error that they may believe lies, who
will not take pains to understand the truth) for an Papist of my
acquaintance, who had been out of the Country, a Scholar sharp enough,
began to deal with me, and put me in question and doubt, concerning the
Religion professed in Scotland, so much the more easily as I understood it not
at that time. Then when J should have sought satisfaction of my doubts at those
who understood the truth, before J had given any more ear to him that seduced
me, J lent my ear still, and gave credit to all that he spoke, without
examination according to the Scriptures (so dangerous a matter is it to admit
any grounds of Religion without trying them by the rule of Gods Word; whether
they be divine or not) and so he possessed me, what by himself, what by
Books, what by conference with Priests and others, of these erroneous positions
following.









Rome belonged to give the sense of it, and that their exposition was as good
as Scripture.

Rome was judge of all contraversies of Religion.

Rome could not err.

Peter was Pope of Rome.

France, and stayed there a season, conversing with Jesuits in their Colleges.
Thereafter J went to Rome to the head spring of that Religion, and stayed there
some eight Months, but was forced to leave it through sickness, and retiering
to West-Flanders, J stayed in a seminary, and studied in a College of
Jesuits some two years, all which time I remained obedient to all their
injunctions given unto me, and albeit many things occurred in my trauells,
which perplexed my mind, making me doubt of the course I was entered into, yet
I smothred all down, by the weight of these grounds, which J had laid down
in the beginning, and namely, of this that the Church of Rome could not err.

CHAP. 3.
The power of Delusion.

I Observed their Churchmen of greatest account and Wisdom among them, to
lay heavy burdens and grievous to be borne upon others, but they themselves
took little pains in the business. They professed for the most part
voluntary poverty one by one; but the yearly Rents and common Purse, whereof
every man was furnished as he had to do was very rich. I saw some of their
Orders live by begging and Alms, who would shortly have forsaken the craft, if
there had been any danger in that course, either of hunger or cold, more than
they pleased to take upon themselves, and make show of: Yet I thought their
Church could not err. They professed to be so retired from the World, as
they could think of nothing but Heaven, and yet took the most witty courses
that could be, to understand all men's effaires, designs and disposition, and
then made use of them all as best served their own ends. They professed
humility, but labored in effect to be in honor and estimation by all, and
were as impatient to be despised as any man: their special pains being
employed, to bring more and more under their subjection, under pretense of making
them religious. Yet J thought still their Church could not err. I saw the Pope
who calls himself Peter's successor, and his Cardinals busked in the greatest
riches, and worldly honor that can be in the Earth, and in the mean time
casting the glory of the Apostles, the preaching of the Gospel, at their
heels, as unbeseeming their Grandour. When the Pope came abroad he was
carried in a gorgeous Chair, upon four men's shoulders, and all men as he went
by, kneeled direct to the ground, in effect adored him, as one invested with
Christ's power and pre-eminence in the earth, and owner of Christ's honor in the
World, as his Legate and Lieutenant, and so I honored him amongs others my
self. And yet I thought all well for this presumption that the Church could
not err. I saw the Church men take direct courses that the Common People
should never understand what they or themselves were doing: for their Masses
and public services all was done in an unknown language to the People, and for
their ordinare Prayers, they enjoined for the most part to say them in Latin,
though they understood not the same. (Indeed here in Scotland, because such
proceeding has given distaste to sundry by appearance, liberty is given to
those who please to have them in the vulgar language else where J have not
seen this so ordinarily practiced) Next by all means they labored that the
Common People either had not the Bible in their vulgar language, or else that
they red it not, or if any read it, that they should not presume to take any
part of it in any sense contrare to the doctrine and practice of the Roman
Church, but instead thereof, J saw they filled their heads and hands with
Jmages and Beads Agnus Deis, meddals and relics and books of Prayer to this
Saint, and to that Saint, and the office of our Lady as they call the Virgin
Mary, and the legends of such and such miracles done by Saints departed, as
they allege. Such stuff as these a man traveling will find in men's houses,
but seldom or never the Bible, and oftener mention will he hear of the Virgin
Mary, than of our Lord and Savior, and the fairest Churches and Chapels you
shall find dedicate to the Virgin Mary, and to Saint Peter, and Saint Paul,
and others, some he, some she Saints, to whose Chapells and Churches, you
shall find daily numbers going in Pilgrimage or visitation and offering their
offerings and Prayers before such an Altar, to one Saint to keep them from the
Pest, to another, to keep them from the Ague, to this Saint, for their Kyne,
to that Saint for their Horses, in such variety as I cannot number: for there
are particulare Saints for all diseases, whom to, at several times by Prayers
and offerings, ordinarily they have their recourse to be helped. Yet I thought
all well thinking the Romish Church could not err. At Rome it self, I
remarked a Church, whose Patron (if I remember) is commonly called in vulgar
speech, Saint Aloy, and has power, as they say, to heal Horses, or keep them
from their diseases. To this Church once in the year all the Horses of Rome,
the Popes horses and Cardinals, Counselors and Citizens horses are brought,
and when they come to the Fount where the holy water stands, I saw one of the
Priests sprinkle holy water on the horse forehead, and another Priest receive
the offering that uses to be given at that time; by which means that Church
and all these that wait upon it are vpholden, and thus it is done in other
places, and for several diseases of men and beasts. All this J approved,
supposing the Church of Rome could not err. Neither do I speak these things
without pity of the estate of the poor Souls so abused: for J my self who
had seen better things, and should have had better understanding, as a
scholar, by tying my self without further warrant, to believe as the Church
believes, and believing the Church of Rome could not err, for that time
allowed or forced my mind to allow of all these abominable Idolatries, and
multitude of false Gods, and was as busy to pray to all the Saints as any man,
and said my Prayers, Pater noster, Ave Marie, and Confiteor upon my beids, as
carefully as the most ignorant old Wife among them. J kept constantly the
Matines and Vespers, and Salute, said the office of the dead, my long letanies
and my (...), I approved their making of holy water, consecrating of meddals,
beads. Agnus Deis etc. Also that there was some divine virtue in making the
sign of the Cross before my breast, for expelling the Devil for the time
from me, I believed I was as clean as glass, when the Priest did shrive and
absolve me. I have come with others to meet a procession of sundry sorts of
Church men, carrying a consecrated hostie, which they did relate was Christ
himself, carried throughout the streets* J have fallen down before it,
worshipped and adored it, with many others supposing it was Christ bodily
present, when I was present at Mass I did the same upon the same presumption,
J beheld the bread of the hostie before it was consecrate as they call it, I
beheld it when it was consecrated, and when it was lifted up, I saw bread as
clearly as J saw the Priests hand that held it up, J opened my mouth, and the
Priest put it in my mouth, I saw btead with my eyes, I smelled it, J felt it, I
tasted and discerned it as sensibly as ever I did bread in my life, yet I
believed that it was not bread, but Jesus Christ corporally present, put in my
mouth, and going down my belly, though all senses (which God has ever made
the faithful witnesses of all miraculous changes whereof we read in Scripture)
did testify the contrare, I gave them all the lie, because I believed as the
Church believed, and believed that the Church of Rome could not err. Thus I
who would not believe the Truth, was given over to such fearful superstition
and strong delusion, that J might believe lies.

CHAP. 4.
No end in erring, except the Lord reclaim.

THese things were common to me, and all others of the Romish Religion, but J
went yet further than the common course, and was yet more besotted by this
delusion, for I have been clark to the mass, helped the Priest to the saying
of it, lifting the mass Book, now from the right hand to the left, now from
the left to the right back again, Now kneeling, now standing, now bowing and
bending the body, now knocking on my breast, now making the sign of the cross
at the elevation. I have born up the Priests tail with the one hand, having a
burning torch in the other hand, sometimes giving him Wine and water in a
Chalice, sometimes one thing, sometimes another, as such like service did
require. I entered my self yet further in their snare, and became one of the
sodalitie of our Lady. ( This sodalitie ties none to any Ecclesiastical order,
for therein with their approbation, all Ranks of Persons may be, so they use
their particular devotion to our Lady) which is an ordour wherein especially
all devout students in Colleges by a solemn oath and invocation of the
Virgin Mary are tied to use special devotion all their days to her, and to
defend her name, where ever they come, and to depend upon her as their Lady
Patroness, and lady advocate with God for them. O fearful Idolatry! and yet
I swalowed it then, believing as the Church believed, and that she could not
err, and obeying as divine truth what their Church commanded.

Last of all J was in terms with the Jesuits to have rendered my self of that
order, and to have taken on their threefold vow, the third whereof, which is of
a blind and absolute obedience to the superiors of that order, renuncing both
my will and judgment (as their Father Ignatius His Epistle to his Brethren in
Lusitania.
calls it) and to follow al their injunctions without asking question to go,
or to stay, to do or to suffer whatsoever they thought good to enjoyne me for
the Catholic cause and good of the Roman Church, This oath J say I could not
get digested. For thereby J should have been bound, if they had thought it fit
to enjoyne me for the advancement of the Catholic cause, to have been an
instrument of all the mischief that they could devise against my native
Country, and under color of relieving souls to do what any has done or
attempted in that blind obedience. Skarring therefore at this oath, I came
home, and yet forced my self still to keep the former grounds of Religion:
whereby I was made obstinat in error, and untoward to be dealt with by any who
would have studied to reclaim me: Yet it pleased God at last to force in his
own truth upon my conscience, that I began to smell sundry of their errors,
and specially of the sacrifice of the Mass and transubstantiation, that I
began to examine these grounds of the Roman Religion which I had drunk in the
beginning if they could bear me out before God or not: wherein finding my
self miserably mistaken, and so long by that means abused, freely and of my
own accord, not being dealt with by any, J addressed my self for conference
with the Ministry of Edinburgh, Falkirke and Glasgow: who all lovingly and
learnedly gave me solution to all my doubts, and furthered this work of God
in helping home a forlorn Son to his Fathers house again.

Now for all the particular reasons why I call their mass and
transubstantiation an error, and the grounds of their Religion vnwarandable,
and why J have renunced their particular errors builded thereon, it were not
convenient to set them all down here: partly because it would accresse to a
volume, partly because in substance they are the same that are learnedlie set
down by these who handles the contrauersies against the Church of Rome. Only J
will content my self to show some few things of many. First, concerning their
Religion in general. Next, concerning their mass, adding thereto compendiously
in the third place, some few things of their common absurdities maintained by
them.

CHAP. 5.
The Scriptures alleged imperfection, and the Pope of Romes perfection, who
can not err as is alleged, because he sits in the Chair of Saint Peter, are
the two rotten Pillars, whereon all these errors are builded.

THis Romish Religion is a mystery: it makes show to hold the common grounds
of Christianity, but by her deeds everts them. The first principles of the
Romish errors do resolve upon these two, the imperfection of the Scripture,
and the peerless prerogative of the Church of Rome. As for the imperfection
of the Scripture, they allege that it does not contain all things necessary
for Salvation, but place must be left for traditions, that is, unwritten
doctrinall points, and ancient customs long used in the Church, as also for
Ecclesiastical constitutions, and determinations or definitive sentences in
matters controverted: all which they allege must have equal authority in
men's minds with the Scriptures.

Next, they allege that these points necessary to Salvation, which are set
down in Scripture are not clear and plain in the Scripture, but that the
Scripture is obscure and doubtsome, and therefore is neither necessary nor
expedient that it should be translated, that it is a dangerous thing for
laics to read it: wherein, to any that will look narrowly upon the matter,
they bewray a secreet fear, if they be hemde in into the rule of the
Scriptures, they cannot justify with any color the abundance of their errors.

Thirdly, evidently they show that the reading of the Scriptures by laics
should breed more doubts about their Religion than they could be able to solve,
and give them such insight in this Religion, that these whom they keep now in
the chains of darkness and blind belief causing them to do, and suffer and
believe what they please, could not but break the yock if they grew acquainted
with the Scripture.

Fourthlie, they bewray the Spirit of Antichrist, who thus under fair
pretenses sclander Christ Jesus. who having taken upon him, as the great
Prophet and Doctor of his Church, to reveal the whole Counsel of God
concerning men's Salvation, and caused set it down in Scripture, yet has come
short of his purpose, as their doctrine importes, and neither has set down
all things needful, nor these clearly which are set down, but obscurely,
ambiguously and dangerously, that it is not safe for common People to read the
same: and so by these means they breed a misregard of the Scripture of Christ
in men's hearts, and skarres Christ's sheep as long as they can from hearing
what the Spirit of Christ says to his Churches.

As for the peerless prerogative of the Church of Rome, the first is, that
she cannot err. If we ask how this can be, since they cannot name six men
living of the Romish Religion, of whom they either dare or will avow but they
may err, and are subject thereto, nor three, nor two. They will answer, that
yet there is one who is head of all the rest of that Religion, the Pope, who
cannot err, all the rest of the Churchmen of that profession being gathered
together without him, or without his mind, sent by his Legate or Nuncio to
them, they grant they may err, only he cannot err. So then in stead of the
Church of Rome, we have the Pope, whose council of Cardinals they will join
with him for lusters cause: but the infallibility of doctrine they place in
none but the Pope only. By virtue of this prerogative of the Pope they ascribe
great things to the Church of Rome, under this pretense all her traditions are
Apostolic, albeit they be not in Scripture, because they are come down, as
is alleged; through the Apostolic channel of the Popes infallibility.
Under this pretense all her customs and observations are Catholic and
Apostolic, and all her Ecclesiasticke constitutions, and definitive sentences
in matters contraverted are of divine authority as they allege, and do
oblige men to belief and obedience no less than the Scripture. Yea, under
this pretense the Scripture has no authority in respect of these who believe
it, wherefore it should persuade them or be credited more than the fables of
Esope, but as much as the Church of Rome allows upon it. Under this pretense,
when other Churches doechallenge the Roman Church for any fault or error, she
takes upon her to be judge in all controversies betwixt her self and others.
The Greek Church for example in Asia challenges her of usurpation above other
Churches; she will be judge, challenges her of defection from Apostolic
doctrine, she will be judge: challenges her of not doing as she ought to
do, or Christ's spouse ought to do, she will be judge: yea, she will give the
sense of the Scripture and the exposition of it as shall best serve to justify
her own cause: and if any man shall take a sentence of Scripture otherwise
than she allows them, than that sentence so taken shall not be accounted
Scripture. These and other such like consequences they draw and deduce from
this one fountain, That the Church of Rome can not err. Ask again of them,
why cannot your Pope err, seeing he is a sinful man as well as others, as
they will not deny, and they least of all who are best acquaint with the Popes
private conversation, seeing it is possible that the Cardinals (who are
subject to error, especially when their head is dead, and a new Pope not yet
created) seeing they may err in choosing an unfit man for so great a charge,
what warrant can they show to give assurance that such a Pope cannot err. They
answer at last, albeit they shift possibliea while, because Saint Peter was
head of the whole Catholic Church in his time having supreme authority and
the fullness of pastoral power in doctrine and government over the rest of the
Apostles, and all the Churches of the World. Saint Peter so qualified say
they, was Bishop of Rome, and there is his Chair, and the Popes are his only
lawful successors, invested lawfully by God in the same Apostolic
authority, over all the sheep of Christ, and all that may be sheep in the
World, and is as infalliblie assisted by the holy Spirit as ever the Apostle
Saint Peter was, after the descending of the holy Ghost upon him, in the
Pentecost. This is the keystone of their whole building: this is the Pillar of
whole Popedom: if this stand, the better for them: if this fall, all goes to
the ground, and all that is builded thereon: for if either they fail in
proving Saint Peter's supremacy, or his Romish Episcopacie, or the Popes
lawfullsuccession in Apostolic authority, and other privileges, then the
Popes infallibility, and the Roman Churches certainty, with all their
traditions, customs, constitutions and all the rest of that work of theirs
builded thereon shall hurl to the ground together.

CHAP. 6.
No Papist in the Earth can show one clear testimony of Scripture to make
good that ever Saint Peter was at Rome, or Bishop of Rome, or that the Pope is
his special successor in his Apostolic office.

TO examine then these grounds, that thereby some taste may be given briefly of
that Cup, which Rome propynes to the World, and the Princes thereof to drink,
that they may fall in love with her; J will say nothing to the Apostolic
authority of the Lords dear servant Saint Peter, nor to his personal
prerogative in age, in time of following Christ, in zeal and painfulnesse in
his calling: Yet let me vindicate him a little from that injury which his
pretended successors do him: who father the basphemous titles of their
Antichristian usurpation and tyranny over Gods Church upon him. For this
peerless power above the whole Apostles, and headship of the Church which
they allege is a thing which without blasphemy cannot be ascribed to any
mortal man: because Christ in his holy Scripture claims this for his own
royal prerogative to be head of his Church, and to have the Church his body
and not another; To be the husband of his Church, and to have the Church his
spouse, and not another: for these belongs to the Savior of the Church, who
is Christ only, and not another, and therefore these three styles are Ephesians. 5.
23.
joined together and ascribed to him. And this supremacy of Peter over the
Apostles is a forgerie only of these who would have some scugge for their
usurpation: Math. 28. 19. Matthew. 23. 8. 9. Mark 9. 33 34. Luke 22. 26. 1. Pet.
5. 3. 4.
for Christ gave all his Apostles equal Commission, equalled them as brethren,
and discharged any of them to take any maioririe or supremacy one over
another: And when in their infirmity they strove for it Christ rebuked them:
and the night before he suffered discharged the same absolutely among them.
Next Peter himself disclaimes this supremacy, and ascribes it only to Jesus
Christ, and discharges all Dominion and Lordship over the Lords inheritance.
And the Apostle Paul testifies the truth of this, for magnifying his
Apostleship, he avows he was nothing inferior 2 Corin. 11. 5. Gal. 1. 1. 16.
17. 18. 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22.
to the chiefest Apostles: And declares that he received his Apostleship from
Christ immediately, and exercised it sundry years before he saw Peter: and
discharges all to glory in men, whether Paul or Cephas, that is, Peter, or
Apollos or any other. But because this is not the maine matter, let us come to
that whereupon all stands. How prove they that Peter was at Rome or Bishop
there? or that God has tied his Spirit to whosoever should be Bishop of Rome
after him. So weighty a matter as the Popes standing or falling, so maine an
Article of Roman Catholic Faith, the only Pillar of the Romish Religion, the
ground of the remission of so many sins, of saving or damning so many Souls,
has need of express, direct and ample warrant from the divine Scripture; or
else of need force the weight of Roman Religion is builded upon the sand, and
has no warrant from God, Let them but show us one testimony out of all the
holy Scripture that Saint Peter was properly Bishop of Rome* and next let them
show any testimony out of the same Scripture, that the Popes of Rome are
privileged from erring, more than other men, and are endued with as infallible
assistance of the holy Spirit as Peter. They will produce to us their own
flatterers and old story writers, who both in those matters and others disagree
among themselves. But who are these that the Souls of so many thousands should
be grounded upon their word? to speak nothing of the fables that is found in
them, and of the small respect that the Church of Rome carries to them, when
they seem to make any thing against them. Therefore I say again, let them
produce divine warrant out of the Scripture, or else let me be justified, who
after the trial of their falsehood and deceat, have departed from them as
seducers, who when J followed their grounds to the uttermost, could give me no
warrant, for the grounds whereon all their Religion stands, but such as are
taken from behind the Bible from lying men's words and forged histories,
supposititous treatises of the favorites of Rome, and helpers up of their
monstrous head the Pope, above the Church: either let them prove these prime
Pillars of their Religion, or else let all Catholics who in their heart would
feign be at Christ forsake their seducers as J have done upon just grounds*
But because it is impossible for the^ to prove S. Peter proper Bishop of Rome
from Scripture, far less that all the Popes of Rome since the Apostles time
were as infalliblie assisted with the holy Spirit and set up in the same
Apostolic authority that he had, J will say something against these for such
as feign would know the right, to think upon, till they prove the same
grounds out of Scripture. The Scripture gives great probability that Peter
was not in Rome at all, far less to fix his Episcopal Chair there: For
first, before Paul did write to the Romans, Peter was not at Rome far less
Bishop of Rome: for then Paul should have made some mention of him, confirmed
his doctrine, commended his labor, and saluted him among the first, but this
he does not. Secondly, Christianity would not have been so uncouth to the
Jews at Rome who desired to hear of it by Act 28 22. 2 Timothy 4 16.
Paul as a novelty, if Peter had been there before Paul came to be prisoner.
Thirdly, when Paul was arraigned before Caesar, all forsook him. Therefore
Peter was not there: except they will lay a second denial of Christ upon him*
Jn all his Epistles written when he was prisoner at Rome, he tells who were his
helpers, among whom Peter is never mentioned. Last of all it is written how
Peter Gal. 2. 7. 8. 9.
preached among the circumcision and prospered in the Gospel, and Paul
preached among the Gentiles and prospered. Then how Peter and Paul with some
others made a covenant that Paul should preach to the Gentiles, and Peter to
the circumcision, that is, that Saint Paul should exercise his Apostolic
office, especially among the Gentiles, and Peter his among the Jews. From
hence I reason, if Peter had either been, or purposed to have been Bishop of
Rome, he would not have made that paction, that Paul should preach to the
Gentiles, of whom, the Romans were a part, and taken himself to the Jews for
his lot. But that he did make this Paction or covenant is evident out of the
place cited: therefore neither was Peter Bishop of Rome, nor purposed to be
Bishop of it: if they say he was Bishop before this Covenant, then he forsook
his Bishopric; if they say after, then he broke his Covenant, and changed
his mind, and did contrare to his purpose. He that considers the nature of the
Apostleship, and of a Bishopric properly taken, will see that this ground of
theirs is a fiction, for to make an Apostle proper Bishop of any Town, is to
digraduate him from his Apostolic office, as far, as to make the Pope of Rome
Parish Priest in a landward Village. Lastly it wants not a mystery that they
can not make out the supputation of these years which their common opinion
ascribes to Peter's bishoping at Rome: as likewise they can not reconcile the
different opinions anent Peter's immediate successors whether it was Linus,
Clemens, or Cletus: A wonder it is that the fastening of the body of popedom
to Saint Peter should be so uncertain: but the truth is, that God hereby would
declare to these who are not blinded, that the mystery of iniquity lurketh
under these, and the like mists: This for Peter's not being at Rome. Now that
the Pope is not lawful successor to Peter in his Apostolic office, J clear
it thus, he has neither Apostolic office, nor Apostolic qualification, nor
Apostolic calling and entry to the office he pretends. Therefore he cannot
be either lawful successor to Peter or any of the Apostles in that
Apostolic charge. The office of Peter and others the Apostles, was, to go
and teach, and baptize all Nations; that is, in their own proper person, to
go from place to place, by preaching to plant Churches and to establish them.
But the Popes of Rome stays in their palaces, and neither teaches, nor
baptizes. Therefore in their office they are not their successors. Secondly,
Peter and others Apostles were immediately called, and entered into their office
by Jesus Christ himself: but the Popes are chosen by their own Creaturs, the
Cardinals, who neither have their own office of God, nor power of God to give
such office to the Pope. Thirdly, Peter and other Apostles were authorized to
write canonical Scripture, and were endued with the gift of miracles, God
testifieing to the World his extraordinar Commission given to them: so are not
the Popes qualified: therefore they are not Peter's successors. Thus I have
shown that one of the two greatest pillars of Popery stands upon the sand.

CHAP. 7.
That this rotten and falling pillar of the Popes supremacy may be
maintained, they leave no humane policy vn-attempted.

THe verity of this, first is clear by the testimony of their Popes and
Cardinals, who for the most part are of noble birth in this World, the
second or third sons of Princes, and great men in Italy, Spain, Germany
and other parts where the Romish Religion has place, by whose Kindred,
friendship and Alliance, the Pope and Popedom is strengthened in all places.
Next for every Nation, among the rest for Scotland, England and Ireland, there
are appointed Cardinals protectors, as they call them, at Rome, and men who
have Church offices and honor at Rome to allure and draw in by all their moyen
whom they can; specially such as out of curiosity in traueling do resort
thither; and lands and rents in and about Rome, besides their purchase, which
is, often more than their set Rent, are not deficient. Then there are Cardinals
sent forth from the court of Rome into all Cuntries where Popedom has place,
to see to the standing of the Popes grandour, and that obedience be given to
his Holiness, as they say, euerywhere. Under them in every Cuntrie where
Romish Religion has place, are Primates, Abbots, Metropolitanes, Suffraganes,
with many other their attendans, etc. unto whom euerie-where large Rents of the
Churchliving, and casualities and commodities do appertain, all these by
their whole strength, study to uphold the Popes grandeur. Under these again
are exceeding many ordouts of Monks, of Friars of diverse colors or habits,
Dominicanes or Iacobines, Augustines, Benedictines, Franciscans, Capucians,
Gray Friars, Recollects, Carthusians, Carms, Minims, and Jesuits etc. hudge
number of all these of whom some live by set Rents, some go a begging, some
live on their purchase as they best may all these beside their proper motives
to advance the Sea of Rome are solemnly sworn to that effect, that they shall
maintain, defend and do their uttermost for the honor welfare and grandour,
of their holy Father the Pope. Besides these they have all the common people
tied unto them by bands, not laid upon their bodies, but upon their Souls, by
their doctrine of auriculare confession, whereby under pain of not being
forgiven their sins, and eternal condemnation, they make them reveal not
only their secreet actual turpitude (whereupon what abuse follows J need not
insist) but also their purposes and intentions which they have had to sin,
and in special if they be privy to any thing against the Church of Rome
their holy mother; by which means they not only bring peoples minds in a
servile subjection to themselves (for none can have more Commandment over one
than their Father confessor) but also by their intelligencing this way, make
the Pope their Monarch dreadful to all Kings of the Earth, for he will do
more by a side Cloak and a sharp knife in one hour, than the mightiest Prince
in the Earth will do by forty thousand armed men in a long time: yet he
should do less harm if he were less dred: for when men are more feared to
grieve the Pope than God, what wonder the Lord let him be a scourge to them?
This their strong sort of Government, (more wittily devised than ever the old
Senate disposed the ruling of the conquered Provinces, or conquering of new)
they second with the extreme show and external luster of holiness and
Religion. For the multitude of Religious Orders, with houses and Closters and
persons in them, with the pretense of their single and chaste life, the
multitude of Religious exercises, Canonicke hours, fastes, Feasts, holy
days, the multitude of Altars, Jmages, and rich Ornaments of their Churches,
the multitude of all sort of Ceremonies, that may carry appearance of
Divinity. The multitude of poor people enduring penance, going in
Pilgrimage, the wonderful mercilesnesse of poor tormented consciences
scourging themselves openly in their streets with their faces covered, at the
direction sometimes of their confessor, sometimes voluntarlie, supposing this
way to do away their sins, and pacify Gods wrath, and their own perplexed
conscience, together with the profession of the common grounds of
Christianity, which Papists makes show of, so astonishes the minds of the
simple people, so rauishes and amazes ignorant on-lookers, so inchants and so
bewitches the multitude, that they cannot think but God will be as well
pleased with such follies, as they are themselves, not knowing what is pleasant
to him by his own Word, or that willworship, though never so specious, is
abominable to him. Then to back and beamfill all, comes in their seminary
Priests, and preaching Friars, and the late ordour of the Jesuits, by all their
powerful persuasion to press the receiving of the grounds of Roman Religion
upon men, and by a show of Philosophy, and the Wisdom of this World that
comes to naught, and the opposition of science falsely so called, (the
instruments whereby Satan opposed the Apostles of old) they strive to make all
seem good that the Roman Church does, and that all is evil that they do
not. But where shall all the riches be gotten to uphold such a stately
Monarchy as this, and so many servants of that state? for answer, they have
so many points of gain full doctrine, as first of the merit of good works, and
supererogation of the merits of Saints, which furnishes the treasure of the
Church of Rome, among which good works, especially Alms, this must be held
for a principle, that those who have wealth cannot do a more meritorious work
to purchase heaven by, than by largely bestowing upon religious men and their
maintenance. Secondly the Doctrine of penance and of indulgence, and
satisfaction; which sometime rendered the Sea of Rome, a great deal more than
now it does, and yet brings hudge moneys to that Sea. Thirdly, the doctrine
of purgatory nothing inferior to any of the former: for these who could not
be enduced to give the^ any thing largely in the time of their life, at the
time of their death for fear of Purgatory, to the end that they may win out of
Purgatory fire soon, by the virtue of Soul masses, and religious men's
devotio^, will be willing to mortify or leave in Legacy what their
Fatherconfessor thinks expedient, and that of the readiest. Fourthlie, the
strait urging the thre-fold vow of single life, poverty, Canonical
obedience, upon all them whom they can persuade to rander themself religious.
For by this means the several Religious ordours, but especially the Jesuits,
if they can by any means persuade a man of wealth, or a rich burges heir, a
Noble man's son, or an heritour of Lands, (as they persuade too too many to be
of their ordours,) then he renounces all his means to be disposed upon, by
the superior of the ordour; and he himself with the rest professes poverty,
and lives upon the common Purse, or his purchase if he be sent out or employed
in service. These, and many more means unsearchable, they have of drawing in
Rents and moyons to themself, beside offerings to Altars, extraordinary mass.
Casualitie at burials, and such lik. In all which things and sindrie other
points both of practice and doctrine, they will be sparing in any part, where
they are seeking to make conquest, as in Scotland, or England or Ireland, for
fear to lose their prey; but when and where they are settled any man that
trauells, if he please may try the truth, whether it be not as J say and
more: for I will be sparing to speak all, lest I should see me to tax
particular persons, rather than to seek the furtherance of the true and
disgrace of counterfeit Religion.

CHAP. 8.
That the Scriptures imperfection and obscurity is wrongfully alleged by
Papists.

THus having at length discovered the main pillar of Popedom with some of
their humane policies for upholding the same, I will speak shortly a word or
two against the imperfection and obscurity which they allege of the
Scripture. This saying is so blasphen ous against God the author of the
Scripture, Let the Lord 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. Ioh 5. 39.
answer for himself. By his Apostle All Scripture is given by divine
inspiration etc. That the man of God may be made perfect thoroughly furnished
unto all good works. And by his son who has given Commandment to those who
thinks to have eternal life to search the Scriptures. Jf thou will obey this
command, constantly praying to God for knowledge daily: the Lord shall show
thee in reading of it that they are his enemies who have so disgraced his
writings. wherefore I would persuade young Scholars, and others of young
years, to drink in the knowledge of the Scriptures and never to quite the
light thereof, which the Lord has appointed to direct us. We have also a more
sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do 2, Pet. 1. 19.
well that ye take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place. etc.
Next when doubts of Religion are casten in their mind, the not running to God
by Prayer, as the fountain of Religion, and to such Godly and truly learned
men, who are content that all they say, be examined according to the
Scripture, is a special cause of provocation of God, to give them over to
believe lies, who thus despysing the right means, and love of the truth, will
not go to law and testimonies. Isaiah. 8. 20, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Romans 1. 21.
as God directs them. But gives ear to seducing Spirits, and doctrine of
Devils, as the Apostle calls them. Further, when men knows God, and
glorifies him not as God, they become vain in their own imagination, and
their foolish hearts are darkened in Gods justice, as is said of the Gentiles.
If thou will not obey this forsaid command and counsel, it is* as needless to
dispute this question further before thee, as to dispute what taste the honey
or the honey comb has with them, that never tasted thereof, for fear it
poison them. And this much for the first part, I promised to speak, which was
of their Religion in general.

CHAP. 9.
No certainty to have the true Christ, or to be free from Idolatry of a
false Christ in the Mass.

Follows hear the next point, whereof J promised to speak, to wit, of the
Mass: but I shall shall insist most upon that gross here sie of
transubstantiation. For upholding whereof their special ground is the words of
the institution; This is my body: which never can enforce transubstantiation,
for first Bellarmine in his third book of the Eucharist, Secundo dicit chap. 23
etc. Declares that Scotus says, there is no place of Scripture so plain,
that compelles evidently to admit transubstantitaion, without the declaration
of the Church. And Bellarmine himself acknowledges, that not altogether to be
improbable. Next, they aggrie not them selves upon the exposition of these
words, so that they cannot condescend upon the very first word HOC, this, as
Bellarmine acknowledges of the Eucharist. Where refusing the opinion of other
Catholics, he takes him to this interpretation that HOC, This, signifies,
sub his speciebus contentum, contained under these speces, which indeed is an
uncouth acception of the word, such as is not to be found in any author
either divine or hu mane; and yet it makes nothing to the purpose: forit may
ever be demanded, what is that which is Sub his speciebus, under these speces:
for that must be either the bread, or the body of Christ: if they understand
the body of Christ, then, the meaning in their exposition is, the body of
Christ is the body of Christ; Which neither agries with Christ's purpose, nor
yet proves their purpose, for the body of Christ may be the body of Christ,
and yet no change made of the bread in the substance of Christ's body. And by,
This, if they understand bread, then the force of the words will be, This
breadis Christ's body: But neither will this prove their purpose, because it is
not said, the substance of this Bread, is changed in the substance of Christ's
body, as they expone it, But only This is my body, which no more can infer
the change of substance in substance, then these words which he said I am
the true vine, can infer a substantial change of himself Ioh. 15. 1. 5. 1.
Cor. 11. 25.
in a vine tree, or these words, which he said in the same Supper, as the
Apostle Paul shows, This cup is the new Testament, can enforce either the
change of the substance of the cup, or of the vine in the cup in a Testament.
So I could find no warrant out of Christ's words for transubstantiation, J
might well take their word for it in stead of Christ's.

Next, their doctrine could give me no infallible certainty that I should be
free from worshipping an J doll, and the fantasy of my own brain in stead of
Christ, when J came to the Mass: for their doctrine is, except the Priest have
a special intention to consecrate, albeit he say Mass, that no
transubstantiation will follow, and so all that are present at the Mass, are
deceived, as they grant. Now what can any man have but a probable conjecture or
charitable opinion, or strong apprehension of another man's intention,
infallible certainty can he not have: And I in special, who knew certainly
some of these Priests who were chosen, and sent out by their superiors to
propagate the Romish Religion, subject to as gross faults in their life, for
drunkenness, and sundry other vices, as other sinful Laics, as they call
them: and yet part of them said Mass many a time, both near hand, and further
off: how could I then but be suspense about their intention, and how could J
but doubt whether God would be pleased at such men's intentions to change bread
in Christ's body, and to put Christ in their hands, and mouths, and to allow
them to be Priests, to offer the Son of God his body in a sacrifice to the
Father. J know what they use to answer in such cases, that the Peoples
worshipping of a supposed transubstantiat hostie were but material Jdolatrie,
because their purpose was to worship the true Christ, when they worshipped only
bread, and the Idol of their own imagination. But alace, this is a poor
shift, and no better than if one should comfort a woman who had lain with
another besides her husband, saying to her, no matter this adultery of thine
is but material only, and not formal; because thy purpose was to give thy
body to thy husband, and no other. For the Scripture compares Idolatry Jeremy
3. 1. 2.
and adultery together very often.

Thirdly, I found their transubstantiation builded upon a pretense of making
men certain of their communion and conjunction with Christ: which conjunction
if it may be sure without a corporal presence of his body, their
transubstantiation is a needless fiction.

Now I understand certainly that, howsoever the Papists do traduce Ministers,
as if they fed people with signs and shadows, yet they believe and teach,
that they are made sure of Jesus our Lord. First by his covenant and promise,
as these that are espoused, being faithful one to another, are made sure one
of another before their compleet marriage, by mutual affection of heart,
consent and covenant, and mutual promise: for which cause, the spouse in the
Canticles many a year before Christ's incarnation, said, My beloved is mine,
and I am Cant. 2. 16.
his. Next they believe and teach that they are made sure of Christ, by his
own great Seals annexed to his covenant, the two Sacraments, Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, which the Lord has ordained to be the pawns, pledges and
Seals of himself his gifts, and his graces bestowed upon them, and so are made
sure of Christ, and his grace for their Salvation, as men are made sure of the
Kings gift when they have his royal donation, and his great Seals annexed
thereto: for which cause, When our Lord had given the Sacraments to his
disciples, he says, J dispone or appoint a Kingdom unto Luke 22. 9,
you; because he had given them the Seals of donation thereof presently
before. Thirdly, they teach that they are made sure of Christ, by the Spirit
of Christ, whom Christ promises, and gives to every one that believes in him,
in such sort that he who has not Romans 8. 9
the Spirit of Christ is none of his. By which Spirit Christ is joined to
them, and they to Christ, as members of one body are joined to the head, and
quickened by one Spirit: for which cause of Christ it is said that he dwells in
us, and we in him, he is the head, and we Ephesians. 3. 17, 4. 16
are the members of his mystical body. By this threefold certainty they
teach and believe that they are made sure of Christ in the Sacrament, for
performance whereof they show that there is no necessity of corporal presence.
First, because these means of certainty were appointed of Christ to supplee
his corporal absence till his second coming again. Secondly, because the
Son of God is more able after this manner from Heaven to communicate himself
to us on Earth then the Sun that shines daily is able from Heaven to give light
and heat to us on Earth, without descending corporally to us. Then for the
exposition of the words of the Sacrament This is my body, they profess to
expone them as Saint Paul expones them, who says, that the bread which we
break is the communion of the body of 1 Cor. 10 16. 1 Cor. 11 25.
Jesus, the cup which we bless is the Communion of the blood of Christ, and
as Christ speaking of the cup it must be exponed: This cup is the new Testament
or covenant in my blood, and according to the usual form of the Scripture
language concerning Sacraments, where the name of the gift is given to the
Seal to assure them who faithully receive the one, that they are made sure of
the other; or the name of a mercy bestowed is given to the memorial of it, to
make the acknowledgment of that mercy more fresh and lively. Seeing that
therefore J could find for the Romish doctrine of transubstantiation no warrant
of the Lords word, and by that doctrine, no ground of infallible certainty to
free me from Idolatry; but on the contrare grounds of assurance, that it
could not be that God would expose his Son any more to personal suffering
of such indignities as is done him in the Mass; Let any man judge whether I
had reason to suit to be received to the communion with him, according to the
warrant of his own word, and be free for ever from all peril of that gross
Idolatry.

CHAP. 10.
The Mass draws away from Christ's rule of the Sacrament and defaces his
institution.

THe next reason why J call the Mass an error, is because it does lead men
away from the right rule of the Sacrament to follow men's devices, and forged
mystical rites of men's appoyntments, whereof the Lord has pronounced in
general: In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine the precepts of
men: Which howsoever they be in estimation among men, yet are abominable
before God: for our Lord Jesus, being to leave the World in regard of his
corporal presence, thought good to appoint a holy Supper wherein he will have
his bodily sufferings, and bloodshed and death represented and brought to
fresh remembrance by the breaking of bread and wine powered out in a cup; and
the Souls of his faithful ones fed and comforted in the assurance that his
body was broken for them, and his blood shed for the remission of their sins,
by eating of the bread broken, and drinking of the wine powered in the cup;
which eating and drinking should be to them a pledge and seal of their
spiritual conjunction with CHRIST, and partaking of his life as certainly
wrought by his spirit, as if these elements which they did eat and drink were
joined with their bodies. Then which ordinance of our Lord nothing can be more
sweet to a Soul that considers his purpose therein: and therefore he has
commanded not his Ministers only, but his whole Church on Earth to do this in
remembrance of him following his example as he has caused set down by his
penmen in his Testament to be followed till his second coming again. But
the Church of Rome as her defection has grown piece and piece, has so far
departed from the rule, that scarsly now in their Mass can the footsteps of
Christ's ordinance be seen: for under pretense that they are not tied to follow
these circumstances which were proper to the first Supper, such as are the
time, after Supper; the place, an upper Chamber; the number of persons, eleven
or twelve; the sex, men only and not women: which any man may perceive to be
proper to that first time, and not belonging to the nature of the Sacrament: if
these circumstances were urged universally they should mar and hinder that
action, and the comfort of the communicants, women being secluded, the night
taking when the day was free, a chamber taking wherein all the Church could not
assemble, and twelve only admitted, where forty twelues were prepared and
waiting on: under pretense, I say, of not being tied to these four
circumstances, when they may be prejudicial to the action, they have taken
liberty to alter the substance, and sacramental rites of this Supper left to
be imitate by all Christ's Churches till his second coming again: for as though
Christ's ordinance had been too base and simple, they have devised to cloth
their Priests in brodering of silk and silver and gold, and to make sumptuous
Mass clothes to set out their work with all: As if Christ his ceremonies had
been of small signification, they have casten them by, and appointed new ones
of their own* making mystical significations of their own devising, As if
the Apostle Paul had superfluously from Christ's mouth given commandment to the
common people to drink of the cup, they have cut off the half of the peoples
comfort, and witholden the cup from them: As if the Lord had not done wisely in
using plain language to his disciples, such as they understood, they have
rolled up all in an uncouth language commanding that Mass should only be said
in Latin: As if our Lord had not well considered, what belongs to the
holiness of such a work, in taking such bread as was usual in the Land, and
as the Master of the house laid down before him to Supper, they have made a
round Mass bread, the quantity of twelvepence, or sixpence, and as thin as
they can cause it stick together, with a stamped crucifixe on the one side of
it for the purpose, they have turned the communion of a number, to the Priests
drinking and eating alone, the Lords table to a stone Altar, the memorial of
his death to an imaginary corporal presence; the seal of Gods giving of
Christ unto men, into men's offering up of Christ to God, Gods Sacrament, into
man's sacrificing of the son of God to the Father; in a word they have turned
Christ's holy Supper in the Popes Mass, and so, what by adding, what by
pairing, what by altering and chopping and changing they have mutilated
deformed and defaced Gods ordinance, falsified King Jesus his great seal and
corrupted his testament, that he who is partaker of the Mass, thinking to get
Gods blessing by it, casts himself in danger of Gods curse, for being guilty
of so manifold dishonoring of the son of God.

CHAP. 11.
The Mass draws men from the true Christ, to adore and believe in a false
Christ.

THe third reason why J call the Mass, and their pretended transubstantiation
in it an error, is this. Because it has drawn me and does draw all that
believes it, from the true Christ Jesus described in the holy Scripture to a
false Christ forged in their fantasy and brains of men, given over for the
time to the spirit of delusion, in all things contrare to the true Christ our
Savior the son of God: for the true Christ is so described to us in holy
Scripture, that if an Apostle or Angel from Heaven teach another Gospel,
especially Gal. 1, 8.
about the person of Jesus Christ, let him be accursed, as the Apostle says.
Well, then the Scripture gives us to understand, that the true Christ has
assumed not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 14 16.
even our nature of the virgin Mary, Partaker of flesh and blood, and in
substance and properties like to us in all things, except sin, who himself
has given us warrant to account of any obtruded in his name, as a false
Christ. But the doctrine of the Mass draws us to a pretended Christ, the
substance of whose body is made of the substance of bread, changed by the
force of five latin words, said by a Romish Priest, Hoc est enim corpus meum.

Secondly the true Christ his body is sensible, might be seen, touched,
handled and felt, as sensibly as any man's body, not only before his death, when
he bare our infirmity, but also after his resurrection, when he had laid
down our infirmities: made up of flesh and bones, the very same that hang
upon the cross, fastened with nails as himself testifies. Behold my hands and
my feet that it Luc. 24. 39.
is I my self, handle me and see me, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as
ye see me to have, says he, wherein he gives us all to understand that he
will not have us to think that he has another body or substance now after his
resurrection, than he had before his crucifying. Next to prove the verity of
his real and corporal presence he appeals to the true testimony of all their
senses, being contented that they should not esteem him bodily present, except
they saw and felt him to have flesh and bones, but the Doctors of the Mass
teach men to believe in, and to adore a Christ, whose body is borne up betwixt
the Priests finger and his thumb, which neither can be seen nor felt, nor any
ways is sensible, a false Christ who may not abide the proof and rule which
the true Christ has set down in his word to try the truth of his body and
bodily presence by.

Thirdly, the true Christ grew up from a child to the ordinary stature of men
before his death, and being dead his body took up proportional rowm in the
Sepulcher, so that when he was now risen, the Linnings wherein his body was
wrapped were found in the sepulcher, some of them at the part where his feet
lay, and some at the part where his head lay, and after his resurrection he
showed his hands and feet in the own due proportion distant one from another
in place; but the Papists are made to worship a Christ in the Mass, whose head
and feet and all the parts of his body compleet, are not only in the bounds
of their paper-thin hostie, but in every preene point rowme of the same, for
this is their express doctrine that, Corpus Christi est totum in tota hostia,
and totum in quolibet puncto, that the body of Christ is whole in the whole
hostie, and whole in every point or part thereof.

Fourthlie, the true Christ will not have us to imagine of his body, that ever
it was or shall be in many places at one time, for when Joseph and his mother
sought him three days, they could not find him till they came to the very
place where only he was in the Temple disputing with the doctors, when he was
upon the mount he was not bodily any where else, when he was on this side of
the Sea, he was not on that side, when he was in the wilderness, pinnacle of
the Temple, in the ship, in the house, there he was and no where else, when he
was in the grave his body was not risen; and when he rose the Angel says of
the grave he is not here, he is risen behold the place where the Lord lay,
when he was with his disciples, he says himself he was not ascended, when
he ascended, he left his disciples in regard of his bodily presence, not to
come again in bodily presence until he came to take them to that place which
he went to prepare for them, but these doctors tell us that their Christ in
whom they believe, and whom they command to be worshipped has a body which at
an instant and point of time is in an hundredth places within a Church, and in
five hundredth places of the same Church is not, in a word has a body which is
in as many consecrated hosties as are in the World at one time though there
will be thousands daily and which body is in no other place or space betwixt
the hosties, and yet will avow that such a body is but one single, and the same
body undivided, which was borne of the Virgin, and hang upon the cross, so
peart are they to hold up their false Christ by calling him the true, when he
has nothing of this truth, that is in our Lord.

Fifthly, the true Christ once died from his giving up the ghost upon the
cross until his resurrection, but after that he dies no more, but is alive
for evermore; he suffers no more bodily, his blood is shed no more, his soul
no more severed from his body, this is the Christ which the Scripture teaches
us to believe into, and to worship: but the Popish doctrine draws these silly
souls that believes them, to believe and adore such a Christ whose very
substantial body is bathed and swimmes in his own natural and true blood
daily: for when the Priest consecrateth the chalice then the wine, as they say,
is turned substantially in blood, as certainly and really as Christ changed
water into wine. Now when the hostie is broken, and a part thereof put in the
consecrate chalice, among the very blood as they teach, which hostie and every
part thereof, as they say, does contain the very body of Jesus, do I speak
any thing but according to their doctrine, when I say that, that Christ of
theirs swimmes daily in his own blood, incace they abide at their doctrine,
teaching that Christ's words in the Sacrament, are taken literally: for these
words This is my body, taking the words literally, must have another sense
than these words* This is my blood, and so the words being taken literally,
as they pretend, the hostie being put in the cup, the body is put in the blood.

Sixthly, the true and living Christ, where he is bodily present, can walk
alone, he needs not to be lifted, nor to be borne, or carried in men's hands,
he is not feared to fall, nor that any evil befall him. But the Romish
Doctors, in effect (J must now say with grief, deceauers) draw the people to
adore for their Lord and Savior, a Christ of the Priests making in the Mass,
who is so weak, that he can not rise till he be lifted, he can not walk
but must be carried, and when he is mounted up in his makers hand, except his
creator and maker hold him up, or if the Priest himself snapper and fall at a
procession, or in a journey, then this Christ goes to the ground, and his
maker both, and there he lies, though it were in a mire, till he be lifted
again. What care have J seen taken to lift this Christ attentively, and to
lay him down again softly, for fear of breaking of him? and if he be not
eaten presently, but must be kept to be adored upon the Altar, some days
after, then every night at even he is put in ward, and kept fast under lock
and key ordinarily, lest while his maker and preserver is sleeping the myce or
the ratts, whom the World can not persuade, but the hostie is very bread
indeed, should carry him away, and use some short improbation against this
their transubstantiation: this can not be but a matter of laughter to those
who are fred from the Romish yock, but alace for pity of the Souls that
believes all is well. I know they gull the people by telling them that Christ
John. 20. 26.
came in to his Disciples the door being shut. And that this could not be
but by rarifying his own substance to such subtilitie that it might go
through the door: but poor Souls that hears this, they must not dispute
nor reply, but believe as the Church believes. If they would reply it were
greater reason that the door should yield to Christ then he to it, and that
it were as easy for him to come in the chamber and the door shut, before and
after he came in, keeping still his bodily substance in the own natural
constitution, as it was to Peter to come through the prison, and through the
iron gate, which was shut before and after he came Act. 12 10.
out, but opened when he went through: And no farther can this text afford
them: if any (J say) would replye after this manner this pretext would not save
them. They please the people another way also (for fear that this might be
answered) by distinction of a glorified body and unglorified, for taking away
whereof I say. Seventhly, the true Christ his body is glorified with such a
glory as does not abolish the substantial properties of his body, but only
makes the same more illustrious and conspicuous: whereof himself gave a proof
in his transfiguration, when he clothed himself with the glory of the only
begotten son of God for a while: at which time his glory made not his body to
disappeare, but to appear more conspicuously than before. Another proof Act.
9. 3. and 26. 13.
he gave of this at the conversion of Paul when from Heaven there shined a
light from him (while he spoke down to Saul) brighter than the Sun at noone
day. and to put us out of doubt in this matter, the same Apostle Philip. 3. 21.
says that Christ shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his own
glorious body. Wherein he lets us understand, first, that our Lord still
retains the same true body which he assumed, and that his body is glorious
and bewtifull. Next, he shows that Christ Jesus has such a body now in
Heaven as we shall have in our own degree when the resurrection comes: but
when the resurrection comes our bodies flesh and bones will rise and be
glorified. Therefore our Lord has such a body in his own degree of flesh and
bones glorified: from which glory now his body can not be severed. But that
Christ which is made in the Mass, has a body no ways glorious nor
conspicuous, but altogether ignominious, and subject to more personal
disgraces, then when he suffered at Jerusalem; as that which is said already
may clear.

Eighthly, and last of all (to be short) the true Christ has forwarned us not
to believe any such Christ after his ascension as men shall point out on the
Earth, saying of Mat. 24 23.
him Lo here, lo there is Christ, For there shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, Math.
so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. Behold I have
told you before, Wherefore if they shall say 24.
to you, behold he is in the desert, go not forth, behold he is 25.
in the secreete place, go not forth. For as the lightning comes 26.
out of the East, and shines to the West, so shall also the 27.
coming of the son of man be. And again by his Apostle Colos. 3* 1. 2.
declares himself only to be fund in Heaven for his bodily presence,
discharging us to set our affection upon any thing on earth. But the Christ in
who^ the Papists Priests and doctors teaches people to believe as their God,
and to worship as their Savior, and on who^ they cause them set their
affection, is corporally present in the earth, and his body on the earth all
the days of the year: of whom my ears have heard say times out of number,
lo here, lo there, lo yonder our Lord and Savior coming through the
street, let us go and convoy him; and in the Mass the Priest lifts him up,
and after puts him in the peoples mouth, and he goes over the throat. What
becomes of him then ye will say? hear what the true Christ says Perceive you
not that whatsoever enters into the Math: 15. 17,
mouth goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught? O how far then
are the people deceived! First, they believe they have among their hands the
true Christ, and do worship him, when they worship only an Idol and a false
Christ. Next, they believe that howeuer the matter be, that their intention to
serve the true Christ will save them from the sin, and the Judgment due to
such a sin, and then they are again deceived: for if good intentions could
have any weight with God where the work is not warrantable, then these men
should go free, who murder the Prophets and servants of Jesus, thinking they
do God good service; of who^ Christ speaks Ioh. 16. 2.
Then the Jews should go free, who believed when they were pleading against
Christ and dishonouring him, that they were friends to the promised Messiah.
The Galatians believed that they held the true Christ when they joined
justification by works and faith together, and yet the Apostle tells them that
if they held Christ so, Christ should not profit them. It was a misconceaued
Christ Gal. 5. 2.
that deceived the* Heretics of old, for every heretic pretended an
intention to honor the true Christ, and it is a false Christ that deceaueth
the Jews, who pretend that they are keeping their faith and worship to the
true Messiah promised, but have forged in their own brain one altogether
different from the true, and yet none of all these have ever conceived a
Christ, more contrary to the true Christ, then is this forged Christ in the
Mass. without warrant as is said of Scripture, and contrare to the tenet of
antiquity, howeuer the Priests and Jesuits gull their auditors with pretense
of the same. For Tertullian says Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis
lib. 4. ad versus Marcionem cap. 40.
corpus suum illud fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis
mei. Christ took bread and gave it to his disciples making it his body, while
he says This is my body, that is, a figure of my body: where ye see that this
Father who lived two hundredth years after Christ does expone these words of the
institution figuratively. And yet Bellarmine is not ashamed to use this
testimony for lib. 3. Eucharistiae cap. 20.
proouing transubstantiation, but does bewray herein his fraud and deceitful
handling of the Fathers: for alleging this place so directly contrare him, he
leaves out the Fathers gloss, that is, a figure of my body. And Augustine is
so clear in this matter, that it is a wonder that any man should oppose him
for giving a rule how to know when the words of holy Scripture are to be taken
figuratively, and when properly he says thus, Si preceptiua loquutio est, aut
flagitium aut facinus vetans, aut lib* 3. (...) doctrina christiana cap. 16
utilitatem, aut beneficentiam iubens, non est figurata, si autem flagitium aut
facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem, aut been ficentiam vetare figurata est:
nisi manducaueritis (inquit) carnem filii hominis, and sanguine^ biberitis non
habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere, figura est
ergo. If the precept forbid any crime or wicked deed, or command any profit
or beneficence then is it not figurative: but if it seem to command any crime
or wicked deed, or to forbid any profit or beneficence it is figurative, then
does he give for instance to this rule these words of our Savior Except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood ye have no life in you,
These words says he seem to command some crime and wicked deed; therefore
they are figurative. Many other passages of Fathers J might cite, but I fear
to be too tedious, neither need J to insist much on Fathers seeing the very
Canon of the Mass does overthrow transubstantiation. For after the words of
consecration: the Priest offering Jesus Christ to God, prays after this
manner. Supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu respic^re digneris sicuti accepta
babere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abell. On which things may it please
thee to look with a good and favorable countenance, and to accept of them, as
thou did accept of the presents of Abell thy righteous servant. Any man may
easily perceive, that if there were nothing there but Christ as they affirm,
the Priest durst never take upon him to be a intercessour betwixt the Father
and the son* as though the son had lost the favor of his Father, for whose
only sake we all are received in favor.

And since J have now made mention of the Mass, J can not conceal what
secreete reluctation was ever in my mind, even when J was most bewitched with
the inchauntments of Popery, against their propitiatory sacrifice daily
offered up in the Mass, which so flatly contradicts the words of Scripture
With an offering has he reconciled Heb. 10. 14. Verse. 10.
for ever them that are sanctified. And to exclude reiteration the Scripture
says We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made.
And most clearly As it is appointed for every man once to die etc. Neither Heb.
9, 27. 28.
will the distinction of a bloody and unbloody sacrifice satisfy this passage,
seeing that the Apostle shows that as a man dies but once, so Christ is
offered but once. How ridiculous a thing should it be for one to say, that a
man can die but once a bloody death, but he can die oftener an unbloody death?
and if this distinction of theirs can not hold in the death of man, neither can
it in the offering of the Lord Jesus. Seeing the Scripture precisly compares
them in number that they are both but once. Yea, in ^^presse words of that
same chapter the Scripture excluds this distinction while it says Without
shedding Ver. 22.
of blood there is no remission of sins. If then the Mass be an unbloody
sacrifice, by it there is no remission of sins. And lest this should be eluded
by the typical sacrifices of old, the Apostle speaks in the present time etc.
And this much concerning their Mass, which was the second part whereof I
promised to speak.

CHAP. 12.
Of Merits.

Follows here the third part whereof J promised to speak, which contains some
of their common absurdities, and first of Merits: for the mixture of our
works, and the works of Christ Jesus is intolerable and more incompatible than
the mixture of wine and water, for to make up the blood* of their Savior in
the Mass: how can we have good works before we be made good by
regeneration? seeing an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. Yea, they
are gone so far on in this mixture, that they exclude Christ's merits
altogether from the formal cause of our justification, and only makes Christ's
righteousness a help whereby we our selves may fully and formally be
justified before God Si quis dixerit homines iustificarivel sola imputatione
iustitiae Canone 10 and 11 sessione 6 Concilii Trident.
Christi, vel sola peccatorum remissione, exclusa gratia and charitate quae in
cordibus eorum per spiritum sanctum diffundatur, atque illis inhaereat, aut
etiam gratiam qua iustificamur esse tantum fauorem Dei, anathema sit. If any
man say that we are formally justified by the righteousness of Christ let him
be accursed. etc. Neither does their doctrine stay here, but proceeds to
works of supererogation, whereby they put God in their debt, and enrich the
Pope by laying of these works of supererogation in his storehouse to be sold
out at his pleasure for moneys. Since these works can be applied to men for
their satisfaction which they have not wrought, wherefore may not the merits of
Christ Jesus be applied to us to our justification? and as sin although inherent
into us, and only imput unto Christ Jesus, who had no inherent sin in him, made
him die the death wherefore may not Christ's righteousness inherent in him and
imput unto us be accepted of God for our justification to life, and that so
much the more because Christ Jesus is our head and cautioner, which the Saints
are not, For he has made him to be sin for us, which 2 Cor. cap 5. verse. 21,
knew no sin etc.

CHAP. 13.
Of taking away the Cup.

TOuching their minching of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Table, and
depriving the People of the one half thereof, contrare to Christ's institution,
who commanded them all to drink of it, is a grievous defrauding of the people
of their due comfort and that by John 6, which they will have spoken of the
Sacrament, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and John. 6.
drink of his blood, ye have no life in you. So to deprive them of the blood
is to deprive them of eternal life. And in the primitive times when
persecution raged in the Church the godly Fathers, never omitted the holy cup
to the people, and that not only because of Christ's divine institution, but
also that they might encourage people to shed their blood cheerfully for him
who had shed his blood for them, and did so friely communicate with them in the
holy cup. Further Christ says it is the cup of the new Testament in his
blood, which he shed for the remission of sins. Then it appears that to
deprive the people of the cup, is as much as to deprive them of the blood of
Christ for the remission of their sins: for in the hostie there is no shedding
of blood, as they themselves confess. As for the custom of the primitive Church,
it is clear in this point neither can they or do they deny it; yet when either
the command of Christ, or practice of the primitive Church seems to cross
their business, they dissalow both him and the ancients, and in open counsel
give a decree to their contrare. The council of Constance holden anno 406,
which was the first council that discharged the cup, as an heresy, toward
the midst of the Canon Concilium Constantinense. 13. sess,
has these words: Although Jesus Christ did institute and administer to his
Disciples this venerable Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine; and
likewise although in the primitive Church this Sacrament was received by the
faithful under both kinds, nevertheless this custom has with reason been
induced that it should be received by those who consecrate under both kynds,
and by the layity under form of bread only etc. And concluds that these that
would maintain the contrare were heretics, where by consequence they make
Christ and the primitive Church heretics, at least in practice, which if J
had not red and considered in their councils, J could not have believed that
men could be so impudent and absurd as to affirm.

CHAP. 14.
Of Images.

HEre J can not pass by their adoration of Jmages 2 book of the images of
Saints chap. 21.
but must give a taste thereof. Their doctrine is of Images that they are not
only relative, as they respect the thing represented, but properly and perse,
by themself, and terminatiuely without respect to the thing represented, as
Bellarmine has expressly: yea, not only with the worship of dulia or service as
they call it (by the which distinction they blind the eyes of the ignorant,
since all religious worship, in whatsoueer degrie belongs properly to God) but
also they teach and affirm that the Images of God, and the cross ought to be
worshipped, with the selfsame supreme worship that is due to God himself,
which they call Latria: as has expressly their 25. ques. 3. arti. in the concl.
4. article
Angelick doctor, in his third part Sic ergo dicendum est etc. and fourth
article in the conclusion Crux Christi etc. which conclusion the foresaid
doctor proves by this, that we give the supreme worship to him, in whom we
put the hope of our safety: but in the cross of Christ (This is the cross of
wood whereon he was nailed) we put our hope of safety. So the Papists object
of faith according to his doctrine, is an Image of stock and stone. And
therefore Suarez says in express terms Per hanc 45. disp. 4. sect.
adorationem, etc. (I shall faithfully translate the words) By this adoration a
man not only professes that which he adoreth to represent God, but also to
be God, and his supreme Lord and Redeemer; otherwise it would not be a true
and supreme worship. The common people their case in this Idolatry is
deplorable; but somewhat more excusable, albeit they be involued in that same
guiltiness, who must believe by an implicit faith, whatsoever their Church
believes: for their great doctors do expressly admonish their Readers, that
their Preachers let not the people understand in their sermons, that this
Sovereign worship of God, should be given to Images, by the principles of the
Roman catholic faith; for it might readily skarre them, and of catholic
Romans make them become Calvinist heretics. See Bellarmine of the Jmages of
Saints at these words Quantum ad etc, 22. chap.
gives the same watchword in the place forsaid. And this 25. ques. 54. dis. 4.
article
because as they both acknowledge in the forsaid places, the common people can
not be capable of these sublime distinctions, whereby the foresaid doctrine must
be maintained: yea, skarsly says Bellarmine, our great doctoures themselves.
Some of them for eschueing the inconvenience of this foresaid doctrine do use
these terms directly and indirectly but any that pleases to examine, at more
length this defense they shall find it indirect enugh to give to the creature
any way a worship due to the Creator. Further for backing of this doctrine
their best reason that I could perceive they ever brought was, their blotting
out of the second command of the Lords Law. for giving and not granting that
the second command were one with the first, yet wherefore do they scrape out so
great a part of that command, if their best defense stood not in cancelling the
Law of God, which is opposite to their adoration of Jmages?

CHAP. 15.
Of their new belief, satisfaction, purgatory.

IN this place their large addition to their belief represents it self to my
mind: as may be seen in the bull of Pope Pitis the 4. concerning the oath taken
of their Churchmen containing their Trent creed wherein beside the Articles of
the Apostles creed, they have engrossed many other Articles of their most
gross and absurd heresies. I can not also omit here their idle repetition
of Prayers, ascrybing merit and satisfaction to the number of them, for I my
self have been enjoined to say such a number of Aues, Pater nosters, by way of
penance, or for the relief of Souls, and no fewer than these that were
enjoined: For they teach that in baptism our sins are forgiven us by the merits
and satisfaction of Christ allanerly, but the sins committed after baptism, be
taken away and expiat by our own satisfactions: but the Apostle says That as
the wage sin is death, so the gift of God is life eternal through Jesus Christ
Romans 6. 23.
our Lord. Heaven then is Gods free gift through Christ and not our deserving.
Neither can it be considered how Christ's obedience is properly a satisfaction,
and yet either requires or admits our satisfaction. Besides their own
extravagant faith, that one drop of Christ's blood is sufficient to save the
whole World, what necessity or place then is for our satisfaction in our
Salvation. They will not receive the Kingdom of Heaven after this manner, but
as a just debt, to the which God of justice is bund and obliged to them, not
only for the merits of Christ, but also for the merits of their own works,
which has an equal worth answerable to the Kingdom of Heaven. J pass by here
their selling of Masses, their baptising of Bells, baptism, being a Sacrament
of the new covenant only, and no ways belonging to senseless creaturs: their
scrotching fire of Purgatory, as hot as hell, wherein the Souls of the godly
dying in the Lord, are tortured before they come to Heaven, till such time as
the punishment due to their venial sin, in that continual torture be ended.
And yet the Scritpure tells us Blessed are the dead that Revel. 14 13.
die in the Lord, for so says the Sprit, they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. Fearful should their rest be, if dieing in the
Lord, with some little thing unsatisfied as they affirm, they should be cast in
the torture as hot as hells fire. And here is to be observed the merciless
dealing of their father the Pope, who having power to relieve souls when he
pleases, yet suffers many thousands to be tortured there still, till he or his
receive money for their deliverance. And thus much shortly for the third part
whereof I promised to speak.

CHAP. 16.
The cunning dealing of Romish Emissaries in seducing and disputing.

NOw being forced here to acknowledge the foresaid false grounds of the Romish
Religion, which in my miscarying J laid down as true, to have been the
beginning of all this mischief; and having my mind ouercharged with the
filthiness and loathsomnes thereof, to testify the unfeigned forsaking of
them, and all the filthynes of their superstition: J must add some things by
way of conclusion for the love I carry to my Country and the truth of that
Religion which is allowed of God, albeit J know it will incense sundry against
me.

I would advertise young Scholars and others, whether at home or abroad, to
be war of the Jesuit his cunning dealing, with other their Emissaries such
as are seminary Priests, Friars etc. whether he come directly to seduce you,
or come occasionally to disput with you. If he have a purpose to seduce you,
he will first make choice of some catholic of your acquaintance, who has
best credit of you; and most respected by you, him he will instruct how to
handle you, and will put his own speeches and arguments in his mouth, if you
hearken and give ear and make hopes you may be theirs, an offer will be made
to you to speak with a Father, or learned man, and so you and and he shall come
to conference. If he can not find a fit person to deal with you, then he
will come openly to you if he be where he may profess himself: if not, he
will come under the habit of a Gentleman or burgess of a Town, or
Countryman, as best fits his purpose; and as it were by occasion falling in
your company, will talk of any purpose till he take you up, and as he has
time to stay or to be with you, so will he work, ordinarily he will blame
all our professors, for few good works and open evil lives of the great many:
this at once he will turn upon the Religion. But stumble not you for this: for
the Religion of the Jews was good when the Prophet complains that Faith and
truth was Psalm. 12.
departed from the children of men. The Lords word which is our Religion,
condemns the sins of professors more than they can condemn the same. They
will object the lives of Ministers, what they please to speak of them, and they
have in readiness some examples and instances in print or writ or in their
memory, but stumble not you at this, for they do injury to the Ministers
when they blame all for the fault of some: and again they do injury to Gods
word, when they prease to blame the truth for the teachers fault. One of the
twelve Apostles was a Devil: what was the Apostles or the Apostleship the
worse? and yet when all is said, if their closters were as open as Ministers
conversation, they should make little talk in this point. They will tell thee of
the ignorance and want of Learning among Ministers, be not you troubled for
this, they are learned enough that know Jesus Christ rightly, and can teach him
soundly, learning is not the glory of our Religion but truth: and yet though I
sometime thought so, and said so as they do, yet I found it otherwise when I
met with the Ministers. Yocke with the Ministers when they will, so far as
J know they will ruse themself little for the want of learning. They will object
they have no warrandable calling, but urge you them to justify the calling of
their chief pillars, Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, whose office and entry in
their office God never ordained in his word. Ministers calling goes not by
succession, but by election. Their office is prescrived in the word, their
entry and qualification: Let every one justify as he is challanged, so much
as may be seen of men is always nearer the rule of the Apostles than any of
their calling. They will object the noveltie of this Religion, and will ask
for succession of Pastors in our Church. But answer you, that they slander you
unjustly for novelty, whose doctrine was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and
recommended to after ages. Where the Catholic Church and true sheep of Christ
who heard his voice and fled sequestrating themselves from strangers were,
there was our Church, particular professors names is no point of salvation.
What manamong ten thousand can show his natural pedigree from the seventh
generation? shall a man be questioned of the truth of his humanity if he cannot
deduce his genealogy from Adam or Noah? Albeit the Protestants can be able to
show continuance of their doctrine by the line, and catalogue of the witnesses
the truth through all ages, from Christ's unto our time. If this objection were
of any worth, we might use it against their Church, and they could not deduce
from Christ or the Apostles time, or a long time after any that ever heard of a
number of the Articles of their Faith. But this is one of their shifts to
dispute about genealogies, and generalities, lest coming to particulars the
strength of our cause and weakness of theirs should appear. They will object
Luther and Calvine, and our first reformers were Papists first: But it makes
not to us, we believe not any point of Religion upon their word, but what we
find aggrieing with Scripture. Again Paul was not the worse Apostle that
sometime he was a Pharisee, but their Religion is so much the worse as such
men and many after them behooued to quite it, or lose their Souls. They will
object diversities of opinions, and divisions, and schisms, but answer you;
that there were divisions in the Churchs of Corinth, Galatia, and other
Apostolic Churches: and yet they were not the less true Churches: let every
Church answer for her self, whether she keep unity with Christ and his
Apostles in her doctrine: for unity without truth is but conspiracy in
error. It is a whorish impudency to object uncleanness to a chaste Matron, they
might remember Christ's aduertisment Hypocrite cast out the beam of thy own
eye first: or the Poets admonition Loripedem rectus derideat. For beside the
bloody schisms of their Popes, and the irreconciliable divisions of their
Doctors, the Jesuits and Dominicans, at this day do jar so hotly concerning
grace and fry will, that their Pope darre not determine the question for fear
he lose one of the parties. Jf they find you ignorant they will cause you
believe that your Ministers teaches such and such heresies, as that they are
enemies to good works* enemies to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints, that
they give liberty to sin, and makes God the author of it, that such a writer
on our Religion has such a blasphemous error in such a book, and another
writer, another blasphemy in another book; Luther says this, and Calvin
says that, and a thousand slanders suchlike. To be short, their whole wits
they will employ to brangle you, in some general, that they may have you at an
vantage, brought over to their grounds, whereof they will make great show and
ostentation, or if they condescend upon a particular, and find you therein
weak, they will shoot at all. But if ye keep the love of the Scriptures, the
Lord shall make you to stand, Great peace have they who Psalm. 119. 165.
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. As for their disputs, they will
make great boast and brag if they see not a learned party: if they find a
learned party, they will take them to discourse if they may: if they must
disput they will keep the former method, that is, stick upon generals, about
the visibilitie of a Church, and notes as they say thereof, whether the true
Church can err, and will hold off whether Rome can err as long as they can:
they will make show to quot councils and Fathers, not because that they can
obtain the victory by them, but because the books are rare, and few are
acquaint with them to know whether they say right or wrong: they will avow
forged distinctions, when they are pressed, and flee to philosophic terms, not
because such refuges will save them, but because by this means they blovv mist
in their eyes that cannot follovv them to their lurking holes: when their
cause is weakest then they grow boldest, and will set a brovv upon their
part, that their countenance may give weight to their vvatter-vversh argument
or answers: when they are like to succumb, they will cry lovvdest, and cast
in a new subject to disput on: ye will not put them to silence, albeit they
know they are overcome For what by shifts, what by subtilities: what by
circumventions, what by apparent verities, they can color their cause, though
never so bad.

It were an endless labor to shovv all their courses and impossible, these may
suffice to give advertisement to you, who may be in danger, that you acquaint
you with the grounds of your own Religion, and diligently read the Scriptures:
that you be not rash to undertake a disput concerning Religion, and lean not
much to your own or others disputation: for in a disput ye will get the two
disputers wits tried, and acquaintance with their own grounds which they
defend, but ye will not so try Religion, it is the studieing of all the
grounds thereof, and trying them by the Scripture must make you sure: when Gods
glory or others edification requires that you disput, do it advisedly, for
they have their set arguments, and their written disputs, carrying about with
them: set the state of the question right, limite thy argument to be brought on
either side to Scripture, or reasons deduced therefrom: not because thou needst
to fear any councils and fathers, but partly because fathers and councills are
but human testimonies, partly because if you go from the Scriptures, ye go
to the long Sands, and the disput will not end shortly, and so he escapes and
his error is not convinced, and the auditors is left suspense. This much may
serve for a general aduertisment. Now for my part, pray for me, that God may
show more and more mercy on me. J know many a bitter hard word will be spoken
against me, and J deserve them all, not for my departing from them, but for my
first revolting in my ignorant youthead from this Religion whereinto I am now
brought home by Gods mercy, his name be glorified for ever. And the Lord make
known this his truth to the World, who knovves it not; and no doubt multituds
shall come unto the Lord and this Religion, which is grounded on his truth, as
Doves flocking to their windows.

Lord do it for Christ's sake. All glory be given to God through Christ.
Yours in Christ, Mr PATRIK CRAVFURD.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 10 for Chap 5 read Chap 4. Page 47 line 8 for justification read
regeneration. Page 5^ line 1. at the beginning read Suarez, The changes of
letters or transposing of words the courteous reader will tolerate.


