A TRIAL OF OUR CHVRCH-FORSAKERS.

OR A MEDITATION TENDING TO STILL THE passions of unquiet Brownists, upon Heb.
10.25.

Wherein is Justified, against them, that the blessed Church of England 1 Is a
true Church. 2 Has a true Ministry. 3 Has a true Worship.


By ROBERT ABBOT, Vicar of Cranbrooke in Kent.

Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is Justified of her Children.

Hosea 2.1. Say to your brethren Ammi; and to your sisters, Ruhamah.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain for Philemon Stephens and Christopher
Meredith, and are to be sold at their shop at the sign of the Golden Lion
in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

REverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Gualtero Episcopo Wintoniensi,
serenissimae Majestati ab Eleemosynis, Aureae Periscelidis Praesuli Clarissimo,
Domino suo intime observando,
Robertus Abbott librum hunc, quo Celebritas Anglicanae Ecclesiae, ministerij,
and cultus, asseritur, and qui Ecclesiae matri, ut pacifici amoris pignus
dicatur, ad perpetuam observantiae Justae memoriam, ut magno in eadem Ecclesia
Patri, ejusdemque causae Patrono, humiliter dat, and consecrat.

TO MY DEAR MOTHER THE MVCH HONORED, HOLY, AND BLESSED CHVRCH of ENGLAND.
Dear and blessed Mother) thou have been long pestered with undutifull, yea
unnatural sons. Sometimes they have been superstitious, sometimes profane,
and for some years, some that have professed themselves best to God, have
been undutifull to thee. It is an ill sign, if children acknowledge a father,
and deny a mother, that all has not been well Do thou live in perpetual
adulteries and rebellions that thy children renounce thee? Surely thy love is
to thy husband alone. Though when thy husband knows of it, and he does not
mislike it, nay, gives thee general allowance, thou take some ornaments and
Jewels from blessed and good men* yet is thy heart to Christ continually, yea
and all thy carriages are according to his will. Many of thy worthy sons have
vindicated this truth both against Rhemes, and Amsterdame. They could not
endure that their mother should be called whore, much less prooved so. Amongst
the rest, I thy unworthy son have appeared in thy cause, renouncing all the
blood in my heart that rises against Christ, and thee his spouse. If I appear
of too mild a temper, thou have not begotten me of murdering mettle, but of
that word which makes us turn spears, and swords into mattocks and sythes.
How soever I look, I am sure I am thy child. And if I have done thee any honor
in this poor service, I am glad: if not, yet I have done the best that I
thought fit for these opposers; and so with my humble prayers for the
flourishing, and increase of thy peace and truth, I kiss thy hand, and rest

Thy obedient son to his utmost power, ROBERT ABBOT.

TO THE COURTEOUS AND CHRISTIAN READERS, ESPECIALLY TO HIS OWN Parishioners,
grace, and truth, and peace, with the Churches of God in CHRIST.
Dearly beloved) I have lived now by Gods gracious dispensation, above fifty
years; and in the place of my allotment two and twenty full. How unprofitably
so ever in the days of my vanity, when the world, the flesh, and the Devil,
bore sway; yet, through undeserved grace, painefully, ever since the weight of
a peoples care was noticed to my conscience. I have had great labors, some
watchings, many strifes, and contentions, with my self, and others, about
truth, and godliness. And though I have earnestly contended that the mouth of
the ox might not be muzled, that treads out the corn, but that J, and
others of Gods laborers, ^ight live honorable of the gospel, and at the
Altar, at which we serve, as Christ has ordained: yet (with a good conscience)
I can say as the Apostle, I have coveted no man's gold, or silver, or apparel:
I have loved, and desired to spend, and to be spent, though the more I love,
the less I am loved of some few

I know that J must lay down this tabernacle, and the time of my dissolution
is not far off. Therefore do I more seriously begin to think of my state:
and do set upon it to examine how I am like to be presented before the
tribunal seat of God. When I think of my sins, and manifold infirmities I
fear and quake, through the sight of the majesty purity and justice of God:
but when I think of Christ the mediator of the new testament, and of the
infinite value of his blood offered in the dearness of Gods love, and applied
and rested on by faith, which the holy Ghost in a saving measure has given me;
I approach with confidence and the lifting up of my head.

But, till that time come I lie under the expectation of floods of sorrows,
streams of temptations, and other humane infirmities. I pray that J may do
nothing that may dishonor Christ my master, and that I may suffer nothing that
may drive me from him and his service. J know that the wasters of grace are
strong, and many, and that no goodness is entayled to us without great care
and vigilance. I know that sins and afflictions are the two great enemies of
perseverance. And though sin be the most powerful, which yet (through grace)
I have learned to trample upon with the constant acts of piety and charity,
according to my measure, yet afflictions are my next care, which if they be
slighted, will make secret inrodes to hind^r peace with God

My afflictions have not been so weighty as millions of Gods dear saints have
felt. In this Gods grace has been mavelous, because he knows my
weakness to bear, and my unworthiness to be a soldier in that warfare:
yet have they not been so little, as that they have not made me work enough.
It is grievous to be slighted of them whom a man dearly loves and to have
contempt powered upon that which comes in fullness of strength, and tenderness
of affection to do good. It is hard not once scarce to be thanked, for
constant travels to edify and save souls. It is something to see respects fly
abroad in full measure to strangers, when nearer relations are forgotten.

But to be persecuted by the tongues of those a man deserves well of, and to
be privily smitten of those from whom best encouragements are due, will wound
the heart of a David though he be after Gods own heart. J have of long
suffered words of diminution and disparagement. They have been my meat,
drink, and clothing. Though when I have been down the wind of weakness,
feebleness of spirit ha^^ given advantage for a deep impression, yet (blessed
be God) as strength has appeared I have kicked at them with cheerfulness,
though pride and folly has sometimes misinterpreted this also.

I have often looked into the cause. Lord, what have I done? Have I not lived
like thy servant, though with much sensible weakness? have I not labored in
thy vineyard with all my strength? have J not taught thy truth by taking heed
to reading and doctrine? yes surely, says my conscience I have kept back none
of thy counsel, I have not strengthened the hands of wickedness. I have loved
the godly, as such, though I have hated their indiscretions, as well as my
own. J have been kind and courteous to those that have ill rewarded me.
Only, this is the truth, J have loved the Church of God amongst us, and the
whole government ecclesiastical, and temporal If any thing have appeared
harsh, I have excused it a^ I was bound. I have not endured to hear public
scandalls to be laid upon them. I have opposed gainesayers with earnestness
of spirit, others will say, like a man, but J will say, and J am sure, like a
minister.

This has fallen upon dark melancholic, high looked, and sour natures, and
so has suffered a disgust. Some have been sowred, but sweetened again with
the trade of the good word of God, and the practice of affability. Some have
been estranged till this contracted folly has been digested. Some have
complained of chiding, when my nature can chide nothing but sin and disorder:
and some have hardened themselves in error, and schism. To cross me (I fear)
and my tenets for the Church, they have revenged upon themselves.

What these few will gain in the issue I do not know. This (I doubt) that
they will repent, if greatness of stomach will let them look back again,
when it is too late. But for you (my good people) in whose hearts God has writ
me by the preaching of Christ, and his truth, ye have not so run in vain.
Ye will not be deluded with their pretenses and sweet words. Ye have heard
formerly from me all these grounds, and oppositions of Brownisme, which here J
present unto you: and here have J thus addressed them for you, that they may
keep you from that snare of simple ones, and that they may ever lie by you,
when J am dead, and with my Christ, to keep you upright in the ways of our
blessed Church.

I know that some of you bear a dear and tender affection to these few
seduced ones, though now they will not hear you. Ye have lived in the same
Church together like friends: ye have delighted in the same word of God,
prayer, and sacraments: ye have sweetly comforted one another in the private
communion of Saints: and ye see that still they seem to live unblameable lives
toward men, and that they pretend to delight still in the word of Christ,
which is the only rule of salvation. These things will give great advantage to
them to work upon you, and to you to keep intimate familiarity with them. But
(in the fear of God I beseech you) take heed: weigh well what in this
discourse J say, and God give you understanding in all things. It is no small
charge to unchurch a church, to unminister a ministry, and to unworship a
worship. They must be sure of their hands, that they can, and will answer it to
Christ with confidence when they have done it. To do it with a trembling
heart, is to do it against conscience. To do it with full assurance of
understanding, is to do it with sure warrants, and precepts of Christ. If they
have such against our Church, I am sure we shall find them: if not let them
go, if they will, but follow not them in the breach.

To keep you out of it, I have done as J do: and to gain them too, if they
will not be resolved without grounds. J am sure they shall have no just cause
to except against my dealing with them. They may except against me, as an
English Priest, and Bishops creature, as I hear, but shall never against my
course with them. I have dealt with them with matter more then with words: and
because they pretend to two things, to the scriptures, and to conscience, and I
know a third thing in them, weakness. Therefore have J dealt with them
accordingly. J have compared scripture with scripture, to find out the truth,
but cannot find theirs. I have dealt conscionably with them in fighting with
that only weapon against them, of their own choosing, the word of Christ. And
because they are weak, I have not showed my self a man in giving them any
bitter language, or exasperating terms. As the barking of one dog begets the
barking of another, though it be against the Moon: so is it with high words,
and therefore it were glorious, and above a man, if it were laid down on all
sides, and partakings. But as the waves of the sea, when they meet not with a
rock, but with the sands, they return backe-againe with a watery flash: so
have J done by them, that all our matters may be done in love.

Indeed I have taken their affected name out of their mouths, separatists;
and given their right one unto them, Brownists; and this J have done out of
conscience. I find by experience that the word, Separation, does win to
their cause: For, when people of strong affections, and weaker Judgments, do
read of the necessity of separation in the scriptures; and can not discern
how we have made separation from heathenisme, and when we have been thrust out
of Rome (because we were unwilling to be so bad as she) have maintained our
just standing from her in a divided way; they have been willing to hearken to
a separating plott. Therefore Brown being the leader amongst us, to this
breach, (if now time has not made it worse then he intended it) J can not
nickname, but inconscience call the child after the fathers name. It was
Christ's course, ye are of your father the Devil, his children ye are, and so
must I.

It is true also, that afterward, ye may find some opinions gone against,
that are held by some that keep Communion with our Church, as of a true
Church. But I am sure they are the Brownists opinions also, to whom I speak.
All that I can say therefore for that, is this. It may be, that some of you
know, or have heard of that Noble Moralizers fable of Amphiolus, who when he
was in all his military accoutraments to give combat (as he thought) to
Argalus a Knight of the Sun. This man's wife dressed her self in her husbands
armor, and gave her husbands enemy meeting. Amphiolus encounters valiantly,
gave a wound in the neck, closes, overthrowes, and gives a mortal wound in
the body. But when he opened the armor, viewes his Conquest, and saw it was
fair Parthenia, Argalus his wife, he could have no comfort of the day, it
became not a man so to ruin a woman. Such is my case here. J say as a father
of old, I dare not write against a Bishop of my communion; the love of
brotherly peace is glorious in the Church, even among men that otherwise differ
in opinion. But if they put on the arms of an enemy, (because they will be
so) with whom I fight for truth, I cannot help it, if they meet with a blow,
though I glory not in it, yea am sorry that there should be any such cause.

I have now done, and commend you all to the word of Gods grace which is able
to save your souls, though no Bownist, nor Anabaptist had ever been hatched.
Live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you. Give not way to any
opinion whereby the unity of spirit, and the bond of love may be broken. Play
the men, be strong and of a good courage. Have prepared hearts to dye for
Christ's cause: but, to be sticklers in such poor quarrels, as can neither
bring peace to the Church, nor comfort to you at last, abhor. We must all
appear before the Judgment seat of God, where colors shall do us no good,
because we shall be judged naked: where pretenses shall do us no good, because
the books shall be opened: and where no authors or favorers of Sects, or
Schisms shall shelter us, because we must stand before the man Christ Jesus:
to whom I ever leave you, and in whose name ye shall have the prayers of

Yours to be used in the service of the Gospel ROBERT ABBOT.

The Contents of this Meditation is thus summed up. In
Section 1. The state of Christians and their care to keep it. Section 2. The
way to keep a Christian state is public communion in assemblies. Section 3.
The vice of those that forsake public communion: and first of the profane.
Section 4. The forsakers of our assemblies that would be accounted holy; and
first of their name of Justice, Brownists, which is due to them. Section 5. Of
that name they would have, Separatists, and how unjustly it is expected and
assumed by them. Section 6. Of the Brownists opinions upon which they forsake
our Church: and first whether we be a true Church. Section 7. Of their first
exception against us, about the nature of a visible Church. Section 8. Of their
second exception against us, about our entrance into a true Church, where of
their covenant. Section 9. A question by the way (because some of them question
it) about baptizing of Bastards of impenitent Christians. Section 10. Of their
third exception against us, about the head of our Church, Christ, and the King
under him. Section 11. Of their fourth exception against us about the members
of our Church; where is debated of wicked professors coming to the Lords
table. Section 12. Of their last exception against our Church about the
government of it: and first of the power of Government, whether in the whole
assembly. Section 13. Of their exceptions against the persons governing,
Bishops, and the exercise of their government, in ordination, excommunication,
imposing oaths. Section 14. Of their second opinion upon which they separate
from us: because we have not a true ministry, where of ordeyners, titles,
callings, infirmities, and maintenance. Section 15. Of their last opinion upon
which they separate from us; because we have not a true worship: where of
Ceremonies of order, and significant, and of stinted prayers. Section 16. Of
their maine exception in their former argument, to wit, our common prayer
book: where of the order of divine service, and their exceptions against
kneeling, Cross, and responses or answers in Baptism. Section 17. Of the use
that is to be made of all good assemblies: to learn consideration, and
exhortation, because the day is approaching, which is applied to our foasakers.
A Postscript.
GOod Reader, there are two texts of scripture whereupon the Brownists do build
their frame, besides many other in particular questions. These thou shall find
cleared (as I judge in conscience) in most Sections, as thou go along. These
are 1 Cor. 6.17. whereupon they ground their separation; and Mat. 18.15, 16,
17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. whereupon they ground the new Parish discipline. Thou shall
find these cleared Section 5. and 12. But before thou read, I would
entreat thee to correct the errors of the press, printed at the latter end
of the book: and then learn with me, or learn me.

A TRIAL OF OUR CHVRCH FORSAKERS OR A meditation to still the passions of
unquiet Brownists, upon Heb. 10.25.
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but exhorting one another: and so much the more as ye see the day approaching.
SECTION I. The estate of Christians and their care to keep it,
THe better our estate is, the more we must labor to keep it. A poor man
takes no great thought for iron bolts and bars: a wooden latch, a pin serves
his turn, Mat. 6.21
and yet he sleeps securely. A rich man, whose treasure is great, and whose
heart is nailed to it, has locks, bolts, and bars of strongest assurance.
Thus must it be with a Christian He is not now in a beggarly estate he is
crowned with loving kindnesses and tender mercies unspeakable. Psalm. 103.4
He has liberty to enter into heaven: he has a way made to lead him
thither: and he has an able guide for his conduct. The holiest is set before
him. Heb. 10.19 20.
His liberty to enter is purchased by the blood of Jesus. His way thither is
Christ's flesh, consecrated by the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily. Col. 2.9. Heb. 10.21
His guide is the high priest over the house of God, Christ the Lord, Christ
alone purchased this liberty he alone is this way, by the marriage of our
flesh: he alone is this guide who has authority over the house of God, and
cannot be defeated. Act. 20.28
His liberty is of the surest tenure, by purchase with the blood of the son
of God. His way is of the firmest sooting, surest foundation, and best making,
by Christ himself. Ioh. 14.
And his guide is truth it self, one that cannot deceive, Col. 3.11.
even our Jesus Christ who is all and in all.

What therefore should he now do* Let them get an estate in means offered
which may present to God this coat o^ arms. Heb. 10.22
A field of heavenly truth, and sincerity (the royallest in Gods eyes), charged
with a clean washed body, opened, for all the world to look upon. In the
midst, an heart sprinkled from an ill conscience, breathing out by degrees, a
full assurance of faith.

And because he is a soldier, and many enemies will assault his colors, to
win them, that he may never give them again; let him not only have such
christian arms, Heb. 10.23 Apoc. 3.11
but hold fast the profession of his faith, without wavering, that he do not
loose his crown, and honor with Christ.

But, Lord, how hard is this? The Christian is weak, Ephesians. 6.
and his enemies many and mighty. It is true therefore let him be strong in the
Lord, and run to such means as God has appointed, who knows best how to
give, ^ Pet. 1.5
and how to guard all his graces given. And what means are they? The public
and private communion of Saints, mentioned in these words. The public is, not
to forsake the assembling of our selves together. The private is, Heb. 10.24
upon due consideration of our selves to exhort one another. These will make
the christian keep his ground, not loose his colors, not quit the field, but
overcome in living, Romans 8.
and be more then Conquerours in dying.

The words (without curiosity) present these three parts unto you. First, the
virtue of some Christians, or rather the act of it. Secondly, the vice of
others, or rather the act of many vices: and thirdly, the use to be made of
eschewing the one, and following the other. The act of virtue in all
Christians, m^n to forsake the assembling of our selves together: to keep
public communion of saints in the acts of religion and worship.

Iud. 5.15
to forsake the assemblies, though the division of Reuben make great thoughts
of heart.

consideration, to exhort one another; which he sets on with a motive; because
the day is approaching, in which all must give accounts according to receipts.

Thus have ye seen in a word, that a christian has a rich and precious
estate: Iam. 2.5. 2 Pet. 1.1 1 Timothy 2.4
that God is willing he should keep it to bring him to heaven: that it is
possible for him to do so in Gods way: that this way is here set down; and
therefore further follow it with me to Gods glory, and your good.

SECT. 2. The way to keep a Christian state is public communion.
TO speak first of the act of virtue of all good christians. If they would
draw near to heaven, and stand fast there, they must not forsake the
assemblings of our selves together: they must love church assemblies, and the
public fellowship of the saints: in a word, they that are good, and would be
better, Tit. 1.4. Jude 3.
must choose to be where Gods people are in public service for the common
faith, and our common salvation.

All the best saints and people of God have been ever for this. They have
loved, and delighted to pray, read, meditate, and confer in private: but
were most glad when others would say unto them, Ps. 122.1.
let us go into the house of the Lord. They mourned when they could not go with
the throng of them, Psalm. 42.4
that went to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise to keep holy
day. Yea, Ps. 84.10
they accounted a day in his courts better then a thousand, and had rather be
doorekeepers in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness.

Not only they under the law were for it (when yet Gods blessings were in
drops to ours in pouring showers): Joel 2.28 Act. 2.17
but as it was prophesied, that, in the days of Christ, Es. 2.3. Mic. 4.
christians should say, come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob; so was it fulfilled by the first converted Jews and
Gentiles, as we see in the history of the Acts.

Yea, in the hardest times, and days of persecution, when goods, liberties,
and lives, lay at the stake, how readily did they deprive themselves of
natural comforts for spiritual? To the caves and holes of the earth, to
stinking mines, and pits, to woods and dens would they flock (when they had no
places authorized for assemblings) to perform their devotions, and public
worships.

This has been ever the glorious practice of Gods people: and we cannot
wonder at it, when we consider, the presence in our assemblies, and the
benefit that arises from them.

First in our assemblies are Gods people, Gods Angels, Gods ordinances, and God
Gods people, who have respect due unto them from the greatest Princes in the
world. Paul speaking to all sorts of Christians, says, submit your selves one
unto another in the fear of the Lord: Ephesians. 5.2^.
and there is a double submission, of Reverence, of Service. By the first, all
inferiors must submit themselves to their elders, and to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake. 2 Pet. 5 5 1 Pet. 2.13
By the second, even the highest must submit to the lowest for good. Thus Peter
has it, be subject one to another: and that ye may not be hindered, 1 Pet. 5.5
he clothed with humility. Thus Esaias prophesied, Es. 49.23
Kings and Queens shall bow down to the church, with their faces to the earth,
and shall lick up the dust of her feet. Not by a subjection of reverence, as if
they must be underlings to the censures of that particular congregation whereof
they are (as Brownists would have it, whereof hereafter): but by a subjection
of service, when they use their crowns and dignities for the honor and
advancement of religion, as every good king does. Mat. 18.10
For they must not despise one of Christ's little ones: but with many people and
strong nations seek the Lord, Zach. 8.22.23.
and take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew (that is a religious person)
saying, we will go with you, for we have heard the Lord is with you; there are
the Angels also. This was figured in the curtains of the Tabernacle, where
Cherubims were wrought of cunning work: Ex. 26 1
and in the walls of the temple, where were carved the carvings of Cherubims:
yea, 1 Kin. 6.29
this also has been taught by the Apostle; who would have women to have power
on their heads, (that is, a veil, 1 Cor. 11.10
as a significant ceremony of subjection to the man, among the Corinthians)
because of the Angels, who are their guardians, and there more especially,
present with them. There are with Gods people, and angels Gods ordinances also,
both the word, prayer, and sacraments. a seed of immortality, and a word of
life: prayer to power out our souls, 1 Pet. 1.23 Phil. 2.13 Lam. 2.19
that God and all grace may have room enough to dwell in them: and the
sacraments, Romans 4.11
to be the seals of the righteousness of faith, and so, the buckets of heaven
to convey grace by Gods assistance, and covenant, to the worthy receivers.
Lastly, there is with Gods people, angels, and ordinances, God himself. For
though we cannot limit to temples made with hands: Acts 7.
yet Christ having promised to be with his Apostles always to the end of the
world (which therefore must be enlarged to their successors when they were
dead: Apoc. 1.13
) and he having presented himself in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks: and lastly, having covenanted for his word and spirits going
together: Es. 59.21
therefore certainly he is (by way of special favor) in the assemblings of
his people. 2 Cor. 3.8 9.
If to the Jews, much more to us: because the ministration of the spirit is
much more glorious. Lay now this together, that in our assemblings there are
Gods people, Gods Angels, Gods ordinances, and God himself and ye cannot
wonder that the good have chosen to dwell in public assemblies, if it might be,
Psalm. 23*6
for ever.

Secondly, in our assemblies all things are for benefit: every thing is
edifiable. And if our hearts were in tune, Psalm. 57.7 Ephesians. 1.3
and our heads full of the expectation of Gods spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in Christ, how might the kingdom of sin and Satan fall down like
lightning, Luke 10.18 Josh. 6.
as the walls of Jericho at the sound of those rams-hornes of old, when we are
in public worship. Es 59.21 Ioh. 16.13
There ye have not only the spirit promised, which will lead you into all
saving truth, convince, convert, and comfort you, Ephesians 4 13
till ye are of full stature in Christ: but ye have many hands to help you in
confession, supplication, deprecation, intercession, and giving of thanks.
There ye have many encouragements to hold on in the way of Christ. There is the
word to promise, sacraments to confirm, prayer to procure, and many of Gods
people to give you the right hand of fellowship till you come to your journeyes
end. Gal. 2.
The first step to apostasy is the neglect of public assemblies. As a man that
has an inclination to take wicked courses, withdrawes himself from good
company ( as Judas when he went out from Christ and his disciples, and yoaked
with the high priest and elders) so, if a man incline to warp, he declines the
assemblies of Gods people, as one weary of such a course. But if he stick
unto them, his hands are strengthened to hold God fast, by the word of precept,
promise, and correction; by the sacraments, wherein a bargain is struck
between God and us, by the prayers of our selves and others, which bring God
near to help; and by the examples of others, Gal. 2.14
which have a compelling virtue to good, as well as ill. When therefore ye
consider this bundle of profit, ye cannot wonder that Gods people have so
constantly tied themselves to watch at the gate, Pro. 8.34
and wait at the posts of the doors, where public worship has been
prepared.

Oh that all Gods people that ate good and would be better, would lay these
things to heart, and not forsake our assembling together! God works by these
means, and if we forsake them, we forsake the hands of the God of strength,
which are in them stirred up to come and help us. Psalm 80.2 Psalm. 42.2
Forsake church assemblies and ye turn your backs upon Gods face, angels,
saints, and comforting acts of worship.

Ezech. 13 22* Ier, 23, 14.
Forsake church assemblies and ye sad the hearts of Gods people, strengthen the
hands of wickedness, and show no reverence to worship. Forsake
church assemblies, and ye let loose thousand of temptations upon you against
faith and manners: the Devil will take you upon his own ground.

Object.
You will say (happily) that great presence* and profit is talked of, but ye see
none, nor feel any upon you. Sol.
It maybe so, yet without the fault of our assemblies, and with the fault of
none but your unworthy selves. Take therefore this advice in Gods fear, and
speed better hereafter.

First, come with prepared hearts, that is, hearts unloaded of the guilt of
wilful sins: hearts standing in awe of Gods presence, and worshipping in
fear: and hearts sincerely purposing to be better. Ye know Gods advice, lay
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, Iam. 1.21
and receive with meekness the ingraffed word which is able to save your
souls. Ye know Peter's proposition, now are we all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God: Act. 10.33 Psalm. 5.7 Es. 2, 3.
Ps. 119, 34.
and Daevids practice. In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple. Ye
know the prophecy that went of you of old, and David's resolution, to keep the
law, yea, to observe it with his whole heart, according to grace given. Do but
you thus, and ye shall find presence Secondly, bring an humble soul along
with you to God house. If God do meet with you in our assemblies, he
acknowledges a Publican, Luke 18,
before a Pharisee: he calls no man Benjamin, the son of his right hand, but
those whom their own hearts call Benoni, in their humility: he salutes them
not Naomi, beautiful, who do not humbly feel themselves Marah, bitter. The
humble God will teach, Psalm. 25 9. Luke 1,
and the humbled God will lift up: for he fills the hungry with good things.
Bring but such senses, and ye shall see presence and profit. But if ye be
swift to hear, and not slow to speak, Iam, 1. Luke 1,
slow to wrath, God sends such rich ones empty away, and casts such mighty
ones from their thrones.

Thirdly, carry your hearts along thorough Psalm* 86, 4.
rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my soul. Let
that plummet run down to the ground, and the wheels of your actions will
not run to your content. Therefore, do but you come with prepared hearts,
humbled souls, and bind your hearts for hearty service in the whole, and then
the presence in our assemblies shall be for you, and the profit for you too,
as well as for others, who are thus virtuous, as not to forsake our assemblings
together.

SECT. 3. The vice of those that forsake public Communion. 1* of the profane.
ALl that can be said, will not prevail with all. There are so many vices to
overwhelm that, as it was of old, so is it still, it is the manner of some to
forsake our assemblings together. The Apostle saw it of old, and labored
against it as an enemy to perseverance in the unity of faith and manners, we
see it still and must labor against this act of many vices.

I Will speak (thorough Gods help) but of two sorts of persons, too near unto
us, who give themselves unto this fault: the first are profane, the second
would be accounted truly religious. The profane show themselves by four
degrees of forsaking our assemblies. The first, is coming to our assemmblies
like those that are unwilling. These that do so are not altogether withdrawn
in body, but in heart are too far from us. The godly say, Zach. 8* 21 Es.
42.8 Ps. 110.3
let us go speedily and pray before the Lord: they are like the Isles that wait
for the law; because they are willing people. But they come as if they were in
fetters, Zach. 5.7
and bolts, like Zachariahs women pressed into an Epha with a talent of lead.
Lord, how slow is their pace, as if it were to the jaile, The second is, loving
to be any where, rather then in the assembly. Surely, when any act this, though
sometimes they come, yet they forsake apace. Gods people cannot rejoice in such
comers, when God told Ezekiel that he should go to a rebellious people that
were unwilling to submit, Ezech. 2.3 5. Ezech. 3.14.
he went in bitterness and indignation of spirit. Such needs must be the
movings of the heart of the assembly about such comers. These think not that
they should come to do homage to God, as David presses, give, give, unto the
Lord, Ps. 29.1, 2
glory strength, worship due unto his name. They think not, that he that
despises the ministry done in assemblies, despises not man, Luke 10* 16
but Christ: therefore they love any meetings rather then them. They account
church assemblies rather matters of complement, then necessity. They need no
soul reparations, so their bodies be fat, and well-liking.

We read of one Victorinus of old, August.
who would be a Christian, Ego te non deputabo inter Christianos, nisi in
ecclesia te videro.
but frequented not christian assemblies. But godly Simplicianus met him, and
thus saluted him, I will not reckon thee among Christians, unless I see thee
in the church among them. Let these men take home this judgment, and see how
they can digest it. The third degree, is preferring all is well, and conscience
is well enough satisfied. But these are enemies to the honor of God, to their
own good, and to the good of others. God is most honored in the service of
assemblies: Ps. 35.18
therefore David vowed to give thanks to God in a great congregation* He knew
that this advanced Gods honor most. Our own good surely shall be greater in
assemblies: Psalm. 87.2
the Lord loves the gates of Sion (where public worship was) more then all the
dwellings of Judah; and certainly where his love is, there are best means for
our good. Besides, we come to seek that which is lost, Apoc. 3.2.
or ready to dye: and when many seek there is more hope of finding. Therefore
when God was turned away from favor, Joel. 2, 15 16.
the people were appointed to blow the trumpet in Sion, to gather together,
that they might be more successeful. Lastly, the profit of others by our
examples will be more conspicuous in assemblies: Matthew. 5
our light will there best shine before men. For this end was Solamons brazen
scaffold in the midst of the court: 2 Chto. 6 13, 2 King 11* 14.
and Ioash stood by the pillar as the manner was. It is true, that others
examples in doing worse must not weaken us in doing better. Hos. 4.15 Ex. 23.2
Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin: we must not follow a
multitude to do evil, much less must ye follow some. Examples are not the
rule which we should follow If they be good, they clear a law they do not
make it. Following of others cannot help us in the day of account. I have done
as others, will be a poor plea. 1 Cor, 10 8. Number. 25 9.
The three and twenty thousand were not helped by the thousand Princes, who
were their leaders to their destruction. But yet if our examples be good in
acts of assembling and worship according to Gods rule, then will others profit
be helped, as by the contrary it will be much hindered.

The last degree whereby profane persons David would not be guilty: he
desired to be a doorekeeper, Psalm. 84
who was first in, and last out. He knew not how better to profess himself
to be a seeker of God early, Pro 8.17
and to stand in need of all the acts of worship, from the first humbling for
a blesssing, and craving of it, to the last giving of it: and thus should it
be with us. We must come with the first. Act, 10.33
Cornelius and his friends, and servants, waited for Peter. They prevented him
that nothing might fall from his ministry untaken up. Ioh. 5
The cripple waited for the moving of the waters at the descending of the
angel: so must all Gods willing people at the places of assembling. Psalm. 110.3
Pro. 8.33
We must also stay with the last. Even the Prince shall be in the midst of
the people in the temple, he shall go in, when they go in, Ezech. 4 10.
and when they go forth, they shall go forth together. The Jews and Gentiles
at Antiochia continued in public service till the congregation was dissolved.
Act. 13.43
And though Zachary stayed long in the middle temple, Luke 1.21 Numb. 6.24, 25,
26*
yet the people would not depart without the blessing which the Priest must
give. If any do otherwise ( without necessity) they withdraw from our
assemblings, and are in a way of forsaking.

SECT. 4. 2 The forsakers of our assemblies that would be accounted godly; and
first of their name.
THere are others, who would be accounted truly religious, who forsake the
assembling of our selves together* and these have a name of pride, and a name
of justice. The name of pride, which they take to themselves, is separatists.
They read sometimes in the scriptures of separation, especially when Paul
(says according to the prophet) come out from among them and be ye separate.
Es. 52.11. ^ Cor. 6.17
And when they do not wisely observe our state, which is not to be separated
from, but see with full contentment their own vain separation, they will
needs glory in the name of Separatists, as others do of catholics. The name
of Justice is Brownists; which though they love not to hear of, because
Brown, after his platform of a new way of advancing Christ's kingdom, upon
wiser thoughts, returned from them, yet how justly they must retain that name
may appear in that which follows.

We read of five introductions to this schism, before it was raised to the
height it now has: height I say, in mold, and opinion, not in members, which
have been so few this sixteen hundred years and more, that we may
demonstratively say, it is a brat of man's brain, not a child of Christ, that
so long grows not at all.

First, about two hundred fifty three Novatus, Novatus rerum novarum se^per
cupidus, arrogantia inflatus, episcopis male cognitus, etc. C^ipri.
woe first lived under Cyprian, next at Rome. He being willing to get himself
a name, denied repentance to them that had denied Christ, thorough heat of
persecution, though out of fear. Yea, he denied repentance to believers who
after baptism fell into any gross sin. After by a strong ambition he had
endeavored to be a Bishop, and was disappointed, he led many poor souls
into his sect: who because they thought themselves better then other christians
(upon the former conceits) called themselves Cathari, or Puritanes. These
suffered their ebb, and flow, for a time as pride and humility took turns. I
am sure that your forsakers will not child it from such a father. Here was a
separation from the unity of the church, but they will not have it theirs.

Secondly, about three hundred thirty and Donatus, who, not being able to make
his party good against Cecilianus his Bishop, took stomach, and drew a strong
party after him for a time. They had this pretense for their separation, In
co^munione sacramentorum mali maculant bonos.
that the wicked did defile the good in the communion of the sacraments. They
accounted the church to be no where, but in Africa amongst themselves. They
judged their time to be the harvest of the church, they being a choice
remnant, like a little wheat in much chafe. If they were pressed to conformity
by the authority of the Emperor, Quid Imperatori cu^ ecclesia?
they cried out, what has the Emperor to do with the church? Being asked,
how they could prove that they only were the church? They replied, from the
wonders of Donatus: from their prayers heard at the sepulchers of the
Donatists: and from the visions, and dreams of the members of their church,
Sacrame^ta sancta and efficacia quando per sanctos homines.
They accounted sacraments holy only, when administered by holy persons. They
account no true baptism, but in their church: and therefore they rebaptized
all that came into their communion. They would run into invited and
unnecessary dangers. This they called martyrdom, whether they suffered from
themselves, Circumcelliones.
or others. I am sure also that our forsakers will not own these for their
setters up in all points, if for nothing else, yet for this they had Bishops.
Here was a separation long and irkesom, yet surely, they will not be of such
an episcopal separation. Thirdly, Lucifer stomachabundus discessit ab Eusebio:
et qui se illi conjunxeru^t ab ecclesia ipsi se segregarunt
besides the separation of Lucifer: who falling at odds with Eusebius
Vercellensis about the ordination of honest Paulinus, departed in choler from
the peace of the church, and made a proud breach, we read about the year
after Christ three hundred seventy one, of one Audeus a Syrian, who raised up
by the common opinion of his zeal, and integrity, a company of followers, who
would not pray with other Christians, Vituperabant episcopos, divites, ipsos
appelantes. Quod in ecclesia ferrentur faeneratores and impuri.
Anthropomorphi^ae.
and Bishops, crying these down as being too rich: who also gave this reason
of their separation, that in the bosom of the church, were suffered usurers,
and impure livers. These sometimes dwelt in solitary places by themselves, and
sometimes in the suburbs of cities. They fained also great holiness and
chastity, and dreamed God to have man's form, and humane parts. But their sect
outlived not their persons: and I am sure also, that our forsakers will not
acknowledge themselves to be of this condemned breed.

Fourthly, when the thoughts of the best the enemy troubled the wheat with
blasted corn, Matthew. 13*
our forsakers say they had a church again. In king Henry the eights, and
Luthers days they find (say they) some congregations upon their bottom. And
indeed we find in stories, that some of their vain opinions crept into the
heads of some right godly persons, in other points who were ready to suffer for
Christ, and did so: for it is hard not to fall from one extremity to another,
Gal. 6.
if sound judgment (according to the rule given) do not poise the lightness
of affections. But these in Germany, were crowned with the name of Anabaptists,
whose doctrine, and practice, to overthrow the Church, and state, are well
known, and as well confuted and condemned, by Luther, Calvine, Zanchius, and
an whole army of others. But our forsakers (I am sure) will not own these in
all points, neither will they own them, because they forsake them also in some.

Fifthly therefore, we must go lower yet: and if we come to the days of
blessed Queen Elizabeth, after diverse strugglings for excesses (which surely
is no friend to the Gospel among variety of judgments, 1 Cor. 13.
which know but in part), we meet with one Brown, who first raises a new
platform of all the tenets of our forsakers (if yet, by time, and age, they
have not made them worse). This man, after he had infected some by preaching,
found means to poison others by writing of his Estate of true Christians, and
other pamphlets. His conceits, within this last age, have lived and died by
turns, as they have been the objects of disconte^ted, or quiet spirits. If
humble souls have met with them, they have seen in them the poison of peace,
the renting of the seamelesse coat of Christ's church, the building upon a
covenant of works, and the hindering of the progress of the Gospel in faith,
and love. But if they have been cast upon a raging sea of an unquiet, and
disjointed heart, they have bred Barrowes, Greenwoods, Penries, Robinsons,
Iohnsons, Aynsworths, and Smiths, the only men (so far as I know) of that
full strain, who have tasted of more or less learning ill placed, from
Christ's time downward. Seeing therefore, Brown is the first full-father of our
forsakers, who raised up their building to that height they would feign
maintain it at: surely, they can have no other name of justice then Brownists,
which they must hold, except they can prove that theirs is a newer way.

Indeed Brown did afterward fall away from them, and his own tenets, for the
most part.

But seeing the first author justly gives the name (as that carpenter that
builds an house for the building of it, though afterward he burn it down)
therefore I cannot be so unjust, as to suffer them, by me, to be called by
any other, then that they received from him in his new christianity.

The issue of this discourse.
If now, you ask the issue of this discourse; it is to draw to this conclusion,
that this church of theirs was never heard of till Brownes time; and so I argue
thus. That which never was a true church from Christ's time to the days of
Queen Elizabeth, was not a true church then, nor is a true church now: Matthew.
^6.
for the gates of hell must not prevail against it. But the Brownists church
was never a true church from Christ's time to the days of Queen Elizabeth:
Therefore it was not a true church then, nor is now as they would have it,

Object. Sol.
If they say, that some of their opinions were of old: I confess it is true.
But let them show but one church, which either positively in all points which
make their church (to them) a church; or negatively, in denying contrary tenets
held by the true church, and then they shall be the true church for me.

Object. Sol.
But it may be they will say, that the church of Rome thus disputes against us*
It is true: and so do we against them about their church built up by the late
council of Trent: affirming confidently that there was never one church but
was under the curse of that council, if it had been of force before. But when
they plead so against us, we go to that which made true visible churches in
the Apostles days, and ever since, that is professed submission to the rule of
faith in the scriptures, Act. 2. Act. 10. Matthew. 16
and a profession of faith in the trinity, especially in Jesus Christ our Lord,
that rock whereupon the church is built: and so long as we have this, we
fear not their plea.

If they say, Object. Sol.
that they do thus much to make them a true church also. It is true, they do
it, as we do; and yet they deny us (so doing) to be a true church except we
be of their new covenant. If therefore, they cannot find a church of that
covenant till Brownes days, how can they be a true church which has never
failed, nor ever shall? Let them duly consider this issue, and God give them
understanding in all things.

SECT. 5. Of that name they would have (Separatists) and how unjustly assumed
as a title of honor.
IT is most true, Object.
that they are loath to acknowledge the name of Brown their father, not
sticking to brand him with the livery of a turne-coate, if not Apostate (and
surely deserves to be soundly lashed who would rashly father it to such a
breach): yea, and they tell us, that they will have their name from scriptures,
not from men, and will be called, they of the separation.

Sol.
In this I am yet glad, that they love the scriptures more then men: and I
humbly pray, that all that would be accounted good men, would not tell us what
this good man, and that, 2 Pet 1.19 1 Cor. 2.5
held, and said; but what Jesus Christ has left to be held in the sure word of
God, that their faith may not stand in the wisdom of men. But yet before we
believe them, we must know in what scripture their name of separation stands.

Levit. 20.24. 1 Kin. 8.53
We read indeed that God says to Israel, I am the Lord thy God which separate
you from other people, which Solomon thus expounds, thou did separate them
from among all the people of the earth. But are not all christians separated
thus as well as they, from Jews, Turks, Heathens? Israel was not separate
from reigning sin, and sinners, but for profession and service of the true
God. For even then God said of them, Numb. 14 2^.35.
ye have tempted me these ten times, and have not harkened unto my voice:
this evil congregation are gathered together against me: Deuteronomy* 9.6, 7, 8.
thou art a stiffenecked people: thou have provoked me to wrath, and I was
angry with thee to destroy thee: and I hope, all christians are of no worse
separation then this.

We read again that Paul at Ephesus, departed from the wicked, and separated
the disciples. Act 19.9.
It is well it was an Apostle, who had an universal Jurisdiction by immediate
Call, and not private persons, who may not do as he. It was well, it was
Paul, who went to Jewish synagogues, to have spiritual communion, and preached
none other thing, Act. 26.22 23.
but that which Moses and the Prophets did say should come to pass, and not
his own dreams. But for his separating the disciples, we read, he separated
them from diverse, not from all; and that from those that were hardened, and
believed not, and spoke evil of faith in Christ before the multitude, as the
text says. What is this to our church? wherein they cannot find one member
that believes not in Christ (at least doctrinally), nor one that speaks evil
of the way of believing in Christ, though thousands justly speak evil of their
way, which is the thing in question.

We read also again that renowned place, come out from among them, 2 Cor.
6.17
and be ye separate, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you says
the Lord. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, and
what agreement has light with darkness? But this will not afford them the
name of separatists neither. Look to the persons that must be separated from.
ver. 14, 15* 16
They are heathenish Infidels, unbelievers, Idolaters, in utter darkness, and
so, not acknowledging the true God. And are we in the church of England such?
Do we not pr^fesse saving truth? Do we not look, from the first, to the
last, to be saved only by Christ? Tit. 1, 15, 16.
If any profess they know God, and by works deny him, yet shall not all
things be pure to them that are pure? Look next to the persons that are
charged to separate. They are the christian Corinthians, to whom the Apostle
gives sweet words, The church of God; 1 Cor. 1* 2 4.9, 30* 1 Cor, 3.23 1 Cor.
4, 15 1 Cor. 9.2 1 Cor. 11.2 2 Cor. 7.11 12, 13.
called to be saints; a gracious people by Jesus Christ; called to the
fellowship of Gods son; in Christ, Christ's own; begotten in Christ Jesus
thorough the Gospel; the seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord; whom I praise
because ye keep the ordinances; and who are full of godly sorrow, with the
signs of it: yet will these Corinthians justify the church of England by
their wicked vices, both in public, and in their private meetings, as I shall
(if God please) show hereafter. Consider now, that this christian church, 1
Cor. 5.1
which was commanded to separate from heathens in their Idol-feasts, and
abominable atheism, was yet in something worse then the heathens themselves
yet does he not teach them to separate one from another in christian duties of
piety and charity; but to redress each other as they could, and only to
separate from the heathens, that they may be all known to be professed, and
not dissembled christians. Ephesians. 5.1^
Look lastly, to the matter the Apostle treats of. It is to warn christians
from having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, and to
reprove them (in their places) in word, judgment, 2 Cor. 6* 14, 15, 16.
affection and conversation. That, with which they must have no fellowship,
Paul terms unrighteousness, darkness, Belial, Idols. The way whereby they
may have fellowship with them* he terms, yoaking, concord, partaking, and
agreement. And it plainly appears that it is as murh as if he had said, ye
that are christians must not be with the unrighteous men of darkness, sons
of Belial, and Idolaters, as if ye were yoaked in their society, living at one,
partaking, and agreeing with them in their wicked course. How I pray, can they
raise a name of separation to themselves from hence, except they can prove that
all of us live in unrighteousness, and darkness, in league with Satan, and in
idolatry, and that we as paires, and couples are linked together, and partake
of these evils? or how can we justly give them that name of Separatists except
we will grant our selves to be such? let them be, from their first father,
Brownists: and because they will be of the number and manner of those, some
that forsake the assembling of our selves together; therefore let us with a
good conscience, and as quiet a spirit as their cause will permit examine their
grounds by the word of God.

SECT. 6. Of the Brownists opinions upon which they forsake our church, 1.
Because we are not a true church.
These grounds of Brownisme they refer to three heads, to wit, our church,
our ministry, and our worship.

1 They deny us to have a true church. 2 They deny us to have a true ministry.
3 They deny us to have a true worship.
If this charge were true, surely, they might say as David to Eliab, Is there
not a cause? But whether it be not most false let a good conscience, guided by
the word of God, Judge,

First, they deny that we have a true church. And though we being in
possession, and they laboring to cast us out, we might put them to the proof,
yet shall I (by Gods help) tender them this one reason, among many, to prove
that we have a true church.

Where there is the true matter and form of a true church, there is a true
church. For this cannot be denied, that the matter and form of a true man make
a true man, that is, the body and soul united: so must it be in the church.
But our church has the true matter and form of a true church: and therefore
is a true church.

It is denied by the Brownists that we have such matter and form; and it is
proved thus, first for the matter. The true matter of a true church is such as
profess saving truth taught in the Scriptures, and is proved thus. That which
makes a man a true member of a true churh, that does make a true church (for
members do constitute the whole): but profession of saving truth makes a true
member of a true church; for Simon Magus, Act. 8.13.37, 38.
upon his profession was admitted a member, till he fell away: and the Eunuch
upon the same profession was admitted too by baptism, and for ought we know
continued for ever. Now, that we in the church of England do profess saving
truth, according to the scriptures cannot be denied. If the Brownists say, that
we overthrow all by thousands of wicked lives in persons, in, and of our
church. I am sure that the church of Corinth was worse then ours can be (in
some things), it was too bad with envyings, 1 Cor. 3.3 1 Cor. 6. 1 Cor. 8. 1
Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 11. and 15. 1 Cor. 5.
carnal men, uncharitable wretches, that went to law before infidels,
scandalizing the weak, partaking with Idols, heresies, abuse of the Lords
supper by drunkenness, and contempt of the poor, and with detestable incest:
yet when Paul writes unto them (even before the incestuous person was cast out)
he salutes them all, as those that are the church of God, Saints by calling, 1
Cor. 1.2
and sanctified in Christ Jesus, at least, by a sanctification of consecration
in baptism, Heb. 10.29
and their profession.

Object. Sol.
But say the Brownists, does profession make a church of the body of Christ?
will nothing but the body of Christ serve for a true church? Then let them know
that Christ's body may be taken two ways: for a body of all those that shall be
saved; Ephesians* 1.23.
and this is the catholic church, which are in communion of saints for life:
and for a body of those that are in the way of salvation if they be not enemies
to themselves; as every branch in Christ that bears not fruit. Ioh. 15.2 1
Cor. 12 12* 1 Cor. 1.30
Thus the whole church of Corinth was Christ as well as any other part of the
church, and in Christ Jesus, though too many members of it professed without
power. For profession brings a church into outward fellowship with Christ's body
(as bad servants with a good master) and so into the way of being savingly of
the body of Christ if they resist not, Act. 7.51 Ephesians. 4 30 1 These* 5.19. Heb.
10, 29
grieve not, quench not, or despise not the spirit of grace.

Secondly, for the form of a true church, that is Christ united unto the
persons professing his saving truth. For as the form of a man is his soul
united to his body; so the form of a church, which is the body of Christ, is
Christ united unto it. Now, that Christ is united unto our church, is proved
thus: because he gives the law of union to us as to the body, and makes it
effectual for conviction, or conversion, to serve the living and true God. As
a king is united to his subjects by his laws, and executions of them for
rewards and punishments: so is Jesus Christ to our church. As the head united
gives laws to the body for safety: so does Christ give laws to us for our
salvation in his word. Psalm. 147.
He has not dealt so with every nation, yet (blessed be his name) he has so
dealt with us to the joy of our souls. Object.
True (say the Brownists) we have his laws, but do not answer them in our
lives.

This does not cut us off (being but true in part) till Christ has sued out
his bill of divorce, Sol.
no more then the disobedience of a wife makes her no wife; the disobedience of
a son no son; and the disobedience of a servant no servant.

Again Christ is united to us, because he makes his law effectual for the
convincing of all, and for the converting of many souls to cleave unto him
faithfully. Gal. 3.17 Romans 6.
We are baptized, and so put on Christ, and are graffed into the similitude of
his death and resurrection. But as we grow in age, many grow in gracelesnesse,
and forget the covenant of their God. Psalm. 78.10 37.
Then comes the word of Christ convincing, and calls many back, kills sin,
quickens grace, Luke 1.17
and converts the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just. This the Brownists will not deny. They confess that
God has many gracious people amongst us by the word, and sacraments. Whence,
I pray, does this proceed, but from the influence and power of Christ united to
us? I am sure that Christ is the way to heaven; Ioh. 14.
and one soul cannot be converted from the kingdom of sin to grace, but it
is by the power and influence of Christ's three offices. As he is a Prophet, 1
Cor. 1.30
he must be his wisdom, to teach him repentance from dead works, and faith
in Christ. As he is a Priest, he must make his atonement betwixt God and him
for righteousness. And as he is a King, he must over-master the gates of
hell, and maintain him to himself in the way of salvation, for
sanctification, and full redemption. Conclude therefore, that if we have the
matter and form of a true church, we must be a true church against all
exception, if good conscience judge by the word of God.

SECT. 7. Brownists first exceptions against us, about the nature of a visible
Church.
BUt because the Brownists make a great noise in maintaining against us, that
ours is not a true church: therefore take particular view of their pleas
against it, that we may see the unjustnesse of their forsaking it. I shall by
Gods help refer them to five heads.

1 What they mean by a true church. 2 The entrance into a true church. 3 The
head of a true church. 4 The members of a true church. 5 The government of a
true church,
They mean by a true church, What Brown mean by a true church.
a set congregation

First, it must be a set congregation (which

Secondly, it must be separated from all Jews, Turks, and Pagans, but from
all gross sins and sinners, which do pollute the worship of the sincerest
service of God. Yet surely, they would have them better taught, and made good,
that, by the consent of the members, they might be jointed in at last.

Thirdly, it must have sufficient authority within it self for government in
all causes ecclesiastical, that is, a plenary power, by consent of members, to
ordain ministers, call, or cast them out, (as the necessity of the church
requires) to excommunicate, and receive in, and to order all things in their
assemblies for the advancement of Christ's kingdom, without the leave or
restraint of any.

Fourthly, it must assemble for acts of government, and solemn worship,
(without which it is but a shadow) that is, it must meet in their meeting
places to pray, preach, prophecy, baptize, and communicate, as the spirit gives
wisdom and utterance.

Now, because they find not our churches thus made up, according to their own
fancies; therefore do they forsake them as false, or (at the least) no true
churches. This is their new way of churching and unchurching of assemblies (so
far as I can gather by their conferences and writings): and they judge of our
assemblies after this mould. I hope they will not deny us to have assemblies;
or to be separate from Jews, Turks, Pagans, Idolaters, and wicked Belialists,
in communion for spiritual life by Christ; that we have authority, and power
for ordination, excommunication, absolution, and order; or that we have
assemblies for government, and solemn worship: and for the rest of the frame
it is but the issue of their own brain, and not of the law and rule of Christ.

For first, whereas they would have no national churches, but particular in
dependent congregations: Act. 7.38
they must confess that the whole nation of Israel was but one church. And
though then they had but one Tabernacle, yet when after they were divided into
several Synagogues, did they not continue the only church of God? were they
not still reputed of God as one man, though some were better, and more worse?

It is true, say they, Object.
because they had but one high priest, a figure of Christ which was to vanish.
Nay rather, Sol.
because they were but one people and commonwealth, professing the same
religion, and ruled by the same laws, both before they had one high priest,
and after, when (by corruption) they had two. Luke 3.2.
Neither was the high priest in respect of government a type of Christ (for so
was Melchizedech, Heb, 7.
of whose order Christ was, and not after the order of Aaron): but in respect
of his sacrifice, and intercession for the whole people, and his entrance
alone into the holy of holies, bearing the names of the twelve tribes: and
Christ's government belongs to his kingdom, not to his priesthood. Besides,
must they not confess that that one church of the nation of Jews was
governed: by one law, and one king? one law for the substance of government,
and one king to order both priests, and people: and that not as a type of
Christ, but as a king by royal authority, 1 Samuel 15.
as head of the tribes, as I shall clear hereafter. 1 Timothy 3.15
Yea, do we not read of the church of Ephesus which was one house of God;
over which Timothy was the first angel and Bishop (as it comes to us from
oldest records) to rule all Presbyters, Deacons, Widows, and people in their
several assemblies? For how fond were it to think that all the Elders,
Deacons, and believers that Paul gives him Jurisdiction over there, should be
of one assembly? Especially seeing Titus his fellow-Bishop was left in Creta to
ordeine elders, Tit. 1.5
and oversee them in every city, according to the necessity of several
assemblies.

Secondly, whereas they urge that a true church must be separate from all false
ways: it is true; it must be thus in profession, when they are plainly
discovered by undoubted scriptures: but that it must be actually thus, or be
unchurched, is utterly false. Israel was Gods people, 1 Samuel 2.29.12.
when the sons of Eli (in communion with them) were sons of Belial and knew
not the Lord. Moses calls them Gods people, Ex. 32.11. Ex. 22.16
even when they were not separated from Idolatry: because he had no authority
to cast them off, before God himself had given a bill of divorce. God by Esaias,
calls the Jews his children and people, Es. 1.2, 3
when they were so far from being separated from rulers of Sodom, rebellious
Princes, Es. 1.10* 23
companions of thieves: that they had such teachers as caused them to err, Es.
3.12.16 Es. 5.8
such women as were full of hellish pride, such rich men as were cruel
oppressors, such inhabitants as the earth was defiled under them; Es. 24 ^
and such a face of the church as the faithful city was become an harlot, with
their oaks, Es. 1.21 22 29.
and gardens of idolatry, ready to bring confusion. Paul calls the Corinthians
a church of God, 1 Cor. 1.2
saints by calling, when at that instant many in communion with them had
debates, envyings, whisperings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, swellings,
tumults, and had not repented of the uncleanness, fornication, and
lasciviousness, which they had committed. 2 Cor. 12 20.21. Apoc. 2 and 3.
Read the epistles of Christ to the seven churches in Asia, and ye shall find
much abominable wickedness, and yet they were crowned by Christ himself with
the name of churches. Object. Sol.
If the Brownists plead that these churches should have been separated. Indeed
they should have better then they were, and because they were not, they after
felt the heavy hand of God: but that the good should have fallen out with God
for the sin of man, and been separated from the good things of God, for the
wickedness of those that were in outward communion of christianity, that we no
where, nor ever, I am sure shall read.

Thirdly, whereas they plead, that every particular congregation has
sufficient power, by general vote of members, in all causes ecclesiastical, I
must wonder, before answer, what? have the people, all the members, power of
jurisdiction over all? What new scripture has ever Christ made for this
confusion? Surely, we find it not before the law: for then power of
government lay upon Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and their
peers. Surely it was not under the law: Ex. 18.19
for then power of government lay upon Moses, and his assistants, ( even by
the advice of Iethro) and upon Aaron, to whom the people must assent. The law
was delivered to the priests and elders, Deuteronomy. 31.9 28.
and they were charged to look to the rest. It is as sure also that it is not
under the Gospel. The people attempted nothing but by the liking leave, and
approbation of the Apostles. The Apostles ordained elders in every city for the
people without them, Act, 14.23 Act. 2^* 17
and conferred with the elders of the church for the good of their assemblies
without the people: Act. 21.18 23.
yea, and upon consultation did decre^ a matter for the peace of the church
without them when their gifts were at the height. Ob^ect. Sol. Act. ^5. ^^ 23.
It is true, that sometimes the people were acquainted with some great matter
in counsel: not because they had authority without which the Apostles and
elders could do nothing: but to acqu^int them with reasons, and to encourage
them in their graces. Sub conscientia plebis.
Thus Bishop Cyprian sometimes did, and sometimes superiors do require the
assent of inferiors for better peace and love.

And that the people had no authority in governing the church appears by the
commission of Christ to his Apostles, and those that should succeed them,
Matthew. 18 19, 20.
go ye (says Christ) and teach and baptize, teaching them to observe what
ever I have commanded, and I am with you always to the end of the world. The
promise is as the charge, to the Apostles and their successors, and not to the
people in business that concerns them not.

Again, I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 16.19
(says Christ to Peter in the name of the rest): and therefore, makes good his
word to them all; he sent them, inspired them, and then said, Io^. 20, 21 22,
23.
whose sins ye remit or retain, shall be remitted or retained. It would be
strange after this commission, to hear of a power of governing in the people;
Ephesians. 4* 11 12.
especially seeing for the executing of it, Christ gave officers to his church,
and not to his church power to make them: he gave them to his church, 2 Cor.
5.20.
to be in Christ's stead to direct and rule by his word, and not to be
directed and ruled by it. Therefore if any thing be out of order he blames
them, not the people. I contended with the Rulers and nobles, Neh. 13.11 17.
says Nehemiah: and to the Angels of churches speaks Christ sharply for
things amiss. Apoc. 2* and 3. To 13.1 2 3. 1 Pet. 2.13 14. Tit. 2.1 Heb. 13.8
17. 1 Timothy 5 17. Numb. 16 Matthew. 18 1 Cor. 5
And for the people, Christ would not have them rule, but to be subject to
magistrates, and spiritual overseers. This I am confident of, that there
cannot one precept, or practice be given that the people should, or did rule in
the church, but under their guides and teachers, except Corah and his
accomplices who were swallowed up in wrath. As for that text, tell the church,
and that other of the incestuous person, we shall meet with them in their
proper places. In the mean time know, that the son of man has left his
house, Mar. 13.34 2 Cor. 10.8 1 Timothy 3.15
and given authority to his servants (for edification, not for destruction) and
not to his house, which is the church. The people are still called sheep,
brethren, household of faith, spouse, and children: but their teachers are
known by the name of Elders, Overseers, and Fathers, on whom the government
lies. Object. Apoc. 1.6
But (say the Brownists) the saints are answereable to the kings of old, who
are to have power ecclesiastical in their hands. Indeed they are so called,
Sol.
but not in respect of any outward power over others more then before, but of
inward power to rule, by the anointing of Christ, 1 Ioh. 2
over their own pride and corruption. This they will not do, and so speak
evil of them in authority, 2 Pet. 2
and advance themselves above the pitch which God has given there. It is a
brave thing to rule, and who would not do so? But if they were David's weaned
child, Psalm. 130.3
they would rather be subject by doing and suffering, then lift up themselves
to high places of government, from whence they may fall to their shame and
sorrow.

Lastly, whereas they put into the end of their assembling, not only the
exercise of government, whereof they have none, and preaching, prayer,
sacraments, which are good indeed, if done by right persons, and in right
manner; but prophesying too: surely herein they walk not with a right foot
according to the truth of the scriptures. Gal. 2.14
They make prophesying an act of some private persons, whereby, as the spirit
moves them, they put in, in public, their verdicts with their Pastors and
Doctors, about the sense, doctrine, and application of the scriptures
propounded: but how Christ's word makes this good to them I cannot see, nor ever
shall. Indeed the Apostle speaks of prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.1
but as of an office of some persons then, not of an ordinary gift now. He
says, let the prophets speak two or three: ver. 29.
and I am sure, that prophets have an office to prophecy. He says also,
prophesying is a speaking to men to exhortation, edification, ver. 3.
and comfort: and I pray, what can the highest gift of preaching do more? If
they may preach, Mat. 28.18 Mar. 16.15.6. Object. Sol.
why may they not administer the sacraments, seeing both go together? They
cannot say, that to preach is an act of office, and to prophecy, is an act out
of office. For where the Apostle speaks expressly of prophesying according to
the proportion of faith, he does speak as plainly of offices as of gifts. To.
12.4, 6


If therefore they will prophecy, let them show their calling to that office,
and then vent their gifts. Do they do it by virtue of their general, or
special calling? They deny any special calling, and we deny that they do
it by virtue of the general calling of a christian, because that gives not the
office. How much better were it for them to follow the word of Christ, no man
takes this honor to himself, Heb. 5.4
but he that is called of God as Aaron, then by jumbling ordinary, and
extraordinary gifts and offices together, to utter things, for want of
knowledge, wisdom reading, 2 Timothy 2 13. 1 Timothy 4.13.
and doctrine, unworthy of the great God of assemblies.

Thus have I considered the four parcels of which the Brownists make up a true
visible. None of which singly, nor all jointly can make our blessed church not
to be so: because they are made up of diverse falsehoods already discovered. What
a true visible church is.
Let us now take better view out of Gods word, what a true visible church is,
that in it we may see our own.

A true visible churth is, men called, and united in the profession of the
truth according to the scriptures. This is always where there is a true
visible church, either planted, or continued, or restored. If it be national,
it is a company of people professing truth in an whole land, as the churches of
Judea, Act. 9.31 Ap. 2, and 3*
Samaria, and Galile, with those of Asia. If it be Parochial, it is a company
of people professing the truth in a town, or parish: Act. 14.23.
as in those where the Apostles ordained elders in every church. If it be
domestical, it is a company professing the truth in a family: Romans 16.5 1 Cor.
16.19.
as in Philemons house, and others. It is true, that the truth may be more
purely professed in one church then in another: more purely in Smyrna, and
Philadelphia, which were praised, and less purely in Ephesus, Sardis, and
Laodicea, which were dispraised. It is true also that some churches may be in
infancy, and so less perfect, as that in Creta, where Titus was left to
redress things amiss, Tit. 1.5.
and those churches of the Gentiles, which must not be troubled for fear of a
rent: and some of riper age, Act. 15.19
as that at Jerusalem, where James was Bishop, and the Apostles held a council,
Act. 15.
and so had a more settled form of government: and that of Philippi, Phil. 1.1.
which had their Bishops and Deacons. But if they join to profess the truth
of Christ they are true visible churches.

First, Mat. 9 36. Ephesians. 2. Rom 10. Act. 8. Act 13.
they ramble ( as sheep without a shepherd) without God, without Christ.
Christ makes himself known unto them by the preaching of the word. They
assemble as those that profess to seek salvation that way, some more closely,
some more loosely. They publickely submit to the word of God and Sacraments,
Act. 20 1 Cor. 1.^
and calling on the name of the Lord. These persons thus professing make up a
true visible church, either in a kingdom, Gal. 2
city, town, or house, though they be worse then Peter in his worse part ( not
walking with a right foot): Act. 8
yea though too many of them be as bad as Simon Magus who joined to Philip and
was baptized. When God sent forth his servants to invite guests, Matthew. 22
there was the calling of a church, When good and bad that were invited, came
to the wedding feast, there was their profession. This made up a visible
church, though many were called and few chosen, but left in their chosen ways
to their ruin. When wise and foolish virgins came of duty to attend their
Lord, Matthew. 25
though five only had lasting oil, and five had but lamps only, Mat. 13.2 3.
etc.
there was a true visible church. When the sower went out to sow the word of
God, though some fell in the highways, and some among the stones, some among
thorns, Mat. 13.24 25. etc. Deus nobis imperavit congregatioonem, sibi
servavit separationem. August. Mat. 13.47 48. etc.
and but some in good grounds; yet all these professing hearers made up a true
visible church. When a man sowed good seed, and his enemy sowed tares, or
blasted corn, which sprang up as from the same root, which must grow together
till the harvest, there is a true visible church. When a net was cast into the
sea and gathered together fish, both good and bad; good to be reserved in
vessels, and bad to be cast away, there also is a true visible church, the
kingdom of heaven upon earth. The word comes, and when it is received, Act.
2.41 Apoc. 2.1. Matthew. 5
it makes the church by profession a candlestick, a city set on an hill which
cannot be hid, especially when those that receive it are baptized, which is the
seal of profession. As open profession of men, who say they are willing to
fight under the colors of a captain (and therefore take their military
sacrament) are a true visible army, though many run away in the day of
battle: so is it in the visible church, which is as acompany of two armies.
Cains, Chams, Iudasses, Cant. 6.13
Simon the sorcerers, and Demas, their profession made them all members of the
visible church, with Abel, Noah, Peter, Philip, and Paul. It is true, Object.
that afterward they either went back, or were thrown out by justice; but
the question is, what made them members of the visible church? Sol.
and that was joining in profession of the truth, as the profession of the same
trade, art, craft, science, or mystery, makes men of such a society, though
some are more worthy, and some less.

This therefore being Gods truth concerning the nature of the visible church;
and the Brownists visible church being coupled of many falsehoods, whatsoever
they say, cannot help their new church, nor hurt our old church, which is
built upon the rock, Ephesians. 2.20.
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone.

SECT. 8. Brownists second exception against us: about the entrance into a true
church.
NExt they object against us the entrance into a true church. We should (say
they) have entered into the state of a visible church, by voluntary covenant
upon knowledge, to advance the kingdom of Christ* and so to have a right to
the name of a true church, and to the privileges of it for us, and our
children: but we were forced in our first planting by edicts, laws, and
proclamations, and yet admitted members, and our posterity after us by
baptism, even of such of us as are not members indeed.

Put case this great plea were true at first, yet may not an after mending of
what was first amiss, rectify and confirm all? Things may be ill done at
first, which being once done, may be of force, and being well carried may end
with a blessing. A child marries without consent of parents, and it is wickedly
done, yet when it is done, and sealed with the bed by free consent, shall it
not be of force? Nay, do not parents look upon their courses, and, if they
see a good carriage, and good success, do they not like it well, and follow
it with their blessings? Shall we make God an harder master? will he not love
Jacob though he got the blessing by deceit? God purposed him the blessing: and
though he got not the possession the right way, shall his purpose fail? God
forbid: yea let God be true and every man a liar; To, 3.3, 4
Jacobs unbelief makes not the faith of God of none effect. So might God deal
with us. He purposed to us the covenant of the Gospel, and we came not to it
the right way, yet when we are in it, in the place where it was said unto us,
ye are not my people, Romans 9.26
we shall be called the children of the living God. Put case a child be cut
out of the mothers belly, and come not the ordinary way, shall the father when
he sees it live, and thrive, deny it to be his child, and conclude it to be a
bastard? So will our God deal with us.

But why should we grant them this? we failed not in our entrance: they can
never prove it by the word of Christ. A true visible church may be considered
two ways; in the planting, and in the reforming of it. How we entered into a
true church in our first planting, God knows, To. 10.18
we know not from his word. The sound of the Apostles went into all the earth,
and their words into the end of the world. The Gospel is come unto you (says
Paul to the Colossians) and to all the world, and brings forth fruit: Col. 1
6.
and surely it entered to us (as it should) by some Apostle, or Apostolic men,
to make our ancient predecessors a true church. Before, we were without
Christ: now we know him. Before, we were without the covenant; now we are in
by baptism. Before, we were no professors; now we are, Ex. 20.
and God shows mercy to thousands among them that love him, and keep his
commandments, and is their God, and the God of their seed. Genesis 9.9. Genesis
17.7.
But this is not the state of the question now.

Therefore for the reforming of a church God would have this course. As it was
with Job, he was first of Gods making, and next (by Gods permission) of the
Devils marring, when he was full of botches and sores, scarce known to his
friends, and loathsome to his wife. All this while Job was a true man, as he
was before, though clouded with some fearful fits of impatience. But when God
would lift up Job again, he did not make a new Job, but reformed the old, he
cured, and cleansed him, that he might appear like himself, and his end was
happy. So God dealt with the church. After it had covenanted with God at first,
it wanted no botches, it was fearfully overspread with diseases. But when God
would have it raised again, he does not build a new church, but reformeth the
old. He shows our forefathers where they were at a loss: that they had the
faith of Christ in the articles, and the profession of it in public
festivities: but with fearful superstitions and vanities. Therefore he puts
into their hands, and the hands of his ministers, the word of his covenant, and
the sacraments of his covenant rightly administered: and thus (by degrees) we
fall to public profession of Christ's truth, by union of laws, consents, and
practices. What then, is the want in our entrance, which does make us no true
church?

The Brownists here, plead four things.

1 All our members entered not upon knowledge. 2 They made not a covenant for
Christ. 3 They were not voluntary professors. 4 They were baptized when they
were the seed of those that were not members of the visible church by actual
profession.
That all our members entered not upon knowledge, is false; were they in
planting from no church, or in reforming from a corrupt church? Surely, the
knowledge of the doctrine of salvation by the blessed trinity, Mat. 28.
is sufficient for the receiving in of members. For Christ says, Go teach all
nations and baptize them. And wh^t must they be taught? That which they must
be baptized into, their faith in the father, son, and holy Ghost, which was
Christ's first creed that made churches. Had not the members of our reforming
church this knowledge? where was the seed of our many hundreds of Martyrs? and
where is these men's charities? Even the darkest times that our church has
suffered has preserved this knowledge, and the profession of looking to be
saved by Jesus Christ the son of the living God, Matthew. 16
which is that Rock against which the gates of hell shall not prevail.

by covenant. Indeed it is lawful for christians, that have been disjointed
in the service of God, to make covenants betwixt themselves to serve him
better. So Asa and his people entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, 2 Chro. 15.12.14.
yea, and they swear unto the Lord. So we read of the Princes, Levites, and
Priests, that made a sure covenant, Neh. 9.38
writ it, and sealed it. Surely, this was a good way to tie up the unruly colts
that were among them to Gods service, if they had but natural conscience, and
the Prophets did not condemn it. From whence I conclude, that it is lawful to
help our selves in the service of God by any means not forbidden, though it
be not precisely commanded in the word: yet is their practice a binding law to
us so far, as to unchurch us if we do it not? How many glorious visible
churches do we read of in the scriptures, which never took this course, nor
were bound unto it, and yet entered covenant with Christ too when they were
admitted members?

They were made Christ's disciples by teaching, and receiving the word, Mat.
28.19 Act. 2.41. 2 Cor. 5.19 Levit. 2.13 Deuteronomy. 29 12. Deuteronomy. 26 18. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
and 26.17 Act 2.41 Act. 8.12 37.38. Mat. 28.19 1 Cor. 10.16 Psalm. 44.17
which is the word of reconciliation. And this word given to his people, is,
Gods covenanting with them, and his avouching them to be his peculiar people:
and their receiving it, is their covenanting with him, and taking God to be
their God. Then do they go to the seals of the covenant (the sacraments),
according to Christ's rule, which do knit us rogether in an holy league, for
the service of Christ, to our eternal good, if we do not deal falsely with
God concerning his covenant. If therefore, they deny not (as they cannot) that
our first members had the true word of God, and sacraments, neither can they
deny that they have entered into the church by covenant. Gal. 3.27 Romans 4.11.
He that is baptized, puts on Christ: and baptism is Christ's seal of the
covenant upon them that are baptized, Ezech. 16.20.
as those that were circumcised, were said to be borne to God by covenant:
which if we break, we renew again so often as we come to the supper of the Lord.

Yea but (they say thirdly), put case of princes. They were not voluntary
servers of Christ, Psalm. 110.3. Acts 2 41
as the members of a true visible church should be. Put this case to them also,
ye are the sons of your mother, who was forced by the authority of her
father, or guardian, to marry your father: will ye say, that ye are
bastards, not lawful heirs, or not true members of the family, because your
mother was not married to your father freely, and willingly? with what will
soever she was married, she afterward lived in love, faithfulness, and
obedience, and brought forth much fruit unto him. Such may be the case of a
true visible church. She may come to Christ her husband, as a Bear to the
stake, being forced by conviction, and the power of natural conscience; she
may be drawn before she run after him; Cant. 1.4.
yet afterward, she remembering his love more then wine, Romans 7.4.
may live in obedient love, and bring forth fruit unto God. Though this be a
sufficient plea, yet let them know, that the first members of our church, in
planting, were a willing people, for ought they know, and for our first members
in reforming, I answer four things. First, that the free acts of the leaders
of the people are accounted by God as the acts of all; when Moses was bid tell
the children of Israel; and he did but tell the elders of Israel, and they
answered, Ex. 19.3.7.8.
all the people are said to answer together in them. So Ioshuah called twelve
choice men, out of every tribe a man, to carry twelve stones, Josh 4.^, 8
and the children of Israel, whom they represented, are said to do it. So Asa
took away the altars of the strange Gods, and brake the idols, 2 Chro. 24 2.4
7.
and cut down the groves willingly; and though he commanded his people, and
ruled by power, yet they obeying, are said, to seek the Lord* and to prosper.
Thus far then, our first reformers were willing members; they were willing in
their guides and leaders, who willingly put themselves on to advance the
kingdom of Christ. Secondly, not only the governors, but the people were
willing covenanters in general body. It was done by the free proceedings of
the house of parliament, where Knights, and Burgesses, were chosen by the free
vote of the commons: and they (being known to be able men) do refer
themselves to their determination in the Lord. What though some submitted out
of fear of power? Thus, many in Mardocai's time became Jews for fear, Hest.
8.17.
yet were so accounted. And many in Hezekiahs time were brought by posts, as
it were, 2 Chro. 30
by the sound of the trumpet, to the passover, and yet their service was
accepted. Thirdly, put case the laws, and proclamations of our Princes forced
some to be members, who were willing to do worse.

It was not in the first planting of a church, where faith is not to be forced
(the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Violentiu^ non coactorum est regnum
caelorum. 2 Chro. 30 19.20.
but faith suffers not compulsion): but it was in the reforming of a church;
and in such a case God did bless the compulsion of Hezekiah, and the people
were not rejected, as no members, though they were not purified according to
the purification of the sanctuary. 2 Chro. ^3
16 2 Chro. 34 32.33.
Did not Manasseh, after he was come home to God, command Judah to serve the
God of Israel? Did not Josiah cause and make his people to stand to his
covenant to serve, even to serve the Lord our God? Is it not lawful for good
Princes in reforming to follow these examples? may not they bind their people
some way, by oath, 2 Chro. 15 12 Neh. 9.38 and 10.29. Ez. 10.3, 19 Object. Sol.
bond, subscription, or taking, and giving hands for better performance of
duties of religion? why may not our good Princes follow those old patterns in
reforming? They say, because it is not found in the new testament. Be it so:
yet it is found in the old testament, and not condemned in the new, nor any
other order prescribed in such a case. Surely, seeing in this new devised way,
they will be tried by none but the new testament, they shall be cast at this
bar in their own courses. Let them give but one text to prove any man called,
or ordained to a Pastors office in the church, by a company of private men
alone, and I shall give them another text to prove any thing they please, I can
yet read of none but Apostles, Evangelists, and the eldership that made
ministers there. If they can show no text, I am sure they have no such Pastors
as they ought: but I am sure we have true kings, who have power in reforming,
to compel wicked people to be better then they are, Romans 13.
because they bear not the sword for naught.

Yea, but (say they lastly) put case baptized, when they were the seed of them
that were not members of the visible church. Conceive it thus. If a man be a
member of the visible church, then his children have a right to baptism,
before they actually profess the faith, by virtue of that promise, I will be
thy God, Genesis 17.7
and the God of thy seed. But if he be not a member of a visible church, (as
a Jew, Turk, or Pagan) then have they no right to it, before they actually
confess, Act 8.
as the Eunuch did. Now the Brownists (keeping a great coile about the jointing
of members into a church, as if it were all one to be jointed into the body of
Christ, coapted, and fitted to our head Christ, for life and salvation, and to
be a member of the visible church, in outward communion and fellowship of
Christ, for the outward privileges of the church) they have (I say) espied,
among many others, this one crime, in the Dutch, and French churches, Fran.
John's Artic against Fr and Dutch Churches.
that they baptize the seed of them that are no members of the visible church:
much more, when they look upon us, whom they account not members of a true
visible church, must they quarrel (if all be of his mind), if our first
reformers be not members of a true visible church, and yet their children are
baptized before they are of years to profess their own faith.

SECT. 9. A question by the way, about baptizing Bastards of impenitent
Christians.
I Confess, I never yet talked with any Brownist about this particular; yet
because I find too many conscious people, hanging after foreign novelties,
and gazing upon (with admiration) the membring, and dismembring in visible
churches: who when they hear of Christians lawfully begotten children denied
baptism, begin to wonder that christians bastards should be admitted.
Therefore to clear both (as God shall in able) I shall labor to satisfy
others (as I have done some) in this question. whether bastards are baptizable
while their mothers are in their sins of adultery, or fornication, and
whether men ought not to stay their baptism, until they be reconciled to God,
in open church, which is publickely scandalized by her fact, and from which she
has dismembered her self by her misdeed?

In this I find two questions inwrapt in one: whether bastards are baptizable?
and whether men ought not to stay such baptism, till the harlot be reconciled
to God, and this be done in the open church scandalized, from which by her fact
she has cut herself off by her sin? I shall first labor to state these
questions, and then the cases will more easily appear.

The estate of the first may be thus set. By bastards, such children are meant,
as come not into the world by lawful acts of marriage: and by baptizable is
meant, such as have a right to the sacrament of baptism in the church. And the
question is not, whether bastards in general are baptizable? for so it is
certain that all are not, as the bastards of Jews, Turks, and Pagans, who
have no right to baptism but by personal confession. But the question is,
whether the bastards of the professors at large, in a christian church, which
is in covenant with God (for the outward privilege of the church at least)
have right to baptism? of these the inquiry is, because in the second part of
this question, is spoken of the mothers reconciling to God, in the open church
offended.

The state of the second question must be laid by considering two things: 1 The
persons enquired of^ 2 The duty of these persons.


The persons enquired of, are Men: and it is too general a term. For it
cannot mean, any men of that assembly, where such a bastard is presented: for
they have no authority (known to me from scriptures) to meddle in any censure
ecclesiastical. These only are to meddle here, Ioh. 20, 21 22, 23*
who are sent, and inspired with delegated service and mininistery from Christ,
either immediately, or mediately. Neither can it mean the Pastors, and deputed
teachers of that assembly: for they have but a dependent authority according to
the laws of Eutaxy, 1 Cor. 14.
and good order in the church. Presbiters under Bishops, Bishops under Synods,
Synods under Councels, and Councels under the word of Christ in plain
scriptures. Our highest appeal is to our head Christ Jesus.

For if ordinary Pastors had such independent power in such cases, think
whether it would not set up a Pope in every parish, especially considering that
we have neither precept, nor president, in all the new testament, of such
power given to any assembly, or Presbiter, that ever I could yet find. By men
therefore, we must understand the public governors of that church, that is,
Ensem stringe^do, decreta publica^do
the King, Prince, state, Bishop, and convocation, by their laws
ecclesiastical for the good of the church. The question enquires of those, in
respect of order, decree, and command: and of these in respect of Canons, and
executions accordingly. Thus I take up the mind of the question, or else I
know not what it would have.

Next, consider in the question, the duty of these persons, whether they ought
to stay bastards from baptism? By this, two things may be meant: denying
baptism; but no man would utterly exclude such: and suspending baptism; and
of this is the question: for it makes a double limitation; first, till the
harlot be reconciled to God. In this, the question meddles not with the
judgment of God, who by his sure omniscience, knows who are reconciled to
him, and who not: nor with the judgment of the conscitnce of any reconciled
persons, who by the assurance of faith or hope, may believe, or hope, that they
are reconciled; for this is Gods tribunal: but with the judgment of the
church, which under the sacrament of charity (as it was termed of old) by the
harlots words, and actions may judge the best: and so this parr of the question
is utterly void. For I never yet knew harlot but would confess, and lament her
sin, and promise amendment before her bastard was baptized, and so give a
ground for charitable hope.

The second limitation is, till she be publickely reconciled to the church
scandalized, from which by her fact she has cu^ her self off. In which four
things are to be pondered. First, the manner of her reconciling, which is
required by the question; in the open church. But what if she be ready to be
swallowed up of sorrow? 2 Cor. 2:7.
Shall we not have the church to apply her power of mitigating indulgence?
shall we have nothing but extreamitie? Did God allow in the time of the law,
Exodus 21.28, 29, 30.
that if an ox did kill a man by the masters negligence, there might be a
commutation of punishment, from death to a ransom of money, and will we in no
case have a mitigation of rigor from the open church, when yet Justice may be
done, and that, with more good sometimes, both upon the party, and others by
charitable and indulgent acts?

Secondly, the persons offended, are the Church scandalized: by which the
question means not the Catholic, or national Church; for with both these the
harlot may be friends still; because they cannot take notice of every such
fact, to be offended by it: But the particular Church and assembly united by
God, and the laws for the professing of Thirdly, consider then the danger of
the harlot offending; she has cut her self off, as the question implies: but
consider how she has cut her self off? and how far? she has not cut her
self off by excommunication ecclesiastical: for that is not in her power, and
the Church has not yet proceeded against her: but by excommunication moral,
by the wickedness of her fact, which makes her censurable both here and
hereafter, in an high degree, if she repent not heartily. But how far has
she cut her self off? Not from the visible Church; for she still professes
saving faith; and would not but have the benefit of it for much: yea, she
still has the character of Baptism, which is the outward mark of a
Christian: for otherwise upon her reconciliation she should be baptized again,
which surely the question intends not: but from two things in the visible
Church: first, from the inward comforts of christianity, till she repent unto
life: For (I think) it will not be denied, but that she may do this, before
ecclesiastical indulgence be applied unto her upon outward submission. And
secondly, from public communion with the visible Church in some holy things,
when she is proceeded against, till she has outwardly, in the congregation
confessed her fault (if need require) and promised amendment. In some holy
things (I say) for I answer, none will deny her a right to read the word of
God, or to hear it read, to hear good exhortations and instructions, or to
pray in private, which yet are the acts of a true Christian.

Fourthly, consider the remedy of this danger, ( her reconciling to the
Church:) by which we must not understand, her returning into favor, by
communion with the Church in repentance unto life, and the faith of the elect;
for no man, or men, can judge certainly of these: but only returning into
favor by communion with the Church in profession to have them.

The question being thus stated, we may the more easily conceive and give
satisfying answers. To the first, whether Bastards are baptizable? 1 Why the
bastards of christians are baptizable?
I answer, the bastards (as other children) of Jews, Turks, and Infidels are
not: but the bastards of professors of Christianity are, for these two reasons.

First, because that which gives right unto the parents, gives right unto the
children in the parents right (for when the parents professed the faith of
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.16.
the Apostles did baptize them and their children, if any such were in the
household: Act. 12. Act. 8. Mat. 28.
) But profession of Christianity gives right to the Parents: for if men do but
profess their faith in the Trinity, they are baptizeable: and therefore the
bastards of Christans are baptizeable.

Secondly, because the children of Christians are baptizeable: but bastards of
Christians, are the children of Christians; for otherwise such parents should
be rebaptized: therefore they are baptizeable.

To the second question, whether men ought to stay their baptism, till the
harlot be reconciled unto God in the open church* which is justly scandalized
by her fact, and from which she has dismembered herself by her misdeed? I
answer, first to the grounds of the question in limitations: and next to the
question it self.

To the grounds of the question, 2 An harlots fact does not make her no
Christian.
I answer two things. First, that her fact has not so dismembered her as to
make her no christian. For let me ask, does a vaste sin so cut off from
Christ, that it does unchristian a man or woman? I do not ask this to move
any man or woman to flatter themselves in such a case. For such have just cause
to doubt whether they are univocall members of saving Christ: neither can they
know by assurance of faith, whether ever they shall rise again: because God
says to no man, sin, and my grace shall help thee up. But I ask it, to
show the hope and charity of the church, about such wicked professors of
christianity. Besides, if her fact had made her no christian, she should be
rebaptized: but she has still the character of baptism, and has right to
the inward comforts of it, if she repent: and so, in her state, and right, her
bastard has a right also.

Secondly, I answer, that her scandalizing of the church, where she lives, 3
An harlots fact does not deprive her or her child of the right of christianity.
does not deprive her self, or her child, of the right of christianity. As
for her child, the scandal was given by the mother, not that, who is a
sufferer in the shame of the sin, not a doer in the work of it. As for her
self, though her scandal deprive her of the best comforts of christianity,
till she repent: yet not of a right to some of the outward privileges of
Christianity, whereof the baptism of her child is one.

And this the rather, because an harlot amongst christians, having a bastard
and not professing her self sorrowful, and that she does believe in Christ,
is not (for ought I know, or have heard) to be found what ever her heart be.

4 No man ought lawfully to stay bastards from Baptism.
Now, secondly, to the question it self, I answer, that no man either in that
church, or over that church, ought lawfully to stay bastards from baptism.
Because they that are in the covenant of Christianity ( as those that are to be
regenerated, though not yet actually regenerate) are not to be stayed from
baptism: Vt regenerandi etsi nondum regenerati
but the bastards of christian harlots are in such a covenant of christianity:
therefore they ought not to be stayed from it. That it is thus with christian
harlots appears thus: because if a christian church be in the covenant of
christianity, then all the members, 1 Cor. 12, 27.
and matter of it are: therefore the church of Corinth is called the body of
Christ, in respect of the covenant of christianity, though fearful wickedness
was acted in that church about word, sacraments, and conversation. But such
bastards are some of the members of a christian church, therefore they ought
not to be stayed from baptism. That they are members of a a christian church,
appears thus, Because all that are within the Jurisdiction and judgment of a
christian church, are the members and matter of it, for (says Paul) What have
I to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor. ^.12
but bastards of Christians are within the judgment and jurisdiction of the
Church: for else, why were they circumcised of old, and some way censured to
certain generations? Deuteronomy. 23.2
and why in the Christian Church have susceptors (or Godfathers) been
appointed for them, to undertake for their education? Therefore are they
members of a Christian Church.

Secondly, the proceeding of Abrah^m (the father of the faithful) in his house
when he was called into the covenant of circumcision, ought to be a president
to christian Churches in the covenant of Baptism. But Ishmael was circumcised
as well as Isaac, though Agar bro^ght him forth unto bondage, If then no men
ought lawfully so to do, Gal. 4. Genesis 21.
surely such Bastards are not to be denied baptism finally, or to be suspended
from it in due time, understanding it as is before said. Thus have I answered
these questions.

But I know, others have answered otherwise: let it therefore be heard and
examined. Some have answered negatively, that Bastards ought not to be baptized
until their mothers be reconciled to God openly in the Church, in the which
her child is to be baptized; let us therefore.

1 Hear their reasons for their opinions. 2 How they maintain it again^
ob^ections made.
Object.
Their reasons are two. First, because all they, and only they may be baptized,
which either do actually believe, or are of believing parents: but bastards in
infancy, do not believe actually, nor are of believing parents: Sol.
therefore they are not baptizable. But I answer to the argument, and
application of it. The argument is imperfect: Exposititij.
for what if bastards be such as whose parents are unknown? in such a case
the learned say well, if they shall be borne among christians, Si inter
Christianos nati fuerint, ex Charitate habendi profilijs Christianorum si non
sit justa causa contrariu^ praesumendi.
the law of charity is to repute the^ for the children of christians, if there
be not a just cause to presume otherwise. Therefore the argument should run
thus. All they, and only they should be baptized, which either do actually
believe, or which are of believing parents, or in charity may be presumed so
to be. To the application of it to bastards, I say; none will resolutely
affirm, that Christian bastards while they are infants, are neither actual
believers, nor of believing parents, nor may be presumed so to be: will they
hold, that in the act of adultery there is an utter falling from the covenant
of christianity? 1 Cor. 6. In sensu composito.
Have they not read of taking the members of Christ, and making them the
members of an harlot? or will they hold that the act of whoredom does utterly
extinguish baptismall grace in the parents? I think they will not; I know they
cannot. No corporation does cast off their members from their enfranchisements
before trial, convictions, and judgment: much less will Christ. Yet they say
two things in their own defense. First, that bastards believe not actually.
Indeed it were too lofty to say that they believe as men of years who are
wrought upon by the word, and prayer. But were it not very harsh to say they
are infidels? Are they not members of a Church in the outward covenant of
christianity as well as others? Have they not read of the seeds of faith, in
such? or that Christ speaking of little ones, says, they believe in his name?
Mat. 18.6.
It may be, he speaks of such as were admitted already into the covenant of
circumcision: but may not they judge charitably of Bastards, in such a case,
seeing ye see, or may see (in the issue) bastards to live graciously in the
bosom of the Church? If they know none such, yet I do; blessed be God.

Secondly, they say that the fathers and mothers of bastards are unbeleevers:
because they are unjust, they work from the flesh, 1 Cor. 6:9.10 Gal. 5.9.22.
1 Cor. 6. 1 Timothy 5.8
they are shut out of the Kingdom of heaven, and they provide not for their
own: and thus they reason. They that are unjust, bring forth the fruits of the
flesh, shut themselves out of the kingdom of heaven, and provide not for their
own as they ought, are unbeleevers. But fathers and mothers of bastard are
such: therefore they are unbeleevers. To this I answer two ways.

First in general, by using their own reason laid otherwise thus. They that
are unjust, live in the flesh, shut themselves out of heaven and proprovide not
for their own are unbeleevers. But many christian parents of children lawfully
begotten are such: therefore they are unbeleevers I confess there is some
difference to be put here betwixt parents of lawfully begotten children, and
parents of bastards, because those do it in an act of justice and goodness,
and that by Gods ordinance if they do it as they ought; and these do it in an
act of impudence and injustice. But if an act of injustice and
uncharitableness does of it self, make them unbeleevers, as they are such,
then it reaches to the one as well as to the other. But there is no good
religion bids us to think that an act of injustice in the parents should put a
child both into the state of sin ( in the neglect of a sacrament, Eze. 18.
) and into the state of punishment ( in being deprived of it) when yet the
child has not followed, nor countenanced the parents wickedness.

Secondly, I answer in particular to the argument, and first to the ground of
it, that such wicked christians are not so unbelievers as to be quite
unchristianed, and so to be deprived, in themselves, and their bastards of the
sign and seal of the covenant. There are two sorts of unbelievers; unbelievers
in part, Two sorts of unbel^evers. ^ In part.
rnd unbelievers in whole: unbelievers in part, and in some particulars, when
the word of God is not so received of them, as the rule of faith and obedience
in some particular parts of it as it ought.

Of these there are to many amongst us, and all christian churches. From hence
proceeds that, they not believing the word of chastity, are unchaste, the word
of justice, are unjust, and the word of care for children, are careless, and
the like, 2 In whole.
Unbelievers in whole, when christianity is dead in them at the root; as when
the whole saving word is rejected. This is that unbelief which does
unchristian a man and woman, and if it be final, is a state of Paganism.
Though (it may be) there be such parents in the eyes of God; (yet I think) few
or none are such among Christians in the eyes of the church. They will all
profess to believe in Christ, and when they are convincingly moved, will
lament their sins, and promise to do so no more. To the application of the
argument to fathers and mothers of bastards in a christian church, that they
are such, is an unsufficient plea. And whether they be so, to the cutting of
them off from Christianity in general, and making their bastards unbaptizable,
judge by what is said, and what follows.

Secondly, they give another reason thus. Object.
They that have no grace already conferred, are not to be made partakers of
the sign and seal of grace. Romans 4.11.
But bastards have not grace conferred, they neither actually believing, nor
being borne of christian parents: and therefore they are not to be baptized, I
answer, Sol.
they mean not (I think) the inward grace of actual faith, such as Abraham
had; for then, why was Ishmael circumcised?

But they mean the outward grace of having right to the sign and seal of the
covenant; and thus their application to bastards is false: understand their
argument thus. They that have not the outward grace of right to the sign and
seal of the covenant, are not baptizable. What though Abraham had true actual
faith when he submitted to circumcision, does it follow that all that succeed
him in circumcision should have so also? Prove that and turn Anabaptists: take
away circumcision and baptism from all infants. Therefore I deny the
application, that bastards of wicked christians have not the grace of right to
baptism. They have a right to receive that right whereto their parents have a
right to convey: and certainly these have a right to convey the right of
baptism to their children; both as they are believers of the word of salvation
by Christ, and as they profess to stand in such a way, though they are wicked
and ungodly in particular acts.

They have a right also to the offers of grace in a christian church, and so
have a right to baptism: for herein God offers grace by way of sign, and
seal of Gods covenant. To understand this, conceive these two points.

First, the difference of the offer of grace to them within, and to them
without the church. They without have a right to it in the word: for I may
preach the word to a Jew, Turk, Heathen, if he come within my limit, Mat.
28.19.
and will hear. But they within have a right unto it in the word, and
sacraments, according to Christ's commission.

Secondly, the privilege they have by it, is, not to be graffed into the body
of Christ, according to the election of grace, but according to the profession
of the Gospel, and the state of the church visible here.

Thus their reasons are void from proving that bastards are not baptizable.
Now mark what reasons they make, and find against them, and what they answer.

First, some of the bastards predecessors Censure.
thus propounded. For what Jew, Turk, or Pagan is there, who may not pretend
that some of their predecessors have been believers, Romans 11. Col. 1.
if the Gospel have been preached thorough the world. They must be
predecessors in a christian church, in outward covenant with God. But let us
see their answer. Sol.
They give a text to prove the contrary, and require a text to oppose them.

Their text is Saint Paul's, who speaking of immediate parents, says, except
one of them are believers, their children are unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14
but now (by the faith of one) they are holy. Censure.
They will not prove (I hope) that believers children are holy by an infused,
or derived holiness from them: for from them they are the children of wrath,
but only that they have a foederall holiness, Ephesians. 2,
by which they have a right to bapti^me. Sanctitatem foederalem, ut qui sunt
regenerandi non regenerati
Neither will they prove that it is necessary to a child's baptism, to have
immediate predecessors such believers, as do in all things contrary to such
sins as do wound or waste a good conscience. It is enough i^ one be a
believet, that is, a doctrinall christian, though like the worst in the church
of Corinth. If he be a Jew, the Apostle calls him circumcision, Romans 2.
and if he profess faith in Christ, he is a christian for his own, and his
childs baptism. What though the Apostle speaks of immediate parents there,
where he speaks of a church newly converted to the faith from heathenisme,
and so to be a church that wanted predecessors before times? may we not
therefore make use of other texts more comfortable for us* who have had the
Gospel a long time, and that, sealed with such christian blood?

If now they require a text to oppose them; let them take that, The promise is
to you, and to your children. Act. 2.39.
But they answer, that the unbeliever, and his children, are not the posterity
of the believer; Object.
I say, yes, if they be members of a visible church. Those wicked kings of
Judah, Sol.
that were idolaters, were the posterity of Abraham, and David, and had right
to the promi^es made to them, yea, and to the ever blessed Messiah, who
descended from them. If they repented not, they had no inward comfort from him,
yet had they outward right unto him, by virtue of the promises made to Abraham
and David.

But they say, Object. Sol.
can unclean bastards be the seed of the believing? I answer, that I approve
that in these terms they express hatred to the sin: but in that they forget
a foederall cleanness in unclean christians children, by virtue of Gods
promise to believers foregoing them, they go the right way, not only to fill
he I with bastards, but with true begotten children, whose immediate parents
are (too often) guilty of greater sins then whoredom, though that be
damnable enough.

Secondly, they find another objection; to show mercy unto a thousand
generations, Exodus 20.
to them that love him and keep his commandments. Therefore bastards of
wicked Christians are baptizable.

The reason should have been put thus: Censure.
God has promised to show mercy to a thousand generations of Israelites in
outward communion with him: for otherwise it follows not, that the bastards of
christians are baptizable. But what answer they? They say Censure.
was not David's child got of the wife of Vrijah the generation of them that
loved God at all, though in that act David loved him not? nor was Ishmael the
generation of Abraham that loved God, though in that act (out of ignorance not
wholly excusing) Abraham loved him not? yes, as Josiah was the generation of
them that loved God, though Manasseh his father had long and fearful fits of
cruel Idolatry: so in this case, bastards may be the generation of them that
love God, though their immediate Censure.
as he must be that is baptized. I have answered before, that the bastards of
Christians have the grace of right to Baptism, and that is sufficient in this
case: for otherwise, Ishmaels right to Censure.
But thus they make them that love God to be the posterity, when it is plain,
the promise was made to them that received the law then, and were to continue
in the profession of saving truth, and so to all others in such a case.
Secondly, that God will show little children favor for their fathers and
mothers sake to a thousand generations. But this they think, cannot be meant,
neither in deed is, as I conceive Yet then add a third sense, which they
forget, that God will show the posterity, that continues in the profession of
his name, favor; not for their parents sake, but for his own sake, for his
promise sake, Genesis ^7.
which he makes to them that love him, and that, for many generations; and then
I reason thus. That which keeps the generations to come, who live as
professors in the visible Church in covenant with God, that gives infants of
such parents right to the seal of the covenant, of which they are capable. But
Gods promise to faithful parents in the visible Church, keeps such
generations to come in covenant with God: and therefore have they right to the
scale of the covenant, whereof they are capable. Now whereas they ask, whether
all children, or some have right? I answer, all, to the grace of right to
Baptism.

Thirdly, they bring forth another objection, Bastards and their parents. They
answer here what if there be no difference put? Sol.
And whatsoever the objection be, (for I know not who ownes it) they run
here a strange course. Out of a desire to honor the seventh commandment, they
dishonor the first, and third. Heb. 13.
Let adultery be abominable (because whoremongers and adulterers God will
Judge) yet let God have his honor in hating infidelity above whoredom. Let
not the Scripture be wronged; but thoroughly weigh their words. They say
first, Censure.
that Bastards and their parents are all infidels: what? though their parents
be Christians? 1 Timothy 5.8.
yes surely, say they; because Saint Paul says they are worse then infidels.
Let them consider, because they are worse then careful infidels, in not caring
for their children (which is against the fifth and eight commandments) are they
worse then infidels in infidelity? They are christians, yet worse, and better,
worse in disgracing their posterity: 2 Pet. 2.19, 20.
yet better in believing still the doctrine of christianity, and so giving a
right to baptism. But they say further, that parents of bastards are worse in
state then Turks, and they would prove it from a Text of final Apostasy: but
what proof this can be against an act of whoredom (in the passion of lust,
clowding reason in an heat) I cannot tell? Let a Turk be a Turk, but no worse;
and let a damnable Harlot be an harlot, but no worse. Her state is bad enough
to bring her to hell without

Fourthly, they meet with another objection, Censure.
that Bastards are borne, and the Church is their Mother; therefore baptism
ought not to be denied them. It should have been put thus; they are borne of
Christian parents, who by profession are members of the Church, and so the
Church is their Mother, Sol.
and the mother of their seed; and therefore to be baptized. But in their
answer, they fall into two errors. First, that the Church is a company of true
believers who^ God bath chosen to eternal life; which Church I pray? Not that
whereof newborn bastards of Christian parents are by profession members. The
holy Catholic Church, and proper body of Christ, may be defined by believers
in that sense of it: but that the visible Church, in the outward face of it, is
thus defined, wants warrant in the word of Christ. Thus the Church is a number
of persons united according to the word. Act. 2. 42. 1 Cor. 1, 2.
in the profession of saving truth, whether they are elect, or no. Their second
error is, that Bastards are infidels; for this can not be conceived of
bastards of Christian parents, as is before proved.

Fifthly, they yet find more arguments to oppose them: Censure.
Bastards may belong to Gods election, and therefore are not to be denied
Baptism: It should have been thus set: They may belong to Gods election as
members of the visible Church: for otherwise election may belong to Jews and
Turks, who yet are not Baptizable without personable profession. But they
answer thus, Sol.
it must not be said, they may belong, Censure.
but they do belong to Gods election: for otherwise the sign is not to be
administered unto them. Do they consider how thus they take away Baptism from
all men, women, 2 Timothy 2.19
and children? The Lord knows who are his and the Church reaches but to the
judgment of charity. A judgment of certainety, to warrant us in these acts is
no where granted, though baptism be deferred to the last gasp for any thing
known to me of faith.

Eze. 18.
But may they not rather thus dispute? Censure.
The children whose parents have a right to baptism, have also a right to
baptism themselves, notwithstanding their parents personal faults; for
otherwise they shall be punished for parents faults: But the christian parents
of bastar^s have a right to baptism themselves: and therefore so have their
children. They have a right of possession to the baptism they have: and a
right of expectation to the comfort of it, upon their faith and repentance. But
take their answer, Sol.
and they say four things. First, that they do not mean to deny baptism, but
to defer it. Indeed here is some charity, but not enough, upon former grounds,
Again they say, to defer baptism is not to punish them for their parents
sins; yes that it is, if it be merely inflicted for parents sins. Though
the baptism of children of believers is not to remunerate them for their
parents righreousnesse, but a blessing upon them for Gods promise sake to
believers; yet to deprive infants of it merely for parents sake, is a
punishment for parents sins. Thirdly they say, that the Prophet Ezekiel
speaks of actual sins of great ones, and not of little childrens sins: and
when they have said thus, they confess it is not to the purpose here. Yet
consider this point: Can any man be guilty of the personal sin of another,
with whom only there is communion of suffering, and not of sinning? God
forbid, and yet such is the case of infants from us. Lastly they ask, what
danger is it if bastards should be unbaptized till they are of years? I
answer, there are dangers more then one. The danger of injustice at large, in
withholding a right from them: yea, may I not call it sacrilege? Act. 8. and 9
The danger of the neglect of this ordinance, which is the ordinary way of God
for entrance into the visible church. Mat. 28.
And the danger of elevating baptism above the mind of Christ, who will have
grace offered to all entering christians in it, yea, and given by way of promise
and covenant which shall not fail to the receivers.

Lastly, they yet find another reason against Censure.
ought not to have their children kept from baptism: but the parents of
bastards in a christian church, are (at least) in the judgment of charity
christians, (for otherwise they were rebaptizable) therefore their children
ought not to be kept from baptism. Sol.
Now take their answer. They say, the judgment of charity ought always to be
according to truth. This is true, of truth probably presumed. But what do they
assume? that whoremongers and harlots cannot be judged such while they are in
their sins, which make them unbelievers. But say, I pray: Is their sin
properly against faith or manners? Is the bad working, or idleness of faith,
in this sin against manners, of such power, as utterly to root out their
doctrinall faith, which yet is sufficient to entitle their children to
baptism? If they answer but these demands well, they shall see their own
errors.

Thus have I taken in by the way, a view of th^s question, which ^s not an
every day doubt, and is useful ^or the quieting of many godly persons in this
particular* and my conclusion is this. That in the reforming of our visible
church, which consisted of visible christians before (though much out of order)
we, their seed, in their right, and so in a right of our own were more purely
baptized, and so made true members of our true visible church, whatsoever
Brownists plead to the contrary. For as bastards of christian parents have a
right to be baptized into their parents christianity: so much more had we
into ours. Our predecessors had a state whereof they repented; and so have
these of which they should. If neither of them repented as they should, yet
were both of them true christians: and so both their posterities were rightly
baptized, and made true members of a true visible church: i^ not for such
government as Brownists dream of, yet to be governed as members of Gods
house, for conviction, or conversion to life.

SECT. 10. Brownists third exception against us about the head of our Church.
We having now done what the Brownists do mean by a true church and the
falsitie of it; and with the entrance into it: we are now come unto their
third exception, taken from the head of a true visible church. They find from
time to time our kings to interpose their authority over every particular
assembly in our church, for the keeping of them in pious, and peaceable ways,
according to the laws of God and our church, and commonwealth: and because
they fancy no visible churches, but particular congregations, which must be
fully furnished from Christ, with power of governing themselves: and they do
perceive withal that the supreme authority of a king over churches, does
(according to kingly duty) hinder their erecting of new ways, and tie them up
to observe the laudable customs of the church: therefore (as if they willingly
subscribed to the speech of Gallio, that wicked deputy of Achaia, Act 18.12,
13, 14, 15.
If it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would
that I should bear with you, but if it be a question of words, and names, and
of your law, look ye to it, for I will be no judge of such matters), they cry
out, we have no head but Christ: he shall rule over us: we will wait upon him
only: but you have another head, and that is the king, whose laws you follow
for government of the church, and upon whom ye do depend for building, or
pulling down whatsoever Christ's law says.

Now, to prick and open this blister, consider, 1 That Christ is the head of
the catholic Church, 2 That Christ is the head of particular Churches. 3 That
Christ is the head of our church. 4 That the headship of the king, does not
hinder but help this, and that according to Christ's word.


That Christ is the head of the catholic church, no christian will deny, 1
Christ is the head of the catholic Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. John 1 16.
Col. 1 19 Ephesians 1.22. Ephesians. 9.6. 1 John 2. Ephesians. 5.23.
or if he do, he will be convinced by scriptures, which teach him to be the
head of the body, even his church. He has in him most perfectly, whatsoever
may be for the life and salvation of his church. He has all things subjected
to him for the behoof of his church. He takes up all debates, suites,
quarrels, and controversies betwixt God and his church, as a counselor,
advocate, yea, husband for his wife. He is the Prince of our salvation, the
proper fountain of all spiriruall life and government. No head is such an
head as he is: Political heads give the influence of civil favor;
Oeconomicall heads of household, and wedlock favors: but this all-sufficient
spiritual head, of saying favors, spiritual blessings in heavenly things. Ephesians
1.3.
This therefore is certain, that thousands in this catholic church do run
into folly, rebellion, and blasphemy. Into folly; because they do things
without the general, or particular direction of Christ: Christ is not in all
their counsels. Into rebellion, because they do things against the direction
of Christ: let Christ say what he will, they will do what they list. Into
blasphemy, because they think not Christ's counsel worth the while, s^ long as
they can shift without it: it is good when they are sick, but if well, it is
but as Elias to Ahab, a troubler of Israel. 1 King. 1.18.
These may be in the catholic church, they are not of it, because Christ is
not their head by infusion of grace.

Secondly, it is true also, that he is the head of particular churches, 2.
Christ is the head of particular Churches* 1 Cor. 12.27.
and visible assemblies. Therefore the church of Corinth is called the body of
Christ, and members in particular. This church (as any other particular church)
may be considered two ways: In it self, and so it was a body: with reference
to other churches, and so it was a member of the catholic church. But consider
it both, or either of these ways; if it be the body of Christ, if a member of
his body, or if both, Christ is the head of it: Apoc. 1.
he is in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes. Therefore also the
church of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 3.15.
is called the house of God: and as in an house there is an head, the husband
is the wifes head; so, but more transcendently, 1 Cor. 11.
is Christ the head of every particular house or church. For God has set his
son over his own house, Heb. 3 6. Heb. 10.
and our high priest is over the house of God. This is true.

3. Christ is the head of our Church.
But thirdly, say the Brownists, what is that to us? Christ is not our head.
Yes, Christ is the head of our church of England. For do but consider 1
Wherein Christ's headship stands? 2 How he uses and exercises it?


Christ's headship does stand in providing fit means for the gathering and
enlarging of his visible church, or churches, and making them effectual. There
is a foundation to be laid, which properly is Christ, and for, 1 Cor 3.10, 11.
Ephesians. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.7. 1 Cor. 3.10
and from him the Prophets, and Apostles. There are builders, yea master
builders, as well as others, to be provided. There are materials to be at
hand, saints by calling some of which grow up to be lively stones, a spiritual
house, 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Pet. 2.5 1 Cor. 3 9.
that they may be Gods building. These faithful ones must be laid and coupled
together, as by joints, till they grow into an holy temple, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
for the habitation of the Lord, by the spirit. Now, that this may be done,
Christ is the principal agent, he adds unto his church, Acts 2.47. John 14.6.
that they may come to the father by him. And withal he provides his word,
that they might believe, Ioh. 10.31 1 Cor 3 5. Rom 6.4. 1 Cor. 10.16
and ministers, by whom they may do it: and the sacraments, that they may be
baptized into his death, and have the communion of the blood of Christ. He
rests not here, but to effectual, in the use of these means, he comes amongst
these citizens with the saints, Ephesians. 2.19
and grants to those that by grace receive the spirit which is of God, 1 Cor.
2.12. Acts 11.18. Acts 15.11 Acts 2.47 Acts 11.20. to 26.
repentance unto life, and faith to purify their hearts: and so he adds to
the church from day to day, a great number that believe and turn unto the
Lord. But for those that come in to the voice of the word, and supper of the
gospel in word and sacraments, and have Simon Magus, Judas, Hymeneus,
Alexander, and Demas his heart, if the conviction of themselves, and the
conversion of others, and their perseverance do them no good, he shows
sometimes what they deserve, by fearful judgments, Acts 5.
and the censures of the church, Mat. 16. John 20. Mat. 13.
but he will show it in full power when the great day of separation comes.

Now look, (in the fear of God) whether our ever blessed Jesus Christ be not
thus our head. Have we not (thorough grace) the word of God, gifts, ministry,
and sacraments from Christ's rule? Say the Brownists, ye have not all Christ's
ordinances, Object.
ye want his discipline. To that I shall speak in due place: Sol.
in the mean time, put case it were true; yet were it a true visible church,
though not a perfect one. That is an ordinance for the comely and well being,
not for the being of the church. But it lies upon them to prove that, what they
say we want, are Christ's ordinances, and branches or his kingdom. This they
never can do by the undoubted word of Christ.

Besides, has not Christ our head, in the use and exercise of these blessings
manifested his effectual power? Mic 7.19.
How many iniquities are subdued, and sins cast into the depthes of the sea?
what place is there, where we shall not find the serpents head broken? Genesis 3.15
Some have been in their ordinary businesses, as the woman of Samaria, John 4
7.
and have come off with the bells of the horses, pots in Jerusalem, and Judah?
Zac. 14 20 2^.
as well as pots in the Lords house, engraved with holiness unto the Lord.
Some have been disciplined with the misery of the h^sks of swine, Luke 15.57.
and have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness, Col. 1.13
into the kingdom of Gods dear son. Some have heard and read good things to
scoff and cavil at them, but have been suddenly changed from glory, 2 Cor. 3
1^
to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. Some have breathed out the stinking
breath of sin, as Saul, Acts 9.
and others have seen the heates of persecutions, and they have returned home
to call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, both theirs and ours. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Yea, and some have seen others fall away from the faith of Christ, and by the
preaching of Christ, have met with graffing in, the riches of the Gentiles,
reconciling, and salvation. Romans 11.^^ 12.15.19.
And though with Christ they have had a sword sent, Mat. 10.34 Phil. 11.13 14
yet bonds in Christ have been famous, and the brethren in the Lord have waxed
confident, and bold to speak the word without fear. Thus has it been with
our blessed church: the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, Mat. 11.22
and the violent have taken it by force. But the ministry of the Brownists
has had no such communion, and influence, with, and from Christ our head; one
of a city, two of a tribe, here a little, and there a little, does not answer,
in a continual course from Christ hither, the power of Christ's intercession,
Psalm. 2.
for the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for
his possession.

But (say the Brownists) we have other heads besides Christ. Object. Sol.
I say we have no other mystical head beside Christ; 4 The headship of the
King does not hinder the headship of Christ. 1 Cor. 11. Esa. 9.15. 1 Samuel 15
17. Exodus 18.25
but only political heads to keep peace, and to see that every person,
within their compass, do his duty religiously. Thus the husband is the wives
head; the honorable man the head; Saul, the head of the Tribes; and Moses chose
men of courage, and made them heads over the people.

But (say they) our King is our head, so as to rule in matters of religion.
This is true: yet (fourthly) consider that this headship of the King does not
hinder ^ut help the advancement of Christ's headship, and that according to the
word of Christ. To clear this, follow me in two particulars.

1 That God has given a power of government to the Church for the well
ordering of it self. 2 That Christ has made Kings prime officers to advance
it in their places.
1 The Church has a power to govern it self under Christ. Mat. 22.23. Exodus
2.14
As a man cannot well be without clothes and good nourture: so neither can the
Church well be without the walls of government. She must also be able to hold
up her head against her enemies that shall say, by what authority do thou
these things, and who made thee a man of authority? Therefore has Christ given
the particular, or general rules of the word, to give a commission to the
Church to govern it self both in matters of substance, and in matters of
circumstance. In matters of substance it has power to govern it self, by
ordering concerning the Word, Acts 2.41.42.
Sacraments and Prayer, so as to make them most comfortable: concerning Church
Offices from time to time, Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. Iam. 5.14.6.8. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
Gal 6.6. 2 These. 3.6. 1 Cor. 11.20.
and duties of charity: concerning the Churches censures, public assemblies,
and oversight that all these be done to the honor of Christ, and advancement
of religion. In matters of Circumstances, it has power to ordain some outward
rites and ceremonies for the outward carriage of Gods worship. In the Church of
Antioch there was a question aabout Circumcision (an useless, because dying
ceremony then.) The Apostles, Acts 15 1. 2
Elders, and brethren at Jerusalem (by their consent and to encourage them in
grace) consulted about it, and delivered their judgment as a rule for the
Church to follow. Ver. 10.24 28
They disanulled the ceremony of Circumcision in those Churches troubled: and
establish others for a time, verse 29.
as abstaining from meat offered to Idols and blood: which yet in themselves
were but things indifferent. For meat commends us not to God: 1 Cor. 8.8.
for neither if we eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the
worse. Again in the Church of Corinth, there was a custom which grew to a
public order in the Church, of covering and uncovering, 1 Cor 11* 4.5, etc.
to signify the headship and sovereignty of the man, and the subjection of the
woman. This was countenanced by the Apostle for the peace of the Church, ver.
33 34
and other otders established. Yea when he purposely treats of acts of
ordinary and extraordinary worship, he gives them rules for the government and
outward carriage of them, 1 Cor. 14.26.46.
let all things be done to edyfyng, and let all things be done decently and in
order. Thus in matters of substance has Christ made his Church able to govern
it self by particular rules, and in matters of circumstance by general rules
of edification, order, and decency.

2 Kings are prime officers to advance government in Churches. Mat. 28. Mat.
16. Mat^ 6 Romans ^2.8 1 Cor, 11.28. Romans 13.5
Secondly, he has also made Kings prime officers to advance this government in
their places. That he has made them Church Officers must be thus taken up.
Not strictly, as Ministers, who have the highest hand under Christ in the Word,
Sacraments, and keys of censures Ecclesiastical* but largely, as those that
are to care for good order about them. The offices of ruling and governing
which Paul speaks of, cannot be proved not to belong to them. They are
Ministers for our good: and our good is not chiefly civil (I hope) but
spiritual. The Apostle would have us pray for them, that we may not only live
in civil honesty, but in Godliness, to be countenanced, and established by
them? 1 Timothy 2.2.
Surely being members of Church, they cannot but be chief ones too, as being
Christ's Lieftenants, who according to his promise are to be nursing fathers,
Esa. 49.23
and their queens nurcing mothers, who have their authority, breasts and duggs
to reach the need of all under them, to cherish and feed the Church of Christ
according to his rules. It is true, they are servants to the Church, Object.
and all good Kings do so acknowledge themselves: Sol.
but not to be equals, or subjects to the members of the Church; but to make
their prime authority serviceable to the advancement of the Gospel for the
salvation of Christ's people. Hence is it that God has given them a sword, Romans
^3.
that when they oversee the ways of the Church within their reach, they may
maintain the rights of it, and by a coactive and coercive power suppress the
opposites: for without this they cannot be the ministers of God for our good.

But (say the Brownists) wherein stands this office of Kings in the Church,
Object.
and over the members of it? I answer, Sol.
first, in calling of assemblies both civil and sacred. Number. 10.1, 2. Josh
24.^* 18. 1 Chro. 15. 2 Chro. 15.14. 2 Chro. 22.3. 2 Chro 20 2 Chro. 34 29 30 1
King. 15 12, 14, 14. 2 King. 23.2, 3. 2 Chro. 29.3, 4, 5. 2 Chro. ^* 14, ^5
The two silver Trumpets were given to Moses the magistrate: and least we should
look upon him as some extraordinary person, we see that right maintained by
Joshua, David, Solomon, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. Secondly, in
abolishing false worship, and establishing true, as we see in Asa, Josiah,
Hezikiah. Thirdly, in looking to the ministry, both that it be sound and good
(as Solomon, who thereupon deposed Abiathar, and put Sadock in his room, as
he performed other acts of justice by royal authority, and Iehosaphat who
sent his princes to see that the Priests and Levites did teach the law of God
in their cities:) and that the ministry be maintained according to the
honors that God has bestowed upon them, 2 Chro. 29 4, and 31.4.16, 17. 2
Chro. 35 2.
as Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, and Nehemiah. Fourthly, in causing the people to
serve the Lord, as Hezekiah, Neh. 13.11.12. 2 Chro. 30 2 Chro. 34 2 Chro. 15
and compelling all that were round in Israel (formerly professing Gods
religion) to seek the Lord as Josiah and Asa: Their people were in the house
of God committed to their charge, and they will see them to live according to
the order set by God. Lastly, 2 Chro. 19 18.
in appointing consistories for the well ordering of the people; as
Iehoshaphat, who set over the Levites and Priests, and chief of the families
of Israel, for the judgment and cause of the Lord at Jerusalem.

Object.
All this is true (say they) of the Jewish kings, who were types of Christ: but
we read of no such officers in the new testament. Sol.
These men are liberal in making types of Christ's kingdom; but I wonder
whence they will prove it, what word of Christ will they bring for it? It is
true, that in some things, some of the kings of Judah were types of Christ (as
Solomon in his name and building the the temple, and David in his troubles, and
victories, and as he was a king, and a prophet): but that all the kings of
Judah were types in their governements over the church and state, even Saul
himself, when God made him head of the tribes, cannot be proved for Gods
truth. 1 Samuel 15.17.
And whereas they talk of no such officers in the new testament. Say it be
so: there were no christian Magistrates while those scriptures were in writing:
and Christ knew them to be sufficiently instructed in the old. This is a sure
rule, that what is warranted in the old testament, and not contradicted in the
old or new, may (as the warrant goes, either by precept for things necessary,
or pattern for things lawful) go for current still. But seeing the new
testament says, that we must pray for kings, that by their authority we may
live in godliness, 1 Timothy 2.2.
as by those that are over us for our good, spiritual and temporal, surely,
3. Rom 13.5.
they have warrant enough to use their power, over all their people to advance
godliness, and the good of religion as well as justice.

But (say they) it is for Christ, Object.
not for kings, to appoint orders about his worship. This is true for
substantial orders; Sol.
for these thas are in the will of Christ may not be altered: but for matters
of circumstance, which concern time, place, and outward form, not determined,
kings are bound, as supreme members of the church, over which they are, to use
christian consistories to order them, so as may agree to the condition of his
church, as well as the master of a family may command his steward to order his
whole family, that the private worship in his family be not dishonored. This
ads both to the glory and strength of a church: to the glory of it, when kings
are nourcing fathers; and to the strength of it, when the power of a king is
the churches, for the suppressing of vice, and maintenance of virtue.

Object. Sol.
But then (say they) they may enjoine their own inventions in stead of Gods
will. I answer, that the inventions of men are of two sorts: of things contrary
to the word of Christ, as worshipping of images, invocation of saints,
forbidding marriage and meats, as these things which directly pollute persons,
or times, or the like. These are impious: and it these are enjoined, christians
must patiently suffer, and lovingly mourn, till in the day of Judgment God
fan away the chafe. But there are others, which in their own nature are
indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden by God; and of which Christ says,
he that is not against us, is with us. Mar. 9.40
In these the christian magistrate has a power for order, and uniformity. For
if Godly persons may bring up customs in the times of Gods worship, Hest. 9. 1
Cor. 11.
as the Jews did their Purim: and if Christians may order what garments women
may wear when they come to church (which Paul after allowed) why* may not the
christian magistrate for the peace of his whole body?

Object.
But then (say they) this makes things arbitrary, and indifferent to become
necessary. Sol.
This is true: but you must conceive that a thing may be said to be necessary
two ways; necessary in it self, and necessary in the outward submission to
the use of it. In it self, a thing indifferent cannot be made necessary. It
is always as it is by nature, and conscience informed must so judge it, yet in
the outward use, for the peace of the Church, it may upon command, become
necessary. After the death of Christ, till the destruction of the temple, Acts
15.28. Acts 16.3. Acts 21.81 22, 23, 24* 25.
abstaining from things strangled, and blood, circumcision, legal vows, and
purifyings were indifferent in themselves, (for else the Apostles would not
have used them so): yet for the peace of some churches they were judged
necessary to be yielded in love; and so may it be in other things: yet the
indifferent nature of things is not taken away, but the necessary use
prescribed, for the peace of the church, upon better grounds then that we
should suffer our selves to be unsettled from royal power.

But again (say they) then kings may require such things as swarve from some
holy patterns we have in the scriptures; Object.
and so by granting this government, we shall be ill to help, I say,
howsoever they use it, we must grant what God has given, Sol.
as they are all the keepers of both the tables. Deuteronomy. 17.
If they use it well, thou must obey in the Lord If ill, thy prayers and tears
must be thy weapons, and thy body must suffer his penalties, and it is praise
worthy for thee to suffer, not in a supposed good cause, but in a good cause
without controversy (which is not the case of sufferers in these days of
peace and the Gospel so far as I know) but for in^oynements, swar^ing from
patterns. Exodus 12.
I find this in scriptures, that Godly men have swarved from patterns, not
seconded by a perpetual law, which might seem to bind stron^ly. The Jews
sat at the passover in Christ's t^me (or rather lay leaning) though the first
gesture was standing or walking: Mat. 26.
and godly men and women communicate in the morning, and in a Church, though
the first pattern was otherwise: Josh 5.5.6 7.9. Math. 12.3 5. 2 Chro. 7.7. 1
King. 8.64. 2 Chro. 30 2, 3, 17.18* etc. Object. Sol. Object. Pro. 2.20. Sol.
yea th^s is plain, that Gods ceremonies might in some cases be dispensed
withal without sin, much more may men be unlosed from patterns which are
not the examples of a law binding so.

I know it will be said that the examples of Gods people (commended by the holy
Ghost) are every whit of as great ^orce as a command. It is true, if they be
examples of a rule: otherwise they show things lawful, but not things
necessary. Solomon indeed says, walk in the way of good men, and keep the
ways of the righteous. But good men, and righteous men are so with respect to
Gods law after which they walk; otherwise they are not so, though b^ng so
good, they may give a pattern of that which is lawful, but not necessary.

My conclusion is this, that the Church has power to govern it se^; by
particular laws in matters of substance, and by g^neral in the outward
carriage of order, comeliness, and edification. And when a king, as head of
government under Christ, puts in ^his authority and power for seeing things
carried within the churches of his kingdom according to these rules, he is a
prime officer under Christ by Christ's own promise, and appointment, whatsoever
Brownists can say against it. If they will still stand against it (for few of
them are found so humble as to search, and yield) they cannot but know this,
that in breaking the laws of men that are not against Christ, Mar. 9.40. Rom
13.5.
they sin against conscience. And as magistrates are encouraged to be great
helps to religion by obedience, so, by the contrary, they are provoked to
trouble. This therefore is a sure rule, that a Christian that will not study to
be quiet, in respect of the laws of men, what possible he can, is a singular
burden to the Church in which he lives.

SECT. 11. Brownists fourth exception against us, about the members of our
Church.
We are now come from the Brownists meaning by a true Church, and their
entrance into, and head of a true church, to the members of a true church.
Here they take on amain, that the true members of a true Church ought to be
saints by calling; whereas ours are a mixture of good and bad, penitent, and
impenitent, to the pollution of the whole body: and that, therefore we are not
a true church. But this still discovers strange weakness. For put case a man
had never a good finger, nor hand, never a good toe, nor foot, never a hair
on head, or beard; or if he have all his members, yet he has the palsy in
one, the gout in another, blindness in another, deafness in another,
botches in another, numnesse and deadness in another, is he therefore no true
man? Surely he is a true man still, though a miserable one. So is it in a
visible church; many members may be weak, and many wicked, as well as some
truly gracious; and yet, in the whole body a true church still. Peter and John
met with a beggar, at the gate of the temple called Beautiful, who was feign
to be carried, because he was lame from his mothers womb, Act. 3.2.
and yet the holy Ghost calls him, a certain man: and Paul met with an
Apostolical Church in Corinth, which was worse in many members then that poor
cripple was, and yet he called it a true church of God: 1 Cor. 1.2.
for the God of truth admits of no falsehood.

But to clear this more fully, I shall by (Gods assistance) consider three
things: 1 What they say true, of their own members and ours. 2 What they say
false, of the members of a true visible church. 3 That their dream of
pollution, is from their own brains, not from Christ's ordinance.


This they say truly, that the members of a true church are saints by calling.
1. Saints by calling. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Profession of saving truth (as I have showed) makes such true members; and all
that so profess themselves (though there be much chafe among the wheat) are
such saints by calling. He that professes so much knowledge, either actually,
or foederally, as admits him to baptism, has put on Christ. Gal 3.
And he that has put on Christ, Act. 1. Ioh. 15.2.
though as an elect vessel as Paul, or as one in Christ bearing no fruit, and
therefore justly to be cut off, is certainly a saint by calling. There are two
sorts of saints by calling: such as are sanctified by habitual infusions, and
actual expressements; and such as are so by baptismal profession, and many
gifts of the spirit, Heb. 10.^9
and so by consecration to God. This may fall upon those that are justly
rejected for their hypocrisy and wickedness These two sorts, have ever and
ever shall (to the end of the world) make up the true members of a true visible
church.

This secondly, they say falsely, 2 Renewed Saints not only matter of a
visible Church.
that the members of a true visible church, are only such saints as are so
regenerated, as they have actual communion with Christ in all the acts of
saving grace. If they would sp^ake of the Catholic Church. It is the number of
all faithful people, which are united to Christ by the union of the body,
head, spirit, and faith of truth. By the first, all members are knit together
with the head in one body: 1 Cor. 12.
and so receive grace from the head according to the measure of every member.
By the second, it has but one head: As the body is but one, so the head is but
one, from whence it receives the grace of life. 2 Cor. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.3.
By the third, the whole Church is directed and governed by one spirit, which
is the spirit of sanctification. And by the fourth, the whole church receives
the doctrine once given to the saints, Jude 3.
which it cleaves unto for ever, Ephesians 2.20. Romans 14.5. 2 Timothy 3.16.
that in this foundation, and love of union it may receive from Christ all
saving doctrine, with the comfortable fruits of it. If they would speak of
this catholic church, let them draw up the members to that sanctity which the
word, and world, will afford.

al spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians 1.3. Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
and be jointed into the body of Christ, till they come to a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; let them speak of all
holiness too, so far as our knowledge in part can reach unto in this kingdom
of heaven upon earth. 1 Cor. 13 9


Judas be in as well as Peter by Christ's his call, and young Timothy, 1 Cor.
16.10.
can work the work of the Lord as Paul does: yet surely they that are best,
and of ablest gifts are fittest for highest places in the visible church. Which
because the Brownists perceive, therefore they having set up to themselves a
government of all the members (which they cannot make good) they think not
only the holiest persons to be the fittest, but the only members of their
visible churches.

If lastly, they would speak of those that David's eyes run over with water,
when members in the church, Psalm. 119.
as well as others kept not Gods law: yea, and it is a fearful reproach, and
tending to corruption to them that favor it.

But when they speak of such members A mixed company in the visible Church
that it is Gods will that a mixed company be invited to the wedding of Christ,
the feast of the gospel, which makes up a visible church. The wedding of
Christ is either complete in heaven, or begun in the church. To that in
heaven, a mixed company is not invited, but conditionally, Ioh. 3.16 1 Cor. 15^
for no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. To this in the
church, a mixed company is invited, and thorough the power of the sweet word of
grace, comes both to the word and sacraments; as Simon Magus to baptism, Act 8.
and the drunken and factious Corinthians to the supper of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.


And that it is Gods will to invite a mixed company appears by texts,
examples, and reasons. The text is clear in Gods commission, Mat. 22.9.
Go ye into the highways, and as many as ye find, invite to the marriage:
and also in his servants execution, 10.
they went, and gathered together all* as many as they found, both good and
bad. All these were members of this feast, till God came and made the
separation: and when he did come, he blamed not his servants for inviting, and
guests for being in communion with the unworthy, but friend, 12.
how came thou in hither? But (say they) what is this kingdom of heaven?
Object.
Is it not the world? Does not Christ himself so expound it in opening the
parable of the tares? Mat. ^3.38 Sol.
The Field is the world. It is true, he says the field is the world, but he
says not the kingdom of heaven is the world. Surely, the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.
and is far different from the kingdom of heaven in the church^ Therefore does
not Christ say, the kingdom of heaven is like to the world, but it is like
unto a man, Mat. 13.24
this man is the son of man, who raises to himself a visible church here.
This he raises not in Jury only, but ( now the separation wall is broken
down) in the world. Here by virtue of his Gospel, he does sow the children of
the Kingdom, ver. 38.
according to that promise of old, I will sow her to me in the earth. But the
Devil, Hos. 2.23.
that envies Christ's Kingdom (not the world) sowes the Tares which are the
children of that wicked one. These Tares grow up in the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is in the field of the world, with the good seed, and so long as the
Devil is the Devil, and envies, it will be so. And it is Christ's Judgment
concerning them, Let them alone, till the harvest, least while ye pluck up the
Tares, ye pull up the Wheat. Surely they were other than the weeds of the
world out of the Church. These might have been plucked up without dangering the
Church. They were blasted Corn upon one stalk, which from the power of the
Gospel were called into the Church, but degenerated by the supersowing of
Satan, into wickedness in life and doctrine; and so became as these Tares,
which grow up together with this good seed till the Harvest. Thus the Text is
clear. Next for examples, look to all the visible Churches that ever were,
and they stand for a mixed company. In Adams house there was a Cain, in Noah's a
Cham, and in Christ's a Judas. But (say they) these were cast out. It is true,
some way or other, but while they were in, they were true members of the
visible Church, as those that could plead, We have eat and drunk in thy
presence, Luke 13.26, 27. Mat. 7 22.
and thou have taught in our streets. Have we not by thy Name prophesied, and
by thy Name cast out Devils? Yet, in the Harvest, because they were only
outward, not inward members, they shall hear depart from me, I know you not,
to wit, to save you and bring you to life. As the Temple in Christ's days was
the house of God, Mat. 24.13.
and yet, by the mixture, a den of thieves: 2 These 2.4. Apo. 18.1, 2. 1 Cor
3.3. 1 Cor. 15.12. 1 Cor. 5.1. 1 Cor. 11.21. 1 Cor. 1 12 1 Cor. 5. Gal. 1. Gal
3.
so may the visible Church now be Gods Temple, and the habitation of Devils. In
the Church of Corinth there were carnal people, an incestuous beast, denyers
of the Resurrection, and drunken, and uncharitable partakers of the Sacrament
of the Lords Body and Blood, yet a true visible church of God then; yea and
after, when of all these wicked ones, none was cast out, but that one
incestuous person. So in the Church of Galatia, there were false brethren that
crept in, revolters from the Faith of Christ, who bewitched others with false
doctrine against the foundation, yet was it saluted, and was, Object.
a true Church of God. If it seem strange to men (who would ingrosse all
religion to themselves) yet it does not to Christ, who would have done
otherwise, but did not for these causes.

Sol.
First, in respect of the Gospel, it is the salvation? so long as they like the
terms and conditions, they come, hear and receive; and though they had rather
have it upon their own conditions, yet they desire salvation by Christ, and so
all sorts are mixed. Besides the Gospel has a double use; to be a savor of
life unto life, out of Gods intention: 2 Cor. 2, 16.
and to be a savor of death unto death, out of man's abuse. So long as God
intends his grace that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11.
and appears unto all men, To. 6.1.
and man abuses it to sin that grace may abound, there cannot but be a mixed
company.

Secondly, in respect of God: He is willing goodness to all, 1 Timothy 2.4
both Jews and Gentiles, in tendering the means of grace. He would have a
ground of his mercy to spare wicked hypocrites for the godlies sake: Genesis 18.22.
and it is fit that he have arguments of justice within the Church, Mat. 22.13
that the godly may fear and not sin. So long as this goodness of God
holds, and the reason of Gods state and government, there will be a mixed
company.

Thirdly, in respect of the godly. They must be tried, and exercised in faith,
wisdom, 1 Cor. 1^.29 Iud. 2.2^.
that they that are approved might be known. As the Canaanites were left among
the Israelites to prove them: so are wicked professors among those that are
good: yea the goodness of the godly, by this means, is made more perspicuous.
As it is a more grievous fault not to be good among the good, so it is an high
and excellent praise to be good among those that are wicked; as Zachary,
Elizabeth, Joseph, the blessed Virgin, Symeon, and Hannah, in bad times, and in
a corrupt Church.

Fourthly, in respect of Satan and ungodly sow his tares. Mat. 13.28
And he would have the wicked to have many cords to draw them to Christ to be
more justly confounded. If the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and the Examples of
good men in the communion of goodness, prevail not with them, their sentence
will be manifested to be more just, when it shall be said, bind them hand and
foot, Mat. 22.
cast them into utter darkness, where shall be wayling, weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. So long as God has godly men in the Church to be tried, and to be
glorified: so long as Satan has malice, and the wicked are under arguments of
just conviction, there will be a mixed company.

Lastly, in respect of the Church, and the Mat. 16.
whereunto it is invited, Christ has committed unto his Church the exercise of
censures according to the several carriages of members. John 20.
If there were to be none but good, loosing would be enough; but seeing there
are to be good and bad, binding is necessary also. And that this is provided
for members, is certain; 1 Cor. 5.12
For (says Paul) what have I to do to judge those that are without? And for
the use of Christ's supper, whereto we are invited, it is to give both the
unions with Christ. The union of profession, and outward covenant; when men
profess themselves to be Christ's, and therefore come to the covenant, in the
word, and seals of it in the sacraments; from which yet (alas) men for their
sins, are daily cut off: and the union by power, To. 11.20.
and inward covenant; when men in Christ's ways are Christ's indeed, Gal. 5.24.
and therefore come to the covenant and seals, Ioh. 15.4.
with an humble purpose to abide with him for ever. So long as the church has
censures to exercise upon her unruly members; and both these unions with Christ
hold true, there will be a mixture in the visible Church.

But (say the Brownists) it is true, Object.
there may be a mixture admitted to the hearing of the word, but not as
members of the Church yet. And why so? Sol.
Surely, if they hear and consent unto it (though in hypocrisy) God accounts
them in covenant, and then who shall deny them to be members? Moses l^id before
the face of Israel all the words which the Lord commanded him; and the people
answered, all that the Lord commands we will hear, and do. Deuteronomy. 5.27
This many of them did in hypocrisy, and therefore God complains, verse. ^9.
O that there were such an heart in them! yet mark what the Lord said to
Moses, and Moses to the people. To Moses God said, write these words, for after
the tenor of these words, Ex. 34 27
I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel: and to the people Moses
said, thou have avouched this day, Deuteronomy. 26.17.18
the Lord to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and the Lord has avouched
thee to be his peculiar people. Say I pray; which of our members do not thus
readily profess? who will say that he will not hear God, and do his will? If
they do it in hypocrisy, woe unto them: if they do it in profession, they
are in outward covenant, as Gods people: if they are in covenant, who can deny
them to be members before they are cast out? But they dream of other members
who must be chosen into their congregations for government, Object.
as those that have a full right from Christ to give voices for ordinations,
elections, excommunications, absolutions, and the like, (as if all the members
of a commonwealth must be counselors, if not kings) but where will they
find in Christ's word, that none are members of a visible church, Sol.
but those that are admitted members for government, I cannot tell, except they
have a new testament not known to us.

It is true, that Peter calls Gods people, a chosen generation, Object.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation. Sol. 1 Pet. 2.9.
But I hope, he does not write to any particular visible church, but to the
dispersed saints in diverse churches, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2.
that were elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, None will
deny these to be true members of the churches where they live: and if they do
deny others, who have not such high graces as these had, to be members of a
visible church as well as they, (though notwithstanding their profession to be
servants of Christ, they flatter with their mouth, Ps. 78.36, 37. 2 Timothy 2* 20*
21.
and lie with their tongues, because their heart is not right with God, neither
are they steadfast in his covenant) they must deny the whole course of
scripture, which must judge them at the latter day.

But (say they) how can the wicked be members of the church of Christ, Object.
seeing Christ is not their head? Sol.
Christ has told no man thus. For though he be not their head by infusion of
saving and sanctifying graces of the spirit unto eternal life: 1 Cor 11.
yet is he their head: (as they are his members) by professed government. A
good husband is the head of a wicked wife: and a good king is the head of
wicked subjects: so Christ is the head of wicked members, to draw them to
better courses, Luke 19.27.
or to have them brought forth to be slain before him, because they will not
that he rule over them as he should.

But (say they) the visible church is the kingdom of heaven: Object.
and wicked men are not the members of that. Sol. Romans 14.
The kingdom of heaven stands in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost: of this kingdom they are not members. But the kingdom of heaven is
like unto a net, that gathered of every kind; Man. 13.47, 48, 49
of this kingdom they are members, till Christ cast away the bad in the end of
the world. They are not in this kingdom by the power of godliness: they are
in this kingdom by profession, and presence among and with the means of
salvation, till the kingdom be removed from them.

Object.
But (say they) wicked men are dead: and how can dead members be members of a
living body? Just as an unfruitful, or rotten branch, Sol.
is a branch, till it be cut off; that bough is dead, (say we) yet is a bough.
That member is gangrenated, yet is a member till the Chirurgions knife comes
and has done its office. Sardis was a true visible church, yet had but a name
to live, Apo. 3.1.
but was dead: so may wicked men be in the church, as members for outward
communion, but not for inward comfort.

Object.
Well (say they): put case that wicked Christians are members of the visible
church till they are cut off; Sol.
yet they should be cut off in a true church, whereas they continue in yours,
and are not cut off. Put case this charge were true; yet Christ learnes not to
argue from thence, that ours is no true church. This may make us a corrupt
church, but not a false one. How many wicked members were in the only church of
God in Christ's time; yet he separates not from it as a false church? For as a
tree, or man, or beast, may have corrupt members, yet not be false creatures in
their kinds: so may it be in a Church. And rashly to separate from such
members, will not prove the correction of them, but their hinderance in good,
when they see themselves contemned without conviction and judgment. Thus are
they put further from the Kingdom of Heaven, and made sevenfold the child of
hell more, How wicked members are cut off from us.
to the hazard of all. But this is false that ungodly men are not cut off from
our true Church. They are cut off two ways, by acts of the state, and acts of
the Church. The State, when they are judiciously tried, cuts off many of them
by the Gallows: and in the Church they are cut off three ways; Ministerially,
when Ier. 15.19.
the vile are separated from the precious, as those that have no actual right
to the salvation of Christ: professionally, when Gods good people pray against
their wickedness, reprove it, Psalm. 109. Ephesians. 5. Psalm. 120.
complain against it, and practice otherwise in wills, affections, and whole
courses, and are paid for it with their reproaches and persecutions: and
lastly, Ecclesiastically, when by Synagogues and assemblies. If all taste not
the bitterness of this censure (when Church Officers remember not the Oath of
God, and so through fear, favor, Eccles. 8.2
and affection, bring them not before the Churches tribunal) yet many do to
be examples to all, as in the Church of Corinth, whereof many wicked persons
one incestuous beast was cast out.

Object.
But (say they) you should separate from them all, at least in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

Sol.
The Apostle Paul saw all the disorders in the Church of Corinth, yet taught not
a separation in this Sacrament, but gave this rule of remedy, 1 Cor. 11.28.
Gal. 6.5.
Let a man examine himself: and to the Galatians he says, Every man shall
bear his own burden. Though in duties of charity we must bear one another
burdens, yet in rendering of accounts, verse. 3.
we must bear our own: Which, were it well observed, it would make them more
careful to reform themselves, then curiously to pry into, and censure others.
Again, put case wicked persons come to our Communions of the Body and Blood of
Christ, we should not separate from them, but they should separate from us: It
is but theirs by their profession, but it is ours by our power of grace. When
things are naught we must separate, but when they are good we must stay in
our own right. 1 Samuel 2.17.24.
It was sin in Israel to separate from the sacrifices, for the mixture of
Elies wicked sons whom God would destroy. But because this does stick so
much with them, and their partners, that wicked men come to our Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, I shall therefore (by Gods help) clear these three
particulars: 1 What right a wicked man has by virtue of the gospel to this
sacrament? 2 What benefit he can have from it? 3 What separation Gods word
will warrant from such receivers?


For the first the sacrament has a double offer grace to them that will
receive it according to their profession; and to exhibit this grace offered to
the worthy receiver. It does the first, as a sign, the bread, and wine of the
Lord; these proclaim to all comers, that Christ is to be had in the use of
them, if they be so disposed as they should, to take him. It does the second
as a seal, the bread and wine, 1 Cor. 10.
which is the communion of the Lord. These proclaim to the faithful, that
they shall not only have bread and wine, but Christ the Lord, Ioh. 6.
as that Mannah that came down from heaven to feed them to eternal life. The
wicked Christian has a right unto it as it offers grace, Mat. 22.9.10.
which he has truly offered to him, on Gods part, in his invitation if he
will take it on Gods condition. The same right that Simon Magus had to
baptism, Act. 8.
have wicked Christians to the supper of the Lord. He professed himself to
believe in Christ, upon Philips preaching, and he had a right to baptism, and
was baptized. It is true that baptism is a sacrament of our ingraffing into
Christ, and the Lords supper of our growing into Christ. But he that is a
baptized Christian, 1 Cor. 11.
and has understanding to examine and judge himself, cannot be denied his
right to this sacrament, as well as to that. Both are but the seals of one
covenant: and whosoever receives the word of Christ, and professes to accept
it by faith, has a right to the offers of the grace of Christ in both the
sacraments: but not to the exhibiting of it, if the bar of impure unbelief
lies betwixt God and his soul.

Mat. 22.12 friend,
and does submit himself to his ordinance, and acknowledge his public
authority for the benefit of his church. And this is a glorious benefit, in it
self, for a christian to wear Christ's badge. But he does not receive the
benefit of the body and blood of Christ, with the benefits of them to life: For
if he did thus eat his flesh, Ioh. 6.54.
and drink his blood, he had eternal life. He brings his soul to the
sacrament without the conditions of the covenant written upon it, Ier 31. Heb.
8.
and so, though he accept of the offer of grace in the sign, yet he carries
not away the seal of it, no more then Judas did from the passover. His right,
and benefit therefore will bring little comfort to him at the last, when his
reckoning comes.

him), you ask, what separation Gods word will warrant from such communicants?
I answer, that I cannot find in the word of God, that any separation was made
in the sacrament by the godly, from the wicked not cast out for their
unworthiness. Ex. 12.
All the ^ewes that were circumcised (and not cast out of their synagogues)
were to eat the passover, or dye: the children that could eat, as a sacrifice
of thanksgiving, and grown persons, as a sacrament and seal of Gods covenant
So all christians (that are not infants, madmen, fools, and excommunicates,
who cannot examine, and judge themselves, or are after conviction, notorious
offenders, and so cast out) are not repellable (if they come) from the
sacrament of the Lords supper. It is true, we read much in the writings of
men of suspensions from this sacrament, even of those, that were neither
children, fools, madmen, demoniacks, nor excommunicate persons by private,
ministers: but I would see this (for the right of it) soundly proved by the
undoubted rule of Christ. I have read also, that the blessed Fathers, in the
wary discipline fit for their times, did not only proclaim before the
sacrament by their Deacons, depart ye that are novices, possessed, and under
your penance for your crimes; but would not also admit any, but the believers,
and the baptized, so much as to see the sacrament. I have read also of the
cautelousnesse of those holy men, in admitting penitents to the Lords table. As
they first admitted them into the limits of the church: next to lie down as
humble suitors, to forget scandal, at the church porch: next to hear, but not
stay prayers: next to hear, and stay prayers too: next to see the sacrament of
the Lords supper, but not to receive it: and lastly, when they were
sufficiently humbled, and edged to those high mysteries, they were admitted to
the Lords table. These courses had high and excellent use in those times, when
they were to lift up the honor of the sacrament in the sight of infidels, and
hold close such christians as played fast and loose with Christ, as peace, or
persecution came. And though they had not particular warrant from God, yet it
being done decently, in order, 1 Cor. 14.
and for edification of the body, had warrant sufficient from that general
rule. As I have read these things of times past, and admire them, so I know,
for the present, that it were a glorious and comfortable thing, if none but
holy persons would draw near unto this holy table, as we deal withal our
communicants by way of exhortation, and persuasion from the danger of Judas.
This certainly is fullest of joy, when Christ meets with none but his
faithful servants, and not one unworthy to trouble the day. But if wicked
Christians that are not lawfully convicted, and are not notorious in law
(though they be notorious in fact) whether these, (when they will offer
themselves to the sacrament as Christ's servants professing his name, to their
own hurt) be to be separated from, by the word of Christ, this is the
question.

I know we may by way of admonition, before hand, tell them of the danger, and
by way of persuasion press them better to prepare themselves: but we may not
for their sakes discommon our selves from the table of the Lord. 2 Cor. 6.
If it were the table of devils, away we must go: but being the table of
Christ, if others abuse themselves at it without our fault, we must accept of
Christ's love, and leave it to Christ to punish him, or them, that do dishonor
them. You know many thieves in this christian commonwealth; will you therefore
separate your selves from the commonwealth, because these thieves are in
common body with you? No: you will leave them to the laws of it to be
punished, and as it lies in your lot, do your best to further it, but you will
not forsake the commonwealth: So must you do to the table of Jesus Christ.
The blessed Apostle says, we have received power to edify, not to destroy. 2
Cor. 10.8
And if we should fall out with Christ's supper for wicked men's sake, and
separate from Christ's ordinance, because wicked men will not use it as they
should, and break off from many godly persons, because more wicked persons are
not excommunicate, for any thing I know, we may more destroy then edify.

Object. Matthew. 7 Matthew. 15. Sol.
But (say the Brownists) holy things must not be cast to dogs and swine, the
childrens bread must not be given to whelps. This is true, if we can help it.
But every wicked christian is not a swine or dog, nor any alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, as the Canaanitish woman, till her new faith made her
a prosilite. Not one of ten thousand of the^ (whom they so highly judge) will
dare to trample the sacrament under their feet, and all to rent the giver of it
unto them. But put case, that some such miscreant might be found, because
these reputed dogs and swine abuse it to themselves, will you abuse it too in
separating from it which exhibits so much good.

Object. Sol.
But (they say perhaps) the ministers might keep them away from it, but do not.
By what authority might they? Put case they had the authority of a judge (which
is false here) may a judge hang a thief before his trial? So, nor may he
discommon any from the Lords table till trial and sentence be past. If any
wicked christian should say I am not excommunicate, I will receive, shall they
disturb Christ's sons for the unmannerlinesse of such a servant? Noe: God is
not the God of confusion, but order. Let them come at their own peril, to our
misery, not to our sin when we have warned.

Object.
But (say the Brownists) we shall partake in other men's sins, and so be polluted
with such communions. To make this vanish, Sol.
it is the third and last point propounded, that remains in this section to
be considered. That their dreamed of pollution is from their own brains, 3
Of pollution of communion by wicked members.
not from the ordinance of Christ. They account all then polluted, that are in
spiritual communion in the worship of God with wicked and ungodly men. But the
Prophets reproved many abuses, and never taught any pollution, neither did God
appoint any sacrifice to expiate such pollution. There was a sacrifice for the
whole congregation, Levit. 4.13.14. etc.
to satisfy for their sins of ignorance, but not to take off the guilt of
pollution by a mixture in the service of God. God tied them all to the
kingdom, priesthood, and temple, and he does not tie men necessarily to
sin. The godly people in the time of the law, were never reprooved for the
worship of God, though wicked men were present. Indeed the priests were blamed
highly, as violaters of the law, because they put no difference betwixt the
holy, Ezekiel. 22.26.
and the profane, nor have showed difference betwixt the unclean and clean;
and that justly too: Deuteronomy. 17.8 9.
because God had made them teachers of the people, and they neglected the
sabbaths: and because he had made them ordinary Judges in these, and other
cases, according to his word. But they never judged the godly polluted, for not
separating from the wicked in Gods service. Again, Christ and his Apostles,
Apoc. 2. and 3.
reproved many corruptions in churches, yet never taught or practiced
separation upon a conceit of pollution. 1 Cor. 11. 2 Cor. 12.
Yea, Christ commends the church of Thyatyra, for living well, where
corruption was. Iezabel was suffered there: Apoc. 2.20 24.25.26.
yet as many as have not this doctrine, nor known the depthes of satan, hold
fast till I come; and he that overcommeth, shall have power over the nations.
Surely the best were not polluted by the worst, nor taught separation, but
constancy in good, and reward at last.

But not to be too large, consider thoroughly but these three conclusions.
First, God does acquit the godly from the sins of the wicked, though they be
mixed in the ordinances of God. They that walk in my statutes and ordinances,
Ezekiel. 11.20.21. Ezekiel. 18.14.17.20
shall be my people, but they whose heart walks after detestable things, I
will recompense their way upon their own head. The soul that sins, shall
dye, not he that is guiltless. The wicked shall die in his iniquity, Ezekiel. 33^
but warn him, and thou shall deliver thy soul. I am confident (says Paul)
that you will be no otherwise minded, Gal. 5.10.
but he that troubles you shall bear his judgment, Tit. 1 15.
whosoever he be. To the pure, all things are pure, but to the impure nothing
is pure. All there were in spiritual communion together, yet God does not cast
the sins of the guilty upon the innocent, but does acquit the one, and accuse
the other,

Object.
Yea but, (say the Brownists) God does not acquit them that consent to the
wickedness of others. This is most true: Sol.
we must neither sin, nor have fellowship with sin, 1 Timothy 5.22. Ephesians 5.11.
Pro. 1.10.
nor consent to sinners: If we do, we make other men's sins our own. Now we
may be said to consent to sin, both in things lawful, and in things
unlawful. In things unlawful when we have fellowship with wicked doers, and
are accessory to their offenses: and this may be diverse ways, whereof some
are proper to superiors, and some common to all. Superiors may be guilty of
other men's sins two ways, by command, and by connivence. By the first, if
they injoyne that which is evil, all the evil that is done upon their
injunction is theirs, whether it be public or private. Nebuchadnezzar by law
and edict, Dan. 3.4, 5, 6.
was guilty of all the Idolatry and cruelty which did ensue upon it. Therefore
woe to them that decree wicked decrees, Es. 10.1.
and write grievous things. Saul was guilty of that murder done upon the Lords
Priests: 1 Samuel 22.18.19. 2 Samuel 11.15, 17.
and David of the death of Vriah, because they commanded them. By the second,
if they wincke at faults which are in their power to redress. Iehoas^ took
not away the high places, 2 K^ 12.3.
and so was guilty of his peoples incense. Ahab wincked at B^nhadad, and let
him go, when God had given him into his hands for death, and was guilty. Mar ^5.
Pilate wincked at the cruelty of the Jews, and notwithstanding all his
washing was guilty. David displeased not Adonjah from his youth, 1 Kin ^
nor said* Why do thou thus? and so was guilty of his riot and rebellion. All
may be guilty of the sins of others, both before the offense be committed,
and in, and after it. Before the offense, by provocation, counsel,
approbation, and silence when called to speak. By provocation, either when men
rage the heart, and fire the passions by thwarting and daring words or actions,
1 Kin. 21.7.25. Prove. 1.11, 12, 13. Pro. 7.18. 1 Cor. 15.33. 2 Sa. 13.5. Mar.
6.^4. Act. 19.25. Nu. 25.3. and 31.16.
as Iezabel, who provoked her husband Ahab: or when they allure and entise with
sweet words, as that Harlot, Come let us fill our selves with love until the
morning; or with infecting and evil words. By Counsel, when men advise to any
sin: Thus Ionadab was guilty of the incest of Amnon; Herodias of the blood of
John Baptist; Demetrius of the uprore against Paul; and Balaam of Isreal's
Baalpeor. By Approbation, when men do not only do such things as are worthy
of death, To. 1.32.
but favor them that do them. This may be done directly, either by word of
deed, as when Saul consented to the death of Stephen, Act* 8.1. Act. 7.58.
and kept the garments of them that stoned him, or by interpretation, when a
man is bound to withstand another man's sin, and does not either by word or
deed. Moses has given us a precept to speak in our places, Lev. 19.17. and
20.45.
and told us the danger of silence. To speak ill does draw men into sin, and
to hold our peace ill does leave a man in sin. By example, when we live
wickedly in the sight of others. For though, happily, the sins that we
practice be not imitated of all: 2 Samuel 12.14
yet because we have done what in us lies to set others a copy, which some
will too greedily follow, therefore are we guilty; we may be guilty again of
the sins of others, in and after the sin is committed, when men do excuse, or
defend the sins, or flatter men in them. Woe to them that speak good of
evil, Es. 5.20. Pro. 24.24
and evil of good. He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall
the people curse, as him that is guilty. Lastly, we may be said to consent to
sin, in things lawful by scandal, when men use their liberty which God has
given them, in things indifferent ( left in their own power to do or not to
do) to the wilful offense, and snare of others that are weak. Of this Paul
speaks doctrinally, it is good neither to eat flesh, To. 14.21
nor drink-wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, and in his own
example, 1 Cor. 8.13
if meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world lasts: so
careful was he not to have communion in the sins of others.

Now let us see whether we are polluted by the sins of the wicked by consent.
Because they consent with us in doing of our good, do we therefore consent
with them in doing their evil? Ephesians 5 11
Their courses are daily reproved, both publickely, and privately: 1 Cor. 6.^
they are judged as such, whose examples we would not follow for a world. They
are neither commanded to do as they do, nor winked at when lawfully tried;
we do not provoke, counsel, or approve their cursed hypocrisies. They have no
such examples from us: and have been so long instructed, both by public
instruments and preachings, and private conferences, that their scandals are
taken, and not given, in those things ( free in themselves, but not to us by
the command of lawful authority) whereat they will still take offense. How are
we yet guilty of the sins of others to our pollution? Object.
O say they, every congregation has power in its own hand to redress things
amiss, to repel wicked livers from our communions, whereas we wait upon our
king, when we should do it without him: and so are guilty of all the
wickedness of our assemblies. Sol.
The vanity of this I have showed in part before; and shall do it more in the
next section: yet in the mean time, first we confess, that we have power to
redress disorders: not in every particular church; for then no man under the
Gospel could perish in the gainesaying of Corah, as Saint Jude says they may.
Iud. 11.
Superiority was the cause of his mutiny, because he might not be equal to
Aaron: Number. 16.10.
but in every diocese, where we are governed not by the laws of one man, but
of Synods of Bishops and Presbyters: and if persons (that should be as the
house of Cloe, to inform, and that upon oath, of things amiss) were not more
to be blamed then offices, we might be as happy as any church under heaven. The
impetuous carriage of some, who despise dominions, Iud. 8.^. 2 Pet 2.10.
and speak evil of dignities, and that, without fear, and think it as easy
to govern multitudes, as an handful, makes them think otherwise: but if
things be weighed by the rule of the word, wisdom, and charity, it will be
found, I am sure, that we have power indeed. But secondly, whereas they make
us guilty of the wickedness of our assemblies, by waiting upon the pleasure of
our king, and not reforming without him, herein we joy, yea, and will rejoice
again: we wait not upon kings and princes to be Christians, and to serve
God faithfully by the acts of true Faith, Hope, and Charity. If all the kings
and Emperors in the world say against it, we must, and (by grace) will do it.
Yea, if all the storms in the world be raised, we must strive unto blood,
Heb. 12.4.
but with tears, prayers, patience in suffering, not with arms, and violence.
This we do by private profession: but when it comes to a public reformation
of Christian Churches already planted, it is our glory to wait upon Christian
kings, whose subjects we are, that we will not govern, but under him, nor
build walls for the citizens of the saints, but under the defense of their
swords; especially considering that we know, we cannot without them mend our
hands. 2 Chro. 14. and 15. 2 Chro. 29 and 30. and 34.
When we look to the days of Asa, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, we
find that no Israelite ever took upon him to reform either without, before,
or against them. Ezr. 2. and 3.
When the Temple of Jerusalem lay waste, Zorababel and Ioshuah did nothing
without Cyrus: Neh. 2.
nor did Nehemiah any thing without Artashashte. Indeed in their times, God
knowing the time was come, when according to prophecy, he was to look upon
the desolations of Jerusalem, and restore it, prepared and whetted the hearts
of the people of the Jews, by Haggai and Zechariah, Hag. 1. Zech. 4.
but they built nothing but by the leave of their Kings, and when countermands
came, they laid down their tools, and the work of the house of God ceased;
Ez. 4.23.23.
so good subjects they would be notwithstanding the height of their Religion.

Object. Hag. 1.4, 6
But (say they) they should have done otherwise: For Haggai reproves them for
letting the house of God lie waste, and God sends a famine upon them. Sol.
This is true, they were too blame when they minded their own houses more, and
took not their seasons allowed them for this great work. But that either the
Prophet threatened, or God punished them, for not building when they were under
the Interdict, that let them prove, and they shall have more said. How unhappy
are they we now see, while they make our assemblies polluted for not doing that
(if we wanted it, as we do not) which is unlawful for us to do without
lawful authority? The Apostles indeed planted Churches without waiting upon
Heathen Kings; but they had Apostolical authority, and were to do according
to Christ's commission to them, which was out of date in their death: but we
cannot reform without or against Christian Kings (if we could yet make a
better reformation) except they can show a new Commission under Christ's own
hand. If therefore we have faults we cannot help (and provided we consent not)
we are not polluted.

The second conclusion is this, That God We know that the sin of the sons
of Ely was so great, 1 Samuel 2.17, 24.
that men abhorred the offerings of the Lord: but in so doing it is said, that
the Lords people did transgress, even unto a cry. Surely, Object.
this truth will not easily be outfaced: yet some of them to avoid it say,
that no marvel if moral wickedness did not pollute the Jewish worship,
because God required only ceremonial cleanness then. Sol.
But how false this is, appears by Gods Covenant with Abraham, where God
required sincerity: by the moral law which was Gods covenant: Genesis 17.1. Ex.
34.^8. Deu. 10 12. Levit. 6. Number. 35 33. Levit. 18.21.24, 25. Es. 1.9.15. and
38.2.10
by Gods requiring, then, truth in the inward part: by his injoyning sacrifices
for moral transgressions as well as ceremonial: by his signifying of
pollution by moral uncleanness: and by threatening of moral sins, and
abhorring all ceremonial service; when men sinned morally against God. Surely,
their moral pollutions went beyond their typical, and wrought their utter
ruin at last, notwithstanding The Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.
the Temple of the Lord: and yet Christ himself would not separate from such
worshippers as were polluted, so long as the worship was Gods. It was fit for a
Pharise; Es. 65.5. Luke 18.14 Tit. 1.
it was not fit for Christ, who knew that to the pure all things are pure.

That the Scripture admits godly Christians to the holy things of God, Matthew.
5.23.24.
though open wicked men be there. Diverse good people go to the Altar with
their gifts: Some are in charity, and some wickedly uncharitable, their
brethren have something against them. Now, Christ does not bid them all go
away, because of that malicious man, 1 Cor. 11.23.28.
but bids him that is malicious (if he would have Gods blessing) go and be
reconciled and come again. Again, when Paul saw fearful wickedness in
Corinthian Communions, he does not bid them all abstain for fear of
pollution, but (according as he had received of the Lord) he bids them examine
themselves, and so let them eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup,
whatsoever others be. Certainly, the Apostle was not acquainted with the
doctrine of the Brownists, which teaches, that because another does sin, I
may not do my duty to God: because a wicked man will come to the Sacrament, I
may not: because another man offends God, in serving him, I may not serve him
then for fear of pollution. No king shall have subjects, nor master have
servant, nor shall God have worshippers upon these terms.

But (say they) the worship of God is polluted by such unclean worshippers.
Object. Sol.
This is true, but to whom? to them that serve him aright, or to them that
serve him amiss? The Apostle says, that the unworthy communicant eats and
drinks judgment to himself, 1 Cor. 1^ 29.
not to them that are better. It is true, that he that touched a dead body,
and purified not himself, defiled the tabernacle, but it was unto himself,
Numb. 19 13.20.
who therefore was to be cut off, and not others that were innocent. It is
true too, that the judgment of the priests was right, that if an unclean
person touch bread, pottage, wine, Hag. 2.12 13.
oil or meat, it shall be unclean, to himself that is unclean, but not to
him that touches it that is clean, and so a profane christian that comes to
the Lords supper, pollutes not what the minister performs, and good people
receive, but what himself touches. It is true also, that a seditious
multitude charged Paul falsely, Act 21.28
that he polluted the holy place by bringing Greeks into the Temple. For,
though God forbade the Israelites to admit the Moabites, Deuteronomy. 23.3
and Ammonites, for a long time into the commonwealth of Israel, what is this
to prose^ites, by profession, coming into the temple? All this is true I say:
yet this typical pollution (which did not foreshadow the pollution of visible
assemblies, but the holiness and impurity and sincere Christians, and hypo,
crites) does not prove the pollution of all worship to the good, for the
naughtiness of the bad, Christ is not so hard a master; neither does he blame
the worthy guests for being polluted by the unworthy, or suffering him to come
in, but says to him only, friend, Matthew. 22
how came thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment?

SECT. 12. Brownists last exception against our Church, about the government
of it, for Power.
FRom the Brownists meaning, by a true Church, and their entrance into, head
and members of a true church, we are at last come to the government of a true
church: and because they find ours not to be governed according to their
fancies, therefore they except against it, as Antichristian, and therefore, not
a true Church.

It is true that government is an excellent blessing, it is as the bridle to
the horse, the rudder to the ship, yea, the laws and judgment seat of a
kingdom. A right to this cannot be separated from a true church. For if it be
a church, it has right to Christ's laws, judgments, and executions to govern
it as his kingdom upon earth. Yea, the use of this right cannot be taken
away, without the great sin of them that do it, and injury to the church
from whom it is taken; yea, the Church that is robbed of it, ought not to rest
in this wrong, when they are so oppressed: but ought of duty to pray to God
for it, and humbly to supplicate unto men in authority, who are able, as
Christ's prime officers for the welfare of the Church, to help them at such a
lift. But no Church ought to call for such a government as Christ never
commanded; yea, no church ought when they have a government suitable to the
Apostles, and primitive times of the Church, and not contrary to any law of
Christ, but suitable to his general rules in the scriptures, for some
pretended, or true defects in government, to make a schism and separation from
public communion.

Yes (say the Brownists) where government is so base, that foul corruptions
rule, Object.
from such a Church we must separate. But who laid this ( must) upon you? Sol.
I am sure not Christ, who taught us otherwise in his blessed life. There were
fearful corruptions in the Church of the Jews, both in the priests, in the
people, and in the worship of God. In the priests, there was ignorance; Mat.
23.16 Mat. 24.3.
for they were blind guides. There was ungodlines, for they said, and did not
There was corrupt entrance into their calling; for Caiphas was high priest for
that year: Ioh. 11.49
he was Annuary (be like) though by Gods law the high priest should continue
during life. In the people there was obstinate wickedness. They would have
broke Christ's neck down a steep hill. Luke 4 28, 29. Lu. 23.18 Mat. 11.20
21.22. etc Mat. 27.25
They rejected him, and chose Barabbas. They were in worse state then Tyrus,
Sidon, and Sodom. They drew, and wished the guilt of Christ's blood to be upon
them and their children. In the worship of God they used many superstitions
precisely; Mar 7.9. Matthew. 21.12* 13. Ioh. 9.22. Matthew. 5.
the temple was made a den of thieves: the Censures were abused for the
casting out of innocents: the doctrine of God was corrupted by glosses: and the
blessed sacraments were abused: for they observed not the Passover on the time
appointed, and therefore Christ's was before theirs. Ioh. 19.14
Notwithstanding all these corruptions, by slack government, yet did Christ
hold public communion with them. He was circumcised the eight day: Luke 2 21
Luke 2.22. Luke 2.46 Luke 3.21 Ioh. 2.13. Matthew* 23 1, 2, 3*
he was presented to the Lord as well as others: he heard, and was baptized: he
eat the Passover with them, and allowed his disciples to hear the very
Pharisees. Can they therefore justly say, that they must separate from a Church
corrupted for want of I government?

Object.
Yes (say they) that they must: when government is naught, practice is
answerable, and better of either cannot be had. I wonder what they would have
done, Sol.
if they had lived in the times of the Judges, Judge. 18.
when every man did what he listed? or in our blessed Saviors time, when so
many schismatics, and sectaries had rule and government? or in the Apostles
time, 3 Ioh* ^.9
when Diotrephes used such tyrannical pride, and usurped such authority, that
he would not receive the very Apostles* would they have separated? I am sure,
that neither Israel, nor Christ, nor his Apostles did so? John did only write
to the Church about it: And are these wiser then they?

No (say they) we do it not out of an opinion of our own wisdom, Object.
but out of conscience, and for the glory of God, and for Sions sake. But take
they heed: Es* 62 ^ Sol.
every one that pretends to make the word of Christ his rule, has not these
ends before him as he ought. Gentilis, that impious blasphemer of the Trinity,
when he was called to answer, said, Se sti^lis conscientiae adactum, ^ fecisse
Se pro gloria altissimi de^ pati* Act 23, 1^ Object. Sol.
that he was drawn to maintain his cause from touch of conscience: and when
he was to dye, that he did suffer for the glory of the most high God. And
Paul when he was yet a Pharisee, lived in all good conscience, when natural
wisdom was his interpreter of Gods word. Even so, may it be with them.

O no: they are sure of their hand: they are taught of God, and they must
separate from such a wicked government as ours is for conscience sake. Why,
what is the matter? let us (in the fear of God) hear the worst, that we may
mend, or be obstinate. I never heard but three things pleaded against our
government by them. 1 The power of true government. 2 The persons of our
governors. 3 And their exercise of our government.
We will hear them in all, to the last word, and our good God give us
understanding in all things for peace and salvation.

Object.
The power of true Church government (say the Brownists) is in the whole Church
and in every particular member in body, and not only in the prime members
only. In this they do not only fight against us, Sol.
but against all the Presbyteries in the world: and so they pull more
adversaries upon them, then they will be able to withstand: In this they beat
down at one blow that which has exercised the wits of thousands, without
satisfaction to millions of consciences. Yea in this they join hands with
Corah, Nu. 16.3.
Dathan, and Abiram, who loved not the government of the best, because all the
congregation is holy, every one of them.

Object.
But against whomsoever they fight, and with whomsoever they join, surely (say
they) true Church government is in the whole congregation. Sol.
It is true, that if we consider the Church as a complete body under Christ
the head, Ephesians. 1.
then the power of Church government is in the whole Church: As the animal body
is said to see, to go, to work, to speak originally, though subjectively and
formally, it is the eye sees, the foot goes, the hand works, and the tongue
speaks. 1 Cor. 12*
But that the whole body of Christ (the Church catholic, or particular for her
part) should have this power, so as to have power to exercise it formally,
cannot be made good from the word of Christ. Before the Law, Church government
lay upon Adam, Noah, Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs. Under the Law, it
lay upon Moses and Aaron (though to Moses was added by Iethroes advise seventy
Elders, Ex. 1.^8.
not by Gods immediate direction, though after they were approved by him.)
Under the Gospel the gifts of power and government was bestowed upon some, not
upon all: To. 12.6, 8. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5 ^^
and the people never attempted any thing without the Apostles leave,
assistance, and direction. The Apostles ordained Elders, and not the people
without them. Act* 14.23
The Apostles called for the Elders and conferred with them without the people.
Act. 20.17.
The Elders did consult with James and Paul, Act. 21* ^8 23.
without asking the votes of the people, and did a matter of weight for the
peace of the Church from their own judgments: Act. 15.2^, 23.
Yea and when the whole Church was with the Apostles and Elders in counsel
these are preferred before them as their superiors, who had their consent of
love and charity, but not of authority. Therefore the people were not reproved
for the disorders of the Church and Commonwealth, Ne. 13.11 Apoc. 2* 1. and
12.18* Apoc. 3.1.
but the Princes and the Priests: according to which general course we must
understand those few particulars wherein blame seems to be laid upon the
body of the people also. For the people are still commanded subjection and
submission to governors ecclesiastical and temporal: To. 13, 21. Tit. 3.1.
Act. 20 28 Heb. 13* 17
and are still called by the names of sheep, brethren, saints, household,
spouse, children, and the like; whereas their governors are called Bishops,
Overseers, Elders, Presbyters, Angels, Fathers, as terms of superiority. 1
Pet. 2. Apoc. 1.6.
It is true, they are also called a royal Priesthood, and Kings: but not in
regard of external power of government in the Church, but of internal power
of saving grace to rule over their own corruptions, To. 6.12.
that sin may not reign in their mortal bodies; which if they would exercise
as they ought these quarrels might soon cease.

Object.
Noe (say the Brownists) these quarrels must not cease, so long as we find in
Scriptures, the peoples power of government in the Church, maintained. For they
instance in two high parts of government, excommunication and absolution, and
they find the peoples power in both. Math. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
For Christ says, If thy brother trespass against thee, and he will not hear
thee, or more with thee, Go tell the church, that is say they, the whole
congregation, and as he does hear or neglect that, let him be to thee either
bound or loosed by excommunication or absolution. Hence they argue thus: Church
is taken for every particular congregation where Christians live: before this
in body, the delinquent that is obstinate must be convented, be it less or
greater: and it has a power in government, even in these things of highest
nature: therefore the power of government is in the people, as well, as deeply,
as in others. Here is their impregnable hold (as they think) and therefore
they come upon us thus roundly: Christ has charged his Apostles, Mat. 28.20.
and their true successors: that they should teach all nations to observe all
things whatsoever he has commanded them: but you that are the ministers of
the Church of England, do not teach us to observe all things: for Christ has
commanded a form of government, Matthew. 18.
wherein all members should have public cognizance of offenses for the
advancement of the kingdom of Christ, and you suffer him to be dishonored,
and us to be robbed of our rights; and therefore ye are not the ministers of
Christ, neither is your Church a true Church of Christ.

Thus (so far as I can gather from them, Sol.
and conceive) I have given them the full advantage of their plea. But if all
this were true, it does not follow that we are not the true ministers of
Christ, nor that our Church is not his true Church. Not the first, because that
exposition of Christ's words is their own, and not Christ's. If Christ had said
unto us, that he would have such a government erected in every parish, then
we should dishonor our master, and rob Gods people, not to preach it. Others
have with prayer, care, and conscience looked upon those words of Christ, as
well as they: and yet some find in that Church mentioned by Christ, only the
Jewish Sanhedrim: some the Pope and his conclave: some the presbytery of mixed
elders: some the consistory of preaching elders: and some Bishops and
superintendents, who have the highest oversight to punish Church scandals under
the Magistrates, under whom they live. But these men (as if they would exclude
other men's discourses, and bind up their consciences to their interpretations)
will have their meaning to be the true sense, and no other.

Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6 1. 1 Timothy, 1.5.
and Faith unfeigned: Ephesians. 4.1.
and how he walks worthy of this fellowship in the way of life, to wit, by
denial of himself, taking up of the cross, Mat. 16.24
and following Christ, so far, that no wilful nor deliberate sin reign in
him: Romans 6.12
and then though he do not observe every outward form and rule, yet (I hope)
Christ may be his Christ, and he Christ's member to life. So in a church must we
observe what gives it true ecclesiastical fellowship with Christ, to wit, the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, breaking of bread, Act. 2.42.
and prayer: and then, if it profess to know these, and to continue in them,
so far as it is come, Phil. 3.
though it observe not every thing that other men think it should, yet I hope
it is a true church of Christ.

But (say they) we have not the Apostles doctrine and fellowship for want of
this popular government. Let them prove once, Object.
Sol.
that this is any part of the Apostles doctrine and fellowship. Indeed they
tell us (as before) that Christ said, go tell the Church, Matthew. 18.
and so forth: but how this Last serves their feet, comes next to be
discussed. If this church were every congregation, and if one man may bind, and
loose, it is certain the whole congregation may do so also, and so have the
greatest power of church government in their own hand: but whether the text
will conclude for such power is the thing in question.

Learned men of most ages have much looked upon that text, Matthew. 18 expounded.
and have applied it either by way of allusion, or properly to church
discipline, some way or other. Some churches in this last age have looked upon
it fully, and (as they think) have squared an exact discipline according to
it; though I cannot find that they cut their course fully according to their
own sense. Some particular persons finding this to be the strongest hold for
that new discipline, have sought to overthrow it so, as utterly to root out
excommunication from the church; and others (finding the good use of that
censure for the well being of the church) have been as eagar to maintain this
hold. But discipline, and that censure, has hold strong enough from other
texts, though that of Christ be set in its proper sense. For when we look to
that promise of Christ to his disciples in the name of Peter, Mat. 16.19 Ioh.
20.23 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 2 Timothy
and how he made it good to his Apostles, and lay together the rules and
practices of the apostles, especially in the epistles to the Corinthians, and
to Timothy (which last are spent in rules, for the well ordering of the
governing, and the governed) we shall find ground sufficient for church
government, either in pattern, or precept, general or special, though we
suffer this text to appear in its own colors.

Col. 3.13.
Let me tell them then, that as Paul says: Forbear one another, and forgive
one another, if any man have a quarrel, or complaint against any: so Christ in
that chapter gives a remedy against private contentions. This is plain to
every eye, Mat. 18.7.
that is not wilfully blinded, that Christ in that chapter tells of the danger
of scandals; and thereupon he gives a double direction: first to live so, Ma.
18. av. 8 ad v. 15. Mat. 18.15 ad finem.
as not to give scandal to others, and secondly, to carry themselves aright to
others that give scandal to them; and that all this is to be referred to
private offenses, the unbroken course of the chapter shows, as Saint Basil
has observed many hundred years ago. That which moved Christ to this
discourse, was the present state of the Jewish disciples under the Roman
Empire. Luke 19.2. Mat. 9 9.
The Romans had no government over them, and the authority of their edlers
was much diminished. For many of the Jews became servants to the Romans, as
their Publicanes, to gather in their tribute: such were Zacheus, yea, and
Matthew. These were freed from the authority of the Jews; as all other Jews
were that were freemen of Rome, which made Paul when he saw oppression before
him, to appeal to Caesar, Act. 25.11 Act. 22 28
and to plead that he was free borne. This was a great vexation to the Jew in
recovering of right, and defending himself from wrong. Therefore Christ to
moderate the Jews passions arising one against another, directs them what
course to take; you must not deal (says he) one with another presently, as
with Publicanes, and Heathens, who are out of Jewish power, and cannot be
impleaded any where, but before a Roman bar: but to cut off al differences
betwixt you and your brethren, ye must proceed in a gentle way.

Why? what must they do? If thy brother (a Jew) shall trespass against thee
(a Jew), right thy self by degrees. First, deal with him fraternally,
according to the rule of charity, Mat. 18.15.
tell him his fault between thee and him alone. If that will do no good to
gain him, ver. 16.
then secondly, deal with him legally, take with the one or two more, that may
hear the difference, convince him of error, and persuade him to peace: for
this is Moses law, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word be
established. Deu. 19.^5 Heb. 10.28
If that will not yet bring him home, then thirdly, deal with him Iewishly,
tell it unto the Church, complain to the Sanhedrim, Mat. 18.17.
tell the seventy elders who sit yet, by Gods approbation, to hear harder
causes, and to decide greater doubts against peace, and charity. If yet he be
so gracel^sse as to neglect thee, and them too, then lastly, deal with him
heathenishly by Roman soveraignety to which now you are subject, but think
him to be as an Heathen and Publican, and deal with him accordingly: The law
is good if it be used lawfully; 1 Timothy 1.8 Allusive. 1 Cor. 6.1.6.
let Caesar's justice end the difference betwixt you. It is true, the Apostle
says, that Brother must not dare to go to law with brother, and that before
unbelievers: yet I hope even then, when the Jews, To. 9.13.
Paul's brethren wronged him, and the saints could not right him, he appealed
unto Caesar. Therefore ye must put a difference betwixt the christian
Corinthians, after the death of Christ, and the christian Jews before the
death of Christ. These had no Church government settled, but that of the Jews,
which by Roman authority was neglected and slighted: but the Corinthians had.
For Christ never meddled to settle any other Church government during life, but
the Jewish, which was to be of force til after his death: but then he sent his
Spirit to direct his Apostles in all necessaries. Ioh. 16.
The Jews were Christians but in working: for the best of them (even the
Apostles) were dreggish in faith and life: In faith about the death and
resurrection of Christ, and about a temporal Kingdom doted upon. In life,
when they too full of revenge in drawing the sword as Peter, or for calling
down fire from heaven upon the Samaritans. But the Corinthians were more
perfectly instructed in the mysteries of faith and charity, and therefore their
brawles would be more scandalous, 1 Cor. 6* 2.
having such wise Saints among them who shall judge the world. Lastly, the
Apostle finds not fault with the Corinthians for going to law absolutely one
with another before infidels; for even Heathen Kings, and all that are in
authority are to be prayed for, 1 Timothy ^.1, 2.
that Christians may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty: And this they cannot do except their Thrones minister justice in mine
and thine. It is lawful therefore when raking and politic Christians do
bite and devour one another, do serve their own bellies, Gal. 5 15. To.
16.18.
and by good words and fair speeches do deceive the hearts of the simple, and
defraud one another in bargaining, 1 These. 4.
to appeal to the minister of justice. To. 13.1, 4.
For all power is of God, and the very Heathen Magistrate does not bear the
sword in vain. But he finds fault with them, that they set too great a price
upon the things of this life; that they were too contentious about them; that
they went to law before Heathens to the scandal of Christianity; and that they
appealed to foreign judgment, when they might have remedy by wise Saints
nearer hand, which the Jews could not have, when their Elders by Roman
liberty were contemned.

Why the former sense is true.
Now, if they doubt whether this sense may be admitted, I shall (by Gods help)
clear it from the Text, and maintain it from exceptions that may arise
thence. First, therefore consider that Peter understood this discourse of
private offenses only: therefore when Christ has done, he says, Mat. 18.21
Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me? Against me, says Peter,
intimating a private trespass. Secondly, consider Christ's answer to Peter in a
Parable, where he concludes thus, So shall my heavenly Father do to you, verse.
35.
if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother his trespasses:
where he still speaks of private trespasses. Thirdly, consider the propriety
of speech in the words of Christ. If thy brother, says Christ, that is, a Jew:
verse. 15.
for no Jew nor Disciple then called any other man brother but a Jew. If thy
brother sin against thee, therefore the offense is still private and personal.
Lastly, verse. 17.
consider that Christ sends the offender from the Church neglected to the
plaintiffes censure and punishment to be sought. He does not say, let him be to
the Church as an heathen and Publican, that is, excommunicate: (for Heathens
were not excommunicated; 1 Cor. 5.11.
for what have we to do to judge those that are without? no nor Publicans
neither; for we read only that Christ wrought Zacheus to restore where he
wronged, Luke 19.
but we read not that he left his office. And when the Publicans came to John
Baptist, Luke 3.12.13.
he did not bid them leave their places, but exact no more than that which is
appointed you:) but says Christ, let him be to thee: because he has
despised the Church, which is the highest tribunal under Caesar, he is in thy
hand to take Caesar's course with him.

But (say they then) how will you maintain this sense from just exceptio^s.
Object. Sol.
We had need indeed: for we are persecuted from this Text by two sorts of
persons. The Papists say that here Christ refers us to the Christian Church
(the Pope out of his chair) to end all controversies. But what have Christians
to do here, if it was the comfort or a Jew against a Jew in private offenses?
The Brownists say, that here is a Rule for every private Congregation like
themselves to claim a sufficisufficient power by, to advance Christ's kingdom.
Object.
And it can be no other (say they) for the word ( church) cannot be taken for
the Jewish Sanhedrim; it is a christian word proper to congregations of saints.
Sol.
Nay, that word in Gods language is used for any assembly. Act* 19.32.39.41.
The assembly was confused; it shall he determined in a lawful assembly; ye
cannot give an account of this concourse, therefore he dissolved the assembly,
says the holy Ghost of a wicked uproare; and in all three places the word
church is used. Why then may not the grave assembly of the seventy elders be
called a church?

Object.
Yea but (they say) here is mention made of binding and loosing, which are
proper to church censures. Sol.
It is true, that for their affinity in sound, they have been often applied
so, at least by way of allusion. But we read of a threefold binding in the new
testament* Divine, Ministerial, and Fraternal, Divine* 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
Matthew. 22.
so the devils a^e reserved in everlasting chains: and God says of final
contemners of grace, bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness.
Ministerial, morally, by way of denunciation only, or Ecclesiastically, by way
of process. This Christ promised to the disciples in the name of Peter, Mat.
16 19 Joh. 20.23
and performed to all his disciples: yea and this is most fearful, when the
bond is laid right, because they do it by commission from God as Gods
Ambassadors; yet is it soluble to true penitents. Fraternall and brotherly ye
loose him of his guilt to you: If he will live in his uncharitableness, ye
bind him by your seeking peace: for he that will not be reconciled from the
heart, Matthew. 5.25, 26. Object. Sol. Matthew. ^8.19. Quid hoc si^^ velit series
ipsa loci declarat.

Siqui correptus est animo indoluerit and in idem propositum venerit cum eo ^
quo corripiaetur dabitur ei de clementissimo Deo ven^a etc.


God will not be reconciled unto him, he shall into the prison till he has
paid the utmost farthing.

But (it may be said) how shall I be assured that upon my brothers submission,
and mine and my witnesses acceptance, that his bond of guilt shall be loosed by
God? From Christ's promise, that if two shall agree on earth, as touching any
thing that they shall ask, it shall b^ done for them (to their brethren) of my
Father which is in Heaven. Thus Saint Basil of old: If two shall ask by
consent it shall be done: what this means the process of the place shows
(says he:) for immediately before Christ speaks of him that reproves his
brother, and him that is reproved; and If he that be reproved be grieved for
his fault, and be joined with the reprover in the same mind, the pardon which
is asked shall be granted from our most gracious God. This I allege (as I
could in this cause many other) not because they like it: but because they may
know that this sense is not a new one of my own. I know that they run a new
and uncharitable way, for when they read that Christ promises not doing for
them that ask, except they agree on earth: they peremptorily conclude, that
they ought not to pray with them that do not consent with them in their
opinions. Therefore would they neither pray with me, nor suffer me to pray with
them to our good God to lead us us into the way of truth: nor will they pray
with their own wives and children, though never so pious, if they do not meet
in the same center of conceits.

Object.
Yea but (say they) all the Text before must be understood of public Church
scandals because of Christ's promise, Mat.18 20
Where two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them: which is ever applied to public meetings.

Sol.
It is true: it is so applied, and so may and must. For it holds strongly, that
i^ Christ be present with private persons, who agree in building up one another
in charity much more is he present in public conventions where faith climbes,
hope roots, charity flames, and zeal burns up corruption, when they are well
used. But yet this proves not, but that here Christ may treat of private
scandals, as the whole context shows, and may encourage brotherly prayers one
for another in peace, because Christ is present with them. But all this is but
a flash to them yet: Object.
for this text must needs be a rule of their perfect discipline in the body
of their members: 1 Cor. 1.5
because the Apostle blames the whole church of Corinth, for not casting out of
the incestuous person. Sol.
That this is no perfect rule of discipline, may appear to any man that will
consider, that here is no direction to proceed against sins against God, or
others, but only against thee, and thee. Here is no excommunication ordained:
for it is not said, put him out from among you, 1 Cor 5.
but let him be to thee for seeking further remedy. Lastly, here is no
determining power given to the church; for the party offended is principal to
admonish, tell, fine. The church is not to excommunicate, but to turn the
offender over to the offended party, let him be to thee, not to us: yea the
church is not to call him by summons, but to expect the plaintiffes coming:
and moreover, if here were a perfect rule, it might fall out that two or three
men, yea women, pretending to be gathered in Christ's name, might cast out
whole congregations for not consenting unto them.

And for that place to the Corinths, Object* 1 Cor. ^*
where Saint Paul is charged to countenance this their new parish discipline;
because he blamed the Corinthians that the incestuous person was not cast out:
I answer, he might have had just cause to blame them, Sol.
if he had committed any such thing to their trust, by devolving his authority
to them: but that he did not yet put over his authority to them in body,
appears diverse ways. First, though the power of government, in respect of
use, belong to the whole church for benefit, that where the fact is notorious,
the law might be notorious too, so as the whole church may be witness of the
doom, 1 Cor. 5.4.
when they are gathered together: yet in regard of the possession for managing
of it, it belongs only to the Pastors, and chief Bishops. For when Christ
made that promise of binding and loosing to his disciples, he did not make it
to them as Apostles properly: for it is no such personal privilege as not to
descend: It is needful for the church in all ages, therefore not tied to any.
Neither did he make it unto them as the body of christians: for when he made
good his promise, he tells us that he sent and inspired them, Ioh. 20.
and after both these, gave this commission of binding and loosing: but he
sent not all, nor inspired all, as he signified by breathing upon the Apostles.
But he did it to them, as pastors, and chief Bishops, and so to men of office
for the use and comfort of the church for ever, And terror of ungodly men.
Secondly, the persons to whom this authority of perpetual government of the
church (in ecclesiastical way) was committed, were the chief Pastors (as
Bishops were anciently called) therefore if Paul had fixed the blame in that
particular upon any, it would have been upon the Angel, Apoc. 2* and 3.
and chief overseer of that church. For Paul and Christ are not of a several
spirit and judgment in church discipline. Thirdly, if therefore Paul blame any
for this, it is under the whole church, those that by office were to redress
these outrages, and to see to the holiness, charity, and comeliness of that
church. But lastly, if we look into the words more narrowly, we shall find
the true fault that he blamed the church of Corinth for. 1 Cor. 5.1.
They had a common fame of such a wickedness committed amongst them, that the
Gentiles by the light of nature did abhor. Paul (having as yet supreme power
ecclesiastical under Christ in his own hand, and (for ought we know) not
having settled a Bishop in highest church government, as in Ephesus, Creta,
Asia,) did expect from them woeful complaints of this disorder, that he might
have directed the^ accordingly, for the taking of it away from among them, with
the author of it. Ver* 2. that he might be (...) away from them, no^ cast out
(...) themselv^.
But they were so far from this, that they were puffed up with their own
gifts, and lamented not that wickedness that reigned among them, that by d^e
course it might be removed. This therefore is that, which the Apostle blames
in the Corinthians. Therefore that he may show them, that they are not so much
to admire themselves, as to take off their eyes from the great faults committed
against them, and that they are to lament, and do their best, that such wicked
persons might be taken away from among them, and not thrust out in a crowd: the
Apostle does three things by authority i^ the face of the Church, verse. 4.
who of conscience ought to consent and bear witness to the doom. First, the
act of an Apostle, Deliver such an one unto Satan (it may be) that he might
have power over his body to torment him, as appears in the Stories of Ananias,
Sapphira, Elimas, Alexander. Secondly, the act of a Bishop, verse* 13:
put away from amongst you that wicked person, that being suspended from the
preservatives of his soul in the visible communion of Saints, he might have a
way to bring him to godly sorrow. And thirdly, the act of every godly Pastor,
to mourn that if any be called a brother, and be a fornicator, verse. 11.
or covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such an one eat not: that is, be so far from countenancing of him in
his sin, that ye take him not into unnecessary familiarity. Now, how from
hence can be picked a popular government of the Church, God knows, I cannot
yet reach.

Object.
But yet (say the Brownists) you may reach thus much to confound you, that if
Paul would not have you eat with such wicked brothers, much less would he
have you to receive the Sacrament with them: for he has more care of his own
supper than of ours. This is certain that God has a greater care of his own
Supper than of ours: Sol.
and therefore though he be willing that all should come both good and bad, yet
if they come, and stay bad, and he come to try them, Matthew. 22.
they shall be bound hand and foot and cast into hell. It is certain also
that we must have a great care of the Supper of the Lord as we can in our
places; private persons, by private communion of Saints; Presbyters, by public
preaching by Word and Doctrine, and by private exhortations as they can; and
Church Officers by presentiments, and punishments fit. But it does not therefore
follow, because we may not eat with them (that is, converse familiarly and
unnecessarily with them) that therefore we may not eat the Lords Supper with
the Saints, because wicked persons are there. Their wickedness we countenance,
when we keep company with them: our goodness they countenance, when they come
into public communion with us: we have no need of their eating with us, they
show their need of their eating with us in the Sacrament, when we have no power
to keep them back.

Yet (say they still) we have power to keep them back: Object.
for Paul speaking of the incestuous person says, 1 Cor* ^.6.
sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was inflicted of many;
therefore the whole Church had power and used it against him. It is true, it
was inflicted by many assessors and conse^ters to his doom, but not as prime
executors of that doom. The Apostle says, that the Saints shall judge the
world, by way of life, witness, 1 Cor. 6.2.
consent, and approbation* yet is it not Christ that is the Judge of wicked and
good? So though this punishment was inflicted upon him by many, by way of
consent, and approbation yet was it primely inflicted by Paul, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.
and his authority in those that declared it. Thus have I satisfied my self
(if not others) in this point concerning the power of government, which lies
not in all the congregation for execution and prime officiating, but in the
chief governors who bear the place of Paul and the other Apostles.

SECT. 13. Brownists exceptions against the persons governing in our Church,
and against the exercise of their government.
PVt case that the power of government were not in every particular
congregation, yet our governors are not to be allowed, yea to be banished the
church, say they. They are far from the sweet moderate spirit of Melancthon,
one of the blessed reformers, who, so the Pope of Rome himself would have
admitted of the Gospel of Christ in truth, would have permitted his superiority
over Bishops, by humane right, for the peace and common tranquillity of
christians under him. But nothing will serve these people but the damnation of
the Pope, and the shame and confusion of all Bishops, one, and the other.

And there are three things principally in them, at which they except, and
against which they stumble: 1 Their name. 1 Their name. Object.
2 Their degree. 3 Their jurisdiction.


Why (say they) should they appropriate to themselves this name of Bishops,
which belongs to all other Pastors as well as to them? There is good cause;
Sol.
for there are two sorts of Bishops: first ordinary Bishops, Act. 20.28
such as were all the Elders of Ephesus. Es. 56.10.
These must not be blind watchmen: for if they see not, they cannot oversee.
They must not sleep and be secure: Matthew. 13.
they must have a great care to keep safe those that are committed to them,
that the enemy come not and sow tares. Secondly, there are extraordinary
Bishops, such as have precedence, and jurisdiction, not only over the flock,
but over the elders and presbyters, which are called Angels; such were Timothy,
Apoc* 2* and ^
and Titus the first ordained Bishops of the churches of Ephesus and Creta, as
appears in the postscript of those epistles. 2 Timothy and Tit. post sc.
Which though happily they are no part of the canonical scriptures, yet are they
authentical records of matters of fact to help our understandings in the
needful stories of th^se times, without which we may think amiss. From these,
they justly assume those names which have been given to men of their order,
ever since the Apostles days.

But put case they could not make such aclaime, Aernis.
if there be the office, shall we quarrel about the names? The first man that
ever found fault with the name, would fame have been a Bishop himself; but
when he found himself crossed, he comforted himself with this, that yet, as he
was a Presbyter, he was equal with them. But let no good Christians be unquiet
for names, if there may be an agreement in things named. 1 Cor. 6.4. To 15.8.
Matthew. 20.28. 1 Pet. 2.25. Heb. 3.1. 1 Pet. 5.1. 3 Ioh. 1. 2 Cor. 8.23. Phil.
2.25 Apoc. 1. and 2. and 3. Object.
The Apostles were called Deacons in Gods language, yea, and Christ himself,
who came to that end. Christ is called the Archbishop, and the Apostle of our
souls. The Apostles are called Elders, and Elders were called Apostles, and
Bishops are called Angels. What matters it then for names, if we can agree in
other things?

But (say they) we do not agree in other things: for these Bishops are in a
degree above Presbyters, and so there is an unequal ministry in the Church of
Christ which should not be. 2 Their degree.
Now surely they have had this from the Apostles days: Sol.
yea the scripture mentions a superiority in the ministry of the Church*
first Apostles, 1 Cor* 12.2^.
secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers. And this is a sure rule, that such a
ministry as is most like the ministry ordained by Christ (it not being
denied unto us expressly, or by consequent, and another commanded) may be
lawfully maintained by us as Christ's ministry. But such is an unequal
ministry in degree, as Prophets, Ephesians* ^
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, one above another in larger
authority, and gifts: for those that were called immediately did excel those
that were called by men. And among those that were called by men, where might
be a rising to an higher degree according as they profited in faith and
godliness. Therefore Paul says, that they that use the office of a Deacon
well purchase to themselves a good degree. 1 Timothy 3.1^.
Therefore may we lawfully maintain a superiority in the ministry of Christ
now.

But (it may be) they would not stand so much upon this, 3. Their jurisdiction
Ob*
because ( for ought I can find) there is some inequality betwixt their
pretended Pastors and Doctors); but that there is a Jurisdiction in our
Bishops, not only over the flock, but over the compresbyters their brethren.
It is true, there is so, Sol.
and that justly; without which, we should have as many religions as parishes:
and for that I say this. Such jurisdiction as is patterned or prescribed in the
epistles to Timothy, and Titus, is worthily exercised in our church of Christ.
If it be said, that that jurisdiction was personal in them; this takes away
the comfort of doctrine in all the other epistles: for it may be as well said,
that the rules of faith and doctrine in them are personal, and belong to that
age. But as this cannot be said, 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Timothy 6.14.
so nor that: for those rules tended to the government of the house of God, and
were to be kept to the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now that, that
jurisdiction patterned or prescribed in those epistles was episcopal, appears
thus. Set aside matters matrimonial, and testamentary, which are the wise
donation of princes for the conscionable ordering of such affairs, and the
jurisdiction of Bishops does stand in two things principally,

1. Ordination. Tit 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22
First in ordination, for the ordaining of ministers. Titus was left in Crete to
ordeine elders: and the Apostle would have Timothy lay hands rashly on none,
that is, ordain. But (say they) these ordained not as Bishops, but as
Evangelists. Object. Sol.
But this they must prove that they were Evangelists strictly so called.
Evangelists were immediately called, so wa^ not Timothy: Act. 16.2.3. 1 Timothy
4.14. Object. 2 Timothy 4.5. Sol. 1 Cor. 16.10.
for according to his good report, and the prophesies, that went of him for his
great use of the church, he was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Yea, but (say they) that Paul bids him do the work of an
Evangelist. True: but may they not as well prove Timothy to be an Apostle,
because he did the work of the Lord as Paul did? know therefore that
Evangelist may be taken three ways: for a penner of the Gospel by divine
instinct; so the Apostles were Evangelists. For a preacher of the Gospel by
divine instinct; so they are accounted so properly. And for a preacher of the
Gospel by ordinary diligence and assistance: and thus Timothy an Evangelist
may be a Bishop to ordain, though not properly as a preacher, yet as made a
great overseer for that use. But (say the Brownists) Bishops claim ordination
to themselves alone: Object.
so did not Timothy and Titus who did it with the eldership. Sol.
Whether these did it always with the assistant presbyters is not yet proved,
there being no set law known to us then, nor I doubt ever will. Indeed, for
our Bishops, they ordain Deacons alone, and so they may according to ancient
custom, and neither I, nor they, know any thing against it. But for the
ordination of Presbyters, as it was in the primitive Church, so our Laws
require that the Bishop should have his assistants, the power of ordaining
being in him, and the liberty of approbation in these.

Secondly, the jurisdiction of Bishops stands in redressing things amiss. 2.
Redressing things amiss* Tit. 1.5.
Titus was left in Creta to redress things amiss, not only in the people,
but Presbyters. Over Presbyters I say, they had a power to command, as Paul
says to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.3
I left thee at Ephesus that thou might charge some that they preach no other
doctrine: to judge, therefore he says, 1 Timothy 5.19.
against an Elder receive not an accusation under two or three witnesses, which
was a juridicall proceeding: and to silence, as occasion is offered; for whose
mouths must be stopped, Tit. 1.11.
says Paul to Titus. Which power, if it be only by verbal conviction, as
every Minister of the New Testament is bound to do as he is able, and not by
real suspension, as he is over Presbyters, the precept is altogether in vain
and idle. For words do but breed words, and contentious spirits will never
have an end.

Object. Act. 4.17.18, 19, 20.
But (say they) the Apostles would not suffer themselves to be silenced, no more
should we. If we cannot do our office in public, we should do it private.

Sol.
This is true of the Apostles, and they did well in it, but there are two sorts
of Preachers: such as were immediately called, who had their gifts, and matter,
and calling, immediately from Christ; these none but Christ can silence, they
are his elect vessels as Paul, Act 9.
to carry his Name: And such as are immediately called, who have their matter
and gifts by reading and industry, and their calling by, and from the testimony
of man. Now, because some men's sins go before, and some men's follow after, 1 Timothy 5.24.
they that gave power, and testimony according to appearance, may, according to
after appearance, take testimony away from the unworthy, except they could
prove themselves Apostles.

But yet (say they) grant all this true, yet are there diverse exceptions
against our Bishops? what? such as may justify a separation? Let us hear
them. Object.
Put case Timothy and Titus were Bishops, yet were they not such as ours, that
is Diocesan Bishops, Sol.
what then? were they parish Bishops? I wish them read in Church stories of the
best times, without which they can never understand some passages of scriptures
of the practice of the Church. I am sure this they should find, that Timothy
and Titus had some compass of jurisdiction allotted, Tit. 1.5.
wherein there were Churches at least according to cities, wherein there were
many presbyters to be overseene, and ordered: and what was this but a Diocese,
which as the Church increased, increased with it.

But these (say they) for all that, Object
had no princely authority, and Lordly command over their brethren. That is
true: neither is this absolutely necessary to the calling, Sol.
or of the essence of it; yet does it not overthrow it, but adorn and
strengthen it when it is well used. If a Bishop were called a beggar, it does
not overthrow his calling; so neither, if he be called a palace, who knows
not, that that proceeded from the favor of our Princes, that they might be
Barons of the parliament to direct the conscience in deep matters of state?

But (say they) this is against the word of God. Be not Lords over Gods
heritage, Object. 1 Pet. 5. ^*
says Peter, and says Christ, the Lords of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27.
and they that are great exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so
among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister, and
whosoever would be chief among you, let him be your servant: therefore
neither the Apostles, nor their successors, must as Lords rule over the flock
of Christ, or over one another. Sol.
Stay here: Christ affoords no such conclusion. He is pleased to oppose, not
Kings and Bishops which are in excellent subordination either to other, but
Gentiles and Christians: and he does not abolish magistracy from Christianity;
for then his Apostles were ill scholars, who taught that higher powers are
ordained of God, To. 13.1. etc. 1 Pet 2.13 14, 17, etc.
and that they must be obeyed by all under them: neither would he abolish an
inequality of ministry in the Church; for he himself (I hope) had
superiority over his disciples; ye call me master, Ioh. 13.13
and Lord, and ye say well; for so I am: yea, and he himself made first
Apostles, 1 Cor 12.28.
secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, which implies an order, degree, and
subordination either to other: neither does he here forbid that his disciples
should be utterly excluded from dealing in any matter of right in the Common
wealth; for then they could easily have replied, Lord we desire not to meddle
in secular affairs, but to have superiority over one another in the Church.
But he labors to prevent the wicked customs of heathen kings in Christian
Commonwealths and Churches, that is, their ruling by their own lusts and
wills, and their ruling for their own ends without respect to the peoples
goods. This is to play the Lords, to domineere over the people, as if they were
their vassals, and themselves had all Lordship paramount that could be
imagined. Now, can any man not soaked in malice or prejudice say, Ezekiel. 34.4.
that our Bishops rule thus like heathens with force and cruelty. when they
govern according to the laws, and Canons of Church and Commonwealth? Is not
this to rule with the consent of the people in the laws of the Commonwealth,
and with the consent of the presbytery in the Canons of the Church?

Yea, but now for the exercise of this government of the Church, Object.
it is (say the Brownists) fearfully abused by the Bishops in three
particulars: 1 In shouldering out such officers in the Church as Christ has
ordained. 2 In imposing oaths upon good men to accuse themselves. 3 And in
base usage of the high censure of excommunication.


Put case all these were true: Sol.
were this a sufficient cause of separation? was Christ no master when his
purse-bearer betrayed him, and the rest of his servants run away from him? Is
his ^eamelesse coat to be rent in sunder because some of those about him have
cast some spots upon it? Because they may (if they will) accuse themselves,
will they therefore accuse Christ as if his bounty in our Church were not worth
the enjoyment? Because one thing is not well used in the punishment of vice,
shall all things be neglected, and spu^ned at that are amongst us for the
maintenance of virtue? yea shall the holy spirit of God assistant in the means
of salvation amongst us, be belyed, as if all the grace they have gotten
amongst us, were no grace till they had discarded us, as some of them do?

But let us take a view of the particulars, and see whether it be so or no,
and how far? First (they say) that Bishops justle out Christ's officers out of
the Church. Object.
And who are these? They tell us first of Elders, lay governing Elders who
should have power in the censures of the church and all matters of order.
Indeed they had wont to tell us of these much. Sol. 1 Timothy 5.17.
But since Master Smith (once of their Church) has pulled down that tottering
wall, by proving that there can be but one sort of Elders proved from the
scripture, that is, Pastors, whose governing duty is to feed the flock of
God: Tit. 1.9
and that the Apostle to Timothy, does not import a distribution of officers,
but commendation of several works in one office; 1 These. 5.11, 13. 1 Timothy 3.1
4.
teaching that Elders are to be honored for two works, well-ruling, and
laborious teaching, as he proves by several texts compared. And since they
weigh that a true Church may stand without them; because otherwise the first
Church of Christians from the death of Christ till these supposed Elders are
ordained, Act* 14
were not a true Church. And especially since they have brought in their new
parish discipline, whereby all power of government is in the whole
congregation; they are not backward to confess that a true Church may be
without them, and that they do not much stand upon that exception against us
(as once a Pastor of that Church confessed to me). Therefore need not I use
more words about that.

But yet they claim their Doctors, Object.
and Deacons, which (they say) the Bishops have banished out of the Church.
Indeed we read of Doctors to teach the word of God: Sol. Ephesians. ^.11.
and if in every congregation (if maintenance were answerable) there were one
in whom were the word of knowledge, 1 Cor. 12.^
and another in whom were the word of wisdom (if these gifts meet not in one
man) we would not mislike it. But that this must be so, as a distinct office
and officer in the church, this we deny. For teaching and preaching may meet
in the same officer (whether Pastor of charge, or Doctor of the chair).
Christ went about teaching, and preaching the Gospel. Paul and Barnabas
continued teaching, Mat 9 ^^ Act 1^.^^ 1 Timothy 6 ^
and preaching; Timothy must teach, and preach. And these the Apostle does not
make several offices: Ephesians. 4.11.
he disjoines them not, but couples them together, Pastors and teachers; to
signify, that though they be diverse gifts, yet they may be, and are often
coupled in one man.

2 Cor. 6.4 To. 15.8. Act. 6.
And for Deacons (which is a name given to ministers, and to Christ himself)
we read indeed of certain men (not called Deacons there) whose work was to
minister to the necessity of the saints, that the Apostles be not driven to
leave the word of God, and serve tables: but have not we such, who take care
for the poor, that the work of the Lord by us be not hindered? Are not our
Churchwardens, and overseers the same for substance of office, if they would
be also always the same for conscience?

Object.
But (say they) we have not the Deacons of Christ. I am sure we have Deacons
for the assistance of the work of the ministry, 1 Timothy 3.13
who serve it for a better degree if they perofrme it wisely. But that Deacons
should be such brethren, who do always attend the business of the poor, and
not belong to ministerial order, is without ground: mark their qualification,
which needed not for such a work, Act. 6.3.
men full of the holy Ghost: mark their ordination, Act. 6.6. Act. 7. Act.
8.35, 38.
which was with imposition of hands, a ceremony ministerial: mark their
practice, Stephen preached, and Philip preached, and baptized too: mark their
description, they must be proved, and found fit, and if they perform their
office well, they shall purchase to themselves a good degree, 1 Timothy 3.13
to ascend higher to be Presbyters, yea and to be Bishops also. And are not our
Deacons such? were they not, yet can we not be denied to be a true Church,
seeing after the ascension, Christ had a true Church before Deacons were
thought of.

Put case Bishops did no hurt this way, Object.
yet they impose oaths upon good men to accuse themselves, (say they) which is
against the law of nature, justice, and religion. Sol.
Certainly nature is for the preservation of the whole body, and head, and so
is justice, and religion too. If therefore such oaths are for the maintenance
of the head, and body in public peace and tranquillity, why they may not stand
with nature, justice, and religion, I cannot see. Ex. 22.10.11, 12.
If one man be entrusted with another man's goods which perish, and he pretend
that it be dead or stolen, then says the law, an oath of the Lord shall be
between them, and the loser shall accept it, or the wronger shall make
restitution. What is here but an imposing an oath upon a man to accuse, or
excuse himself? If a man trespassed against his neighbor, 1 King. 8.31.
an oath was to be laid upon him to cause him to swear before the altar, in
Gods house: yea, and if any person were concealed from the King, 1 King. ^8.10.
he took an oath of the kingdom and nation that they found him not as Obadiah
says to Elijah: what is here again but an oath imposed to excuse, or to
accuse a man's self? And what do our Bishops more then thus? Genesis 25.33.
If Jacob bound Esau by an oath to secure that which he had bought of him. 1
Kin. 2.8.43, 44.
If Solomon bound Shime^ by an oath to his confinement in Jerusalem, because
he knew he had a wicked heart against government, from his grievous curse
against David, to secure his peace, why may not our Bishops (having law in
their hand) secure the rights of the Church, and peace of the state, by the
like oath also? How is it possible that the Church and state can ever live
securely, when false brethren come in privily to bring us into bondage; Gal.
2.4.
when they creep into houses and lead captive simple women; 2 T^m* 3.6 Jude 4.
^ Tim. 2.1^.
when certain men creep in unawares, whose words eat as does a canker, being
closely conveyed, and having secret operations upon weak spirits, I say, how
is it possible to be safe from th^se, but by the oath of God to make them
manifest? A^ when treason is detected, suspected, presumed, or fained, I hope
no man think it unfit that the king, who is worth ten thousand of us, should
be secured by an oath, though it be to the loss of thousands of lives: so
(nor I think) can they judge it unfit that the Church, the spouse of Christ
should be secured of her rights, and peace, by an oath* though thousands do
suffer in goods, and liberty by it.

But (say they) if Bishops may be excused in former things, yet can they not in
the base usage of the censure of excommunication, I am yet glad that they do
so highly account of it: for it is a fearful censure indeed, when men by it
are separated from public Communion, and fellowship with Christ in his
ordinances of salvation, and so bound and held under the guilt of sin. Too
many do too highly esteem it; and because some zealous men in former times
have called the Excommunication of the Pope and his clergy (when it was whetted
against grace and the true worship of God) a wooden dagger; therefore they
think that they may do the like against ours.

Why not (say the Brownists? Object.
) seeing the Bishops do ingrosse it to themselves, when it is a common power
to the whole Church. Sol.
They do use it no otherwise than Paul, who while he kept that key in his
own hands, 1 Cor. 5.
by his own spirit and authority, cast out the incestuous person, as I have
said before. Nay, they do not ingrosse it to themselves; for they do denounce
it according to Canons and rules which are made in Synods and convocations of
Bishops and Presbyters, gathered by the authority of their Princes.

But (say they) they are decreed by Chancellors, Object.
Commissaries, and Officials. Sol.
By them indeed as servants to the Laws and Canons of the Church under their
jurisdiction, for execution. For the censures are not referred to them, or any,
but according to Laws and Constitutions, which they are sworn to execute
justly and impartially. I think that they cannot blame this service of theirs,
if they consider the original. First Bishops judged ecclesiastical causes in
person, under which burden they groaned, and the Church was deprived of other
comforts. Then, when causes increased by the increase of the Church, and all
ordinary cases were ruled by the canons of Counsels, there was less need of
Bishops presence. And when matters of Tithes, Testamentary, and Matrimonial
(by the favor of Princes) were referred to Ecclesiastical cognizance, then
such assistants were ordained, as by such study and industry were useful to
serve the Church under Bishops: and what hurt is here?

Object.
Sweet servants indeed (say they) who having this spiritual Sword in their
hands do thus abuse it. Do we not see indulgences, and pardons, by their
absolutions, and suspensions of processes, fly abroad for money in their
commutations, and purse penances? Sol. Indulgences.
As for Indulgences, they are of two sorts, Papal, and Evangelicall; the Pope
grants them out of Papal authority, by way of mitigation of these
satisfactions we owe to God: these we abhor and disclaim as impious. But in
our Church they are granted, upon repentance and promise of amendment, by way
of mitigation of that satisfaction we owe to men offended by us. Of these Paul
does speak, sufficient to such a man is this punishment: ye ought to* 2 Cor.
2.6, 7, 8, 10
forgive him, lest he be swallowed up with too much sorrow. And if this be not
regulated aright, the fault is in persons, Object.
not in this good order. It is true that this is granted when offenders do but
say to them, Sol.
I am sorry, I repent, I will do it no more: which though it be not enough to
take off the merit of sin before God, yet is it enough to take off the
censure of excommunication. For this is a sure rule, that that which is enough
to constitute an outward member of the visible Church, is enough to admit a
wounded member into the outward privileges of it. Purse penances.
And for purse penances and commutations, of which you speak, let it be
considered that it has some ground in the Word of God. Ex. 21* 29, 30.
For if there may be a commutation by the purse for murder (as ye may see in
the law of the owners Ox killing a man, as I have said) why not for less
matters when it is well regulated?

Yea but (say they) do we not see more abominations yet? Is not power, Object.
by their dispensing of Excommunications, taken from Churches, to remove
scandals, and purge out wicked livers, to the annoyance of the Kingdom of
Christ? Put case we had not power to remove scandals, Sol.
must they therefore separate? If they abstained from the approbation of sin,
and labored to supply the defect of this power by holiness of life, might they
not thus judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.
and continue in our fellowship with glorious comfort? Put case we had no power
to purge wicked livers, must they presently say, Depart from me, I am holier
than thou? Gal. 6.
They should bear only their own burdens in sin, and one another burden
by compassion, toleration, charity, and meekness. By rash separation the
correction of the wicked is not furthered, but hindered: for when they see
themselves contemned, they are put further from the Kingdom of Heaven, and
made sevenfold the child of Hell more, to the hazard of all. But the truth is
we have excellent power for both these works. Though not in all the members of
every particular congregation, as they mean; for then no man could perish in
the gaine-saying of Core, Jude.
whose mutiny was because he could not be equal to Aaron, Nu. 16.10.
whom God appointed his superior: yet have we it in every Diocese, where
laws are made not by one but many, for the ruling of all under them. And if
persons were not sometimes in fault more then offices (who yet seem worse
through the impetuous carriages of those that speak evil of government, 2
Pet. 2.
and think it as easy to rule multitudes, as a few in a Parlour) we might be
easily as happy in our power as all the Churches under Heaven.

Object.
Then, I pray, tell me (say they) the reason of two things; why ungodly men are
not cast out? and why your excommunication is thundered against good men,
meaning the oath of God, present scandals, think thus; I shall be accounted a
troubler of my neighbors, our presentiments come to nothing, but to make the
court rich, to present the poor, brings but charge to the parish, meaning his
own purse, no man can observe all the Canons, or it is better, to punish them
before the civil magistrate out of prejudice to courts of spiritual
judicature; then is it impossible, be the government never so good that wicked
men should be cast out. But if Churchwardens be as the house of Cloe to Paul
to give true information and to open the eyes of the not-seeing judge, they
shall soon here, as of that incestuous person, Cast them out. But the truth
is, this question need not be moved by them, seeing they see more cast out in
our Churches, then in the Churches of Corinth, whereof choice of wicked members
we hear only of excommunicating only one beast.

To the second quaere I answer, because it If then they are cast out it is not
for goodness, but because they are not good enough. There is a double
goodness, a certain goodness, and a controversal goodness, which is so
judged of some good men, but not so of others as good as they. No good man is
cast out by us for certain goodness, but for controversal, which ends in
stirs and tumults, and then, I would they were cut off that trouble you says
Paul. Gal. 5.
Again there is a double goodness, in the thing it self, and in the carriage
of it: as Jobs cause was good, yet he carried it badly, and therefore before
God received him to his favor, he was driven to abhor himself and repent in
dust and ashes. Job. 42.
No man by us is cast out for any good thing, but for his undiscreet and bad
carriage of it. A man does not only love the meat, but the dressing of it, so
does God the manner, as well as the matter, and so does the Church. If
therefore the carriage of goodness end in faction, and turbulency, the
actours, happly, may be justly cast out for a time to make them more humbly
wise.

Object.
Yea but (say they) such good men as were persecuted for our consciences by the
Bishops and their instruments, with their curses, and prisons, when wicked men
are spared. It may Sol.
when wicked men confess their faults, and they deny one disturbs the public
peace of the church more then the other. For (as it is well said) in a
Commonwealth some smaller offense has heavier punishment, as breaking open a
poor Cottage where no goods are lost, or person hurt, then the stealing of
some cattle, which happily are more worth, because the public tranquillity and
peace of subjects is more hurt: so also is it justly in the Church when public
peace is in hazard.

But is the sin of separation so great, Object.
that it should be punished more then blasphemy, perjury, whoring,
drunkenness, say they? Sol.
All these and other sins are detestable, and by all laws fall under great
censures, 1 Cor. 4.^1.
and find not the spirit of meekness but the rod, when the sleepy consciences
of Officers will present them in due course of Law. The greatness of the sin
of separation
Yet the sin of separation is very great. It makes men throw dirt in their
mothers face, and defile their fathers and brethren. It stands and pleads it
own justification in despite of government, whereas the other are self
condemned wretches. It sowreth many quickly under show of holiness, whereas
the other are abhorred by a natural conscience. It begets divisions which
breed thoughts of heart, Jud. 5.
and proud contentions, whereas none will contend in defense of the other; yea,
it shakes the hearts of men in Religion, making them to doubt whether any
Religion be good. For while they see these that are reputed good men to be so
divided, the adversary triumphs, the scoffer mockes, but the serious Christian,
that knows he must have a Religion to bring him to heaven, knows not which
way to take. His body is in one Church, his soul in another, his opinion in
neither, but as the wind of affection, and the tide of well pleasing persons
carry him* whereas the other move him not one foo^ in Religion. For Religion
gives holy and good principles. If they be not sucked into make men better, it
is not because Religion is naught, but because those that profess it are too
bad, as they will know in the day of our Lord Jesus. Weigh but this thoroughly,
and you will not blame Bishops for the punishment of the vain sin of
separation.

Object.
But put case (say they) that they did well in all their former use of
excommunication, yet when they make it base and vile in excommunicating for
trivial and unworthy causes, as fees, and small portions of money to be paid
by them that are not able to pay, in this they sin against the Kingdom of
Christ. Indeed if it be so through Bishops faults, Sol.
now verily there is a fault. I know no Bishop in our Church but would
willingly redress it. If there be a defect any where it is in Law, not in
Bishops Courts. If there were any common Law for the poor Minister to recover
his Offerings, and other petty dues* for the officers of courts to procure
their fees, whereof both must live or sterve, would they ever run to the
dreadful sentence of excommunication? It proceeds not from any order or
sentence of our Bishops, but from a mere want of other law, for which I hope
they will not separate from the commonwealth; get some law to recover their
rights other ways, and then excommunication shall shine in its glory. Yet, in
the mean time, thus much (I am sure) may be said, to quiet a tender
conscience. A man asks his dues, and it is denied: so he that denies it, is
an unrighteous person. He asks it again, and it is denied in choler: so, he
that denies, is a contentious person; he asks it again, and he is reviled:
so he that does so is a reviler. Now, the holy Ghost says, To. 2.8, 9.
that contentious persons shall have indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and
anguish: that unrighteous persons, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
thieves and revilers, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Therefore they
are bound in heaven while they are so. Is not this reciprocal then, those that
are bound in heaven, should upon due conviction, be bound on earth, and those
that are so bound on earth, shall be bound in heaven? But these that will not
pay just fees, dues, if they be able, upon conviction, and contumacy, are
bound in heaven: therefore upon their contumacy they may lawfully be
excommunicate.

Ob.
Yea but (say they) the Bishops officers should have no fees at all in
spiritual cases. Should they not live? Sol.
so it may be, some would, that would do what they list. But when they spend
their time and strength in rectifying disorders as they can by law, shall they
have no reward? Indeed it were a gracious thing, if there were a common
treasury to maintain them that they might hear no more of, Hos. 4.
they eat up the sins of the people: yet because they must be maintained
one of these two ways; either out of the common purse of the innocent, or out
of the purses of the guilty. Judge whether it be more equal that one man should
spend for another man's sin, or that a man that will sin should be driven to
spend for his own; that if he fear not sin, yet at the least he may fear
the weakening of his purse. And thus (at the last, by Gods blessing) have I done
with the first general plea of the Brownists against us, that we are no true
Church. We have all their pleas, about the nature of a true Church, the
entrance into a true Church, the head of a true Church, the members of a true
Church, and the government of a true Church. In all which, thorough Christ's
assistance, I have so cleared our Church, and showed the vain singularity of
theirs, that, if they will not come to us, yet we shall keep where we are,
and not forsake the fellowship in our assemblies.

SECT. 14. The Brownists second opinion upon* which they forsake our Church,
because we have not a true ministry.
WE are now (by Gods favor) come unto their second opinion, upon which they
ground their separation from us to be just, and necessary; that we have not a
true ministry, and therefore (alas) they pity me and others of my brethren.
They do, or should know, that the best ministry, now, is the opening and
applying the word by them that are sent, that which Paul says of prophesying,
that it is a speaking unto men for exhortation, edification, ^ Cor. 14.3.
and comfort, is this same with the best ministry. And if they that do it be
sent, Romans 10.
then surely it is right as it should be. Now, to the sending of this
ministry there must be three acts: the act of Christ; the act of the Church;
and the act of the parties sent. To Christ all authority and power is given,
Matthew. 28.
and he uses a double act: an immediate act when he does, in calling,
extraordinarily fit men with knowledge, and power to do his work, so he fitted
the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists. A mediate act, when he does it the
ordinary way, by means, and degrees. Men (by his grace) take heed to
doctrine, and to themselves, give attendance upon reading; 1 Timothy 4.16.13.
and attain to these four things: integrity of life, 1 Timothy 3 7. 1 Timothy 2.2.
1 Timothy 3.2. 2 Timothy 3.16. 1 Timothy 3.2 1 Pet. 5.2.
by which they get a good report even of those that are without: Soundness in
christian Doctrine; by which they are able to teach, exhort, reprove, correct,
and instruct those committed to them. Dexterity in teaching, by which they are
apt to teach, and communicate their knowledge to others. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.
And lastly, willingness, by which they feed the flock of God willingly and
of a ready mind, out of love and zeal to Christ. Of all these no ordinary man
can judge: but he that finds them in himself may say, I thank God, I find
this act of Christ in sending me which opens the door. The act of the Church
is the Porter that does let us in: Joh. 10.
and stands in four things, presentation, probation, ordination, and election.
Presentation is when those that are to be called are presented. Act. 1.23.
Thus the Disciples presented or set before the Apostles Joseph, Barsabas, and
Matthias; Act. 6.6.
as after they set before them the Deacons that were to be called. Probation is
a trial of their gifts and life: as Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.10. 1 Timothy 4.14. Act
6.6. Act. 13.3. Tit. 1.5.
Let them first be proved, and then let them minister if they be found worthy.
Ordination is when they are consecrated and set apart with imposition of hands,
and prayer. Thus Paul and Barnabas ordained the Elders in every Church, and
Titus was left in Creta for this end. Election and calling is when they are
assigned for execution of their Office to their particular titles and
allotments, as Matthias to his Apostolical jurisdiction, and Timothy, and
Titus to Episcopal in Ephesus and Creta; which Election though it may be
conceived to go before Ordination in respect of the office to which they are
elected, yet not in respect of the execution of it in their particular places.
The Act of the party sent, is a desire of the Office for the glory of God, and
a purpose to spend and to be spent upon that service. They must have
(ordinarily) a desire of their office, 1 Timothy 3.^. 1 Cor. 1^.^^
and to addict themselves to the Ministry of the Saints as the house of
Stephanas. If it seem to be unlawful for a man to desire it, because Moses
and Jeremy were unwilling to undertake such high service; Exodus 4. Jer. 1.6.
and all the Apostles were called without their own seeking, and above their
desires; yea and some ancient worthies have been found to hang back when such
offices have been tendered? yet when we consider the willingness of Esaias,
here am I send me, Es. 6.
we must learn to judge aright. If any desire it when they are not meet and
qualified, How the M^nistery may be desired.
it is a wickedness against justice and charity: against justice in taking the
hire when he is no labourer; and against charity in not feeding the souls
committed his trust. If any qualified man desire it in a wicked way, as
ambitions suit, slavish flattery, or the like, it is stained to them who make
gain their godliness. 1 Timothy 6.
But if they desire it out of notice and testimony of sufficiency to be
Christ's instruments (as they are able) to further the work of the Lord, 1 Timothy
4.16. 1 Timothy 3.1. Joh. 21.15.
and the salvation of souls, as Esaias, it is both just and charitable. It is a
worthy work, and full of charity, and to be desired: Yea God moves the heart
of some to it, and he never does that to what is unlawful. As for Moses,
Jeremy, and some others, it proceeded out of a too backward modesty, upon
conscience of their own unworthiness: and as for the Apostles their case was
different; they knew of no such service to be done, and therefore they could
not desire it. Again, the party sent has a purpose to spend, and to be spent
in the service of Christ. Act. 20.28 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. 2 Timothy 4.2 Matt. 28.20. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Dan 12.3
They know it to be a work; yea, and to be a worthy work too; because he
never labors without Christ his Lord and master: he labors for the
saving of souls, in whose hearts they have honor, as well as with God in
Christ: and therefore he resolves to say as Paul, I will very gladly spend, 2
Cor. 12.15.
and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be
loved.

This they do or should know to make up the best Ministry of Christ. Object.
Sol.
But (say they) where is this to be found? Certainly in our Church, in those
that are sent according to the true meaning of our Laws and Canons both
ecclesiastical and temporal. It is their true intent and meaning, that none
should enter (when they can be had) but such as are such and thus qualified. If
it be otherwise, it falls out as betwixt Ahimaaz and Cushi: 2 Samuel, 18.19. ad
fine^.
Ahimaaz was forward and would go carry news to the King: Ioab denies him,
and sends Cushi; yet Ahimaaz presses, and would go, and went with much a do,
and came to the king first. But when he came there, he could only say, I saw
a tumult, but I know not what. It was Cushi that did the message to purpose,
who was the messenger intended. So in the intention of our laws and
governors, the best able, instructed, and worthy should still be sent: but
when they are deluded with unworthy presentations; false testimonies, seeming
appearances of learning and gravity, 1 Timothy ^.2^
( for some men's sins go before, some follow after) and with popular
importunities, which seldom proves to the best, the least worthy run fast^st,
to the scandal of good laws, and blessed orders. But for all this, why should
we not have a true ministry?

O no (say the Brownists), Object.
excuse what you can, you have not the true ministry of Christ. Indeed we have
not Prophets, Sol.
Apostles, and proper Evangelists: Ephesians. 4. Marks o^ true teachers.
but have we not Past^rs and teachers? Look upon Christ's formal marks of true
shepherds. First, they are not the ministers of the Pope of Rome that
spiritual Babilonian; no more are we. They are proper sacrificing priests for
the quick and the dead, so are not we. They are his by doctrine, oath,
obedience, which ^s the true mark of a servant: so are not we. To. 6.16 Ioh.
8.34
They are embraced by him as his sons, we are disclaimed, and persecuted by
him with fire and faggot. Ioh. 15.19
If we were of him he would love us, for the world love her own. Secondly,
they publish sound doctrine, which is the trial of a true minister. Such as
stand not in his counsel, Ier.23.22.
and declare not his word, are not sent of God as they should: 1 Timothy 4.6
but if they be nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine, to
which they have attained, of which they put the brethren in remembrance, I hope
they are true pastors. It is true that all truth is not sit at once; Ioh*
16.22 1 Cor. 3.
there must be first milk, then stronger meat: and ordinary pastors have not
all truths so revealed as they cannot err in so^ething: 1 Cor. 13. Phil. 3.15,
16.
yet if they walk according to the same rule, minding the same thing, and
humbly expect, though they be otherwise minded then some other of their
brethren, in some things, till God reveal even that unto them, by the
scriptures, and public discussions, and lawful definitions of the Church, I
hope they are the true ministers of Christ.

Ioh. 10.2.7
Thirdly, they have the true properties of a good shepherd given by Christ.
They go in by the door, verse. 3.
that is, Jesus Christ who calls them by his Church. The porter opens to
them, that is, not the wh^le house, multitude, and congregation; this cannot
but be a vain dream: but partly the holy Ghost who opens to them by gifts,
and partly the governors of the Church, who are delegated under Christ for
their admittance. They call their sheep by their names, Verse. 3. Pro. 27.23
laboring to know the state of their flocks, that they may draw out of their
treasury things, Mat. 13.52
both new, and old, and minister to them according to their need. They lead
them forth, Verse. 3.
from pasture to pasture, Psa. 92.14
from milk to strong meat, that they may be sat and wel-liking before Christ.
For though many of their people are ignorant and wicked (because they will not
come to Christ that they may be saved) yet as the Shepherd leads his cattle
to green pastures and waters, J^hn 5.
though they will not eat or drink of them: so our good Ezekiels are leaders of
their people, though the wicked, that follow not, perish. And lastly, they go
before their flocks, Jo^. 10 4.
in sound Doctrine and good life, both according to the intention of our Church
in sending them, and very often in plain examples. And are not these true
Ministers that do thus?

Fourthly, they have an ordinary and daily assistance of Christ for the
converting of souls. For though it cannot be said of every particular true
Minister: Es. 4^.4.
for I have labored in vain and spent my strength for nothing, said Esaias; The
bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed, the Founder melts in vain, Jer.
6.29.
for the wicked are not plucked away: yet is it true, of a true Ministry of a
Church, in general; for if they stand in Gods counsel, Jer. 23.^2.
and declare his Word to Gods people they shall turn them. And is it not thus
with our Ministry? To. 1* 16.
Has not the Gospel been the power of God by it to many that have believed
it? Can they not truly say, 1 Cor. 4:15.
In Christ Jesus we have begotten thousands through the Gospel? Object.
Let it be said, that our Ministry has converted none from Heathenisme and
Judaisme to Christianity, as the Apostles did; yet has it been by Christ's
blessing, Sol.
powerfully sealed by plucking away thousands from lewd courses, by no
compulsion, but by the fear of God wrought by the preaching of the hammer and
fire of the Law and Gospel, Jer. 23.29.
by us; and by converting them to holiness of life. Object.
If it be said that none can be converted but Infidels, such as the Apostles
converted in the first planting of the Churches of the Gentiles: Sol.
It is certain that it is as true a conversion from any sin to
sanctification, as from infidelity to faith. For John Baptist was sent to turn
the disobedient Jews: Luke ^.17. Luke 22.32. Jer. 31.18.
and Peter after his fall was to be converted: and Ephraim was to say, turn
thou me and I shall be turned: and the remnant of Jacob was to return to the
mighty God. Es. 10.21.


Object. Joh. 4.
But (say they) this may be done by private persons, as by the woman of Samaria,
and by the good wife, who winnes her husband by her conversation. 1 Pet. 3.1.
Who does doubt that as the base carriage of Christians does make religion
blasphemed: so the fair carriage of the^ does win aliens to like it? Who
doubts but the persuasions of others may draw men to Christ or his followers to
be informed in good ways? Act. 18.
Who doubts of Aquilas and Priscillas taking Apollos (a man mighty in the
Scriptures) and making him understand the ways of Christ better? Yea and
Christ (if he please) may use them as means for through conversion. But what
is Christ's ordinary way? he has now given Pastors and Doctors, not only for
the setting of the Saints in joint, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
and edifying of the body of Christ, but for the work of the Ministry: and
what is that? It is to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, Act. 26.18.
that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them that
are sanctif^ed by Faith in Christ. Therefore our Ministry having done thus,
are not these true Ministers?

No (say the Brownists) and therefore do they make exceptions against us.
Object.
They like not our ordainers, our titles, our callings, our infirmities, nor
our maintenances: therefore we are not true Ministers. Sol.
Let us follow them with Christ's light. It is as if they should have said,
though we cannot overthrow the substance of your Ministry, yet we reject you
because of the circumstances of it, as the children of Israel who could not
outface Elishaes calling from God, yet could in scorn say come up thou
bald-pate, 2 King. ^.23
thou art not without thy blemish, till the Bears stopped their mouths. Let
them take heed. If a King have all the substance of right and Kingshippe, yet
if in his inauguration he have not a pleasing ^nnointer, title, acclamation,
maintenance, or have some infirmities, is he not a right King? I doubt, if
these spirits had power in their hand, neither true King, nor true Priest, nor
true people, should scarcely be found to stand before them.

Object.
But to the particulars. They say, we are ordained by Bishops, Sol.
who are (as they are such) the very limbs of Antichrist. That they are the
blessed governors of our Church, according to the pattern, and rules
Apo^tolicall, of Timothy and Titus, I have showed before. And by whom should
we be ordained but by such? Can a good man dream that the body of a people of
men, and women, have a power to ordain and consecrate presbyters, when if he
run thorough the whole new testament, he can never find but bresbyters
ordained by presbyters? If ours be Bishops, yet they are presbyters and more.
They have an order, and jurisdiction, by right above us, Tit. 1.5.
as Titus in Creta, yet I hope, that does not exclude presbytership from them.
The inferior orders may stand alone, but the superior comprehends all. A
Bishop may read, administer sacraments, and do other offices of the inferior
orders, and often does: whereas the other inferior offices have no
jurisdiction over their brethren, where the blessing of Bishops may by the
favor of times, and Princes be settled according to the word of God. That
which is their weapon here, I suffer to run unto my heart, not to wound it,
but to comfort it: that I have not been brought up in other Churches, to
receive my ordination from the presbytery (which yet is good in case of
necessity, when our way cannot be had): but that I have received it by the hand
of a Bishop, as well as presbyters, which makes the practices and rules of
scriptures about ordinations the less defective, the more complete.

But these Bishops of ours (say they) do ordain us Priests, Object. Sol.
which is not a ministry of the new testament. And what if we be so called in
our ordination? Is it so contemptible a name which is put upon all Christians,
Apoc. 1* ^
both kings and beggars? may not we be called so as ministers, as well as we,
and they too as Christians? Indeed, popish Priests had an ill name, when they
ruled our people, which made it a name of disgrace: and proud and scornful
people will cast it upon us, with disgrace, who do deserve better: but by
Christ's help, I shall never be ashamed of that name which I must labor to
answer in my office, if I will be found faithful. Ep^. 1. Phil. ^. Col. 1*
Christ as a Priest makes intercession; and I as a Priest must pray for my
people, as Paul did often. Christ as a Priest did offer a sacrifice; and I as a
Priest must minister the Gospel of God, that the sacrificing of my people may
be acceptable, To. 15.16.
as Paul of the Gentiles. And why should any be offended at that name by which
the holy Ghost calls us? for when Esaias speaks of the ministers of the new
testament, he says, of them will I take for Priests, and Levites; says the
Lord. Es. 66.21.
What matters it what we are called, so long as we offer no idolatrous
sacrifice, but only in our office commemorate the sacrifice of Christ, and do
other services for his honor?

Object.
Put case we may be Priests in name, and Presbyters indeed, yet (say they) we
are not called by the people, whose souls we feed, but are put upon them by
laws and Canons. This is in part true, Sol.
but not fully: for while Presbyters are put into parishes by law, they come
unto them by their own consent. For have not the people chosen knights, and
Burgesses to draw up, and to consent to laws for them? And have not Presbyters
chosen clerks, synodically to meet, to make rul^s and Canons for them? And
do not both these settle Presbyters in every parish. Therefore they are
inducted by all ministers and peoples consent. But put case it were fully true,
were we not therefore true ministers? Did we never hear of a man and woman
that were married together against the will of one party (by the power of
parents) who yet, being married, were true man and wife, and by an after
combining, lived lovingly together? so may it be in this case: a free consent
of minister and people after, in the true worship of God may supply and make up
that defect. But is it certain that the people have such a right in calling
their Presbyters? Let us look into the sure word of God. I see the right of
Christian Magistrates in choosing them unto their places. Ex 28.1^ Ex. 40.16 1
Chro. 23.1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Kin 2.27 2 Chro* 8.14. 2 Chro, ^9 24.
Take thou unto thee Aaron for the Priests office, says God: and thus did
Moses. See also how David did sort, and divide the Priests and Levites for
their several works. Did not Solomon by soveraignety deprive Abiathar, and
induct Zadoch, yea and appoint the Priests and Levites to their several
service, as David? Did not Hezekiah the same, and that not by instinct, as a
type of I know not whom, but still after the example of David, who was not
checked for it? Why then should our Christian kings lose their rights, which
they partly execute by themselves, and partly according to the laws by their
delegates, and officers, both in Church, and Commonwealth? It is true, we may
read of the people to have some hand about Church officers in the scriptures,
Act. ^, 15. etc. Act. 6.2.
as when Matthias was chosen, and when the Deacons (as they call them there)
were: yea and in after times too, till uproares, tumults, and seditions
followed for want of those graces, which the people in the Apostles times had:
but let them duly weigh, that Christ has left no precept for that, no nor
established practice in all Churches. Yea, such elections never were but when
the Apostles were present with them, yea the people must be confessed then to
have extraordinary gifts ( they were baptized, Act. 2.38. Act. 10.44
and the Holy Ghost came upon them) and so to be able to be assistant in
choice. Yet these people did never assume it as a right in themselves, but come
to it upon the Apostles exhortations for the time being. How slender therefore
are such grounds, which fell out in unimitable cases, and when there was no
Christian Magistrate, to carry with them a continued right, let good
consciences guided by the Word of God, judge*

I know not what the Brownists will say to this; but I am sure they load us
with fresh burdens which press us down from being a true Ministry, at least
in the guilty. They find in many of our congregations wicked and ignorant
Priests, Object.
who pollute the whole worship of Christ; and are these the true Ministers of
Christ? Sol.
They are true Ministers of Christ, if they minister the things of Christ
truly: true Word, true Sacraments, Ephesians. 47.
true Prayers according to the measure of the gift of Christ. There is a
difference betwixt a good man and a true man: so betwixt a good Minister and a
true Minister. I wish from my soul that this distinction need not: and that
all Presbyters and Bishops were both unreproveable in life, 1 Timothy 3.
and able to teach; that so neither Brownists nor Atheists may have occasion to
stumble at them. But so long as Satan and hypocrisy are in the Church, 1 Sa.
2.24.
there will be such annoyances: Yet Gods people must not abhor the
sacrifices for the wickednesses of Elyes sons; Joh. 3.22. Joh. 4.2. Joh. 6.70.
if they do they sin as God has said. Put case they be wicked Priests, yet
may they perform the true service of Christ. Jesus Disciples baptized
sufficiently (I hope) and Judas was one of them, yet himself was a Devil. The
Priests and Levites of old offered sacrifices, celebrated Sacraments whereby
the faithful had their faith confirmed, yet too many of them were too wicked.
Christ's ordinances have their efficiencie from him, not from them that serve
about them. The garden may be watered and made fruitful by water that runs
through a wooden gutter, yet that not a whit the better, but the worse for it.
The Sun may give us comfortable light through a sluttish and noisome window,
yet that never the better by it. The field may bring forth a goodly crop though
sowed with a durty hand. The Bell may call us to the Church though it never
enter it self but by the sound. The Well may yield excellent water though it
have much mud. Therefore though such Preachers are odious, yet how can the
people refuse the holy things of God which come truly from them. They will if
they deserve hanging, receive the Kings pardon whosoever writes or brings it to
them. They have deserved worse, Hell, will they refuse the seal of a pardon
from a wicked Priest? Put case they be ignorant Priests (though, blessed be
God, that cloud was never better blown over) I hope they know how to preach
the Word and administer the Sacraments truly. The Disciples were not such
excellent Clearkes when they baptized. Though they were initiated in Christ's
School, examine whether they did not do it before they were sent to preach:
Joh. 3.22.24. Mat. 4.12.17.
They baptized before John was cast into prison: and Christ did not begin to
preach himself publicly before John was imprisoned, and after that he sent
his Disciples to preach: what they were that went with Peter to Cornelius let
them certainly tell me. The Text calls them certain brethren; Act. 10.23.
verse. 48.
yet when Peter had preached to Cornelius and those about him, he commanded
them to be baptized: who baptized them? As yet there was no communion betwixt
the faithful and the Gentiles, and only certain brethren went with Peter,
and no Deacons chosen but them at Jerusalem. I doubt they will not find such
clearkship in them. Thus I answer them, not to uphold an ignorant ministry, I
abhor it from my soul: or to bear with private persons meddling with the
holy things of God; for our Church government is against it. But partly because
the Word says, 1 Cor. 12.28.
that God has set in the Church helps or helpers to be assistant in reading
and in ministering of the Sacraments to teachers, and partly because none should
think no Sacraments true Sacraments, except administered by learned Clearkes
fully able to teach.

But now, to let all things pass which are gone for this time, the Brownists
will have about with our Ministry if it be but for our maintenance. Our
maintenance is a Jewish and ceremonial maintenance; namely, Object.
Tithes, which are fitter for the ministers of Antichrist, whose Religion has
a mixture of Judaisme in it, then for the Ministry of Christ. Sol. 1 Cor ^.^*
verse. 8, 9.10* 1^.
They will not deny that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: this Christ has ordained, and not man. Nor will they deny that the
Apostle proves by the Law and Leviticall practice, that the Ministers of the
Gospel must have maintenance from the Church. Neither will they deny that he
that labors in the Word and doctrine is worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy ^.17*
18. Gal. 6.6.
and must be communicated unto by him that he teaches in all good things: But
yet they do not love to hear of these Jewish Tithes. I would ask them this
one question: They say they must do nothing about the worship of God, or for
the support and maintenance of it, but what they must have a particular warrant
from the Word of God for. Well then, seeing God does require that Pastors
should be maintained honorably by a communicating in every good thing, let
them tell me, how they will satisfy their consciences in the particular
quantity they must bestow upon them: Some men will say one thing, some another,
but how will conscience be satisfied, that it may dye in the peace of justice
and charity? The Scripture speaks not of any other particular quantity but the
tenth part, what therefore else can satisfy conscience that it err not?

Object. Sol.
But (they will say) that ^thes are Jewish ceremonies which are abo^ished. It is
easy to say so, but not so easy to prove. For Jewish ceremonies are shadows
of things to come, Col. 2.17
the body whereof is Christ. Let them show from Gods word that tithes are so
accounted. I am sure than God blames the faulty performance and resting in
ceremonies: Es. 1.
but he never blames the neglect of ceremonies, as of tithes, when he says,
ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, Mal 3.9
even this whole nation, in not paying tithes. Yea we never read that ever
Christ said so much of any Jewish ceremony as of tithes, Matthew. 23 Object.
these things ought ye not to leave undone. If it be said, that this
maintenance cannot be proved out of the new testament. I say, Sol.
that this will trouble any man to prove: for when Paul proves out of the law,
that the ministry of the new testament has maintenance due, does he not say,
(so) has the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14
that he that preaches the Gospel should live of the Gospel? and how is that?
As they of old lived at the altar by tithes, so we now. Again, does not the
Apostle say, that tithes are due to the ministry of Christ that lives, Heb.
7.6, 7, 8* 9.
because they were due to Melchizedech, to whom Abraham paid them as a Priest,
and tythe-taker, and type of Christ? who therefore should receive them, 2 Cor 5
20
but those that are in his stead to beseech you to be reconciled unto God? The
same reason that God gives why Levi should have Gods portion, ( because God is
his portion) is it not true, of ministers whom alone he has taken to be
ministers of the new testament? It is true, 2 Cor. 3.
they are not Priests after the order of Melchizedech, as Christ was, yet the
High Priest of our profession, has ordained us to live out of his portion,
which must be his tithes due to him, or else our consciences can never be
settled what it is. Let them duly weigh this, and when they can salve it up
well, as in the sight of God, then may they hear of much more; we hate
Judaisme as much as they, but we cannot bear that title, except it be
inflicted by Christ himself. And thus (by the help of God) I have cleared
their second exception, upon which they separate, because we are not a true
ministry.

SECT. 15. The Brownists last opinion upon which they forsake our Church,
because we have not a true worship.
WE are now come (thorough Christ's help) unto their last exception against us;
which concerns the worship of God amongst us, as if we had not a true, but an
idolatrous worship of the true God. This they do so much detest (and so do we
too, if they can prove it) that they cannot with any good conscience have
communion with us in it. Do not we cleave to the only true God, by
knowledge, repentance, faith, fear, love, confidence, joy, thankfulness,
patience, and adoration? Do we not know God to be the only true God, and
therefore give him his true worship in spirit and truth, according to his word?
Do we not pray to him knowingly, faithfully, zealously, penitently, and
obediently desiring to be made better? Do we not preach and hear his word
carefully, and reverently, desiring to know, and do? Do we not administer
the sacraments of Christ, and receive them with a desire and purpose to enter
covenant with God to be his people, and keep it unto our lives end? Do we
not in all these lament our defects, and others, laboring to help what we
can, and what we cannot patiently suffer; and lovingly mourn till Christ in
the day of judgment fan away the chafe? Do we not publickely solemnize the
Lords day, that in the public use of Gods ordinances we may learn to be
better, and do better till we come to the full age in Christ Jesus? How then
can it be imagined that we should not have a true worship?

Yes (say the Brownists) your worship is Ceremonial, typical, and stinted,
Object.
contrary to Christ's will, Ioh. 4.
who would have you worship him in spirit and truth. Sol.
First they say it is a ceremonial worship; will no worship please them, but
a slovenly one, unbecomming the person of that God whom we worship? If our
ceremonies were part of the worship, as they of the Jews, or proper worship,
as many are reputed in the Church of Rome, then they might talk aloud: but
when they are but outward accidents for the well and orderly carriage of the
worship of God, what hurt is in them? Will it grieve any man to see Christians
to worship their God in an humble, comely, and reverend way? Nay would it not
vex any good soul to see them to do otherwise.

They say, Ob^ect. Heb. 3^*
that Christ was more faithful in the house of God then Moses. If therefore
Moses prescribed Gods worship only according to the pattern given, much more
does Christ, to which it is wickedness to us to add. Sol.
Indeed Christ is more faithful then Moses: for the law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth by Jesus Christ: Moses gave a perfect shadow of our
reconciliation under types, but Christ gives a perfect body which has nothing
but truth in him, and not a shadow of things, as the things of Moses. Ioh. 14.
Heb. 10.
But what is this to decent ceremonies, which are not types and shadows of
Christ, and his but only documents, and signs of our humble and reverend
respects to God? As faithful as Moses was, yet even then had the Jews
ceremonies of order, and comeliness, which were not disallowed by God, or
reprooved by his Prophets. Two sorts of ceremonies.
There are two sorts of ceremonies: such as corrupt the worship of God, and
such as do preserve by advancing the worship of God. If they had made any
types of Christ which God had not made, they had corrupted the worship of God,
Deuteronomy. 4.2.
as the Brownists do; who when we tell them of the acts of the kings of Judah*
about the worship of God, they presently (without the warrant of God) tell us
that they were types of Christ. They may (...) well say that the kings of other
nations were types of Christ too: because the Jews were to have Kings
according to other nations. 1 Samuel 8.5 Deu. 17.14
But when the devout Jews did by their own ceremonies, labor to carry the
worship of God in the most becoming way, in this they did preserve the worship
of God by advancing it. Thus Salomons peace offering was commanded, but his
advancement of that service was permitted to himself, when he offered two and
twenty thousand oxen, 1 Kin. 8.63
and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. Did he now go against the
faithfulness of Moses, when he commanded it not? Did hre not likewise honor
God with the solemnity of seven days, ver* 65.
and seven days without particular warrant? He was commanded to pray, but when
he added this ceremony of his own (fit for that time of jubilation) to stand
before the Altar, ver. 22.
and spread forth his hands toward heaven, did he corrupt the worship of God
because Moses commanded it not? If Princes hold their people faithfully to
them, to serve God and the King, this is commanded them, Deuteronomy. 17.
as the Law is committed to them: but if Ioshuah do it by setting up a stone
in Shechem; Josh. 24* 26. 2 Chapter 15.14 Nehe. 9. ult. and 10* 11.
if Asa do it by an oath, and if Nehemiah do it by subscription, who has
required it? Is Moses unfaithful? Are not these things permitted to them and
us? To remember Gods benefits is commanded: Hest. 9.
but for Mordecai and the Jews to do it by the Feast of Purim, who has
required it? was it not only permitted? So it is with us: 1 Cor. 14 26.40.
we have precepts and permissions under general rules. In conscience to the
precepts we preach and hear the word, we administer and receive the
Sacrament, we pray both publicly and privately: But in conscience to the
permission, we hear and preach from the Pulpit, or from none, with one in a
gown, or cloak, in white, or in black: we receive standing, sitting, or
kneeling* we pray standing, lying, or sitting, as necessity and order is put
upon us by God and our superiors, and as the worship of God may be best
advanced: And what hurt is here?

Object.
But (say they) these permissions are put upon us by peremptory Laws contrary
to our Christian liberty. Sol.
By a Law indeed they are bound to them with us, but not contrary to Christian
liberty: for then Titus was in vain left in Creta to set in order things that
are wanting, Tit. 1.5.
if Christians in the outward carriage of things might do what they list.
Therefore I wish them brotherly to consider something concerning ceremonies,
and something concerning Christian liberty. Ceremonies may be considered two
ways: Before a Law has bound this or that way; and After the bond of a Law.
Before, they may have not only variety, but contrariety, and yet not displease
God. One eats, Romans 14.3.5,
another eats not, yet God receives both: one esteems one day above
another, another esteems every day alike, yet if they be charitable, and
fully persuaded in their own hearts, God is not displeased. But when a Law has
passed upon them, those things that are permissions in themselves are precepts
in their use: as when the Church decreed the abstaining from stranguled and
blood, Act. 15.
so long as was convenient for the Churches of the Jews. As God loves that we
should keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, in one faith: Ephesians 4
3* 5 Col. 2.5.
so Paul joys when he beholds the order among the Colossians, that all their
things were done in love. So long as we are free, we are like the daughters
of Zelophehad, who, Number. 36
so they kept within their own tribe, might marry whom they pleased: so we
may look which way we please, and settle according to our pleasure. But when
the law of expediency is put upon us, we must say, all things are lawful, but
all things are not expedient. 1 Cor. 10* 23.
When the law of Charity is put upon us, we must say, if meat make my brother
to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13
I will eat no flesh while the world stands. And when the law of loyalty is
put upon us, we must say, thou (O Christian king) art worth ten thousand of us,
the scandal of thee swallows up the scandal of ten thousand persons;
therefore we must do as Ioab, number the people, 2 Samuel ^4.
no sin in it self, though we see inconveniences that may fall upon it.
Next, concerning Christian liberty, it does not make us lawless: for then were
it vain for any Church whatsoever, to determine what is fit for ceremonies to
be done by them: for then every one might fly to Christian liberty, and say,
I will do what I list, my Christian liberty shall bear me out. And how unfit
this were* every religious soul c^n judge: but it is a liberty that frees our
consciences from inward bondage, that we be not brought under the dominion of
any thing. 1 Cor. 6.^*
I eat fish or flesh as is appointed, but I am brought under the dominion of
neither. I wear white or black, I stand, or sit, or kneel, but I am brought
under the dominion of none of them. In my conscience, my Christian liberty has
set me free, but in my practice, I am bound in these things to expediency,
charity, or loyalty for the establishing of good order in the Church, or in the
co^mon-weale. If they would but duly consider these two things, they would
never talk of permissions turned into laws to prejudice Christian liberty.
Yea, Christian wisdom would learn them too, that religious worship is called
by the name of outward ceremonies used in them: Ephesians. 3.14 Genesis 14.22.
as God calls praying, b^wing of the knees, and swearing, lifting up our hands;
not because these are commanded duties in such acts of worship, but because God
permits, and loves our well carriage in his worship according to general
rules, though we have no particular precepts.

Yea, but (say they) our ceremonies are typical and Jewish ceremonies, which
hurt our worship. Object.
They mean (as I conceive) they are teaching ceremonies, not ceremonies of
mere order, but significant, to put us in mind of duty. Sol.
I am sorry that this should be accounted a fault. If they did not signify,
how could they edify? 1 Cor. 14.26.
Were they types and shadows of the mysteries of the Gospel invented by men,
indeed Christ were ill advised not to ordain them. But being only mo^al
documents and monitors of some duties, I wonder where their guilt lies. If I
had an hundred boxes in my house for my uses, and some few of them had a mark
upon them, to direct me where my money lay, that I might be careful of that,
does this savor of want of natural wisdom? So neither does it taste of want
of spiritual wisdom, to set a mark upon some few ceremonies, to put me in
mind of my duty to Christ.

What are these (say they) but images set up to our selves for religious use.
What? Object.
to worship? to adore God in, or by? No, Sol.
but to reminde us of what we ought to do. And this was the practice of the
Church in all ages; Abraham put his servants hand under his thigh in swearing,
Genesis 24.
surely to signify his subjection to him in that business about the promised
seed. Moses set up an Altar when Amaleck was overthrown, and called it
Jehovah Nissi, to signify, that the Lord was their banner. Ex. 17.15 Josh.
^2.24, to 35.
The two tribes and a half built an altar, not to distinguish their borders,
but to signify, that they were Gods people, and that they had all one God, to
whom they, and their posterity must sacrifice upon his own altar: 1 Samuel
Samuel set up a stone when the Philistims were discomforted, and called it
Eben-Ezer, to signify that the Lord helped them. When Christ the truth was
come, he used humane significant ceremonies, as the feast of dedication,
sitting at the Passover, a sign of rest, Joh. 2.
the water pots of the jewish purifications, the custom of embalming, Luke
4.17, 20.
beside other formalities of the synagogue. The Corinthians had the women's
veil in the congregation, to signify subjection, 1 Cor, 11. 1 Cor. 16.20. 2
Pet. 2.11 Jude.
and the kiss of peace* to signify love. Other Christians had Agapae at the
sacrament, in the room whereof the Christians offertory was brought in for
pious uses, to signify that love they should have one to another. So we have
standing at the belief* to signify that it is not a prayer, and that we are
ready to confess our faith; kneeling at the commandments, to signify the
honor we have to that God that gave it, and that we must be ready to dart up
prayer for our obedience; and kneeling at the sacrament, to signify an humble
acknowledgement of Gods love for so great a benefit. And do we and all these
saints before us set up images to our selves in these ceremonies, for religious
u^e? God forbid. The practice of these saints when the laws of God were purely
taught and kept, teach us, that though we my not set up an image to worship God
by, 1 Cor. 14.
or in, yet may we set up some edifying signs to put us in mind of those
duties we owe to God. The Patriarchs may build altars, give their children
proper names, to be admonishing signs of their duties to God: and we may set
all our senses on work that way. We may set up a post in a dark and dangerous
passage, that when I go that way and touch it, it may signify my danger, and
I may avoid it* I may set a watchman in a tower to give a sound when the
enemy comes, that he may signify my enemies approach, and I may avoid him. I
may set up a Sea mark to signify a Rock near, that I split not upon it, And
may not we be as wise for our souls as for our bodies? God forbid. I am sure
he has no where forbidden it: therefore it is not against Christ. If it be not
against him, Mar. 9 40.
it is for him, says our Savior.

Why then (say they) have we cast out all the significant ceremonies of Popery.
Object.
Not for their significancy barely, Sol.
but for their weight and measure. They are not to them only, as outward
garnishments of worship, but as proper worship, efficacious and meritorious:
their number stifles devotion, and fills it with shows without substance. A
cup of water refreshes, but an whole Well of water choakes. Yea an hundred
Sermons weekly would not edify, they would eat out our conscience in our
particular callings: much more would an hundred ceremonies eat out the
substance of our general callings, when a few may much refresh and profit, if
judgment overpower fancy and affection.

Yea but (say they) our significant ceremonies were taken from Idolaters and
limbs of Antichrist who have abused them. Object*
Were this true, Sol. Pro. 25* 4
yet take the dross from the silver and make a vessel for the finer: but it is
false. Though they have had such as ours, and have still, yet ours are our
own, and were never theirs in special. Fire and water are contrary, yet they
agree in their kind, they are both elements: so ours are ceremonies, and so are
theirs, but otherwise they differ as fire and water; they scorn therefore
ours, and we deride theirs. We read of sacrifices offered to Devils, 1 Cor. 8.
and 10.
yet some of this was sold in shambles, and some the Heathens made feasts of.
It was all the same flesh in kind, but not in use. The christians did damnably
if they went to it when it was sacrificed, yea and if they went to their Idol
feasts when they blessed an idol, it was idolatry: but if they bought part of
that flesh in the Shambles, and eat it, or went to their private feasts when
they eat of it (for ought they knew) without reference to the Idol, then says
Paul, Eat making no question for conscience sake. So say we of our cross,
Surplice, kneeling, they were ordinances before Idolators abused them. If they
take them and bless an Idol with them, be it upon their own pates* but if we
be invited to them in a better use (and not know, nor have just cause to
suspect any lurking Idolatry) why should we make so many needless questions
about the use of them? Put case such as they are, pertained to Idolaters. So
did Goliahs sword, yet David laid it up in an holy place for better use. So did
bowing belong to Baal, prostrating the whole body to Idols, 1 Kin. 19. Ex.
23.24.
kissing to the Calves, kissing the hand to the host of heaven, Ezekiel. 18.6 Ps
44.20. Ex. 32.6.19. Am. 2.8.
lifting up the eyes, stretching forth both hands, showting for joy, sitting or
lying along upon the ground, or on a carpet, to idols: yet all these we may use
in the worship of the true God. So for our ceremonies, such as they are
pertained to idolaters, but were not idolatrous of themselves. The cross was
used as a sign of profession before idolatry prevailed. The white garment was
ordained as a cover-sloven in the poverty of the Church; kneeling was used as
an act of reverence before the breaden God was hatched. And may not we lawfully
use them now, to show that we are in communion and fellowship with that blessed
and persecuted Church, without such noises and schisms.

Yea, Object.
but in our worship there is (say they) as bad as all behind; we have a
stinted worship by that foul idol the common prayer book, and so we worship
not in spirit, Ioh. 4. Sol.
and truth. Do we not worship in spirit, when the spirit moves toward heaven
as well as the flesh? Do we not worship in truth, when our petitions are true
petitions, uttered with a true tongue according to the truth of our hearts? Do
we not worship in spirit and truth, when with such petitions, heart, and
tongue; we seek to God in all places, not trusting in any? Certainly we do,
and should do far better, were it not for them who disgrace our
common prayer book, and draw the hearts of Gods people from it. Yet those that
know the vanity of their words, and trust them not, know also, that they, even
when they use that book to send their prayers t^ heaven by, do pray in spirit
and truth, God bearing them witness by the holy Ghost.

Object. Sol.
How can they pray in spirit (say they) when they use him not? what? Is there no
spirit but our own? Surely there is a public spirit, and a private spirit.
The first, has wrought in the holy saints, and army of martyrs, who have laid
up stocks of prayer for us generations that follow them: and by the blessed
providence of God, they are come into our hands. There we see how they prayed
for us before we were. There we learn to pray of them, of whom the world was
not worthy. This spirit we use as well as our own: and it is pity that any
Christian that can pray to God by his own dexterity of spirit, should yet
contemn the workings, and helpings of the public spirit, without whom the
world had never had such a benefit.

Object.
But alas (say they) our spirits are quite stinted when they are fettered with
words appointed. Sol.
Surely, the freedom of spirit stands not so much in freedom of words, and in
intention of zeal. As a servant that delivers his masters message in his
masters words may do it with a free spirit: So may a man pray when he takes to
himself words, and not coins them himself. H^s. 14.2.
The best prayers are those that are delivered in Gods words: and are our
spirits stinted because we tie our selves to Gods words? As Gods Spirit is not
stinted when it speaks unto us by the Scriptures read: so nor our spirits when
we speak feelingly to God by read Prayers. Put case one man pray with a
thousand that have large spirits, will they say that their spirits are stinted
because they are tied up, for the time being, to his spirit? so nor when we
pray with others Prayers. Have we a spirit better than the Disciples of
Christ? and do we know what will stint them better than Christ? yet Christ
gave them the Lords Prayer not only to say after that manner, Matthew. 6.
when he taught the Doctrine of Prayer, Luke 11* 2.
but also to say, when he taught them the practice of Prayer.

But (say they) has not God given every good Christian a spirit of
supplication, Object. Zach. 12.^0.
by which they have a faculty and power to pray? The Disciples (I hope) were
good Christians, yet they say to Christ, Luke 11.^.
teach us to pray. Yet know that there is a double power to pray: An inward
power, A double power of prayer.
by which the heart moves, and goes out of it self after God, Christ, grace,
and salvation. This power all good Christians have, by the spirit of adoption,
whereby they cry Abba, Father. Romans 8.
An outward power, whereby they are able distinctly and judiciously to express
the motions and desires of their hearts. This power all have not, and therefore
have need still to have further help and direction, as our Savior did help
his Disciples.

Object.
But surely (they may say) the Lords Prayer is not a form of Prayer taught his
Disciples, or us. It is short and imperfect, it has no such glory in it as
some other; I may think^ it, though Christ's word be say* and none are tied to
this form of Prayer alone. Let all this stand till it be removed. It is true
it is short, Sol.
and in that is seen the glorious wisdom of Christ; but it is most perfect.
We must pray all manner of Prayers, Ephesians. 6. 1 Timothy 2.
Supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks: yet all these are
comprehended in it. Again, there is infinitely more glory in it then in all
Prayers made by men. If all Prayers be made they have their graynes of weight
from hence. It briefly comprehends them all, and has the best authority in the
world. The wisdom of God the son of God, the beloved of God made it and
expressed it with his tongue, in such blessed order as men and Angels cannot
devise the like. It is true that Christ says, Psalm. 14.
say it: but there is a saying with the mind and heart, as well as with the
tongue. For there are two parts of Prayer; Psalm. 47. 1 Cor. 14.
the soul of Prayer, when it is presented with understanding, heart, and
spirit: and the body of Prayer to help our fervencie; Lu. 22.41 Lom 3.
as when we bow our knees, lift up our hearts with our hands, and our eyes are
lift up to God, and our bones say, Ps. 123 1. Ps. 35.10. Psalm. 45.
Lord who is like unto thee, and our tongues are the pens of ready writers.
Yet has not Christ tied us unto this prayer only. Christ himself has other
prayers beside this, and the Apostles many, together with the Church, and godly
particulars. Yet by reason of the perfection of it both in matter, order, and
words: by reason of the sufficiency of it to supply all wants: and by reason of
our forgetfulness to ask all, or half; it is a sure and comforting way (what
ever we pray) to use it always with judgment and understanding.

But (say some of them) it is of so large extent that we cannot comprehend it.
Object. Sol.
It is true, that it is of large extent and therefore we must labor for
strength of judgment, and memory to put it up from the heart, that we may not
tumble it over (as the manner of some is) as if it burnt their tongues. But
Christ's looks not that we should conceive of every thing in it* every time we
use it. As there are few prayers we can make* but are of larger extent then
we presently conceive, as when we say, the Lord san^tifie your sickness unto
you, the Lord bless you, the Lord give you grace, there are more things
comprehended then presently meant^ so in the Lords prayer; and therefore we
must have docible hearts to understa^d it better, and better, and we must have
wisdom according to our apprehension, to apply it to several occasions.

Object.
But (say they) this or any other stinted prayer, are the very cut-throates of
devotion, Sol.
and coolers of affections. Indeed they are so to wicked hearts. Children must
be pleased with novelties, and wicked men loath Gods continued favors, though
it be Mannah from heaven: Number. 21.5
but if set prayers wrought so of themselves, would Christ ever have given a
set form to his disciples? Certainly they will be no enemies to devotion, if
Christians be zealous and careful in using them. For the constant practice of
the saints in scriptures commends them unto us in prescribed Psalms, and
forms of blessing. And such is the inequality of gifts dispensed by Christ
unto his people, that to some a prescribed form is necessary, when he has not
given them gifts of knowledge, and utterance to express their desires in any
comely way; To others necessary too, who are able fitly, and fully to do it in
private, yet are not so faced, and tongued, that they can do it with
confidence in public; to all it is excellently useful, that they may not
only have help of their own spirits, but of the public spirit of God
working in his church, to advance them forward to heaven. It is a world of
pity, that men that have some great gifts (as they think) should contemn
them that have them not, though happily they have others better then they. To
have a gift of expressing our desires in fit order, matter, and words, is a
comely ornament, yet may it, and does often fall upon an hypocrite, it is not
of the essence of a saveable Christian^ but to say, we know not what to pray
for as we ought, but the spirit helps me (publicly and privately) with
groans and sighs that cannot be expressed, to say thus, To. 8.26, 27.
I say, and to feel the truth of it too, is a note of a good Christian, and
can fall upon none but a child of the kingdom of heaven.

But (say they) put case that others may be helped by set forms of prayer,
Object.
yet is there no reason that a Minister or Presbyter that has gifts, should
be tied to a form of words. Neither is he always, Sol. Why se^ forms are
prescribed ministers?
but that he should be tied to common solemn prayer, as with us, there is
excellent reason for it, as well as in all other reformed Churches, except
theirs. First, for uniformity, that all Gods people in our Church might meet
at the same time, and put up the same petitions with earnest desires, in the
same manner. And is not this a comforting thought, that we have an opener way
to heaven made us, by the joint suites of all good English or hearts. Secondly,
for memory, that he may not forget the general necessities of all the Church,
and so stick upon those particulars only, which are according to his own
feeling. Thirdly, for honor to the blessed saints and martyrs whose prayers
they were. That as we have had benefit by them, when they were put up to God
before, so we may bring benefit to our selves and others by them, when we
pray them now. Fourthly, for his calling sake. He is not immediately called by
God, (...) and the Church. Therefore as he is called by God, he uses those
gifts which he has received from God; as he is called by the Church, he is to
use and honor the public gifts of the Church, in interpretation, prayer, and
the like. What more need be said to justify our worship by set forms of
prayer, for the present I see not: when I shall, by Gods assistance I shall say
more.

SECT. 16. The Brownists maine exceptions in their former argument, against our
common prayer book more specially.
THough set forms of public pray^r may be lawful, useful, commendable, and
glorious, Ob.
yet they say, that our common prayers are not so fit a way to worship God by:
nay they say more, that that worship is plainly idolatrous. I am sure that
that assertion is weakly superstitious. I would wish them that they be piously
careful, that they speak not evil of that they know not, 2 Pet. 2.
because they are not careful or willing to know, we ordinarily know unwise
young men, when their whose souls live in their affections, to make many
objections against many good orders, and laws, who, when ripeness, and
experience, has made them see the reasons, have been ashamed of what they
have done: and may it not be so with these men and women? Howsoever I would
entreat them to consider what they may read in the history of our Church,
that when a godly martyr was reading in a primar of our Church, and came to
Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, an ungodly serving-man, who
was set to attend him, blasphemously mocked at it, but he was struck mad
that night, and dyed miserably. Let them duly consider this, and fear to open
their mouths against any comforts of the godly, and advancement of godliness.
As for my part, I have read some liturgies beside our own, and have heard of
others: but (blessed be God) I never saw, or heard of any more fully
accomplished for the work in hand. But am I not deceived?

Let us (in the fear of God) take a view how it proceeds in all public
service, and call in along their exception (which I know) as we go along.
There is in it first, a preparation to public service, and then the service,
and worship it self. The preparation is by meditation, exhortation, and
prayers.

The Presbyter, or Deacon, does in the beginning propound some texts of
scripture to be thought upon, that we by their meditation, may draw our selves
into the presence of our God to hear and do. Object.
Yea indeed (say they) they do corrupt the text. For though they say, Ezekiel.
18.21, 22.
At what time soever a sinner does repent from the bottom of his heart, God
will blot them out of his remembrance, which is not the speech of Ezekiel. Sol.
I pray is not this the full sense of the Prophet; made speak to ordinary
capacity, if not his words? Does he not say, if the wicked will turn? Is not
this equivalent to at what time soever, whether to day, to morrow, or
whenever? I hope when conditions are performed, God will be as good as his
word whenever. Does he not say, If they turn from all their iniquities, and
keep all my Statutes? What is this but repent from the bottom of the heart,
and leave no root of bitterness behind? Does he not say, He shall live, his
sins shall not be mentioned unto him? what is this but I will put them or
blot them out of my remembrance? This is not corruption, I hope, when the Text
is plainly expressed in the true sense of it.

Secondly, he does exhort the people according saying after him. By this he
puts them in mind what to do, namely to confess their sins aright, that
their poison being vomited up, they may the better set themselves to seek God
in the other acts of worship. But (say they) what need this, Object.
saying after me, seeing the Presbyters Prayer and the peoples Amen is enough.
Sol.
Indeed it is enough to a Prayer, the petitions whereof are not known to the
people before, such as that of Ezra, Neh. 8, 6.
and when men exercised their own gifts for the edification of many. 1 Cor.
14.16.
But is it therefore unlawful for the people to say after their leader when
he prompteth them, or they are taught by the Church? Do not all the people,
as well as the Presbyter pray to God, and praise God in singing Psalms? And I
am sure the Word of Christ, which warranteth what is commanded, and what it
goes not against is not against it. It is true, Object.
it is uncomely for many mouths to put up a petition to the King at once: It
would confound him whose apprehension and understanding is limited. But it is
not so to God who is understanding it self, wisdom it self, Sol.
to whom millions sing Psalms at once, and thousand millions pray to him at
once over all the world.

Thirdly, he does pray for and with them, Confession without a purpose to amend
does no good: Prove. 28.
therefore are both united in our good confession. Then does he (for their
encouragement) declare and pronounce the absolution and forgiveness of sins
to true penitent believers according to the Gospel; Matthew. 16. Joh. 20*
and applying it to the people prays, that upon their repentance, their sins
being done away, they may do worthily that service which now they are about.
And then to supply all defects in all, all pray with one heart, as one man, the
Lords Prayer, which is the King of Prayers: and so rise with short and earnest
prayers, that they may praise God, and that God would help them; and with a
profession of their faith in the Trinity, and desire that all glory may be
given unto that blessed three in one. Thus, I am sure, if we have pious and
humble souls, may we be prepared, for the public worship of God, publicly.

Now for the service and worship it self, in this good Book it has three
degrees, the Beginning, Middle, and End of it. In the beginning of it there is
reading of Psalms* principally to raise up our affections, and of other
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, to confirm our judgments in the
truth, Act. 17.
and to help us to search whether things heard are so or no. There is
confession of our faith, that we may profess it as a brief rule from
Scriptures, to try whether we stand in the faith, whereto we may refer the
truths of faith in the Scriptures. And we have Prayers wherein we are not long
at once, or with a breath; but have distinct and divided salutations, praises
and Petitions, for our selves: chief members, and the Church, that we may the
better hold out unto the end without distractions.

All this (I am sure) none, if they understand, can justly blame. Only there
is one thing (worth notice) which does hardly relish to some few, and can by
no means be endured by the Brownists, and that is the Litany. This sticks
most, because they are more careful to make objections against it, then
answers for it, that they may have comfort and peace with us. Therefore (with
Christ's help) I shall endeavor two things; to show the reason of the name,
and how they may satisfy themselves against such scruples as may arise. It is
called a Litany, Of the Lit^y.
which is an humble prayer, whose use is most for adversity. It comes of a word
that signifies to supplicate, from whence comes suppliant prayers. The ancient
Churches were full of them, as I could show, which usually began with Lord
have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us; and why should ours be empty,
seeing we would be accounted as good Christians as they?

There are diverse exceptions against ours, therefore let us see next, how they
may satisfy themselves against them. There is no Church that I know, but must
have a favorable construction of some things, and so must ou^s* yet in this I
see not, but that all excepters may be fully satisfied. The exceptions that I
have yet met with, are against the manner of this prayer, and against the
matter of it.

Ob.
Against the manner (they say) that it is with repetitions of the people, and
interlocutary passages. Sol.
As for that, I find that in the scriptures God has commanded public
prayers, that is, that Presbyter and people should pray: but he has not
commanded any form, or manner, to carry their prayers in, but only that it
be done to edification. Therefore he has left that free to the wisdom and
judgment of the governors. And this we have often experience of, that if a
continued prayer be but half so long, some will be nodding before it be
done; whereas if they be kept busy, by the matter in hand, they are more
vigilant. Ob.
But (say they) he has given us the Lords prayer all in one length, and set
Amen in the latter end. Sol. Luke 11.
This is true: yet mark, he said to his disciples, when ye pray, say, Our
Father, and Amen too: and he has not told them in what manner they should say
it when they pray together: whether one should say the Petitions, and the rest,
Amen, or whether all should say the Petitions, and Amen too: In this he has
left them to edif^cation, Object.
and us also. But (it is said) that some parts of the Litany are so said, that
the reader shows only what they must pray for, and the people make the suite,
as when they say from such, and such a thing, good Lord deliver us: and this
seems to be absurd. Sol.
That the people should make it without the minister is not enjoined: that the
minister does not intend and make the suite, is false, except he be
careless, and wicked. As the people say Amen aloude; and the minister says it
too, though happly not so loud: so the minister intends, and says, Good Lord
deliver us, though the people in turns, exceed in voice.

Against the matter of this prayer, many things are objected, few things
weighed, and nothing proved, but evident quarrels. There are exceptions against
words and phrases; and against suites conveyed in them. The words and phrases
are, by thy cross, and passion, by thy precious death, etc. Which some of
them, Object.
out of the le^ity of mind, call conjuring; some, out of worse, call swearing,
as if none could out swear the Litany. Sol.
Let them take heed how they blaspheme the piety of Gods servants. It was none
of Elies goodness, when he reproached the prayers of Hannah; 1 Samuel 1.
as if she were drunk when she made them. Let them apply this to themselves.
It will not be denied but that Christ brought us a great benefit by all these.
For what he did as a public person, he did for us and our salvation, in one
degree or other. Now, what is this, but a praying that all these acts, and
passions of Christ, in their virtue and merit be applied to us by Gods love,
that we may find the profit of them?

But now the suites that we convey in the words of that good Prayer are
troublesome to them, both when we sue for things, and Persons, Object.
As for things, we pray against two things which they do not like, against
sudden death, and against the sins of our forefathers. Sol.
As for the first, there is a double sudden death: sudden in time, and sudden
for want of preparation. God has said, that he will come before that we are
aware, like a thief in the night. His will be done: we pray not against
that. But we pray that his coming may not be so sudden, but that through
wisdom given, Es. 38.1. Matthew. 25
we may set our houses in order, and be as the wise virgins having our lamps
and oil in a readiness: and from such sudden death good Lord deliver us. As
for the sins of our forefathers (which being dead are now out of the state of
forgiveness) we pray not that their sins be forgiven them, (...)* 20.
but that they be not remembered to be punished in us. God punishes to the
third and fourth generation: and the Psalmist says, Psalm. 109.13, 14.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord, and let not the
sin of his mother be blotted out, that their posterity be cut off, and in
the generations following their names be blotted out. And because these
comminations have conditions of Repentance annexed to them, do not we well to
repent, and cry to God, remember not the iniquity of forefathers, for fear of
those sins that have gone before us.

But yet they like not the Persons that we pray for, when we say, Ob*
that God would have mercy upon all men. For Christ says, Joh. 17.
he prayed not for the world: but our Church cares not whom they pray for.
Indeed, Sol.
because we find that we have a Precept, pray for all men, and an holy
practice, 1 Timothy 2 1 Ps. 67.3.
Let the People praise thee O God, let all the People praise thee, therefore
we do as we are bound in praying for all men. Yet do not we pray for the
world, but against it that we may follow Christ. Christ prayed for the Jews
and Gentiles that persecuted him to death, father forgive them, Luke 23.
for they know not what they do: yet he prays not for the world that lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5.
but that it come out, and serve God: so we pray once more against their
wickedness, Psalm 141. As some translate.
but we pray for their Persons. As far as our charity tends, so far our
Prayers extend; and I am sure we must do good to all. Gal. 6.2. 1 John 5, 16
But if God shall reveal any special Persons that have sinned unto death, we
will not pray for them. In the mean time, give us leave (if you have so much
charity) to pray that there may be none such. Yea, Object.
but (say they) we pray in that Litany, for all that travail by land, or by
water, and so for thieves, and pirates too, yea, and I know not for what,
Devils in men's brains, Sol.
who compass the earth too and fro. Where is their charity? The pious Church
provideth a Prayer for Men and not for Devils, who are out of hope, and out of
all Communion with her: and for all men that are within a saveable condition in
that word, Our Father. So she prays for thieves and pirates to make them
better, or else against them, to maintain Gods just providence in their future
punishments. If these be all their exceptions against our good Litany, as they
are all I have heard, I hope they will give me leave to use it as I do, and
use it with me in peace.

The second degree of our Church worship is the middle of it, when we read
the commandments of our great God with Prayer, when we read the Epistles and
Gospels, more fully to strengthen our faith, and pray for the whole Church.
Object.
In the first, they do except that we kneel when the commandments are read,
as if it were a Prayer. Sol.
Noe: we do it not to make it a Prayer: it is none. But yet we do it,
partly to testify our subjection to the God that gave it, Ex. 19.
as the People on mount Sinai fell down at the publication of it, and as we
kneel before the King: and partly, because it is joined with that submissive
Prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Next come the Epistles (as indeed the whole word is an Epistle written to our
souls): wherein we have sometimes prayers, but mostly fit rules of holiness
of life: and after the Gospels, Ephesians. 4 1.
that we may know the benefits of which we must live worthy. These strengthen
our faith in all the articles, and further our thankfulness for all Gods
mercies by Christ and his Apostles. I know nothing worth notice that is here
excepted against. Object.
If they call them shreads of scripture, yet they are scriptures, and fit texts
applied to every season. And if Christ would not only preach truths, Sol.
but fit truths for the people: and if they themselves (I hope) will choose fit
texts for feasts, and fasts, times of solemnity, and times of mourning, I hope
also that the Church cannot be denied this liberty. If they say, Object.
they are applied to diverse holidayes which are not of Christ's appointment. Yet
are they not without Christ's leave and permission. Sol.
If Christ have permitted them (though God says, Ex. 20.
six days thou shall labor) yet to use their liberty according to discretion,
upon any of the six to refresh themselves, or spend in holy exercises; is he an
harder master, yea husband unto his Church? Surely, as occasion is offered,
they may choose any fit days either to feast, or to fast.

But alas (say they) all this, Ob.
in that common prayer book is but an English mass, taken out of the
masse-booke of Rome. Sol.
Belike then we had it out of the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4.
where that man of sin sits, well: be it so. A thief has got a true
man's purse, may not Justice deliver it to him again, and leave the thief to
his Judge and punishment? Such is our case. The Pope could not have hid
himself so long, but under the banner of Christ, and the service of God with
the Saints. Therefore he gets the Leitourgy, or common prayer book of the
blessed Fathers, and adds to it of his own rubbish, as Masses for quick and
dead, Dirges, Requiems, Praying to Saints and ANGELS, blessing of Bells and
Candles, to give power to drive away Devils. When this was espied, by the
breaking out of the beams of the glorious Gospel, the blessed Martyrs
challenge their own, and leave the wicked trash to the founder. And is not
this Justice? If these men had gold and silver mingled with dirt, and poison,
would they cry out, all dirt, all poison, and work for more? No: they would
wash, cleanse, purify, and keep the gold and silver for their uses. So have
we done, and noe more. We have taken off the spots, and keep the garments, We
have washed away the filth, from the gold of the first great Saints and
Martyrs. If this be a fault, we rejoice in it, and commend to others, as
Doctor Rowland Taylour when he was going to be burned, next unto the Bible,
the Service-booke, to bring up our children in the fear of God. And so I pass
that.

The last degree is the end of our common prayer worship, which is the
administration of Sacraments. The wit of Men and Angels cannot devise a better
way of GODS worship in them. Such grave exhortations, effectual Prayers,
propounding of warrants, laying down of promises, confident expectations of
their making good by Christ, to Children, Parents, and all penitent and
believing Christians, are there upon record, that a modest man would wonder how
any exceptions could be found out. Yet three things are there that much trouble
them, and us by them.

1 Kneeling at the Communion. 2 Cross in Baptism, and 3 The responses, or
answers in Baptism.
As for kneeling, I shall endeavor (with Gods help) to do two things: show
that they may lawfully worship God in the use to this Sacrament, kneeling; and
take away their maine rubs in the way. That which is for Christ they may
lawfully do: but kneeling at the Sacrament is for Christ: Mar 9.4.
for what is not against him, is for him. If it be against him, let them show
where he has forbidden it. If they cannot, they may lawfully kneel. Again,
that which is neither commanded nor forbidden by God, they may lawfully do
(for the Apostle says of such things, 1 Cor, 6.
all things are lawful) yea they must necessarily do it now, Romans 13.5
not out of conscience to the gesture, but out of conscience to the command of
our Christian King and Church: But kneeling at the Communion is neither
commanded nor forbidden by God, but commanded by the King and Church: therefore
they may, they must kneel. Again, if they kneel not, but sit, as an act of
Religion, they make it essential to the supper, and the Apostle Paul an
unfaithful servant to so good a Master. 1 Cor. 11.
For he says that what he received of the Lord he delivered unto them: but he
does not speak one word of the gesture. Therefore sitting is no act of
Religion, the gesture is left to the Church, they may kneel, or Paul is
unfaithful. Lastly, if they kneel not, they bring juster censures upon
themselves then they can give to us that kneel, which they are bound to avoid.
As they be justly charged first to worship God by the will of man, Es. 29.13.
Mat. 15.9.
and so in vain* For to place a worship of God in sitting or standing rather
then in kneeling, is a worship of God by the will of man, because they have no
such warrant from God. Secondly, D^ut. 4 2: and 12.32.
they be justly charged to add to, or take from the Word, and so to corrupt
it: For all impositions upon the conscience, which God has not warranted are
such additions. But such are these new traditions, as kneel not, Col. 2*
but stand or sit, touch not, taste not, which things perish with the using.
Thirdly, they are justly charged to have communion with the worst heretics.
For Arrians do directly deny the Divinity of Christ, and to profess
themselves to do it, they will not kneel at the Communion of the blessed Body
and Blood of Christ, but sit. These charges they lay upon us, but more justly
they lie upon themselves: because we make not kneeling an act of worship from
men, or an addition to the Word, but only an act of good order, to witness
our reverence to God, who is pl^ased to give us such a pledge of his love. How
they will answer these things to God, I know not. They either cannot, or will
not answer them to me, only they put in their plea against kneeling in the act
of receiving, which I shall now labor to remove.

They mainly urge the example of Christ, Object.
that he and his Disciples sat at the supper. Sol.
But all the world is not able to prove that they sat at the delivering and
receiving of the Bread and Cup. He sat down indeed with them, but then he
took, he blessed, he brake, he gave: what gesture he used in blessing they
cannot tell. Certainly if according to Scripture examples, Deu. 27.12 1 King.
8.14.55. Neh. 8.5. Object. Sol.
he either kneeled or stood: then whether after his blessing they sat down
again, let them tell me. Never let them dream that he sat as a shadow of
rest in heaven: for let them show that Christ's pleasure was to ordain shadows
in the New Testament when the body was come, and Canaan, that old shadow was to
be cursed; or if he did, I Will tell them that Paul was an unfaithful servant,
that would not teach that shadow to the Corinthians, to whom he professes to
deliver what he received. But grant that Christ did sit; what he occasionally
did, is no example to bind us to do the like: but as by occasion he
administered at night, after supper, with unlevined bread; so he might
occasionally sit according to the ceremony of the Jewish Church at the
Passover. Besides if they would sit because Christ sat, they must sit as he
did, or else they do not imitate Christ: but Christ might sit a sacrifice way,
or lying along, and leaning, which they do not observe.

Object.
But put case they sit not in every point like Christ, yet they tell us of the
fitness of this gesture, to signify our fellowship with Christ on earth and
in heaven. Sol.
The they will ordain a significant ceremony against us, but not for us. And
in truth, they dream so much of fellowship with Christ, that they forget him
to be their Sovereign King and Lord, and so are too saucy with him. But for
the Table gesture, will they have all other formalities, at a Table, fit for
the Table of the Lord? I^ not, why must this alone be fit, 1 Cor. 10.
when Christ has no said so? Besides, if Table gesture be urged, Christ's
example does not bind. For his was not a common Table gesture, but only used
at sacrifices and sacred Feasts, when they did discumbe or lie along. Had
Christ told us that this was the fittest gesture we should have rested in his
pleasure: but he having left it at liberty, and even common understanding
judging of it fittest to receive a seal of a pardon upon the knee, as the
greatest sign of thankfulness used for such a favor why we should not take
it up, we cannot yet see.

Yea but (say they) we do not only look to the fitness of sitting, Object.
but to the beginning of kneeling: It was begun by a wicked Pope in honor of
the breaden God: and therefore not to be continued by us. Put case this plea
were true, Sol.
yet that which was misapplied to the honor of a creature, may (I hope) be
rightly applied to the honor of our God; for else no man may sit: because the
accursed Arrians have brought in this sitting at the Sacrament to dishonor
Christ: And the Pope seconds them, who sits then in state to advance himself
above all Gods people, both Kings and beggars. But the truth is, that no Pope
brought in kneeling in the act of receiving. It was brought in by him indeed at
the Elevation, and when the Sacrament was carried in procession, but not as we
do use it. They have no Law (that I could ever yet read of) save only for the
Pope himself to receive it sitting, but only the Law of Custom and
Convenience to receive it kneeling.

Ob.
Put case all this be true; yet (say they) the use of kneeling sticks with
them They do not know why they should kneel now, Sol.
seeing kneeling is a part of GODS worship, or a sign of it. It is no part of
Gods worship, or sign of it in it self: for then we might not use it in
civil, or ordinary things. Psalm. 95.5.
Indeed we are exhorted to it) which shows the lawfulness of it, as we
are, Ps 149.3. Ps. 150.4. Psalm. 47.1.
to praise GOD in the dance, and to clap our hands: but there is no Precept
which binds it to GOD alone. The Servants of GOD have sometimes stood, and
sometimes sat reverendly before the LORD, 2. Sam. 17. 1 King. 1.47.
and sometimes lain along, that GOD might have his worship in all gestures
left free to the users. But why should they speak of worship here, when we
neither require kneeling, to worship the consecrated Bread by, no nor him that
does administer the Sacrament, but to testifye our humble thankfulness to GOD
for our pardon sealed. There remains now nothing of worth under this head, but
their ready obedience, when GOD shall humble their minds, and quiet their
hearts, that they may live in peace, and worship with us.

The second and third things that trouble them, are in our Baptism: and are
the Cross in Baptism, and the Respon^es, The cross in Baptism.
or Answers of the Godfathers and Godmothers in the childs name. As for the
Cross, I wondered always that private persons should once name it, seeing it
concerns the consciences of us that administer, not of infants that receive
it, who by it are made neither better, nor worse. They are but seers, and
sufferers in it, not doers of it. If therefore we can satisfy our selves in
the doing of it, that we may preach JESUS CHRIST unto them in the Churches
peace, they have cause to thank us, and to thank GOD for pacifying our
consciences for their good, and not cry out against us, and run away from us.
Object. Sol.
O but they cannot abide to see that idolatrous and abominable Cross to pass
over poor Childrens faces, without either reason, or religion. There is reason
for it; because it depends upon the commands of superiors, and reason wills
that they be obeyed in lawful and possible things. There is Religion for it;
because it is but a ceremony testifying our communion with the primitive CHVRCH
which gloryed in, and was persecuted for the Cross of CHRIST: and good
Religion has never been against such things. As to testify Communion with
believing Jews, even the Gentiles abstained from stranguled and blood: Act. 1^.
so to testify our Communion with the believing Gentiles of old, we retain
that sign still, which they used in the face of their Persecutours, to
signify that they were ready to confess that LORD who dyed for them on the
Cross. What though the Church of ROME did afterward fearfully abuse it, yet
it is (certainly) to us neither abominable, not idolatrous. How we use the
sign of the cross? 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 Pet. 5.14
We use it not as a sign from GOD to men, as the Sacraments are: nor as a
sign from Men to GOD, as bowing in Prayer^ is: but as a sign from Men to Men,
as that old kiss of love. For as that did signify Christian concord and
agreement: so this, our hope if the Child lives, that it will fight under the
banner of CHRIST; therefore if the Child be ready to dye, this sign (by good
order) is omitted? The Church of ROME uses it, both for Consecration,
Benediction, and Operation effective of I know not what feats: but we use it
to none of these purposes. Object.
If it be said that the Child by that badge is dedicated to GODS service in
our use of it, as the CANON runs: Sol.
yet the sense must not be contrary to the commanded use. Therefore as we are
said to wed with a ring, which is nothing but a declaring of a marriage knot,
by giving and receiving of a ring, and by joining of hands: and as the Priest
was said to cleanse the leaper by the appointed means, Levit. 14.
when he did only declare and pronounce him to be clean: so the Cross is
no dedicating sign, for that is done in Baptism, which receives it into the
Congregation of CHRIST'S flock, but only declares, to the hope of the CHURCH,
that it shall so live to CHRIST. I see not but this may satisfy the soul of
any good Christian (knowing what I said before of ceremonies) concerning the
use of the Cross in our good Church.

As for the Godfathers and Godmothers answering in the name of the child,
Object. Responses Sol.
though it seem unreasonable to them, yet is there excellent reasons for it.
They know there were questions and answers in Philips baptizing of the Eunuch,
Act. 8.
which has ever been continued in the Church because of the covenant in
Baptism. And though infants cannot answer, yet are there three reasons why
their sureties should. The first is ecclesiastical, the second civil, and the
Church reason is, because it might put the whole congregation in mind of what
was done by them: when they were baptized, they entered covenant with God. As
the Prophet spoke to the dead altar to admonish living Jeroboam, O Altar,
Altar, hear the word of the Lord: so do we to infants to admonish all that
hear ^t. The Civil reason is, because by in law as his pupils act. Now,
because our sureties in Baptism are such, therefore they answer for children,
and what they do profess to do, is accounted the infants act, 1 Samuel 20.42.
to which he is bound, as we see in the civil covenant betwixt David and
Jonathan, and their seeds for ever. The Divine reason is, because in the very
substance of Baptism, Romans 4.11
which is a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, there is an interrogation
on GODS part for repentance, and belief of the GOSPEL, and on our parts a
repromission or answer of a good conscience, ^ Pet. 3.21.
which is opened and expounded by these questions and answers. If
notwithstanding these reasons they seem yet to be unreasonable; it is enough
they know them, and they must stand, till they can from sound grounds overthrow
them from the word of Christ.

Thus (by GODS blessing) I have finished the three grounds upon which our
forsakers leave us: and (I hope) I shall satisfy them in this, that we have a
true CHURCH, a true MINISTRY, a true WORSHIP, and that they (for any thing I
know) have no just cause to say otherwise. If yet they persevere and multiply
scandal, and schism, they must once again remember the blessed words we
began with, Heb. 10.25
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but exhorting one another: and so much the more as ye see the day approaching.

SECT. 17. The use to be made of the constancy of some, and forsakings of
other: consideration, exhortation, because the day is approaching.
IT is the course of too many to cleave to the assemblies, but they are never
the better. They only stand to outward profession, but grow not in grace and
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.
Hence is it, that if never so many of them stand, they cannot encourage them:
nor if never so many fall away, they cannot wisely consider them, and exhort
unto faithfulness. Therefore the Apostle would have us such knowing, and wise
Christians, by the help of public assemblies, that we may wisely consider
one another, and weightily exhort one another, that we may keep one another
in sound knowledge and pious practice.

There are three things which we shoud consider in our selves; our aptness to
fall, 1 Consider one another.
the difficulty of our standing, and our love to that way which is most
dangerous. Though God set us not justly in slipperie places, yet are apt to
slide away continually. We carry about with us the foolish and unwise flesh,
which makes us unwarie, and so we are soon caught in a deceitful net. Eccles.
9.
There are questing snares of gain, and questioning snares or frivolous and
idle things which end in noise and tumult without profit: and thus we are apt
to fall. We as hardly keep our standings, we are children, 1 Cor. 16.
and do not play the men. We are a mixture of weakness, and must have Gods
good spirit lead us, Psalm. 143^ Ephesians. 6. Matthew. 7.
or down we go. Satan is principality and power, by whom the wind rises,
and the rain falls, and the floods come, and then our house, if it be not
strongly founded goes to wrack. That little strength we have is apt to false
us, by faith we stand, Romans 11. 2 These. 3.10,
and still there is something lacking to our faith. And thus it comes that we
hardly keep our feet steady. We are also too much in love with that way that
has most danger in it. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak, Matthew.
26.
and is ready to eat poison for wholesome food; sometimes out of custom,
sometimes out of curiosity, and sometimes out of an ill appetite we have got
to unwholesome things.

But if we do wisely consider these things in one another, we will be full
of compassion. And as they that consider not are full of fierce and fiery
censure, as Judah to Tamar, Gen 38.
bring her forth and let her be burnt, not considering his own guilt: so they
that do it, are led by the contrary spirit. As when we consider a man aloft,
who totters, is apt to fall, and unable to keep his feet in a settled posture,
our bowels yearne, our flesh drops fear, and we are out of our selves with
sudden apprehension: so is it with a man that considers his brother; he puts
him on by fellow feeling. Yea then we will prudently deal one with another to
keep up. As we see dispositions, gifts, virtues or faults, we wisely
fore-thinke, how to maintain the best, and prevent the worst. Besides, this
considering brings us to Paul's rule, Gal. 6.1.
If a brother fall by infirmity, (not by pride and self conceit) restore him
with the spirit of meekness; 1 Cor. 4. ult.
with a tender heart and hand, set him in joint again.

For want of this consideration too many Christians are ready to fail. The
frailety of the flesh, the opposition of grace is little considered, and so
there is neither wisdom, compassion, or meekness to heal. Men difference
not stubborn faylers, for whom there is a rod of iron; and weak failers, for
whom there is a Spirit of meekness. Men discern not sinners of custom, who
are as blacke-moores and sinners overtaken, Ier. 23.
who with stripes must not be driven quite away, and so do more hurt than
good. But be more wise to consider hereafter than before. This moved Paul to
say, He that stands, Romans 11.
let him take heed lest he fall. This moved John to say, little children, 1
John 5.21. Luke 22.
keep your selves from Idols. Yea this moved CHRIST to say, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. Out of such consideration, I have labored
to give this revalsion and Antidote. And if our forsakers had had it too, it
might have saved me a labor, and they might with it have had more wisdom,
meekness, and compassion, and less heart-dividing censures.

2 Exhort one another.
The Apostle would have us also make such use of public assemblies that we may
exhort one another. He knows that it is a great work to continue in love to
God, his truth, and Saints, and in good works. Pride is one of the last sins
that dye. It is like a man of a strong heart which hardly yields; his heart is
more in compass than another man's. It will work it self out of less sin
and more grace: Pro. 13.10. Iam. 1.21
and where pride is, there is contention: and so less truth and love. Again,
superfluity of maliciousness drownes the whole nature of man. Even when the
head floates with Christ, the heart is too much drencht in this. It is crossed,
and will cross again, like the devils cock, to spur all opposites: and
hence also comes loss of truth and love. Again, the spirit of a man lusts
after envy. Jam. 3. Mat. 20.
This makes the eye evil because God is good. It desires to be in the
uppermost form, like the two sons of Zebedeus. Therefore Joseph, the
reformed Prodigal, and the last workers in the Vineyard are grumbled at: and
hence also is less truth and love. Lastly, truth and love enter at a narrow
passage, Ephesians. 1.
and Christ comes not with all his mighty power at first. As the Sea is not
sifted through the narrow crevises of the earth at once: so is it with truth and
love. And as a Conqueror, that leaves most of his Army behind him, subdues
not presently: so it is with Christ and us. We are not able to receive his
truth and love together, neither stands it with his dispensation, we being not
extraordinary, but ordinary servants, who must attain by industry. Hence
therefore men dreaming that they have attained, when there is much behind, do
ill use what truth and love they have, and so fail foulely.

Neither is it less difficult to continue in good works. The fountain is apt
to be dry, that is, a good heart. John 7.
If out of the belly do not flow rivers of waters of life, no waters will
run to the living. How soon is this stream dried up, because men live not
with Christ the springhead? Besides, men are not altogether for gathering this
worlds goods to spend it upon their lusts. They forget that there is a time to
scatter, Eccles. 3.
and then they cast not their bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.
they believe not that they shall find it so. Lastly, men have three bad
thoughts that keep them from good works. They think that no man is more
worthy to have then themselves. Some are wicked and not worthy: some are good,
yet themselves are better: some are idle and will live upon the spoil: and
some are painful, and therefore the better able to provide for themselves:
still self is thought to be the only man to have. They think themselves
again the absolute owners of what they have. 1 Samuel 25.
It is their own, as Nabal said, why should they give it to others? This they
willingly think not, that they are stewards, Luke 19.
and so are kept back. Lastly, they think this worlds goods the only
commanders of men and things: and therefore they will not put themselves out of
them that they may rule all.

Now, because it is so difficult a work, not only to continue in good works,
but in truth and love which must make them excellent: therefore the Apostle
would have us so improve our selves by the fellowship of public assemblies
that we may be able to exhort one another. Such is the inconstancy of nature
in all good courses, that it is easily apt to change from good to worse. Moses
was but a while gone, and Israel fell to idolatry. Ex. 32.
Paul wondered that the Galathians were so soon turned to another Gospel. Gal.
1*6.
Yea such is our slownesse in good, that we had need be spurred continually.
Apo. 2.4.
Ephesus forsakes her first love: Yea and when Christ's hearers heard, they must
be exhorted to hear: Mat. 13.9.
and when the Thessalonians did edify one another they must be exhorted to
do it. 1 These. ^.11.
Men are in a dead sleep, and they are loath to be awaked as the sluggard: they
think themselves able to exhort themselves, Prove. 6.
they love not many masters, Jam, 4.
they see not how frozen they are, till their own hearts smite them, as
David's, 2 Samuel 24.10. 2 Samuel 16.7, 8.
till God raise up some adversary to reproach them, or till God take them in
hand himself by some heavy visitation. Therefore says Paul, exhort one
another. Oh that we could always walk in the presence of this duty, Heb. 1^.
and suffer the words of exhortation too. The wicked will call one upon another
to go to hell, Ex. ^. Prove. ^.
why should not we to get one another toward heaven. But how our forsakers
will answer it to God I know not, who cast themselves out of our assemblies in
folly, before they are cast out in justice, and forgo this whetstone of
exhortation, for a blunt stick of their own devising. This I am sure, they
might be exhorted with us, and learn to exhort others better from us then they
do, to lead poor souls into the ways of discord, distraction, and strife.

3 The day approaches.
I have but one thing to think upon this text more, and that is Paul's motive
and inforcement ( so much the more because ye see the day approaching) men
complain much of days, and times* but I am sure, the worse they are the more
had they need to keep the communion of Saints both public, and private.
Evil days will come fast enough, no man had need to pull them upon himself.
If he do, there is ( the day) coming which will pay to the purpose (without
a pardon) for all his sins and indiscretions. Luk 19.42
All other days are our days, in which we eat, drink, marry, give in
marriage, work, play, pray, and hear, and the like: but this is the day, with
GODS mark upon it, when all shall be awaked and gathered before their JUDGE.
The thought of this day should sharpen us to love assemblies, and call others
to them, because they are the ordinances of CHRIST the JUDGE* On this day there
will be fullness of fears and terrors. Fearful sights of an universal
fire, throne, and JUDGE: fearful yellings and cryings of desperate men:
fearful accusations from heaven, earth, and consciences; and the fearefullest
sentence that ever yet passed, Go ye cursed. Therefore had we need all our
lives to get something to comfort us against that time, for it is an evil time
to the wicked. On that day will there be an expectation of comfort, or
discomfort, for ever, and ever, upon all that we have done, either in our
assemblies, or out of them. On that day we shall hear such accounts as we
have never heard, as how we have wilfully sinned in every secret. Eccles 12.
In the secret of our understanding, will, affections, judgments, consciences,
corners, woods, and denns? How many assemblies we have neglected? How many we
have profaned, in being no better? How many in our power we have not
exhorted? How many have exhorted us, and we have not answered and followed? On
that day shall I be judged if I have taught you to acknowledge our CHURCH a
true CHURCH, our MINISTRY a true MINISTRY, and our WORSHIP a true WORSHIP,
against my judgment and conscience according to the rule of CHRIST so far as
I am come, yea, and I shall be cast also. And on that day, shall our forsakers
escape scotfree? shall they not pass a strickt trial and examination? Have
ye had a care to keep a Christian state to CHRIST'S honor? Have ye loved
public assemblies to that end and use? Have ye not forsaken the assemblies
of CHRIST'S people for no just cause? Is not that a true church which professes
the name of Christ according to his word, whereto it submits as the rule of the
religion it has? Is not that a true Church which enters covenant with me, as
all the Christians in the World by entering into my school by Baptism? Is not
that a true Church which acknowledges me only head for supreme rule, and
under me my liefetenants and chief officers, to govern according to my laws
general, and special? Is not that a true Church which rejoices in good
members, yet dare not forbid wicked hypocrites from the outward privileges of
my feast, because I have commanded her that good and bad should be called? Is
not that a true Church which has the power of government in best and wisest,
when I never commanded that whole assemblies should ever have an independent
power to do according to voices, which cannot but be the author of schism?
Is not that a true Church which does exercise government according to my
patterns and rules, ins^rting things in order, ordaining teachers, and casting
out unworthy beasts, as information, and conviction could be justly had? Have
you forsaken such a Church, to set up a Church of your own devising, which
has never been from my time downward; to ordain Pastors and Doctors that
are not able to divide the word of God aright; to cast out, or keep in
according to the voices of two, or three men or women, which may out of
self-conceit, and pretense of my word, presume to be a Church contrary to my
will? What Ministry have you forsaken? A ministry that has been honored by
the blood of blessed martyrs: that are no wooden Priests, but whose breath has
blown away Romish tyranny, idolatry, superstitions, and falsities, which
dishonored me and my offices; a ministry that has gained souls from
heathenisme, and profaneness in their turns, and moved (by my blessing)
effectually to serve the living and true God, even to thousands, and millions?
What worship have you forsaken? a worship of praying and receiving of
Sacraments with my word, with petitions, supplications, intercessions, and
giving of thanks to my father in my name? Have ye forsaken such a worship,
and all because every one that go before in worship have not their tongues at
liberty to say what they list, but are helped by the public spirit of my
Church, so as they may with one heart and mouth at one time, when I have no
where commanded the contrary? Oh let this Terror of the Lord persuade men. 2
Cor. 5.11. 2 Pet. 3.
A thousand years with Christ are but as one day; for the Judge stands at
the door: and when he does come, think what praise and honor ye shall get
by disturbing a Church where is a true Ministry, and worship, by disheartning
of Gods tender people from his service, under pretense of his word, when for
none of your fancies you can produce one precept of Christ. The most you
pretend are obscure places (which by the diligentest searchers of scriptures
have been and are diversely expounded, and therefore no sure footing) or some
obscure examples without laws; which yet, if they were never so pregnant,
prove but the lawfulness, not the necessity of such practices. And will you
hazard the peace of a Christian Church, the comfort of your consciences, the
liberty of your goods, and bodies, upon so sandy a foundation. Oh think upon
that day, and take wiser men's advice then your selves that have not been
carried with rashness, puffed with pride, in love with a conceit of
selfe-government, or pricked with envies, emulations, jealousies, just
punishments, and see whether such men will warrant your courses upon the price
of their souls in that day. And if all candor be not banished, if hatred to
an English Priest, a Bishops creature (as some body is termed) have not put out
the eyes of wisdom and charity, do but read what here in all humble love,
and without bitterness of language is presented unto you. Read it as in the
sight and presence of God. See that my hearts desire is that you may have
comfort with us, and that hereafter you may be saved without needing
repentance for this your unwise and unwarranted way. If it do not (except you
outface light) satisfy you; in the maine it will burn like stubble, chafe,
and straw, in the day of Christ. But if it do, and yet (out of a thought of
what a brave thing it is to cast down the government of others, that you may
govern your selves, and then call it Christ's) and yet (I say) will not follow
it, then That day approaches, and I send you over to him, to do with you
according to his pleasure, yet with hearty and humble prayers for the saving of
your misse-led Souls.

FINIS.

