A TREATISE OF THE FIFTH GENERAL COUNCEL Held AT CONSTANTINOPLE, Anno 553. under
JUSTINIAN the Emperor, in the time of Pope VIGILIVS.

The Occasion being those Tria Capitula, which for many years troubled the
whole Church.

WHEREIN IS PROVED THAT THE POPES Apostolical Constitution and definitive
Sentence, in matter of Faith, was condemned as Heretical by the Synod.

And the exceeding frauds of Cardinal Baronius and Binius are clearly
discovered.

By RICH: CRAKANTHORP Dr. in Divinity, and Chapleine in ordinary to his late
Majesty King JAMES.

Opus Posthumum.

Published and set forth by his Brother GEO: CRAKANTHORP, according to a
perfect Copy found written under the Authors own hand.

LONDON, Printed for R. M. 1634.

And part of the Impression made over, to be vented for the Benefit of the
Children of JOHN MYNSHEW, deceased.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD NEWBVRGE Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IN all duty and submission I here present unto your Lordship a Treatise
concerning the fifth general Council held at Constantinople, the cause being
the Controversy of the Three Chapters which for many years troubled the whole
Church, and was at length decided in this Council held under Justinian that
religious Emperor. This Treatise, now printed, was long ago penned by one
well known unto your Honor; your sincere affection to the truth of God and
Gods cause, gives me good assurance of your favorable acceptance hereof. I
confess indeed, that when J call to mind the manifold affairs wherein your
Honor is daily employed, the very thought hereof had almost persuaded me not
to interrupt your more serious affairs, by drawing your Honor to the reading
or view of this Book: but when J call to mind those respects of love and
duty, in which the Author hereof stood bound unto your Lordship, J was again
encouraged in his name to tender it to your Honor: And although J my self can
challenge no interest in your Lordships favor to offer this, yet your Lordship
may challenge some interest in the fruits of his labors, who was so truly (as
I can truly speak) devoted unto your Honor. Among many other, he especially
acknowledged two assured bonds of love and duty by which he was obliged unto
you, and your friends; the former arose from that unfeigned affection which you
ever bare him from your first acquaintance in the College; that other, by
which he was further engaged unto you, and your friends, was, when in a loving
respect had unto him in his absence, without any means made by him, or
knowledge of his, he was called by that much honored Knight Sir John Levison
his Patron, your Father in law, unto the best Black Notley in Essex.
means of livelihood he ever enjoyed in the Ministry, where spending himself
in his studies, he ended his days; during which time your Honor made your
affection further known unto him by special expressions of extraordinary
favors; Jn regard whereof I persuaded my self, that I could no where better
crave Patronage for this work, than of your Honor, that it may be a further
testimony of his love again, who cannot now speak for himself. And this I
entreat leave to do, the rather, because J doubt not but he acquainted your
Lordship with his pains and intent in this, and other Tractates of the
Councels; See his Epistle to the Reader for the defense of Justinian, printed
Anno 1616.
for when after diverse years study bestowed in this argument of Councels, he
was desirous to make some use of his labors; his intent was, to reduce all
those points into four several Books; 1. That the right of calling general
Councels; 2. That the right of highest Presidency in them; 3. That the right of
the last and supreme Confirmation of them; is only Imperial and not Papal.
4. That all the lawful general Councels which hitherto have been held,
consent with ours, and oppugn the doctrines of the present Church of Rome.
Some of these he finished, the fourth he could not so much as hope to
accomplish, and therefore after the examining of some particulars therein, he
desisted and weaned himself from those studies: And yet after some years
discontinuance, being by some of his learned friends solicited to communicate
to others, at least some one Tract in that argument, consenting to their
earnest desire, after long suspense he resolved on this Treatise, as being for
weighty and important matters most delightful unto him. That it was not then
published, let it not seem strange unto your Honor, for having long since
finished the Tract of this whole Council, it was his purpose, that it should
have undergone the public view and judgment of the Church; but when he came
(as J can truly testify) unto them, whose art and aid is needful in such a
business, and found an averseness in them, for that it wholly consisted of
controversall matters, whereof they feared that this age had taken a satiety,
he rested in this answer, as willing to bury it. After this, being upon a
special command from his Majesty, King James of blessed memory, made known
unto him by my Lord his Grace of Canterbury, to address himself to D^fensio
Ecclesiae Anglic. cont. Archiep. Spal.
another work, he then desisted from his former intended purpose, and in
finishing of that last work of his, he ended his days. Some few years after
his death being desirous to take a view of some of his Papers, I came to the
view and handling of this book, a book fully perfected for the Press in his
life time, the publishing whereof being long expected, and of many earnestly
desired, it was my desire and theirs, to whose most grave and judicious censure
J willingly submitted it, that it might be published for the benefit of Gods
Church; and the rather, that it might give some light in the study of the
Councels, and animate some of the Eccles 3.7.
threescore valiant men that are about Salomons bed, being of the expert and
valiant men of Israel, unto the attempting and undertaking of the like: Now
what his desire was in this, and other of his labors, surely none but the very
enemies of God and Gods truth, can take it to be any other than to testify his
unfeigned love unto God and Gods Church, and to subdue the pride, idolatries and
impieties of that Man of sin, and to Jude Epist. v. 5
strive for the maintenance of the true faith. Now what allowance so ever it
may find abroad among our adversaries, it humbly craves your favorable
accepta^ce at home; and as it is published with no other intent than to gain
glory to God, and good to his Church, so J doubt not but that God, who 2 Cor.
4.6.
causes light to shine out of darkness, will effectually in time bring to
pass, that not only their violent oppugning of the truth, but their
fraudulent dealing also against the same, will, if not breed in themselves, yet
increase in all welwillers unto the truth, a constant dislike, nay, detestation
of their heretical and Antichristian doctrines, and for your self my earnest
and continual prayer to God shall be, that you may ever continue your
religious and ardent desire to advance Gods truth and honor here, which will
procure your own immortal fame in this world, and, through Gods mercy in
Christ, eternal felicity in that life, which, being unlike to this, shall
neither have end of days, nor end of blessedness.

Barton near Bury S. Edmonds in Suffolk, April 29. 1631. Your Lordships
humbly devoted GEO: CRAKANTHORP.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE CHRISTIAN REAder touching the Scope, Argument and
manifold Use of this ensuing Treatise.
IT is not ambition to live in other men's writings, but desire, if I could, to
breath some life into them, which has drawn me of late rather to preface other
men's works, than to perfect mine own. It grieved me much to see such evidences
lie in the dark, which being produced to public view, would give singular
light to the truth: And if Socrates, the mirror of modesty in a Philosopher,
held it no disparagement to profess, that he performed the office of a Midwife
to other men's wits, by helping them in the deliverie of those conceptions
wherein himself had no part: why should I either fear or regard any
detraction from the living, for a charitable office in this kind to the dead?
doubtless if the office of a Midwife be at any time needful, it is then most
necessary, when the living Child is to be taken out of the dead womb of the
parent: Such was this Posthumus, in whom I hope the observation of Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 7. c. 9. Auspicactus enecta Parente nascuntur, sicut Scipio Africanus
primusque Caesarum a Caeso matris utero dictus: simili modo natus et Manlius
qui Carthaginem cum exercitu intravit.
Pliny concerning children thus borne will be verified: For the most part
(says he) those Children prove most lively and fortunate, of whom the Parents
dye in travel; never seeing them live, who cost them their lives. The
instances are many and very illustrious, Fabius Tert. lib. de resur. carnis.
Possumus illos recogitare qui execto matris utero vivi aerem hauserunt, Laberij
aliquiet Scipiones et Fabius Caeso ter Consul.
Caeso thrice Consul, Scipio surnamed the Africane, Julius Caesar the first and
most renowned of all the Roman Emperors, and our peerlesse K. Edward 6.
Howbeit I confess, it is an hard thing to calculate the nativity of a Book,
and certainly foretell what hazard the impression of a Treatise of this
subject may run, or guess what argument will please the diverse tastes of this
distempered age; yet this I am confident of, that all who exactly view this
work in all parts, and compare it with others, drawn with the same Pencill,
will esteem it like the Cic. Orator.
Minerva of Phidias his Masterpeece: It cost him near as many years labor as
Isocrates Panegyrique, the Prime rose of his flowery Garden, did him. This
Author perfected this work in his life time, and commanded it, after a sort,
to the Press in the last Def. Eccles. Angl. cap. 4. p. 19 De quo loto Concilio
conscriptum scias a me librum integrum, in quo innumerabiles Baronij frauds,
mendacia, etiam et haereses palam detectae, etc.
book he published by command from supreme authority in defense of the Church
of England against the calumnies of the revolted Archbishop of Spalata, (in
these words:) The Church had been undone if Vigilius his decree had taken
place; But the most holy Emperor Justinian, and the fifth Council then happily
showed themselves Pillars of the Catholic faith; concerning which whole
Council I desire you to take notice of an entire book written by me, wherein
the innumerable frauds, lies and heresies of Baronius are manifestly detected;
out of that book, if it see light and come to your hands, you shall understand
and plainly perceive how frail and reedy your Roman Pillar is.

In which passage he insinuates, that the argument of it is, non de
stillicidiis, aut aquis pluviis, not of Eves droppings or water passages, but
of the Roof of the house and Arch it self, the authority of Councels, and the
infallibility of the Papal Chair. The Title carried through the whole book,
carries not the greatest part of it, plus Quintil. instit. Orat. lib. 1. ca. 4.
in recessu est, quam a front promittit; his warehouse within is fraught with
more variety of rich stuffs tha^ is set out on his shop. An entire Treatise of
the fifth general Council, he professedly undertaketh; but currente rota, in
the prosecution of this argument, he takes tardy Baronius, and Binius, and
other Romish falsaries; he runs through all the later general Councels; he
substantially handles the maine Controversies concerning the power of calling,
and authority ratifying Ecclesiastical Synods, and so clears all Antiquity
on the Reformed side in points of great moment, that I persuade my self, the
wiser sort of our learned adversaries, who will by stealth get a sight thereof,
will take good counsel, and utterly derelinquish their most glorious, but most
vain and false claim to general Councels; for if we devide the Councels,
that bear the still of Oecumenicall and General, according to the different
times in which they were held into pure, mixed, and wholly corrupt; the first of
undoubted, the second of doubtful, the third undoubtedly of no authority at
all; the first are wholly ours, the last are wholly theirs in the middle sort
we part stakes with them: 4. of the first rank have been heretofore wrested
perforce out of the Romanists hands by Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Dr Renols,
Dr Whitaker and others. The fifth, this accomplished Antiquary vindicates also
from them, and declares how in the Councels of the second rank we share with
them; and in fine he leaves them nothing entirely, but the lees and dregs of
all Councels, the Laterane and Trent. Habeant quod sunt, let them have these
lees to themselves, who themselves, Moab-like, for these many ages are settled
upon the lees of their own corruption.

Had this judicious and industrious Writer bent all his forces against the
Romanists false pretended right to general Councels, and forcibly beat them
out of that Hold only, he had deserved that Eulogiu^ which the Panlus Fagius
Epist. ad Albertum est magna religio apud Judaeos non subiicere nomen eius qui
boni aliquid dixit, docuit aut scripsit.
Jews give any Rabbin, to whom they are indebted for a^y wise saying or apt
note upon any Scripture text, Vid. comment. Rabb. passim.
ZICRONO LIBRACHA, sit memoria ejus in benedictione, blessed be is memory: How
much more when he assaulteth the maine fort of the Romish faith, and by
impregnable authorities and infallible reasons overthrows the Popes supposed
infallibility, when he sits in his Chair, and with his Roman Synod,
determines out of it questions, and defines Articles of faith. This is indeed
to let Rome bleed, in her Master-veine, to strike heresy at the root, to
crush the Cockatrice in the head, not to batter and break down the mudd-wals,
but utterly to ruinate the very foundation of the Tower of Babell. For
howsoever Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and the Catholic Church, (...), are
pompously brought in into their Polemike writings against us; yet the last
resolution of their faith is upon the Pope, who gives credit to Fathers,
validity to Councels, and authority, at least quoad nos, to the Scriptures
themselves. This their Champion Bellarmine (...), and Skulkenius his second
confidently undertakes to maintain against all oppugners of the Popes
transcendent power, and uncontrollable verdict in a matters of eternal life
and death. The Bell. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. ca. 1 in disputatione de verbo
Dei. Iam ostendimus iudicem controtroversiarum no^ esse scripturam, nec
seculares Principes, etc. ac proinde ultimum iudicium summi Pontificis esse.
Cardinal thus flourishes, In our disputations about the word of God we have
already showed, that the Scripture is not the Judge of Controversies, nor are
secular Princes, nor private persons, though learned and honest, but
Ecclesiastical Prelates; in our disputations of the Councels it shall be
demonstrated, that Councels general and particular may judge of Controversies
in religion, but that judgment of theirs is then of force and validity when
the Pope shall confirm it, and therefore that the last judgment of all is the
Popes, to which all good Catholics owe such absolute obedience, that Bell. de
Romans Pontif. lib. 4. ca. 5 in fine. Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, et virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra conscientium peccar^.
if the Pope should err by commanding vices and prohibiting virtues, the
Church is bound to believe, that vices are good, and virtues bad, unless she
will sin against Conscience. What, sin against Conscience in not sinning,
and not sin against Conscience in committing sins known by the light of
nature, if the Man of sin command the one and forbid the other? Woe be to
them, says the Prophet, that call evil good, and good evil, put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter,
Esaias. 5.20. If Bellarmines divinity be current, Pope P^^^ the fourth needed not
to have coined twelve new Articles Bulla Pij 4. super forma juramenti
professionis fidei, anno Dom. 1564.
of faith, affixt to the Canons of the Council of Trent: it had been
sufficient to have added this one, I believe in the Pope his sovereign
infallibility, for this is prora and puppis, the Alpha and Omega, the formalis
ratio and demonstratio (...) of a Papists belief. The Popes power (says
Skulkenius Skulke^. Apolog. pro Bell. ca. 6. Pontisicia potestas est vel ut
cardo fundame^tu^, et ut uno verbo dicam, suma fidei Christianae.
) is the hinge and foundation, and, to speak in a word, the sum of Christian
faith: A short sum and soon cast up. What then serves Fathers, Councels,
Church-Traditions, and Scripture it self for with them? for little better than
Ciphers, which being added to the Popes authority in their Arithmetike makes
something, but without it nothing. To begin with Scriptures, they believe them
to be divine, but not because the Scripture says, that all Scripture 2 Timothy
3.16.
is given by divine inspiration: For so (says Bell. de verbo Dei non scripto
lib. 4. ca. 4. Etiamsi scriptura dicat libros Prophetarum, et Apostolorum esse
divinos, tamen non certo id cream, nisi prius credidero, scripturam qua hoc
dicit esse divinam, nam etiam in Alchorano Mahometi passim legimus ipsum
Alchoranum de Caelo a Deo missu^, etc
Bellarmine) we read every where in the Alcoran of Mahomet, that the Alcoran
was sent from God, yet we believe it not; why then do they believe them to be
the word of God? he answers readily, propter traditionem Ecclesiae, for the
Churches tradition. Quicunque, non innititur doctrinae Romanae Ecclesiae, ac
Romani Pontificis tanqua^ regulae fidei infallibili, a qua etiam sacra
Scriptura robur trahit et authoritate^; haereticus est: co^tra Lutheru^.
Silvester Pierius outvies the Cardinal, affirming, that the holy Scripture
takes force and authority from the Roman Church and Pope. Upon which promise
of Pierius, Gretzer Gretz. defens. Bell. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, id selum pro
verbo Dei veneramur ac suscipimus, quod nobis Pontifices ex Cathedra Petri
tradu^t.
inferres this peremptory conclusion, We do receive and reverence that alone
for the word of God which the Pope in Peter's Chair does determine to be so.
Strange divinity to believe, that the Scriptures receive their authority from
the Church, that is, that God receives this authority from man. May we not
justly upbraid the present Romanists, as Tertullian Tertul. Apol. adversus
gentes Ca. 5.
does the ancient heathen, apud vos de humano arbitratu divinitas pensitatur,
nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit; Homo jam Deo propitius esse debebit;
With you Deity is estimated by man's valuation, unless God please man, he shall
not be God; now man must be propitious to God; for if the Pope be not
propitious to the Scripture to allow it for Gods word, it shall not pass for
such in Rome.

As for the Fathers; they deal with their writings as Faustus Manicheus did
with the writings of the Apostles, in August. lib. 11. contra Faustum
Manicheum, ca. 2. inde probo inquiebat Faustus, hoc illius esse, illud non
esse, quia hoc pro me sonat, illud contra me.
which he takes it for a good proof, that such passages are the Apostles true
writings, because they made for him; others were spurious, because they made
against him: Fathers, says Dureus adversus Whitakerum, fol. 140. Neque eni^
patres censentur, cum suum aliquid quod ab ecclesia non acceperunt, velscribunt
vel dicunt.
Dureus, are not to be accounted Fathers, when they teach or write any thing
of their own, which they have not received from the Church, meaning the
Roman; and Gretzer Gretz. lib. 2. de iure and more prohibendi libres noxios.
ca. 10. Nam Ecclesiae pater ille dicitur, qui Ecclesiam salutari doctrinae
pabulo alit et pascit, iam ergo si pro salutari doctrinae pabulo admetiaur
Lelium et Zizania non Pater est sed Vitricus.
backs this assertion with a reason drawn from the formal definition of a
Father: for, says he, he is a father of the Church, who feeds and nourishes
the Church with wholesome doctrine, who being set over the Lords household,
gives them their measure of Corn in due season; now if in stead of wholesome
food and good Corn he give them Cockle and Tares, he becomes no father but a
stepfather, no Doctor but a seducer.

To instance in some particular; Eusebius Caesariensis when he seems to
favor Popery, he is highly extolled by Lindane Lindan. Panoplia lib. 1. ca.
17.
, Senensis Senensis Bib. ^. titulo Eusebius.
, and Possevine Possevinus in apparatu sacro.
he is then a most famous writer of the Church, most learned, worthy to be a
Bishop, not of one City only, but of the whole world; but when the same
Eusebius looks awry upon Rome, then he is branded by Canus Canus locorum
Theol. lib. 7. ca. 3
, Costerus Coster. in Apolog. contra Greuinc. ca. 8.
, and Baronius Baron. ad annum 340. Lindan. panoplia lib. 1. cap. 23.
, for a stickler for Arrius, an Arrian heretic, a ringleader of the Arrian
faction, whose memory is accursed in the second Synod of Nice. Tertullian
likewise is gilded by Lindanus c and Rehing Rehing. in muris Civitatis
sanctae. fund. 2. et 12.
, with the glorious titles of a very noble author, the chief of all the Latin
Fathers, the great light of Africa, a most ancient Writer and Doctor, most
learned, most skillful, most acute; where he has some passages which may be
detorted to give countenance to some Romish superstitions: But elsewhere when
in express words he oppugneth some doctrines defined now for Articles of faith
in the Church of Rome, he is as much besmeared with foul imputations by
Azorius Azorius moral. lib. 8. cap. 16.
, Maldonate Maldon. in Math. cap. 16. verse. 19. p. 340.
, and Bellarmine Bell. de sanctorum beat. lib. 1. cap. 5. p. 1938. Bell. de
Sacram. Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 698.
, An heretical author, an Arch-heretike, an enemy to the Catholic, and like
to the Calvinists, a man whose authority is not much to be set by, because he
was no man of the Church: and as Eusebius. and Tertull. so also Origin has had
contrary testimonials from the Church of Rome, when he pleases them he is
Lind. Panopl. el. l. 3 c. 24. et 26
a famous light of the Church of Alexandria, whom S. Hier. calls another Mr of
the Churches after the Apostles, a Dumus contra Whit^^ fol. 109.
witness beyond all exception; But when he fits not their humor, then he is
a Schismatike Canus loc. The. lib. 7. c. 3. Maldon. in Joan. cap. 1. verse. 3.
page 399.
, a father of the Arrians and Eunomians, a bold Ribera in Malach. Prophet.
proemium.
and rash man, an obstinate lover of his own errors.

In Councels the case is yet clearer, for the Cardinal sticks not in most
plain terms to hang all them upon the Popes sleeve: The Bell. de Romans Pont.
lib. 4. ca. 3 Tota firmitas legitimorum Conciliorum est a Pontifice Romano, et
cap. 1.
whole strength and authority (says he) of lawful Councels is from the Pope,
their Conciliorum iudicium tum demu^ sirmum est cum accesserit, Romans Pontificis
confirmatio.
judgment then begins to be of force after the Pope shall ratify them. And
what Councels will he ratify? you may be sure not the Council in Trulio, for
that taxes the Roman Church by name for enforcing single life upon the
Clergy: not the Council at An. Do. 681.
Constantinople, under Constantine Pogonate, for that he accurseth Honorius the
Pope for an heretic: not the Council held at Frankfort An. Do. 794.
in the time of Pope Adrian, for that condemns their Image Worship: not the
Synod of Pisa An. Do. 1409.
, for in that Gregory and Benedict Popes, were deposed: not the Synod An. Do.
1430.
of Basil, wherein Engenius was unpoped; nor the Council of Constance An. Do.
1414.
, for in it a general Council is set above the Pope, and three Popes were
cashiered by their Authority, (I except the later Sessions of the same
condemned Council, which are Gospel with them, because they Anathematize the
Wicliffists and Hussites:) But the An. 787.
second Synod of Nice shall be held for a general Council, because it
defends and commands the worship of Images; though it be full of
blasphemous absurdities and was called by an insolent woman domineering Irene.
over her husband, and devoted wholly to superstition. The Council An. Do.
1517.
of Laterane, though consisting of none in a manner, but the Popes creatures,
shall, in despite of the Oecumenicall Councels of Pisa, Constance and Basil,
be held a holy and general Council, because it defines, that the Pope is
above general Councels; and for greater reason will the Pope advance the small
Conventicle of Trent to the honor of a sacred Oecumenicall Council, because
it is thoroughly for them in all points; though, as a learned Bishop, present at
that Council, truly affirms, that matters in it came to that pass through
the wickedness of those hungry Dudithius quinque Eccles. Epist. ad
Maximilianum secundum Caesar.
Bishops, that hung upon the Popes sleeve, and were created on the sudden by
the Pope for the purpose, that that Council seemed to be an assembly, not of
Bishops, but of Hobgoblins, not of men, but of Images moved like the statues of
Daedalus, by the sinews of others.

Lastly, for their pretended title of Catholic Church, it may be said of it as
it was of Pompeius Lucan de bello ^iu. l. 1.
Surname in his declining age and fame, Stat magni nominis umbra, it is but the
shadow of a great name; for by it they mean nothing but their particular
Church of Rome, or the Pope himself: Thus Bellarmine glosseth upon the words
of our Savior, Matthew. 16. the Pope, Peter's successor, is bid to Bell de
Council. author. l. 2. c. 19. Dicere Ecclesiae, id est, sibi ipsi ut praesidi.
et Ecclesiae, cui ipse praeest.
tell the Church, that is, to tell himself as Governor, and the Church which
he governs. Gretzer Gretz. desen. Bell. lib. 3. de verbo Dei: Ais tertio
interpretantur Ecclesiam Patam, non abnuo, quid tum?
comes off more roundly; Thou will say, they interpret the Church the Pope: I
grant it; what then? And 2a. 2ae. disput. 1. q. 1.
Greg de Valent. By the name of the Church we understand the Head of the
Church, the Pope: and Bozius Boz lib. 2. de signis Eccl. ca. 21. See farther in
this Treatise, cap. 13. p. 174.
declares this mystery more explicitly, The Pope sustaineth the person of all
Bishops, of all Councels, of the whole Church.

The learned Author then of this ensuing Tractate foyling the Pope,
consequently foyleth the whole Roman Church, though he take only Vigilius to
task, yet in overturning his Chair he overthrows, as has been showed,
all the Roman religion, which is fundamentally in the Popes Decree, and the
whole Roman Church, which is vertually, as they teach, in his person. For if
Pope Vigilius, not as a private man, but as Pope in Cathedra, not sitting
alone, but with his Synod, may err, not only in matter of fact, but in matter
of faith, judicially and doctrinally determining heresy, and commanding it to
be received for Catholic truth: and if this decision and determination of his
be reversed, condemned and accursed in a lawfully called, sacred and
Oecumenicall Synod, approved by the Christian world, all which are in the
following Treatise punctually and uncontroulably proved against all cavils of
modern Papists, -- Ecquis posthac Paparum numen adoret? Will any man
hereafter, not wholly given over to be infatuated with strong delusions, adore
the Popes Chair? or kiss his foot? or pawn his salvation upon his
Cathedral determination?

By all this discourse thou may see, Christian Reader, the maine scope of the
Author; I shall not need to enlarge upon other questions of lesser moment,
though now more in vogue, which upon the by and occasionally this learned
Writer accutely handles both in this work and others, especially in that
imposed upon him by our late Sovereign of blessed memory, in defense of our
Church, Chap. 35, 36, 37, 38, and 78.

Wherefore since the Composer of this Treatise is most orthodoxall, the argument
of great importance, the manner of handling very exact and accurate, I doubt
not but thou will give it such entertainment, as that thereby others may be
encouraged to tread in his steps, and to guide thee in the right way. What
though the work be of some bulk and weight? who ever found fault with gold
for that it was too massy and heavy? When Tully Plut. in vit. Cicer.
was asked which Oration of Demosthenes he liked best, he answered, the
longest; and questionless in books of this nature, caeteris paribus, the
largest which meet with all possible, or at least probable objections, and
solidly refutes them, give the best satisfaction. Is it not a shame to see in
many men's studies idle Poems, Astreas, Guzmans, and play-books in folio, but
divinity books in decimo sexto, or slender pa^phlets, stitcht up in blew coats,
without any cogniza^ce, glancing at Church or State, or tre^ching upon
Controversies better buried alive, than to be revived after they are dead;
which are cried up by the common adversary, of purpose to foment discords
between the professors of the Gospel, that whilst, Pastores odia exercent,
Lupus intret Ovile, the shepherds are at strife, the Wolf may make havocke of
the flock; which I speak not for a justitium to any error, or that I wish
any way should be given to those plausible tenants to corrupt reason, which
one of late fitly compared to flat bottomed Boats sent from our neighboring
Countries to land Popery in England. But first my desire is, that all that
agree in the love of the same truth, may seek that truth in love, and
continually Psalm. 122.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem; next I pray, that Phil. 1.9.
our love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, that
we may discern things that differ, and so seek by all good and lawful
means to destroy the wrigling tail of the Adder, whose head was smitten off
1200. years ago in a Synod at Palestine, that yet our principal care be to
drive out the Romish Basiliske, or rather the Apoc. 9.11.
King of the Locusts, against whose poison I commend the ensuing Discourse as a
sovereign antidote.

Lambeth, April 26. Anno Dom. 1631. Thine in the Lord Jesus DANIEL FEATLEY.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS ENSVING TREATISE.
Cap. 1. THat Justinian assembled the fifth general Council at Constantinople,
to define the doubt of faith which arose about the Three Chapters. Page 1. Cap.
2. That the fifth General Council, when Pope Vigilius wilfully refused to come
unto it, was held without the Popes presence therein, either by himself, or by
his Legates. page 4. Cap. 3. That Pope Vigilius, during the time of the fifth
Council, published his Apostolical Constitution in defense of the Three
Chapters. p. 7. Cap. 4. That the holy General Council in their Synodall
judgment contradicted the Popes Apostolical Constitution, and definitive
sentence in that cause of faith made known before unto them. Page 14. Cap. 5.
The first Exception of Baronius, pretending that the cause of the Three
Chapters was no cause of faith, refuted. Page 36. Cap. 6. That the first reason
of Vigil. touching the First Chapter, why Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not to
be condemned, Because none after their death ought Noviter to be condemned,
concerns the faith, and is heretical. Page 47. Cap. 7. That the second reason
of Vigilius touching the First Chapter, why Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not
to be condemned, because he dyed in the peace and Communion of the Church, is
erroneous and untrue. Page 58. Cap. 8. That the third and last reason of
Vigilius, touching the First Chapter, why Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not to
be condemned, because he was not condemned by former Fathers and Councels, is
erroneous and untrue. Page 67. Cap. 9. That Vigilius, besides diverse personal,
held a doctrinall error in faith, in his defense of the Second Chapter, which
concerns the writings of Theodorus against Cyril. Page 91. Cap. 10. That
Vigilius and Baronius err in diverse personal points, or matters of fact
concerning the Third Chapter, which was the Epistle of Ibas unto Maris. Page
107. Cap. 11. That Vigilius and Baronius in their former reason for defense of
the Epistle of Ibas, drawn from the union with Cyrill, mentioned in the later
part of that Epistle, do defend all the heresies of the Nestorians. Page 112.
Cap. 12. That Vigilius and Baronius in their later reason for defense of the
Epistle of Ibas, taken from the words of Ibas, wherein he confesses Two
natures and One Person to be in Christ, do maintain all the heresies of the
Nestorians. Page 138. Cap. 13. Two assertions of Baronius about the defenders
of the Three Chapters, refuted; and two other against them confirmed; the one,
That to dissent from the Pope in a cause of faith makes one neither an heretic
nor a Schismatike: the other, That to assent in faith to the Pope or present
Church of Rome, makes one both an Heretic and a Schismatike. Page 170. Cap.
14. The second Exception of Baronius excusing Vigilius from heresy, For that
he often professes to hold the Council of Chalcedon, and the faith thereof,
refuted. Page 199. Cap. 15. The third Exception of Baronius in excuse of
Vigilius, taken from his confirming of the fifth Council, answered: and how
Pope Vigilius three or four times changed his judgment in this cause of faith.
Page 213. Cap. 16. That the Decree Pope of Vigil. for Taciturnity, touching the
Three Chapters, and the Council wherein it is supposed to be made, and all
the Consequents upon that Decree, painted out by Baronius, are all fictions and
Poetical. Page 225. Cap. 17. That Vigilius neither by his Pontifical Decree,
nor so much as by a personal profession, consented to, or confirmed the fifth
Council, after the end thereof, or after his supposed exile. Page 240. Cap.
18. The fourth and last Exception of Baronius in defense of Vigilius,
pretending, That the fifth Council, wherein the Decree of Vigilius was
condemned, was neither a general nor a lawful Council, till Vigilius
confirmed the same, refuted. Page 266. Cap. 19. The true notes to know which
are General and lawful, which either are not General, or being General, are
no lawful Councels, with diverse examples of both kinds; and that none of
those which the Romanists do reckon after the sixth, are General lawful
Councels. Page 291. Cap. 20. How Cardinal Baronius revileth the Emperor
Justinian, and a refutation of the same. Page 324. Cap. 21. How Baronius
revileth Theodora the Empress, and a refutation of the same. Page 355. Cap.
22. How Baronius declameth against the Cause it self of the Three Chapter, and
a refutation of the same. Page 361. Cap. 23. How Baronius revileth both the
Imperial Edict of Justinian, and Theodorus Bishop of Cesarea, and a refutation
of the same. Page 363. Cap. 24. How Baronius carpeth at the Synodall Acts of
the fifth Council, as corrupted, and a refutation in general of the same. Page
377. Cap. 25. The 1. Alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, For
that the Text of the Council at Chalcedon is changed therein, refuted. Page
381. Cap. 26. The 2. Alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, For
that Ibas is said therein to have denied the Epistle written to Maris to be his,
refuted. Page 386. Cap. 27. The 3. Alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by
Baronius, For that the Council of Chalcedon is said therein to condemn the
Epistle of Ibas, refuted. Page 389. Cap. 28. The Three first Defects in the
Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, For that the Acts against the Origenists,
The Edict of Justinian, And his Epistle touching that cause, are wanting
therein, refuted. Page 391. Cap. 29. The 4. Defect in the Synodall Acts
pretended by Baronius, For that the Emperors Epistle to the fifth Council is
wanting therein, refuted. Page 398. Cap. 30. The 5. Defect in the Synodall Acts
pretended by Baronius, For that the Costitution of Pope Vigilius, concerning
the Three Chapters is wanting therein, refuted, Page 399. Cap. 31. The 6.
Defect in the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, For that the Decree which
advanced Jerusalem to a Patriarchall dignity is wanting therein, refuted. Page
403. Cap. 32. The two first Additions to the Synodall Acts pretended by
Baronius, For that the Epistle of Mennas to Vigilius, And the two laws of
Theodosius, are falsely inserted therein; refuted. Page 408. Cap. 33. The 3.
Addition to the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, For that the Epistle of
Theodoret written to Nestorius after the Union, is falsely inserted therein,
refuted. Page 413. Cap. 34. The 4. Addition to the Synodall Acts pretended by
Baronius, For that the Epistle of Theodoret to John Bishop of Antioch, is
falsely inserted therein, refuted. Page 422. Cap. 35. That Baronius himself
follows many forged writings in handling this cause of the fifth Council, as
particularly the Excommunication ascribed to Vigilius, and the Confession
ascribed to Mennas, Theodorus, and others. Page 440. Cap. 36. That Baronius
reproves Pope Vigilius for his coming to Constantinople, and a refutation
thereof: with a Description of the life of the same Vigilius. Page 462.
A TREATISE OF THE FIFTH GENERAL COVNCILL held at Constantinople under
Justinian, in the time of Pope Vigilius: Wherein the exceeding fraud and
falsehoods of Cardinal Baronius are clearly discovered.
CAP. I. That the Emperor JUSTINIAN assembled the Fifth General Council, to
define a doubt of Faith, about The three Chapters.
CONCILIA generalia mea sunt; primum, ultimum, media, says their Roman Camp.
Ra^. 4.
Thraso; General Councils are all ours, the first, the last, and the middle.
Alls mine, as said the Devil to the Collier. A vaunt too vain, too
Thrasonicall. Divide the Councils aright, and let each have his own due part
and portion, and then all the five first, and so much as they account the sixth,
that is, all which were held for 600. years and more; All the golden Councils,
and of the golden ages of the Church, are ours only, and not theirs, in many
and even in the maine points of Religion, repugnant to them and their
doctrines: but in every Decree, Canon, and Constitution of faith, so consonant
to us, that we not only embrace, but earnestly defend them all, as the
rightful and proper inheritance left unto us by those holy Fathers of the
ancient and Catholic Church. The middle rank, beginning at the second Nicene,
unto the Council of Florence, which were held in those ages of the mingled and
confused Church, none of them are either wholly ours or wholly theirs, those
miscellane Councils, are neither thine nor mine, but they must all be divided.
The two last, the one at Laterane, the other at Trent, which are the very lees
and dreggs of Councills, held only by such as were the dross of the Church
quite severed from the gold, we willingly yield unto them: they and they only
are wholly theirs, let them have, let them enjoy their Helenaes, we envy not
such refuse Councils unto them.

2. When first I set my self to the handling of this argument concerning the
Councils, it was my purpose, besides those other general questions, concerning
the right of calling general Councils, the right of Presidencie in them, and
the right of confirming them, to have made manifest those three several
points, touching those three ranks of Councils; every one of which, is not
only true, but even demonstrable in it self. And though with a delightful
kind of toil I have made no small progress therein, yet alas, how unequal am
I to such an Herculean labor? whose time, whose strength of body, or industry
of mind, is able to accomplish a work of such amplitude, and of so vast
extent, for which not Nestors age would suffice? Wherefore turning my sails,
from this so long, and tedious a voyage, which I could not so much as hope to
end, and which beside many dangerous rocks, hidden Syrtes and sands, is every
where beset by many Roman enemies, specially by Baronius the Archpirate of
this and former ages, with whom at every turn, almost, one shall be sure to
have an hot encounter; I thought a shorter course far more fit, for my small
and unfurnisht bark, and despairing of more or longer voyages, I shall be glad
if God will enable me to make but a cut only over some one arm of that great
Ocean, not doubting but the ice being once broken, and the passage through
these straits opened, many other will with more facility, and felicity also,
perform the like in the rest, until the whole journey through every part of
these seas be at length fully accomplished.

3. Among all the Councils I have for sundry reasons made choice of the fifth,
held at Constantinople in the time of the Emperor Justinian and Pope Vigilius,
for authority equal to the former, it being, as well as they, approved by the
consenting judgment of the Catholic Church; for antiquity venerable, being
held within 600. years after Christ, even in those times while as yet the
dross had not prevailed and got the predominancie above the gold, as in the
second Nicene Synod and succeding ages it did: for variety of weighty and
important matters, more delightful then any of the rest; and, which I most
respected of them all, most apt to make manifest the truth and true Judgment
of the ancient and Catholic Church touching those Controversies of the Popes
supremacy of authority and infallibility of judgment, which are of all other
most ventilated in these days.

4. The occasion of this Council were those Tria capitula, as they were
called, which bred exceeding much and long trouble to the whole Church: to wit,
The person and writings of Theodorus B. of Mopsvestia long before dead: the
writings of Theodoret B. of Cyrus against Cyril: and the Epistle of Ibas B. of
Edessa unto Maris: al which three Chapters were mentioned in the Council at
Act. 8, 9, 10.
Chalcedon.

5. The Nestorians (whose heresy was condemned in the third general Council)
when they could no longer under the name of Nestorius countenance their
heresy, very subtly indevored to Nestorij sequace propriam impietate^
applicare volentes sanctae Dei Ecclesiae, and non potentes hoc per Nestoriu^
facere, festinaverunt eam introducere per Theodorum Mopsvestenum, nec non per
impiae scripta Theodoreti, and persceleratam Epistolam quae dicitur Jbae ad
Marin. Just. Ep. ad Syn. 5. Col. 1. pa. 519. b. Ide^habet ^oncilium ipsum in
sua sententia definitiva. Col. 8. pa. 584. and Lib. c. 10
revive the same, by commending Theodorus B. of Mopsvestia and his writings, as
also the writings of Theodoret against Cyrill and the Epistle of Ibas unto
Maris. This after the Council of Chalcedon they more earnestly applied, then
before, pretending Theodori et Nestorij sequa^es conan tur dicere susceptam
esse eam (Epistolam Iba) a 5. Chalcedonensi Conc. nomine ejus Theodorum and
Nestorium condemnatione liberare festinantes. Just. Edict. Tali. Et iterum
Epist. Just. ad Synod. Col. 1. pa 519 b. Et Dicebant istam impiam Epistolam
quae laudat et defendit Theodorum et Nestorium et eorum impietatem susceptam
esse a Synodo Chalc. Conc. 5. Col. 8 pa. 585. b.
that not only the persons of Theodoret and Ibas (who both had sometimes been
very earnest for Nestorius and his heresies) but that the writings also of
Theodoret and the Epistle of Ibas, which is full fraught with Nestorianisme,
and wherein Theodorus with his heretical writings are greatly extolled, were
received and approved in that famous Council. And in truth the Nestorians
little less then triumphed herein, and insulted over Catholics, thinking by
this means either to disgrace and utterly overthrow the Council of Chalcedon,
if their doctrine were rejected or, if that Council were embraced, together
with it, and under the color and authority of it, to renew and establish the
doctrine of Nestorius, which (as they boasted) that council had certainly
confirmed, by their approving that Epistle of Ibas.

6. By occasion hereof, many who were weak in faith began to doubt of the
credit and authority of that most holy council: and those, as Leontius Lib. de
sect. act. 6.
shows, were called Haesitantes, waverers or Doubters: Many others (who for
other causes distasted that Council) were hereby encouraged pertinaciously to
reject the same, as Illi (Acephali) hoc offenduntur in Syn. Chalced quod lauds
suscepit Theodori Mopsvest. Epistolam. que Ibae, quae per omnia Nestoriana esse
cognoscitur. lib. Brev ca. 24.
Liberatus declares. Such were the Agnoites, Gainites, Theodosians,
Themistians, and other like Sectaries, called all by the common name of
Acephali, because they had no one head by whom to be directed. All these,
though being at mortal wars one with another, yet herein conspired to oppugn
the faith, and the holy Council of Chalcedon, taking now advantage of that
which the Nestorians every where boasted, and these men gladly believed, that
in it the Epistle of Ibas (which maintains all the blasphemies of Nestorius)
was approved. Thus the Church was by contrary enemies, on every side assailed,
and so extremely disturbed, that as the Emperor Sacerdotes sanctarum Dei
Ecclesiarum ab Orient usque ad Occidentem d^visi, Just. Epist. ad Synod. pa
519. b.
testifies, it was in a manner rent even from East to West, yea the East Ob
tria Capitula inter se invicem tam in orient quam in occidente sideles sucrunt
scissi atque schismate separat^. Bar. an. 547. nu. 29. Vniversus fere orbis
occident alis ab orientali ecclesia divisus erat. Bin not. in 5. Conc.
Concitium.
was rent from the West.

7. Justinian the religious Emperor, knowing Initium et fundamentum nostri
imperij fecimus, conjungere divisos Sacerdotes. Epist. ad Synod. Col. 1.
how much it was available not only for his honor, and the tranquillity of
his empire, but for the good of the whole Church, and glory of God, to appease
all those broiles: and knowing further, that the holy Council of Chalcedon,
though it received the persons of Theodoret and Ibas, after that they had
publicly renounced the heresy of Nestorius, yet, did utterly condemn both
that Impious Epistle of Ibas, as also the person and doctrines of Theodorus of
Mopsvestia (both which that Epistle defends) together with the writings of
Theodoret against Cyrill: he knowing and that exactly all these particulars,
that he might draw all the subjects of his Empire to the unity of that most
holy faith which was decreed at Chalcedon, set forth an Extat apud Bin. tom. 2.
Conc. pa. 492.
Imperial Edict containing a most orthodoxall, religious and holy profession,
or rather an ample Declaration of his, nay not his, but of the Catholic Faith.
Among many other things, the Emperor in that Edict did particularly and
expressly condemn Theodorus of Mopsvestia with his doctrines, the writings of
Theodoret against Cyril, and that most impious Epistle of Ibas, accursing Si
quis desendit Theodorum, etc. anathema sit. Edict. pa. 496.
all these as heretical, and all those, who either had heretofore, or should
thereafter maintain or defend them, or any one of them.

8. But notwithstanding all this, which the Emperor with great prudence, piety
and zeal performed, very many, even some of those who bare the names of
orthodoxall and Catholic Bishops, were so far from consenting to this Imperial
Edict, and the Catholic truth delivered therein, that they openly oppugned his
Edict, and defended the Three Chapters (by him condemned and anathematized) by
words, by writings, by all means which they could devise, publishing libels
and bitter invectives against it and the Emperor himself also. He seeing so
general a disturbance in his Empire, and the whole Church to be in a
combustion about this cause, to end and quiet all, used that which is the best
and last public means which is left to the Church for deciding any doubt or
controversy of faith, and of purpose to determine this so weighty a cause
(whether those Three Chapters were to be condemned or allowed) he assembled
this fifth and holy general Council, whereof, God assisting us, we are now to
entreat.

CAP. II. That the Fifth General Council, when Pope Vigilius refused to come
unto it, was held without the Popes presence therein, either by himself or by
his Legates.
1. THat this Council was celebrated when Pope Vigilius was at Constantinople;
that he was once, again, often and earnestly, invited to the Synod, but
wilfully refused to be present either personally or by his deputies, the Acts
of the Council do abundantly witness. The holy Synod said Coll. 2. pa. 524.
a.
thus, Saepius petivimus. We have often entreated the most holy Pope Vigilius;
to come together with us and make a determination of these matters. Again, the
holy Synod said, Col. 1. pa. 521. b. and Coll. 8 pa. 584. b.
The most glorious Judges and certain of us (saepius adhortati sunt Vigilium)
have often exhorted Vigilius, to come and debate and make an end of this cause
touching the Three Chapters. Neither did they only invite, exhort, and entreat
him; but in the Emperors name they commanded him to come to the Synod: We being
present (said Coll. 2. pa. 524. a.
the Bishops, who were sent unto him) Liberius, Peter, and Patricius,
proposuerunt Iussionem pijssimi Imperatoris sanctissimo Papae, proposed to the
most holy Pope Vigilius the command of the most holy Emperor. If all this seem
not enough, the Emperor himself testifies Epist. Justin. ad Conc. Coll. 1.
pa. 520. a.
the same, Mandavimus illi, we have commanded Vigilius, both by our Judges, and
by certain of your selves (he writ this to the Synod) ut una cum omnibus
conveniret, that he should come together with all the rest, in common to debate
and determine this cause touching the Three Chapters.

2. What Pope Vigilius did, after so many invitations, entreaties, and
commands, Card. Bellarmine does declare, The Pope, says he, Lib 1. de Conc.
ca. 5. Coacta.
neque per se, neque per legatos interfuit, was not present in the Council
either by himself, or by his legates. And more clearly in another place, The
Pope, says he, Lib. eod. 19. Add.
was then at Constantinople, sed noluit interesse, but he would not be present
in the Council. Binius testifies Notis in Conc. genesis 5. Praesedit.
the same. At the fifth Council Vigilius was not present either by himself or
by his deputies. And Baronius, The Pope (says he) Anno 553. nu. 29.
noluit interesse, would not be present either by himself, or by any to supply
his place. And this Cardinal adds Ibid. nu. 31.
not without some choler, The members assembled without the head, nulla Vigilij
agrotantis adhuc habita ratione, having no regard at all to Pope Vigilius then
sick.

3. What? does the Card. complain that they had no regard of him, when
himself a little before professes, noluit interesse, he himself was not
willing to be present? Or had they no regard of him when before ever they
assembled or sat in the Synod, they writ an Epistle Epist. Eutychij ad
Vigilium lecta Coll. 1. ideoque missa ante inchoatum Synodu^.
unto him entreating his presence, and with their own request, signified Et
primo die instantis Maij pervenimus ad Vigilium: -- Diximus, Pijssimus Dominus
vult te una cum alijs co^venire: proposucrunt jussionem pijssimi Imperatoris.
Coll. 2. pa. 523. b. 524. a. Concilium vero coepit 4. die Maij. Coll. 1.
the Emperors command, will, and pleasure to him, that he should come together
with the rest? when after they were assembled in the Synod, they so often, so
earnestly invited, and even entreated him to come together with them? when they
whom they sent to invite him were no mean, no ordinary messengers neither for
their number nor dignity, but twenty reverend Bishops, all of them
Metropolitanes, as the Cardinal Missi sunt qui cum vocarent Episcopi numero
viginti, ijdemque Metropolitani. Bar. an. 553. nu. 35.
both knew, and acknowledged, and the Synodall acts Coll. 1. and 1. nam in
utraque missi sunt.
do witness, and of those twenty, three were Patriarks, Eutychius, of
Constantinople, Apollinarius, of Alexandria, and Domninus, of Antioch? Was this
a sign that they had no regard of Vigilius? when besides all this, in token of
their most earnest desire of his presence, among diverse other they proposed two
most effectual reasons to induce him to come. The one, the promise of
Presidencie among them, which so far as in them lay, they offered unto him,
saying, Coll. 1. pa. 521. a.
Petimus praesidente nobis vestra beatitudine, we entreat that your holiness
being present in this Synod, the question may be debated and have an end: The
other (which should not only in equity, but even in common honesty have
prevailed with a Pope) for that himself had promised and that under his own
handwriting, that he would come to the Synod: we told him (said Coll. 2. pa.
523. b.
the Bishop) your holiness knows, quod in his quae inter nos in scriptis
facta sunt, promisistis; that in those things which were done in writing
betwixt us, you have promised to come together with the rest and discuss these
three Chapters. And again, we entreated his reverence (say the whole Synod)
Coll. 8. pa. 584. a
scriptas suas promissiones adimplere; to perform that which in his writing he
had promised.

4. Had they no regard of sick Vigilius, whose infirmity being signified to the
Synod at their first session, they forthwith concluded that Session, saying,
Coll. 1. in fine.
Oportet, we must defer the examination of the cause to another day? And
whereas the Pope Postero die pollicitus est manifestare, quod ei de tali
conventu placuerit. Coll. 1.
promised to give them an answer the next day, then because his qualme was
overpast, he found new excuses for his absence: one because Ille respondit non
posse nobiscum convenire, eo quod plurimi quide^ hic sunt Orientales Episcopi,
pauci vero cum eo. Coll. 2. pa. 523. a.
there was but a few western Bishops then present with them; another because
Dicebat sacere se per semetipsum in scriptis, and offerre Imperatori, ideo enim
and inducias se postulasse ab ejus serenitate. Ibid.
he would himself alone declare his judgment in writing, and offer it to the
Emperor, for which cause he had entreated respite for certain days of his
highness. Both which were in truth nothing else but mere prete^ces, as the
Bishops the^ sent, manifestly declared unto him. For both the Emperor, said
they, vult te in co^muni convenire; will have you to come together with the
rest, and therefore he ought not to have given his sentence alone but in common
and in the Synod: and for his other excuse, Baronius Eam suae absentia causam
pratexuisse. an. 553. nu. 36.
himself doubts not to call that a pretense: for so it was indeed, seeing as
the Bishops truly told Nec in sanctis 4. Synodis multitudo Occidentalium
Episcoporum inventa est unquam, sed duo vel tres Episcopi. Col. 2. pa. 523. b.
him, in none of the former Councils there was any multitude of Western
Bishops, but only two or three, and some Clerks, whereas at that time, there
were present with the Pope at Constantinople Nunc vero adsunt multi ex Jtalia
Episcopi, sunt etiam ex Africa, and ex Illyrico. Ibid.
many Italian Bishops, others out of Africa, others out of Illirium, for their
number more then had been in all the four former Councills; whereupon they
plainly and truly told Ibid. Col. 2.
the Pope to his face, Nihil est quod prohibet vos convenire una nobiscum;
there is no sufficient or allowable cause to stay you from coming to the Synod
together with us: not sickness, not want of Western Bishops, Nihil est, there
is nothing else at all but an unwilling mind. So extraordinary respect had they
of the Pope at this time, and so earnest were they to have him present in the
Synod, of whom Baronius without any regard of truth shamed not to say, that
they assembled having no respect at all unto sick Vigilius.

5. The true reason which made the Pope so unwilling to be present in the
Synod, and why Noluit interesse, was indeed his heretical affection and
adversnes from the truth in this cause of the Three Chapters. He saw the
Catholic Bishops, then assembled, to be bent and forward (as their duty was)
for condemning those Chapters, which himself embraced and defended: he
therefore thought it fit to separate himself from them in place, from whom in
judgment and in the doctrine of says he was so far disjoined and severed.
This to have been the only true cause of his wilful absence and of his
Noluit interesse the sequel of this Treatise will make most evident. For this
time it is sufficient, by all those honorable invitations, earnest persuasions,
and Imperial commands, to have declared that as the holy Synod for their part
was most desirous of his presence, so he not only was absent, but in mere
stomach, wilfulness and perverseness, absented himself from the Holy
Council at this time.

CAP. III. That Pope VIGILIVS, during the time of the fifth Council, published
his Apostolical Constitution in defense of the Three Chapters.
1. WHen Pope Vigilius remaining then at Constantinople where the Council was
held, by no entreaties, persuasions nor Imperial commands could be brought to
the Synod, having no other let, as before was declared, but his own
wilfulness, the holy Synod resolved Deo juvante, futuro die convenientes, qu^
oportet. agemus. Col. 2. in fine
without him to debate and judge the Controversy then referred unto them. And
in truth what else was to be done in that case? The Emperor commanded Celeriter
de ^bis quae interrogavimus vestram manifestate voluntatem. Just. ep. ad Synod.
Col. 1. pa. 520. b:
them not to delay nor protract the time, but deliver a speedy, yet withal a
sound and true judgment in that cause. The necessity of the Church required
this, which was now in a general Ob tria capitula fideles fuerunt scissi atque
schismate separati. Bar. an. 547. nu. 29.
tumult and Schism about those Three Chapters. The Nestorians on one side
triumphed as if the Council of Chalcedon had approved the Epistle of Ibas, and
thereby confirmed their heresies. The Acephali on another side rejected that
Council, as favoring the Nestorians by approving that impious Epistle. The
wavering Hesitantes were in a maze, not knowing which way to turn themselves,
whether allow the Council of Chalcedon with the Nestorians, or with the
Acephali reject it. The Catholics against all these Sectaries, both defended
the Council of Chalcedon, and yet rejected that impious Epistle and the two
other Chapters. In such a general rent and contention of all sides, what delay
could the Church endure? which the Council rightly considering, Nec enim
justum est vel Jmperatorem vel fidele^ populum ex dilatione scandalizari. Co.
2. p. 533. b
said, That it was not just nor fit by delaying their judgment, to suffer
either the Emperor or the faithful people any longer to be scandalized. And for
the absence of Vigilius, they knew right well that which Card. Cusanus very
truly observes, Alioqui si expectatus non mitteret, vel non veniret, vel
nollet, Concilium congregatum suae necessitati, and Ecclesiae saluti providera
debet. lib. 2. de Concord. Cath. cap. 1.
that if the Pope, being invited, did not, or would not come, or send to a
Synod, but wilfully refused to come, in this case the Council without him must
provide for the peace of the Church and safety of the Christian faith. They had
a very memorable example hereof, as yet but fresh before their eyes, when the
Popes legates being present at Chalcedon were Regavimus dominos Episcopos de
Roma, ut communicarent ijs gestis. Conc. Chalc. act. 16. pa. 134. a.
invited and entreated to be present at the Synod there held (which was the
very next before this) at the debating of the right and preeminence of the Sea
of Constantinople but wilfully refused to be there, saying Ibid.
(as Vigilius now did) Non, sed alia se suscepisse mandata, No, we will not
come, we have a contrary command from pope Leo, yet that holy Council of
Chalcedon handled and defined, that cause in their absence, and their
determination, notwithstanding the Popes absence, was not only declared Viri
illustrissimi Iudices dixerunt, quod interlocuti sumus tota Synodus approbavit.
Ibid. pa. 137. b.
by the most glorious Judges to be just and Synodall, but the same was both by
that holy Synod, and all other ever since, held to be the judgment and
definition of the whole general Council: for in their Synodal relation to the
Pope, speaking of this very decree, they say, Ibid. pa. 140. a.
Confirmavimus ante, we (to wit, this whole general Council) have confirmed
the sentence of the 150. Bishops for the prerogative of Constantinople. A most
clear and undeniable demonstration, and that by the warrant of one of the most
famous Councils that ever were, that the peevishnes, perverseness, or wilful
absence of one or a few Bishops, yea of the Pope himself, ought not, nor could
not hinder a Synod to judge and determine any needful cause; much less a cause
of faith about which there should happen (as now there did) a general
disturbance of the whole Church. Upon these and other like reasons the holy
Synod now assembled at Constantinople, having done as much as in them lay, Cum
nos per omnia, quod decet, and servavimus and servamus, and saepius petivimus
Vigilium. Col. 2. pa. 524. a.
yea, k as much in all points as was fit to be done for procuring the presence
of Vigilius, and having in their first and second Sessions done nothing but
waited and expected for his coming; seeing now all their invitations and
entreaties to be contemned by him, and their longer expectance to be but in
vain, address themselves to the examining of the cause, being stird Pa.
eadem. b.
up by the words of St. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Peter, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of your hope, which readiness if it must be in all Christians, much
Incongruum aute^ Sacerdotibus esse putanies protrahere dandum a nobis responsum
Christianissimo Imperatori. pa. eadem.
more in Bishops: and if it must be declared toward all men, most of all
toward the Emperor, who now required their speedy judgment and Synodall
resolution in this cause.

2. Having in their first and second Sessions declared their long and earnest,
but vain expectance of Vigilius, In their third Collation (so their Sessions
are called) they set down as a foundation to all their future acts, a most
holy confession of their faith, consonant in all points to that which the holy
Apostles preached, which the four former Councils explained, and which the
Holy Fathers with uniforme consent maintained.

3. In the 4. and 5. Collations, they at large and very exactly discuss the
first Chapter, concerning the person and writings of Theodorus B. of
Mopsvestia, adding so much also as was needful touching the second Chapter,
which concerned the writings of Theodoret against Cyril.

4. Now in that fifth Collation, as Baronius tells Vigilij libellus oblatus
Synod. Bar. an. 553. nu. 47.
us, the Constitution of Pope Vigilius touching the Three Chapters was brought
unto the Synod. The Pope promised Ibid.
that he would send his judgment thereof, ad ipsum Imperatorem, atque ad
Synodum; both to the Emperor, and to the Synod; which he ingenuously performed;
yea An. eod. nu. 48
, modo opportune praestandum putavit, he did it opportunely at this very time
of the 5. Collation: And the Card. is so resolute in this point, that he
peremptorily affirms of the Popes Constitution, Cognoscitur, Jbid.
its known to pertain to this very day of their fifth Collation: and it Anno
eod. nu. 41.
was this day offered to the Council: for which cause he strongly imagining
this Constitution Constitutum hoc ex actis 5. Synode^ nos^itur esse sublatum.
an. eod. nu. 47.
to be stolen out of the Synodall acts now extant, is bold to insert Cum ad
hunc ipsum annum et dies Collationis 5. pertinere cognoscitur. Ibid. nu. 48.
it into the 5. Collation; as into his own due and proper place, wherein it
was, and now ought to be.

5. The Card. is too confident about the day when it was sent to the Synod, as
also in his adding this Constitution to the Acts of the Synod, as hereafter in
due place will appear. Thus much is certain and evident by the Synodall acts,
that this Constitution of Vigilius was made known to the Bishops of this holy
Council, before their sixth Collation, for in that sixth, diverse things are
expressed, which have a clear and undoubted reference to the Popes decree, as
containing a refutation of the same, and herein the Card. says truly, The An.
553. nu. 210.
decree of Vigilius was first sent to the Emperor, and from him to the Synod,
as by the sixth Collation may be perceived, wherein those things which the Pope
had alleged for defense of the Epistle of Ibas, are refuted.

6. As for the dignity, credit and authority of this writing, it is neither any
ordinary nor private instruction, but as the Pope himself calls it, a
Constitution, Quae praesenti statuimus Constituto. Vig. Constable. apud Bar an.
553. nu. 208.
a Statute, Statuimus et decernimus. ibid.
a Decree, a Definition, Post praesentem definitionem. ibid.
or Definitive sentence: and by the name of a Constitution, it is subscribed
unto, both by the Pope Vigilius Episcopus huic Constituto nostre subscripsi.
ib. nu. 209.
and all Johannes Marso^num huic Constituto subscripsi, and alij similiter.
ibid.
the rest of his Assembly; and for such it is commended by Card. Ann. 553. nu.
47.
Baronius and Binius Vigilij Papae Constitutum. Bin. in Fragm. 5. Conc. pa. 591.
. In it the Pope delivers his Apostolical sentence and Judgment touching
the Three Chapters, this being Hunc ipsum esse scias, quem de sua sententia
interpellatus, pollicitus est se missurum ad Jmperatorem. Bar. ann. 553. nu. 47.
that very same answer which Vigilius promised to send to the Emperor, and for
the advised setting down whereof, he Constable. Vigit. nu. 58.
requested of the Emperor the respite of twenty days. During which time he did
insudare and laborare, as the Card. says, Ann. 553. nu. 28.
with much sweat and toil elaborate this large decree, (containing no less
Apud Bar. nu. 553 a nu. 50. ad 210.
then thirty six columes in folio) that it might in every respect, and for the
exact handling of so weighty a cause, be correspondent to the gravity and
authority of his infallible Chair, specially seeing he set it forth of
purpose, that it might be notified Bar. an. 553. nu. 47
not only to the Emperor and the Synod then assembled, sed universo orbi
Catholico, but to the whole Catholic Church, as a public direction in faith
for them all; in which kind of teaching, nullo casu errare potest, says Card.
Bellarmine, Lib. 4. de Pont. Romans ca. 3. Sit.
the Pope can by no means be possibly deceived. For this cause also Vigilius
at this time, and in this business, used the help and advice of a Synod,
consisting of Italian, Africane, and Illyrian Bishops, then present with him at
Constantinople, sixteen Bishops beside himself, and three Roman Deacons.
These all consented with the Pope, and subscribed Vide subscriptiones loc. cit.
nu. 209.
to his Constitution; and in theirs was included the consent of the Africane,
of the Illyrian, of the Italian, and other Western Churches, even of the
Church of Rome also, who all at this time agreed in judgment about the Three
Chapters with the Pope, as Card. Baronius professes O^cidentales perstabant in
sententia qua semper fuerant pro trium defensione capitulorum. an. 547 nu. 39.
. So deliberate and advised was the Pope in this cause, that his resolution
herein is not only a Pontifical, but a Synodall Sentence also, yea a Decree
and definitive judgment delivered by the Pope, as himself expressly
witnesses, Vigilij Constable. apud Bar. loc. cit. nu. 209.
Ex authoritate sedis Apostolicae; by the authority of the Apostolic sea, an
whole Synod of Bishops (the Western Churches consenting with them) subscribing
to the same, for their number, well-neere In Sess. 1. Conc. Trid. Archiepiscopi
and Episcopi non plures quam 26. ut ex actis liquet.
as many, as there were Bishops present in some Sessions of their Oecumenicall
Council at Trent.

7. This Apostolical Constitution, which had long laid in obscurity, about
some 18. years since was brought to light, and first Bar. an. 553. nu. 48.
of al published by Card. Baronius to the open view of the world, copied by him
out of an ancient Ibidem.
manuscript in their Vaticane, where still it is kept: and more then half of
it, is set out by Binius To. 2. pa. 591.
, annexed as a fragment to the fifth general Council. But for what good
purpose Binius clipped away the residue, being a great (no less then five or six
columes in folio) and by far the most needful part of the Popes Decree,
thereby not only injuring the Popes Holiness, and deluding the world, but
foully maiming and disgracing his own Tomes of the Councils, you will easily
perceive hereafter.

8. The sum and effect of the Popes Constitution is the Defense of those
three Chapters, which the Emperor by his most religious Edict had condemned and
accursed. The Pope, says Baronius, An. 553. nu. 218.
during the time of the Synod, set forth Decretum pro defensione trium
Capitulorum, his decree for defense of the Three Chapters. Again, Ibid. nu.
218.
Vigilius made known to the whole Church pro Tribus Capitulis Constitutum a se
editum, his Constitution published in defense of the Three Chapters. Again,
Ibid. nu. 272.
pro ipsorum defensione laborat; Vigilius labored for defense of the Three
Chapters. But the Constitution it self makes this most evident.

9. Concerning the first Chapter, whether Theodorus (being dead more then an
hundred years before this Council) ought to be condemned, Vigilius thus
decreed, Nulli Vigilij Constable. apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 179.
licere noviter aliquid de mortuorum judicare personis, That it is not lawful
for any to judge ought anew of those persons who are dead, that is, not to
condemn those, who, as Vigilius explaining himself says, Ibid. nu. 176.
minime reperiuntur in vita damnati, are not found to have been condemned
while they lived. This for the generality of the dead: particularly for
Theodorus B. of Mopsvestia he thus decreed Ibid. nu. 179.
, Seeing the holy Fathers had not, (as he says) condemned him, eum nostra non
audemus damnare sententia, we dare not condemn him by our sentence, sed nec ab
alio quopiam condemnari concedimus; neither do we permit that any other shall
condemn him.

10. For the second Chapter which concerns the writings of Theodoret against
Cyrill, Vigilius was so tender of the credit of Theodoret, that he would by no
means permit his name to be blemished by co^demning his writings, seeing as he
says, Jbid. nu. 181.
neither Cyril himself, nor after him the Council of Chalcedon had condemned
them. Nay Vigilius further adds, Nu. 180.
that it is valde contrarium and indubitanter inimicum; very contrary and
undoubtedly repugnant to the judgment of the Council at Chalcedon, to
condemn any Nestorian doctrines under the name of Theodoret. Whereupon he
definitively decrees in this manner Nu. 182.
; Statutimus atque decernimus, we ordain and decree that no injury or slander
shall by any man be raised, or uttered against Theodoret, sub taxatione nominis
ejus, by taxing of his name. So Vigilius, decreeing that the condemning of
those writings of Theodoret against Cyril, is an injury to Theodoret.

11. The third Chapter (which indeed is the most material, but withal most
intricate and obscure) concerns the Epistle written against Cyril and the holy
Ephesine Synod, by Ibas B. of Edessa unto Maris a Persian and an Heretic: the
copy whereof is set down in the 10. Action of the Council at Chalcedon, and
repeated in the 6. Collation of this fifth Council: What the Pope decrees
herein, Baronius does declare, who explaining the words and meaning of
Vigilius, says, Ann. 553. nu. 191
That the Fathers of Chalcedon, dixerunt eam Epistolam ut Catholicam
recipiendam; said that this Epistle of Ibas was to be received as Catholic;
and further adds, Ibid. nu. 196.
Ex ea Ibam comprabatum essa Catholicum; that by this Epistle Ibas himself was
proved to be a Catholic, yea that An. 448. nu. 71.
he was so proved by the consenting judgment of all the Bishops at Chalcedon.
So Baronius.

12. This to have been indeed the true meaning of Pope Vigilius, his own
words in his Constitution make manifest. There he first sets down the ground
of his sentence, and that was the sayings of Pascasinus and Maximus in the
Council at Chalcedon. The Constable. Vigil. loco citato nu. 187.
Popes legates said by Pascasinus, Relecta ejus epistola agnovimus eum
orthodoxum; By the Epistle of Ibas now read, we acknowledge him to be
orthodoxall: Maximus said, Ibid. nu. 189.
Ex relecto rescripto epistolae, orthodoxa est ejus declarata dictatio; by the
Epistle of Ibas now read, his Epistle or writing is declared to be orthodoxall.
Vigilius grounding himself on these two speeches, collects and sets down two
positions of his own, concerning this third Chapter; The former, that the
Council of Chalcedon approved that Epistle of Ibas as orthodoxall; to which
purpose he says, the Ibid. nu. 192.
Fathers of the Council at Chalcedon, Ibid. nu. 193.
Epistolam pronunciantes orthodoxam, pronounced this Epistle to be orthodoxall:
and yet more plainly, Orthodoxa est Iba a patribus pronunciata dictatio; the
Epistle or writing of Ibas was pronounced orthodoxall by the Fathers at
Chalcedon; The other, that by this Epistle they judged Ibas to be a Catholic;
to which purpose Vigilius writes thus, Iuvenalis would never have said that
Ibas was a Catholic, nisi ex verbis epistolae ejus confessionem fidei
orthodoxam comprobaret, Unless by the words of his Epistle he had proved his
faith to be orthodoxall, which words evidently show that Vigilius thought in
like sort all the Bishops at Chalcedon to have judged the same by the words of
that Epistle, for it is certain that they all embraced Ibas himself for a
Catholic.

13. Hereupon now ensues the Definitive sentence of Vigilius touching this
Chapter, in this manner: Ibid. nu. 196.
We following the judgment of the holy Fathers in all things, seeing it is a
most clear and shining truth, ex verbis Epistolae venerabilis Ibae; by the
words of the Epistle of the reverend B. Ibas, being taken in their most right
and godly sense, and by the acts of Photius and Eustathius, and by the meaning
of Ibas being present, that the Fathers at Chalcedon did most justly pronounce
the faith of this most reverend Bishop Ibas to be orthodoxall, we decree by the
authority of this our present sentence, that the Judgment of the Fathers at
Chalcedon ought to remain inviolable, both in all other things, and in this
Epistle of Ibas so often mentioned. Thus Vigilius: decreeing both that this
Epistle of Ibas is Catholic, and that by it and by the words thereof, Ibas
ought to be judged a Catholic; both which he decrees upon this ground, that
the Council of Chalcedon (as he supposes) had judged the same.

14. In the end, to ratify and confirm all that concerns any of these Three
Chapters in the Popes Decree, he adds this very remarkable conclusion; Ibid.
nu. 208.
His igitur a nobis cum omni undique cautela atque diligentia dispositis; These
things being now with all diligence, care and circumspection disposed,
Statuimus et decernimus, we ordain and decree, that it shall be lawful for
none pertaining to Orders and ecclesiastical dignities, either to write, or
speak, or teach any thing touching these three Chapters, contrary to these
things which by this our present Constitution we have taught and decreed: aut
aliquam post praesentem definitionem movere ulterius quaestione^, neither shall
it be lawful for any, after this our present definition, to move any question
touching these Three Chapters. But if any thing concerning these Chapters be
either done, said, or written, or shall hereafter be done, said, or written
contrary to that which we have here taught and decreed, hoc modis omnibus ex
authoritate sedis Apostolicae refutamus; we by all means do reject it by the
Authority of the Apostolic See, whereof by Gods grace we have now the
government. So Vigilius.

15. Think ye not now, that any Papist considering this so advised, elaborate
and Apostolical decree of Pope Vigilius, will be of opinion that there was now
a final end of this matter, and that all doubt concerning these Three Chapters
was for ever now removed: seeing the supreme Judge had published for a
direction to the whole Church his definitive, Apostolical, and infallible
sentence in this cause, what needs the Council either to judge, or so much
as debate this matter after this Decree? To define the same was needless, more
then to light a candle when the Sun shines in his strength. To define the
contrary, were Heretical: yea after such an authentical decision and
determination, to be doubtful Dubious in fide infidelis est. lib. 5. Dec. tit.
7. de haereticis.
only what to believe, has the censure of an Infidel. But thrice happy was
it for the Church of God, that this doctrine of the Popes supreme authority
and infallible Judgment, was not then either known or believed. Had it been,
the Nestorians and their heresy had for ever prevailed, the Catholic faith
had been utterly extinguished, and that without all hope or possibility ever
after this to have been revived, seeing Vigilius by his Apostolical
authority had stopped all men's mouths from speaking, tied their hands from
writing, yea and their very hearts from believing or thinking ought contrary to
his Constitution made in defense of the Three Chapters, wherein he has
confirmed all the Blasphemies of Nestorius, and that by a Decree more
irrevocable then those of the Medes and Persians. Had the holy Council, at that
time assembled, believed or known that doctrine of the Popes supremacy and
infallible Judgment, they would not have proceeded one inch further in that
business, but shaking hands with Heretics, they and the whole Church with
them, had been led in triumph by the Nestorians at that time, under the
conduct of Pope Vigilius.

16. And by this you may conjecture that Binius had great reason to conceal
the later part of the Popes decree, for he might well think, as any papist
will, that it were a foul incongruitie to set down three entire Sessions of
an holy and general Council, not only debating this controversy of faith
about the Three Chapters, but directly also contradicting the Popes definitive
sentence in them all, notwithstanding they knew the Pope by his Apostolical
authority to have delivered his Judgment, and by the same authority to have
forbidden all men either to write, or speak, or to move any doubt to the
contrary, of that which he had now decreed. But let us see by a view of the
particulars and of their following Sessions, how this Cathedral sentence of
the Pope was entertained by the holy general Council.

CAP. 4. That the holy general Council in their Synodall Judgment
contradicted the Popes Apostolical Constitution and definitive sentence, in
that cause of faith, made known unto them.
1. IN the sixth, which was the very next Sessions after they had known the
Popes will and pleasure, contrary to the Apostolical authority and command of
Vigilius, the Holy Synod began to examine the Epistle of Ibas: for the causes
of Theodorus and of Theodoret were sufficiently discussed in their former
Collations. And first of all, alleging a saying of the Emperor (to which
themselves do assent) they thus say, which being well observed gives light to
the whole cause and opens both the error of Vigilius and the ground thereof.
Because Col. 6. pa. 561. a.
the most holy Emperor added among those things which he writ unto us, that
some indevouring to defend the Epistle of Ibas, presume to say that it was
approved by the holy Council of Chalcedon, using the words of one or two most
religious Bishops, who were in that Council, as spoken for that Epistle, cum
alij omne^, whereas all the rest were of another mind, we think it needful,
this question being proposed, to recite the Epistle of Ibas. Thus said the
Synod, even at the first, calling the Popes judgment Presumption, and checking
him both for pretending the Council of Chalcedon, and for alleging the
Interlocutions of one or two, as the Judgment of that Council. For, that the
whole Synod consented to that speech of the Emperor, appears both by their
own words, where they show this to be so odious an untruth, that they all
cried out against it, saying, Col. 6. pa. 576. b.
The Decree of the Council at Chalcedon condemns this Epistle, he that
receives this Episte rejects the Council at Chalcedon: and, by those
speeches of Theodorus Bishop of Cesarea, Andreas Bishop of Ephesus, and others,
to which the whole Sancta Synodus dixit, Scimus et nos hae^ ita consequuta
esse. Col. 6. p. 564. a.
Synod assented, Quomodo Col. 6. pa. 563. b.
praesumunt quidam dicere, How do any presume to say, that this impious Epistle
of Ibas was approved by the Council of Chalcedon? And again, Miramur quomodo,
we do even marvel that any will defend this Epistle by the name of the
Council at Chalcedon: and yet more sharply reproving Vigilius with others, for
using so deceitful a proof, they add, Astutia enim haereticae utentes, for
they (who so say of the Council at Chalcedon) using the fraud and subtilitie
of heretics, do produce the Interlocutions of one or two, as spoken for that
Epistle, whereas this is to be set down for a certain rule, that in
Councills, non unius aut secandi interloquutionem attendere oportet, the
speeches of one or two must not be attended, but what is defined by all, or by
the greater part of the Council. And yet further expressing their dislike of
that fallacious and sophistical reason which Vigilius herein used, the whole
Council said, The holy Coll. 6. p. 576. a.
Fathers at Chalcedon did, pro nihilo habere, quae ab uno vel duobus pro eadem
Epistola dicta sunt, did esteem as nothing, or made no reckning at all of
those things which were spoken for that Epistle by one or two; And those one or
two were Pascasinus and Maximus, on whose interlocutions the Pope, as you have
formerly seen, grounded his decree, concerning this Chapter; and if the proof
be of so small account by the judgment of that most holy Council, it
inevitably follows, that the Decree of Vigilius which wholly (for this
Chapter) relyeth on this proof, is no better then the ground thereof, that is
in very deed, worth nothing at all.

2. Now that all this is purposely spoken against Vigilius and his Constitution
(which before this 6 Collation was made known unto them) beside that it is
evident by the Acts themselves, seeing the Council does exactly mention, and
refute all the principal points on which Vigilius does insist, Baronius does
not only profess, but truly, upon this reason, does prove the same: for
entreating of this 6. Session, and mentioning the contents thereof, This was
done, says he, An. 553. nu. 112.
as is evident, against the Constitution of Pope Vigilius (although for
reverence they do not name him) and partly also they excuse him, partly they
reprove him, using especially this argument, Because in Councils we must not
attend what one or two say, but what is defined by all or the most. Thus
Baronius; who as he truly acknowlegeth the Council herein to have dealt against
Vigilius and his Decree, so in the other points, he bewrayes too great
partiality toward Vigilius, for the Council is so far from excusing the
pope, that neither Baronius could, nor any of his friends shall be ever able to
show that excuse: And for their not naming of Vigilius, it proceeded not from
any reverence they bare unto him (though in every respect they gave him all
honor that was due to him, or his place) but the true reason thereof was this,
because they neither did, nor thought it fit to name any one of those, whom
they did condemn, but without mention of their names in particular, condemned
them all under one general Appellation of, Sequaces Definitio Synod. Col. 8.
pa. 586. a. Defensores Nestorij and ejus impietatis, Ibid. pa. 585. b. Theodori
discipuli. Ibid. and saepe alibi.
Nestorij et Theodori, the followers of Nestorius and Theodorus, their
Disciples, or defenders which titles they saw the Emperor to have used and
given unto them before, both in his Edict, Theodori and Nestorij sequaces. pa.
497. a.
and in his Nestorij sequaces. pa. 519. b.
Epistle to the Synod, which common names to have as fitly and truly agreed to
Pope Vigilius as to any else, the Council knew right well, seeing in every
point concerning these Three Chapters, he wholly agreed with them all. The
Theodori and Nestorij defensores dicebant, etc. Col. 8. pa. 585. b. Et
praesumunt dicere, Col. 6. pa. 561. a. and Col. 8. pa. 586. a.
followers of Theodorus and Nestorius pretended, and presumed to say, that the
Council of Chalcedon approved the Epistle of Ibas: Vigilius pretended, and
presumed to say the same; The Fathers at Chalcedon (says he) pronounced Constable.
Vig. apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 192
the Epistle of Ibas to be Orthodoxall. The followers of Col. 8. pa. 586. a.
Theodorus and Nestorius fraudulently used the Interlocutions of one or two, as
the An. 553. nu. 212.
Judgment of the whole Council at Chalcedon. Vigilius used the very same
fraud, and for this very cause, as the Cardinal confesses, is reproved by the
Council. Seeing then, Vigilius did at this time, and in this cause, walk hand
in hand, and step by step with the other followers of Theodorus and Nestorius;
The holy Council judged it most fit and sufficient (as it was indeed) to
refuse and condemn both him and his Constitution, by that common name which
agreed to all the rest, with whom in one common doctrine, both for his position
and proofs thereof, he fully conspired.

3. The holy Council having now fully discovered the error of the Popes
position, and the fallacious proof which he used to uphold the same, proceeds
to refute his very definitive sentence, prooving that neither the Epistle of
Ibas is to be received as Catholic, neither that by it Ibas was, or ought to
be judged a Catholic, which were the two maine points of the Popes Decree
touching this Chapter. For declaring both these, they diligently examined the
whole Epistle, and found it in every part to be heretical and blasphemous. But
for the more clear demonstration hereof, as also how untruly and unjustly
Vigilius, and the other followers of Nestorius pretended, that it was received
as orthodoxall by the Council at Chalcedon, they thought it not sufficient to
lay open the several impieties of that Epistle, considered by it self, but
making a comparison or Collation betwixt it and the holy Council at Chalcedon,
they set, in a direct opposition, the most holy and Catholic truths decreed at
Chalcedon, against the blasphemous impieties and heresies contained in that
Epistle of Ibas. The sum of which Collations, or of some of them, I will here
briefly propose out of the Synodall acts, referring the Reader for the full
notice of them all, to the Acts themselves, wherein they are at large, exactly,
and excellently Col. 6. pa. 575. and seq.
delivered.

4. I. The holy Council of Chalcedon professes GOD to be incarnate, and made
man: The Epistle calls them Heretics and Apollinarians, who say that GOD
was incarnate or made Man.

II. The holy Synod professes the blessed Virgin to be the Mother of GOD: The
Epistle denies the Virgin Mary to be the Mother of GOD.

III. The holy Council embraced that form of Faith which was declared in the
first Ephesine Synod, and anathematizeth Nestorius: The Epistle defends
Nestorius, injureth, nay rejects, Primam Ephesinam Synodum reprobat haec
Epistola. Col. 6. pa. 563. a.
the holy Ephesine Council, as if it had condemned Nestorius without due
trial of his cause.

IV. The holy Council commends Cyrill of blessed memory, and approves his
Synodall Epistles, in one of which are contained those his 12. Chapters by
which he condemned the heresy of Nestorius: The Epistle calls Cyrill an
heretic, and his 12. Chapters it terms impious.

V. The Holy Council professes their faith to be the same with Cyrils, and
accurseth those who believe otherwise: The Epistle says of Cyrill, and those
who believed as he did, that they were confounded, and recanted their former
doctrine.

VI. The holy Council accurseth those, who either make, or deliver any other
Creed, then that which was expounded at the great Nicen Syond: The Epistle does
extol Theodorus, who besides innumerable blasphemies, made another Creed,
wherein he teaches the Word of God to be one person, and Christ another
person, accursing all, who do not embrace that his new Creed. This is that
Creed of Theodorus, against which (being openly read before in the fourth
Collation) the holy Council exclamed, saying, Pa. 536. a.
the devil himself composed this Creed: Cursed be he that composed this
Creed: Cursed be all those that curse not the composer of this Creed. Of this
it is, that here they witness, that the Epistle of Ibas praises and magnifieth
the author and composer thereof.

VII. The holy Council teaches, that in Christ there are two distinct
natures, yet but one person consisting of both: The Epistle teaches, that as
there are two natures, so also two persons in Christ, and that there is no
personal, but only an affectuall unity of those two persons. Thus far has
the Synod opened, by way of comparison, tho blasphemies of that Epistle, and
the contrary truths decreed at Chalcedon.

5. Now although this Collation does abundantly of it self manifest both the
Impieties of that Epistle, of which Vigilius had decreed, that it ought to be
received as orthodoxall: and how repugnant it is to the Council of Chalcedon,
of which Vigilius had decreed, that it was received as orthodoxall, by those
holy Fathers, yet for more evidence of this truth, the holy Council does in
plain and express terms, express both these points: for after this
comparison they said, Col. 6. pa. 576. a.
This our Collation, does manifestly show, quod contraria per omnia est
Epistola definition; that this Epistle of Ibas is in all and every part thereof
contrary to the definition of faith, which was made at Chalcedon. And again,
We all accurse this Epistle, who so does not accurse this Epistle is an
heretic; who so receives this Epistle is an heretic: who so receives this
Epistle rejects the Council of Chalcedon: who so receives this Epistle
denies God to be made man. Thus said, and cried out the whole Synod with one
voice: accursing (as you plainly see) not only the decree and definitive
sentence of Vigilius as heretical, but Vigilius himself as an heretic, as a
rejecter of the Council of Chalcedon, as a denier that God was incarnate, or
made man.

6. Think ye not that the Council was very unmannerly, daring not only to
talk and write of this Chapter, contrary to the Popes known will and
pleasure, but even to condemn with one consent his sentence for heretical,
and himself for an heretic? Binius was exceeding loath to have it thought,
that a general, lawful, ancient, and approved Council, had so directly
contradicted the Popes Cathedral judgment, and proclaimed to all the world the
Pope to be an heretic, yea a definer of heresy, and that by his Apostolical
authority; and therefore he not knowing any better way to save the Popes
credit, thought it most fit to suppress and dash out that whole passage in the
Popes Constitution, which bewrays this matter: Deleatur, let all that part of
the Constitution of Vigilius be left out; though the omission thereof does
disgrace and maime my edition of the Councils, let the latter part of his
Apostolical sentence lie in obscurity and never see the Sun.

7. Baronius, who (to the eternal infamy of their Popes, of their infallible
Chair, and of their whole religion, which wholly relies thereon) first had the
heart to publish this Heretical decree of Vigilius, devises another medicine
to salve this sore: But avoiding Sylla he falls into Charybdis, a worse gulf
then the other, plunging himself, with the Pope, in a condemned heresy. There
are (as he could not but confess) Ann. 553. nu. 191.
many blasphemies in that Epistle, but none of those, says he, did either the
Council of Chalcedon or Pope Vigilius approve. What then, I pray you, was it,
which his Holiness defended, and approved therein? Forsooth in the end Ibid.
nu. 192.
of the Epistle, Ibas declares that he assented to the covenants of Union
between John and Cyrill, qua recepta, necesse fuit eundem probare catholicum;
which peace and union being embraced by Ibas, he must needs be acknowledged
thereby to be a Catholic. Seeing Ibid. nu. 197.
then, this is understood, and gathered out of it, that after the Union, Ibas
was a Catholic, we may see, ob id non esse explodendam epistolam, sed ad hoc
quod dixi recipiendam, that for this cause the Epistle is not to be rejected,
but to be received, for this purpose, which I said, that by the end of it Ibas
may be proved to be a Catholic. And the Cardinal labors to prove this by two
testimonies, the one is that of Pascasinus, and the other legates of Leo: They
(says he) Ibid. nu. 213.
spoke not amiss, when they said, Epistola illa lecta, Ibam probatum esse
Catholicum, that by that Epistle being read, Ibas was proved to be a Catholic:
The other is that speech of Eunomius B. of Nichomedia, of whom he thus writes,
Ibid.
Hoc plane fuit, this is clearly that which Eunomius said, ipsam Epistolam in
principio apparere haereticam, in fine vero inventam esse Catholicam; that the
Epistle of Ibas by the beginning seems to be heretical, but by the end was
found to be Catholic. Thus Baronius, in defense of that most impious Epistle,
which as he says, by the end of it is found to be orthodoxall and catholic,
and so to be received.

8. What is it to be an heretic, if this be not? Directly to contradict the
judgment of an holy general Council, and defend that writing or part of it
to be Catholic, which in every part the whole Council has defined to be
heretical? The whole Council Haec omnes dicimus, etc. Col. 6. pa. 576. b.
with one voice proclaimed; Tota Epistola haeretica est; Tota Epistola blasphema
est, qui istam suscipit, haereticus est; The whole Epistle is heretical, and
blasphemous, who so receives this Epistle (either in the whole, or in any
part, as themselves expressly affirm Qui dicunt came rectam esse vel partem
ejus. Col. 8. pa. 587. b.
) he is an heretic.

Not so, says the Card. It is not all heretical, It is not all blasphemous:
The latter part of it, is right, holy, and Catholic, by it Ibas was rightly
judged to be a Catholic; That part, at least, is to be received and embraced,
to declare Ibas to be a Catholic. Now though this alone were enough to refute
whatsoever the Cardinal does or can say in this cause, seeing it is all
nothing else, but the saying, nay the cavilling of a convicted heretic,
proclaimed for such by the loud cries of an ancient and holy general Council,
yet for the full manifesting of the truth, I will do the Cardinal that
favor, as to examine both his assertion, and the proofs thereof. And because
I shall hereafter in due place have fit occasion at large (as the obscurity
and intricacy of this cause requires) to discuss the words and declare the
true meaning of Ibas in that part, which the Cardinal does most wilfully and
heretically mistake and pervert, for this time, I will use no other proof
against him, but the clear judgment and consenting testimony of the general
Council, which has professedly refuted this very cavil, which Baronius
borrowed from the ancient heretics of those times. And I am verily persuaded,
that Baronius would never, for very shame of the world, have used this so
untrue, so heretical, and withal a rejected evasion, but that he hoped that
none would compare and examine his writings by the Acts of the Councils, or if
they did, that the fame and credit of Cardinal Baronius his name would
countenance any untruth or Heresy against whatsoever opponents.

9. Is the end of the Epistle of Ibas Catholic? or does that show Ibas to be
a Catholic? The whole Council expressly witnesses the contrary. Our Col. 6.
pa. 576. a.
Collation (say they) does manifestly show that this Epistle of Ibas, contraria
per omnia est Definitioni; is in every part of it contrary to the Definition of
faith made at Chalcedon. This whole Epistle is heretical, and blasphemous.
Again, We have demonstrated (say they) Col. 8. pa. 5.
this Epistle, contrariam esse per omnia; To be in every part of it contrary to
those things which are contained in the Definition of faith made at Chalcedon.
Again, Col. 6. pa. 564. a.
Tota epistola impietatis plena est, the whole Epistle is full of impiety. And
more clearly to our purpose, and against this cavil of Baronius, they add,
Those Ibid.
who say that the former part of this Epistle is impious, but the latter part
or end thereof is right, Calumniatores demonstrantur, such are demonstrated to
be Calumniators or Slanderers, Posteriora enim inserta Epistolae majori
impietate plena sunt, for those things which are set down in the latter part
or end of that Epistle, are more full of greater impiety, injuring Cyrill, and
defending the impious heresy of Nestorius. So by the judgment of the whole
Council, Baronius is not only proved, but even demonstrated to be an Heretic,
and a malicions Caviller, for his defending the latter part of this Epistle to
be right and catholic. And this is al which he has gained by renewing that
old heretical and rejected cavil for defense of Vigilius.

10. But what shall we then say to the proofs of Baronius? what first, to the
Interlocution of the Popes Legates so often and with oftentation mentioned by
the Cardinal? What? Truly the very same which the holy general Council has
said before us, and taught, and warranted all others to say the same. The holy
Fathers at Chalcedon (say they) did these things, pro Col. 6. p^. 576. a.
nihilo habentes ea quae ab uno vel duobus pro eadem Epistola dicta sunt;
esteeming worth nothing at all, those things which were spoken by one or two
for that Epistle. Thus testifies the whole Synod, and themselves follow herein
the judgment of the Fathers at Chalcedon: So by the judgment of two holy and
general Councils, that Interlocution of the Legates of Pope Leo, on which
(after) Vigilius and Baronius relyeth, is worth nothing at all.

11. Yea, but Eunomius, as Baronius tells us, affirms, that though the
beginning of the Epistle be heretical, yet the end of it is found to be
Catholic. Baronius indeed says so of Eunomius; but what truth and honest
dealing there is in Baronius, let the discreet Reader judge by this one saying
among ten thousand the like; Eunomius says not so, Eunomius says the flat
contrary, as in the fifth Council is clearly witnessed; where against this
cavil of the old heretics, whom Baronius follows, they say Col. 6. pa. 564.
a.
thus, Nullam partem epistolae apparet Eunomium comprobasse; it is evident that
Eunomius approved no part at all of this Epistle. And again, Quomodo Ibid.
praesumunt isti defensores calumniari interlocutionem Eunomij: how dare the
defenders of this Epistle presume to slander the Interlocution of Eunomius, as
condemning one part of it, and approving another, seeing the whole epistle is
full of impiety? I say yet more (which will manifest the Councils doom of
Baronius, that he is a malicious caviller, to be most just) Eunomius speaks
not either of the beginning or end of that Epistle in his Interlocution, but
Baronius, according to his wont, foists in that clause (touching the end of the
Epistle) out of his own pate, and thereby falsifieth both the words and
meaning of Eunomius. This in the Council is evidently declared by reciting the
true words of Eunomius out of the Acts Act. 10. p. 116. a
at Chalcedon: which are these; Ex recitatis, Con. 5. Col. 6. pa. 564. a.
By those things which have been read and recited, Ibas is showed to be
innocent: for wherein he seemed to be blameworthy in accusing Cyrill, in
posterioribus, or in postremis, recte confessus, having afterward, or at the
last, made a true confession, he has refuted that wherein he was blamed:
wherefore I also judge him worthy of his Bishoprike if, he accurse Nestorius,
Eutyches, and their wicked heresies, and consent to the writings of Leo, and
this general Council. Thus said Eunomius: wherein there is neither mention
nor intention of that Epistle, neither of the first, middle, nor last part
thereof. But whereas in the Council of Chalcedon, many other Act. 9. and 10.
things, besides that Epistle, were recited touching the cause of Ibas, and
particularly the whole Acts before Photius, Eustathius, and Vranius B. of
Berithum, where a Synod was held about Ibas; it was those Acts and judgment
given by them, and performed by Ibas, (and not the Epistle of Ibas) to which
Eunomius had respect, when he said, by the posteriora, or postrema, Ibas made a
true confession, for so in the fifth Council it is clearly witnessed: It is
manifest (say they) that Col. 6. pa. 564. a.
Eunomius made this speech, gesta apud Photium, et Eustathium attendens,
looking at those Acts before Photius and Eustathius. Now in those Acts, as is
manifest by the diligent perusal thereof, and is further testified by the fifth
Council, Ibid. pa. 563. and seq.
there was a judgment pronounced by Photius and Eustathius, adversus came
epistolam et quae in ea continentur; against that Epistle, and the contents
thereof: Ibas being commanded by those venerable Judges, both to embrace the
first Ephesine Synod, which that impious Epistle rejects, and to condemn and
accurse Nestorius and his followers, whom that Epistle commends: which
judgment that Ibas then performed, the Acts before Photius and Eustathius do
make evident: for there it is thus said, Apud Conc. Chal. act. 9. pa. 108. a.
Confessus est Ibas sic se credere? Ibas professed that he believed as the
letters of Cyrill to John did import, and that he consented in all things to
the first Synod at Ephesus, accounting their judgment as a decree inspired by
the holy Ghost. Yea he did not only in words profess this, but in
Praeparavimus Jbam, quod and amplexus est, ex scripto dare quid sentit de pia
fide nostra. ibid. 107. b.
writing also, (at the persuasions of Photius and Eustathius) he expressed the
like for the full satisfaction of such as had been before scandalized by his
impious doctrine. And Ibas yet further of his Ex abundanti ante^ promisit, etc.
ib.
own accord promised before those Judges, that he would in his own Church at
Edessa, and that publicly accurse Nestorius as the chief leader in that
impious heresy, and those also who did think as he did, or who did use his
books or writings. Thus much do those Acts declare.

12. This orthodoxall confession of Ibas, made before Photius and Eustathius,
this accursing of Nestorius and his heresies, this embracing of the Ephesine
Council, is that, which Eunomius calls Posteriora, or Postrema, as following
by many years, not only that which Ibas did or said before the Union made
between John and Cyrill, but even this Impious Epistle also written after that
Union. Of this confession Eunomius truly said, that by it (being posterius,
later then the Epistle) Ibas had refuted all for which he was formerly blamed:
for by this, in effect, he refuted, condemned, and accursed this whole Epistle
with all the heresies and blasphemies, both in the head and tail thereof. And
for this cause, and in regard of this holy confession, the fifth Council said,
that thereby Ibas Ostenditur inde quod anathematizavit Epistolam etc Col. 6.
pa. 564. a.
had anathematized his own Epistle, contrariam per omnia, being in every part
of it contrary to the faith, both in the beginning and end thereof. And the
interlocution of Eusebius B. of Ancyra, at the Council of Chalcedon, does
fully explain the meaning of Eunomius; for he expressly mentions those Acts
before Photius and Eustathius, and the confession of Ibas then made (which
Eunomius called posteriora) saying thus, Act. 10. Council. Chal. pa. 115 b.
The reading of that judgment before Photius and Eustathius, does teach that
Ibas, in that judgment, accursed Nestorius and his impious doctrines, and
consented to the true faith: Wherefore I receive him for a Bishop, if he now do
condemn Nestorius. The like said Ibid.
Diogenes B. of Cyzicum, Thalassius Bishop of Cesarea, John Bishop of Sebastia,
and they all cried, Omnes eadem dicimus, we all say the same. So clear it is
that upon this holy Confession of Ibas made first before Photius and
Eustathius, and after that, before all the Council at Chalcedon, and not upon
this Epistle, nor any part, first or last thereof, Ibas was acknowledged and
embraced for a Catholic, both by Eunomius, Eusebius, Diogenes, and all the
whole Council of Chalcedon.

13. By this now appears not only the error, but the extreme fraud of
Baronius, who in excuse of Vigilius, not only affirms an heretical untruth,
that the latter part of the Epistle is orthodoxall, but labors to uphold and
boulster out that untruth with a malicious perverting and falsifying both of
the words and meaning of Eunomius. And thus far proceeded the holy Council
against Vigilius in their sixth Session, being the very next after they had
received the Popes mandatorie letters, commanding them neither to speak nor
write ought concerning the Three Chapters, otherwise then he by his
Apostolical constitution had decreed.

14. In the seventh Collation, besides the public reading of diverse letters
and writings for the manifestation of the truth, and of the uprightnes of their
judgment in this cause of the three Chapters; all that was formerly done, was
now again Quae jam acta sunt, relegantur: and relecta sunt. Col. 7. pa. 577. b.
repeated and approved by the holy Council. Such diligence and wariness they
used in this matter, that nothing might pass without often recital and
serious ponderation by the whole Council.

15. In the eight, which is the last Collation, the holy Council proceeded to
their Synodall, and Definitive sentence, touching all those Three Chapters,
which Vigilius (as they knew) by his decree and Apostolical authority had
defended. But the Council directly contradicting the Pope in them all, does
Definitively condemn and accurse them all, and all who defend them or any of
them: which sentence of the Council, as Baronius truly confesses Au. 553. nu.
219.
, was pronounced contra decreta ipsius (Vigilij) in a direct opposition to the
Decrees of Vigilius. Which that it may fully appear, as you have before seen
the words of the Popes Decree, so now consider also, and compare with them, the
words and Decree of the Council.

16. First the holy Council sets down in general their sentence concerning
all the Three Chapters, (The defenders of which they had before Qui hanc
(Epistolam) non anathematizat, haereticus est. Col 6. pa. 576. b.
, and here Haereticorum condemnationem. Col. 8 pa. 586. b.
again do proclaim to be heretics) in this manner; We Ibid. pa. 586. a,
accurse the Three foresaid Chapters, to wit, Theodorus of Mopsvestia, with his
impious writings, The impious writings of Theodoret against Cyril, and the
impious Epistle of Ibas, et defensores little, et qui scripserunt, vel scribunt
ad defensionem eorum; also we accurse the Defenders of those Chapters, and
those who have written, or who do (at any time) write for the defense of them,
or who presume to say that they are right, or who have defended, aut defendere
conantur, or who do (at any time) endeavor to defend their impiety under the
name of the holy Fathers, or of the Council at Chalcedon. Thus decreed the
whole Synod. Now Pope Vigilius, as you have seen before, defended all these
Three Chapters, he defended them by writing, yea by his Apostolical
authority, Constitution, and Definitive sentence: he defended them by the name
of the holy Fathers, and of the Council at Chalcedon; Pope Vigilius then, by
the judicial and definitive sentence of this holy general Council is an
Anathema, a condemned and accursed heretic; yea a Definer of a condemned and
accursed heresy. Baronius writes earnestly in defense of Pope Vigilius and
his Constitution, he commends him for defending those Three Chapters, saying,
An. 546. nu. 40*
The Defenders of them were praised while they had Pope Vigilius, whom they
might follow: and Vigilius himself he had An. 553. nu. 233.
many and worthy reasons to make his Constitution in defense of those Chapters:
he further presumes to defend Vigilius under the name and show of consenting
with the holy Fathers and Council at Chalcedon. Card. Baronius then by the
same definitive sentence of this holy and general Council, is an Anathema with
Vigilius, a condemned and accursed heretic.

17. After this general sentence, the Council proceeds, in particular and
severally, to condemn each of these Three Chapters by it self. Of the first
they thus define. Col. 8. pa. 587. b.
If any do defend impious Theodorus of Mopsvestia, et non anathematizat eum,
and do not acourse him and his impious writings, let such an one be accursed.
Now Pope Vigilius (as you have seen) would not himself, neither would he
permit any other to accurse this Theodorus, he forbids any to do it, he
made an Apostolical Constitution that none should accurse him: Card. Baronius
he writes in defense of Vigilius and of his Constitution in this point: Thomas
Stapleton goes further, for he is so far from accursing this Theodorus, that
he expressly calls Conterbl. divis. 68. pa. 171.
him a Catholic, yea a most Catholic Bishop: Vigilius then, Baronius and
Stapleton are al of them accursed by the Definitive sentence of this holy
general Council, in this first Chapter.

18. Of the second Chapter they Col. 8.
thus decree. If any defend the writings of Theodoret against Cyril, et non
anathematizat ea, and do not accurse them, let him be an Anathema. Vigilius
would not himself accurse them, he would not permit any other to disgrace
Theodoret, or injure him by accursing his writings: Baronius defends and
commends this decree of Vigilius; they both then are tied again in this
third Anathema of the Council.

19. Though a threefold cord be not easily broken, yet the holy Council adds
a fourth, which is more indissoluble then any adamantine chain. Of the Third
Chapter they decree in this manner; f If any defend that impious Epistle of
Ibas unto Maris, which denies God to be borne of the blessed Virgin, which
accuses Cyrill for an heretic, which condemns the holy Council of Ephesus,
and defends Theodorus and Nestorius, with their impious doctrines and
writings, if any defend this Epistle, et non anathematizat eam, et defensores
ejus, et eos qui dicunt eam rectam esse, vel partem ejus, et eos qui
scripserunt et scribunt pro ea; If any do not accurse this Epistle, and the
Defenders of it, and those who say that it, or any part of it, is right; If any
do not also accurse those who have written, or who (at any time) do write for
it, and the impiety contained in it, and who presume to defend it by the name
of the holy Fathers, or of the Council at Chalcedon, such an one be accursed.
Now Vigilius (as was formerly declared) defends this Epistle, as orthodoxall,
he defends it by his Cathedral sentence and Apostolical authority, he
defends it under the name of the holy Fathers, and of the Council at
Chalcedon; saying, Constable. loc. cit. nu. 192.
Orthodoxa est Ibae a patribus pronu^ciata dictatio; Baronius defends both
Vigilius and this Epistle in some part thereof, he defends them under
pretense of the Fathers and Council at Chalcedon, saying, An. 553. nu. 191.
Patres dixerunt, eam Epistolam ut Catholicam recipiendam; The Fathers at
Chalcedon said, that this Epistle ought to be received as orthodoxall: Is it
possible think you, by any shift or evasion, to free either Vigilius or
Baronius from this fourth Anathema denounced by the judicial and Definitive
sentence of this Holy General Council.

20. But what speak I of Baronius, as if he alone were a Defender of Vigilius
and his Constitution? All who have, or who at any time do hold, and defend,
either by word or writing, that the Popes judicial and definitive sentence, in
causes of faith, is infallible (and this is held, by Bellarmine, Gretzer,
Pighius, Gregorius de Valentia, and, as afterward I purpose to declare at
large, by all Vt nomo Catholicus esse possit, qui illa^ non amplectatur Greg.
de Val. in 2. 2 disp. 1. par. 1. pa. 30
and every one, who is truly a member of the present Roman Church) all these
by holding and defending this one Position, do implicitly in that, hold and
defend every Cathedral and definitive sentence of any of their Popes, and
particularly this Apostolical Constitution of Pope Vigilius, to be not only
true, but infallible also: and so they all defend the Three Chapters; they
defend the Defenders of them, by name Pope Vigilius among the rest. All these
then are unavoidably included within all the former Anathemaes all denounced
and proclaimed to be heretics, to be accursed and separate from God, by the
judicial and definitive sentence of this holy general Council.

21. With what comfort, alacrity and confidence may the servants of Christ
fight his battles, and defend their holy faith and religion? or how can the
servants of Antichrist choose, but be utterly dismayed and daunted herewith,
seeing they cannot w^g their tongues or hands, to speak or write ought either
against ours, or in defense of their own doctrines, especially not of that
which is the foundation of the rest, and is virtually in them all, but ipso
facto, even for that act alone, if there were no other cause, they are declared
and pronounced by the judicial sentence of an holy, general, and approved
Council, to be accursed heretics.

22. The Council yet adds another clause, which justly chalengeth a special
consideration. Some there are who would be held men of such a mild and
merciful disposition, that though they dislike and condemn those assertions
of the Popes supremacy of authority, and infallibility of judgment, yet are
they so charitably affected to the Defenders of those assertions, that they
dare not themselves, nor can endure, that others should call them heretics or
accursed: Durus est hic sermo, this is too harsh and hard. See here the fervor
and zeal of this holy Council! They first say, Cursed be the defenders of
this Epistle or any part thereof: As much in effect, as if they had said,
Cursed be Vigilius, Baronius, Bellarmine, and all who defend the Popes
judgment in causes of faith to be infallible, that is, all that are members of
the present Church of Rome, Cursed be they all. And not contenting themselves
herewith, they add, Cursed be he who does not accurse the defenders of that
Epistle or of any part thereof: As much in effect, as if they had said, Cursed
be every one who does not accurse Vigilius, Baronius, Bellarmine, and all that
defend the Popes judgment in causes of faith to be infallible, that is, all
that are members of the present Roman Church, Cursed be he who does not
accurse them all. The holy Council no doubt had an eye Nos timen^es
maledictionem, quae imminet his qui negligenter opera Domini faciunt, Col. 8.
pa. 584. a.
to the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, Cursed be he that
keeps back his sword from blood. To spare when God commands, and whom he
commands to curse or kill, is neither pity nor piety, but mere rebellion
against the Lord, and pulls down that judgment which God himself threatened 1
King. 20.42.
to Ahab, Because thou have let go out of thine hand, a man whom I appointed
to dye, thy life shall go for his life.

23. What then? is there no means, no hope of such that they may be saved? God
forbid. Far be it from my heart once to think, or my tongue to utter so hard a
sentence. There is a means, and that after the Scripture, the Council
expressly and often sets down, even were they denounce all those Anathemaes,
for thus they say, Col. 8. saept.
They who defend Theodorus, the writings of Theodoret against Cyrill, the
impious Epistle of Ibas, or the defenders of them, et in his vsque ad mortem
permanent, and continue in this defense, until they dye, let such be accursed.
Renounce the defense of these Chapters, and of the Defenders of them, that is,
forsake and renounce that position of the Popes Cathedral infallibility in
defining causes of faith: renounce the defense of all that defend it, that is,
of the whole present Roman Church, Come Apoc. 18.2.3.4.
out of Babylon the habitation of devils, the hold of all unclean spirits,
which has made all nations drunk with the wine of her fornication, which
themselves Johannes in Apocalypsi passim Roma vocal Babylonem. Bell lib. 2. de
po^t. Romans cap. 2. Praterea.

Babylon quae casura ^radicitur, Roma quidem est. R^ber. in cae. 14. in Apoc.
pa. 377. Et. Roma qualis in fine saeculi futura est. ib. pa. 378. Johannes
loquitur de Roma qualo sub fine^ mundi futura est. Gretz. Def. ca. 13. lib. 3.
de Romans pont. pa. 927.

Babylon, quam esse Romam ait lib 7. pa. 228. seeds et civitas antichristi est.
Sand. lib. 8. de visib. Monar. ca. 48.


cannot but acknowledge to be meant of Rome: This do, and then, Come Isa. 55.7.
unto the Lord and he will have mercy, and to our God, for he is very ready to
forgive: All your former impieties, heresies, and blasphemies shall not be
mentioned unto you, but in the righteousness and Catholic truths which ye then
embrace, you shall live. If this they will not do, we accuse them not, we
accurse them not: they have one who does both accuse and accurse them, even
this holy general Council, whose just Anathemaes shall as firmly bind them
before God in heaven, as they were truly denounced by the Synod here on earth,
for he has sealed theirs and all like censures with his own signet, who
Matthew. 18.18.
said, Whatsoever ye bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven.

24. After all these just Anathemaes denounced as well in general as in
particular by the Council against the defenders of these Three Chapters or any
one of them; the holy Synod sets down in the last place one other point as
memorable as any of the former: And that is by what authority they decreed all
these things, of which they thus say, Col. 8. pa. 588. a.
we have rightly confessed these things, quae tradita sunt nobis tam a divinis
scripturis; which are delivered unto us both in the divine scriptures, and in
the doctrines of the holy Fathers, and in the definitions of faith made by the
four former Councils. So the holy Council. Whence it does evidently ensue,
that to teach and affirm, that the Pope in his judicial and cathedral
sentence of faith may err and define heresy, and that Vigilius in his
constitution de facto did so, is a truth consonant to Scriptures, fathers, and
the four first general Councils: But on the other side, to maintain or
affirm (as do all who are members of the present Roman Church) that the Popes
cathedral sentence in causes of faith is infallible, is an heretical position
repugnant to Scriptures, Fathers, and the 4. first Councils, and condemned by
them all. So at once the Holy Council judicially defines both our faith to be
truly ancient and Apostolical, the self same which the Holy Fathers, general
Councills, and the Catholic Church professed for 600 years; and the doctrine
of the present Roman Church, even that fundamental position, on which all the
rest do rely, to be not only new, but heretical, such as none can
maintain, but even thereby he oppugneth and contradicts both the Scriptures,
Fathers, the four first general Councils; and the Catholic Church for 600
years after Christ.

25. Further yet: because one part of their sentence is the accursing of all
who defend the Three Chapters, either expressly, as did Vigilius, or implicit,
and by consequent, as do all who maintain the Popes judgment in causes of
faith to be infallible, that is, al who are members of the present Roman
Church, and so die; it clearly ensues from that last clause of the Council,
that to condemn and accusse as heretics all these, yea, all which do not
accurse these, is by the judgment of this whole general Council, warranted by
Scriptures, by Fathers, by the four first general Councils, and by the
Caholike Church for 600 years after Christ: The judgment of this fifth
Council being consonant to them all, and warranted by them all.

26. Neither is their Decree consonant only to precedent Fathers, and
Councils, but approved and confirmed by succeeding general Councils, by Popes,
and other Bishops, in the following ages of the Church. By the sixth Council,
which professes Act. 15. pa. 80. a.
of it self that in omnibus consonuit; it in all points agrees with the
fifth. By the second Nicene, (which they account for the seventh) which
reckneth Act. 6. pa. 357. a
this fifth, for one of the golden Councils, which are glorious by the words of
the holy Spirit, and which all being enlightened by the same spirit, decreed
those things which are profitable: professing that themselves did condemn all
whom those Councils (and among them whom this fifth) did condemn. By other
following Councils, in every one of which the 2 Nicene (and by consequent this
fifth) Council is approved, as by the acts is clear: and Baronius confesses
An. 553. nu. 229.
that this fifth, in alijs Oecumenicis Synodis postea celebratis cognita est
atque probata, was acknowledged and approved by the other general Councils
which were held after it.

27. It was likewise approved by succeeding Popes and Bishops. By Pelagius the
second, who writ an whole Epistle Epist. 7. Pelag. 2.
to persuade the Bishops of Istria to condemn the Three Chapters, telling Pa.
687.
them that though Pope Vigilius resisted the condemnation of them, yet others
his predecessors which followed Vigilius did consent thereunto. By Gregory,
who professing Lib. 1. Epist. 24.
to embrace and reverence the 4 first Councils, as the 4 Evangelists, adds of
this fifth, Quintu^ quoque co^cilium pariter veneror; I do in like manner
reverence the fifth Council, wherein the impious Epistle of Ibas is rejected,
and the writings of Theodoret, with Theodorus and his writings. And then of
them all he says, Cunctas personas, whatsoever persons the foresaid (five)
venerable Councils do condemn, those also do I condemn, whom they reverence
I embrace; because seeing they are decreed by an universal consent, whosoever
presumes to loose, whom they bind, or bind whom they loose, se et non illa
destruit, he destroys himself, but not those Councils; and whosoever
thinks otherwise, let him be accursed. Thus Pope Gregory the great, ratifying
all the former anathemaes of the Council, and accursing all that labor to
unty those bands. By Agatho In Cont. 6. Act. 4. pa. 16. a.
, by Leo Epist. ad Constan. Imp.
the second, who both call this an holy Synod; and, not to stay in particulars,
All Bar. an. 869. nu. 58, 59.
their Popes (after the the time of Gregory) were accustomed at their election
to make profession of this fifth, as of the former Councils, and that in such
solemn and exact manner, after the time of Hadrian the second, that they
professed (as their form it self set down by Anton. Augustinus In
manuscripto codice ex quo eum citat Bar. loco citate
does witness) to embrace the eight general Councils, (whereof this was one)
to hold them pari honor et veneratione, in equal honor and esteem, to keep
them entirely usque ad unum apicem, to the least iota, to follow and teach
whatsoever they decreed, and whatsoever they condemned to condemn both with
their mouth and heart. A like form of profession is set down in the Council
at Constance Ses. 39. pa. 1644.
, where the Council having first decreed Ses. 4. pa. 1560.
the power and authority of the Pope to be inferior and subject to the
Council, and that he ought to be obedient to them both, in matters of faith
and orders of reformation, by this their superior authority ordains, That
every Pope at the time of his election shall profess that, cord et ore, both
in words and in his heart he does embrace and firmly believe the doctrines
delivered by the holy Fathers, and by the eleven general Councils (this fifth
being reckned for one) and that he will keep, defend and teach the same faith
with them, usque ad unum apicem, even to the least syllable. To go no further,
Baronius confesses An. 553. nu. 229.
, that not only Gregory and his predecessors (unto Vigilius) sed successores
omnes, but all the successors of Gregory are known to have received and
confirmed this fifth Council.

28. Neither only did the Popes approve it, but all orthodoxal Bishops in the
world: it being a custom, as Baronius shows An. 869. nu. 58.
, that they did profess to embrace the seven general Councills, which form
of faith Orthodoxi omnes ex more profiteri deberent, all orthodoxall Bishops by
custom were bound to profess. And this, as it seems, they did in those
Literae Formatae, or Communicatoriae, or Pacificae, (so they were called Cum
quo totus orbis commercio formatarum, concordat. Opt. lib. 2. p. 40. Quaerebam
utrum epistolas communicatorias quas Formatas dicimus, possent quo vellent
dare. Aug. Epist. 163. Sub probatione Epistolij, sine Pacificis, quae dicuntur
Ecclesiastica. Conc. Chalc. can. 11.
) which from ancient time they used to give and receive. For by that form of
letters they testified their communion in faith, and peaceable agreement with
the whole Catholic Church. Such an Uniform consent there was in approving
this fifth Council in all succeeding Councills, Popes and Bishops, almost to
these days.

29. From whence it evidently and unavoidably ensues, that as this fifth Synod,
so all succeeding Councils, Popes and Bishops, to the time of the Council of
Constance Celebratum est an. 1414.
, that is, for more then fourteen hundred years together after Christ, do
all with this fifth Council condemn and accurse, as heretical, the judicial
and definitive sentence of Pope Vigilius, delivered by his Apostolical
authority, for instruction of the whole Church in this cause of faith: and
therefore they al with an uniforme consent did in heart believe, and in words
profess and teach, that the Popes Cathedral sentence in causes of faith, may
be, and de facto has been heretical: that is, they all did believe and teach,
that doctrine which the reformed Churches maintain, to be truly ancient,
orthodoxall and catholic, such as the whole Church of Christ for more then 14
hundred years believed and taught: but the doctrine (even the Fundamental
position whereon all their doctrines do rely, and which is vertually included
in them all) which the present Church of Rome maintains, to be new,
heretical and accursed, such as the whole Church for so many hundred years
together with one consent believed and taught to be accursed and heretical. It
hence further ensues, that as this fifth Council did, so all the
forementioned general Councils, Popes and Bishops, do with it condemn and
accurse for heretics not only Vigilius, but all who either have or do
hereafter defend him and his Constitution, even all, who either by word or
writing, have or shall maintain that the Popes Cathedral judgment in causes
of faith is infallible, that is, all who are members of the present Roman
Church, and so continue till their death: nay, they not only accurse all such,
but further also, even all who do not accurse such. And because the decree of
this fifth Council is approved by them, to the least iota, it in the last place
follows, that the condemning and accursing for heretical that doctrine of
the Popes infallibility in causes of faith, and accursing for heretics, all
who either by word or writing have, or do at any time hereafter defend the
same, and so presist till they dye; nay, not only the accursing of all such,
but of all who do not accurse them, is warranted by Scriptures, by Fathers, by
all general Councils, by all Popes and Bishops, that have been for more then
14. hundred years after Christ.

30. This Uniform consent continued in the Church until the time of Leo the
10 and his Laterane Council. Till then, neither was the Popes authority held
for supreme, nor his judicial sentence in causes of faith held for infallible:
nay, to hold these was judged and defined to be heretical, and the maintainers
of them to be heretics. For besides that they all till that time approved this
fifth Council, wherein these truths were decreed, the same was expressly decreed
by two general Councils, the one at Constance, the other at Basil, not long
before Conc. Basil. sinitum est an. 1442. id est, an. 74. ante council. Later.
that Laterane Synod. In both which it was defined, that not the Popes
sentence, but the Judgment of a general Council, Council. Basil. in Decreto
quinq. conclus. pa. 96. a.
is, supremum in terris; the highest judgment in earth, for rooting out of
errors, and preserving the true faith, unto which judgment every one, even the
Pope Cui quilibet etiamsi papalis status existat, obedire tenetur. Conc.
Constant. sess. 4. et Bas. sess. 2.
himself, is subject, and ought to obey it, or if he will not, is punishable
Debite puniatur. Conc. Constable. ses. 5. and Basil. ses. 3.
by the same. Consider beside many other, that one testimony of the Council of
Basil, and you shall see they believed and professed this as a Catholic truth,
which in all ages of the Church had been, and still ought to be embraced. They
having recited that Decree of the Council at Constance, for the supreme
authority of a Council, to which the Pope is subject, say Sess. 33.
thus, Licet has esse veritates fidei catholicae satis constet; although it is
sufficiently evident, by many declarations made both at Constance, and here at
Basil, that these are truths of the Catholic faith, yet for the better
confirming of all Catholics herein, This holy Synod does define as follows;
The verity of the power of a general Council above the Pope, declared in the
general Council at Constance, and in this at Basil, est veritas fidei
Catholicae, is a verity of the Catholic faith; and after a second conclusion
like to this, they adjoyne a third, which concerns them both; He who
pertinaciously gainsayeth these two verities, est censendus haereticus, is to
be accounted an heretic. Thus the Council at Basil; clearly witnessing, that
till this time of the Council, the defending of the Popes authority to be
supreme, or his judgment to be infallible, was esteemed an Heresy by the
Catholic Church, and the maintainers of that doctrine to be heretics: which
their decrees were not, as some falsely pretend, rejected by the Popes of those
times, but ratified and confirmed, and that Per Concilia generalia, quae summi
Pontifices. Consistorialiter declaraverunt esse legitima, etiam pro eo tempore,
quo ejusmodi declarationes ediderunt. Conc. Basil. pa. 144. a.
Consistorialiter, judicially and cathedrally by the indubitate Popes, that
then were, for so the Council of Basil witnesses; who hearing that Eugenius
would dissolve the Council, say Epist. Conc. Basil. pa. 100. b.
thus; It is not likely that Eugenius will any way think to dissolve this
sacred Council, especially seeing that it is against the decrees of the
Council at Constance, per praedecessorem suum et seipsum approbata; which both
his predecessor Pope Martine the fifth, and himself also has approved. Besides
this, that Eugenius confirmed the Council at Basil, there are other evident
proofs: His own Bull, or embossed letters, wherein he says Literae bullatae
Eugenij lectae sunt in Conc. Bas. Ses. 16.
of this Council, pure, simpliciter, ac cum effectu, et omni devotione
prosequimur; we embrace sincerely, absolutely, and with all affection and
devotion, the general Council at Basil: The Council often mention his
adhesion, Jn sua adhaesione. sess. 16.
his maxima^ adhaesionem Decreto quinque Concl. pa. 96. b.
to the Council; by which Adhesion, as they teach, Sess. 29. pa. 96. b.
Decreta corroborata sunt, the Decrees of the Council at Basil made for the
superiority of a Council above the Pope, were confirmed: Further yet the
Orators which Pope Eug. sent to the council, did not only promise, but Jurabant
ejus decreta defendere, etc. Sess. 16.
corporally swear before the whole Council, that they would defend the
decrees thereof, and particularly that which was made at Constance was, and now
renewed at Basil. Such an Harmony there was in believing and professing this
doctrine, (that the Popes judgment in causes of faith, is neither supreme nor
infallible) that general Councils at this time decreed it, the indubitate
Popes confirmed it, the Popes Orators solemnly swear unto it, the Universal
Haec veritas toties et tam solenniter per universam ecclesiam declarata est.
Epist. Conc. Bas. pa. 144. a.
and Catholic Church until then embraced it, and that with such constancy and
uniforme consent, that, as the Council of Jn decreto quinque conclus. pa. 96.
Basil says, (and their saying is worthy to be remembered) nunquam aliquis
peritorum dubitavit, never any learned and skillful man doubted thereof. It may
be some illiterate Gnatho has soothed the Pope in his Hildebrandicall pride,
vaunting, Hildebrandum sic gloriari solitum testatur Avent. lib. 5. Annal. pa.
455.
Se, quasi deus sit, errare non posse; I sit in the temple of God, as God, I
cannot err; but for any that was truly judicious or learned, never any such
man, in all the ages of the Church until then, as the Council witnesses, so
much as doubted thereof, but constantly believed the Popes authority not to be
supreme, and his judgment not to be infallible.

31. After the Council of Basil, the same truth was still embraced in the
Church, though with far greater opposition then before it had: witness hereof,
Nich. Cusanus a Bishop, Poss. Biblic. in Nic. Cusano.
a Cardinal, a man scientijs pene omnibus excultus, who lived 20 Obijt ann.
1464. Poss. Conc. autem finitum est. an. 1442.
years after the end of the Council at Basil. He earnestly maintained the
decree of that Council, resolving Lib. 2. de Concor. Cathol. ca. 17.
that a general Council is omni respectu tam supra Papam quam supra sedem
Apostolicam; is in every respect superior both to the Pope and to the
Apostolic see. Which he proves by the Councils of Nice, of Chalcedon, of the
sixth and 8 general Councils, and he is so confident herein, that he says,
Quis dubitare potest sanae mentis? what man being in his wits can doubt of this
superiority? Witness John de Turrecremata, a Cardinal also, who was famous
at the same time, Claruit an. 1460. Tritem. de Scrip. eccl. in Ioh. de Tur.
He thought he was very unequal to the Council at Basil, in favor be like of
Eugenius the 4, who Poss. in Ioh. Tur.
made him Cardinal, yet that he thought the Popes judge meant in defining
causes of faith to be fallible, and his authority not supreme, but subject to a
Council. Andradius will tell you Lib. de author. gener. Council. pa, 88.
in this manner; Let us hear him (Turrecremata) affirming that the Definitions
of a Council concerning doctrines of faith, are to be preferred Iudicio Romans
Pontificis, to the judgment of the Pope; and then he cites the words of
Turrec. that in case the Fathers of a general Council should make a
definition of faith, which the Pope should contradict (This was the very case
of the fifth Council, and Pope Vigilius) dicerem, judicio meo, quod Synodo
standum esset et non personae Papae, I would say, according to my judgment,
that we must stand to the Synods, and not to the Popes sentence: who yet
further touching Turr. sum. de eccl. lib. 2. cap. 93.
that the Pope has no superior Judge upon earth, extra casum haeresis, unless
it be in case of heresy, does plainly acknowledge, that in such a case a
Council is superior unto him. Superior, I say, not only (as he minceth the
matter) by authority Tunc Synodus major est Papa, no^ quidem potestate jurisd
ctionis, sed authoritate discretivi judicij. Turrec.
of discretive judgment, or amplitude of learning (in which sort many mean
Bishops and presbyters are far his superiors) but even by power of
Jurisdiction, seeing in that case (as he confesses) the Council is a superior
Judge unto the Pope, and if he be a Judge of him, he must have coactive Bell.
lib. 3. de ver. Dei. ca. 9. Praeterea. Et lib. 2. de council. ca. 18.
authority, and judicial power over him. Witness Panormitane, an Archbishop,
and a Cardinal Poss. in Nich. Tudisc.
also, a man of great note in the Church, both at and after the Council of
Basil; He Cap. Significasti. de Elect. extrav.
professes that in those things, which concern the Faith, or general state
of the Church; Concilium est supra Papam, the Council in those things is
superior to the Pope. He also writ a book in defense of the Council at Basil
so distasteful to the present Church of Rome, that they have forbid Poss. loco
citat.
it to be read, and reckned it in the number of Prohibited books in their
Roman Index. At the same time lived Obijt an. 1467. Tritem. in Ant. Ros.
Antonius Rosellus, a man noble in birth, but more for learning, who thus
writes, Monarch. part. 2. ca. 15.
I conclude, that the Pope may be accused and deposed for no fault, nisi pro
heresi, but for heresy strictly taken, or for some notorious crime scadalizing
the whole Church: and again, Li. cod. par. 3 c. 21
Though the Pope be not content or willing to be judged by a Council, yet in
case of heresy, the Council may condemn and adnull sententiam papae, the
Judgment or sentence of faith pronounced by the Pope; and he gives this reason
thereof, because in this case the Council is supra papam, above the Pope: and
the superior Judge may be sought unto, to declare a nullitie in the sentence of
the inferior Judge. Thus he: and much more to this purpose. Now although by
these (the first of which was a Belgian, the second a Spaniard, the third a
Sicilian, and the last an Italian) it may be perceived, that the general
judgment of the Church at that time, and the best learned therein, was almost
the same with that of the Council at Basil, that neither the Popes authority
is supreme, nor his judgment in causes of faith is infallible; yet suffer me
to add two other witnesses, of those who were after that Council.

32. The former is the Judgment of Universities, quae Orthuin. Gra. in fasc.
rer. expet. pa. 240.
fere omnes, which all, in a manner, approved and honored that Council of
Basil. The other is the Council at Biturice (some Ortel. Synon.
take it for Bordeaux) called by Charles the seventh, the French King, in which
was made consensu omnium Ioh. Marius lib. deschis. and conc. ca. 23.
ecclesiasticorum, et principum regni, by the consent of the whole clergy, and
all the Peers of France, that Pragmaticall Sanction, which John Marius calls
Ibid.
medullam, the pith and marrow of the decrees of the Council at Basil. One
decree of that Sanction is this, Gag. annal. Fran. Lib. 10.
The authority of the Council at Basil and the constancy of their decrees,
perpetua esto, let it be perpetual, and let none, no not the Pope himself,
presume to abrogate or infringe the same. This Sanction was published with full
authority not seventy years before the Council at Lateran (as Leo the tenth
witnesses Ab ipsius Sanctionis editione vix annos 70 fluxisse. Co^c. Later.
Sess. 11. pa. 639. b. Loquitur autem desecunda ejus edit. nam antea promulgata
erat an. 1438. test Gag. and Mario.
) that is, some four years after the end of the Council at Basil. And
although the Popes (whose avarice and ambition was restrained by that sanction)
did detest it, as Gagninus says, Lib. 10.
non secus ac perniciosam haeresin; no otherwise then as a dangerous heresy,
yea and labored tooth and nail to admit it, yet as says the universitie of
Paris, In sua Appel. a Lean. 10. ad Council.
by Gods help, hactenus prohibitum extitit, they have been ever hindered
until this time of Leo the tenth. Indeed Pius secundus indevored and labored
with Jews the 11. to have it abrogated, and he sent Io. Mar. lib. citat. ca.
24.
a solemn ambassador Card. Balveus, a very subtle Homo versutus, planeque
perversus. ib.
fellow, to bring this to pass, but after much toyling both himself and
others, re infecta redijt, he returned without effecting the Popes desire. And
to go no further, Leo the 10. and his Laterane Synod, are ample witnesses that
this Sanction was never repealed, before that Synod, for they Conc. Later. ses.
11
complain that, by reason of the malignitie of those times, or else because
they could not help it, his predecessors tolerasse visi sunt, seemed to have
tolerated that pragmaticall Sanction, and that for all, which either they did
or could do, the same Sanction retroactis temporibus viguisse, et adhuc
vigere; had in former times, and did even to that very day of their eleventh
Session, stand in force, and full vigor. Now seeing that Sanction condemns as
heretical (as did the Council also of Basil) that assertion of the Popes
Supremacy of authority, and infallibility of judgment in defining causes of
faith, which the present Roman Church defends, it is now clearly
demonstrated that the same Assertion was taught, professed, and believed to be
an heresy, and the obstinate defenders thereof to be heretics, by the
consenting judgment of Councils, Popes, Bishops, and the Catholic Church,
even from the Apostles time unto that very day of their Laterane Session, which
was the 19. of December, in the year 1516. after Christ.

33 On that day ( a day never to be forgotten by the present Roman Church, it
being the birthday thereof,) Leo the tenth with his Laterane Council (or as
the learned Divines of Paris Leo 10. in quedam caetu, nescimus qualiter, tamen
non in Spiritu Domini congregato. App. Vniv. Paris.
account it, Conspiracy, they being not assembled in Gods name) abolished, as
much as in them lay, the old and Catholic doctrine, which in all ages of the
Church had been believed and professed until that day, and instead thereof
erect a new faith, yea, a new foundation of the faith; and with it a new Church
also. He and his Synod then reprobated Quae de authoritate Concilij supra
Pontificem constituerunt. sententia Co^c. Lateranensis plane reprobata sunt.
Bin. Not. in Conc. Constable. Ex part.
the Decree of Constance for the superiority of a Council above the Pope:
they reprobated Reprobarunt decre. tum Concilij Basiliensis. Bell. lib. 2. de
Conc. ca. 17. Denique.
also the Council of Basil, and the same Decree renewed by them. That Council
they condemn as Conciliabulum, or Conc. Lat. sess. 11.
Conventiculam, quae nullum robur habere potuerit, As a Conspiracy, and
Conventicle, which could have no force at all. They reprobated the Ibid.
Pragmaticall Sanction, wherein the Decree of Constance and Basil was for ever
confirmed. Now that Decree being consonant to that catholic Faith which for
1500 years together had been embraced, and believed by the whole catholic
Church until that day, in reprobating it, they rejected and reprobated the old
and catholic Faith of the whole Church. In stead hereof they decreed the Popes
authority to be Hujus sanctae sedis suprema authoritate. Ibid. pa. 640.
supreme, that it is, de Ibid.
necessitate salutis; a thing necessary to salvation, for all Christians to be
subject to the Pope; and that not only as they are severally considered, but
even as they assembled together in a general Council: for they define Solum
Jbid. pa. 639.
Romanum Pontificem authoritatem super omnia Concilia habere; The Pope alone to
have authority above all General Councills. This the Council at Laterane
diserte and ex professo docuit; taught clearly and purposely, as Bellarmine
tells Lib. 2. de Council. ca. 17. Denique
us: nay, they did not only teach it, but expressissime definiunt Lib. cod.
ca. 13. Deinde.
, they did most expressly define it. And that their Definition is no other then
a Decree of Faith, as the same Cardinal assures us; Decrees of faith (says
he) Lib. ^^d. ca. 17. Ad hunc.
are immutable, neither may ever be repealed after they are once set down;
Tale autem est hoc de quo agimus, and such is this Decree for the Popes supreme
authority over all, even General Councils, made in their Laterane Synod. And
what mean they (think you) by that supreme authority? Truly the same which
Bellarmine explaineth, That because his authority is supreme, therefore his
judgment Proinde ultimum judicium summi po^tificis esse. lib. 4. de Romans
pontif. ca. 1. Sed nec.
in causes of Faith, is the last and highest: and because it is the last and
highest, therefore it is Restat igitur ut Papa sit Index (ultimus) et proinde
no^ possit errare. Lib. 4. de Pont. Romans ca. 3. Contra. Et Dicu^t Concilij
sententiam esse ultimu^ judicium Hinc autem apertissime sequitur, non errare.
Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 3. Accedat.
infallible. So by their Decree, together with supremacy of authority, they
have given infallibility of judgment to the Pope; and defined that to be a
catholic truth, and doctrine of Faith, which the whole Church in all ages
until then, taught, professed, and defined to be an heresy, and all who
maintain it, to be Heretics, and for such condemned both it and them.

34 Now, because this is not only a doctrine of their faith, but the very
foundation, on which all their other doctrines of faith do rely, by decreeing
this, they have quite altered not only the faith, but the whole frame and
fabric of the church, erecting a new Roman church, consisting of them, and
them only, who maintain the Popes Infallibility and supremacy, decreed on
that memorable day in their Laterane Synod: a church truly new, and but of
yesterday, not so old as Luther, a church in faith and communion severed from
all former general Councils, Popes, and Bishops, that is, from the whole
catholic Church of Christ, which was from the Apostles times until that day.
And if their Popes continue (as it is to be presumed they do) to make that
profession which by the Councils of Constance and Basil they are bound to do,
to hold among other, this fifth Council ad unum iota, this certainly is but a
verbal, no cordial profession; there neither is, nor can be any truth
therein, it being impossible to believe both the Popes Cathedral judgment in
causes of faith, to be heretical, as the fifth Council defined; and the Popes
Cathedral sentence in such causes, to be infallible, as their Laterane
Council decreed: So by that profession is demonstrated that their doctrine of
faith is both contradictory to it self, such as none can possibly believe, and
withal new, such as is repugnant to that faith which the whole Catholic
Church of Christ embraced, until that very day of their Laterane Session.

35 Yea and even then was not this holy truth abolished. Four months did not
pass after that Laterane Decree was made but it was condemned by the whole
University of In Appel. a Leon. 10. quae facta est 21 die Mart. an. 1517.
Decret. Later. fact. 19 December. 1517.
Paris, as being contra fidem Catholicam, against the catholic Faith, and the
authority of holy Councils. And even to these days the French Church does not
only distaste that A Relation of Religion in the West parts, published an.
1605. pa. 129.
Laterane Decree, and hold a General Council to be superior to the Pope, but
their Council also of Gentil. Exam. Co^c. Trid. Sess. 13. and Car. Mol. dec.
Conc. Trid. decret. pa. 3.
Trent, wherein that Laterane Decree is confirmed, is by them rejected. And
what speak I of them? Behold, while Leo with his Laterane Council strives to
quench this catholic truth, it bursts out with far more glorious and
resplendent beauty. This stone, which was rejected by those builders of
Babylon, was laid again in the foundations of Sion, by those EZra's,
Nehemiah's, Zorobabel's and holy Servants of the Lord, who at the voice of the
Angel, came out of Babylon, and repaired the ruins of Jerusalem. And even as
certain rivers are said to run Alpheum fama est huc Elidis amnem, Occultas
egisse vias subter mare. Virg. lib. 3. Ae^eid.
under or through the salt Sea, and yet to receive no salt or bitter taste from
it, but at length to burst out, and send forth their own sweet and delightful
waters: Right so it fell out with this and some other doctrines of Faith. This
Catholic truth (that the Popes judgment and Cathedral sentence in causes of
faith is not infallible) borne in the first age of the Church, and springing
from the Scriptures and Apostles, as from the holy mountains of God, for the
space of 600 years and more, passed with a most fair and spacious current,
like Tygris and Euphrates watering on each side the Garden of the Lord; or like
Pactolus, with golden streams enriching and beautifying the Church of God:
after that time it fell into the corrupted waters of succeeding ages, brackish
(I confess) before their second Nycene Synod, but after it and the next unto
it, extremely salt and unpleasant, more bitter then the waters of Mara. And
although the nearer it came to the streets of Babylon, it was still more
mingled with the slime or mud of their Babylonish ditches; yet, for all that
dangerous and long mixture, continuing about the space of Tot anni intersunt a
Conc. Nic. 2. quod habituus est an. 787. ad annum quo Lutherus se primum
opposuit Indulge^tijs papalibus and pontifici, qui fuit an. 1517 Cocl. in vita
Luther.
730. years, this truth all that time kept her native and primitive
sweetness, by the constant and successive professions of the whole Church
throughout all those ages. Now after that long passage through all those salt
waves, like Alpheus, or Arethusa, it bursts out again, not as they did, in
Sicily, nor near the Italian shores, but (as the Cardinal tells Brevi
occupavit (Lutheri haeresis) multa regna. Bell. l. 3. de pontif. ca. 23.
Similitudo. Et, Romanasedes amisit nostris temporibus magnam Germaniae partem,
Suetiam, Gethians, Norvegiam, Daniam universam, bonam Anglia, Gallia. Helvetia,
Polonia, Bohemia, ac Pannonia partem, lib. eod, ca. 21. Ac postea.
us) in Germany, in England, in Scotland, in France, in Helvetia, in Polonia,
in Bohemia, in Pannonia, in Sueveland, in Denmark, in Norway, in all the
Reformed Churches, and being by the power and goodness of God, purified from
all that mud and corruption wherewith it was mingled; (all which is now left in
it own proper, that is, in the Roman, channels;) it is now preserved in the
fair current of those Orthodoxall Churches, wherein both it and other holy
doctrines of Faith, are with no less sincerity professed, the^ they were in
those ancient times before they were mingled with any bitter or brackish waters.

36 You see now the whole judgment of the Fifth General Council, how in every
point it contradicts the Apostolical Constitution of Pope Vigilius,
condemning and accursing both it for heretical, and all who defend it for
heretics: which their sentence, you see, is consonant to the Scriptures, and
the whole Catholic Church of all ages, excepting none but such as adhere to
their new Laterane decree and faith. An example so ancient, so authentical,
and so pregnant to demonstrate the truth, which we teach, and they oppugn,
that it may justly cause any Papist in the world to stagger, and stand in
doubt, even of the maine ground and foundation whereon all his faith relyeth.
For the full clearing of which matter, being of so great importance and
consequence, I have thought it needful to rip up every vein and sinew in this
whole cause, concerning these Three Chapters, and the Constitution of Vigilius
in defense of the same: and withal examine the weight of every doubt, evasion,
and excuse, which either Cardinal Baronius, (who is instar omnium) or Binius,
or any other, moves or pretends herein; not willingly, nor with my
knowledge, omitting any one reason, or circumstance, which either they urge, or
which may seem to advantage or help them, to decline the inevitable force of
our former Demonstration.

CAP. V. The first Exception of Baronius, pretending that the cause of the
Three Chapters was no cause of faith, refuted.
1 THere is not, as I think, any one cause which Card. Baronius in all the
Volumes of his Annalls has with more art or industry handled, then this
concerning Pope Vigilius, and the Fifth General Council. In this he has
strained all his wits, moved and removed every stone, under which he imagined
any help might be found, either wholly to excuse, or any way lessen the error
of Vigilius. All the Cardinals forces may be ranked into four several
troops. In the first do march all his Shifts and Evasions which are drawn
from the Matter of the Three Chapters: In the second, those which are drawn
from the Popes Constitution: In the third, those which respect a subsequent Act
of Vigilius: In the fourth and last, those which concern the fifth General
Council. After all these, wherein consists the whole pith of the Cause, the
Cardinal brings forth another band of certain subsidiary, but most disorderly
soldiers, nay, not soldiers; they never took the Military oath, nor may they
by the Law of arms, nor ever were by any worthy General admitted into any
lawful fight, or so much as to set footing in the field; mere thieves and
robbers they are, whom the Cardinal has set in an ambush, not to fight in the
cause, but only like so many Shimei's, that they might rail at and revile
whomsoever the Cardinal takes a spleen at, or with whatsoever he shall be
moved in the heat of his choler: At the Emperor Justinian, at Theodora the
Empress, at the cause it self of the Three Chapters, at the Imperial Edict,
at Theodorus Bishop of Cesarea, at the Synodal acts, yea, at Pope Vigilius
himself; we will first encounter the just forces of the Cardinal, which only
are his lawful warriors; and having discomfited them, we shall with ease
clear all the coasts of this cause, from all his theevish, piraticall, and
disordered straglers.

2. The first and chiefest exception of Baronius arises from the matter and
controversy it self touching these Three Chapters; concerning which he
pretends, that no question of faith was handled therein, and so one dissenting
from another in this cause, might not be counted or called an heretic. This
was a question says he, An. 547. nu. 30 and nu. 215.
de personis, and non de fide; of persons and not of the faith. Again, Ibid.
nu. 46.
Vigilius knew, Non de fide esse quaestionem, sed de personis; that there was
no question moved herein about the faith, but about certain persons. And yet
more clearly, In these disputations, says he, Ibid. nu 231.
about the Three Chapters, as we have often said, Nulla fuit quaestio de side,
ut alter ab altero aliter sentiens dici posset haereticus; there was no
question at all about the faith; so that one dissenting from another herein,
might be called an heretic. And this he so confidently avoucheth, that he
says of it; Abomnibus absque ulla controversia consentitur; all men agree
herein without any controversy. Thus Baronius, whom Binius applauding, says,
Not. in Conc. 5.. Ne quis.
Sciendum est, be it known to all men, that in these disputations and
differences about the Three Chapters, non fuisse quaestionem ullam de fide, sed
tantummodo de personis; there was no quaestion at all concerning the faith, but
only concerning the persons. So he. Whereby they would insinuate, that Pope
Vigilius did err only in a personal cause, or in a matter of fact, which
they not unwillingly confess that the Pope may do; but he erred not in a
cause of faith, or in any doctrinall position of faith, wherein only they
defend him to be infallible.

3. Truly the Card. was driven to an extreme exigent, when this poor shift
must be the first and best shelter to save the infallibility of the Apostolic
Chair. For to say truth, the maine controversy touching these Three Chapters,
which the Council condemned, and Vigilius defended, was only doctrinall, and
directly belonging to the faith; nor did it concern the persons any other way,
but with an implication of that heretical doctrine which they and the
defenders of these Chapters under that color did cunningly maintain: A truth
so evident that I do even labor with abundance of proofs.

4. Justinian the religious Emperor, who called this Council about this
matter, committed it unto them, as a question of faith: We have, says he,
Epist. ad. Synod. Coll. 1. pa. 520. a.
commanded Vigilius to come together with you all, and debate these Three
Chapters, that a determination may be given, rectae sidei conveniens, consonant
to the right faith. Again, stirring Ibid. ^.
them up to give a speedy resolution in this cause, he adds this as a reason,
Quonia^ qui de side recta interrogatur; for when one is asked concerning the
right faith, and puts off his answer therein, this is nothing else but a
denial of the true confession; for in questions and answers quae de fide sunt,
which are questions of faith, he that is more prompt and ready is acceptable
with God. Thus the Emperor.

5. The Holy Council esteemed it, as did the Emperor, to be no other than a
cause or question of faith; for thus they say, Gum Coll. 8. page 584. a.
de fide ratio movetur, when a doubt or question is moved touching the faith,
even he is to be condemned, who may hinder impiety, but is negligent so to do;
and therefore, Festinavimus bonum fidei semen conservare ab impietatis
Zizanijs; We have hastened to preserve the good seed of faith pure from the
tares of impiety. So clearly does the whole general Council even in their
definitive sentence call the condemning of the Three Chapters which themselves
did, a preserving of the good seed of faith; and the defending of them, which
Vigilius did, a sowing of heretical weeds which corrupt the faith. Again,
Ibid. pa. 586. b.
We being enlightened by the holy Scriptures, and the doctrine of the holy
Fathers, have thought it needful to set down in certain Chapters, (those are
the particular points of their Synodall judgment) Et praedicationem veritatis,
and haereticorum eorumque impietatis condemnationem; both the preaching of the
truth, or true faith, and the condemning of Heretics, and their impiety. And
in the end, having set down those Chapters, and among them a particular and
express condemning of these Three with an anathema denounced to the defenders
of the, they conclude thus, Ibid. pa. 588. a.
We have confessed these things, being delivered unto us both by the sacred
Scriptures, by the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and by those things which are
defined, de una eademque side, concerning one and the same faith by the four
former Councels. Then which nothing can be more clear to witness their decree
touching these Threee Chapters most nearely to concern the faith, unless some
of Baronius his friends can make proof, that the condemning of heretics, and
their impious heresies, and the maintaining of that doctrine which the
Scriptures and Fathers taught, and the four first Councels defined, is not a
point of faith.

6. Neither only did the Catholics which were the condemners of these Three
Chapters, but the heretics also which were the defenders of them, they also
consent in this truth, that the question concerning them, was a controversy or
cause of faith. Pope Vigilius in his Constitution Apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 106.
197. 208. and alibi.
still pretends his Defense of Those Chapters to be consonant to the Council
at Chalcedon, and the Definition thereof: and of the Epistle of Ibas he
expressly says, The Council of Chalcedon pronounced it to be orthodoxall. And
none I suppose will doubt, but that the question, whether that or any other
writing be orthodoxall, and agreeable to the Definition of Chalcedon, as
Vigilius affirmed that Epistle to be; or be heretical and repugnant to that
Definition, as the Holy Council adjudged that Epistle to be, is a plain
question and controversy of faith. Victor B. of Tunen, who suffered
imprisonment and banishment for defense of these Three Chapters, teaches the
like, saying, Jn Chron. an. 2. post Consul. Basilij.
That Epistle of Ibas was approved and judged Iudicio Synodi approbata, and
oribodoxa judicata est. ibid.
orthodoxall, by the sentence of the Council at Chalcedon: and the condemning
of these Three Chapters, is the condemning and banishing of that Council.
Facundus B. of Hermian, who writ seven books of these Three Chapters, does
more than abundantly witness this of him. Victor thus writes, In suo Chron.
an. 10. post Consul. Basilij.
Evidentissime declaravit, Facundus has declared most evidently, that those
Three Chapters were condemned in proscriptione fidei Catholicae and
Apostolicae, for the exiling and rooting out of the Catholic and Apostolic
faith. Facundus himself does not only affirm this, but prove it also, even
by the judgment of Pope Vigilius. Vigilius, says he, Lib 4. pro desens. trium
Capit apud Bar. an. 546. nu. 57.
esteemed the condemning of these Three Chapters to be so heinous a crime, that
he thought it fit to be reproved by those words of the Apostle, Avoid profane
novelties of words, and opposition of science falsely so called, which some
professing have erred from the faith. And hereupon, as if he meant purposely to
refute this Evasion of Baronius, which it seems some did use in those days,
he adds, Quid adhuc quaeritur utrum contra fidem factum fuerit; why do any as
yet doubt whether the condemning of them be against the faith, seeing Pope
Vigilius calls it profane noveltie and opposition of science, whereby some
have erred from the faith? And a little after concluding, This says he, Ibid.
nu. 58.
is not to be thought such a cause as may be tolerated for the peace of the
Church, sed qua merito judicatur contra ipsius fidei Catholicae statum commota;
but it must be judged such a cause as is moved against the state of the
Catholic faith. Thus Facundus testifying both his own, and the judgment of
the other defenders of those Chapters, and by name of Pope Vigilius, that they
all esteemed and judged this to be a question and controversy of faith, of
which Baronius tells us, that in it there was moved no question at all
concerning the faith; and that Pope Vigilius know that it was no question of
faith.

7. Now whereas the whole Church at that time was divided into Vniversus fere
orbis occidentalis ab orientali Ecclesia divisus erat. Bin. not. in S. Conc..
Concilium.
two parts, the Eastern Churches with the holy Council condemning; the
Western with Pope Vigilius defending those Three Chapters, seeing both the one
side and the other consent in this point, that this was a cause and question of
faith, what truth or credit think you, is there in Baronius, who says, that
All men without any doubt agree herein, that this is no cause or question of
faith: whereas all, both the one side and the other agree in the quite
contrary. Truly the wisdom of the Cardinal is well worthy observing, He
consents to Vigilius in defending the Three Chapters, wherein Vigilius was
heretical: but dissenteth from Vigilius in holding this to be a cause of
faith, wherein Vigilius was orthodoxal; as if he had made some vow to follow
the Pope, when the Pope forsakes the truth, but to forsake the Pope, when the
Pope follows the truth.

8. Nor only was this truth by that age acknowledged, but by succeeding,
approved. By Pope Pelagius, who to reclame certain Bishops from defense of
those Chapters, wherein they were earnest, and had writ an apology for the
same, uses this as one special reason, because all those Chapters were
repugnant to the Scriptures and former Councels. Consider, says he, Epist. 7..
Pensate.
if the writings of Theodorus, which deny Christ the Redeemer to be the Lord,
the writings of Theodoret, quae contra fidem edita, which being published
against the faith, were afterward by himsefe condemned; and the Epistle of
Ibas, wherein Nestorius the enemy of the Church is defended; if these be
consonant to the Prophetical, Evangelical, and Apostolical authority. And
again, Ibid. Sed cur.
of the Epistle of Ibas he adds, If this Epistle be received as true, tota
sanctae Ephesinae Synodus fides dissipatur, the whole faith of the holy
Ephesine Council is overthrown. Let here some of Baronius friends tell us how
that question or cause does not concern the faith, the defending whereof
(which Vigilius did) is by the judgment of Pope Pelagius repugnant to the
Euangelical and Apostolical doctrines, and even anutter and total overthrow
of the faith. To Pelagius accords Pope Gregory, who approved Lib. 2. Ind. 10.
Epist. 36.
this Epistle of Pelagius, and commended it as a direction to others in this
cause. And what speak I of one or two, seeing the Decree of this fifth
Council, wherein this is declared to be a cause of faith, is consonant to all
former, and confirmed by all succeeding general Councels, Popes and Bishops,
til that time of Leo the 10. and his Laterane Synod, as before we Cap. 4.
have showed? was not this think you, most insolent presumption in Baronius to
set himself as a Johannes ad oppositum, against them all, and oppose his own
fancy, to the constant and consenting judgment of the whole Catholic Church
for more than 1500 years together? These all with one voice profess this to
be a cause of faith: Baronius against them all maintains, that it is no cause
of faith: and to heap up the full measure of his shame, adds a vast untruth,
for which no color of excuse can be devised; Consentitur ab omnibus, that all
men without any controversy agree herein, that this is no question nor cause
of faith.

9. Besides all these, Card. Bellarmine sets down diverse (...), and clear
tokens whereby one may certainly know when a Council decrees or proposes any
doctrine tanquam de fide, to be received as a doctrine of the Catholic faith.
This says he, Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 12. Quartu^.
is easily known by the words of the Council, for either they use to say,
that they explicate the Catholic faith; or else, that they who think the
contrary are to be accounted heretics; or, which is most frequent, they
anathematize those who think the contrary. So he. Let us now by these marks
examine this cause, and it will be most evident, not only by some one of them,
which yet were sufficient; but by them all, that the Holy Council both held
this controversy to be of faith, and also proposed their decree herein, as a
Decree of faith.

10. For the first, the Council in plain terms professes even Coll. 8. pa.
588. a.
in their definitive sentence, that in their Decree they explane that same
doctrine which the Scriptures, the Fathers, and the four former Councels had
delivered in their definitions of faith. Then undoubtedly by Bellarmines first
note, their Decree herein is a Decree of faith, seeing it is an explication of
the Catholic faith.

11. For the second, the Council in like sort, in plain terms calls the
defe^ders of those three Chapters, heretics. For thus cried all the Synod,
Coll. 6. pa. 576. b.
He who does not anathematize this Epistle, is an Heretic: He who receives
it, is an Heretic: This we say all. And in their definitive sentence they
profess Coll. 8. pa.
that they set down the preaching of the truth, and Haereticorum
condemnationem, and the condemning of Heretics. So by the second mark of
Bellarmine it is undoubted, that the Councels Decree herein is a Decree of
faith.

12. The third note is more than demonstrative. For the Holy Council
denounces, not once or twice, but more I think than an hundred times an
Anathema to them that teach contrary to their sentence. Anathema Coll. 4. pa.
537. a. and Coll. 8. pa. 586. et 587.
to Theodorus; anathema to him that does not anathematize Theodorus; we all
anathematize Theodorus and his writings. Anathema Coll. 8. pa. 587. b.
to the impious writing of Theodoret against Cyril: Anathema to all that do
not anathematize them: we Coll. 6. pa. 576. b.
all anathematize the impious Epistle of Ibas: If Coll. 8. pa. 587. b.
any defend this Epistle, or any part of it, if any do not anathematize it,
and the defenders of it, let him be an Anathema.

13. So by all the notes of Cardinal Bellarmine, it is evident, not only that
this question about the Three Chapters, is a question of faith; but, which is
more, that the holy general Council proposed their Decree herein, tanquam de
fide, as a Decree of faith. Now because every Christian is bound to believe
certitudine fidei cui falsum subesse non potest, with certainty of faith which
cannot be deceived, every doctrine and position of faith, then especially when
it is published and declared by a Decree of the Church to be a doctrine of
faith: Seeing by this Decree of faith which the Council now made, not only
the Popes Apostolical sentence in a cause of faith, is condemned to be
heretical, but all they also who defend it, to be Heretics and accursed; and
seeing all defend it who maintain the Popes cathedral sentence to be
infallible, that is, all who are members of the present Church of Rome: it
hence inevitably ensues, that every Christian is bound to believe certitudine
fidei cui falsum subesse non potest, not only the doctrine, even the
fundamental doctrine of the present Church of Rome to be heretical, but all
that maintain it; that is, all that are members of that Church, to be
heretics and accursed, unless disclaiming that heresy they forsake all
communion with that Church. Baronius perceiving all those Anathemaes to fall
inevitably upon himself, and their whole Church, if this cause of the Three
Chapters which Vigilius defended and defined by his Apostolical Constitution,
that they must be defended; if this I say were admitted to be a cause of faith,
that he might shuffle off those Anathemaes, which like the leprosy of Gehazi
does cleave unto them; thought it the safest, as indeed it was the shortest
way, to deny this to be a cause of faith, which not only by all the precedent
witnesses, but by the judgment of their own Cardinal, and all the three
notes set down by him, is undeniably proved to be a cause of faith, and that
the Decree of the Holy Council concerning it, is proposed as a Decree of faith.

14. I might further add their own Nicholas Sanders, who though he saw not
much in matters of faith, yet he both saw and professed this truth,, and
therefore in plain terms calls Ob easdem haeres^s decrevit eos esse alienos
a diaconorii honor. Lib. 7. de visib. Monarch. an. 537.
the defending of the Three Chapters an heresy. Now heresy it could not be,
unless it were a cause of faith, seeing every heresy is a deviation from the
faith. But omitting him, and some others of his rank, I will now in the last
place add one other witness, which with the favorites of Baronius is of more
weight and worth, than all the former, and that is Baronius himself, who, as
he does often deny, so does he often and plainly profess this to be a cause of
faith. Speaking of the Emperors Edict concerning these Three Chapters, he
bitterly reproves; yea, he reproacheth the Emperor for that he would An. 546.
nu. 41.
arrogate to himself edere sanctiones de fide Catholica, to make Edicts about
the Catholic faith. Again, the whole Catholic faith, says he, would An.
eode^. nu. 43.
be in jeopardy, if such as Justinian de fide leges sanciret, should make laws
concerning the faith. Again, Ibid. nu. 50.
Pelagius the Popes Legate sounded an alarm contra ejusdem Imperatoris de fide
sancitu^ Edictu^, against the Emperors Edict published concerning the faith.
And yet again, An. 547. nu. 50.
Pope Vigilius writ letters against those qui edito ab Imperatore fidei decreto
subscripsissent, who had subscribed to the Emperors Edict of faith. So often,
so expressly does Baronius profess this to be a cause of faith, which himself,
like the Aesopicall Satyr, had so often, and so expressly denied to be a cause
of faith; and that also so confidently, that he shamed not to say, Consentitur
ab omnibus, all men agree herein, that this is no cause of faith; whereas
Baronius himself dissenteth herein, confessing in plain terms this to be a
cause of the Catholic faith.

15. The truth is, the Cardinals judgment was unsettled, and himself in a
manner infatuated in handling this whole cause touching Vigilius and the fifth
general Council. For having once resolved to deny this one truth, that
Vigilius by his Apostolical sentence maintained and defined heresy, and
decreed that all other should maintain it, (which one truth, like a Thesean
thread would easily and certainly have directed him in all the rest of his
Treatise;) now he wandreth up and down as in a Labyrinth, toiling himself in
uncertainties and contradictions, saying, and gainsaying, whatsoever either the
present occasion which he has in hand, or the partiality of his corrupted
judgment, like a violent tempest does drive him unto; when the Emperor or his
Edict (to both which he bears an implacable hatred) comes in his way, then
this question about the Three Chapters, must be a cause of faith: for so the
Cardinal may have a spacious field to declame against the Emperor for
presuming to intermeddle and make laws in a cause of faith. But when Pope
Vigilius or his Constitution (with which the Cardinal is most partially
blinded) meet him, then the ease is quite altered, the question about the Three
Chapters must then be no more a question or cause of faith; for that is an
easy way to excuse Vigilius, and the infallibility of his Chair: he erred
only in some personal matters, in such the Pope may err; he erred not in any
doctrinall point, nor in a cause of faith; in such is he and his Chair
infallible.

16. There remains one doubt, arising out of the words of Gregory, by the
wilful mistaking whereof An. 547. nu. 30. and an. 553. nu. 231.
Baronius was misseled. He seems to teach the same with the Cardinal, where
speaking of this fifth Synod, he says, Lib. 3. Epist. 37.
In ea de personis tantummodo, non autem de fide aliquid est gestum; In it was
only handled somewhat concerning those persons, but nothing concerning the
faith. So Gregory, whose words if they be taken without any limitation, are not
only untrue, but repugnant to the consenting judgment of Councels and Fathers
above mentioned, even to Gregory himself: for speaking of all the five
Councels held before his time; he says, Lib. 1. Epist. 24.
Whosoever embraces, praedictarum Synodorum fidem, the faith explaned by those
five Councels, peace be unto them. And if he had not in such particular manner
testified this; yet seeing he approves (as was before Ca. 4. nu. 27.
showed) this fifth Council and the Decree thereof; and seeing that Decree
clearly expresses this to have been a cause of faith, grounded on Scriptures,
and the definitions of faith set down in former Councels; even thereby does
Gregory certainly imply, that he accounted this cause for no other than (as the
Synod it self did) for a cause of faith.

17. What then is Gregory repugnant to himself herein? I list not to censure
so of him; rather by his own words I desire to explane his meaning. There were
diverse in his time, as also in his Predecessor's Pelagius, who condemned this
fifth Council, because, as they supposed, it had altered and abolished the
faith of the Council at Chalcedon, by condemning these Three Chapters, and had
established a new doctrine of faith. Gregory entreating against these, whom he
truly calls Exeuntes maligni homines turbaverunt animos vestros. Lib. 2.
Epist. 10.
malignant persons, and troublers of the Church, denies, and that most justly,
that this Council had done ought in the faith; not simply, as if they had done
nothing at all, but nothing in such a manner as those malignant persons
intended; nothing that was contrary to the faith decreed at Chalcedon; nothing
that was new, or uncouth in the doctrine of faith; in this manner the Council
did nothing in the faith. Hear the words of Gregory expressing thus much;
Some there are (says he) Lib. 3. Epist. 3.
who affirm, that in the time of Julian there was somewhat decreed against the
Council at Chalcedon; But such men neither reading, neither believing those
who read, remain in their error; for we profess, our conscience bearing
witness unto us, de fide ejusdem Concilij nihil esse motum, nihil violatum;
that nothing concerning the faith of that Council at Chalcedon, was here (in
the fifth Council) moved or altered, nothing violated or hurt; but whatsoever
was done in this fifth Synod, it was done, that the faith of the Council at
Chalcedon should in no sort be infringed. So Gregory, who to like purpose
again says, Lib. 2. Ind. 10. Epist. 36.
In the Synod concerning the Three Chapters it is manifest, nihil de fide
convulsum esse, nihil immutatu^; that nothing concerning the faith was weakened,
nothing changed therein.

18. Now as against their first calumny, Gregory teaches, that nothing was
done contrary to the faith of the Council at Chalcedon; so against their other
he shows, that they decreed no noveltie in the faith, nor ought else but what
was formerly decreed at Chalcedon. To which purpose he says Lib. 7. Epist. 54.
of this fifth Synod, that it was in omnibus sequax, in every point an imitator
and follower of the Council at Chalcedo^: and again Lib. 2. Ind. 11. Epist. 10.
more clearly, In this fifth Synod nothing else was done, qua^ apud
Chalcedone^sem Synodu^ fuerat constitutu^; then was formerly decreed in the
Council at Chalcedon. So Gregory. Both this fifth, and that at Chalcedon (as
also the former at Ephesus) decreed one and the self same faith, as by Gregory
is truly witnessed: but the Council at Chalcedon and Ephesus decreed it
absolutely, without any express reference to those persons or writings which
are condemned in the fifth, though in them both was implicit contained a
condemnation of all these Three Chapters; the fifth Council decreed it with an
express reference to these Chapters, and an explicit condemnation of them.
The Decrees made at Ephesus and Chalcedon were Introductive; as first
condemning those heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches. The Decree of this fifth
Council was only Corroborative, or Declarative, explaning and corroborating
those former decrees, by condemning these writings of Theodorus, Theodoret, and
Ibas, which did overthrow the same. As Vigilius and other followers of
Nestorius, did not at this time broach any new heresy, but under those Three
Chapters on which they put the visor of the Council at Chalcedon, sought to
revive the heresy of Nestorius, which before, when it came in its own habit,
was condemned: Even so the fifth Council needed not, neither did they condemn
any new, but unmasked the old and condemned heresy of Nestorius lurking under
the defense of these Three Chapters; they pulled off the visor of Chalcedon
from it, under which it most subtly now sought to insinuate it self, and
creep into the Church. And when Gregory says, that in this fifth Council they
dealt tantummodo de personis, that tantummodo, in his sense does not exclude
all handling of the faith, not the explaning, not the corroborating of the
faith, for both these they certainly did, and Gregory acknowledges: but it
only excludes such an handling of the faith as was used ar Ephesus and
Chalcedon, by making an Introductive decree for condemning some new heresy.
The fifth Council dealt only with persons, without making such a Decree; yet
it dealt with those persons with an intent to explane and corroborate those
Introductive decrees.

19. The words of Gregory next following those on which Baronius relied, do
yet more fully explane this to have been his meaning. In the fifth Synod
nothing was done concerning the faith, but only the persons; and those persons,
de quibus in Chalcedonensi Synodo nihil continetur, concerning which persons
nothing is contained or set down in the Council at Chalcedon. For as there is
much contained in that Council concerning those persons, especially Ibas, (in
whose cause, and the examining thereof, two Act. 9. and 10.
whole Actions are bestowed) and yet in a favorable construction, or according
to Gregory his meaning, he might truly say, that nothing concerning them is
contained there; to wit, nothing to condemn Theodorus, or the writings of
Theodoret and Ibas in such an express and particular manner as they are
condemned in the fifth Council: Right so, though the fifth Council not only
handled a cause of faith, but published their decree as a Decree of faith; yet
in a like favorable construction, and according to Gregory's meaning he might
truly say, that nothing was done therein concerning the faith, to wit, nothing
to make such an Introductive decree for condemning a new heresy, as was
formerly made in the Council at Chalcedon.

20. By all which the true meaning of Gregory is now by his own explaning most
evident. In the fifth Council nothing was done contrary to the faith, (as the
malignant slanderers of this Council pretended) nothing was done de novo, to
condemn any new heresy; nothing was done absolutely, or without reference to
these Three Chapters: all this Gregory truly intends, when he says, nothing
was done therein concerning the faith: but seeing all that was done in the
Council, was done to explane, confirm and corroborate the faith decreed at
Chalcedon, and Ephesus; as Gregory himself professes, it undoubtedly
follows, that even for this cause, and by Gregory's own testimony, the
question here defined was a cause and question of faith. Upon Gregory's words
the Cardinal might well have collected, that Vigilius in defending the Three
Chapters, erred not in any new heresy, or new question of faith, such as was
not before condemned; but that he erred not at all in a cause of faith, is so
far from the intent of Gregory, that out of his express words the quite
contrary is certainly to be collected. For how can the Pope be said not at all
to err in the faith, when by his Apostolical Constitution he defends that
cause of the Three Chapters, the defending whereof contradicts a former
definition of faith, and utterly overthrows the holy Council of Ephesus and
Chalcedon; yea, the whole Catholic faith?

21. Neither must this seem strange to any, that the fifth general Council
did only explane and confirm a former definition of faith, and made no decree
to condemn any new heresy repugnant to the faith. The like hereof in some
other Councels may be observed. The Council of Sardica was a general holy
Council, as beside Socr. lib. 2. ca. 16. Ex pluribus quam 35 provincijs
collecta. Athan. Epist. ad solit. vitam agent. pa. 225.
others the Emperor Justinian in that his Ab universali Sardicensi Synodo.
Just. Edict. Quod autem.
Edict witnesses: and yet in it, Bin. Not. in Conc. Sard. Cum igitur. and
Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. chap. 25 Tertia.
nihil novi quoad fidem definitu^ est; no new doctrine of faith was there
defined, nor any new heresy condemned, but only the faith decreed at Nice was
corroborated, and confirmed. And the cause why the Sardican Council is not
reckoned in the order of general Councels, was not that which Locis citat.
Bellarmine and Binius fancy; because the Sardican and Nicene were held to be
one and the same Council, (for neither were they so indeed, being called by
different Emperors, to different places, at different times, and upon
different occasions; neither were they ever by the ancient, or any of sound
judgment held for one Synod) but the true reason thereof was this, because the
Sardicane, though in dignity and authority it was equal to the Nicene, yet
only confirmed the Decree of faith formerly made at Nice; and made no new or
Introductive decree, to condemn any heresy, as did the other at Nice. And
truly for the self same reason, the Church might, if they had pleased, have
done the like to this fifth Council, and not have accounted it no more than
they did the Sardicane, in a distinct number; but only esteemed it a Council
corroborative of the Council at Chalcedon, as that at Sardica was of the
Nicene Council, which some Churches also did, as by the 14. Council at Can.
6. and 7.
Toledo, held a little after the sixth general, appears; wherein this fifth
being for that cause omitted; the sixth, held under Constantinus Pogonatus, is
reckoned as the fifth, or next Council to that at Chalcedo^. But for as much as
this cause about the Three Chapters had bred so long, and so exceeding great
trouble in the Church; and because the explanation of the faith made in this
fifth Council upon occasion of those Chapters, was so exact, that it did in a
manner equal any former decree of faith, and benefit the whole Church as much
as any had done: it pleased the Church for these reasons, with one consent,
declared first in the sixth Act. 15. pa. 80. Sa^ctas and universales quinque
Synodos, and super has and quintae Synodi.
Council; and then in the 2. Can. 1.
Nicene, and diverse other after it, to account this for the fifth, and rank it
as it well deserves, in the number of holy and golden general Councels.

22. It now I hope clearly appears how unjustly the Cardinal pretends the
words of Pope Gregory, as denying this to be at all any cause of faith; whereas
not only by the Emperor, by the fifth Council, by the defenders as well as
the condemners of these Chapters; by succeding general Councels; by Popes,
even Pope Gregory among the rest; by the Catholic Church, and consent thereof
until their Laterane Synod; but even by their own writers, Cardinal
Bellarmine, Sanders, yea, by Baronius himself, it is evidently proved so
nearely to concern the faith, that to defend these Chapters (which Vigilius
did) is to enervate and overthrow; and to condemn them (which the Council
did) is to uphold and confirm the Holy Catholic faith. And although this
alone (if I should say no more) were sufficient to oppose to this first Evasion
of Baronius; yet, that both the truth hereof may more fully and further
appear; and that the most vile and shameless dealing of Baronius in this
cause, such, as I think few heretics have ever paralleled, may be palpable
unto all; To that which hitherto we have spoken in general concerning all
these Three Chapters, I purpose now to add a particular consideration of each
of them by it self; whereby it will be evident, that every one of these
Chapters does so directly concern the faith; that the defense of any one of
them, but especially of the two last, is an oppugnation, yea, an abnegation of
the whole Christian faith.

CAP. VI. That the first reason of Vigilius touching the first Chapter, why
Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not to be condemned, because none after their
death ought noviter to be condemned, concerns the faith, and is heretical.
1. IN the first Chapter, wherein Vigilius defe^deth that Theodorus of
Mopsvestia, being long before dead, ought not to be condemned for an heretic;
the Popes sentence relyeth on three reasons, the examination whereof, will both
open the whole cause concerning this Chapter, and manifest the foul errors of
Vigilius, as well doctrinall, as personal, as well concerning the faith, as
the fact.

2. His first reason is drawn from a general position, which Vigilius takes
as a Maxim, or doctrinall principle in divinity. Nulli Constable. Vigil. ap. Bar.
an. 55^. nu. 179.
licere noviter aliquid de mortuorum judicare personis, It is lawful to
condemn none after their death, who were not in their life time condemned; and
therefore not Theodorus. That Theodorus in his life time was not condemned,
Vigilius proves not, but presupposes; nor do I in that dissent from him; for
although that testimony of Leontius Leon. lib. de sec. Act. 4.
be exceeding partial and untrue, where he says, that Theodorus and Diodorus,
in pretio habiti mortem oppetiere; died in honor; neither did Viva quidem
ipsis cur nemo contradixerat, factum ideo, etc. Ibid.
any, while they lived reprove any of their sayings: yet are there diverse other
inducements to persuade, that Theodorus was not in his life time, by any
public judgment of the Church, either declared, or condemned for an heretic:
for besides that neither Cyrill, nor Proclus, nor the fifth general Council,
do mention any such matter, the words of Cyrill do plainly import the
contrary. The Ephesine Synod, says Cyril. epist. ad Procl. in Conc. 5. Coll.
5. pa. 550, 551.
he, forbear in particular, and by name, to anathematize Theorus, which they
did dispensative, by a certain dispensation, indulgence, or connivence,
because diverse held him in great estimation, or account: what needed either any
such dispensation, or forbearance, had he in his life time been publicly
condemned for heresy? Again, the Church of Mopsvestia, where he was Bishop,
for diverse years after his death, retained his name in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa.
552. and seq. in act. Synod. Mopsv.
Diplicis, that is, in their Ecclesiastical tables, making a thankful
commemoration of him, as of other Catholics in their Liturgy; which, had he
been in his life time condemned for an heretic, they would not have done.
Lastly, what needed the defenders of the Three Chapters have been so
scrupulous, to condemn him being dead, had he in his life time been before
condemned? Or how could this have given occasion of this controversy, whether
a dead man might Noviter be condemned, if Theodorus had not been noviter
condemned when he was dead.

3. Wherefore this particular being agreed upon, that Theodorus was not before,
but after his death condemned, the whole doubt now rests in the Thesis,
whether a dead man may Noviter be condemned. Now that this is no personal, but
merely a dogmaticall cause, and controversy of faith, is so evident, that it
might be a wonder that Baronius, or any other, should so much as doubt thereof,
unless the Apostle had foretold, that because men 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
do not receive the love of the truth; therefore God does send unto them
strong delusions, that they may believe lies. Certain it is that Pope
Vigilius, held this for no other, but a doctrine of faith; for he sets it down
as a Perspeximus si quid de his praedecessores nostri decreverint. Vig. Constable.
loc. citat. nu. 176. Hujus causa formam veneranda praedecessorum nostrorum
constituta, nobis apertissime tradiderunt. Ibid. Idem regul^ria Apostolicae
sedis definiunt constituta. Jbid. nu. 179.
Definition, or Constitution of his predecessors, decreed by the Apostolic
See: particularly by Pope Leo, and Gelasius; and so decreed by them, as
warranted, and taught by the Scriptures; for out of those words, Whatsoever ye
bind, or loose upon earth, Pope Gelasius Ibid. nu. 177.
collecteth, and Vigilius consents unto him, that such as are not upon earth,
or among the living; hos non humano, sed suo Deus judicio reservavit; God has
exempted them from humane, and reserved them to his own judgment: nec audet
Ecclesia, nor dare the Church challenge to it self the judgment of such. As
the Pope, so also the holy general Council took this for no other, than a
question of faith; for they plainly profess, even in their Synodall
resolution, that their decree concerning dead men, that they may be Noviter
condemned; is not only an Ecclesiastical Licet cognosceremus Ecclesiasticam
de impiis traditionem. Coll. 8. pa. 585. a.
tradition, but an Apostolical doctrine also, warranted by the texts, and
testimonies of the holy Scriptures. To which purpose alleging diverse places of
Scripture, they add these words; It is many ways manifest, that they who
affirm this, [that men after their death may not Noviter be condemned,] nullam
curam Dei judicatorum faciunt, nec Apostolicarum pronunciationum, nec
paternarum traditionum; that such have no regard either to the word of God, or
the Apostles doctrine, or the tradition of the Fathers. So the whole Council
judging, and decreeing Pope Vigilius to be guilty of all these.

4. Now when both the Pope on the one side, and the whole general Council on
the other; that is, both the defenders, and condemners of this Chapter profess
it to be a doctrine taught in the Scripture, and therefore undoubtedly to be a
cause of faith; what insolency was it in Baronius to contradict them both, and,
against that truth, wherein they both agree, to deny this Chapter to be a cause
of faith? or seeing it is clear, both by the Pope, and Council, that the
resolution of this question is set down in Scripture, what else can be
thought of Baronius denying either the one, or the other part, to be a cause,
or assertion of faith, but that with him the doctrines defined, and set down in
Scriptures, are no doctrines or assertions of faith, at least, not of the
Cardinals faith?

5. Seeing now this is a cause of faith, and in this cause of faith, the Pope,
and general Council are at variance; either of them challenge the Scripture,
as consonant to his, and repugnant to the opposite assertion; what equal and
unpartiall umpire may be found to judge in this matter? Audito Ecclesiae nomine
hostis expalluit, faith their vain, and vaunting Camp. Rut. 3.
Braggadochio; Have thou appealed to the Church? to the Church, and judgment
thereof shall thou go; at the name of which, we are so far from being
daunted, or appaled, that with great confidence, and assurance of victory, we
provoke unto it.

6. But where may we hear the voice, and judgment of the Church? out of doubt
either in the writings of the Fathers, or provincial Synods, or in general
Councels; and in which of these soever the Church speak, her sentence is for
us, and our side. Her voice is but soft and still in the writings of single
Fathers; the Church whispereth rather then speaks in them; and yet even in
them she speaks this truth very distinctly, and audibly. Hear Saint Epist.
ad Bonif. quae citatur Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 548. b.
Austen, who entreating of Caecilianus, about an hundredth years after his
death, says; If as yet they could prove him to have been guilty of those
crimes, which were by the Donatists objected unto him, ipsum jam mortuum
anathematizaremus, I and all Catholics would even now accurse him though dead,
though never condemned before, nor in his life time. Again, Aug. lib. 3. Cont.
Cresc. ca. 35.
In this our communion, if there have been any Traditores, or deliverers of
the Bible to be burned in time of persecution, when thou shall demonstrate or
prove them to have been such, and cord and carne mortuos detestabor. Hear
Pope Pelag. 2. Epist. 7. In his autem.
Pelagius, who both himself fully assenteth herein to Saint Austen, and
testifies the assent of Pope Leo, in this manner; Quis nesciat, who knows
not that the doctrine of Leo is consonant to Saint Austen. Hear Cyr. lib.
cont. Theod. cit. a Conc. 5. Collat. 8. pa. 585. a.
S. Cyrill, who speaking of heretics, says, Evitandi sunt, sive in vivis,
sive in mortuis; they are to be avoided, whether they be dead, or living.

7. The Church speaks yet somewhat louder, in the united judgment of
Provincial Synods. In an Citatur in Conc. 5. Coll 5 pa. 548 a.
Africane Council it was proved, how certain Bishops at their death had
bequeathed their goods to heretics; whereupon statuerunt, the Bishops in that
Synod decreed, ut post mortem anathemati subjiciantur; that such should be
accursed, even after their death; and this Sextilianus an Africane Bishop
testifies upon his own certain knowledge. The judgment of the Roman Church
is to this purpose most pregnant. About some twenty years before this fifth
Council, Dioscorus was chosen Bishop of Rome; but shortly after dying, eum and
post mortem anathematizavit Romana Ecclesia; the Roman Church accursed him
even after he was dead, although he had not offended in the faith, (but in
some pecuniary or Symoniacall crime) Et hoc sciunt omnes, qui degunt Romae; and
they all who live at Rome, know this to have been done against him after his
death; they especially who are in eminent place, who also continued in the
communion with Dioscorus until he dyed, as after Inst. Edict. Invenimus.
Justinian, Benignus Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. a.
Bishop of Heraclea, and after them both the fifth Council Coll. 8. pa. 585. b.
testifies. In this very cause of Theodorus there was a Synod held in Armenia,
by Rambulas Bar. an. 435. nu. 4
Bishop of Edessa, Acatius, and others, wherein, both themselves condemned
Theodorus, (though dead) and in their letters to Proclus exhort Petimus
quatenus fiat unitas vestra contra Theodorum, and sacrilega Dogmata ejus. Jn
Libell. Presbyt. Arme^. ad Procl. in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 542. b.
him to do the like.

8. But this voice of the Church sounds like a mighty thunder in the consenting
judgment of general Councels. In the sixth, Act. 12.13, 18.
Pope Honorius, who in his life time had not been, was now about threescore
years after his death, convicted to be an heretic; and then noviter
condemned, and anathematized by the whole Council. The same sentence of
Anathema was confirmed, and again denounced against him in the second Act. 7.
in Epistola 2. Synod. and Can. 1.
Nicene; and in the other under Honorius post mortem ab Orientis Episcopi^
anathemate est affectus. Conc. 8: Act. 7. pa. 891. b.
Hadrian, which they account to be the seventh and eighth general Councels. In
the Council of Chalcedon, Domnus Edict. Justin. Quod autem. and Conc. 5. Coll.
6. pa. 575. b.
Bishop of Antioch, was after his death condemned. In the holy Ephesine
Council was this very Theodorus of Mopsvestia, after his death condemned, as
Pope Pelagius Pelag. 2. Epist. In his.
expressly testifies. The like to have been done against Macedonius, by the
fifth Council at Constantinople, Justinian Sancta Dei Ecclesia and post mortem
Macedonium anathem atizavit. Just. Edict. Quod
declares. Before that, was the same done by the Council at Sardica; for when
some of those, who had subscribed to the Nicene faith, returned to Arianisme,
alij quidem Jbidem.
vivi, alij autem post mortem anathematizati sunt a Damaso Papa, and ab
universali Sardicensi Synodo; they were anathematized, some while they lived,
others after their death, by Pope Damasus, and by the general Council at
Sardica, as witnesses Athanasius. With such an uniforme consent do all these
Councels teach this, and teach it, not as any novell doctrine, but as a truth
successively from age to age, even from the Apostles time delivered unto them;
by warrant of which Apostolical tradition Valentinus, Martian, Basilides, a
nulla Synodo Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. a.
anathematizati, being by no Synod in their life time condemned, were after
their death accursed by the Church of God.

9. And yet if none of all these particulars could be produced, seeing the
doctrine of the faith decreed in this fifth Council, (one part whereof is this
of condemning the dead) is consonant to all the former, and confirmed by all
succeeding Councels, (as we did before demonstrate) nor Councels only, but
approved by all Popes, and Bishops, from Gregory the first, to Leo the tenth,
yea, by all Catholics whatsoever, who all, by approving this fifth Council,
consent in this truth; Seeing all these, that is, the whole Catholic Church,
for 1500 years, with one consenting voice, sound out, like a multitude of
mighty waters, this Catholic truth, which Vigilius oppugneth, that one may
after his death be noviter condemned, and found it as a doctrine of the
Catholic faith, and even thereby found out Pope Vigilius to have held, yea, to
have defined heresy; and all, who defend Vigilius, to be heretical; I do
nothing doubt, but if ever you did, or can, you do now most distinctly hear
the voice of the Church, even of that Church, of which their Roman Rabsecha
vaunteth, that we are marvellously affrighted at the very name thereof.

10. May I now entreat, that as you have heard the Church, so you would be
pleased to hear what the Cardinal does say of this matter. After this part of
Vigilius decree, he sets a memorable gloss upon the Popes text. Hic adverte,
Note here, says the Cardinal, that Bar. an. 553. nu. 185.
this assertion of Vigilius (that dead men ought not to be condemned) is not so
generally received as it is set down by him. A worthy note indeed out of a
Cardinals mouth; Papa hic non tenetur. But I pray you, by whom is it not
received? The Cardinal answers, not by the holy Church; the holy Church
Ejusmodi homine jure damnare post mortem sancta consucvit Ecclesia. Bar. ibid.
does practice the contrary unto it. What? the holy Church not receive the
dogmaticall and Apostolical assertion of the holy Pope? not that assertion
which his Holiness decrees to be taught by Scripture, to be a Constitution, a
rule, a definition of the holy Apostolic See? No truly; The holy Church for
all that, receives not this assertion, says the Cardinal. And the Cardinal
was to blame to use such a palpable (...). The Church receives it not: he
might, and he should have said; The holy Church rejects, condemns, and
accurseth this Cathedral assertion of the Pope, and all that defend it: nor
the Church only of that one age wherein Vigilius lived, but the Catholic
Church of all ages, speaking by the mouths of al general Councels, of Fathers,
of Popes, of al Catholics, this holy Church condemns and accurseth the
assertion of Pope Vigilius. The Cardinal was too diminutive in his
extenuations, when he spoke so faintly, The holy Church does not so generally
receive it.

11. Let us bear with the Cardinals tenderness of heart: the Popes sores must
not be touched, but with soft, and tender hands. Seeing the Cardinal has
brought the Pope, and the holy Church to be at ods, and at an unreconciliable
contradiction; the Pope denying, the Church affirming, that a man after his
death may noviter be condemned, it is well worth the labor to examine, whether
part the Cardinal himself will take in this quarrel; you may be sure, the
choice on either part was very hard for him: he has here a worse matter than a
wolf by the ears. This is dignus vindice nodus, a point which will try the
Cardinals art, wisdom, piety, constancy, and fair dealing: And in very deed,
he has herein played Sir Politic would be, above the degree of commendation.
The Cardinal is a man of peace, he loves not to displease either the Pope, or
the Church; he knew, that to provoke either of them, would bring an army of
waspes about his ears; and therefore very gravely, wisely, and discreetly he
takes part with them both: and though their assertions be directly
contradictory, he holds them both to be true, and takes up an hymn of Omnia
been to them both.

12. First, he shows that the Church says right, in this manner: Although
Bar. an. 553. nu. 185.
it be proved, that one dyed in the peace of the Church, and yet it do
afterward appear, that in his writings he defended a condemned heresy, and
continuing in that heresy died therein; and but dissemblingly communicate with
the Church, the holy Church uses to condemn such a man, jure, even by right.
Having said as much as can be wished, on the Churches part, the Cardinal will
now teach, that the Pope also says right, in this manner; Pope Vigilius Bar.
an. 553. nu. 233.
had many worthy reasons for his defense of the Three Chapters, by his
Constitution; and among those worthy reasons this is one: for if this were once
admitted, that a man who dies in the communion of the Church, might after his
death be condemned; pateret ostium, this would open such a gap, that every
ecclesiastical writer, though he dyed in the Catholic Communion, may yet
after his death, out of his writings be condemned for an heretic. Thus
Baronius.

13. O what a golden and blessed age was this, that brought forth such a
Cardinal! The Church decrees, that a man after his death, may noviter be
condemned for an heretic; and it decrees aright: The Pope decrees the quite
contrary, that no man after his death may noviter be condemned for an heretic;
and he also decrees aright, and with good reason. So both the Church says
well, and the Pope says well; and you can say no less then, Et vitula tu
dignus, and hic: or because the Cardinal says better than they both; and,
what Jupiter himself could never do, makes two contradictory sayings to be
both true, and both said well; he best deserves, let him have all the prize,
Vitula tu dignus utraque.

14. I told you before, and this ensuing treatise will make it as clear as the
Sun, that Baronius having once lost the path, and forsaken that truth, where
only sure footing was to be found, wandreth up and down, in and out in this
cause, as in a wilderness, treading on nothing but thorns, wherewith feeling
himself pricked, he skips hither and thither for succor, but still lights on
briars and brambles, which do not only gall, but so entangle him, that by no
means he can ever extricate, or unwinde himself; for if one listed to make
sport with the Cardinal, it clearly and certainly follows, that if the
Church say true, then the Pope saying the contrary, does say untrue. Again, if
the Pope say true, then the Church saying the contrary, does say untrue; and
then upon the Cardinals saying that they both say true, it certainly follows,
that neither of them both say true, and yet further, that both of them, say
both true and untrue, and yet that neither of them both says either truth, or
untruth.

15. But leaving the Cardinal in these briars, seeing by the upright, and
unpartiall judgment of the whole Catholic Church of all ages, we have proved
the Popes decree herein to be erroneous, and (because it is in a cause of
faith) heretical, let us a little examine the two reasons on which Vigilius
groundeth this his assertion: The former is taken from those words of our
Savior, Matthew. 18.18.
whatsoever ye bind on earth, whence, as you have seen, Vigilius, and, as he
says, Gelasius also collecteth, that such as are not on earth or alive, cannot
be judged by the Church.

16. The answer is not hard; our Saviors words, being well considered, are so
far from concluding, what Vigilius or Gelasius, or both, do thence collect,
that they clearly and certainly do enforce the quite contrary; for he said
not, Whatsoever ye bind, or loose, concerning those that are on earth, or
living; in which sense Vigilius took them: but, Whatsoever concerning either
the living or dead, ye my Apostles, and your successors being upon earth, or
during your life time, shall bind or loose, the same according to your censure
here passed upon earth, shall by my authority be ratified in heaven. The
restrictive terms [upon earth] are referred to the parties, who do bind, or
loose; not to the parties, who are bound, or loosed. The general term
[whatsoever] is referred to the parties who are bound, or loosed, whether they
be dead, or alive, not to the parties who bind or loose, who are only alive,
and upon earth. Nor does our Savior say, Whatsoever ye seem to bind or
loose here upon earth, shall be bound or loosed in heaven; for, (ecclesiae
clave errante) no censure does, or can either bind, or loose, either the
quick or the dead: but he says, Whatsoever ye do bind or loose, if the
party be once truly and really bound, or loosed, by you that are upon earth, it
shall stand firm, and be ratified by my self in heaven. So the parties who
do bind, or loose, are the Apostles, and their successors only while they
are upon earth: the parties who are bound, or loosed, are any whosoever whether
alive or dead; the party who ratifieth their act in binding and loosing, is
Christ himself in heaven; For I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.

17. This exposition is clearly warranted by the judgment of the whole
catholic Church, which, as we have before declared, both believed, taught, and
practiced this authority of binding, and loosing, not only upon the living,
but upon the dead also. Of their binding the nocent, we have alleged before
abundance of examples: for their loosing the innocent, that one of Flavianus is
sufficient. The Ephesine Act. conciliab. Ephesians. citata in actis Conc. Chalc.
Act. 1. pa. 57. b.
latrocinie adjudged and condemned Flavianus a most holy and Catholic Bishop,
for an Heretic; under the censure of that general Council Flavianus died,
nay was martyred Caesus Flavianus dolor plagarum migravit ad Dominum. lib ca.
12.
by them: The holy Council at Chalcedon after the death of Flavianus, loosed
that band, wherewith the latrocinious conspirators at Ephesus, thought they had
fast tied him, but because their key did err, they did not in truth. They
honored and proclaimed Flavianus for a Saint and Martyr Quae (Synodus Chalc.)
Flaviano palmam mortis tribuit gloriosae. Edict. Valen. and Mart. in Chalced.
Conc. Act. 4. pa. 86. a. and Flavianus injuste quidem in vita condemnatus,
just post mortem revocatus est a B. Leone et sancta Synodo Chalcedonensi.
Just. edict.. Invenimus.
, whom the faction of Dioscorus had murdered for an heretic: the holy Council
feared not to loose him, because he was dead, and their power to bind, or
loose, was only toward those that are upon the earth, or living. By which
example, and warrantie of that holy Council, our Church of latter time,
imitating the religious piety of those ancient Bishops, restored to their
pristine Hist. combustionis Buc^ri et Fagij et restitutionis eorum.
dignity and honor those reverend Martyrs, two Flaviani in their age, Bucer
and Fagius after their death; when a worse then that Ephesine conspiracy had
not only with an erring key bound, but even burned them to ashes. Now it is
rightly observed by Justinian Si non oporteret anathematizari post mortem eos
qui insua impietate mortuisunt, oportebat nec eos qui injuste condemnati sunt
patres post, mortem revocari. Lust. edict. prope finem.
, that if the Church may after their death, restore such as being unjustly
condemned, and falsely supposed to be bound, died in their innocence, and
sincerity of faith: it may also by the very same reason, condemn, and
anathematize such after their death, who died in their impiety or heresy being
charitably perhaps but falsely supposed, to have died in the communion of the
Catholic Church.

18. And truly, whether soever of these censures; either of binding, or
loosing, the Church uses toward the dead, as they both are warranted by the
words of Christ, and judgment of the Church, so in doing either of both, they
perform an acceptable service to God, and an holy duty to the Church of God.
For as we profess in our Creed to believe the Communion of Saints, which in
part consists in loving, praising, and imitating all such as we know, either
now to live, or heretofore to have dyed in the faith, or for the faith of
Christ: so do we by the same Article of our Creed, renounce all communion
with whatsoever heretics, either dead or alive, and therefore though in their
life time, they had never been condemned for such, but honored as the servants
of God, under whose livery they hide their heresies, and impieties; yet so
soon as ever they shall be manifested to have been indeed, and to have died
heretics, we ought forthwith to forsake all communion with them, not love
them, nor speak well of them, much less imitate them; but as Saint Austen
says he would do of Caecilianus, even after their death, cord and carne
anathematizare, not making them accursed; (For that the Church cannot do, and
themselves have done that already) but declaring them to be accursed, and in
truth excluded from the society of God, and Gods Church; and to be such though
dead, as with whom we can have no more communion, then has light with
darkness, faith with heresy, God and Beliall; nay we should wish that if it
were possible, there might be such an antipathie, and disunion betwixt us and
them, as is said to have been betwixt Eteocles Impositis eorum cadaveribus
eidem rogo, flammam se divisisse traditur, vid. Stat. in Theb.
, and Polinices, that even our dead bones, and ashes, might leap from theirs,
nor sleep in one Church, nor one earth with them, from whom one day they shall
be eternally severed, by a wall of immortality and immortal glory.

19. Vigilius his second reason is taken from the rules, decrees and
Constitutions Idem regulariter Apostolicae sedis definiunt constituta. Vigil.
loc. citat. nu. 179.
of their Apostolic See, by name of Pope Leo, and Gelasius, both who^
Vigilius says to have defined this, that a dead man might not noviter be
condemned: was it not enough for Vigilius, that himself was heretical herein,
unless he drew his predecessors also into the same crime, of defending, yea
defining heresies? How much better had it beseemed him, to have covered such
heretical blemishes of their Apostolic See, and of so famous Bishops as Leo
and Gelasius were, it not with a lap of his robe, as the good Emperor would,
yet at least with silence and oblivion.

20. And yet for all this, if Vigilius and the defenders of his infallibility,
will give me leave, I am for my own part willing to think better, and more
favorably of Leo, and Gelasius, in this matter: specially of Leo, whose
authority, when some defenders of the three Chapters objected Praemisislis
dicentes, doctrina vestrae reverendae sedis est, per B. Leonem successoresque
ejus, mortuum ab hominibus damnari nullatenus opertere. Pelag. 2. Epist. 7.. In
his.
to Pope Pelagius, as according with them, Pelagius replied not only that he
could no where remember any such thing in the books of Leo, but that Leo
indeed taught the quite contrary, as consenting Quis nescit quod ejusdem Leonis
and B. Augustini praedicatio contradicat, ibid
wholly with Saint Austen, who professed, that he would anathematize
Caecilianus after his death, if it could appear that he were guilty of those
crimes. Which testimony of Pelagius as it fully clears Leo of this heresy,
so does it manifest how unjustly Vigilius pretends his consent with him in
this cause; yea and the words of Leo, which he cites, do declare no less.
In that Epistle Leo Epist. 91.
Leo entreating of those who by the just censure of the Church, were
excommunicated, or who did not perform the acts required in repentance, says,
If any of them die before he obtain remission, quod manens in corpore non
receperit, consequi exutus carne non poterit, he cannot obtain that (to wit,
remission of his fault) being dead, which before his death he had not received:
And upon these follow the words cited by Vigilius. Neither is it needful that
we should sift the merits or acts of them, qui sic obierunt, who so die, seeing
our Lord has reserved to his justice, what the priestly ministry could not
perform, (to wit, the loosing of that band of censure or of sin, under which
they dyed.) Thus Leo, who denies not that men after their death may be
condemned, but that any who in his life time is not, may after his death be
pardoned; He speaks not of such as have not been in their life time
condemned, of which only Vigilius entreats, but of such, who being
unpenitent, or condemned by the Church, die in their sin, or under that just
censure, and therefore in the state of condemnation. So neither do the words
of Leo signify any such thing, as Vigilius by them intended to prove: and Pope
Pelagius assures us, that Leo taught the quite contrary to that, which out of
Leo, Vigilius in vain labors to prove.

21. The very like construction is to be given of the words of Gelasius in
both the places cited out of him by Vigilius. In the former, Gelas. Epist. 11.
entreating of Acatius, he thus says, Let no man persuade you that Acatius is
freed from the crime of his prevarication; for after he had fallen into that
wickedness, and deserved to be excluded, and that, jure, by right, from the
Apostolic communion, in hac eadem persistens damnatione defunctus est, he
persisting in this condemnation dyed; Absolution cannot be now granted unto
him being dead, which he neither desired, nor deserved while he lived: for it
was said to the Apostles, Whatsoever ye bind on earth: But of him (these are
the words cited by Vigilius) who is now under Gods judgment, (that is, who is
dead in this sort) it is not lawful for us to decree ought else, but that, in
quo eum supremus dies invenit, wherein he was found at the time of his death.
So Gelasius. In which words it is evident that he speaks not (as Vigilius
does) of such as in their life time were not condemned, nor denies he that
such may after their death (when their heresy is discovered) be condemned, but
of such as being in their life time justly condemned, dye impenitent in that
estate, and of such he denies, that after their death they can be absolved. A
truth so clear, that Binius sets this marginall note upon it, Qui impoenitens
mortuus est excommunicatus, post mortem non potest absolvi; He who dies
impenitent under the censure of excommunication, cannot after his death be
absolved. And Gelasius himself often repeateth the same most clearly, in his
Commonitorium to Faustus: We read says he Gelas. Epist. 4.
, that Christ raised up some from the dead, but we never read, that he
forgave, or absolved any who were impenitent when they dyed: and this power he
gave to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth: on earth says he, nam in
hac ligatione defunctum nusquam dixit absolvi; For Christ never said that any
who dyed being so bound should be loosed.

22. The same is his meaning also in the other place Epist. Synodalis Gelas ij,
and Synod. Romans 2. p. 268. b.
alleged by Vigilius; In it he entreats of Vitalis and Misenus, who being
the Popes Legates, had communicated with Acatius, and other heretical
sectaries, and were for that cause both of them excommunicated by Pope Felix
the next predecessor of Gelasius; Misenus repenting was received into the
communion of the Church: Vitalis remaining impenitent died under that just
censure: when some of Vitalis friends desired the like absolution for Vitalis
being dead Nos etiam mortuis veniam praestare deposcunt. ibid.
, Gelasius utterly refused to grant it, and calling a Roman Synod, it was
declared in it; That Misenus ought in right to be loosed, but not Vitalis,
whom, as they professed, they gladly would, but by reason of his own
impenitency wherein he dyed, they could not help, nor absolve; but must leave
him, (which are the words on which Vigilius relyeth) to the judgment of God,
it being impossible for them to absolve him being dead, seeing it is said,
Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth: such then as are not upon earth, God has
reserved them not to man's, but to his own judgment; Nor dare the Church
challenge this unto it: So Gelasius and the whole Roman Synod: who do not
herein generally deny, that any without exception may be judged being dead,
for then they should condemn besides many other, the holy Council of
Chalcedon, which absolved Flavianus, and bound or condemned Domnus, and both
after their deaths: but limiting their speech to the present matter which they
handled, they teach that none who are dead (to wit in such state as Vitalis
dyed, excommunicated and impenitent,) no such can after their death be judged
(to wit in such sort as the favorers of Vitalis would have had him adjudged,
that is, absolved or loosed after his death from that censure:) and that the
words of our Savior do forcibly conclude, seeing whatsoever is bound upon
earth is also bound in heaven, and seeing such as die in that just bond of the
Church, are indeed reserved to the only judgment of God, the Church can
pronounce no other, nor milder sentence, then it has already passed of them.
That none at all after their death may be condemned by the Church, Gelasius
says not, and that is the heretical position which Vigilius should out of
Gelasius, but does not prove: That none who at their death are justly bound by
the Church, and dye impenitent therein, can after their death be loosed by the
Church, is a catholic truth, which Gelasius teaches, and we all profess,
this Vigilius firmly by Gelasius does, but should not prove.

23. So willing am I to quit Pope Leo and Gelasius from that heretical
doctrine wherewith Vigilius by his Apostolical decree has not only himself
eternally blemished the Roman See, but labors also to fallen that heresy,
as an ancient and hereditarie doctrine from the time of Leo unto their See. If
this my endeavor, for the honor of Leo and Gelasius be not accepted by them, I
must return a conditional and shorter, but more unpleasing answer to this
second reason of Vigilius, relying on their authority, and that is this, If Leo
and Gelasius truly and indeed taught the same with Vigilius, that none after
their death may noviter be condemned, then were they also, as Vigilius, by the
consenting judgment of the catholic Church, heretical: If they did not
indeed teach this doctrine, then is Vigilius not only erroneous in faith, both
decreeing himself, and judging them to have decreed heresy, but slanderous
also, falsely imputing so great a crime as is heresy, to so ancient and famous
Popes as were Gelasius and Leo: And so whether they taught this doctrine, or
taught it not, this second reason of Vigilius is of no worth at all; proving
nothing else, but either them to be heretical, if Vigilius say true; or
himself to be a slanderer, if he say untrue.

24. Now after the reasons of Vigilius fully refuted, in stead of a conclusion,
I will add one short consideration to all that has been said, That this
position decreed by Vigilius is such, as does not only condemn the catholic
church, that is, all the oppugners of it, but even Vigilius himself, and all
who defend it. Say you, that a dead man may not noviter be condemned? In saying
so you condemn the holy Council at Sardica, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of
Chalcedon, for they all did noviter condemn such persons being dead, as in
their lives time had not been condemned. Now the holy Fathers of those
Councels, having thus condemned the dead, dyed themselves in the Lord, and were
in peace gathered to the Lord. If you say, they should not have condemned the
dead, even in saying so you do noviter condemn all those Fathers being now
dead; and so you do that same thing, which you say must not be done; and even
by defending your position, you overthrow your own position; for you do
noviter condemn all those holy Fathers being dead; and yet you say, that no
man may noviter condemn the dead: Nay, you condemn not them only, but even
your own self also herein, for you condemn those, who condemn the dead, and
yet your self condemns all those holy Fathers, being now dead; and you
condemn them for doing that, which your self now do; even for condemning the
dead. Such a strange discord there is in this heretical position of Vigilius,
that it not only sights against the truth, and the opposites unto it; but
viperlike, even against it self, and against the favorers, and defenders of
it.

CAP. VII. That the second reason of Vigilius touching the first Chapter, why
Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not to be condemned, because he dyed in the
peace, and communion of the Church, is erroneous and untrue.
1. THE second reason of Vigilius, why Theodorus of Mopsvestia should not be
condemned, is, for that (as he supposes) Theodorus dyed in the peace and
communion of the Church: to this purpose he says, that Vigil. Constable. apud Bar.
an. 553. nu. 179.
the rules of his predecessors (which he applies to Theodorus) did keep
inviolate the persons of Bishops, in pace Ecclesiastica defunctoru^, who dyed
in the peace of the Church. And again, We Ibid. nu. 184.
do especially provide by this our present Constitution, lest by occasion of
perverse doctrine, any thing be derogated from the persons of them, who, as we
have said, in pace and communione universalis Ecclesiae quieverunt; have dyed
in the peace and communion of the Catholic Church; and that no contumely be
done to those Bishops, qui in pace Catholicae Ecclesiae sunt defuncti; who have
dyed in the peace of the Catholic Church. Now that Theodorus so dyed Vigilius
proves not, but takes as consequent upon the former point, which, as we have
Sup. ca. 6.
showed, was known and confessed, because Perspenimus si quid de his qui
defuncti sum, and nunime reperiuntur in vita damnati. Vig. loc. cit. nu. 176.
Quos vocat, In pace Ecclesiae defunctos. Ibid nu. 179. and 184.
he was not in his life time condemned by the Church. Nor was Vigilius the
first founder of this reason, he borrowed it of other Nestorians, with whom in
this cause he was joined both in hand and heart. They (to wit, the followers of
Theodorus and Nestorius) flee unto another vain excuse, says Just. Edict.
Quod autem.
Justinian, affirming that Theodorus ought not to be condemned, eo quod in
communione Ecclesiarum mortuus est; because he dyed in the communion of the
Churches.

2. I shall not need to stay long in refuting this reason of Vigilius: The
Emperor has done it most soundly, and that before ever Vigilius writ his
Constitution. Oportebat Just. ibid.
eas scire, those men who plead thus for Theodorus, should know that they dye
in the communion of the Church, who unto their very death do hold that common
doctrine of piety which if received in the whole Church. Iste autem usque ad
mortem in sua permanens impietate, ab omni Ecclesia ejectus est; but this
Theodorus continuing in his impiety to his death, was rejected by the whole
Church. Thus Justinian. To whose true testimony Binius ascribes so much as
well he might, that whereas some reported of Theodorus that he recalled his
heresy, this, says he, might Bin. Notis in Conc. 5. verbo Theodorus.
be believed, nisi Iustinianus, unless the Emperor had testified that he dyed
in his heresy.

3. The same is clearly witnessed also in the fifth Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 552. a.
Council, where, as it were of purpose, this reason of Vigilius is refuted in
this manner; Whereas it is said of some (and one of those is Vigilius) that
Theodorus died in the peace and communion of the Church, mendacium est and
calumnia, magis adversus Ecclesiam; this is a lie and slander, and that
especially to the Church. For he is said to die in the communion and peace of
the Church, qui usque ad mortem rectae Ecclesiae dogmata servavit; who has
kept and held the true doctrines of faith, even till his death: But that
Theodorus did not keep those doctrines, certum est, it is certain by his
blasphemies: and Gregory Nissen witnesses the same. And after the words of
Gregory recited, they add this, quomodo conantur dicere, how do any say, that
such an impious and blasphemous person as Theodorus was, dyed in the communion
of the Church? Thus testifies the Council.

4. Can ought be wished more pregnant to manifest the foul errors of Vigilius
in this part of his decree? Vigilius affirms that Theodorus dyed in the peace
and communion of the Catholic Church: The Emperor and Council not only
testify the contrary, but for this very cause the Council (impatient at such
indignity offered to Gods Church,) calls him in plain terms a liar, and a
slanderer; yea, a slanderer of the whole Catholic Church in so saying.
Vigilius from the not condemning of Theodorus in his life time, collecteth,
that he dyed in the peace and communion of the Church: both the Emperor and
Council witness his doctrinall error herein: truly teaching, that though an
heretic live all his life time; not only uncondemned by the Church, but in
all outward pomp, honor, and applause of the Church; either himself
cunningly cloaking, or the Church not curiously, and warily observing his
heresy while he lives; yet such a man neither lives, nor dies in the entire
peace and communion of the Church. The Church has such peace with none, who
have not peace with God; nor communion with any, who have not union with
Christ. It condemned him not, because, as it teaches others, so it self
judges most charitably of all: It judged him to be such, as he seemed, and
professed himself to be. It was not his person, but his profession, with
which the Church in his life time had communion and peace; As soon as ever it
sees him not to be indeed such as he seemed to be, it renounceth all peace
and communion with him, whether dead, or alive; nay, rather it forsakes not
her communion with him, but declares unto all, that she never had communion
or peace with this man, such as he was indeed before, though she had peace
with such as he seemed to be. She now denounces a double anathema against
him, condemning him first for believing or teaching heresy, and then for
covering his heresy under the visor of a Catholic, and of the Catholic
faith. So justly and fully does the Emperor, and Council refute, both the
personal error of Vigilius in that he affirms Theodorus to have dyed in
the peace of the Church; and the doctrinall also, in that he affirms it upon
this ground, that in his life time he was not condemned by the Church.

5. Now whereas Accesserunt dignae causae ac rations. Bar. an. 553. nu. 233.
Baronius says, that Vigilius had just, and worthy reasons to defend this
first Chapter: one of which is this, because, if this were once admitted that
one dying in the communion of the Church, might after his death be condemned
for an heretic; pateret ostium, there would a gap be opened, that every
ecclesiastical writer, licet in communione Catholica defunctus esset; although
he dyed in the communion of the Catholic Church, might after death be out of
his writings condemned, for an heretic; truly he fears where no fear is at
all. This gap, nay, this gate and broad street of condemning the dead has
lain wide open this sixteen hundred years. Can the Cardinal, or any of his
friends in all these successio^s of ages, wherein have dyed many thousand
millions of Catholics; can he name or find but so much as one who has truly
dyed in the peace and communion of the Church, and yet has been after his
death condemned by the Catholic Church for an heretic? He cannot. The Church
should condemn her own self, if she condemned any with whom she had peace,
and whom she embraces in her holy communion, which is no other but the society
with God. Such indeed may dye in some error, yea, in an error of faith, as
Papias, Irenee, Iustine, in that of the millenaries: as Cyprian, (as is likely)
and other Africane Bishops in that of Rebaptization; but either dye heretics,
or be after their death condemned by the Catholic Church, for heretics, they
cannot.

6. But there is most just cause why the Cardinal, and all his fellows,
should fear another matter, which more nearly concerns themselves; and fear
it, even upon that Catholic position, that the dead out of their writings may
justly be condemned. They should fear to have such an itching humor to write
in the Popes Cause; for his supremacy of authority, or infallibility of his
Cathedral judgment: fear to stuff their Volumes (as the Cardinal has done
his Annals) with heresies, and oppositions against the faith; fear to continue
and persist in their heretical doctrine: fear to die before they have
attained to that which is secunda post naufragium tabula; the second and only
board to save them after their shipwreck; to dye I say, before they revoked,
disclamed, condemned, or been the first men to set fire to their heretical
doctrines and writings; and at least, in words, if not, as the In fine vitae
reconciliatio petentibus et poenitentibus non est neganda, dum tamen, si
haeretici sint, recipiantur cum scriptura and juramento. Gloss in did. 1. de
poenit. ca. Multiplex.
custom was, by oath, and handwriting, to testify to the Church, their desire
to return unto her bosom. These are the things indeed they ought to fear,
knowing that howsoever they flatter themselves with the vain name of the
Church; yet in very truth, so long as their writings remain; testifying that
they defended the Popes infallibility in defyning causes of faith, or any other
doctrine relying on that ground, whereof in their life time they have not made
Satis est ut Ecclesiae judicio co^flet aliquem decessisse impoenitentem, si non
conflet de illius poenitentia, qui haereticus post mortemco^victus est. Fran.
Torrens. lib. de 6, 7, and 8. Synod. pa. 13. and ejusdem sententiae ait Pigh.
fuisse.
a certain, and known recantation, they neither lived nor dyed in the peace
and communion of the Catholic Church, but may at any time after their death,
and ought whe^soever occasion is offered, be declared by the Church to have
dyed in their heresies, and therefore dyed both out of the peace of God, and of
the holy Church of God. This, unless they seriously and sincerely perform, it
is not I, nor any of our writers, (whom they imagine, but most unjustly, out of
spleen and contention to speak these things) who condemn them, but it is the
whole Catholic Church; She, by approving this fifth Council and the true
decree thereof, condemns this Apostolical and Cathedral definition of Vigilius,
and all that defend it; that is, all the members of the present Roman Church,
to be heretical; and as convicted heretics, she declares them to die
anathematized; that is, utterly separated from God, and from the peace, and
most blessed communion with the Church of God; howsoever they boast themselves
to be the only children of the Church of God.

7. If any shall here reply, or think, that by the former examples of Papias,
Irenee, Iustine, Cyprian, and the rest, Baronius, and other members of the
present Roman church may be excused; that these also, as the former, though
dying in their error, may dye in the peace and communion of the Church; this I
confess is a friendly, but no firm excuse; for although they are both alike
in this, that the former as well as the latter, dye in an error of faith; yet
is there extreme odds, and many clear dissimilitudes, betwixt the state or
condition of the one, and the other.

8. The first arises from the matter it self wherein they err. The former
erred in that doctrine of faith, wherein the truth was not eliquata, declarata,
and solidata per plenarium Concilium, as S. Austen Aug. lib. 2. de bapt. ca. 4.
speaks, not fully scanned, declared, and confirmed by a plenary Council:
Had it bin, we may well think the very same of all those holy men, which Austen
Ibid.
most charitably says of S. Cyprian, Sine dubio, universi orbis authoritate
patefacta veritate cessissent; without doubt they would have yielded to the
truth, being manifested unto them, by the authority of the whole Church. The
latter err in that, which, to use same Fathers Aug. lib. eod. c. 1.
words, per universae Ecclesiae statuta firmatum est; which has been
strengthened by the decree of the whole Church. This fifth Council, consonant
to all precedent, and confirmed by all subsequent general Councels, unto Leo
the tenth, decreeing this cathedral sentence of Pope Vigilius, to be
heretical: whence it does clearly ensue, that as the former, who were ready to
embrace the truth, had it been manifested unto them, erred not of pertinacy,
but, as Austen says, of humane infirmity; so the latter, who reject the truth
being manifested unto them, and withstand the known judgment of the whole
catholic Church, even that judgment which is testified by all those
witnesses, to be consonant to the Scriptures, and Apostolical doctrine, can no
way be excused from most wilful and pertinacious obstinacy, seeing they adhere
to that opinion, which themselves, or their particular church has chosen,
though they see, and know the same to be repugnant to Scripture, and the
consenting judgment of all general and holy Councels, that is, of the whole
catholic Church. So the error of the former though it was in a point of
faith, yet was but materially to be called heresy, as being a doctrine
repugnant to faith; yet being not joined in them with pertinacie, which is
essentially, as Canus Quod haeresis esse sine pertinacia nequeat, non est
difficile ostendere co^muni omnium Theologorum sententia, etc. Canus lib. 12.
Loc. Theol. ca. 9. Quod.
shows, required in an heretic, could neither make, nor denominate them to
be heretics: The error of the latter, is not only an error in a point of
faith, but is formally to be called heresy, such as being both a doctrine
repugnant to faith, and being in them joined with pertinacy, does both make,
and truly denominate them, who so err, to be heretics; and show them to hold
it heretically, not only as an error, but as a most proper heresy.

9. The second difference is in the manner of their error. The former held
their opinions as probable collections, not as undoubted doctrines of faith;
and so long as those errors were so held, the Church suspended Sancta Ecclesia
aliquandiu de ea re supersedit, judiciumque suspendit Bar. notis in Martyr. in
Febr. 22. voce Papiae.
her judgment, both concerning the doctrines, and the persons. And this was at
least until the time of Jerome, touching the millenary opinion; for he
mentioning the same, says Hier. in cap. 19. Ieremia.
thus; Haec licet non sequantur, tamen damnare non possumus, quia multi
Ecclesiasticorum virorum and martyrum ista dixerunt: These things (concerning
the reign of Christ for one thousand years upon earth, in a terrestrial, but
yet a golden Jerusalem) although we do not our selves follow, yet we cannot
condemn them, because many of the Ecclesiastical writers and Martyrs have
said the same: whereby it is evident, that in Ieromes Hieronimi tempore nihil
adhuc ab Ecclesia de ea re fuit definitum. Bar. notis in Martyr, loc. cit.
time nothing was defined herein by the Church; for then Jerome might, and
would constantly have condemned that error by the warrant of the Churches
authority, which then he held to be a probable, and disputable matter. In
which regard also Austen calls it a tolerable Quae opinio esset utcunque
tolerabilis, si, etc. Aug lib. 20. de Civit. Dei. ca 7.
opinion, and such as himself had sometimes held, if the delights of the
Saints in that time be supposed to be spiritual. Baronius tells Bar. an. 118.
nu. 2. et an. 373. nu. 14
us, (how rightly I will not now examine,) that when Apollinarius renewed this
opinion, and urged it, ut dogma Catholicum, no longer as a matter of
probability, but as a Catholic doctrine of faith; It was then condemned by
Pope Damasus about the time of Jerome; and so being condemned by the Church, it
was ever after that held for an heresy; and the defenders of it, for heretics.

10. Did Baronius and the rest of the Roman Church in like sort, as those
millenary Fathers, commend their Popes infallibility no otherwise then as a
probable, a topicall, or disputable matter, the like favorable censure would
not be denied unto them, but that they also, notwithstanding that error in
faith, might die in the communion of the Church. But when Pope Vigilius
published his Apostolical Constitution, as a doctrine with such Statuimus,
nulli licere quicquam contrarium his conscribere, vel proferre. Vig. Constable. in
fine
necessity to be received of all, that none either by word or writing might
contradict the same; when the chief Pillars of their Church urge the Popes
Cathedral definitions in causes of faith, for such as wherein, nullo Bell.
lib. 4. de Po^t. ca. 3. et Gretz. def. ca. 2. lib. 1. de Pont. pa. 652. et alij.
casu errare potest, he can by no possibility be deceived, or teach amiss;
when they urge this, not only as Apollinarius did the other, ut dogma
Catholicum, as a doctrine of faith; but as the foundation of all the doctrines
of faith; It was high time for the Catholic Church, as soon as they espied
this, to creep into the hearts of men, to give some sovereign antidote
against such poison, and to prevent that deluge of heresies, which they knew,
if this Cataract were set open, would at once rush in, and overwhelme the
Church of God. And therefore the fifth general, and holy Council, to preserve
for ever the faith of the Church against this heresy, did not only condemn
it, decreeing the Apostolical and cathedral sentence of Pope Vigilius to be
heretical; but decreed all the defenders of it to be accursed, and separated
from God, and Gods Church; so that whosoever after this sentence and decree of
the holy Synod, approved by the whole Catholic Church, shall defend the Popes
Cathedral judgments as infallible, and dye in that opinion, they are so far
from dying as Papias and Irene did, in the peace of the Church; that by the
whole catholic Church they are declared, and decreed to dye out of the peace
and communion of the whole catholic Church.

11. A third dissimilitude arises from the persons who err. The former, for
all their error; held Cyprianus ita dixit, quid ei videretur, ut in pace
unitatis esse volucrit, etiam cum eis qui de hac re diversa sentirent. Aug.
lib. 2. de baptis. ca. 1
fast the unity with the Church, even with those who contradicted and condemned
their errors; and we doubt not but that was verified of very many of them,
which Austen Lib. 1. de baptis. ca. 18.
affirms of Cyprian, that they kept this unity of the Church, humiliter,
fideliter, fortiter, ad martyrij usque coronam; kept it with humility, with
fidelity, with constancy, even to the crown of martyrdom. By reason of which
their charity they were not only fast linked, and, as I may say, glued to the
communion of the Church, both in their life, and death, but all their other
errors, as Austen Charitate praesenti quaedam (veritates) venialiter non
habentur. Aug. ibid.
says, became venial unto them: for charity covers a multitude of sins.
The latter are so unlike to these, that with their error, and even by it, they
have made an eternal breach, and separation of themselves from the Catholic
Church; even from all who consent unto, or approve this fifth general Council:
for having by their Laterane decree erected, and set up in the Roman Capitol,
this pontifical supremacy, and infallibility, they now account all but
Schismatickes Nemo potest subesse Christo, and communicare eli Ecclesia, qui
non subest Pontisici Romans Bell. lib. de Eccl. milit. ca. 5. Schisma est quando
unum membrum no^ vult esse subillo capite, quare tollit unitatem essentialem
atque Ecclesia^ ipsam. Schismaticus igitur non est de Ecclesia. Ibid. and
similia habent alij.
who consent not with them; they will have no peace, no communion with any, who
will not adore this Romish Calfe of the supreme and infallible authority of
their vice-god. So the former, notwithstanding their error, died in the peace
of that Church, to which, by most ardent affection they were conjoined: The
latter dying in this their error, whereby they cut off, and quite dis-joyne
themselves from the union of all, who approve the decree of the fifth Council,
(and those are the whole catholic Church of all ages) though they dye in the
very arms, and bosom of the Queen of Babylon, cannot choose but die out of
the blessed peace, and holy communion of the whole catholic Church, which they
have wilfully, insolently, and most disdainfully rejected.

12. The fourth and last difference which I now observe, arises from the
judgment of the Church concerning them both. The former, she is so far from
once thinking to have dyed in heresy, or heretics, that she most gladly
testifies her self not only to hold them in her communion, but to esteem
and honor them as glorious Saints of the Church. Papias Natalis beati Papiae.
Martyr. Romans Feb. 22.
the author of that opinion, a Saint, Irene, Passio Irenei Episcopi and
Martyris. Mart. in martij 24 and Menol. Graec. in Aug. 23.
Iustine, and Cyprian, both Saints, and Martyrs. On the parties which hold the
latter error, she has passed a contrary doom; for by decreeing the Cathedral
sentence of Vigilius to be heretical, and accursing all who defend it; she
has clearly judged and declared all who defend the Popes infallibility in
defining causes of faith, to be heretics, and dying so, to die heretics;
yea, convicted heretics, anathematized by the judgment of the catholic
Church, and so pronounced to die out of the peace and communion of the
catholic Church.

13. I have stayed the longer in dissolving this doubt, partly for that it is
very obvious in this cause; and yet (as to me it seemed) not very easy; but
specially that hereby I might open another error in the Constitution of
Vigilius, who from the example of those Millenarie Fathers (one of which, to
wit Nepos, he expressly mentions) Vig. Constable. loc. cit. nu. 178.
would conclude, That none at all though dying in heresy, may after their
death be condemned, seeing Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, though he condemned
the books and error of Nepos, yet Nepos himself he did not injure, nor
condemn, propter hoc maxim, quia jam defunctus fuerat, for this reason
especially, because Nepos was dead. But by that which now at large I have
declared, it appears, that Vigilius was twice mistaken in this matter, for
neither did Nepos die in a formal heresy, but in an error only at that
time, to which he did not pertinaciously adhere; though Prateolus Prateolum
Nepotem recenset inter haereticos, tum in Indice, tum in libro ipso, in suo
Elench. verbo Nepos. Et ait cum suisse authore^ Epicurcae illius opinionis, in
verbo Chiliastae.
, and after him, the Cardinal, Mittimus Tertullianum and Nepotem extra classem
haereticorum vagantes. Bar. Not. in Martyr. Feb. 22.
upon what reason I know not, but sure none that is good, reckons Nepos with
Tertullian, as one excluded from the rank and order of catholics: neither did
Dionysius or the Church, for that reason at all which Vigilius fancieth; much
less for that especially, forbear to condemn Nepos, because he was dead:
(for then they would not have condemned Valentinus, Basilides, Cerinthus, who
also were dead Justin. in Edicto Quod autem.
, when the Church condemned them,) but because they judged Nepos as well as
Irene, Iustine, and the rest, to have dyed, though in an error, yet in the
unity, peace, and communion of the Church. And this the words of Dionysius Apud
Eusebius. lib. 7. Eccl. hist. ca. 19.
, not rightly alleged by Vigilius, and no better translated by Christopherson
do import. For Dionysius said not, that he therefore reverenced Nepos, quia
jam defunctus fuerat, as the one Vigilius.
, nor quia ex hac vita migravit, as the other Christopher. in sua translatione.
reads them, that is, because he was dead, (for upon that reason the holy
Bishops should have reverenced also Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and other
heretics, who were then dead) but because (...) which Musculus very rightly
translateth thus; I much reverence him as one, qui jam ad quietem praecessit,
who is gone before me unto rest: that is, because he so dyed, that his death
was a passage to rest; even to that rest of which the scripture Apoc. 14.13.
says, using the same words, they rest from their labor: to that rest unto
which himself hoped to follow Nepos: for that Nepos is gone before to this
rest; therefore did Dionysius reverence him. So both the assertion of Vigilius
which from Dionysius he would prove, is untrue, that none who are dead may be
condemned, and yet the saying of Dionysius is true, that such as go to rest,
or dye in the peace of the Church, ought not to be condemned.

14. After this which the Cardinal has said in general concerning such as
dye in the peace of the Church, he adds one thing in particular concerning
Theodorus of Mopsvestia, by way of application of that general position unto
him, saying Bar. an. 553. nu. 49.
that Vigilius was therefore very slack to condemn him, because he would not
condemn those, quos scisset in catholica communione defunctos, whom he knew to
have died in the catholic communion of the Church. So the cardinal tells us
that Vigilius knew, and therefore that it is not only true, but certain, that
Theodorus dyed in the catholic communion.

15. What think you does the cardinal gain by pleading thus for Theodorus a
condemned heretic? Truly for his pains herein the holy Council pays him
soundly: for first in plain terms it calls him a liar, and a slanderer, yea a
slanderer of the whole Church, and if this be not enough, it denounces an
Anathema unto him for so saying: Cursed be he that curses not Theodorus; how
much more cursed then is he, who acquits Theodorus from that curse, who makes
Theodorus blessed? for blessed are all they that dye in the peace and holy
communion of the Church, and that Theodorus so dyed the Cardinal for a
certainty does assure us; for Vigilius knew that he so dyed.

16. But what Church I pray you is that in the communion whereof the Cardinal
assures us Theodorus to have dyed? you may be sure it is their Roman: for in
the Cardinals idiome that's not only (...) the Church, but its the one and
only Church. In the communion then of their Roman church, even in the
communion with the Cardinal himself dyed Theodorus. Now its certain, he died
not in the communion of the Church, which was in the fifth general Council,
for they utterly disclaim him, accurse him, and call them liars, and
slanderers, that say he dyed in their communion. Again, its certain that the
Church of that fifth Council, was of the same communion with the whole
Catholic and Apostolic Church, themselves professing to hold the same faith,
and communion with all former holy general Counsels, and Catholics, and all
succeeding catholics by approving it, professing the same faith and communion
of with it. Seeing then Theodorus dyed not in the communion of this Church,
which is the true and truly catholic Church, and yet dyed as the Cardinal
assures you if the communion of their Roman church, it does clearly and
certainly hence ensue, that their Roman church is neither the true catholic,
neither has full communion with the true catholic Church.

17. Lastly, seeing Theodorus as the Cardinal tells us, died in the peace, and
communion of their Church, and Theodorus was most certainly an heretic,
condemned by the catholic Church; declared by the same Church to be accursed,
that is, separated from God; nay to be a very Devil, as the holy Council Hoc
symbolum Satanas composuit, Conc. 5. ita ait de symbolo Theodori. Collat. 4.
pa. 537. a.
proclaimed him; Their Roman church must needs be at peace, and of the same
communion with condemned heretics, with Arius, Nestorius, Eutiches, Eunomius,
(none of them all can be worse then as Theodorus was, condemned heretics, by
the judgment of the whole Church:) of the same communion with those who are
separated from God; yea it must needs be at peace, and league with the Devils
communicants. Since this is the peace, this the communion of their church (if
Theodorus dyed, as the Cardinal assures us he did, in the peace and communion
of it) let them for ever keep to themselves, let them alone enjoy, both alive
and dead, this peace, this communion, of their Church. But let disunion, and
immortal wars, be for ever betwixt us, and it; betwixt the society with God,
and all communion with it.

-- Nullus amor populis, nec foedera sunto;
Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas,
Imprecor; arma armis, pugnent cineresque, nepotesque,
Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab ipsis.
And let this suffice, (to be opposed against the second reason of Vigilius,
who therefore decreed that Theodorus ought not to be condemned, because, as he
thought, nay knew, as Baronius says, that Theodorus dyed in the peace and
communion of the Church.

CHAP. VIII. That the third and last reason of Vigilius touching the first
chapter, why Theodorus of Mopsvestia ought not to be condemned, because he was
not condemned by former Fathers, and Counsels, is erroneous and untrue.
1. THe third and last reason of Pope Vigilius in defense of the first Chapter,
is drawn from the authority of the ancient Fathers and Counsels; by none of
which, as he pretends, Theodorus of Mopsvestia was condemned, ibid. nu. 179.
and therefore ought not now by himself, or any other to be condemned. And
Vigilius was so exceeding careful to inform both himself, and all others of
the certainty, and truth herein, that he says, we Vig. Constable. nu. 173.
added, solicitudinis nostrae animum, the careful solicitude of our thoughts,
and diligentissima investigatione quaerere curamus: We have taken most
diligent care to find out, whether any thing was decreed, ordered, or disposed
by the Fathers, de persona, vel nomine, either concerning the person, or the
name of Theodorus: and again, Omnibus diligenter inspectis; We have diligently
viewed all things belonging to this matter. Now after all this careful,
solicitous, diligent, yea most diligent inspection, Vigilius says, that,
neither in the Council of Ephesus Ipsam Synodum Ephesinam solicit
recensentes, nihil de Theodori persona, refer co^perimus. ibid. nu. 173.
, nor of Chalcedon Sed neque insancto Chalcedonensi concilio aliquid de
Theodori nomine in^enimus statutu^. ibid. nu. 175.
, nor in Cyril Ex quo claret beatum Cyrillum noluisse nomen ejus (Theodori)
monumentis Synodalibus propter regulam quae de mortuis servanda est, contineri.
ibid. nu. 173.
, nor in Proclus Quando scripsi oportere aut Theodorum aut alios qui pridem
desuncti sunt anathemati subdi oportere. ibid. ex Proclo. nu. 174.
, nor in other Fathers, could he find that Theodorus was ever condemned.

2. Truly Vigilius had exceeding dim eyes in this cause: or to speak more
truly, Nestorianisme had so blinded, and put out his eyesight, that he could
discern almost nothing; though it were never so clear, and obvious, unless
it favored the condemned heresy of Nestorius. Can you see neither the person,
nor the name of Theodorus condemned by the Fathers? not by Cyrill? not by
Proclus? not by the Counsels of Ephesus, and Chalcedon? not by others? Suffer
me I pray you, to help the Popes sight with some better spectacles. Of Cyrill
and Proclus, the fifth Council, after a far better view, and inspection, even
in the Synodall decree, do thus witness. They Conc. 5. coll. 8. pa. 585. b.
show their meaning concerning Theodorus, quod oportet eum anathematizari, that
he ought to be accursed, as we have demonstrated before, out of those things,
which Cyrill, and Proclus have written, ad condemnationem Theodori, for the
condemning of Theodorus, and his impiety. In another place, Coll. 9. pa. 551. b.
of them both they write again in this manner, Let them who pretend the names
of Cyrill, and Proclus, say if Theodorus be not by them numbered with the Jews,
Pagans, Sodomites and heretics; particularly of Cyrill, they say Ibid. pa.
551. a.
, Cyrill seeing that diverse continued to defend the blasphemies of Theodorus,
was forced to write books against him and his impieties, and post mortem
ejusdem Theodori, ostendere eum and haereticum, and impium, and super Paganos,
and super Iudaeos blasphemium. And after the death of the same Theodorus, to
show him to have been an heretic, and more blasphemous then either the Jews
or Pagans. This the Council saw in the writings of Cyrill, and Proclus, and
upon their sight and knowledge testified the same.

3. The words of Cyrill, and Proclus do clearly witness the same. Cyrill
speaking Cyrilli verba citantur in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 551. a.
of Theodorus, calls him one, whose tongue speaks iniquity against God; one
whose horn is exalted against God: one who insulteth Quousque insultas
patienti Christo. ibid.
over Christ, who lesseneth the crimes of the Jews, who pulls him down, ad
infamiam, to infamy and disgrace. Proclus also speaking Epist. Procli ad
Armenios, de fide, extat to. 3. Bib. 5. and citantur verba ejus Conc. 5. coll.
5. pa. 551. and 542. b. Proclus de Theodoro and ejus impietate ita dicit, etc.
not only of the doctrine, but of the person of Theodorus, whom he sets in
the same rank with Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, and other heretics, he
calls him as he does the rest, turbulentos, and coenosos fallaciae rivos,
filthy and mirie rivers of deceit; adding, that the new blasphemy (which was
taught by Theodorus and Nestorius) does far exceed, the blasphemy of the
Jews. Thus Proclus. Where think you was the Popes eyes, when he could not,
or would not see any of all this? Or if yet we doubt of Cyrills mind herein,
Baronius Bar. an. 435. nu. 11.
himself could not choose, but observe this out of him, you see that Cyrill
does una, eademque lance, Theodorum expendere cum Nestorio, put him in the same
scale, and weigh him altogether alike, as he does Nestorius. So the Cardinal:
checking the Popes sight, that would not see him to be condemned by Cyrill,
whom Cyrill esteemed every whit as wicked an heretic as Nestorius.

4. But this whole matter, and the unexcusable error of Vigilius, will be most
evident, by considering the judgment of the Ephesine Council touching
Theodorus, and what ensued upon, or after it. That Theodorus of Mopsvestia, who
dyed about some four Theodorus obijt nu. 427. Bar. nu. 27. Conc. Ephesians.
habitum nu. 431. Bar. and Bin.
years before, was condemned in the holy Council at Ephesus, Cyrill who was
President in that Council does declare, as the fifth Council witnesses.
Cyrill (say Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 585. a.
they in the Synodall decree) writ unto John, touching Theodorus, utpote una
cum Nestorio anathematizato; as being anathematized together with Nestorius, in
the Ephesine Synod: and this they show out of the words of Cyrill, which are In
Epist. ad Ioh. Antioch. and Synod. cum eo.
worthy of most diligent consideration. Peltanus, and after him In Act^ Conc.
Ephesians. tom. 5. ca. 9.
Binius, have very unfitly translated Cyrils words, but in the Greek; as also
consonantly thereunto they are set down in the fifth Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 585.
a.
Council, thus; Processit adversus omnes, qui eadem sapiunt, vel sapuerunt
aliquando; (...): id quod absolute, nos and vestra sa^ctitas dixit, Pelt and
Bin. ita vertunt, Ita and nobis and vestrae sanctitati absolute dicere liceat,
Anathematizamus, etc.
Athematizamus illos, qui dicunt duos filios: That sentence of Anathema, which
we (to wit, the holy Ephesine Council) and your Holiness pronounced
absolutely, (without naming any person) saying, we accuse those who say there
are two Sons, or two Christ's: that sentence proceeded against all who do
think so, or who have thought so. Thus Cyrill, and that also in one of those
his Synodall Epistles, which the holy Council of Epistolas Cyrilli Synodicas
ad Nestorium et alios per Orientem, acceptissimas habet. Sic de se ait Conc.
Chal. Act. 5 pa. 96.
Chalcedon, in their very definition of faith, has approved: so that this is
now not only the judgment of Cyrill, but of the whole Council at Chalcedon.
The same is repeated again by Cyrill, and more conspicuously in his Epistle
Quae extat in Act. Conc. Ephesians. tom. 2. Append. 1. ca. 6. et citantur etiam
haec Cyrilli verba in Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 585 a.
to Anastasius, Alexander, and the rest; which also has equal authority by
the Council of Chalcedon. Sancta Synodus Ephesi, says Cyrill, The holy
Ephesine Synod, having pronounced a just sentence of condemnation against
Nestorius, has by the like sentence condemned the impiety of others, qui vel
postea futuri sunt, vel jam fuerunt eadem illi sapientes; who either shall
hereafter, or heretofore have thought the same; aequalem condemnationem eis
imponens; imposing the same condemnation upon them also: for it is fit, that
when one is condemned for such vain speeches, non contra unum tantum venire,
that the sentence should not come against him alone, but against the whole
heresy, and sect. Thus S. Cyrill setting this down for a golden rule to be
observed, in all Synodall sentences, and judgments of faith; and being so
useful, the fifth Synod does often Coll. 5. pa. 543. b. et pa. 548. a. et in
sententia Synodali Coll. 8. pa. 585. a.
insist upon it.

5. Seeing then Theodorus did not only teach, write, and speak the same with
Nestorius, but was indeed the Arch-heretike, and author of this heresy,
Nestorius being but his Theodorus doctor Nestorij. Justin. in Epist. ad Conc.
5. Coll. 1. pa. 519. b. et idem ait Conc. 5. in sententia Synodali Coll. 8. pa.
585. b. et Nestorius Theodori verba loquutus est. Coll. 5. pa. 550. a. et. Nec
enim Theodorus Nestorij fuit discipulus, sed iste illius Ibid.
disciple, or the trunk to sound out or blaze abroad that heretical doctrine,
which Theodorus had breathed into him; it is evident by this golden rule of
Cyrill, that though Theodorus was dead before the Synod at Ephesus, yet the
anathema and condemnation denounced by the Synod, no less pertains to him,
than to Nestorius, though the one was named, and not the other. And this the
fifth Council out of those very words of Cyrill, does collect, and warrant
others to collect the same. The writings, say they, of Coll. 5. pa. 549. b.
Theodorus being in all things consonant to the vaniloquie of Nestorius, are
together with his, deservedly rejected by the Council of Ephesus, utpote
anathemate quod adversus Nestorium factum est procedente etiam adversus eos,
qui ante illum similia illi sapuerunt: the Anathema which was pronounced
against Nestorius, proceeding also against those, who before Nestorius thought
the same which he did.

6. This same judgment of the Ephesine Council, in condemning Theodorus, is
yet another way declared, and testified expressly by Pope Pelagius, Theodorum
Pel. 2. epist. 7. In his.
mortuum sancta Synodus Ephesina damnavit; the holy Ephesine Council condemned
Theodorus being dead: which so clear a testimony, though alone, were enough to
manifest the foul error of Vigilius in this point. But Pelagius sets down a
proof also thereof, which opens another error of Vigilius. He to excuse
Theodorus, would persuade that Symbolum quod Charisius Presbyter illic
prodidit, etc. Vig. Constable. loc. cit. nu. 173.
Theodorus was not the composer of that impious, and diabolical creed, before
mentioned. Hear now the words, and and proof of Pelagius, taken from that
creed: The Ephesine Synod, says Pelag. loc. cit.
he, condemned Theodorus, nam cum ab ejus discipulis dictatum ab eo Symbolum;
for when that creed, dictated and composed by Theodorus, was brought forth
before the Ephesine Synod, cum authore damnatum est; both it, and the author of
it was condemned presently by the same holy Fathers. So Pelagius: testifying
against Vigilius, both Theodorus to be the author of that creed; and both him,
and it, to have been condemned by the Ephesine Council.

7. What Pelagius says was formerly delivered by the whole fifth Council, who
thus say, Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 575. b.
Theodorus; besides other innumerable blasphemies, ausus est and impium
exponere symbolum, was so audacious as to set out that impious creed: and
again, hoc impium Theodori Symbolum; this impious creed of Theodorus was
anathematized, the other with the writer of it, in the first Ephesine Council:
and again, when this creed was repeated, which is by them Coll. 5. pa. 575. b.
called, Impium Theodori Symbolum, the impious creed of Theodorus; the holy
Synod Coll. 4. pa. 537. a.
cried out, anathema to him that composed it; (and that was Theodorus as
themselves witness;) the holy Ephesine Council accursed this creed, una cum
authore ejus, together with the author of it. Thus testified the whole
Council. Before this fifth Council, Justinian, in his most religious Edict,
witnesses the same. Theodorus (says Just. Edict. Tuli.
he) who exceeds in impiety, Pagans, Jews, and all heretics, did not only
contemn the Nicene Creed, sed aliud symbolum exposuit, but he has expounded
another creed, full of all impiety: and this impious creed of Theodorus being
produced in the first Ephesine Synod, cum ejus expositore, condemnatum est; was
condemned, together with the author or composer of it, by that holy Council.
So the Emperor.

8. Before all these, this is testified, and fully explaned by S. Cyrill, who
Cyrilli verba ex ep. ad Procl. citantur. Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 550, 551.
was the chief Bishop in the Ephesine Synod: This creed, says he, composed by
Theodorus, as they, who brought it, said, or witnessed, was rejected by the
holy Council; and those who thought as that creed taught, being condemned (in
which general sentence Theodorus himself was especially included) nullam viri
mentionem fecit dispensatione, nec ipsum nominatim anathemati subjecit propter
dispensationem; the Council by a dispensation, made no particular mention of
Theodorus, but forbear by name to denounce an anathema against him, by a kind
of connivence, or indulgence; lest some, who held him in great account, should
separate themselves from the Church. So Cyrill. Whence two things are evident;
the one that Theodorus, though dead before, was condemned in general terms by
the Ephesine Council: The other, that they might in particular also have
condemned him, as they did Nestorius; but they forbear that particular naming
of him, only by a dispensation, toleration, or connivence at his name: because
Theodorus was then held by many in great account; his impieties, and
blasphemies being not as yet so fully discovered to the world: Wherein the
Ephesine Council imitated the wisdom and lenity of the Apostles, who for a
time by a Et talem dispensationem in divina scriptura est invenire. Paulus ad
hoc Timotheum circumcidit, etc. Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 585. b. et Coll. 5. pa.
551. b.
dispensation, and connivence, permitted the use of the Ceremonial Law, that
so by insensible degrees the Jews might be weaned from that, unto which they
had been so long accustomed: which examples of the Apostles, the fifth
Council, even in their Synodall sentence, apply to this very cause of
Theodorus: the Church and Ephesine Council, for a time, spared by name to
condemn him, even then, when by their general sentence he was as truly
condemned, as the Mosaicall ceremonies were dead, (though then not deadly) to
the end that the estimation which some (but very unjustly) had of him, might
rather dissui, than dissecari; rather by little and little be untwined, and
worn out, than by a peremptory anathema, be at once, and as it were with one
violent blow, obliterated out of the hearts of such as admired him, which they
saw could hardly be effected.

9. But as the Apostles, when afterward the Gospel had been long published,
and sufficient time allowed, to forget, and bury the ceremonies, then did
utterly condemn all that used the same, saying, If Gal 5.2.
ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: Even so did the Church in
this cause of Theodorus. She expected that her general sentence should have
deterred all from that heresy; specially seeing the Emperors, Theodosius, and
Valentinian, had strengthened that Synodall judgment, by a severe Imperial L.
66. de haeret. Cod. Theod.
Edict, set forth some four years Conc. Ephesians. babit. an. 431. Basso et
Antiocho Coss. ut ex Act. liquet. Tom. 2. ca. 1. Edictum vero editum Theodosio
15 Coss. id est. anno 433.
after the Ephesine Synod; forbidding the books of Nestorius, either to be
read, or retained: But it fell out far otherwise; for when the Nestorians
could no longer shroud themselves under the name, nor countenance their heresy
by the books and writings of Nestorius, they found this new device, to
Confingentes enim quae Nestorij sunt, odisse, alio iterum ea introducunt modo,
quae Theodori sunt admirantes. Cyrill. cujus verba citantur in Conc. 5. Coll.
5. pa. 550. a. ^t idem docet Liber. ca. 10.
commend their doctrine, under the name, dignity, and authority of Theodorus of
Mopsvestia,, whose doctrine was the very same with that of Nestorius, he having
sucked all his heretical poison from Theodorus, and this they thought they
might safely do, Theodorus being not by name condemned, either in the Synodall
judgment, or by the Imperial Edict. To which purpose they, and particularly
Ibas quaedam ex impijs Theodori Capitulis in Syrorum linguam transtulit, et
ubique transmisit. Con. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 562. b.
Ibas, spread abroad the books of Theodorus in every country, and corner,
translating them, as Liberatus Ca. 10.
shows, into the Syrian, Armenian, and Persian languages; by which means
they deceived, and seduced many, pretending Theodorus Theodori scripta
admirantes, et dicentes eum recta sapuisse et consonantia sanctis patribus,
Athanasio, etc. Conc. 5 Coll. 5. pa. 550. a.
writings to be consonant to the ancient fathers. The Catholics seeing how
little effect their connivence at Theodorus name had taken; and that the
heretics abused their lenity in forbearing him, to strengthen their heresy;
saw that now it was time, no longer to dispense or wink at Theodorus; and
therefore the time Quoniam nec susceperunt dicta illorum, et tempus, quod
dispensationis ^^digeres, praeterijs, jam scripserunt (patres) quae superius
dicta sunt, post mortem ejus adversus cum, et ejus scripta. Conc. 5. Coll. 5.
pa. 551. b.
of that dispensation being expired, they began now in plain terms, and by
name, to condemn both his person, and his writings, as before they had in a
generality performed them both in the Council of Ephesus; and this was done
by several Bishops, in several Countries, and by many several ways.

10. The first sentence wherein Theodorus was particularly, and by name
condemned, was in a Council at Armenia, where the credit of Theodorus had done
most hurt. The chief Bishops in that Synod, were Acatius Bishop of Melitiu^ in
Armenia, a very learned, and holy man, who had bin one Vt liquet ex
subscriptionibus, in quibus saepe Acatius. To. 2. Act. Conc. Ephesians ca. 3.
of the chief also in the holy Ephesine Council; and Rambulas vocatur in Conc.
5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. a. et apud Gratian. Cause. 24. a. 2. ca. 6. ex ^me^d. Greg.
13.
Rambulas, or Rabulas Bishop of Edessa, (whose name it seems the Nestorians
for very spite against him, turned into Sic a Liberato (homine Nestoriano
vocatur. ca. 10. et Ibas narrat Theodorum injuste a Rabulae damnatum. Bar. an.
448. nu. 72.
Rabula, that so they might with more facility revile his person) a man of such
piety and high esteem in the Church, that Cyrill Cyrilli Epist. ad Rabulam, in
Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 543 b.
calls him columnam, and fundamentum veritatis; the very pillar and foundation
of the truth; and Rambulas sanctae memoriae Episcopus, qui in Sacerdotibus
exple^dun. ^enig. in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. a.
Benignus testifies, that he was a fair and resplendent lamp in the Church.
These Liber. ca. 10.
two stirred up the Bishops of Armenia to reject the writings of Theodorus,
tanquam haeretici, as one who was an heretic; yea, the author of the Nestorian
heresy; and themselves were present in that noble Council of Fuit nobile
Concilium in Armenia celebratum, c^i Acatius cum Rabula interfuit. Bat. an. 435
nu. 4.
Armenia, wherein they not only condemned Theodorus as an impious person, an
oppugner of Christ, and the child of the Devil; as by the contents of the
acts of that Synod Libellus transmissus ab Episcopis Armenia Proclo, extat in
Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 542.
does appear; but further also, they writ their Synodal letters both to
Proclus, Bishop of Constantinople, and to Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, quatenus
fiat unitas vestra contra Theodorum, and sacrilega dogmata ejus; that they also
would join with them, and their Synod, in co^demning by name, both the person
and sacrilegious writings of Theodorus; giving this as a reason thereof,
because they exhort them but to do in plain, and express manner, the same
thing which was done by them before, but in a generality: We write unto you,
per vos etiam antea condemnatum sine nomine, Theodorum nominatim condemnari;
that Theodorus may now by name be condemned by you, who has already, though
without expressing his name, been condemned by you. And what they exhorted
Proclus, and Cyrill to do, that Rambulas performed, not only in the Armenian
Council, but in his own Church at Edessa; for as Ibas in his impious Epistle
Quae extat in Conc. Chal. Act. 10.
says, Ausus est Theodorum clare anathematizare, he was bold by name, and
expressly, to anathematize Theodorus in his own Church, and, both Benignus and
Liberatus witness the same. Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 549. a.


11. Liber. ca. 10.
What Proclus did upon receipt of those letters sent from the Armenian Council
unto him, is not to be learned out of Liberatus report of this matter, for he
in the narration of this passage, is not only untrue, and partial, but very
heretical also, justly herein taxed by Baronius Liberatus caute legendus, ut
pote qui ab aliquo Nestoriano eam videtur mutuatus historiam. Bar. an. 435. nu.
9.
, and Binius Historiam ca. 10. incaute nimis ab al quo Nestoriano magna ex
part mutuatus videtur. Bin. de Liberato. Notis ad Liber.
, as borrowing his narration from some Nestorians; which the Reader will easily
observe: but the truth herein must be taken out of Cyrill, and the fifth
Council. Proclus, says Cyrill Cyrilli verba citantur in Conc 5. coll. 5. pa.
543. b.
, sent a tome or writing to them of Armenia full of sound doctrine, and he
adjoined thereunto certain chapters, collecta e Theodori codicibus, gathered
out of the books of Theodorus, consonant to the doctrine of Nestorius,
exhorting them, etiam illa anathematizare, to accurse even those doctrines of
Theodorus also. The fifth Council explaines this more fully; Proclus say they
Coll. 5 pa. 551. a.
, writes thus against Theodorus and his impious doctrine. And then they cite,
first those words of Proclus before mentioned, wherein he sets Theodorus in the
same rank with Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius In Epist. Procli quae extat in
Bibl. S. pa. to. 3. corrupt legitur Manichei.
, and other like heretics, calling them all puddles of errors and deceit. And
after this, those other words of Proclus, written to John Bishop of Antioch,
wherein he calls the doctrines of Theodorus; or those chapters which were
collected out of his books, vaniloquie, monstriloquie, Judicial impiety: ad
destructionem legentium evomita: doctrines vomited out by him, to the
destruction of the readers and hearers: exhorting others, to reject, to
abhor, to tread under foot, and to accurse all those chapters of Theodorus:
utpote diabolicae insaniae constituta, and inventiones: as being the positions
and inventions of devilish madness. From which words of Proclus, uttered both
against the person, and doctrine of Theodorus: the Council concludes very
justly, that Proclus (not only in particular condemned Theodorus as the
Armenian Council exhorted him) but condemned him as a Jew, Pagan, and
Heretic: And this was done by Proclus in the year when Valentinian was the 4,
and Theodosius the Corrupt legitur in editione illa epist. quae extat to. 3.
B.S. pat. Theodosio 5. pro 15. ut ex fastis liquet
15. time Consul, as the date of his letter or Tome to the Armenians does
declare; which declares also, that the Armenian Council was held the same
year Conc. Armeniae habitum an. 435. Bar. anno illo nu. 4. is est Coss.
Theodosij 15, et Valent. 4.
: for it followed the spreading abroad of the books of Theodorus; and that was
not done till the Nestorians were by the Imperial Edict forbidden to read the
books of Nestorius: Now the Imperial Edict bears date, in the same
consulship Coss. Theodosij 15, quiest an. 435. juxta Bar. illo an. nu. 1.
, which shows evidently, that as soon as ever the Nestorians began to revive
the honor, and name of Theodorus (being only in a generality before
condemned) the catholics forthwith opposed themselves, and by name condemned
him. And which is specially to be observed, Proclus did this against Theodorus,
although the Eastern Bishops entreated him Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 551. a.
plurimis deprecationibus, ut ne anathematizaretur Theodorus, nec impia ejus
conscripta, did with most earnest prayers solicit him, not to condemn the
person, or doctrine of Theodorus: but, the truth of God which was oppugned by
Theodorus, and the sentence of the Council which had condemned Theodorus, did
more prevail then all their supplication with that holy Bishop.

12. Saint Cyrill did the like as Proclus herein, he seeing the connivence
Quoniam ejusmodi dispensationem Cyrilli and Procli non susceperunt (Nestoriani)
e contrario vero permanserunt desendentes blasphemias Theodori, videns Cyrillus
crescentem impietatem coactus est libros conscribere adversus Theodorum, and
post mortem ejusdem, eum haereticum, and impium, et supra Paganos et Iudaeos
blasphemum ostendere. Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 551. a.
, and dispensation of the Council, not to take the intended effect, but that
the Nestorians proceeded rather from worse to worse, boasting of Theodorus
writings, that they were consonant to the ancient Fathers, and so far
applauding him, that in some Churches they would cry Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 550
a.
out, Crescat fides Theodori, sic credimus sicut Theodorus, let the faith of
Theodorus increase, we believe as he did: yea even stoning Ibid.
some in the Church who spoke against them, Cyrill seeing all this, could
forbear no longer, Ego Ibid. citantur vero verba Cyrill. ex Epist. ad Acat.
ista non sustinui, sed fiducialiter dixi; I could not hold my self to hear
those things, but said with great boldness, and confidence, that Theodorus was
a blasphemous speaker, a blasphemous writer, that he was an Coactus est
ostendere eum esse haereticum. ibid. pa. 551. a
heretic, mentiuntur contra sanctos patres; I said, that they belyed the holy
Fathers, who affirmed Theodorus writings, to be consonant to theirs, nec Ibid.
pa. 551. a.
cessavi increpa^s ea quae scripserunt, nec cessabo: nor have I ceased, nor
will I cease, to reprove those who write thus: and which demonstrates yet
further the zeal of that holy Bishop; he writ Sed et ad Theodosium Imper.
consonantiascribens. ibid.
the same things concerning Theodorus, to the Emperor Theodosius, exhorting him
Rogo ut intactas, et inviolatas animas vestras conservetis ab impietatibus
Theodori. ibid.
to keep his soul unspoted from his impieties. Thus Cyrill by name condemning
both the person and writings of Theodorus.

13. The religious Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian moved partly by the
grave admonitions of Cyrill, and specially by that disturbance which the
Nestorians then made, by their defending and magnifying Theodorus; besides the
former against Nestorius, published two other Imperial Edicts, against
Theodorus, declaring him by name, to have been every way as blasphemous an
heretic as Nestorius; and that the defenders of him, or his writings, should
be liable to the same punishments, as the defenders of Nestorius. Those Edicts
being so pregnant, to demonstrate the error of Vigilius, I have thought it
needful, to express some parts or clauses of them.

14. We Extant leges illae Theodosij et Valent. in Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 544.
545.
again Iterum igitur doctrina Diodori, Theodori et Nestorij abominanda visa
sunt. ibid.
declare that the doctrine impiorum, and pestiferorum, of those impious and
pestiferous persons is abominable unto us: similiter autem and omnes, and so
are all who follow their error. It is just that they all have one name, and be
all clothed with confusion, lest while they be called Christians they seem to
be honored by that title; Wherefore we by this our Law do inact, that
whosoever in any part of the world be found, consenting to the most wicked
purpose of Nestorius, and Theodorus, that from hence forward they shall be
called Symonians, as Constantine decreed, that the followers of Arius should be
called Porphirians. Further let none presume either to have, or keep, or write
their sacrilegious books, especially not those of Theodorus, and Nestorius:
but all their books shall be diligently sought, and being found, shall be
publicly burned. Neque de caetero inveniatur praedictorum hominum memoria:
neither let there be found any memory of the foresaid persons: Let none
receive such as love that sect, or love their teachers, either in any city,
field, suburbs; let them not assemble in any place, either openly, or privily.
And if any shall do contrary to this our sanction, let him be cast into
perpetual banishment, and let all his goods be confiscate. And let your
excellency (they sent this to their Lieutenant) publish this our Law through
the whole world, in every Province, and in every city. Thus did the Emperors
inact, and which is specially also to be remembered, they inacted all this,
corroborantes Jbid. pa. 545. a.
ea que pie decreta sunt Ephesi, strengthening thereby that which was decreed at
Ephesus.

15. Whence two things may be observed, the one, that Theodorus was not only
accounted, and by name condemned for an heretic, as by other catholics, so by
the Emperors also, but that this particular condemning was consonant to the
decree of the Ephesine Synod, this being nothing else but an explanation of
that, which they in general terms had set down, and a corroboration of the
same: The other, that seeing this Imperial decree, has stood ever since the
inacting thereof in force and unrepealed, by virtue of it; had it been, or
were it as yet, I say not rigorously, but duly, and justly put in execution,
not any one defender of the three Chapters, no not Pope Vigilius himself, nor
any who defends his Apostolical constitution, (and those are all the members
of the present Roman church) not one of them, should either have been
heretofore, or be now tolerated, in any city, suburbs, town, village, or
field; but besides the ecclesiastical, censures and anathemaes, denounced
against the^, by the Council and catholic church, they should endure, if no
sharper edge of the civil sword, yet, perpetual banishment out of all
Christian Commonwealths, with loss and confiscation of all their goods.

16. After this Imperial Law was once published, the name and credit of
Theodorus (whose memory the Emperors had condemned and forbidden) grew into a
general contempt and hatred, whereof the church of Mopsvestia, where he had
been Bishop, gave a memorable example. They for a time esteeemed of Theodorus,
as a catholic Bishop, and for that cause kept his name in their dipticks, or
Ecclesiastical tables; reciting him among the other Orthodox Bishops of that
city, in their Eucharisticall commemoration; But now seeing him detected, and
condemned, both by catholic Bishops, by Counsels, and by the Imperial Edict
for an heretic, they expunged and blotted out the name of Theodorus, and in
his room inserted in their dipticks, the name of Cyrill, who though he was
not Bishop in that See, yet had by his piety and zeal manifested and
maintained the faith, and brought, both the heresy and person of Theodorus
into a just detestation, and all this is evident by the Acts of that Synod
Acta illa Synodi Mopsvest. extant in Conc. 5. Collat. 5. pa. 553. and seq.
held at Mopsvestia, about this very matter, of wiping out of the name of
Theodorus.

17. We are now come to the time of the Council of Chalcedon: for, the
expunging of Theodorus name, and inserting of Cyrills, followed as it seems
shortly after the death of Cyrill, and he dyed about seven Cyrill. obijt an.
444. Conc. Chalced. habitum an. 451. Bar. et. Bin.
years before the Council of Chalcedon. That by it Theodorus was also
condemned, their approving Conc. Chalc. Act. 5. in definit. Synodi.
the Council of Ephesus, and the Synodall Epistles of Cyrill, (in both which,
and in the later, by name Vt liquet ex Cyrilli Epistolis ad Iohannem A^tioche^,
et ad Acatium, quae citantur in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. et 550.
Theodorus is condemned) does manifest: and besides this the Emperor Justinian
expressly says Justin. Edict.. Tali.
of it, that the impious Creed of Theodorus being recited in that Council,
both it, cum expositore ejus, with the Author and expounder of it, (and that
was Theodorus) were condemned in the Council of Chalcedon.

18. When many years after that holy Council, some Nestorians began again,
contrary to the Edict of Theodosius, and Valentinian, to revive the dead, and
condemned memory of Theodorus, Sergius Bishop of Cyrus making mention Vt
teslantur Act. Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 578. a. et. 582. a.
, and commemorating him in the Collect among catholics; the truth of this
matter being examined and found, that same Sergius by the command of Justinius
the Emperor, was deposed from his Bishopric, excluded out of the Church, and
so continued even to his dying day: and this was done but six years before the
Empire of Justinian, as by the date Justinius scripsit id edictum, Rustico Coss.
Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 582. b. fuit is Coss. an. 520. ut teslatur Marcell. in
Chron. et agnoscit, Bar. in illo an. nu. 1 Justinianus vero coepit imperare an.
527. ut Marcell. et Baron. asserunt.
of Justinius his letters does appear.

19. Now if to all these particular sentences, you add that which the fifth
Council Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 557. a.
witnesses, that Theodorus, post mortem a catholica ecclesia ejectus est, has
been after his death condemned, and cast out, and that even by the whole
Catholic Church, you will easily confess, that from the time almost of his
death, unto the reign of Justinian there has been a continual, and never
interrupted condemnation of him in the Church. But in Justinians time, and
perhaps before, though less eagerly, the Nestorians began afresh, to renew the
memory and doctrine of Theodorus, setting now a fairer gloss and varnish on
their cause, then ever they had before: for they very gladly apprehending and
applauding those (to say the least) inconsiderate speeches of the Popes
Legates, and Maximus in the Council of Chalcedon, that by his dictation, or
Epistle, Ibas was declared to be a catholic, hereupon they now boasted, that
the holy Council, by approving that Epistle of Ibas, had approved, both the
person and doctrine of Theodorus, seeing they both are highly extolled, and
defended in that Epistle. By this means was this cause brought ab inferis the
second time, upon the stage, and that also cloaked under the name, and credit
of the Council of Chalcedon. And at this second boute, all the defenders of
the Three Chapters, and among them Pope Vigilius, as General to them all,
undertook the defense of Theodorus: and, as if there had never been any
sentence of condemnation, either in general, or in particular denounced
against him, even in his definitive, and Apostolical constitution declares,
That Theodorus was not condemned, either by former Councels, or Fathers; and
this he declares after his solicitous, circumspective, and most diligent
examination of their writings.

20. What think you was become of the Popes eyes at this time, that he could
see none of all those condemnations of Theodorus, before mentioned? Not the
general anathema of the Councels at Ephesus, and Chalcedon, in which Theodorus
was involved: not the express, and particular anathema denounced against him
by Rambulas, and Acatius, with the Council of Armenia: not the condemnation of
him, and his writings by Saint Proclus, by S. Cyrill, by the Church of
Mopsvestia, by the Edict of the religious Emperors, by the whole Catholic
Church. None of all these things were done in a corner; they were all matters
of public notice, and record; obvious to any that did not shut their eyes
against the sunshine of the truth. But, as I said before, and must often say,
Nestorianisme, like Naash the Ammonite, had put out the Popes right eye, he
could see nothing with that eye; all that he saw in this cause, was but a very
oblique, and sinister aspect, as does now, I hope, fully appear, but will be
yet much more manifest, by that which in the Constitution of Vigilius we are
next to consider.

21. For, as if it were a small matter, not to see Theodorus condemned by the
former Councels, and Fathers, (though in a man professing so exact and accurate
inspection in any cause, such gross oversights are not venial) the Pope
ventures one step further, for the credit of this condemned heretic. He could
not find that Theodorus was condemned by the former witnesses: Tush, that is
nothing, he finds him acquitted by them all: he finds by Cyrill, by Proclus,
by the Councels of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, yea, by Justinians own law, that
Theodorus ought not to be condemned. This was indeed a point worthy the Popes
own finding. But withal I must tell you, that you also shall find one other
thing, that Pope Vigilius, having once passed the bounds of truth, for defense
of Theodorus, cares not now if he wade up to the ears, and drown himself in
untruths.

22. Let us then examine the allegations, which, for proof of this, the Pope
has found; and begin we, as the Pope does, with Cyrill. In his Eam citat Vigi.
in Constable. nu. 173. and 174. apud Bar. an. 553.
Epist. to John B. of Antioch, Vigilius found an explication, how it was said
by Cyrill, that by a dispensation the name of Theodorus was not condemned; for
there Cyrill says, Sed just audient, they shall justly hear this, though
they will not: ye forget your selves, when you bend your bows against ashes,
that is, against the dead; for he who is written among them (that is, the dead)
no^ superest, is not; and let no man blame me for these words, Grave est enim
insultare defunctis, vel si Laici fuerint; for it is an hard matter, to insult
over the dead, yea, though they be but Laikes; how much more over those, who
with their Bishoprics have left their lives. Out of which words Vigilius
affirms S. Cyrill to teach it to be an injurious and hard matter, repugnant
to the Ecclesiastical rule, to condemn any that is dead; and then certainly
not a Bishop, not Theodorus.

23. For answer hereunto, I do earnestly entreat the reader to ponder
seriously the Popes good dealing herein. That Epistle which Vigilius commends
unto us, under the name of Beatae recordationis Cyrillum: et beatus Cyrillus.
Vig. loc. cit.
S. Cyril, is none of Cyrils, it is a base and counterfeit writing, forged by
some Nestorians in the name of Cyrill; Witness hereof the whole fifth general
Council, who, of purpose, and at large, examined this matter, and refuted this
cavil of Vigilius, before ever he set forth his Constitution; for thus they
Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 549. a.
say of it, Some loving the persidiousnesse of Nestorius, which is all one as
to say, the madness of Theodorus, do not refuse to faigne some things, and
use certain words, as written in an Epistle by S. Cyrill; Nusquam vero talis
Epistola scripta est a sanctae memoriae Cyrillo; but Cyril never writ such an
Epistle, neither is it in his books. And then reciting the whole Epistle, and
all those words which Vigilius alleges; they add, Et ista quidem continet
conficta Epistola; these are the contents of this counterfeit Epistle: and a
little after, That nothing of all, quae in conficta Epistola continentur, which
are contained in that counterfeit Epistle, was writ by Cyrill, it is declared
by that which he writ to Acatius: and yet further, These things are spoken, ad
convictionem Epistolae, quae a defensoribus Theodori falso composita est; to
convince that Epistle to be a forgerie, which is falsely composed by the
defenders of Theodorus. The sum of this they repeat in their Synodall
sentence, saying, Coll. 8. pa. 585. b.
We have found, that the defenders of Theodorus have done the same which
heretics are wont to do; for they clip away some part of the Fathers words,
quaedam vero falsa ex semetipsis componentes, and confingentes; and devising,
or faigning other things of themselves, they seek by them, as it were, by the
testimony of Cyrill, to free Theodorus from the Anathema. Thus the Council:
all of them with one voice proclaming Pope Vigilius for a lewd dealer, who
commends, and that even in his Apostolical Constitution, a false and forged
writing, for the true Epistle of S. Cyrill.

24. It is true, Vigilius is not the first Pope, who has blemished their See,
by such false and fraudulent dealing: Zozimus and Bonifacius were long before
this taxed, and that justly, by the Africane Conc. Afric. Epist. ad Caelest.
ca. 105. tom. 1. conc. pa. 645. et seq.
Bishops, for down facing the Nicene Canons. Vigilius was too too bold with
Cyrill, as now you see. But if you descend to Pope Nicholas, or to Gregory the
seventh, and their successors, they were so shameless and audacious in this
kind, that they scarce writ any decrees of importance, but they stuffed them
with such Fathers: Even the basest, and most abject fictions, which were void,
not only of truth, but of brain, were fittest for the Popes, and their
Pontifical determinations, and were they never so base, and bastardly, yet the
Popes, like kind Godfathers, could, when they listed, christen them with the
names of S. Cyrill, Cyprian, or the like, and then they must be called, or
esteemed for no others, than holy and reverend Fathers.

25. Proclus follows: In whose writings Vigilius found three testimonies, to
prove, that Theodorus being dead, was not to be condemned: The first is out of
his Epistle to Constable. Vig. nu. 174
John Bishop of Antioch; where these words are alleged; When did I write to
you, oportere aut Theodorum, aut alios quosdam, qui pridem defuncti sunt,
anathemate subdi; that either Theodorus, or others, being dead, ought to be
anathematized? The second is out of the same Epistle; I rejected indeed those
Chapters, (annexed to my Tome) as being impious, neque autem de Theodoro, neque
de alio quoquam, qui jam defuncti sunt; but I neither writ of Theodorus, nor of
any other who is dead, that they should be anathematized, or rejected. The
third is out of an Epistle of Proclus to Maximus; I understand, that the names
of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and of some other, is prefixed to the Chapters, ad
anathematizandum, to be anathematized, together with the Chapters, cum illi ad
Deum jam migrarunt, whereas they are now departed to God, and it is needless
to injure them, being now dead, quos nec vivos aliquando culpavimus; whom being
alive we did never reprove. These are the Popes allegations out of S. Proclus;
in which I confess it is clearly taught, that neither any after their death
may be condemned; and particularly that not Theodorus, seeing he is gone to
God, and was never in his life time once reproved.

26. It is a De regulis juris lib. 6. decret. reg. 8.
rule in law, semel malus, semper praesumitur esse malus; He who is once
convicted of any crime, is presumed still to be faulty in that kind. Vigilius
being lately convicted to commend forgeries for the writings of Fathers, is in
reason and equity to be thought to allege such a S. Proclus, as before he
did S. Cyrill: Nay, there needs no presuming in this matter; there is evident
proof, and witnesses, above exception, to manifest the same; even the whole
fifth general Council; who, out of the true, and undoubted writings of
Proclus, testify, that Proclus taught the quite contrary, both that the dead
might, and particularly that Theodorus ought to be condemned, and that he was
by Proclus himself condemned; for in their very Synodall decree, they thus
Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 585. b.
write, Because the disciples of Theodorus most evidently oppugning the truth
(thus sharply do they reprove Vigilius) do allege certain sayings of Cyrill,
and Proclus, as written for Theodorus; It does appear, that those Fathers do
not free him from the Anathema, but speak those things dispensative, by way of
dispensation, and in the very words of dispensation they declare of him, quod
oportet anathematizari Theodorum, that Theodorus ought to be anathematized;
adding, that they have demonstrated this, even out of the words of Cyrill, and
Proclus, which they writ ad condemnatione^ ejus, for the condemning of
Theodorus. Thus writ the Council, unto which the whole Catholic Church has
ever since subscribed. Seeing then it is certain that Proclus both taught that
Theodorus ought to be condemned, and did himself write to condemn him, there
can be no doubt, but that those Epistles to John, and Maximus, which Vigilius
cites; and wherein Proclus is made to avouch the quite contrary, that neither
himself did, nor that any ought to condemn Theodorus, are forged in the name
of Proclus, by such hands as had wrought the like feat in Cyrill: And if either
those Epistles were extant, (for in that of Proclus to John, recorded in the
fifth Coll. 6. pa. 562.
Council, there is no such thing at all) or, had this Constitution of Vigilius
been published, and known to the Council before they had fully examined, and
cleared this Chapter touching Theodorus; it is not to be doubted, but the one
of them, if not both would have discovered this forgery also.

27. Besides all which, there are diverse evident prints of a false, and
heretical hand in those Epistles. Is it injury (as that forged Proclus
affirms) to condemn the dead? Nay, it is even heretical, and that by the
judgment of the whole Catholic Church, as before we have proved, to say, that
the dead may not be condemned. Had Proclus writ, or said this, he had condemned
the Councels of Sardica, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, as injurious unto the
dead; nor them only, but he had condemned himself, who, as we have now
demonstrated, both condemned the dead, and taught, that Theodorus, though dead,
ought to be condemned.

28. Did Theodorus at his death go (as this forged Proclus affirms) to the
Lord? a blasphemer; an heretic; equal, by the judgment of Proclus himself,
to the Jews, and Pagans, and of the same rank with Arius, Macedonius,
Eunomius, and Nestorius; such a blaspheming heretic go unto the Lord? why
then did the Ephesine Council, why did Saint Cyrill, why did Proclus himself
adjudge him to be anathematized, that is, separated from the Lord? Heretics,
and impious persons, as living, they go not in the ways of the Lord, but in
their own ways; so dying, they go, like Judas, to their own place; not to
the Lord, not to his habitation, and place of rest; the Saints, and they only
go that way. To them only he sairh, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

29. Was Theodorus not so much as blamed; no, not so much as once in his life,
as the forged Proclus says? It seems Leontius borrowed his most partial
speech, before mentioned, out of this Proclus, and was too credulous unto it:
But the true Proclus living so Theodorus obijt an. 427. Proclus sit Episcopus
an 434. Bar. in illis annis.
near to the time of Theodorus, could not be ignorant, nor would ever have
uttered so foul an untruth: for although the Church pronounced no public
censure by name against him, yet was he reproved and blamed, not only by
others complaining of his erroneous doctrine, but even by Theophilus B. of
Alexandria, and Gregory Nissene. This the fifth Council witnesses saying Conc.
5. coll. 5. pa. 545. a.
, Saint Theophilus, and Saint Gregory Nissene susceptis querimonijs adversus
Theodorum adhuc viventem, Complaints being brought unto them against Theodorus
of Mopsvestia, as yet living; and against his writings, scripserunt adversus
eum Epistolas, they writ Epistles against him: and in those Epistles (some part
whereof is recorded in the Council) they blame him as presuming to renew the
heresy and madness of Paulus Samosatenus. And it is further added, porrecta
sunt autem, and the impious chapters collected out of the books of Theodorus,
were showed and brought to Theophilus; whence it is now evident, that those
Epistles alleged by Vigilius under the name of Proclus, are no less, by the
untrue, and heretical assertions contained in them, then by the clear
testimonies of the fifth general Council, convicted of forgery.

30. From Fathers he comes to Counsels, and concerning the first Ephesine.
Vigilius notes two points. The former that Theodorus was not condemned by it,
to which purpose he thus says Vigil. Constable nu. 173.
, Solicit recensentes, having with diligence, and solicitude reviewed the
Ephesine Synod: We have found that in it nothing is related touching the
person of Theodorus. What, nothing? how then did Pope Pelagius Theodorum
mortuum sancta Synodus Ephesina damnavit. Pelag 2. Epist. 7.. In his.
after Cyrill, and the fifth Council find that in it Theodorus was condemned?
and if they condemned him, then certainly somewhat was related, and debated
about him, upon knowledge whereof the Council condemned him. But say indeed,
is nothing found concerning Theodorus in that Council? What say you to the
impious and diabolical Creed, which was both related Act. Ephesians. conc. to. 2.
ca. 29, 30, 31, and 33.
in the Synod, and condemned Hec Symbolum una cum authore Ephesina prima
Synodus anathematizavit. conc. 5. coll. 4. pa. 537. a.
together with the author of it? Truly here Vigilius uses a shift, worthy to
be observed. That Creed he found, and he found it to be condemned: but to
quite Theodorus, he Sed Symbolum quod Charisius prodidit (condemnatu^) magis
quia ab Athanasio, Photio, etc. Vigil. constable. nu. 173. ubi sententia manca per
dictionem (condemnatum) aut aliam simile^ supplendae est.
would have it believed, that Theodorus was not the author of it; nor that it
was condemned, as being the Creed of Theodorus, but because it was divulged by
certain Nestorians, Athanasius, Photius, Antonius, and Iacobus. Nor does
Vigilius use this shift only about that impious Creed, but in other heretical
writings of Theodorus. Proclus adjoined to his Tome certain impious positions
collected e Theodori codicibus, as Cyrill Cyrill Epistola ad Acatium, quae
citat. in conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 543.
expressly witnesses. Vigilius likewise of them would have it thought, that
they were none of the positions of Theodorus; and by the forged Epistles of
Proclus, he would persuade Mala quae damnaverat, cujus essent, Proclus
professus est se ignorare. Vigil. conc. nu. 175.
that Proclus himself did not know whose they were. The Emperor Justinian
before the Synod began, sent threescore several heretical passages or
chapters truly gathered out of the books and writings of Theodorus, hoping
that the Pope, seeing Theodorus books so full fraught with heresies, and
blasphemies, would make little doubt to condemn the writer of them. Vigilius
turns to his former shift, he will not think, nor have others to think that
Theodorus writ such heresies, though they had his name prefixed unto them: for
concerning those 60. chapters (expressed both in the Popes Constitution Conc.
Vig. a nu. 60. ad nu. 173.
, and in the Synodall Conc. 5. coll. 4.
acts) he thus says Vigil. in constable. nu. 173.
, We decree that by those foresaid chapters, nulla injuriandi praecedentes
patres praebeatur occasio: no occasion be given to injure the former Fathers
and Doctors of the Church. And again nu. 184.
, We provide by this our Constitution, that by these or the like doctrines
condemned in Nestorius and Eutyches, no contumely, nor occasion of injury be
brought to those Bishops who have died in the peace of the Catholic Church:
and that Vigilius thought Theodorus so to have dyed, we have before Sup. ca. 7.
declared: yea that Vigilius knew it, Baronius assured us. Thus Vigilius to
free Theodorus from condemnation, pretends those heretical writings to be none
of his.

31. What is it that Vigilius will not say for defense of this blasphemous and
condemned heretic? This cavil was used, as Baronius Defensores Theodori, ea
ipsius scripta esse negarunt. Bar. an. 435. nu. 14.
tells us, by the old Nestorians and defenders of Theodorus, denying those to
be the writings of Theodorus, quae diffamata, which were famously known
through the whole East: and which being afterward detected, and discovered to
be truly his writings, both they, and their author with them were condemned.
Now this old heretical and rejected cavil Vigilius here renews; those
writings famously known to be the works of Theodorus, condemned as his
writings, and he with them and for the^, Vigilius will now have thought to be
none of his, nor he by them nor for them may be now condemned. And that you
may see how Vigilius herein does strive against the maine stream of the truth.
Saint Cyrill Cyrill. Epistolae ad Proclum, citata in Conc. 5. coll. 5 pa. 550.
b.
who then lived, testifies Theodorus to be author of those heretical and
blasphemous writin^^. That we have found certain things in the writings of
Theodorus, nimiae plena blasphemiae, nulli dubium est, full of blasphemy, none
that thinks aright can make any doubt. And again Ibid. pa. 550 a.
, I examining the books of Theodorus, and Diodorus, have contradicted them as
much as I could, declaring that sect to be every where full of abomination. Yea
he writ diverse books Qui Cyrilli libri citantur saepe in Conc. 5. coll. 5.
pa. 538. and seq.
against Theodorus, expressing the words of Theodorus and his own confutation
of the same. So clear, and undoubted was this truth in Cyrills days, who
lived at the same time with Theodorus, that he thought them unwise, who made
any doubt of that, which Vigilius now calls in question. And particularly
touching that impious Creed, Cyrill says Prolata apud sanct^m Synodum
expositione ab en composita, sicut dicebant, qui protulerunt, etc. Verba
Cyrill. in Epist. ad Proclum citat. in Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 550. b.
, that they who brought it to the Synod of Ephesus, said, that it was composed
by Theodorus: which they said not as by way of uncertain report, but as
testifying it to be so, in so much that the whole Synod giving credit
thereunto, thereupon condemned Theodorus His condemnatis qui sic sapiunt,
nullam viri (Theodori) memoriam fecerunt. Ibid.
, though by a dispensation they expressed not his name.

32 The same is testified by Rambulas, Acatius, and the whole Armenian
Council, who after examination Fiat unitas vestra contra Theodorum, and
sacrilega capitula and dogmata ejus. Libell. Episc. Armen. ad Proclum. in Conc.
5. coll. 5. pa. 542. b.
of this cause found the true and indubitate writings of Theodorus to be
sacrilegious: and therefore by name condemned him, exhorting both Cyrill and
Proclus to do the like. The Imperial Edicts of Theodosius De quibus legibus
supra, hoc cap. Exta ^t vero in Conc. 5. coll. 5. pa. 544.
, and Valentinian leave no scruple in this matter: who would never have so
severely forbidden the memory of Theodorus, and the reading or having of his
books, had it not by evidences undeniable been known, that those were indeed
his works, and heretical writings. If all these suffice not, when this cause
about Theodorus was now again brought into question, the Emperor Justinian,
and the fifth Council, so narrowly and so exactly examined the truth hereof,
that after them to make a doubt, is to seek a knot in a rush. They testify
those very heretical assertions whereof Vigilius doubts, to be the doctrines
and words Habemus quae ex Theodori codicibus collegistu. Conc. 5. coll. 4. pa.
527. b. and idem docet Justin. in suo Edict. Si quis defendit Theodorum.
of Theodorus, that impious creed also, whereof Vigilius is doubtful to be
composed by Theodorus: they are so certain Jmpius Theodorus aliud Symbolum
exposuit. Just. in Edicto.. Tali, Et impium ejus (Theodori) Symbolum. coll. 4.
pa. 537. a.
hereof, that even in their Synodall sentence Licet volentibus codices impij
Theodori prae manibus accipere, vel quae ex impijs codicibus ejus a nobis
inserta his gestis sunt. Conc. 5. coll. 8. pa. 585. a.
, they refer the trial of what they decree herein to the true and undoubted
books of Theodorus. And in their sentence is included the judgment of the
whole catholic Church, ever since they decreed this which has with one
consent approved their decree.

33 After all these Pope Pelagius, in one of his decretall Epistles, wherein at
large he handles this cause, not only testifies that impious Creed Ab ejus
(Theodori) disc^pulis, dictatum ab eo symbolum in ea ^em Synodo Ephesina
prolatum. Pelagius Epist. 7.. In his.
, and those heretical Ejusdem Theodori ex libris illius dicta replicemus. ibid.
writings, to be the works of Theodorus, alleging many places of them, but
whereas some obstinately addicted to the defense of the three Chapters moved
again Haec Theodori dicta, utrum ejus sint, fortasse dubitatur. ibid.. Haec.
this same doubt which Vigilius does; and as is likely by occasion of his
decree: Pelagius of purpose declares those Ibidem. and seq.
to have been the true writings of Theodorus, and consonant to his doctrine;
and that he proves by the testimonies of the Armenian Bishops, of Proclus, of
John of Antioch, of Cyrill, of Rambulas, of Honoratus a Bishop of Cilicia, (and
so a neighbor of Mopsvestia which is in the same Secunda Cilicia, sub qua
Mopsvestia constituta est. Conc 5. coll. 5. pa. 547. b.
Province,) of Hesychius, of Theodosius, and Valentinian the Emperors, and of
Theodoret, then whom not any (except perhaps Nestorius) was more devoted to
Theodorus; insomuch that he is thought to have taken from Theodorus the name of
Theodoret. After which cloud of witnesses produced, Pelagius thus concludes
Epist, 7.. Etsi.
, blasphemias has ejus esse quis dubitat, who may doubt but that those
blasphemies are truly his, (namely of Theodorus,) being by so many witnesses
declared to be his? Now when Pope Vigilius against all these Counsels,
Bishops, Emperors, Popes, of the same, of succeeding ages, yea against the
consenting judgment of the catholic Church, shall not only doubt, whether
Theodorus be the author of those heretical and blasphemous assertions and
writings: but by his Apostolical Constitution decree it to be an injury to
ascribe those blasphemies unto him, or for them to condemn him, (as the whole
Church, ever since the Ephesine Council has done) does it not argue, nay
demonstrate an heretical, and most extreme distemper in the Popes judgment,
and in his cathedral sentence at that time.

34. The other point which Vigilius observes out of the Ephesine Council is
worse then this, for as yet he has only found that Theodorus was not de facto
condemned by the Ephesine Synod; but in the next place, he will find by that
Council, that Theodorus, de jure ought not to be condemned. To which purpose
he says Vigilius in Constable. nu. 173.
, that Cyrill (and so the Ephesine Synod consenting to him as President) would
not have the name of Theodorus contained in the Synodall Acts at Ephesus:
propter regulam quae de mortuis in sacerdotio servandae est, for the rule which
is to be kept in such Bishops as are dead. And that rule he explaines in the
words following, to be this, that the dead should not be condemned, nor should
the living bend their bow against ashes, or insult over the dead, whereby
Vigilius even by his Apostolical decree, adjudgeth both Cyrill, and the whole
Ephesine Council consenting therein with him, to have believed and held a
condemned heresy, as an Ecclesiastical rule, or rule of their faith and
actions; That one who is dead may not be condemned: and so by the Popes
Constitution both Cyrill and the holy Ephesine Synod were heretics. Such
worthy points do the Popes find when they use their art, and industry, to
review ancient writings, with a reference to their own determinations, and so
easy was it for Vigilius to find the Ephesine Council, first injurious to
the dead, and then heretical in a doctrine or rule concerning the dead.

35. The very like he found also in the Council of Chalcedon, that Theodorus
ought not to be condemned. His reason is this; John Vigil. in Constable. nu. 145.
Bishop of Antioch, writ a letter to the Emperor Theodosius in excuse of
Theodorus of Mopsvestia, ne post mortem damnari deberet, that he ought not to
be condemned after his death. Now this letter of John, Venerabiliter
memoratur, is with honor, (not only with allowance and liking) remembered by
the Council of Chalcedon, in their Relation, or Synodall Epistle to the
Emperor Martianus. Whence Vigilius collecteth, that seeing the Council with
reverence, embraces that letter of John, and that letter imports, that
Theodorus being dead, ought not to be condemned; therefore the Council judges
that none who are dead, and particularly, that Theodorus ought not to be
condemned: which reason of Vigilius was borrowed from other Nestorians, and
defenders of the three Chapters, as appears by Liberatus, who explaineth it,
and sets Liber. ca. 10.
it down almost totidem verbis: John says he, writ three letters in the
behalf of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, praising in them Theodorus, and declaring
his wisdom; one of those letters he sent to the Emperor Theodosius, another
to Cyrill, the third to Proclus. Now the first, and third, containing the
praises of Theodorus, the Council of Chalcedon, in their Relation to Martianus
the Emperor, did Duas Iohannis Epistolas lauds Theodori continentes, Chalced.
Synod. suscepit, et confirmavit. Jbid.
embrace, and confirm. Thus Liberatus agreeing wholly herein, as you see, with
Vigilius.

36. For answer of which reason of Vigilius, I will entreat you to spare my
labor, and hear how fully, and soundly Cardinal Baronius does refute it; but
yet so, that he will not seem to tax, or touch Vigilius; that had been
great insolency, and incivilitie in a Cardinal; but he pays the Deacon home
to the full, who says but the very same with the Pope: Liberatus, says Bar.
an. 435. nu. 11.
he, borrowed this narration of I know not what Nestorian, and incaute nimis;
and he affirms too indiscreetly, that the writings of Theodorus were praised
in the letters of John, Bishop of Antioch; and, which is far worse, that
those letters of John, containing the praises of Theodorus, were received, and
confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon, in their Relation to Martianus; for by
that means, adducit in idem crimen, he makes the whole Council of Chalcedon
guilty of the same crime; to wit, of approving the praises and doctrine of
Theodorus. So Baronius. By who^ it is clear, that Vigilius (saying the same
with Liberatus) makes the whole Counsel of Chalcedon guilty of the same crime;
that is, in plain terms avoucheth them to be heretical: Videsne, says the
Jbid.
Cardinal, quot, and quales lateant colubri sub uno cespite? Do not you see
how many, and how vile, and venomous snakes lie hid under this one turfe, or
tuft of untruth? And that very tuft, has Pope Vigilius chosen to build up, and
beautify with it his Apostolical decree. Now, if under that one turfe there
lurk (as indeed there does, and the Cardinal acknowledges,) so great a
number of Vipers; what infinite, and innumerable heaps of most deadly, and
poisonfull untruths, are compacted into the whole body of his Apostolical
Constitution, which contains (if one listed narrowly to examine it) more than
a thousand like turfes; nay, beyond comparison worse than this.

37. But the Cardinal has not yet done with Liberatus; Let us, says Bar.
ibid. et nu. 12.
he, put the Axe to the root of the tree; and citing the very words of the
Council, and their Relation to Martianus, he adds, You see that here is no
mention at all of Theodorus of Mopsvestia; which reason of Baronius, Binius
Bin. notis in Liberatum. Breviarium hoc.
explaneth, saying, That which Liberatus affirms, that the Council of
Chalcedon received the praises of Theodorus, is not only untrue, sed etiam
ipsi relationi Synodicae contraria; but it is plainly contrary to the Synodall
Relation of the Council at Chalcedon, to which Liberatus refers himself:
Change but the name, and all this is every whit as forcible against Vigilius,
as against Liberatus. But the Cardinal had well learned the old lesson, Dat
veniam corvis vexat censura columbas; the Pope offends more than any, but the
poor Deacon must feel the smart, and bear all the blows; and yet by your
leave, through the Deacons sides the Cardinal has cunningly given a deadly
wound, and cut the very root of the Popes Apostolical decree; although he
will not be thought so unmannerly, as once to touch his Holiness, or speak
one syllable against him.

38. After Fathers, and Councels, Vigilius will next find, that the Emperor
Justinian himself, who was so earnest in condemning Theodorus, does yet teach,
that Theodorus ought not to be condemned; and how proves he this? You, says
In Constable. nu. 175.
Vigilius to the Emperor, laudabiliter adduxistis, have with praise and
approbation alleged that Relation of the Council of Chalcedon in your law, de
sancta Trinitate. Seeing then that Relation of the Council approves the
letters of John, and the letters of John, show, that Theodorus being dead,
ought not to be condemned; the Pope from hence infers, that by Justinians
own law approving that Relation, Theodorus ought not to be condemned. It were
very easy with Baronius Hatchet to chop off this reason, and cut it up by the
root, seeing neither John's letters did teach that Theodorus, being dead, might
not be condemned; nor did the Council, in their Relation approve, either the
person, or doctrine, or any praises of Theodorus, or so much as mention him:
But I will not trouble the Cardinal in so easy a matter as this. Besides all
the inconsequences in this reason, Justinian is so far from teaching, or
thinking this, so much as in a dream, that in the same title, In Cod. Just.
leg. 6. tit. de summa Trin.
de Summa Trinitate, and fide Catholica, (which seems to be that which
Vigilius intended) he accurseth all heresies, and specially that of Nestorius;
and all, qui eadem cum ipso sentiunt, vel senserunt; who either do think, or
have thought as Nestorius did; in which number Theodorus of Mopsvestia to be
comprehended, not only by that which we have said before, is manifest; but
even by Justinian himself, who expressly witnesses, Theodorus Theodorus
haereticos omnes impietate superat, etc. Just. in edict. Tali.
to have thought so, and to have Iste autem (Theodorus) usque ad mortem in sua
permanens impietate. Ibid. Quod autem.
dyed in that heretical opinion; and for that very cause does he condemn, and
accurse him. Now seeing that law, de Summa Trinitate, was published in the
seventh year of Justinians reign, (as by the Datum Iustiniano August. 3.
Coss. Is vero est annus 7. Iustiniani, ut docet Marcell. in Chro^. et Bar. in
eum an. nu. 1.
date appears) and sent into twelve several Provinces; seeing, after this,
Justinian, in his twentieth Vt ait Bar. an. 546 nu. 8.
year, set forth another Edict Edictum hoc de quo toties mentionem fe^imus.
concerning these three Chapters, wherein he particularly, and by name
anathematizeth Just. Edict Si quis defendit Theodorum.
Theodorus; nor him only, but all that defend him; yea, all, who do not
anathematize him; out of which number Vigilius himself is not exempted, seeing
he remained so constant in this truth, that after Vigilius had published his
Constitution, both himself signified to the fifth Council, that he still
persisted in condemning the three Chapters, one of which was the condemning of
Theodorus; and the whole fifth Synod testified the same, saying in their seventh
Collation, semper Pa. 582. b.
fecit, and facit, the Emperor has ever done, and now continues to do, that
which preserves the holy Church, and true faith: Was it not a very strange
thing in Vigilius to pretend in his Constitution, that by the Emperors own
law, Theodorus ought not be condemned; whereas by the Emperors Edict, not
only Theodorus by name; but all, who defend him, even Vigilius himself, eo
nomine, because he defends him, is condemned, and anathematized.

39. And now you have seen all that Vigilius brings for defense of
Theodorus, all that he found after his most diligent search of the Fathers,
Councels, and ancient writings; whereby I doubt not but it is evident unto all,
that Nestorianisme had either quite blinded the Pope, or at least induced him
to play (which he has done very skilfully) one of the Lamiae in this cause;
when ought that tended to the truth, came in his way, and offered it self unto
him, he then locked up his eyes, and kept them fast in a basket; but when, or
where ought that tended to Nestorianisme, and the defense of a condemned
heretic, might in a likelihood be found; then he put his eyes in his head, and
became as quicksighted, as the Serpent of Epidaurus. The writings of Cyril, and
Proclus, condemning Theodorus for an heretic, worse than either Jew, or Pagan,
the Councels of Ephesus, of Armenia, of Chalcedon, anathematizing him; the
Imperial laws of Theodosius, commanding all memory of him to be abolished,
and his heretical books to be burned; the expunging his name out of the
Ecclesiastical tables, even in that Church, where he had been Bishop; and a
number the like; none of all these could Vigilius, in his most diligent
inquisition, find or see: why, the Lamia had locked up his eyes against all
these public, and known evidences, and records. But when the base
Counterfeits, forged in the name of Cyrill, and Proclus; when the depraving, or
calumniating the Councels of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, and of Justinian, as being
maintainers of a condemned heresy: when these, or the like might be found, oh
the Pope saw these at the first; his eyes were now as clear, as the sight of
Linceus, he could spy these through a Millstone; nay, which is more, he could
see them, though there were no such matters at all to be seen: And truly, if
you well consider, there was good reason why he should see the one, and not
the other: For the Pope saw the Epistle of Ibas to be orthodoxall, and to be
approved by the Council of Chalcedon; he saw in that Epistle Theodorus to be
called a Quorum unus est beatus Theodorus veritatis praedicator, et doctor
Ecclesiae. Epist. Jbae in Conc. Chal. Act. 10. pa. 113. b.
Saint, a Preacher of the truth, a Doctor of the Church; Now it had been an
exceeding incongruity, to see a condemned Saint, an accursed Saint, an
heretical, or blasphemous Saint; It was not for the Popes wisdom to see such
a Saint, and therefore at all such sights, up with the eyes, lock them fast,
that they see none of those ugly, and offensive sights; nothing of the
condemning, of the accursing, of the heresies, and blasphemies of Theodorus. So
bewitched was the Pope with Nestorianisme at this time, that it had the whole
command of his heart, of his eyes, of his sense, of his understanding; it
opened, and shut them all whenever it listed.

40. I have stayed too long, I fear, in examining this first Chapter, touching
Theodorus; but I was very loath to let any material point pass, without due
trial, or before I had shaken asunder every joint, and parcel of the Popes
Constitution in this cause, and fully manifested, how erroneous his
Apostolical decree is, as well in doctrinall, as personal matters. That
Theodorus was dead, is personal; but that none after death may be condemned
for an heretic, is doctrinall; yea, an heresy in the doctrine of faith. That
Theodorus dyed in the peace of the Church, is an error personal; but that
Theodorus therefore dyed in the peace of the Church, because he was not in his
life time condemned by the express sentence of the Church; or, that any dying
in heresy, as Theodorus did, do die in the peace of the Church, are errors
doctrinall. That Theodorus was not by the former Fathers, and Councels
condemned, is a personal error; but that Theodorus by the judgment of the
Fathers, and Councels, ought not after his death to be condemned, is
doctrinall; even a condemning of the Councels of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, as
guilty of believing, and teaching an heresy. So many ways is the Popes
sentence, in this first Chapter, erroneous in faith; of which Baronius most
vainly pretends, that it is no cause of faith, no such cause as does
concern the faith.

41. There now remains nothing of Vigilius decree concerning this first
Chapter, but his conclusion of the same: And although that must needs of it
self fall down, when all the reasons, on which it relyeth, and by which only
it is supported, are ruinated, or overthrown; yet if you please, let us take a
short view of it also, rather to explane, than refute the same. His conclusion
has two branches, the former is, that in regard of the foresaid reasons,
nostra Vig. Constable. nu. 179
eum non audemus damnare sententia; we dare not condemn Theodorus by our
sentence, we dare not do it, says Vigilius.

42. Oh how faint-hearted, pusillanimous, and dastardly was the Pope in this
cause; Cyrill, the Sanctissimorum Episcoporum hic coactorum caput Cyrillum,
etc. Epist. Synod. Ephesians. to. 4. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 8.
head of the general Council: Proclus, a most Cyrill. epist. ad Acat. in Con.
5. Coll. 5. pa. 543. a. Dominus meus sanctissimus Episcopus Proclus.
holy Bishop, whose Epistle, as Liberatus Lib. ca. 10.
says, the Council of Chalcedon approved: Rambulas, the pillar of the Church:
the religious Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinian; the Church of Mopsvestia,
the Councels of Ephesus, of Armenia, of Chalcedon, the whole Catholic Church
ever since the Ephesine Synod, both durst, and did condemn Theodorus: and,
besides these, Baronius, and Binius, two of the most artificial Gnathonizing
Parasites of the Pope, even they durst, and did, even in setting down the very
Constitution of Vigilius, call Rursumque haereticus, blasphemus, etc. Bar. an.
553. nu. 120. et seq. et Bin. pa. 595. et seq.
Theodorus, more than forty times, an heretic, a crafty, impious, mad,
profane, blasphemous, execrable heretic; only Pope Vigilius has not the
heart, nor courage; he only with his sectators, dare not call him, nor
condemn him for an heretic; we dare not condemn him by our sentence.

43. And yet when Vigilius saw good, he who durst not do this, durst do a
greater matter, he durst do that which not any of all the former, nay which
they all put together, never durst do. Vigilius durst defend both an heresy,
and a condemned and anathematized heretic, he durst commend forged, and
heretical writings, under the name of holy Fathers, he durst approve that
Epistle, wherein an heretic is called, and honored for a Saint; he durst,
contrary to the Imperial and godly Edict of Theodosius, contrary to the
judgments of the holy general Counsels, defend Theodorus, honor his memory,
yea honor him as a teacher of truth while he lived, as a Saint being dead;
These things none of all the former ever durst do: in these Vigilius is more
bold and audacious then they are all.

44. Whence think you proceeded this contrariety of passions in Vigilius, that
made him sometimes more bold then a Lion, and other times more timorous then an
Hare? Truly even from hence: As Vigilius had no eyes to see ought, but what
favored Nestorianisme, so he had not the heart to do ought which did not
uphold Nestorianisme. If a Catholic truth met him, or the sweet influence
thereof happened to breath upon him, Vigilius could not endure it, the Popes
heart fainted at the smell thereof: but when the Nestorian heresy blew upon
him, when being full with Nestorius he might say, agitante calescimus illo, not
Ajax, not Poliphemus so bold nor full of courage as Pope Vigilius. As the
Scarobee or beetle Pier. Hierog. lib. 55.
is said to feed on dung, but to dye at the sent of a Rose; So the filth of
Nestorianisme was meat, and drink to the Pope, it was vita vitalis unto him;
but the fragrant and most odoriferous sent of the catholic truth, was poison,
it was even death to this Beetle. So truly was it fulfilled in him, which the
Prophet says Jer. 9.3.
, they bend their tongues for lies, but they have no courage for the truth: we
dare not condemn Theodorus by our sentence.

45. The other branch of the Popes conclusion is, Sed Vig. Constable. nu. 179
nec ab alio quopiam condemnari concedimus, neither do we permit that any
other shall condemn Theodorus: Nay we decree Vig. Constable. nu. 208
that none else shall speak, write, or teach otherwise, then we do herein. As
much in effect, as if the Pope had definitively decreed, we permit, or suffer
no man whatsoever, to teach or believe what Cyrill, what Proclus, what the
whole general Counsels of Ephesus and Chalcedon: that is, what all
Catholics, and the whole Catholic Church has done, taught and believed: we
permit, nay we command, and by this our Apostolical Constitution, decree, that
they shall be heretics, and defend both an heresy, (that no dead man may be
condemned) and condemned heretics, in defending Theodorus, yea defending him
for a Saint, and teacher of truth: This we permit, command, and decree, that
they shall do; but to do otherwise, to condemn Theodorus, or a dead man,
that by no means do we permit or suffer it to be lawful unto them.

46. And as if all this were not sufficient, the Pope adds one other clause
more execrable, then all the former; for having recited those threescore
heretical assertions, which as we have declared, were all collected out of the
true, and indubitate writings of Theodorus, he adjoynes, Vig Constable. nu. 173.
Anathematizamus omnem, we accurse and anathematize every man pertaining to
orders, who shall ascribe or impute any contumely, to the Fathers, and Doctors
of the Church, by those forenamed impieties: and if no Father, then not
Theodorus for those may be condemned. See now, unto what height of impiety, the
Pope is ascended, for it is as much as if he had said, We anathematize, and
accurse Saint Cyrill, Saint Proclus, Saint Rambulas, Saint Acatius, the Synod
of Armenia, the general Counsels of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, of Constantinople
in the time of Justinian; yea even the whole catholic Church, which has
approved those holy Counsels: all these out of those very impieties, which
Vigilius mentions, have condemned Theodorus, them all for wronging, and
condemning Theodorus for those impieties, we do anathematize, and accurse,
says Vigilius.

47. Consider now seriously with your selves of what faith and religion they
are, who hold (and so do all the members of the present Roman Church,) this
for a position or foundation of faith, that whatsoever any Pope does
judicially, and by his Apostolic authority define in such causes, is true, is
infallible, is with certainty of faith to be believed and embraced: Let all
the rest be omitted, embrace but this one decree of Vigilius, nay but this one
passage or parcel of his decree touching this first Chapter which concerns
Theodorus; yet by approving this one, they demonstrate themselves, not only to
renounce, but with Vigilius to condemn, accurse, and anathematize both the
Catholic faith, and the Catholic Church: yea to accurse all who do not
accurse them, which because none but Antichrist, and his heretical adherents
can do, they demonstrate again hereby their Church to be heretical,
catacatholike, and Antichristian, such as not only hates, but accurseth the
holy, and truly Catholic Church of Christ. But the curse Prove. 26.2.
that is causlesse shall not come. Nay, God does, and for ever will turn their
cursings into blessings. Blessed are Ma. 5.11.
ye, when for my sake, (for professing and maintaining my truth) men revile
you, and speak evil of you. Let Balak hire with hous-fulls of gold: Let the
Roman Balaam for the wages of iniquity attempt never so often, on this hill, on
that mountain, or wheresoever he sets up his altars to curse the Church of
GOD, the Lord Deuteronomy. 23.5.
will turn the curse into a blessing unto them: for, there is no sorcery Numb.
23.23.
against Jacob, no curse, no charm, nor incantation, against Israel. Nay
their curses shall fall on their own heads and return into their own
bosoms, but peace, and the blessings of peace shall be upon Israel. For
blessed Numb. 24.9.
shall he be that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses thee.

CHAP. IX. That Vigilius besides diverse personal, held a doctrinall error in
says, in his defense of the second Chapter, which concerns the writings of
Theodoret against Cyrill.
1. THere was some shadow of reason to think, that the former Chapter was a
personal matter; seeing that was indeed moved concerning the person of
Theodorus. But in the two other, there is no pretense, or color for Baronius
to say, that in them the question, or cause was personal, and not wholly
doctrinall; who in all the fifth Council once doubted of the persons of
Theodoret, or Ibas, whether they were Catholics, after their anathematizing of
Nestorius in the Council of Chalcedon? The only question about them was,
whether the writings of Theodoret against Cyrill were to be condemned, which
the Pope denies, and the holy Council affirms, and whether the Epistle of
Ibas was Orthodoxall, or he by it known to be Orthodoxal, which the Pope
affirms, and the holy Council denies. The question about them, no way
concerned their persons, but only their writings. And it might be a wonder
that Baronius should have the face to say, that the cause in these two Chapters
was only personal, if it were not daily seen by experience that necessitas
cogit ad turpia, were necessity enforced the Cardinal to use any though never
so untrue, never so unlikely excuses for Vigilius.

2. There are I confess diverse personal matters, and questions of facts,
which concerns both these Chapters: and although they were not the
controversies moved, and debated, betwixt the defenders, and the oppugners of
those Chapters; yet is it needful to say somewhat of them also; partly for
more illustration of the cause of faith, and specially that we may see how
foully Vigilius and Baronius have erred, not only in doctrinall causes, which
are more obscure, but even in those personal matters, which had been easy,
and obvious, if they had not shut their eyes against the truth.

3. Concerning the second Chapter, the Popes decree herein relyeth, and is
grounded, on three personal points, or matters of fact. The first is, that
Vigilius would persuade, that Theodoret was not the author of those writings
against Cyrill, and against his twelve Chapters or Anathematizmes Extant in
Actis Conc. Ephesians. to. 1. ca. 14. et tom. 5. ca. 1.
, which containing a just condemnation of the twelve heretical assertions of
Nestorius, were approved both by the Council of Ephesus Ibid. to. 5. ca. 2..
Ego vero. Et Liber. ca. 6.
, and Chalcedon Act. 5. in definit. fidei.
. To which purpose he calls them not Theodorets, but writings, quae Vigil.
Constit. nu. 180.
sub Theodoreti nomine proferuntur, which are set forth under the name of
Theodoret. And again, the reprofe of the 12. Chapters of Cyrill: a Theodoreto
Ibid. nu. 181.
ut putatur ingesta, made as is thought by Theodoret: adding Jbid.
this as one reason, why the Council of Chalcedon, did not condemn those
writings, because they having those matters which were done but of late before
their eyes, Theodoretum nihil tale fecisse probaverunt, did judge that
Theodoret had written no such thing. Thus Vigilius pretending those writings
against Cyrill not to be Theodorets, and that the Council of Chalcedon also
thought the same: whence he would infer, (and justly upon this supposall)
that Theodorets name ought not to be blemished by those writings which were
none of his.

4. Not his? why Theodoret is known, and testified by so many, to have been
so eager and violent in defense of Nestorius, and his heresy, and so spiteful
both in words, and writings against Cyrill, and all orthodoxall professors of
that time, that it were more strange if Vigilius was ignorant of this, then
that knowing it he should deny, or make a doubt thereof. Witness Binius, John
of Antioch, says he, Bin. in argumento ca. 2. Append. ad to. 5. Act. Conc.
Ephesians. pa. 859.
persuaded Theodoret, that he should with all his art and skill oppugn and
refute those 12 Anathematizmes of Cyrill. Theodoret being as much an enemy to
Cyrill, as was John himself, willingly yielded to his petition, and by
manifest sycophancy wrested every one of Cyrills Chapters from their true,
genuine, and orthodoxall, to a false, preposterous, and heretical sense, and
Enoptius sent that refutation of Theodoret unto Cyrill. Again, Bin. notis in
Epist. Leonis. 62. to. 1. Conc. pa. 971.
Theodoret did once defend Theodorus and Nestorius, two most pestiferous
Arch-heretikes against Cyrill. Yea Binius says, defendit constantissime, he
defended them most constantly, as if to defend heresy, were with these men not
pertinacie, but constancy, witness Baronius. Theodoret says he Bar. an. 427.
nu. 30.
being most addicted to Theodorus, shadowed his praise, by his friendship with
Nestorius, but he utterly darkened it by his undertaking of the defense of that
Arch-heretike against Cyrill. And again an. 431. nu. 182.
, Theodoret being at that time the patron of Nestorius, and an oppugner of the
Catholic faith, throws his darts against the Chapters of Cyrill, and by new
writings does oppugn them; crying out in his letters to the Bishops of
Millaine of Aquileia, and of Ravenna, that Cyrill renewed the heresy of
Apollinaris.

5. Witness (men of better note then the former) Liberatus, who says, Liber.
ca. 4.
that John of Antioch commanded two Bishops, Andreas and Theodoret, that they
should write against the 12. Chapters of Cyrill, blaming him as one who renewed
the heresy of Apollinaris: and that Theodoret consented, the event made
manifest. Pope Pelagius, who says Pelag. 2. Epist. 7. Discusso.
that Theodoret, monstratur scripsisse, is demonstrated and certainly known to
have written against the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, and against the true Faith.
The Acts of the Ephesine Council, wherein Reprehensio 12. Capitulorum, divi
Cyrilli a Theodoreto co^scripta, habebetur in Append. ad to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians.
ca. 2. pa. 859. b.
is recorded the very refutation of those twelve Chapters by Theodoret, and
the answer of Cyrill unto it* the one still called, Theodoreti reprehensio;
and the other, Cyrilli adversus Theodoretum refutatio; Cyrill, who, in his
Epistle Cyrill. Epist. ad Eulog. extat. to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. c. 8.
to Eulogius, says thus, You have my refutation which I set forth against
Andreas, and Theodoret, who writ against my Chapters.

6. Witness Theodoret himself, who, in sundry of his Epistles, testifies
his spleen, and spite against Cyrill, and the Catholic faith. In Extat in
Conc. 5. Coll. 5 pa. 559. a.
one of them to Nestorius he professes his most perverse, and pertinacious
resolution to abide in that heresy of Nestorius; I will never, says he, while
I live, consent to those things which are done against you, and against the
law: (so he taxes, not only the Chapters of Cyrill, but the decree of the
holy Ephesine Synod) no, I will not consent unto them, though they should cut
off both my hands. In another to John, the Bishop of Antioch; We Extat et
citat. ib.
continue still, says he, contradicting the twelve Chapters, ut alienis a
pietate, as being contrary to piety: In another to Aemerius, We Ea citatur a
Pelagio, Epist. 7 Discusso.
ought not to consent to the condemnation of the venerable, and most holy
Bishop Nestorius: in another to Citatur ibid.
Alexander, I told you before, that the doctrine of my venerable, and most holy
Bishop Nestorius has been condemned; nec ego, cum his qui faciunt,
communicabo; neither will I communicate with those who condemned that doctrine:
and yet more bitterly in his Epistle to Extat in Conc 5. Coll. 5. pa. 558. b.
Andreas, his fellow-oppugner of those Chapters. Insanit iterum Aegyptus
adversus Deum; Egypt is again mad against the Lord, and makes war with
Moses, and Aaron, the servants of God: As if Nestorius, and his
fellow-heretikes were the only Israel; but Cyrill, Bishop of Alexandria in
Egypt; and the holy Ephesine Council, and all Catholics who held with them,
were no other but Pharao, and his Egyptian troops, which fought against GODS
people.

7. Do we yet desire more, or more pregnant, and ample testimonies in this
matter? Take this one out of the acts of Chalcedon: When Theodoret, being
called, came first into the Synod, the most reverend Bishops of Egypt,
Illirium, and Conc. Chal. Act. 1 pa. 6. a.
Palestine, cried out against him in this manner; The Canons exclude this man,
thrust him out, Magistrum Nestorij for as mittite; thrust out the master of
Nestorius: the orthodoxall Council does not receive Theodoret: Call him not a
Bishop, he is no Bishop, he is an oppugner of God, he is a Jew, thrust him
out: he accused, he anathematized Cyrill; If we receive him, we reject Cyrill;
The Canons exclude him, God does detest him. Thus cried out the Bishops against
Theodoret, before they knew him to have renounced the heresy of Nestorius,
which he had so long, and so eagerly defended: nor were they pacified
otherwise, but that Theodoret, at the appointment of the Judges, should sit
only as an accuser of Dioscorus, not as one having judicatorie power, or a
decisive suffrage, till his own cause was fully examined, and heard. Seeing
now there are besides, many other which I willingly omit, so many, so evident,
so obvious, so undeniable proofs, that Theodoret writ against Cyrill, and
against his twelve Chapters, in defense of Nestorius, and his heresy; what can
one think of Vigilius, but that he wilfully, and wittingly resisted the truth,
while he, not only strives to persuade, that Theodoret writ no such thing, and
that the Council of Chalcedon thought so; but takes this known, and palpable
untruth, for one of the grounds of his Apostolical decree touching this second
Chapter.

8. And yet there is a worse matter in this very passage of Vigilius, and that
is, the reason whereby he proves, that Theodoret writ not against Cyrill, or
in defense of Nestorius; you shall hear it in his own words: It is, says
Vigil. Constable. nu. 180.
he, undoubtedly repugnant to the judgment of the Council of Chalcedon, that
any Nestorian doctrines should be condemned under the name of that Bishop
(Theodoret) who, together with those holy Fathers, did accurse the doctrines of
Nestorius: Quid enim aliud est mendaces, and simulantes professionem rectae
fidei patres in sancto Concilio Chalcedonensi residentes ostendere, quam dicere
aliquos ex ijs similia sapuisse Nestorio: for to say, that any of them who were
in that Council, had thought as Nestorius did, is nothing else then to show or
affirm those Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon to be liars, and dissemblers
in faith, as condemning that faith which they do allow. Thus reasons
Vigilius, who hence implies, that seeing Theodoret was one of the Bishops, and
Fathers at Chalcedon, if he ever writ any such things in defense of Nestorius,
then both he, and the rest admitting him, should dissemble in their faith, and
lie, professing to condemn Nestorius, and yet approving him, who had writ in
defense of Nestorius.

9. Truly I do even admire, to consider the blindness of Vigilius in this
whole cause of the three Chapters. Most certain it is, as we have showed, that
Theodoret did both think as Nestorius, and write in defense of him, and his
heresy, and that the Council of Chalcedon knew he did so: If then to receive
such an one, as they knew Theodoret to have been, be, as Vigilius says, a
dissembling, and lying in the faith; the whole Council of Chalcedon, by the
Popes judgment, and decree, were undoubtedly all liars, and dissemblers in the
faith; a calumny and slander so vile, and incredible, that it alone should
cause any Catholic mind to detest this Apostolical Constitution of Vigilius:
But to say truth, the Popes reason is without al reason. Had the holy Counsel
admitted Theodoret before he had renounced his heresy, or manifested the
sincerity of his faith unto them, the Pope might have had some color to have
accused them of dissembling, as condemning Nestorianisme, and yet receiving a
known Nestorian into their communion: but it was quite contrary. In the former
actions, till Theodoret had cleared himself of heresy, he was, as we have
declared, no otherwise admitted, than only as a plaintiff, who Gloriosiss.
Iudices dixerunt, Theodoretus in locum accusatoris nunc ingressus est, unde
patiamini ea quae inchoata sunt finiri, reservata post hac omni accusatione, et
vobis, et illi. Conc Chal. Act. 1. pa. 6. a.
accused Dioscorus for injuriously deposing him, and placing another in his
See. And in the eight Action, wherein he came to clear himself, and to be
reconciled to the Church, he had no sooner almost set his foot in the Synod,
but the Bishops cried Act. 8. Conc. Chal.
out, Theodoretus modo anathematizet Nestorium; let Theodoret forthwith
anathematize Nestorius: let him do it instantly and without any delay. And
when Theodoret to give the Council better satisfaction offered them first a
book to read containing the sincere profession of his faith; and when (that
being Nihil relegi volumus, anathematizet Nestorium. Ib.
refused) he purposed at large by words Ego (inquit Theoretus) quomodo credo,
etc. Ibid.
to have expressed the same; the Synod suspecting the worst, and that he used
those delays, as being loath to anathematize Nestorius, cried out, He is an
heretic, he is a Nestorian, haereticum for as mitte, out with the heretic;
and so they had indeed thrust him out, but that he leaving all circuition,
presently before them all, cried, Anathema to Nestorius; Anathema to him, who
does not confess the blessed Virgin to be the Mother of God: with which
profession the Synod being fully satisfied, the glorious Judges said, omnis
dubitatio, now all doubt is quite taken away concerning Theodoret; and then the
Synod both received him into their communion, as an orthodoxe, and restored him
to his See, from which in the Ephesine latrocinie, he was deposed, they all
crying out, Theodoret is worthy of his See; let his Church receive their
orthodoxall Bishop: To Theodoret, a Catholic Doctor, let the Church be
restored.

10. What greater detestation of heresy could the Synod possibly show, what
greater tokens of the sincerity of his faith, could either Theodoret express,
or the Synod require. It was too great rashness, if not simplicity in
Vigilius to collect that the holy Council did dissemble in their faith,
because they received him who had sometimes swarved in the faith; The
heretical Theodoret, they exclude and reject, the orthodoxall Theodoret they
reverence and embrace. That which Saint Austen Aug. lib. 2. de Adulter. conjug.
ca. 9.
says in another cause, that the husband who had put away his adulterous wife,
ought again to receive her being purged by unfeigned repentance, but so receive
her, non ut post viri divortium adultera revocetur, sed ut post Christi
consortium adultera non vocetur, that same may be accommodated to any other
offense, and not unfitly to this of heresy, and the repentant heretic; whom
they before, for that cause had from themselves disioyned; but they neither
call, nor count him an heretic, whom Christ has now upon his repentance unto
himself conjoined. So neither is the Popes reason consequent, that the
Council did dissemble in their receiving of Theodoret, nor his conclusion
true, which he would thence infer, that Theodoret writ not against Cyrill and
the Catholic faith.

11 The second personal matter which Vigilius takes for another ground of his
decree is, that neither Theodoret himself did, nor did the Council of
Chalcedon, require him to anathematize his writings: Vig. Constable. nu. 180.
There was, says he, diverse in the Council of Chalcedon who said, that
Theodoret had anathematized Cyrill, and was an heretic; yet those holy Fathers
most diligently examining this cause of Theodoret, nihil aliud ab eo exigisse
noscuntur, are known to have required no more of him, than that he should
anathematize Nestorius, and his impious doctrines; hoc sibi tantummodo
sufficere judicantes; judging this alone to be sufficient for them to receive
Theodoret. Now it is unfit, says Ibid. nu. 181.
he further, nos aliquid quaerere velut omissum a patribus, that we should seek
or require more than did the Council of Chalcedon; as if they had omitted any
thing in this cause of Theodoret: seeing then they required no anathematizing
of his writings against Cyrill, neither ought any others to anathematize, or
require of any the anathematizing of the same.

12. As you saw Vigilius in the former Chapter to use haeretica astutia; so may
any man here easily discern, that he uses an evident, and fallacious
sophistication. The Council indeed required not that, nor did Theodoret in
explicit, or express terms perform it, saying, I anathematize my own
writings against Cyrill; but in implicit terms, in effect, and by an evident
consequent, both the Council required, and Theodoret performed this before
them all; for, he subscribed Ego autem et definitioni fidei subscripsi, ait
Theod. in Conc. Chal. Act. 8.
to the definition of faith decreed at Chalcedon: one part of that definition
is the approveing Approbamus Synodicas Epistolas Cyrilli. Conc. Chal. Act. 5.
in definit.
of the Synodall Epistles of Cyrill: a part of one of those Epistles Nam
continentur in Epist. Cyrilli et Conc. Alexand. ad Nestorium, quae extat inter
acta Concilij Ephesians. to. 1. Act. ca. 14. et repetitur in Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa.
568. et seq.
are the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, which Theodoret refuted: in every one of
those chapters, is an anathema denounced to the defenders of the contrary
doctrine: Then certainly, Theodoret by subscribing to the definition,
subscribed to the Epistles of Cyrill, by them to the twelve chapters, and by
doing so he condemned, and anathematized all who oppugned those twelve
chapters, and then undoubtedly, his own writings which were published, as a
confutation of those twelve chapters. And it seems strange, that Vigilius
professing that Theodoret did devota mente suscipere, with a devout affection
receive and approve the Epistles of Cyrill, and the doctrine of them, could
deny or be ignorant, that in doing so he did anathematize his own writings,
which by the twelve chapters of Cyrill, are anathematized.

13. Besides this, how often, how plainly does the Council of Chalcedon Act.
8.
require, and urge Theodoret to anathematize Nestorius and his doctrines? how
willingly did Theodoret perform this? What else is this, but a vertuall, and
implicit anathematizing of those his own writings against Cyrill, which
defended Nestorius and his doctrines? None can anathematize the former, but eo
ipso he does most certainly (though not expressly) anathematize the later; as
on the contrary, none can say (as Vigilius does, and decrees, that all shall
do the like) none can say that the writings of Theodoret against Cyrill, and
his twelve chapters ought not to be anathematized, but eo ipso, even by saying
so, he does most certainly (though but implicit and by consequent) say that
Nestorius and his heresy, ought not to be condemned. A truth so clear that
Pope Pelagius Pelag. 2. Epist. 7.. Quis haec.
from his anathematizing of Nestorius and his doctrine, concludes of
Theodoret: Constat eundem, it is manifest, that in doing this, he condemned his
own writings against the twelve Chapters of Cyrill.

14. Neither is that true which Vigilius fancied, that to require men to
anathematize the writings of Theodoret, is to seek, and require more then the
Council of Chalcedon required: It is not. It is but requiring the self same
thing to be done in actual and express terms, which the Council required and
Theodoret performed in vertuall and implicit terms. The thing required and
done is the same: the manner only of doing it, or requiring it to be done, is
different: Even as to require of men to profess Christ to be (...), which the
Council of Nice, and the Church ever since requires, is not to require them
to profess more, or ought else, then the Scripture teaches, and all
catholics Hoc testimonio omnes patres utuntur contra Arianos, ut probent unam
esse essentiam patris and filij. Bell. lib 1. de Christ. ca. 6.. Quartum.
before professed, by those words, I and my Father are one: but it is a
requiring of an explicit profession of that truth concerning the unity of
substance of the Father, and the Son, which by those words of Scripture they
did before implicit profess.

15. But yet at least will some of Vigilius friends reply, it was unfit to
require this explicit anathematizing of Theodorets writings, seeing the
Council of Chalcedon did not require it. No, not so neither. The explicit
condemning of them, was not only fit, but necessary at that time, in the days
of Justinian, and Vigilius; For as when the Arians denied Christ to be (...),
it was enough for one to clear himself of Arianisme, to say, that he held
this text for true, I and the Father are one, though therein he do implicit
profess Christ to be (...), and though to have professed that alone, before
the question about the unity of one substance was moved, had been sufficient;
but now he must explicit profess that truth which is explicit denied and
oppugned: even so it is in this cause of Theodorets writings, and all like it.
While there was no doubt moved by heretics, whether those writings of his
ought to be condemned; and whether by the Council of Chalcedon they were
condemed or no; so long it was sufficient for one to profess that he condemned
Nestorius, and subscribed to the definition of Chalcedon; both which were
implicit condemning of those writings of Theodoret: but when the Nestorians
began to boast, that Theodorets writings against Cyrill, neither were
condemned, but rather with the author of them approved by the Council of
Chalcedon, neither ought to be condemned, the Church now was necessarily
e^^^rced to require of all men a profession of that truth in plain and
explicit terms, which before they made only in general and implicit. Nor
could Vigilius, or any other Nestorian, who refused in express manner to
condemn the writings of Theodoret, purge himself of that heresy of Nestorius
at this time, by saying they approved the definition of Chalcedon, or condemned
Nestorius; though in both these they did implicit condemn the writings of
Theodoret, but now they must expressly profess that which the heretics
expressly denied, they must in plain terms anathematize those heretical
writings of Theodoret, and acknowledge them to have bin anathematized by the
Council of Chalcedon, as the heretics in plain terms vau^ted, that neither
they ought nor were anathematized, but approved by the Council of Chalcedon,
whenever any point tending to the impeaching of faith begins explicit to be
denied, the holy Church may not then content her self in general and
implicit to condemn the same, (few perhaps can perceive that, and many will
make that generality of terms, as Vigilius and other Nestorians now did, but a
cloak for their heresy) but the Church must now in most plain, easy, and
expressed manner that can be devised, both teach, declare, and define the same.
This the Church did in this fifth Council, as in the other two, so in this
Chapter touching Theodorets writings. It taught but the very same which the
Council of Chalcedon had done before it, anathematized those his writings,
which at Chalcedon were anathematized before, but they did this now in a plain
manner and explicit, which by the Council of Chalcedon only in an obscure
manner, and implicit was done before.

16. The third personal error which Vigilius Vig. Constable. nu. 181.
takes for a ground of his decree, is that Cyrill himself though he was so
exceedingly injured by the writings of those Eastern Bishops that took part
with Nestorius, yet when he made union with them, he required them not to
anathematize their own writings, but overpast them in silence, as if there had
never been any such: whence Vigilius infers, that neither ought this
anathematizing of their writings (by name of Theodorets) be required by
others, yea he says, the Fathers of Chalcedon imitated this example of Cyrill,
and so would not require that of Theodoret, which they saw Cyrill not to have
required of others.

17. The answer is easy by that which has been declared: this saying of
Vigilius labors of the same equivocall sophistication, as did the former;
for both Cyrill required, and all who were united unto him, and received into
his, which was the communion of the Catholic Church; they all did, though not
in explicit terms, which then was not needful; yet vertually, and after a
certain, and undoubted, though implicit manner, condemn, and anathematize
all their writings against Cyrill, and the Catholic faith; for he received
none till they had anathematized the doctrines of Nestorius. This does Cyril
himself most plainly witness in his Epistle to Cyrill. Epist. ad Dynat. extat
in Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 16.
Dynatus; I would not, says he, admit Paulus Bishop of Emisa into communion,
priusquam Nestorij dogmata proprio chyrographo anathematizasset; until he had
anathematized by his own handwriting the doctrines of Nestorius: And he
entreated me in behalf of the other Bishops, that I would rest contented with
that profession which they had sent, and require no more: nulla ratione id
fieri passus, I would by no means yield unto that, but I sent them a
profession of faith; and when John 8. of Antioch, caeterique, and the rest with
him, had anathematized the doctrine of Nestorius, then, and not before,
communionem illis restituimus, did we receive them into our communion. Thus
Cyrill, who by requiring this, did in effect require (and they performed the
same) a condemning of all their witings which were made against him, and in
defense of that heresy of Nestorius: And had Cyrill lived to see any question
made, whether those writings (by whomsoever they had been written) ought to
be, or were by himself condemned; out of all doubt that holy Father would in
most plain, and express terms, have anathematized them all, as vertually,
and implicit he had before, and would most strictly have exacted the like
express anathematizing of them, of all those who would wash their hands of the
blasphemies, and heresies of Nestorius.

18. Now from these three grounds (every one of which is demonstrated to be
untrue) Vigilius collects his Conclusion, or definitive sentence in defense of
this second Chapter, which also is an error, but not as the former, personal,
but doctrinall; yea, heretical: that those writings of Theodoret, or going
under Theodorets name against Cyrill, and his twelve Chapters, ought not to be
condemned; which is as much as if he had decreed plainly, that the heresies of
Nestorius ought not to be condemned; for in those writings of Theodoret, they
are all defended, and that with such eagerness, art, and acuteness, that if
all other Nestorian books were abolished, those writings alone of Theodoret
would suffice as a rich storehouse to furnish the Nestorians with abundance of
all kind of weapons, to maintain their own, and oppugn the Catholic cause;
nor ever can Nestorianisme be pulled down, or overthrown, so long as those
writings of Theodoret keep their credit, and stand uncondemned, yet shall not
these be condemned, does Vigilius decree.

19. Pope Pelagius seeing the poison of the heretical doctrine, which the
defending of this second Chapter does bear with it, exclaimes against it in
this manner Pelag. 2. Epist. 7.. Quis hac.
: O my dear brethren, who sees not these things to be full of all impiety?
And again, who sees not quanta temeritate plenum sit Theodoreti scripta
superbiendo defendere? how full of temeritie it is to defend so insolently, the
writings of Theodoret? The fifth general Council Collat. 8. pa. 587.
, not only accurseth those writings of Theodoret, as heretical, but all who
defend them, yea all who do not anathematize them. A clear evidence that they
not only judged this second Chapter to concern the faith, but the
Constitution of Vigilius even herein to be heretical, because he would not
anathematize those writings of Theodoret, and much more because he decreed that
they should not be anathematized, and to their judgment consents the whole
catholic Church, they all condemn the decree of Vigilius even in this point
as heretical.

20. I, but Vigilius you will say condemns Quaecunque scripta vel dogmata
scel^ratorum Nestorij and Eutychetis erroribus manifestantur consonare,
anathematizamus and damnamus. Vig. Constable. nu. 182.
those very heresies of Nestorius, which are defended in those writings; he
does so: at least he seems by his words to do it: and had he not withal
decreed that Theodorets writings should not be condemned, he could not justly
have been reproved in this point. But in doing both, he proves not himself
orthodoxal, by that which he says well, but unconstant and contrary to himself
in overthrowing that which he says well, for if Theodorets writings against
Cyrill may not be condemned, as Vigilius decreth; then may not the doctrines of
Nestorius defended therein be condemned as Vigilius would seem to do.
Theodorets writings and Nestorianisme are inseparable companions, either both
must stand, or both fall together. Its as impossible, and repugnant to condomne
the one, and deny that the other may be condemned, as to condemn
Euticheanisme, and yet defend the Ephesine latrocinie and decree thereof, or
condemn Arianisme, and not condemn the Arimine Council. Its the honor of
truth, that it never is nor can be dissonant to any other truth: but heresy
not only may, but almost ever does fight, not only against truth, but against
it self, and overthrows with one hand, or positio^, what it builds up by
another, as in this of Vigilius is now apparent.

21. Now although this clearly convinces the Popes decree to be heretical,
seeing it maintains two contradictory positions in a cause of faith, and the
one is without all doubt an heresy; yet is it worthy the examining, whether of
these contradictories must pass for the Popes judgment and cathedral
resolution in this cause. Cardinal Baronius will certainly direct us in this
doubt: for he tells us (which of it self also is evident) that the Popes
purpose Pro ipsorum defensione laborat Vigilius. Bar. an. 553. nu. 172.
and intent in setting forth this Constitution, was to defend the 3 Chapters:
adversus Imperatoris decretum, and sententiam Synodi, against the Emperors
Edict, and the sentence of the fifth Synod. As the Emperor then and the Synod
condemned, Ibid. nu. 2^2.
so was it the Popes maine purpose to defend the writings of Theodoret against
Cyrill, which was the second Chapter. This is and must stand for the judgment
and cathedral resolution of the Pope in this matter: what he speaks repugnant
to this is casual, and praeter, nay contra intentionem, its against his mind
and purpose; its to be thought only by inincogitancy to have slipped from his
pen. So his condemning of the Nestorian doctrine is but in show, its only
verbal, his defining that Theodorets writings which maintain Nestorianisme
may not be condemned, is the true purpose and intent of his mind, its cordial
and real. By his verbal condemning of Nestorianisme, he shuts it out in words,
or as you may say at the foregate of his palace, By his defining that
Theodorets writings may not be condemned, he pulls in Nestorianisme with all his
might, and sets wide open a postren gate unto it: by condemning Nestorianisme
in show of words, he seems to be orthodoxall, by defending Nestorianisme
indeed and in truth, he demonstrates himself to be heretical. Or because
Vigilius was so very wise a Pope as hereafter out of Baronius you shall hear,
it seems he meant to show one part of his wisdom, and policy, in this
matter, and therefore while the heresy of Nestorius comes in his own natural
habit, or in the liverie of Nestorius, away with it, the Popes holiness will
not admit it, he cannot abide it: but when it comes countenanced, and graced,
with the name of Theodoret, and in his liverie, the Pope embraces it in both
his arms, and by his Apostolical authority commands all men, to give most
friendly welcome and entertainment unto it.

22 You have now the judgment, and cathedral resolution of Vigilius, touching
this second Chapter, that the heretical writings of Theodoret against Cyril,
and the Catholic faith may not be condemned. Take a view also of those two
reasons, by which he labors to strengthen, and persuade the same. The former
is drawn from the Council at Chalcedon: It is, says Vigilius, Vig. Constable.
nu. 180.
valde contrarium, and Chalcedonensis Synodi judicie indubitabiliter inimicum,
very contrary, and without all doubt repugnant to the judgment of the Synod
at Chalcedon, that any Nestorian doctrines should now be condemned, sub ejus
sacerdotis nomine, under the name of Bishop Theodoret. So Vigilius.

23 Could he not content himself, to be heretical alone, unless he disgraced
the holy Council of Chalcedon as guilty of the same heresy, as if they also
had judged that none of Theodorets writings, not those written against the
faith, ought to be condemned? They to judge this? or is it contrary, and that
indubitabiliter, to condemn those writings of Theodoret, or any writings under
his name? Far was it from the thought, much more from the grave judgment of so
holy a Council. Even themselves, as before we declared, condemned and
anathematized all those writings of Theodorrt, and warranted by their judgment
all others to anathematize the same. Gregory Lib. 7. Indic. ^. Epist. 54.
witnesses of the fifth Council, that it is sequax in omnibus, in all things a
follower of the Council at Chalcedon. Seeing then the fifth Council, does so
often and so constantly condemn and anathematize those writings of Theodoret,
its undoubted, that the same writings were formerly condemned by the Council
of Chalcedon, the fifth Synod but treading in their steps and following them in
that judgment, wherein they had gone before them. If to condemn those
writings be repugnant to the judgment at Chalcedon, then is the fifth Council
not a follower but a confuter and contradicter of the judgment at Chalcedon.
Nor only the fifth Council, but the whole catholic Church ever since the time
of Vigilius, they all do reject, and condemn the judgment of the Council at
Chalcedon, seeing they all by approving the fifth Synod, and decree thereof, do
anathematize those writings of Theodoret, which to do is, as Vigilius
teaches, indubitanter contrarium, most certainly contrary to the judgment at
Chalcedon. If the whole catholic Church be not heretical (which to think is
impiety) by contradicting and condemning the judgment of the Council at
Chalcedon, then undoubtedly is Vigilius heretical in teaching and decreeing,
that to condemn any writings of Theodoret, or any under his name, is repugnant
to the judgment of the Council at Chalcedon.

24. The other reason of Vigilius, is, because it were a disgrace, injury and
slander, against Theodoret, to condemn his writings. This the Pope Vigil.
Constable. nu. 182.
expresses in the very words of his sentence, in this manner, The truth of
these things, (those are the three personal points before handled) being
weighed, we ordain and decree, nihil in injuriam, atque obtrectationem
probatissimi viri, hoc est Theodoreti sub taxatione nominis ejus, a quoquam
fieri vel proferri, that nothing shall be done or spoken by any, to the injury
and sla^der of the most approved Bishop Theodoret by taxing of his name: and it
must needs be taxed, if his writings or books be condemned.

25. See here the compassionate and tender heart of Vigilius. Not only
Justinian, and the fifth general Council, but Pelagius, Gregory, and other
succeeding Popes, and Councels, even the whole Catholic Church ever since the
time of Vigilius, they all, by approving the decree of the fifth Synod, do not
only tax the name of Theodoret, but accurse, and anathematize the writings of
Theodoret, and that even under his name: Now, such a loving and tender
affection does the Pope carry toward the heretical writings of Theodoret,
that rather than they may be condemned, or his name taxed by the condemning of
them; Justinian, Pelagius, Gregory, and other his successors, the fifth, the
sixth, and other general Councels, even the whole Catholic Church, they all
must be, and are de facto, here declared, and by the Popes cathedral sentence
decreed, and defined, not only to be heretical, (as the former reason
imported) but injurious persons, backbiters, and slanderers, they all must be
condemned, and for ever disgraced, rather then Theodorets name must be taxed,
or his heretical writings condemned, or disgraced.

26. But say indeed: Is it an injury, a slander, a disgrace to one, that his
errors should either by himself, or by the Church be condemned? How injurious
was that holy Bishop Saint Augustine to himself in writing so many
retractations, and corrections of what he saw amiss? And what himself did,
he would not only willingly, but gladly have permitted the holy Church to
have done. Nor may we think this mind to have been only in Austen, Modesty
and humility, are the individual concomitants of true knowledge and learning:
and the more learned any man is, the more judicious is he in espying, the more
ingenuous in acknowledging, the more lowly and humble, in condemning his own
errors. As it is but wind and no solid substance, which puffes up a bladder,
so is it never any sound, or solid learning, but mere ventositie and
emptiness of knowledge which makes the mind to swell, to bear it self
aloft, and either not see that truth into which his high and windy conceit
will not suffer him to look down and dive; or seeing it, not embrace the
same, though it were with a condemning, yea with a detestation of his own
error. It must never be a shame or disgrace to any man to recall and condemn
his errors; till he be ashamed of being a man, that is subject to errors. Saint
Augustine Illi quos vulgo moriones vocant, quanto magis absurdi and insulsi
sunt, tanto magis nullum verbum emittunt quod revecare velint, quia dicti mali
paenitere, utique cordatorum est. Aug. Epist. 7.
more sharply says, That its a token not only of a foolish, and proud
self-love, but of a most malignant Nimis pervers^ se ipsum a man, qui and
ali^^ nuli errare ut error suus lateat. ibid.
mind, rather to wish others to be poisoned with his heresies, then either
himself to recall, or permit others, specially the Church of God, to condemn
his heresies. It was no injury, no slander; nor disgrace to Theodoret, that
his heretical writings, were by the Church condemned, but it had been a fault
unexcusable and an eternal disgrace to the Church, if she had suffered such
heretical writings to pass uncondemned.

27. Oh but Theodoret was, probatissimus vir, a man most approved by the
Council of Chalcedon, says Vigilius; is it not an injury to condemn the
writings of a man most approved? No verily, the more approved, the more
eminent, learned, and orthodoxall any man is, the more careful and ready, both
himself, and the Church must be to condemn his former heretical writings:
When heresy comes in his own deformed habit, it does but little, or no hurt
at all; who will not detest it, when he reads it in the writings of Arius,
Nestorius, Eutiches, or such like condemned heretics? the odiousness of their
names breeds a dislike almost of a truth in their mouths, but certainly of an
error; But when Satan assumes the form of an Angel of light, when heresy
comes palliated, yea, countenanced with the name of a Catholic, a learned, an
holy, a renowned and approved Bishop; then, and then specially is there danger
of infection: The reverence, the love, the honor we bear to such a person,
causes us unawares to swallow the poison which he reaches unto us, before we
take leisure to examine, or once make doubt of his doctrine.

28. It was truly said by Vinc. de H^res. ca. 23.
Vincentius Lirinensis, The error of the Master, is the trial of the
Scholar, and tanto major tentatio, quanto ipse doctior, qui erraret, and the
more learned the teacher is, the greater still is the temptation; which, beside
other, he shows by the example of Origin; he was in his age a mirror Vincent
Li^. loc. citato.
of gravity, integrity, continency, zeal Zelo dei se truncavit. Hier. Epist.
ad Pa^mac. and Ocean. to. 2. pa. 194.
, piety, of learning of all sorts, both divine, and humane, of so Scripturas
memoriter tenebat. ibid.
happy a memory, that he had the Bible without book, of such admirable
eloquence, that not words but honey Vinc. doc. cit.
seemed to drop from his lips; of so indefatigable industry, that he was called
Adamantius, and was said by some Hier. lib. 2. ado. Ruffin.
to have written six thousand books, by Hier. epist. ad Pam.
Hierome, one thousand, besides innumerable commentaries; of such high esteem,
and authority, that Christians Vinc. loc. cit.
honored him as a Prophet; Philosophers, as a Master; they flocked from the
utmost parts of the world to hear his wisdom, as if a second Solomon had
been sent from heaven; yea, most would say, malle se cum Origene errare, quam
cum alijs vera sentire, that they had rather err with Origin, then think
aright with others. When such a man lapseth into heresy, if his writings may
escape without censure, if it shall be judged a contumely, an injury or
slander, to condemn his books, for the honor which was given to his person,
one such man as Origin, were able to draw almost the third part of the stars
of heaven after him.

29. And if any believe the Epistles going under his name, Theodoret was in
diverse respects, not much inferior to Origin. His birth noble, Nobilibus
parentibus nascitur. Possen. in Theodor.
his parents being without hope of Children, vowed Epist. Theod. 81. ad Nonium
extat apud Bar. an. 448. nu. 12.
him before his conception, like another Samuel unto God. And accordingly even
from his Cradle consecrated him to Gods service: Violently Javitus episcopus
sum ordinatus ibid.
drawn to the dignity of a Bishop, the City of Cyrus in Syria, where was his
episcopal See, he nobilitated, being before but obscure (though worthy Erat in
Syria oppidulum veheme^ter neglectum Cyrus nomine, a Iudaeis extructum ut
qualemcunque gratiam benefactori (Cyro) refarre^t. Proc. de aedific. Justin.
Orat. 2. in fine.
of eternal memory, as being one monument of the deliverance of Gods people,
by the hand of Cyrus, out of the Babylonish captivity) So upright, blameless,
and void of covetousness, that having been five and twenty years Bishop of
that place; in all that time, ne Theod. Epist. ad Nonium.
obolum mihi in tribunali ablatum aliquis conquestus est, none could say that
he had exacted, or received for causes of judgment, so much as one half
penny. I took no man's goods, no man's garments, nay, which is a memorable
token of integrity, none of mine house, says he, has taken the worth of an
egg, or a morsel of bread: So plentiful in works of charity, That he
distributed Quae nobis a parentibus obvenerlit, post eorum mortem ^atim
distribui. Theod. Epist ad Leonem. extat inter Epistolas Leonis post Ep. 62.
his inheritance among the poor, repaired Churches, Theod. Epist. 81.
builded bridges, drained Rivers, to towns where was want of water, and such
like, in so much, says he, that in all this time, I have Epist. Theod. ad
Leonem. and ad Nonium.
provided nothing for my self, not any land, not any house, no not so much as
any sepulcher; nothing, praeter laceras has vestes, I have left nothing to my
self, but only this ragged attire, wherewith I am apparelled, For learning
and knowledge both in divine and humane matters he was much honored, compared
to Nilus (...) Epig. apud Poss. in Theodor.
as watering the whole country, where he abode with the streams of his
knowledge, he converted eight towns, Theod. Epist. ad Nonium quae est 81.
infected with the heresy of the Marcionites, to the faith, two other of the
Arians and Eunomians: wherein he took such pains, and that also with some
expense of his blood, and hazard of his life, that in eight hundredth parishes
(within the Diocese of Cyrus) Ne Jbid.
unum quidem haereticorum zizanium remansit, there remained not so much as one
heretical weed.

30. So learned, so laborious, so worthy a Bishop was Theodoret: and so
desirous am I not to impair any part of his honor, much less to injure,
disgrace, or slander him. Whom almost would not the writings of a man so noble
for birth, and parentage, so famous for learning, so eminent in virtue, move
and persuade to assent unto him, if they might go current without taxing,
without note or censure of the Church? and that much more than the books of
Origin; both because Origin was but a Presbyter, but Theodoret a Bishop, and
specially because Origin Originem, fontem Arij, Niceni patres percussere,
damnantes enim eos qui filium negant esse de substantia patris, illum
(Origine^) Ariumque damnaverunt. Hier. Epist. ad Pon. mac. de error. Orig.
Omnis tam orientis, quam occidentis Catholicorum Synodus, illum, haereticum
denunciat. Hier. Apol. 2. adver. Ruff.
himself was by the Church condemned; and so the author being disgraced, the
authority of his writings must needs be very small but the person of Theodoret
was approved by the whole Council of Chalcedon, they all proclaimed Con. Chal.
Act. 8.
him to be a Catholic, and orthodoxall Bishop. Here was a far greater
temptation, and greater danger when his writings are heretical, whose person,
so famous and holy a Council commends for Catholic. Now, or never was the
Church to show that it honored no man's person, writings, or name, more tha^
the truth of Christ. And so much the rather was the Church to do this in
Theodoret, because about some thirty Nam Iustini rescriptum de ea re datum est
Rustico Coss. ut liquet ex Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 582. Vbi rescriptum extat.
Eusticus vero Consul cum Vitaliano an. 520. Marcel. in Chron. et Bar. in eum
annum nu. 1.
years, before this fifth Council, in the time of Justinius the Emperor, the
Nestorians (as if not only some writings of his, but Theodoret himself had
been wholly theirs) set up Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 582. et pa. 578. a.
his image in a Chariot, and with great pomp, and singing of hymns, brought
it in triumphant manner into the City of Cyrus, where Sergius a Nestorian, and
Bishop of that place, mentioned in a Collect Theodorus of Mopsvestia,
Nestorius, and Theodoret as three of their principal Nestorian Saints: was it
not now high time to wipe away that blemish from the name of Theodoret, and to
condemn those writings of his which gave occasion to the Nestorians to make
such boasts?

31. I appeal now unto any man, whether their condemning of Theodorets
writings, did not much more tend to the honor, then, as Vigilius fancieth, to
the slander, and disgrace of his person. As it is a blemish to a man to retain
a filthy spot in his garment, but the taking of it away does grace, and make
him more comely; even so the name of Theodoret was stained by those writings;
they emboldened the Nestorians to put him in their cursed Calender; but by the
condemning of those writings was the stain and blemish wiped away from his
person, his name, and honor was vindicated from the Nestorians, and brought,
as it well deserved, to the holy Church of GOD; nothing of Theodoret left for
heretics to vaunt of, but the only stains of Theodoret; nothing but those
heretical writings condemned and accursed, both by Theodoret himself, and by
the whole Church of God.

32. No, no; it is Pope Vigilius (and such as applaud his decree for
infallible) that disgraceth, and most ignominiously uses the name, person, and
memory of Theodoret: By his decree those heretical writings of Theodoret,
which, by the Churches sentence of condemnation are quite dulled, receive full
strength, and vigor for the Nestorians against Catholics: By him the
Nestorians have an eternal charter, and irrevocable decree, that Theodorets
writings against Cyrill, and with them the heresy of Nestorius, ought not to
be taxed, nor condemned. His Apostolical Constitution is a triumphant chariot
for them to set the Image of Theodoret in their Temples, and with Anthemes and
Collects to canonize, yea adore him in their Masses, among their heretical
Saints. But for the Church of God, I constantly affirm they could not possibly
have more honored Theodoret, than by burning up the hay and stubble of his
writings, the condemning of which the Pope decrees to be an injury and
slander unto him.

33. May we now in the last place consider a little what might be the
intendment of Vigilius in pleading, and decreeing this for Theodorets writings?
I doubt not but the love he bare to Nestorianisme might make him zealous for
those writings, which are the bulwarks of the Nestorians: but non sunt in eo
omnia. Popes are men of profound thoughts, and very long reaches; they have
deep, and mystical projects in their decrees. Vigilius had, and it may be
principally, an eye to this his own, and all their Cathedral Constitutions
like unto it: If the heretical writings of Theodoret may not be condemned,
because himself was a Catholic, a fortiori, this decree of Vigilius, be it
never so heretical, may not be condemned, because the Pope is the head of all
Catholics. If it be an injury, and a slandering of Theodoret, to tax him, or
his name, by condemning his writings; it must much more be an injury, and
slander, nay, that is nothing, even a blasphemy and sin irremissible to tax
the Popes Holiness, by condemning his Apostolical decree: If you presume to
condemn, nay, but tax them, or their names, though their decrees shall be as
apparently heretical, as are those writings of Theodoret, you are condemned
for ever as injurious, as contumelious, as slandering persons. And let this
suffice for the errors both personal, and doctrinall, of Vigilius touching
this second Chapter.

CAP. X. That Vigilius and Baronius err in diverse personal points, or matters
of fact, concerning the third Chapter, or the Epistle of Ibas.
1. THere remains now the third and last Chapter, which concerns the impious
Epistle of Ibas; In handling whereof, being of them all most intricate and
obscure, as Vigilius first, and then long after him his Champion Baronius, have
here bestowed greatest pains, and used all their subtilty, judging this to be
(as indeed by reason of the manifold obscurities, it is) the fittest cloak for
their heresy; so must I on the other side entreat the more serious and
attentive consideration at the readers hands, while I endeavor, not only to
discover the dark and secret corners of this cause, but pull both the Pope and
his Parasite out of this, being their strongest hold, and most hidden
heretical den, wherein they hoped of all other most safely and securely to
have lurked; for the more perspicuous proceeding wherein, before I come to the
doctrinall errors, and maine heresy which in this third Chapter they
maintain; I will first manifest two or three of their personal untruths,
which will both open a passage to the other, and will give the reader a taste,
nay, a certain experiment what truth, fidelity, and faire-dealing he is to
expect at the hands of Vigilius and Baronius in their handling of this Chapter.

2. The first, and that indeed a capital untruth, is, that Vigilius avoucheth
the Council of Orthodoxa est Ibae a patribus pronunciata dictatio. Vig. Constable.
nu. 192.
Chalcedon to have approved this Epistle of Ibas as orthodoxall. They approve
that impious, and blasphemous Epistle? they rejected, they condemned,
anathematized, and accursed it to the very pit of hell, witness the fifth
general Council, and the whole Catholic Church, which has approved it; for
thus cried out, and proclaimed all the Bishops, Epistolam Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa.
576. b.
definitio sancti Chalcedonensis Concilij condemnavit, ejecit; the definition
of faith made by the holy Council at Chalcedon has condemned this Epistle, it
has cast out this Epistle. But because I have formerly Supra ca. 4.5.1.3.13.
entreated hereof, I will add no more of this which is proclaimed by the whole
Church to be an untruth.

3. The second untruth is like this. Vigilius having cited the interloquutions
of Pascasinus, and Maximus, wherein they say that Ibas by his Epistle is
declared to be a Catholic, Vig. Constable. nu. 19^
adds, that all the rest in the Council of Chalcedon did not only not
contradict their interloquutions, verumetiam apertissimum eis noscuntur
praebuisse consensum; but also they are known to have assented, and that most
manifestly unto those interloquutions. So Vigilius. It had been enough, and
too much to have said, that the Council had assented, or had but seemed to
assent: but Vigilius in saying that all the rest did most manifestly assent to
those interloquutions, uttered a papal and supreme untruth, whereof no
colorable pretense can be made, witness the fifth general Council, and the
whole Catholic Church, which has approved it: They expressly Conc. 5. Coll. 6.
pa. 576. a.b.
testify, that the Council of Chalcedon did pro nullo habere, esteem as
nothing, that which was spoken by one or two, (those were Pascasinus, and
Maximus) for that Epistle; but of this also I have spoken before.

4. Now both these untruths, whereof Vigilius is so evidently, and by so ample
witnesses convicted, Cardinal Baronius has again revived; telling with a
face more hard than Brass, or Adamant, Patres Bar. an. 553. nu. 191.
dixerunt eam Epistolam ut Catholicam recipiendam; the Fathers of Chalcedon
said, that this Epistle of Ibas is to be received as orthodoxall: and Ba an.
448. nu. 71
again, ex ipsa Ibam fuisse probatum orthodoxum, aeque una fuit sententia
omnium Episcoporum; that Ibas was by this Epistle approved for a Catholic, it
was the consent and uniforme judgment of all the Bishops at Chalcedon; then
which, two louder untruths, and well worthy of a golden whetstone, could hardly
have been uttered: And though he took them from Pope Vigilius, yet are they
far more inexcusable in the Cardinal, than in the Pope his Master. Vigilius
dyed before he saw the judgment of succeeding Popes, and general Councels;
which had he known, we may charitably think, that his Holiness would have
casseired and defaced such palpable, and condemned untruths: But Cardinal
Baronius knew all this; he knew that the fifth In 6. collatione Conc. 5. allata
ab ipso Vigilio pro defensione Ibae Epistolae confutantur. Bar. an. 553. nu.
210.
general Council had condemned these untruths in Vigilius: he knew that
Pelagius, Gregorius cum praedecessoribus and successoribus ejus omnes quintam
Synodum confirmasse, noscuntur. Bar. an. 553 nu. 229.
Gregory, and their successors, that the sixth, Bar. ibid.
seventh, and other general Councels had approved the fifth Council, and so in
approving it, had condemned those same untruths; and yet against the known
consent, and judgment of all those Popes, and general Councels, that is,
against the known testimony of the whole Catholic Church for a thousand
years together; he is bold to avouch both those former sayings, for truths,
which all those former witnesses with one voice proclaim, to be condemned
untruths. Such account does the Cardinal make of Fathers, Popes, General
Councels, and of the whole Catholic Church, when they come cross in his way.

5. A third personal matter there is concerning this Chapter, of which not
Vigilius, but Cardinal Baronius does enforce me to entreat; and that is,
whether Ibas was indeed the author of this Epistle, or no: for although it be
not material to the intent of the fifth Council, (which, against the decree of
Vigilius, we now defend) whether Ibas writ it or not, seeing neither this fifth,
nor the former Council of Chalcedon condemned the author of this Epistle, but
only the Epistle it self; yet seeing the Cardinal was pleased to undertake
the defense of a needless untruth, that this is not the Epistle of Ibas. I am
desirous that all should see how wisely and worthily he has behaved himself
in this point.

6. Baronius speaking against this Epistle, first makes it doubtful whose it
is, saying Bar. an. 432. nu. 71.
, author qui fertur nomine Ibae, quisquis ille fuerit, the author of this
Epistle which passes under the name of Ibas, whatsoever he be; and having thus
bred a distrust in your minds: then as the serpent dealt with Eve, he
positively sets down his untruth. It is not the Epistle of Ibas, in this
manner: Caeterum, Ibid.
ut publica acta testantur, producta in Concilium Epistola illa, non esse Ibae
comperta, but the public acts do testify, that when this Epistle was
produced in the Council at Chalcedon, it was found not to be the Epistle of
Ibas: and so it being condemned, Ibas was absolved. Thus Baronius, who for
proof hereof alleges the public acts Conc. Chalc. Act. 10. and Conc. Nic.
2. Act. 6. citantur a Bar. ibidem.
both of the Council of Chalcedon, and of the 2. Nicene Synod. And truly in
the second Nicene Synod, that which the Cardinal says, is read indeed by
Epiphanius, a Deacon in that Synod: but it is the testimony of the whole
Council, Epiphanius only reading and proposing it in the name Epiphanius
scitam a patribus appositam responsionem per legit. Bar. nu. 787. nu. 34.
and behalf of the Synod. And because it is a testimony very pregnant for the
Cardinals assertion, and is cited out of a Council which he much honoreth, and
affects, I will do him the favor, as at large to express that passage: the
rather because this, as the whole answer read by Epiphanius, is not only
commended as a matter delivered Quam confutationem nobis spiritus sanctus
dedit. Conc. N^c. 2. Act. 6. pa. 356. a.
unto them by the holy Ghost: but they further request Rogamus autem, quicunque
etc. ibid b.
all who shall happen to light on that commentary of theirs, that they will
not read it slightly, or perfunctorily, but with singular indagation and search
of the same. And I am loath to deny those Nicene Fathers, so very just and
reasonable a request.

7. In that place Conc. Nic 2. Act. 6. pa. 371. a.
there was read on the behalf of the Iconoclasts, a testimony out of the
ancient Father Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, forbidding to set up Images either
in the Churches, or Epiphanius Cyprius sic inquit, Ne in ecclesiam imagines
infer atis, neque in coemiterijs statuatis: neque in domo communi tolerentur.
ibid.
in Churchyards, or in their common dwelling houses, but every where to carry
about, God in their hearts. This saying netled the Nicene Fathers not a little,
who were very superstitiously devoted to Image Worship: and therefore in stead
of a better answer, they say that the book whence that is alleged, is falsely
Id (ex Epiphanio lectum) nequaquam illius existit. ibid. a. Et, verum ut
novitij (libelli) et alieni falsique sunt. ibid b.
ascribed to Epiphanius, he was not the author of it. Epiphanius they honor
Commentarium illum reijcimus beatum autem patrem (Epiph.) ecclesiae Doctorem
agnoscimus. ibid. b.
as an holy Father and Doctor of the Catholic Church, but that book going
under his name, they reject: which fact of theirs, they illustrate and labor
to warrant by the example of the Council at Chalcedon, who received Ibas
himself, but accursed the Epistle going under the name of Ibas, non Jbid. b.
enim demonstrari poterat quod esset Ibae: for it could not be proved to be the
Epistle of Ibas: wherefore they anathematized not Ibas, but it: Dicebatur enim
Ibae, cum tamen illius handquaquam esset: for it was said to be the Epistle of
Ibas, whereas indeed it was none of his. Even so those false writings against
venerable Images are said to be the writings of Bishop Epiphanius, but they
are not his. So those public acts, and second Nicene Fathers, whose testimony
concurreth and jumpeth with the Cardinal, this is not the Epistle of Ibas.

8. Before I come to examine those public acts, I must observe one thing
touching Baronius, which he will occasion and enforce me often to repeat; and
this it is, that Baronius was merely infatuated in his handling of this whole
cause touching the three Chapters, and this one might almost even swear: but
any may see it as clear as the light: besides many other, even by this one
point whereof we now entreat. If a man should study and devise ten days
together, how to confute and utterly overthrow all that Pope Vigilius has
decreed touching this third Chapter; and all which Baronius himself has
either taught or said in defense of Vigilius in that point, he cannot possibly
do it more clearly, more certainly, more effectually, then by denying, as the
Cardinal, and his Nicene Fathers do, that this is the Epistle of Ibas: for
how could either the Council of Chalcedon, or the Popes Legates therein, by
this Epistle, and by the dictation and contents thereof judge Ibas to be a
Catholic (which Vigilius Vigil. Constable. nu. 196.
decrees, and Baronius Bar. an. 553. nu. 191, 192.193.196 197, etc.
more then twenty times I think repeateth,) unless it were indeed the Epistle
of Ibas; for of Ibas no otherwise then in the first person, or as the author
and writer of it, there is no mention at all to be found or collected out of
that Epistle.

9. Now if you require testimonies, or authorities in this case, I oppose to
Baronius the Popes Legates at Chalcedon, of which Baronius himself says Bar.
an. 448. nu. 71.
; This to be the Epistle of Ibas, the Popes Legates, and after them the rest of
the Bishops by their subscription, confirmed, and again, the an. eod. nu. 77.
Acts of Chalcedon do teach, that this we acknowledged to be the Epistle of
Ibas. I oppose Pope Vigilius, who in his Constitution assenteth Vigil. Constable.
nu. 90
to that judgment of the Popes Legates, and those words, relecta ejus
Epistola, the Epistle of Ibas being read, we acknowledge him to be a Catholic.
I oppose the confession of Ibas himself, of which Baronius says, the Bar. an.
448. nu. 77.
Acts at Chalcedon declare Ibam confessum esse eam esse suam, that Ibas
confessed this Epistle to be his own: and again Bar. an. 553. nu. 211.
, we have before declared Ibam eandem Epistolam suam esse professum, that Ibas
professed this same Epistle to be his own: and Ibas of all men in the world
knew best, whether it was his or no. I oppose lastly Baronius to Baronius, for
he an. 448. nu. 71.
says of this Epistle, vere esse Ibae fuisse cognitam, that it was known
truly and indeed to be the Epistle of Ibas. Say now in sadness, what you
think of Baronius, and where you think his five wits were, when he denied,
and that upon proof by public records, this to be the Epistle of Ibas, which
the Popes Legates, with the whole Council of Chalcedon, which Pope Vigilius
whom he defends, which Ibas his own self, yea which Baronius also
acknowledges, confesses, and professes to be truly, and in very deed the
Epistle of Ibas.

10. But what shall we then say to those public acts, which as the Cardinal
tells us, do testify, that this is not the Epistle of Ibas. What first to the
acts of the Council at Chalcedon, which he first Bar. an. 432. nu. 71.
alleges, and the tenth Action thereof? I say, and say it upon certain
grounds, that the Cardinal therein says an untruth, for proof whereof, I
appeal to that same tenth Action of the Council, in no part whereof it is
said, nor can thence be collected, that this was not the Epistle of Ibas. Or if
you will not believe my saying, yet believe the Cardinal himself, more then
once testifying that which he says to be untrue. These are his words Bar. an.
448. nu. 77.
, The Acts of the tenth Action of the Council at Chalcedon: Eandem epistolam
ut Ibae cognitam esse a patribus docent, do teach, that this Epistle was
known to be the Epistle of Ibas. And again Jbid. nu. 71
, Vere esse Ibae fuisse cognitam eandem actio decima docet, that this was
known to have been truly the Epistle of Ibas, the tenth action of the
Council at Chalcedon does teach. Think you not that Baronius is more like the
Esopicall Satyr, then a grave Cardinal of the Roman Church? At his first
blast he makes the tenth action of the Council at Chalcedon to testify that
this is not the Epistle of Ibas; and then he blows a quite contrary blast,
professing the tenth action of the Council at Chalcedon to testify that this
is truly, and certainly the Epistle of Ibas.

11. O, but the second Nicene Council, and the public acts thereof, they
witness the same which the Cardinal affirms, that this is not the Epistle
of Ibas. They do so indeed: But as it is an untruth in the Cardinals mouth:
so it is also in those his Nicene Fathers from whom he took it, unless
perhaps those men of Nice, knew better whose Epistle it was, then did the 600
holy Bishops of the Council at Chalcedon, before whom Ibas stood, or better
then Ibas himself who confessed it to be his own Epistle. The Cardinal may
not be offended that we dissent from his Nicene Council, which dissenteth from
the holy Council at Chalcedon, from Ibas his own confession, yea from whom
the Cardinal dissenteth as much as we in this point. And I cannot see, what
depth of wisdom it was in his Cardinalship to allege them for witnesses,
whose testimony, himself in this very point for which he produces them, does
avouch to be untrue. But let him please himself in those Nice Fathers, we
envy not such a Council, nor such Fathers, nor such public records unto
them. That Nicene assembly was but a conspiracy against the truth, it was fit
they should uphold untruth, by untruth. And whosoever shall be pleased to
examine and rip up the Acts of that Council, I will give him this one assured
comfort, that besides their superstitious and heretical doctrins therein
maintained, he shall find them full stuffed with many gross and palpable
untruths, of matters de facto, on which they build their doctrinall positions,
as in this concerning the Epistle of Ibas, it is now most manifest.

12. For this time I will not enter into so spacious a field, but yet this one
thing by the way I cannot but observe; seeing those Nicene Fathers profess,
that writing against Image Worship, going under the name of Epiphanius, to be
in such sort the book of Epiphanius, as this Epistle going under the name of
Ibas, is the Epistle of Ibas: and seeing we have now demonstrated this Epistle
to be truly and indeed the Epistle of Ibas, it follows even by their own
reason and comparison, that the book also against Image Worship, cited by the
Council at Constantinople in the name of Epiphanius, is in truth and in very
deed the true writing of Bishop Epiphanius. And yet further, because those
Nicene Fathers acknowled Epiphanius for a Catholic Beatum patrem (Epiphanium)
catholicae ecclesiae Doctorem agnoscimus. Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 6. pa. 371. b.
Doctor of the Church, one who held the ancient tradition Illi qui antiquam
ecclesiae traditionem recipient beato Epiphanie non adversantur. ibid. b.
of the Church, and consented to the Catholics, in and before his time: it
hence again follows, that the doctrine of condemning Image Worship which in
that book of Epiphanius is delivered, and was by the general Council at
Constantinople some thirty Conc. Constable. contra Imagines, habitum est an. 754.
Bin. to. 3. pa. 229. Conc. Nicenum habitum. an. 787. Bin. notis in id Conc.
years before this Nicene Assembly, decreed Qui imaginem ausus fuerit parare,
aut adorare, aut in ecclesia, aut in privata domo constituere, aut clam habere,
si Episcopus fuerit, deponatur. etc. Decretum Conc. Constant. sub Constantino
Copronimo, quod extat in Nicen^ Conc. 2. Act. 6. pa. 377. a.
, that it I say is ancient, Catholic, consonant to the ancient tradition, and
the doctrine of the ancient and catholic Fathers of the Church, even from the
Apostles time. And this is all which Baronius has gained by his alleging
those public acts of the Nicene Fathers, to prove this not to be the Epistle
of Ibas. And let this suffice to be spoken of the personal untruths of
Vigilius and Baronius touching this Epistle of Ibas, which are but a praeludium
to their doctrinall errors and heresies; whereof in the next place we are to
entreat.

CHAP. XI. That Vigilius and Baronius in their former reason for defense of the
Epistle of Ibas, drawn from the union with Cyrill, mentioned in the latter
part of that Epistle, do defend all the heresies of the Nestorians.
1. WE come now from personal matters to that which is the Capital point, and
maine heresy contained in the defense of this this Chapter, wherein Vigilius,
and Baronius have so behaved themselves, that those former errors though they
be too shameful, are but a very sport, and play to that heretical frenzy
which here they do express. For now you shall behold the Pope and his
Cardinal in their lively colors, fighting under the banner of Nestorius, and
using the most cunning stratagems that were ever devised, to cloak their
heretical doctrine, and gain credit to that condemned heresy. Those sleights
are principally two. The former is gathered out of the latter part of the
Epistle of Ibas, where mention is made of the union betwixt Cyrill, and John,
which although I touched before Sup. ca. 4.
; yet because it is a matter of greater obscurity, and contains a most
notable fraud of Vigilius, and Baronius, I purposely reserved the full handling
of it unto this place, where without interruption of other matters, I might
have scope enough; to explain the depth of this mystery.

2. In the time of the Ephesine Council, there was, as all know, an exceeding
breach betwixt Cyrill, with other Catholic Bishops, who condemned Nestorius,
and John Bishop of Antioch, with diverse other Eastern Bishops, who took part
with Nestorius, against the holy Council. And the division was so great, that
at the selfsame time, in one, and the selfsame city of Ephesus, they held
two several Councels, and set up altar contra altar, Council against
Council, Patriarcke against Patriarcke, Bishops against Bishops, and Synodall
sentence against Synodall sentence. But betwixt those two Councels, there was
as much difference, as is betwixt light and darkness, betwixt truth and
heresy, betwixt the Church of God, and the Synagogue of Satan. The one
consisted of holy orthodoxall and Catholic Bishops whose President was Cyrill:
the other of heretical, Coactis in unum solo nomine Episcopis, qui una cum
Nestorio descivera^t: ex quibus alij erant extorres, ^agi, proprijs sedibus
destituti, alij a suis Metropolicanis depositi, alij, Pelagij and Caelestij
veneno imbuti. Epi. Synodal. sanct. Conc. Ephesians. ad Caelestinum. to. 4. Act. Ephesians.
c. 17.
factious, and diverse deposed Bishops, whose President was John. The former
condemned Nestorius and his blasphemous doctrine, whereby he denied Christ to
be God: the latter defended Nestorius and all his impious doctrines. The former
was held in a Church, even in the Church of the Blessed Considentibus in
sanctiss. Eccles. quae appellatur Maria, to. 2. act. Ephesians. co^c. ca. 1. and
saepe alibi.
Virgin, whose Son they professed to be truly God: the latter in an Inn
Iohanne in diversorio mane^te, sacraque illius Synodo praesente, Act. Ephe.
co^c. to. 3. ca. 1. Cum vix curru dissilijsset (Johannes) cubiculu^que
ingressus esset. Apol. Cyril. ad Imper. to. 5 ca. 2. pa. 827. b.
, or Tavern, a fit place for them who denied Christ to be God. The former
proceeded in all respects, orderly and Synodally, as was fit and requisite that
they should: the latter did all things tumultuously Johannes cum suis, nullam
omnino vel per leges ecclesiasticas, vel per. Augustorum decretum, potestatem
obtinuit, Libel. Cyril. et Mem. oblatus s synodo; to. 4. Act. ca. 2. Johannes
omni ecclesiastica authoritate proculcata, omnique ecclesiarum ordine and ritu
and consuetudine contempta, etc. ibid. Quae temere vaneque fuerant nugati,
quaeque praeter omnem Canonum ordinem ediderant, etc. Epist. Synod. ad Imp. to.
4. ca. 8. quod contra leges et canones, omnemque ordinem perpetrarunt, ibid.
, presumptuously, and against the Canons of the Church, supporting themselves
only by lies, calumnies, and slanderous reports. In a word, the former, was
truly an holy, a general, an Oecumenicall Omnes Orientales atque Occidentales
vel per se, vel per legatos sacerd^tali huic concessui intersunt. Act. Ephesians.
to. 2. ca. 16. Quod a nobis exijt judicium, aliud nihil esse quam co^munem
concordemque terrarum orbis sensum atque consensum. Ep. Synod. Ephesians. Conc. ad
Imp. to. 2. ca. 17.
Council, wherein was the consent of the whole Catholic Church: the latter
was nothing else, but an heretical, schismatic, and rebellious faction or
conspiracy of some thirty Ille (Johannes) 30. tantum numero, eosque vel
haereticos vel alios illius factionis socios. Epist. Synod. 5. Conc. ad Imp.
to. 4. ca. 2. Johannes rebellionis hujus antesignanus. ibid. ca. 3. and alibi
saepe.
or forty persons, unworthy the name of Bishops, insolently opposing
themselves to the holy Council, yea to the whole Catholic Church, in which
number and faction besides others, who less concern our purpose, were these
Vt patet ex eorum subscripsione. Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 3. ca. 2. and tom. 4.
ca. 7.
John Bishop of Antioch, the ringleader of the rest, Paulus Bishop of Emisae,
Theodoret of whom we before entreated, and Ibas, (not then, but some three or
four years after Bishop of Edessa) whom to have been present at that time as
a Bishop, though his name be not expressed in their subscription, both Glicas
Glic. Annal. part. 4. pa. 363.
in his Annals, and the Council at Chalcedon, Post duos dies venimus in
Ephesum ait Ibas in Epist. sua. Conc. Chal. act. 10. se^uutus sum primatem meum
ibid. pa. 112. b.
and Ibas his own words therein, do make manifest.

3. Now though there was so great odds betwixt the holy Council, and this
factious conventicle, yet were they (as is the custom of all heretics and
schismatickes) most insolent in all their actions. As the holy Council deposed
Nestorius for an heretic, so the Conventicle to cry quittance with them;
deposed Tu Cyrille and tu Memnon, scitote vos exauctoratos, omnique episcopali
honor exutos. to. 3. Act. Ephesians. ca. 2.
Cyrill for an Arch-hereticke also, condemning Capita haeretica a Cyrillo
exposita ut quae Euangelica and Apostolicae doctrinae aperte repugnant. Ibid.
his twelve Chapters as heretical, which the holy Council had approved as
orthodoxall. As the holy Council excommunicated Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 4. ca. 7.
and anathematized, John, Paulus, Theodoret, Ibas, and all the rest of their
factious adherents, and defenders of Nestorius, and his heresy: So did the
Conventicle also excommunicate and anathematize Cyrill, and all At vos reliqui
omnes qui Cyrilli actis consensistis, anathemati subjacete. tom. 3. Ephesians. Act.
ca. 2.
that took part with him, and defended his twelve Chapters, and so among
these, even Pope Celestine, and the whole Catholic Church. As the holy
Council truly and justly, called themselves; the sacred and oecumenicall
Council, and termed John with his adherents, a faction and heretical
Schismaticorum conciliabutum. to. 4. Act. Conc. Ephe. ca. 15.
Conventicle of Nestorians: so did the Conventicle arrogate unto themselves,
the glorious name of the holy Sacra Synodus, etc. tom. 3. act. ca. 2.6.7. and
alibi saepe
Ephesine Council, and slandered them which held with Cyrill to be a
Conventicle Confuso illorum Conciliabulo se conjunxerunt. tom. 3. act. Ephesians.
ca. 1. Quoddam inter se conciliabulum instituerunt. ibid. c. 4.
, an unlawful Seditiose, inique, contra ecclesiasticas sanctiones, regiaque
decreta consensistis. ibid. ca. 2.
and disorderly assembly, tearming them Arians, Qui furijs quibusdam agitati,
Arij, Apollinarijque dogmata inflaurare voluerunt. to. 3. ca. 18.
Apollinarians, and from Cyrill, Cyrillians Scitote Cyrillianos tyrannide,
fraudibus, etc. Append. ad to. 3. act. Ephesians. ca. 10.
. As the holy Council constantly refused, to communicate with John To. 4. act.
ca. 15. et ca. 18.
, or any of his faction, until they did consent to the deposing of Nestorius,
and anathematizing his heresy: so the conventicle most peevishly and
pertinaciously not only refused the communion with Cyrill, and other
Catholics, but bound themselves by many solemn oaths, Iuravimusque
saepissime pientissimo Regi, quod impossible sit nobis co^municare his
(Cyrillianis) si non exploserint capitula. Appen. to. 3. act. ca. 9. and 10.
and that even in the presence of the Emperor, that they would never
communicate with the Cyrillians, unless they would condemn the twelve
chapters of Cyrill, adding that they would rather dye Parati sumus prius mori,
quam suscipere unum ex Cyrilli capitulis. ib. ca. 7.
, then admit or consent unto any one of those twelve chapters. Such an unhappie
and lamentable breach John and the Eastern Bishops made in the Church at the
time of that Ephesine Council.

4. The religious Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinian whose imperial
authority, was the only means to end all these strifes; had they been
personally present in the Synod, to see all these disorders, they would no
doubt, either have prevented this breach, or after it had happened, have healed
and made up the same. But they residing then at Constantinople, were extremely
abused by the vile dealings of the Nestorians, for so much had these Nestorians
prevailed, both at the Court and in the City of Constantinople, where
Nestorius had been Bishop, that though the holy Council sent letters after
letters, to certify the truth of all matters to the Emperor, yet either
Arbitramur pijss. Imperatorem nihil horum dilucide intellexisse. Ita terra
marique obsidemur, ut nihil eorum quae nobis hic eveneru^t vestrae Sanctitudini
significare potuerimus. Epist. sa^. conc. ad Eu^atium and alios. tom. 4. act.
ca. 21. Qui. Nestorij studiosi erant, omnia maria and publicas vias.
^bfiden^^^, neminem. prorsus a sacra Synodo Constantinopol. venire permittunt.
to. 2. act Ephesians ca. 19.
were their messengers stopped, or their letters by the malicious vigilancie of
the Nestorians intercepted, so that none, no not any small notice of them came
to the Emperors, whereas on the other part the frequent Ea interim quae inimici
Christi erant, ultro citroque deferebantur. ibid.
letters of the conventicle fraught with lies and slanders, had every day
access, yea applause in the City, in the Court, and before the Emperors. And
which was the worst of all, Count Candidianus, whom the Emperors made their
own deputy, and president of the Council, to see all good, and Synodall
orders observed therein, he failed of that trust committed unto him, and being
most partial Candidianus Comes amicitiam Nestorij pietati a^te ponens -- ea
pietati vestrae instillare fluduit, quae cum sibi tum Nestorio commoda grataque
futura intelligebat. Relatio Synod. ad Imp. to. 4. ca. 10.
toward Nestorius and his heresy, by his letters also he seconded and soothed
all the lies which the conventicle had writ unto the Emperors. By which means
it came to pass, that the Emperors knowing nothing of that division amongst
the Bishops; and how beside the holy Council, there was a factious, and
schismatic conventicle held in the city, thought all that was done, as well
against Cyrill, and Memnon, in deposing them, as against Nestorius, in deposing
him, that all this had been in the act, judgment and sentence of one and the
same Council, upon which subreption and misinformation, the Emperors confirmed
at the first the condemnation Et Nestorij, and Cyrilli, et Memnonis
exauctorationem a Sanctitate vestra nobis insinuatam, calcuis nostro
approbavimus. Sacra missa ab Augusto ad Synod. to. 3. act. Ephesians. ca. 15.
of them all three; But at length a letter being brought from the holy Synod to
Constantinople by one, who to avoid suspicion put on the habit of a beggar
Epistola ex Epheso scripta, opera cujusdam m^ndici, qui in Scipione eam
inclusam gerebat, tandem reddita est. tom. 2. act. ca. 19.
, and carried the letter in the trunk of his hollow staff which for that
purpose he had provided; as soon as the report of these strange disorders came
to the Emperors ears, they sent for, and commanded certain Bishops of either
side, personally to come before them to Constantinople, that they might be
fully informed of the truth in all the proceedings: and the truth after
diligent examination being found, the Emperors by their Imperial authority
adnulled all the Acts of the conventicle, restored Cyrill Platuit pientiss.
Regi ut Aegyptius et Memnon ^in suis locis maneant. Epist. Legatorum Conciliab.
Append. tom. 3. ca. 10. pa. 791. b. et ille (Cyrillus) ad thronum suum redit.
Jbid.
, and Memnon, approved Legalorum Synodi sententia public approbata, Orientales
quidem condemnat, Nestorio vero exilium indicit. De^retum Regium, tom. 5. act.
Ephesians. ca. 11.
the judgment of the holy Council against Nestorius, adding banishment also
from Constantinople, to his deposition: But the Synodall sentence Quae extat
tom. 4. act ca. 7.
of deposition against John, and the other Bishops of his faction, that they
stayed, and suspended for a while, partly to prevent a greater schism, which
John was like to procure, but specially in hope that John, and the other
Eastern Bishops might in time be Imperator decrevit ut sententia Oecumenicae
Synodi contra Nestorium vim obtineret, quidque in causa Iohannis constituisset,
suspenderetur, Bin. not. ^n Conc. Ephesians. Verum. pa. 921.
reduced and brought to unity with Cyrill, and the catholic Church, which in
that height of their heat and stomach could not have been expected. And thus
was the Council at Ephesus dissolved, a far greater rent by this means being
left at the end, then had been at the beginning thereof, and so that malady
for which it was called, not cured but increased.

5. But the religious Emperor Theodosius could not be at quiet while the
Church was thus disturbed, but the very next year after the Ephesine Council
was ended, when time and better advise had now cooled the former heat of the
Eastern Bishops, he began to effect that union which before he had intended,
and he so earnestly labored therein, that himself professed, Sacr. Jmp. ad
Acatium Episc. Ber. to. 5. act. Ephesians. ca. 10.
I am certainly and firmly resolved, not to desist in working this
reconcilement, until God shall vouchsafe to restore unity and peace to the
Church; To which purpose he writ a very religious, and effectual Epistle
Sacr. Imp. missa per Aristol. ad Iohannem, tom. 5. act. Ephesians. ca. 3.
to John B. of Antioch, by many reasons persuading, and by his imperial
authority commanding Iohanni mandavit ut scelerata Nestorij dogmata
anathematizaret etc. Epist. Cyril. ad Din. to. 5. act. Ephesians. ca. 16.
Imperatores literas miserunt ad Acatium B^rcensem et Iohannem, quibus severe
praecipiunt, ut turbas consopiamus. Epist. Pauli ad Cyril. to. 5. act. Ephesians. ca.
4.
him, and with him the rest of the faction, to subscribe to the deposition of
Nestorius, and the anathematizing of his heresy, and so to embrace the holy
communion with Cyrill, and the catholic Church, which persuasions of the
Emperor, took indeed the intended effect: for after some tergiversation for a
while, both John and most of the Eastern Bishops, before the end of that
year, relented, and in a Synod held at Antioch, subscribed as the Emperor
persuaded them, both to the deposing of Nestorius, and to a truly orthodoxall
profession, sent unto them by Cyrill, wherein they approved Cum igitur Johannes
subscripsisset caeterique qui majori authoritate apud ipsum erant, e^ Nestorij
dogmata anathematizassent, co^munionem illis restituimus, Epist. Cyril. ad
Dynat. to. 5. ca. 16.
the holy Ephesine Council, and condemned all the heresies of Nestorius, and
upon this their consenting to Cyrill, and the orthodoxall faith, were received
into the peace of the Church; and so union and concord, was fully concluded
betwixt Cyrill, with the other orthodoxall Bishops, and John with most of those
Eastern Bishops, who before adhered unto him.

6. Let us now see how Vigilius, and after him Baronius under color of this
Union, plead for Ibas, and his heretical Epistle. In the end of that Epistle,
Ibas makes mention Et communicantibus adinvicem, co^tentio de medio ablata est,
et pax i^ Ecclesia facta. Ibae verba in sua Epist.
, of the union betwixt John and Cyrill, yea mentions it as a great blessing
of Voluit autem Deus, qui suae semper curam gerit Ecclesiae. Ibid.
God to the Church, seeing that he not only consented, but greatly rejoiced at
the same. Thus much is clear and certain by the Epistle. Now because the
Union as we have declared, was made by consenting to the Catholic faith, it
seems that Ibas who consented to the Union, consented also to the Catholic
faith, and so was received into the communion of Cyrill and the Catholic
Church. Seeing then Ibas by this Epistle is showed to approve and embrace the
Union, and embracing of the union is the proof of a Catholic, it follows
that even by this Epistle Ibas declares himself to be a very good Catholic,
and an earnest embracer of the Catholic faith. This is the sum of their
collection, which is, as any will confess, a very fair and plausible pretense,
and therefore more fit for the Pope and Cardinal to cloak their heresy under
the show thereof. But least we seem either to wrong them, or leave out ought
which is emphaticall in their reason, it is needful to hear them dispute in
their own words.

7. It differs much, says Bar. an. 448. nu. 75.
Baronius, to say that the Epistle is Catholic, or that those things which are
written in it are true, and to say that Ibas by this Epistle was proved to be a
catholic. Etenim nihil aliud inde acceperunt patres nisi Ibam tunc temporis
fuisse Catholicum, for the fathers at Chalcedon took nothing at all out of
that Epistle, but that Ibas at that time (when he writ it) was a Catholic,
seeing in it is demonstrated that Ibas who had sometimes erred with the
Nestorians, and dealt against Cyrill, after the peace once made, did communicate
with Cyrill, and condemn Nestorius with his doctrine. Again, Bar. an. 553.
nu. 191.
the reader is here to be admonished, that the sentence of the fathers at
Chalcedon does not tend to this end, ut voluerint probasse Epistolam Ibae, as
if they meant to approve the Epistle of Ibas, in which there are many
blasphemies affirmed, neither did Vigilius mean to teach this: sed tantum ex
ea recipiendum esse Ibam, in qua nimirum testetur ipse se jam amplecti pacem
ecclesiae, qua recepta, necesse fuerit eundem probare Catholicum, but both they
and Vigilius meant only that Ibas, by this Epistle was to be esteemed and
embraced as a Catholic, seeing in this Epistle Ibas testifies that he
embraced the peace of the Church, which being received, it is necessary that he
be approved for a catholic. Again, the Jbid.
Fathers of Chalcedon, said, that this Epistle was to be received as Catholic,
not in regard of those errors wherewith Ibas was once entangled, and which are
recited therein, sed quod ex illa Ibas profitetur se paci initae consentire;
but for that Ibas in it professes himself to consent to the peace or union
made between John and Cyrill: and a little after, Vides Nu. 192.
non alia ex part; you see that this Epistle was approved by the Fathers at
Chalcedon in another part or respect; but for that which Ibas signifies in the
last part of the Epistle, that he consented, omnibus pactis and conventis, in
all the conditions and covenants of the catholic union made between John and
Cyrill. And to omit many the like places, (for Baronius harps much upon this
string) he repeateth this An. eod^^ 553. nu. 213.
most plainly in this manner: In the end of this Epistle, Ibas the author of it
does testify, that peace was made, that himself consented unto it, and
rejoices therein, seeing he gives thanks to God for the same. Now seeing the
peace was concluded upon this condition, that Nestorius and his errors should
be condemned, and the decrees of the Ephesine Council received, it did
plainly and necessarily ensue, that Ibas condemned Nestorius, and approved the
Ephesine Council, and so the Popes Legates, and others at Chalcedon spoke not
amiss, when they said, that Ibas by that Epistle being read, was proved to be
a catholic. Thus disputes the Cardinal for this impious Epistle, nor did he
wholly devise this of himself, but he had the ground of it out of Vigilius his
Apostolical Constitution, where he thus says, The Vigil. Constable. nu. 192.
Fathers at Chalcedon pronounced this Epistle of Ibas to be orthodoxall,
propter illam praedicationem fidei, for that profession of faith, by which
Cyrill and John, and all the Eastern Bishops made concord and union by the
means of Paulus Bishop of Emisa, quam Ibas quoque in eadem Epistola laudans
libenter amplectitur; which union and profession of faith Ibas both praises in
this Epistle, and gladly embraces. So Vigilius.

8. Here first of all must be observed the admirable acuteness of the Pope and
the Cardinal: They can see in the Epistle of Ibas, more than the whole fifth
general Council, than other succeeding, either Popes or general Councels;
more than the whole Catholic Church ever did, or could; more than all the
world besides, excepting only the Nestorians: They, and none but they of all
the former could see by the latter end of that Epistle, or by the union
mentioned therein, that either the Epistle was Catholic, or Ibas by it to be
judged a Catholic. But Vigilius and Baronius, though in some matters they be
as blind as a Beetle, yet when they list, (and they ever list when they defend
heresy) they can see far into a Millstone: And yet, if it be well considered,
they gain not much by this their quick sight, and quirke of the union, which
they have spied in the end of that Epistle; for the whole fifth Council
(approved by succeeding Councels, and by the whole catholic Church, as before
we have declared) adjudgeth, not only the beginning, and the middle, but the
end also, even the whole Tota Epistola haeretica est, tota Epistola blasphema
est, haec omnes dicimus. Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 576. b.
Epistle, and every part, above all, and principally, the end Posteriora
inserta Epistola majore impietate plena sunt. Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 564 a.
thereof, to be blasphemous, and heretical, they anathematize Si quis defendit
memoratam Epistolam, and non anathematizat eam, et defensores ejus, et eos qui
dicunt eam rectam esse, vel partem ejus. Conc. 5. Coll. 8. in sententia
Synodali. Anath. 14.
also as heretics all who defend either the whole Epistle, or any part
thereof, yea, all who do not anathematize every part thereof: whence it is
undeniably consequent, that both Vigilius, and his Procter Baronius, and all
who do, or shall hereafter herein defend them, yea, all who do not
anathematize them, are for this very quirke and subtilty of the union found in
the latter part of this Epistle, anathematized, and condemned by the consenting
judgment of the whole catholic Church. This have they gained as a just
recompense for defending but the end only of that Epistle, and much more for
defending it by pretense of the Council at Chalcedon, though they should
condemn all the rest of it.

9. But if the matter be well considered, it will appear that Vigilius by this
one clause of the union makes good, not only the latter part, (as Baronius
pretends) but even the whole Epistle of Ibas; for had he intended to approve
no more than only the latter part of that Epistle, his reason had been this;
The Fathers at Chalcedon approved that part of the Epistle, wherein the union
is mentioned; therefore they approve the latter part of the Epistle, which is a
mere nugation, proving idem per idem; for seeing the union is only mentioned
in the latter part, it is all one as if he had said, They approved the latter
part, therefore they approved the latter part; and me thinks it sounds not
well, to hear such nugatory, and frivolous reasons to proceed out so the
infallible Chair: Nor does indeed Vigilius so conclude; but from that union
and concord which the latter part of the Epistle testifies Ibas to have
approved, he inferres, that Ibas when he writ this was a Catholic, and writ
it as a Catholic, and so the writing, or Epistle it self to be Catholic; for
thus stands his reason; The Vig. Constable. nu. 192.
latter end of the Epistle shows, that Ibas praised the union betwixt John
and Cyrill, and gladly embraces it; and propter illam fidei praedicationem
orthodoxa est Ibae a patribus pronunciata dictatio; therefore for that
confession of faith, which Ibas by his Epistle shows that he embraces, for
that did the Fathers of Chalcedon pronounce the writing, or Epistle (not the
end only of it) to be orthodoxall: So he takes this one part, of which he
made no doubt but it was approved at Chalcedon, as a Medium to prove that which
was doubted, to wit, that the Epistle it self, even the whole Epistle was by
the same Fathers approved; yea, and Baronius also, though he in words pretends
the contrary, yet seems to be indeed of the same judgment, for he uses the
very like reason as Vigilius does, quod Bar. an. 553. nu. 191.
ex illa, because Ibas in this Epistle professes himself to consent to the
union, therefore Patres dixerunt eam Epistolam ut Catholicam recipiendam; the
Fathers at Chalcedon said, that the Epistle (lo the Epistle, says the
Cardinal, not a part only of it) ought to be received as Catholic.

10. Which will be more plain if we observe one other point out of Vigilius
and Baronius, which may not well be omitted; for whereas all contained in any
part of the Epistle respects things done, either before, or at, or after the
union; in none of these, if ye will believe them, is this writing heretical,
or against the faith; for what was done before the union, though therein much
be spoken against Cyrill, and the Ephesine Council, and Cyrill called an
heretic, yet is all that, says Bar. an. 448. nu. 71. Epistola historiam
continet rerum gestarum inter Iohannem and Cyrillum, et quae inter eos
transacta essent, refere, etc.
Baronius, spoken by way of an historical narration, as declaring what was
done, not as allowing that which was done; ut ex hac part nihil adversus
Cyrillum obloquutus videatur, that in this part there is no wrong done to
Cyrill. At the union, or when it was concluded, then was Ibas reconciled to
Cyrill, and received to the communion of the Church, and so would not write
against the faith, so teaches the Cardinal; Ibas, says An. eodem. nu. 59.
he, took part with Nestorius, usque ad tempus per Paulum Emissenum; until
the time that the union was made by Paul Bishop of Emisa, quando ipse sicut
alij, communicare cum S. Cyrillo, and Ecclesia Catholica caepit; at which time
Ibas, as the rest, begun to communicate with Cyrill, and with the Catholic
Church. Vigilius Vigil. Constable. nu. 192.
notes the same, and out of him Baronius seems to have borrowed it. By Paulus
Bishop of Emisa, John, atque omnes orientales Episcopi, and all the Eastern
Bishops, (then Ibas among them) returned to concord with Cyrill. And Baronius
further by the Epistle it self makes this plain, for by it, says Bar. an.
448. nu. 75.
he, is declared, that Ibas, though before that time he had doated, tunc
temporis fuisse Catholicum, yet then (to wit, when he writ this) he was a
Catholic; and Ibas writ this Epistle, eodem Ba. an. 553. nu. 211
momento pacis initae, at the very time and moment when the peace was made and
concluded after which he never spoke one undecent word against Cyrill: so at
the time of the union being a Catholic, he would not oppugn or write against
the faith; much less after the time of the union, for after that time Vigilius
Vig. Constable. nu. 194
testifies, that Ibas remained still a catholic, and in the catholic
communion, usque ad exitum even to his dying day: And Baronius expresses the
same, saying Bar. an. 553. nu. 211.
, that after the union it could not be proved, aliquod verbum indecens
adversus Cyrillum protulisse; that Ibas spoke any unseemely word against
Cyrill. Hereupon now it follows, that the whole Epistle is to be approved,
written by Ibas when he was a catholic, written with a catholic mind and
affection; by him, who both at, and after the union would not write against the
faith which himself professed, and what is spoken of matters before the union,
that is all historically narrated, not by assent approved.

11. Oh how do these men even labor and study to be miserable, and to tie
more fast the knots of those Anathemaes denounced against them by the holy
Council, which nothing but renouncing their heretical defenses of this
Epistle can ever dissolve! what will they doubt or fear to say, who would
justify that whole Epistle, as affirming nothing repugnant to the faith, (for
a narration is no assertion of that which is related) of which the holy
Council, and catholic Church has pronounced, that it is wholly heretical;
and every part, head and tail, beginning and ending, an absolute, and positive
denial of the faith? what untruth will they not avouch, who deny Ibas after
the union to have injured Cyrill, whereas the holy general Council
witnesses, and that truly, as you shall straight see, that even in this union
which Ibas mentions, he wrongeth Cyrill and all catholics more, than in any
part of his Epist. yea, more tha^ Nestorius himself ever did. But omitting for
this time all the other untruths, which are not a few in those assertions of
Vigilius and Baronius; there are two things therein, which I may not well pass
over in silence.

12. The former is, (at the consideration whereof I could not refrain from
laughter) how curious, and even superstitious the Cardinal is in calculating
the nativity of this impious Epistle, as if he had performed the office of Juno
Lucina unto it, and knew the very moment of time when this fair babe was first
brought to light: It was written, says he, eodem momento pacis initae, in
that very moment when the union was made betwixt John and Cyrill. At that very
moment? Sure the Cardinals Ephemerides, or the constellations deceived him. It
was neither written in that moment, nor in that month, nor in that year, nor
at the least two whole years after the union was concluded: for the Epistle
mentions, not only the praise of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, but his
commendation by Rambulas. Now, neither did the Nestorians so much honor, nor
did the catholics by name condemn Theodorus, till the Emperor had by his
Edict straightly forbidden the reading, writing, hearing, or having of the
books of Nestorius; till then the name and writings of Nestorius, being a
Patriarch, and of so eminent a city as Constantinople, was far more fit to
credit, and countenance their doctrines, than the name of Theodorus, being but
a Bishop, and of a very obscure and ignoble town, or corner rather, which in
likelihood had been buried in eternal oblivion, had not he by his own infamy
made it famous, as Herostratus Herostratus, ut nomen memoria sceleris
extenderet, in^endium nobilis fabricae (quod inter 7. orbis miracula unu^ erat)
manu sua struxit, sicut ipse fassus est. Sol. n. ca. 53. S^rab. li. 14. and
Val. Max. tit. de Cupidit. gloriae. lib. 8. ca. 14.
did himself by burning the temple of Diana at Ephesus: But when both the name
and books of Nestorius was now so detested by reason of the imperial Edict,
tunc caeperunt Theodori volumina circumferre, says Liberatus, then Liber. ca.
10.
they began but to disperse the writings of Theodorus, which Baronius Bar. an.
435. nu. 3.
also confesses; when the rivers, that is, Nestorius was stopped by the Emperors
law, then the Nestorians ipsum fontem aperuore, opened the very fountain,
divulging the books of Theodorus, and Diodorus. The Epistle then, mentioning
the express condemning of Theodorus, does of a certainty follow that
imperial Edict against Nestorius: That Edict was published, as by the date
Leg. ult. de haereticis eod. Theod.
appears, in August, when Theodosius was the fifteenth time Is est annus Chapter
435, ut docet Marc, in Chron. and Bar. in illum annum.
Consul. The union betwixt John and Cyrill was made the next year after the
Ephesine Council: for John writing to Xistus Bishop of Rome, and testifying
his unity Placuit and nobis quoque in sacrae synodi sententia acquiescere.
Epist. Iohannis ad Xistum. Act Conc. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 17.
and consent to Cyrill, says in that Epistle, that the Ephesine Council was
held anno proxime lapso, the year next before. The Council at Ephesus both
began and ended in the year when Antiochus Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. ca. 1. ubi
habita dicitur Synodus post Coss. 13. Theodosij, anno autem post istum
Consulatum, Antiochus and Bassus erant Consules, ut ex Marcell. in Chron. and
fastis certum est. Et to. 3. Act. Ephesians. ca. 17. literae Im per. ad Synodum datae
sunt Antiocho Consule. Caepit autem Concilium 23. die Maij eo anno. to. 2. Act.
ca 1. and finitum est post quatuor (ut Liber. ca. 7.) vel post 3. menses ut
Socrates ait. lib. 7. ca. 33. and 37.
and Bassus were Consuls Is est an. Chapter 431. Marc. in Chapter and Bar. in cum annum.
. Betwixt Valerius and Aetius, (who were next Consuls after Antiochus and
Bassus, and in whose Consulship the union was fully concluded,) and the
fifteenth Consulship of Theodosius, wherein the Edict against Nestorius was
published, are two entire Consulships An. 433. Theodosius 14. et Maximus Coss.
an. 434. Ariobinda and Aspar. Coss. an. 435. Theodosius 15. et Valent. 4. Coss.
Fasti. et Mercell. et Bar.
, as by the Fasti, and others is certain. So that it is certain, that the
Epistle which mentions the condemning by name of Theodorus, was not written
till more then two complete years after the union ended: but how long after
these two years it was, before Ibas writ it, is wholly uncertain, in
likelihood it was two or three more: for some time after the Edict must be
allowed for the Nestorians, to translate first, and then disperse the books of
Theodorus: some more after that, for the condemning of him by Rambulas: some
again after that, before Rambulas dyed, to whom Ibas succeeded in the
Bishopric of Edessa: and who writ this Epistle, when he was in possession of
that See, as both the title Fragmentum Epistola Ibae Epis^opi Edesseni. Conc.
Chalc. Act. 10.
and contents Ex quibus unus (qui Theodorum condemnat) extitit (falso alicubi
scribitur existit) nostrae civitatis tyrannus, Ibas in sua Epist. loc. citat.
tyranni autem nomine significari Rambulam testatur Liber. ca. 10. ubi sic ait.
De quo (Rabula) successor ejus Jbas in epistola sua di^i^, ^un^ (Theodorum)
praesumpsit, qui omnia praesumit, aperte in ecclesiastia anathematizare, etc.
of the Epistle declare. By all which, and if there were none else, by the last
only, that Ibas writ this, being Bishop of Edessa, it is clear, that some
good while, in likelihood three or four years, were past after the union,
before Ibas writ this Epistle, of which Baronius tells us so precisely, that it
was writ, eo momento, at the very moment, and instant when the peace was
concluded.

13. The other point, to be observed is, what manner of a Catholic Pope
Vigilius, and Cardinal Baronius have here set forth unto us. Ibas when he writ
this Epistle, is with them a Catholic, a Catholic Writer, a Catholic Bishop;
in him you shall see the lively portrature of one of their Catholics. He even
in this Epistle, written after the Union (when he was as they teach Vig. Constable.
nu. 194. and Ibam tunc temporis (cum hanc Epistolam momento ipso unionis
scripsit) Catholicum fuisse. Bar. an. 448. nu. 75.
, a Catholic) denies God to be incarnate, and Marie to be the Mother of God:
he condemns the holy Ephesine Council, and the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, he
commends Theodorus of Mopsvestia for a Preacher of the truth, while he lived,
for a Saint being dead. These are the doctrines of Ibas, all of them taught
positively, and avouched, (not as the Cardinal fancieth, historically related)
in his Epistle, as the words Vide Epistolam ipsam, and hoc clarum erit.
themselves do show, and the whole fifth Council Conc. 5. coll. 6. pa. 575. and
576.
witnesses, all taught by him, after the Union, when he was one of the Popes
and Cardinals Catholics, yea taught consonantly to the Union which Ibas then
embraced; yet Ibas teaching, writing, and maintaining all these blasphemies and
heresies, that is, oppugning with all his art and ability the whole Catholic
faith, is crowned and canonized by Vigilius and Baronius for a good Catholic.
Of such Catholics their Roman Church has great store; nay, seeing none is
now of their Church, who approves not all the Cathedral decrees of their
Popes, and therefore this of Vigilius among the rest, it hence ensues, that
none is now a Roman Catholic, that is, a member of their present Roman
Church, who approves not Ibas, such as he was when he writ this Epistle, for a
Catholic, that is, who approves not the most blasphemous heretics, and
oppugners of the whole faith, to be Catholics, and who condemns not the
Cyrillians, that is, all that maintain the Catholic faith, for heretics.

14. But still as yet the doubt concerning the Union remains: Ibas, say they,
when he writ this Epistle embraced the union with Cyrill, and none can embrace
that union but he shows himself thereby to be a Catholic. True; none can
truly and sincerely embrace that union which Cyrill made with John, the
condition whereof was the subscribing to the holy Ephesine Synod, and
condemning of Nestorius, with his doctrines, but he is and must be
acknowledged to be a good Catholic. Had Ibas approved that union or consented
unto it; Ibas had not been Ibas, he had never written that impious Epistle,
which in every part, and most of all in the end, where he speaks of the
union, is repugnant to that holy union. It is the union in Nestorianisme, the
union in oppugning and overthrowing the whole Catholic says, which Ibas when
he writ this Epistle embraced, and which in his Epistle he commends, which
that it may appear to all, we are now to unfold the mystery of that union
with Cyrill, under color whereof Ibas first, then Vigilius, and lastly
Baronius with all who hold the Popes judgment to be infallible, do very
cunningly convey their heretical doctrines, and contradict the Catholic faith.

15. The Nestorians being loath to forsake, or have it thought that any of them
did forsake their heresies, and being withal most desperately given to lying
and slandering, set forth a form of union, forged by themselves, wherein they
made Cyrill, and all who consented to him, that is, all Catholics, to condemn
their former Catholic doctrine decreed at the Ephesine Synod, and to assent to
their heresies. And, as if this had been the true union, and the conditions of
peace agreed upon betwixt Cyrill and John, they every where buzzed this into
the ears of their sectaries, and spread abroad the copies thereof, triumphing
in it, that now they had won the field, that Cyrill and all his partakers had
now consented to Nestorianisme; and that upon this consent a general union and
peace ensued in the Church. This and no other is the union which Ibas in his
Epistle embraces, and by consenting whereunto Pope Vigilius decrees, and
Baronius defends Ibas to be a Catholic, to which union whosoever consents,
or approves others, consenting to it; they do even by that one act, besides
all the rest, infallibly demonstrate themselves, not only to be Nestorians,
and to approve all the heresies and blasphemies of Nestorius, but to be in the
most base, abject, and low degree of all Nestorians, even such as by lies and
calumnies strive to uphold their heresies.

16. For proof whereof, I shall produce records above exception: and first of
all Cyrills own testimony. Acatius the worthy Bishop of Meletene hearing by
the report which the Nestorians Ex altera part quidam de palatio culpaverunt
Cyrillum, cur susceperit ab orientalibus Episcopis duarum confessionem
naturarum, quod Nestorius dixit and docuit. hoc ipsu^ Valeriano, and Acatio
videbatur. Liber. ca. 8.
had spread abroad, that Cyrill in making the union had consented to the
Nestorian doctrine of two natures (making two persons) in Christ, contrary to
his own 12. Chapters, certified Cyrill of this report: Cyrill writ unto him at
large, declaring the contrary, and assuring him, that it was but a mere
calumny devised against him: They reprove and accuse us, says he Cyril.
Epist. ad Acat. to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 8. pa. 8^4. 835.
, as if formerly, we had thought the quite contrary to those things which now
(at the union) we have written; and I understand that they object also unto us,
quod novam fidei expositionem vel symbolu^ receperimus, that we have now (at
the union) embraced a new Creed, or new exposition of the faith, rejecting that
old and venerable Creed: Thus did the Nestorians accuse Cyrill, as himself
testifies: but what answered he for himself? At stultus stulta loquitur, and
cor ejus vana meditatur, he calls them in plain terms, fools and liars: the
fool speaks foolishly, and his heart meditateth lies. And in the end he
warns Acatius not to give credit to the counterfeit Epistle, or form of
union, which the Nestorians had forged and spread abroad in his name. If any
Epistle, says he Jbid. pa. 837. a.
, be carried about as written by me, tanquam de ijs quae Ephesi acta sunt, jam
dolente, and poenitentiam agente, contemnatur: as if I did now (since the
union) sorrow and repent for those things which were done and decreed at
Ephesus, let such an Epistle be condemned: Nay the Greek is more emphaticall,
(...) scorn and deride every such writing. The like almost does Cyrill write
to Dynatus Bishop of Nicopolis, who upon the Nestorians slanderous reports,
suspected as it seems the very same of Cyrill, as Acatius did. Cyrill Cyrill.
Epist. ad Dynatum quae est 38. and extat tom. 5. Act. Ephesians. ca. 16.
having declared the certain truth of these matters unto him, says in the
end, It is needful that you should know the clear truth of these matters;
lest some men who do vainly (...).
and falsely report one thing for another, should trouble any of the brethren:
Perinde ac si nos quae contra Nestorij blasphemias scripsimus, retractaremus
(...).
, as if we had (upon the union) recalled, revoked or denied, those things
which we have written before against the blasphemies of Nestorius.

17. Besides these indubitate testimonies of Cyrill, the Nestorians themselves
do manifest this their calumny: For although John and those Eastern Bishops
who in their Council at Antioch, subscribed to that holy profession of faith
which was sent from Cyrill unto them, who were by far the greater part, and
who therefore are counted the Eastern Church, though these I say, were as they
well deserved, received into the Catholic Communion, when the union was
concluded, yet is it most untrue which Vigilius affirms, and takes it for a
ground of his error touching Ibas, that omnes Vig. Constable. nu. 192
orientales Episcopi per Paulum Emisenum ad concordiam redierunt, that all the
Eastern Bishops by Paulus Emisenus returned to the unity and communion of the
Church. They did not all, not Helladius, not Eutherius, not Hemerius, not
Dorotheus, for whose restoring to their Sees, (for they were deposed) Paulus
did earnestly labor with Cyrill, but not being able to prevail for them;
manserunt in eodem schismate, in quo etiam nunc perseverant, they continued in
their former schism, as rent from the Church: and so they do now also remain;
nor was there in the covenants of peace, any mention of them, as Cyrill Cyr.
Epist. ad Dynatum.
expressly affirms. But I will only insist upon two of the principal
sticklers in the Nestorian heresy, and who most concern our present cause:
Theodoret and Ibas.

18. Theodoret believing the reports of his fellow Nestorians that the
Catholics at the time of the Union had revoked their former doctrines, and
consented to Nestorianisme, insulted over them in a public oration Quae extat
in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 559.
at Antioch, before Domnus, in this manner: Vbi sunt dicentes, quod Deus est
qui crucifixus est? where are those that say that he was God, who was
crucified? God was not crucified, but the man Jesus Christ, he who is of the
seed of David, was crucified: Christ is the Son of David, but he is the
temple of the son of God. Non jam est contentio, Oriens and Aegyptus sub uno
jugo est, There is now no contention, the East, and Egypt (that is, all who
hold as Cyrill did) are now both under one yoke. Thus triumphed Theodoret over
the Catholics, supposing (as the Nestorians slanderously gave out) that Cyrill
and all that held with him, that is, all Catholics, had submitted themselves,
to the yoke of their Nestorian heresy, that Christ is not God, nor that God
was either borne of Mary, or suffered on the Cross. And this being spoken by
Theodoret, after the death of Cyrill, which was twelve Nam unio facta an. 432.
Cyril. autem obijt an. 444. Barin illo ann.
years after the union made, does demonstrate the obstinate and malicious
hatred of the Nestorians against the truth, who notwithstanding Cyrill had
often by words, by writings, testified that report, to be nothing else, but a
slanderous untruth, yet in all that time, would not be persuaded, to desist
from that calumny, but still let it pass for current among them, and insulted,
as if Cyrill and the Catholics at the time of the union had condemned their
former faith, and consented to Nestorianisme. So hard it is to reclame those
who by self-will are wedded to any heretical opinion.

19. The other is Ibas, the Popes own Catholic doctor, whom, at that very
time when he writ this Epistle (which was long after the Union made betwixt
John, and Cyrill) to have embraced no other then this slanderous union, or
union in Nestorianisme, those very words in the later part of his Epistle, out
of which Vigilius, and Baronius would prove him to be a Catholic, even those
words I say, do so fully and manifestly demonstrate, that you will say, if not
swear, that nothing but the love of Nestorianisme could so far blind them,
as to defend that part of his Epistle, or undertake by it to prove Ibas to be a
Catholic. The words of Ibas are these Habentur tum in Conc. Chalc. Act. 10.
tum in Con. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 561.
. After that John had received the Emperors letters, compelling him to make
agreement with Cyrill; he sent the most holy Bishop Paulus of Emisa, writing
by him a true profession of faith, and denouncing unto him, that if Cyrill
would consent to that profession, and anathematize those who say that the
Godhead did suffer (which opinion the Nestorians slandered Cyrill, and all
Catholic to hold) and also those who say that there is but one nature (that
is, one natural subsistence or person) of the divinity and humanity in Christ;
then would he communicate with Cyrill. Now it was the will of God, who always
takes care for his Church, which he has redeemed with his own blood, to
subdue the heart of the Egyptian (that is Cyrill) that he presently consented
to the faith, and embraced it, and anathematized all who believed otherwise. So
they (John and Cyrill) communicating together, the contention was taken away,
peace was made in the Church, and now there is no schism but peace, as of late
there was. And that you may know what words were written, by the most holy
Archbishop John, and what answer he received back from Cyrill, I have to this
my writing adjoined their very Epistles, that your Holiness reading them may
know, and declare to all our Fathers that love peace, that the contention is
now ceased, and the partition wall is now taken away, and that they (he
means Cyrill and the Catholics) who had before seditiously enveied against
the living (Nestorius) and the dead (Theodorus) are now confounded, making
satisfaction for their faults, and contraria docentes suae priori doctrinae,
and now teach the contrary to their former doctrine. For none now dare say,
that there is one nature (that is, one natural subsistence or person) of the
divinity and humanity, but they confess and believe, both in the temple, and
in him who dwells in the temple, who is one Son, Jesus Christ. And this I
have written to your Sanctity, out of that great affection which I bear to
you, knowing that your holiness does exercise it self, night and day, in the
doctrine of God, that you might be profitable unto many. Thus far are the
words of Ibas, written unto Maris an heretic Ad Marin Persam, haereticum. Con
5. Coll. 8. pa. 587. b.
of Persia, and writ not as a private letter, but as an Encyclicall Epistle to
be showed and notified to all that love peace, that is, according to their
heretical dialect, to all that loved Nestorianisme in Persia, and in the
places adjoining, to be a comfort and encouragement to them, to persist in
their heresy, to which even Cyrill himself, and all Catholics had upon
better advice, at the time of the union with John, consented.

20. In which words any who has though but half an eye of a Catholic, cannot
choose but clearly discern, the very poison, and malice of all the heresies,
and practices of the Nestorians, to be condensate and compact together. First,
here is expressed their maine heresy, that Christ is not God, as the house is
not the man who dwells in the house. Secondly, is set down a notorious
slander against Cyrill and the Catholics, that they at the union made with
John, did anathematize all who held one natural subsistence, or one person to
be in Christ, that is, in effect did accurse all Catholics, and the whole
Catholic Faith. Thirdly, it is a notable untruth, that Cyril made the union
with John upon this condition, that he should anathematize all who hold Christ
to be one person, the condition was quite contrary, to wit, that John, and
they on his part, should anathematize all who denied Christ to be one, or who
affirmed him to be two persons. Fourthly, it is a slander, that Cyrill writ an
Epistle to that effect, as if he assented to that condition mentioned by Ibas.
The Epistle is testified by Cyrill himself not to be his, but a counterfaite
writing, forged by the Nestorians. Fifthly, it is a Calumny, that Cyrill and
the rest who condemned Nestorius and Theodorus were seditious persons: it is as
much as to say, that the holy Ephesine Council, was a conspiracy and
seditious conventicle. Sixthly, it is an unexcusable slander and untruth, that
Cyrill and they who held with him, that is, the Catholics, that they were
confounded, and repented of their former doctrines, or writ contrary unto
them. These, besides diverse the like, are the flowers wherewith the latter part
of that Epistle is decked, even that part which Pope Vigilius and Baronius do
so magnify, the one defining, the other defending, that by it Ibas ought to be
judged a Catholic, and his Epistle received as Catholic: This part above all
the rest, is so stuffed with heresies and slanders, that I do constantly
affirm, that none of all their Roman Alcumists can extract or distill one
dram of Catholic doctrine, or any goodness out of it. Only Pope Vigilius,
being, as I have often said, blinded with Nestorianisme, and Cardinal
Baronius, being infatuated with the admiration of their Pontifical infallible
Chair, they two by the new found art of Transubstantiating, wherein that sect
excels Iannes and Iambres, and all the inchanters in the world, they by one
spell or charm of a few words pronounced out of that holy chair, can turn a
serpent into a staff, bread into a living body, darkness into light, an
heretic into a Catholic, yea the very venom and poison of all
Nestorianisme, into most wholesome doctrines of the Catholic faith: such, as
that none may write, speak, or think ought to the contrary.

21. See ye not now, as I foretold that you should, both the Pope; and the
Cardinal; marching under the banner of Nestorius, and like two worthy
Generals, holding up a standard to the Nestorians, and building in the Roman
Church, but very cunningly and artificially, a Capitol for Nestorianisme? They
forsooth will not in plain terms say that Nestorianisme is the Catholic
faith, that Christ is not God, that the Son of Mary is not the Son of God,
that Cyrill is an heretic, and the holy Ephesine Council heretical: Fie,
these are too Beoticall, and blunt, they could never have gotten any one to
taste of that cup of Nestorianisme, had they dealt so plainly, or simply
rather; Rome and Italy, are Schools of better manners, and of more civilitie
and subtlety: you must learn there to speak heresy in the Atticke Dialect,
in smooth, plausible, sweet and sugared terms; you must say the union which
Ibas in his Epistle embraces is the Catholic union, that Ibas by embracing
that union was a Catholic, and ought to be judged a Catholic; that whosoever
embraces not this union, which the Pope has defined to be the Catholic
communion, cannot be a Catholic: or if you speak more briefly and
Laconically, you may say, the Popes decrees and Cathedral judgments in causes
of faith are infallible. Say but either of these, you say as much as either
Theodorus or Nestorius did, you deny Christ to be God; You condemn the
Ephesine Council, you speak true Nestorianisme, but you speak it not after
the rude and rusticke fashion, but in that purest Ciceronian phrase which is
now the refined language of the Roman Church. By approving this union, or the
Popes decree in this cause of Ibas, you drink up at once all the blasphemies
and heresies of Nestorius, even the very dregs of Nestorianisme; yet your
comfort is, though it be rank poison, you shall now take it as an antidote,
and sovereign potion, so cunningly tempered by Pope Vigilius, and with such a
grace and gravity commended, reached, and brought, even in the golden cup of
Babylon, by the hands of Cardinal Baronius unto you, that it kills, not
only without any sense of pain, but with a sweet delight also, even in a
pleasing slumber and dream of life; bringing you, as on a bed of down, unto
the pit of death.

22. See here again their Synonia^ art. Oh how nice and scrupulous is Baronius
in approving, or allowing Vigilius to approve the former part of this Epistle
of Ibas? The Epistle Bar. an. 553. nu. 192.
was in no other part, but only in the last concerning the union approved:
Why? there is nothing at all in the former, no heresy, or impiety set down in
it, which does not certainly and unavoydably ensue upon the approving of that
union in Nestorianisme, which Ibas embraces in the latter part. Why then must
the latter, and not the former be approved? Forsooth in the former part Vid.
Epist. Jba loc. cit.
the blasphemies of the Nestorians are in too plain and blunt a manner
expressed; Cyrill is an Apollinarian; The twelve Chapters of Cirill, omni
impietate plena sunt, are full of all impiety. The Ephesine Council unjustly
deposed Nestorius, and approved the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, which are
contraria verae fidei, and such like. It is not for a Pope or a Cardinal to
approve such plain and perspicuous heresies; they might as well say, We are
heretics, we are Nestorians: which kind of Beoticisme is far from the
civility of the Roman Court: But in the latter part the heresies of Nestorius
and all his blasphemies are offered in the show of union with Cyrill, and
communion with the Church; and coming under the vaunt of that union, as in the
womb of the Trojane horse, the Pope and the Cardinal may now with honor
receive them; the union (and with, or in it all Nestorianisme) must be brought
into the City, the Pope and the Cardinal will themselves put their hands to
this holy work, pedibusque rotarum subijciunt lapsus, and stupea vincula collo
intendunt, themselves will drag and hale it with their own shoulders to within
the walls: nor is that enough, it must be placed in the very Roman Capitol, in
the holy temple, and consecrated to God, and that the Pope himself will do by
an Apostolical and infallible constitution: by that immutable decree is this
union set up as the Catholic union, Et monstrum infoelix sacrata sistitur
arce; this unholy and unhappy union is now embraced, by which all the gates of
the City of God are set wide open for all heresies to rush in at their
pleasure, and make havocke of the Catholic says.

23. Now it is not unworthy our labor to consider whether Vigilius and
Baronius did in mere ignorance, or wittingly embrace this union mentioned by
Ibas, that is in truth, all Nestorianisme. And for Vigilius, if any will be so
favorable as to interpret all this to have proceeded of ignorance, I will not
greatly contend with him. It is as great a crime for their Roman Apollo, and
as foul a disgrace to their infallible Chair upon ignorance to decree an
heresy, as to do it upon wilful obstinacy; yet to confess the truth, I am
more than of opinion that Vigilius not upon ignorance, but out of a settled
judgment and affection which he bare to Nestorianisme decreed this union, and
with it the doctrines of Nestorius to be embraced: And that which induces me
so to judge, is the great diligence, care, and circumspection which Vigilius
used to inform both himself and others in this matter; for besides that this
cause was debated, and continually discussed in the Church for the space of six
years and more, before the Pope published this his Apostolical Constitution,
(all which time Vigilius was a chief party in this cause) himself in his
decree witnesses concerning this third Chapter, or Epistle of Ibas, that he
examined it, diligenti Vig. Constable. nu. 186.
investigatione, by a diligent inquisition; yea, that he perused his books
most Gesta Concilij Chalc. diligentissime perquirentes. Jbid.
diligently for this point, and concludes both of it, and the rest, that he
decreed these things, cum Ibid. nu. 208.
omni undique cautela atque diligentia; with all possible care and diligence
that could be used: And because, plus vident oculi quam oculus, he added to
his own the judgment of an whole Synod of Bishops, all of them bending their
eyes, wits, and industry to find out the truth in this cause. Further yet
Vigilius speaks in this cause of Ibas not doubtfully, but in words proceeding
from certain knowledge and resolute judgment, dilucide, Nu. 186.
aperteque reperimus, evidenter Nu. 190.
advertimus, apertissimum Ibid.
noscuntur praebuisse consensum, evidenter Nu. 193.
declaratur, in Iba Episcopo nihil in confessione fidei fuisse reprehensum,
illud Nu. 195.
indubitanter patet, apertissima Nu. 196.
lucet veritate ex verbis Epistolae, constat Nu. 198.
eundem Ibam communicatorem Cyrilli fuisse toto vitae ejus tempore, luce
clarius Nu. 207.
demonstratur: All which do show, that Vigilius spoke out of his settled
judgment and resolution, after most diligent examination of this cause. Now
that the whole Epistle, and, of all parts, that especially where Ibas
entreats of the union, that this is full of Nestorianisme, is so evident,
that scarce any, though but of a shallow judgment, who does with ordinary
diligence peruse and ponder the same, can otherwise choose than observe, and see
it. Wherefore I cannot think but that Vigilius both saw and knew that part of
the Epistle, above all the rest, to contain the doctrines of Nestorius, and an
approbation of them all, and that by approving the union there mentioned, he
approved all the doctrines of the Nestorians.

24. But for cardinal Baronius, that he in defending the latter part of this
Epistle, as does Vigilius before him, that in striving so earnestly by it to
prove Ibas to have been a catholic, and his Epistle to be orthodoxall, at
least in the latter part, because Ibas assented to the union mentioned therein;
that he I say did herein wittingly, willingly, and obstinately labor to
maintain the condemned heresy of Nestorius: for my own part I cannot almost
doubt, nor, as I think, will his best friends when they have well considered
of his words: He entreating of this matter touching Ibas and his Epistle, in
another place, where this Constitution of Vigilius comes not to the scanning,
and so did not dimne his sight, ingenuously there confesses, that this Epistle
is heretical, written by a Nestorian, written of purpose to disgrace Cyrill,
and the catholics, as if they at the union had recanted their former
doctrines. But let us hear his own words.

25. He having showed Bar. an. 432. nu. 68. absque condemnatione suorum
Capitulorum, cuncta arbitrio Cyrilli gesta sunt.
that the union was made in every point according to Cyrils mind, and without
the condemning of his twelve Chapters, adds this, They An. eod. nu. 69.
who favored Nestorius spread abroad a rumor, that Cyrill had in all things
consented unto John, and condemned his former doctrines: and a little after
declaring Ibid. nu. 70.
how the Nestorians did slander Cyrill, he says, Besides others, who took
part with Nestorius, even Theodoret also, ijsdem aggressus est Cyrillum urgere
calumnijs, vexed Cyrill with the same slanders, that he had condemned his own
Chapters; and then coming to this Epistle of Ibas, he thus writes, Who Ibid.
nu. 71.
so desires to see further the sleights of the Nestorians, let him read the
Epistle, which is said to be the Epist. of Ibas unto Maris, wherein any may see
the Nestorian fellow insulting and triumphing, as if the cause had been
adjudged to him, and jactantem Cyrillum poenitentem, tandem recantasse
palinodiam, and vaunting that Cyrill repenting himself of his former
doctrines, did now at last revoke the same, and sing a new song. And this the
author of that Epistle writ, and sent abroad as a Circular Epistle, to be read
throughout the Provinces, pro solatio eorum, and ignominia Catholicorum; for
the comfort of the Nestorians, and for the disgrace of Catholics, Thus
Baronius. Professing as you see, that he knew this Epistle to be heretical,
and that even in the latter end, which Vigilius and himself defends as
orthodoxall, yea, eve^ in that very point touching the union mentioned in that
Epistle, to be a mere calumny against Cyrill, and the Catholics, as if they,
by making the union, had consented to Nestorianisme, and renounced the Ephesine
Council, and the Catholic faith.

26. Seeing now the Card. knew all this to be true, and yet afterward for
defense of Vigilius and his Constitution, teaches and maintains, that by
embracing the union mentioned in this Epistle, Ibas was a Catholic, and was
for this cause by the Council at Chalcedon, and ought by all others to be
adjudged a Catholic, is it not evident that the Cardinal wittingly and
willingly maintains hereby the union with the Nestorians to be the catholic
union, and so the doctrines of the Nestorians to be the catholic faith? for
this union mentioned in the Epistle, is, as the Cardinal professes, an union
in Nestorianisme, an union with Cyrill, having now renounced the Ephesine
Council, and the catholic faith.

27. Only there is one quirke or subtilty in the Cardinals words, which may
not without great wrong unto him be omitted, where he acknowledges this
Epistle to be Videre est Nestorianum hominem, etc. Bar. an. 432. nu. 71.
heretical, and heretical in this point of the union, there he will not Non
esse Ibae comperta. Ibid.
have it to be the Epistle of Ibas, for then by it Ibas should be judged a
Nestorian, which would quite overthrow the Constitution of Vigilius: when in
the other Vigilius afferere voluit ex ed Epistola Ibam esse recipiendum, in qua
nimirum ipse testatur se amplecti pacem ecclesiae, qua recepta, necesse fuerit
eundem probare Catholicum. Bar, an. 533. nu. 191.
place he defends, as Vigilius decrees, that Ibas by this Epistle, and by
consenting to this union was a Catholic, and ought to be judged a Catholic,
there the Epistle is truly the Epistle of Ibas, but then consenting to this
union is the note of a Catholic: So both this Epistle is the Epistle of Ibas,
and it is not the Epistle of Ibas; and to consent to the union herein
mentioned, is the note of a Nestorian heretic; and to consent to the same
union, is the note of a good Catholic. Thus does the Cardinal play, and sport
himself in contradictions, and as the wind blows and turns him, so does he
turn his note also: If the wind blow to Alexandria, and turn the Cardinals
face toward Cyrill, then the union is heretical, lest Cyrill who condemned
it, should be condemned for an heretic. If the wind blow from Afric, and
turn the Cardinals face toward Rome and Pope Vigilius, then the union is
Catholic, lest Vigilius approving this union, should not be thought a
Catholic. Or because a Cardinal so learned, so renouned as Baronius, may not
be thought to contradict himself, or speak amiss in either place, let both
sayings be admitted for true, and then it unavoydably follows, that by the
Cardinals divinity, and in his judgment, Nestorianisme is the Catholic faith;
which aptly and easily will accord both his sayings, for so the author of this
Epistle by approving this union shall be a perfect Nestorian, as in the one
place is affirmed; and by approving this union shall be withal a perfect
Catholic, as in the other place is avouched.

28. Besides this confession of Baronius, which is clear enough, there is yet
another means to demonstrate that the Cardinal by defending this latter part
of the Epistle touching the union, did wittingly and wilfully maintain the
condemned heresy of Nestorius: for the fifth general Council, approved, as
we have showed, by the judgment of the whole Catholic Church, has adjudged
this very part Posteriora enim inserta Epistolae, majori impietate plena sunt,
Cyrillum et similia ei sapientes injuriantia, et omnino impiam sectam Nestorij
vindicantia. Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 564. a. Scimus et nos haec ita subse. quuta
est, etc. Ibid.
of the Epistle, the defense whereof Baronius has undertaken, not only to be
heretical, but to be more full of blasphemies than any of the rest; it has
Qui dicit eam rectam esse, vel partem ejus. Coll. 8. pa. 587. b.
further judicially defined all that defend either this, or any part of that
Epistle, to be heretics, and for such it has anathematized them, yea, all
that write Eos qui scripserunt velscribunt pro ea. Ibid.
eirher for it, or for them. Now the Cardinal had read the whole fifth
Council, as appears by that summary collection Extat in Annal. Bar an. 553.
a. nu. 33. ad 217.
which he has made of the Acts, and of every Collation thereof; nay, he had
not only read these Acts, but pried earnestly with a jealous and carping eye,
into every corner and sentence thereof, as you shall perceive hereafter; and
therefore it is doubtless that he knew the judgment of this fifth Council,
concerning all that defend any part of this Epistle, and specially the latter
part, which concerns the union. Neither only did he know that to be the
judgment of this fifth Council, but (as himself An. 553. nu. 229.
expressly witnesses) of all both Popes, and general Councels which followed
it, all of them approving this fifth Council, and the judgment thereof; whence
it is clear, that Baronius knew certainly himself by defending this part of
the Epistle touching the union, to defend that which by the judgment of the
fifth Council, and the whole Catholic Church ever since has been condemned
for heretical, and the defenders of it anathematized as heretics: yet such
was the Cardinals zeal, and ardent affection to Nestorianisme, that against
the judgment of the whole Church known unto him, yea, known for this very
cause to anathematize him, yet he defends the union there mentioned, and the
latter part of that Epistle, wherein it is mentioned, that is in truth, all the
blasphemies of Nestorius, chosing rather, by adhering to Vigilius and his
heretical decree, to be condemned, and anathematized by the whole Catholic
Church for a Nestorian heretic, than by forsaking the defense of Vigilius, and
his decree, to condemn this latter part of the Epistle of Ibas, touching the
union, which contains in it the very quintessence of all Nestorianisme.

29. I think it is now sufficiently apparent by that which we have already
said, that the union which Ibas in his Epistle mentions and embraces, and
which Vigilius first, and after him Baronius approves, is not that true union
in the Catholic faith, which Cyrill made with John and other Eastern Bishops;
but only an union in Nestorianisme, and in denying the Catholic faith, to
which the Nestorians falsely reported and slandered Cyrill, with the other
Catholics, to have consented, and thereby to have condemned and anathematized
that truth, which the year before they had decreed at Ephesus; Yet for the
full satisfaction of all, and clearing of all doubts which may arise, I will
add one thing further which will much more manifest both the calumny of the
Nestorians, and the constancy of Saint Cyrill, and that is, upon what color or
pretense the Nestorians raised this slanderous report, which I am the more
desirous to explane, because the narration of this matter is extremely
confounded, and entangled by Baronius and Binius, and that, as may be feared,
even of set purpose, that they might either quite discourage others (as almost
they had done my self) in the search of this truth, or at least misleade them
into such bypath, that they should not find the truth in this matter.

30. When Theodosius the religious Emperor had written by Aristolaus that
earnest letter to John, and the other Eastern Bishops, persuading, yea,
commanding them to consent with Cyrill, and embrace the Catholic communion;
they upon the Emperors motion sought indeed to make an union with Cyrill, but
they labored to effect it by drawing Cyrill unto their bent, and to consent
unto their heresies. This they first attempted by a letter of Acatius Bishop of
Berea, willing Apud Acatium Bercensem Episcop^^ congressi, scribi ad me
curarunt, pacem concordiamque nisi eo modo quem praescriberent, fieri non
debere, Epist. Cyrilli ad Acatium, quae est 29. and ext. tom. 5. Act. Ephesians.
ca. 7. and idem habetur in Epist. Cyrilli ad Dynatum tom. eod. ca. 16.
him to write, in all their names unto Cyrill, that no unity, or concord could
be made, but according to those conditions which themselves should prescribe:
And the condition prescribed by them, was that Cyrill should Vrgebat ut omnibus
quae adversus Nestorium scripsimus abolitis and velut inutilibus rejectis, etc.
Epist. ad Dynat. and similia habentur, in Epist. Cyrill. ad Acat. locis cit.
abolish and condemn all that ever he had written against Nestorianisme, and
so both his twelve Chapters, and the Ephesine decree, and all the like. Cyrill
answered Cyrill. Epistola ad Dynat. and ad Acat.
with great confidence: rem eos postulare quae fieri plane non posset, that
they required a matter utterly impossible, because what he had written
touching that matter, was rightly written, and in defense of the true faith,
and therefore that he could not either condemn, or deny what he had written.

31. When it succeeded not this first way, they next attempted to effect the
union by Paulus Miserunt Alexandriam Paulum Episcopum Emisenoru^ etc. ibid.
Bishop of Emisa, whom they sent to Alexandria, to negotiate for them both by
words, and by a second letter which they sent by him. And although they were
not in this second so violent as in the former of Acatius, yet they writ At
tulit quaedam parum decore and commode proposita, ibid.
some things therein also, not sitting, nor allowable; for they reproved the
holy Ephesine Council, as if things had been spoken, and done therein amiss;
What did Cyrill answer? Hujusmodi epistolas equidem non admisi, truly I did not
admit or allow of this their second Epistle neither, seeing therein they did
add new contumelies, who should have asked pardon for the old. But where as
Paulus did very earnestly excuse the matter, affirming, and that upon his oath
also, that their purpose was not to exasperate Cyrill, but to accord with him,
dilectionis gratia excusationem admisi, I in charity was content to admit of
this excuse. And Paulus being very desirous to effect the union, consented to
anathematize Nestorius and his heresies; to consent also to the deposing of
Nestorius, and the electing of Maximianus in his place: which when Paulus had
performed, and subscribed suo chyrographo, with his own handwriting, (which
was all that either the Emperor or Cyrill required) ad synaxim recepi, I
received him to the communion of the Church. But when Paulus would further have
persuaded Cyrill, that seeing he was sent in the name of the rest, and had
subscribed this, pro omnibus, and tanquam ex communi omnium orientalium
persona, for them all, and as it were in the person of them all: and therefore
labored with Cyrill, that this his subscription might satisfy for the others
also, and that he would require no more of them, but be content with their
letters which by him they had sent; nulla ratione id fieri passus sum, says
Cyrill, I could by no means endure that: I told Paulus also, that his
subscription in condemning Nestorius and his heresies, Ipsi soli sufficere,
could satisfy but only for himself, but as for the rest, John Modis omnibus
opus esse dixi ut Johannes scriptam de ^ his confessionem coleret, etc. Cyrill.
Epist. ad Acatium.
, and they must personally, and for themselves subscribe; or else they could
not be received into communion: whereupon Cyrill writ an orthodoxall
profession Nisi chartam qua significavi, si Johannes illi subscripserit, tum
communionem illis reddite. Cyrill. Epist. ad Dynat.
to that same effect, whereunto Paulus had subscribed, and sent it unto John,
requiring his personal subscription to it. This was the sum of all that was
done by Paulus at his first coming.

32. Paulus returning to Antioch, brought this resolute answer of Cyrill, to
John, and the Bishops of his Synod. They seeing no other means to make an
union, but only by consenting to Cyrill; and seeing that Paulus, whom they put
in trust as their agent, had both himself consented, and further undertaken
that John and they should likewise consent unto the same which he had done,
did now at length yield Cum Johannes subscripsisset, caeterique qui majore
authoritate apud ipsum erant, Cyrill. Epist. ad Dynat.
to all the demands of Cyrill: and for an assurance of their sincerity therein,
they writ a Synodall Ea extat inter Epist. Cyrilli Epist. 27. and in Act. Conc.
Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 5.
and Encyclicall Epistle unto Cyrill, which they likewise sent unto Pope
Sixtus, to Maximianus, and other principal Bishops, wherein they first set
down a very sound, true and orthodoxall confession of their faith, and then
testify their willing assent and subscription, to the deposing Placuit nobis
Nestorium pro deposito habere, pravasque illius prophanasque novitates
anathematizare. Epist. Synodalis Iohannis Antioch, and Synodi Antioch. to. 5.
Act. Ephesians. ca. 5.
of Nestorius, and the condemning of his heresies. Miserunt autem eandem
Epistolam, quam ad me scripserunt ad Xistum and Maximianum, Cyrill. Epist. ad
Dynat.


33. This Synodall letter they sent to Cyrill by Paulus Nos Dominum nostrum
Paulum ad sanctitatem tuam mittendum duximus Epist. Ioh. and Synod. Antioch.
loco jam citato, and ex charta, quam Dominus meus Paulus nunc attulit evidenter
cognoscimus. Continet enim inculpatam fidei confessionem. Cyrill. Epist. 28.
quae est ad Johannem Antioch. and extat tom. 5. Act. Ephesians. ca. 6.
Bishop of Emisa, that he might make a final peace, and union. At whose
coming to Alexandria this second time, and bringing with him this undoubted
testimony of the orthodoxie of John, and the chief of the Eastern Bishops,
and that they had now consented to all which either the Emperor, or Cyrill
required of them, the union was fully concluded on every part, and peace made
in the Church: In token whereof Paulus preached at Alexandria, in the month of
December Nempe 29. mensis Chiath. i. Decembris. to. 6. Act. Ephesians. ca. 13. in
tit.
, making there before Cyrill, and the whole City, so orthodoxall a profession
of the faith, that the people for joy interrupting him four or five times,
exclamed Ibid. to. 6. ca. 13.
, Been venisti Orthodoxe, O Orthodox Paul thou art welcome to us, Cyrill is
orthodoxall, Paulus is orthodoxall: and Cyrill for his part writ that learned
Epistle Epist. Cyrilli 28. qua extat tom. 5. Act. Ephesians. ca. 6:
in congratulation unto John, and the rest which begins, Let the Heavens
rejoice, and let the earth be glad, publishing it as an hymn of joy and
thanksgiving for the union now effected in the Church, singing Glory unto God,
and peace among men.

34. This is the true narration of the whole proceedings betwixt Cyrill, and
the Eastern Bishops touching this matter of the union, as they who diligently
peruse the Epistles of Cyril to Acatius Bishop of Melitene, to Dynatus, and
John, and compare therewith the Epistle of John, and the Synod of Antioch sent
to Cyrill and Xistus, will clearly perceive, whence three things may be
observed: The first is the most shameless dealings of the Nestorians, who
slandered Cyrill to have at the time of the union consented in all points unto
them, and to their heresy, and to have condemned his former doctrine, and the
Ephesine Council, whereas the quite contrary was true. He was most inflexible
and constant in maintaining the true faith; more inexorable than Aeacus, or
rather, as Moses Exodus 10.26.
would not consent to Pharaoh, no, not in the least hoof, so would not Cyrill
yield one heire-bredth unto them, but brought them to subscribe wholly, and in
every point, to that which he desired.

35. The second is, the occasion which the Nestorians took for their pretended
calumny: They knew that John and the Eastern Bishops had written to Cyrill,
willing him to condemn his own Chapters; yea, that they had writ so
resolutely, that unless Cyrill did so, they would not consent unto any peace,
or union. Thus much was true, as by the letter of Acatius Bishop of Berea to
Cyrill is evident: Now they saw that Cyrill afterward, and in that very year
consented with John, and made union with him, whereupon they boasted that
Cyrill did it upon the condition required by John at the first, which was the
condemning of his former doctrine; wilfully and maliciously concealing both how
Cyrill utterly denied to yield unto them, or to that condition required by
them; and how at the length John, and so many of them as were received into
communion, consented wholly unto him, and subscribed to the Catholic faith.
All this they quite suppress; and, to color the matter, they forged Si qua
Epistola a quibusdam circumferatur tanquam a me, de ijs quae Ephesi acta sunt
jam d^lente, and poenitentia^ agente, perscripta, ea quoque contemnatur.
Cyrill. Epist. ad Acat. in fine.
a letter under the name of Cyrill, as consenting to condemn his own
doctrine; which no doubt was the same letter that Ibas in his Epistle enclosed,
and sent unto Maris the heretic.

36. The third is, how Baronius has perverted the narration of this union, and
strengthened the calumny of the Nestorians by his misreporting of the same:
But first we must set down the Cardinals words; Upon the Emperors letters
(says he Ba. an. 432. nu. 54
) sent unto John, commanding him, and the rest, to agree with Cyrill, John and
the Eastern Bishops met together in a Synod at Antioch, and they agreed to
Consultius deliberatur, ratam habendam esse damnatione haeresis Nestorianae.
Ibid.
ratify the condemnation of Nestorius, and his heresy, as the Emperor had
required them to do; and so to make union with the Pope, with Cyrill, and with
the Catholic Church. According to this agreement they made a Synodall decree,
and Synodall Johannes ex Synodo tunc Antiochiae habita, de damnatione Nestorij,
et ejus haeresi, Synodalem dedit Epistolam. Ib.
Epistle, containing the condemning of Nestorius, with his heresies; and an
orthodoxal profession which they sent to Pope Sixtus, and other Catholic
Bishops, to testify their communion with them al Hactenus Epistola comm^^is
omnibus quidem Episcopis Caetholicae fidei, qua Catholicam Ecclesiarum omnium
communionem nanciscerentur. Bar. an. eodem nu. 56.
. This Epistle Epistola illa extat to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 17.
by the way, is in effect the Nam in utraque damnatur Nestorius, et illius
haeresis, et approbatur Synodus Ephesina, vide, et confer Epistolat.
same which Paulus Bishop of Emisa brought, at his second coming into
Alexandria. The Cardinal proceeding, tells us, that this Epistle was sent as
common to all, save Dedit Epistolam ad Sixtum. Bar. an. 432. nu. 54. quae erat
communis omnibus Episcopis Catholicis. Ibid. nu. 56
only to Cyrill; but as for Cyrill, against whom they had most bitter enmity,
aliter Ibid. nu. 57.
sibi agendum putarunt; they would take another course, and deal after another
manner with him; and mark, I pray you, how that was, they would so deal with
him, ut Ibid.
ab eo exigerent Catholicae fidei confessonem, qua, sua Capitula velut erronea
condemnaret; so that they would exact of him a Catholic confession, wherein
he should condemn his own twelve Chapters as erroneous: and when Cyrill
refused so to do, in the next place they send Paulus Bishop of Emisa, as their
Legate, unto Cyrill, qui si posset ab eo quod petitum antea furat, extorqueret;
who should, if by any means he could, wring from Cyrill that which before
they required; (to wit, the condemning of his Chapters;) but if he could not
do that, nor prevail therein with Cyrill, tunc de damnatione Nestorij literas
ei redderet; then they willed Paulus to deliver unto Cyrill their Synodall
letters, written by them, containing the condemnation of Nestorius, and his
heresy. Thus Baronius; and Bin. Notis in Co^c. Antioch. tempore Sixti.
Binius traceth him in these steps.

37. In which narration of the Cardinal, besides many untruths wherewith it is
stuffed, there are two things, above all the rest, to be observed. The former
is, how wise and politic the Cardinal does make John, and the whole Synod of
Antioch, to be in this matter of the union: first, they condemn the heresies
of Nestorius, approve the Ephesine Council, and by so doing approve the twelve
Chapters of Cyrill; they do this in a Synod, and publish their Synodall decree
at Rome, at Constantinople, and other places, to show and testify themselves
to be truly orthodoxall; and when all this is done, they labor earnestly,
with Cyrill, to make him condemn his own twelve Chapters, which is in effect
to maintain Nestorianisme; to condemn the Ephesine Council, (wherein his
Chapters were approved) yea, to condemn their own Synodall decree, by which
themselves, at Antioch, had condemned Nestorius, and approved the Chapters of
Cyrill. Again, he makes John, and his Synod to communicate with Sixtus, with
Maximianus, with all other Catholics save Cyrill, and them of his
Patriarchship; with all the former they will communicate, though they all
approved the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, with Cyril they will not communicate,
unless he will condemn the same twelve Chapters. If they thought the twelve
Chapters to be heretical, why hold they communion with Sixtus, Maximianus, and
others who approved them? nay, why did themselves approve them? If they thought
them orthodoxall, why would they (being themselves orthodoxall) persuade, yea,
enforce and wring out of Cyrill a condemnation of the orthodoxall faith?
Besides, what a worthy piece of policy was this, which the Cardinal does
fasten upon John, and all the rest? he makes them to send Paulus, a reverend
Bishop, with a letter purposely to be delivered to Cyrill, which testified
their Synodall, and willing consent in approving the twelve Chapters of Cyrill,
that is, of the Catholic faith, and yet command Paulus to urge and wring from
Cyrill, if he could, a condemnation of those twelve Chapters, that is, of the
whole Catholic faith? What deep dissemblers and hypocrites does he make
John, Paul, and the rest of those orthodoxall Bishops? Lastly, of what faith or
religion, do you think, must John, Paul, and the rest be, by the Cardinals
narration. By their Synodall sentence, and holy confession therein; they appove
the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, and so are perfect Catholics; again, by their
urging of Cyrill to condemn his twelve Chapters, they are perfect Nestorians,
for the condemning of them, is the defending of all the Nestorian heresies; so,
by the Cardinals divinity, they are at the self same time, both perfect
Nestorians, and perfect Catholics; which can no way be effected, but by
admitting the Cardinals old position, which he learned of Vigilius, that
perfect Nestorianisme is the perfect Catholic faith.

38. Into such labyrinths does the Cardinals foul misreporting of this matter
lead, and even draw a man; whereas the truth, as, by that which formerly has
been declared, is evident, that John, and the rest of the Synod, when they
urged Cyrill to condemn his Chapters, had not made that Synodall decree for
condemning of Nestorius; and when they had once made that decree, they never,
either by word or writing, urged Cyrill to condemn those Chapters: Before they
made that decree, and condemned Nestorius, they were heretical, and held
communion neither with Cyrill, nor Sixtus, nor any other Catholics: After they
had made that decree, and condemned Nestorius with his heresies, they were
orthodoxall, and communicated no less with Cyrill, tha^ with Sixtus, or any
other Catholic; nay, they communicated first of all with Cyrill, and then with
all other Catholics.

39. The other point to be observed out of the Cardinals words, is, that by
his narration Cyrill did indeed, as Ibas and the Nestorians slandered him,
renounce and reject the Catholic faith, for the Cardinal makes Paulus of
Emisa but to go once to Alexandria about the union, or if any can find in the
Cardinal a second journey thither, yet by his narratio^, the Synodall Epistle
of John, and the rest, wherein they condemn Nestorius, and set down an
orthodoxall profession, that Epistle was sent by Paulus at the first time, for
he had withal in charge to urge Cyrill to condemn his twelve Chapters, which
at his last going had been absurd and incongruous. So then the Epistle which
Paulus, at his first going to Cyrill brought with him, was the orthodoxall
Epistle of John, and the Synod. Now it is certain by the express words of
Cyrill, that the letter which John and the rest, sent by Paulus at his first
going, was rejected by Cyrill, for he says of that Epistle, hujusmodi
epistolas non acceptavi, I did not accept this Epistle sent by Paul: and the
Cardinal Bar. an. 432. nu. 66.
citing those words of Cyrill verbatim, and making some pretty collection out
of them, could not be ignorant hereof. Seeing then by the Cardinals narration,
the Epistle which Paulus brought at his first coming, was orthodoxall, and
seeing it is certain that Cyrall rejected that Epistle, which Paulus at his
first coming brought from John, it inevitably follows, upon the Cardinals
narration, that Cyrill indeed rejected an orthodoxall and Catholic profession,
containing the condemnation of Nestorius, and his heresies, and therefore that
Cyrill renounced his former Catholic doctrine, and consented to Nestorianisme,
which is the same calumny wherewith Ibas in his impious Epistle, slandereth
Cyrill. And although Baronius do in words deny this, as I know he does, yet
considering the deep projects which the Cardinal has, it may be feared,
that he meant by this means, cunningly, and closely, to lay a foundation to
uphold that union, in which Ibas in his Epistle rejoices, and which Vigilius
and the Cardinal himself approve for Catholic, or if the Cardinal intended
not this, yet I am sure that he has then unwittingly devised, such a notable
ground, to maintain that slander, which Ibas imputes to Cyrill, that at the
time of the union he rejected his former doctrines, as that neither Ibas
himself, nor any of the old Nestorians could possibly have forged a more fair
and colorable pretense for the same.

40. My conclusion now of this their former reason, for defense of the impious
Epistle of Ibas; drawn from the union mentioned therein, is this: Seeing that
union mentioned and approved by Ibas in the later part of his Epistle, is no
other but the union in Nestorianisme, unto which he maliciously slandereth
Cyrill to have consented: and seeing Pope Vigilius, and Cardinal Baronius not
only approve as Catholic, the union there mentioned by Ibas, but prove by it
and consenting to it, both Ibas himself to be a Catholic, and his Epistle,
in that part at least, to be orthodoxall, it hence clearly ensues, that
Vigilius by his Apostolical sentence defines, and Baronius by name (as also
all who maintain the Popes Cathedral sentence in causes of faith to be
infallible) do all defend Nestorianisme to be the Catholic union, and so;
Nestorianisme to be the Catholic faith: which whosoever affirms, are by the
judgment not only of the fifth, but the fourth and third general Counsels,
convicted, condemned, and anathematized heretics.

CHAP. XII. That Vigilius and Baronius in their later reason for defense of the
Epistle of Ibas, taken from the words of Ibas, wherein he confesses two
natures and one person in Christ, do maintain the heresies of Nestorius.
1. THe other reason whereby they labor to defend this impious Epistle, and
with no less fraud then they did in the former, is taken from the very
confession of Ibas, set down in his Epistle, wherein he acknowledges Christ
to have two natures, and to be one person. His words to Maris the heretic
are these, near the beginning of his Epistle In Cont. Chalc. Act. 10.
. Cyrill has written twelve Chapters which I think your holiness knows,
wherein he teaches, quia una est natura divinitatis and humanitatis, that
there is one nature of the divinity, and humanity in Christ, these things are
full of all impiety; and giving a reason hereof, he adds, for the Church
says thus, as it has been taught from the beginning, and confirmed therein
by the doctrine of the most blessed Fathers; Duae natura, una virtus, una
persona, quod est unus filius, Dominus noster Jesus Christus, Two natures, one
power, one person, which is one Son our Lord Jesus Christ: Thus Ibas: which
words seem to be so true, so orthodoxall and Catholic, that Vigilius and
Baronius, might either be themselves hereby deceived; or, which I rather
think, judge them, as they are indeed, a most colorable pretense to deceive
others, and lead them into Nestorianisme: for no Catholic can possibly in
fairer terms, or better for show of words, express against Nestorius the
true doctrine of the Catholic faith, then to say that there are two natures in
Christ, and yet but one person. This seeing Ibas professes in his Epistle, and
withal accurseth Denuncians ei ut anathematizaret eos qui dicunt quia una est
natura divinitatis et humanitatis, Ibas in eadem Epist.
those who deny two natures in Christ, sure none can think but this was a fit
text for Vigilius and Baronius, by it to commend this impious Epistle as
orthodoxall and Catholic, wherein so Catholic a confession seems to be
made. But let us see how the Pope and the Cardinal descant on these words.

2. Baronius says not much, but yet he speaks plainly of this matter; The
fathers at Chalcedon, says he Bar. an. 448. nu. 75.
, out of this Epistle of Ibas, gathered Ibas then (when he writ it) to be a
Catholic, utpote quodex eadem epistola demonstratur ipse, because by this very
Epistle Ibas was demonstrated, both to have held communion with Cyrill,
execratusque esse unam naturam in Christo confitentes, confessus vero esse,
naturas duas unam Vox [personam] vitio Typographi deest apud Baron. sed ex
Constructione Gammatica, et ipse sensu, necessary ad. dendam liquet.
[personam] efficere, Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, and also he was
demonstrated by this Epistle, to have accursed those who confess one only
nature in Christ, and to have confessed the two natures, to make one person,
and Lord Jesus Christ. So Baronius: teaching not only that profession which
Ibas makes in his Epistle, of two natures, and one person, to be Catholic, but
that Ibas by that very confession is proved, nay demonstrated to be a Catholic.

3. Vigilius handles this matter far more largely, but very obscurely and
mystically, as being indeed so miserably entangled in the birdlime of
Nestorianisme, that he knew not possibly how to unfold himself. I must first
of all set down his words, though they be many, and because they are very
obscure, they will require more attentive, and serious ponderation; Those
things, says he Vig. Constable. nu. 192
, which in the Epistle of Ibas, are injuriously spoken against Cyrill by a
misunderstanding of Cyrills sayings, the Fathers at Chalcedon, when they
pronounced the Epistle to be orthodoxall, did not receive; for the venerable
Bishop (Ibas) himself by changing, refuted those, when he had gotten better
understanding of those Chapters which Eunomius in his interloquution does most
evidently declare. And Ibid. nu. 193.
the interloquution of Iuvenalis does signify the same, who therefore decreed
that Ibas should receive his Bishopric, as holding the orthodoxall profession
of faith, because he devoutly ran, to embrace the communion with Cyrill,
after that Cyrill had explaned his Chapters, and Ibas had understood them
otherwise then before he did, though he had carped at Cyrill, when he
misunderstood those Chapters, for thus said Iuvenalis; The holy Scripture
commands that he who is converted should be received, for which cause we
receive such as return from heretics; wherefore I decree that the reverend
Ibas should obtain favor and receive his Bishopric, both because he is an
old man, and because he is a Catholic. So Iuvenalis: By which this is
understood: If we receive such as return from heretics, how should we not
receive Ibas who is a Catholic? whom it is manifest to be a Catholic, seeing
he is now converted, from that understanding of Cyrills Chapters, whereby he
was deceived, who while he doubted of the understanding of those Chapters, did
seem to speak against Cyrill: for never would Iuvenalis say that Ibas were a
Catholic, unless he had proved by the words of this Epistle his confession to
be orthodoxall. And that the Interloquutions of Iuvenalis and Eunomius do
agree, the words of Eunomius do show, which are these; In what things Ibas
seemed to blame Cyrill, by speaking ill; he has refuted all those things
which he blamed, by making a right confession at the last. By which words of
Eunomius it is evidently declared, that in the confession of faith, made by
Ibas, nothing was reproved, seeing it is manifest, that his faith was praised;
and that Ibas has refuted that, which by misunderstanding Cyrill, he had
thought amiss of him.

4. For Ibid. nu. 194.
the same venerable Ibas, by the precedent Acts, (as the judgment of Photius
and Eustathius does show) is most manifestly declared to receive and embrace
all things which were done in the first Ephesine Synod, and judge them equal
to the Nicene decrees, and to put no difference betwixt those and these at
Ephesus: and Eustathius is showed very much to commend the sanctity of Ibas,
for that he was so ready and willing to cure those, who, either by suspicion,
or any other way did hurt the opinion of his learning: For after that Cyrill
had explaned his twelve Chapters, and the meaning which Cyrill had in them was
declared unto Ibas, after that, Ibas professed himself, with all the Eastern
Bishops, to have esteemed Cyrill a Catholic, and to have remained, even unto
his end, in the communion with him; whence it is clear, that Ibas, both before
he understood the twelve Chapters of Cyrill, and when he suspected one (only)
nature of Christ to be taught and maintained by them, did then in an orthodoxal
sense reject that which he thought to be spoken amiss in those Chapters; and
also after the explanation thereof, did in an orthodoxall sense reverently
embrace those things which he knew to be rightly spoken in those Chapters.

5. Further, Ibid. nu. 195.
it does without all doubt appear to the minds of all the faithful, that
Dioscorus with Eutiches, did offer more wrong in the second Ephesine Synod,
than Ibas, to Cyrill and the first Ephesine Council, by understanding Cyrils
Chapters in an heretical sense, believing Cyrill to teach by his twelve
Chapters one (only) nature in our Lord Jesus Christ; and for this cause did
Dioscorus condemn some of the Eastern Bishops, who would not acknowledge one
(only) nature in Christ; among whom he condemned as an heretic, and deposed
Ibas from his Bishopric, specially for this very confession of his faith,
wherein he most plainly professes two natures, one power, one person, which
is one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ: and Dioscorus restored Eutiches, as a
Catholic, for the confession of one (only) nature in Christ, condemning also
Flavianus, of blessed memory, for the same doctrine of holding two natures: And
Dioscorus and Eutiches are found much more to endeavor to overthrow the first
Ephesine Synod, while they defend it under the show of an execrable sense, (of
one nature) and to slander Cyrill more while they praise him, than did Ibas,
when, by the error and misconceiving of Cyrils meaning, he dispraised him; for
seeing their praise and dispraise do tend unto the same thing, Dioscorus and
Eutiches, who condemned Cyrill, are found to have commended him with an
heretical spirit, or in an heretical sense, and therefore were they condemned
in the Council at Chalcedon; but Ibas, who at the first dispraised Cyrils
Chapters, thinking one (only) nature to be taught by them; and who, after the
sense and meaning of them was declared unto him, did profess himself, with
the Eastern Bishops, to communicate with Cyrill, was judged by the same
Council of Chalcedon to have continued in the right faith. Thus far are the
words of Vigilius, and so much of his Constitution as concerns this profession
made by Ibas, of two natures and one person in Christ.

6. Words like the Oracles of Apollo, full of thick darkness, and hid
mysteries. Nor must you here expect any light at al from Binius; was wise
enough to decline these rocks in the Epist. of Ibas, both that of the union
with Cyril, this and of his confessing two natures and one person; at which
fearing to make shipwreck of faith, as Vigilius had done before, he thought it
to be far the safest course at one stroke to wipe away and sponge out those
whole passages both out of the Popes Constitution, and his own Tomes of
Councels: best to have them smothered in silence, or buried in eternal
oblivion. Add yet, to say truth, had Binius used all his art in this point,
that alas would but have helped a little; he, poor lamb, is not able of
himself to wade, no not through shallow places, it would require an Elephant
to swim through such a deep: All his light is but borrowed of others,
specially from Baronius, where Baronius is silent, he is more mute than a fish:
yea, and when some of the Cardinals beams do happen to collustrate his notes,
yet even there they lose a great part of that vigor which they have in the
Cardinals Phoebean lamp.

7. The only man in the world fit to make a full and just commentary on this
text of Vigilius, had been Baronius himself: He by his long acquaintance with
Popes, and Court of Rome, by his continual rifling of the Vaticane
Manuscripts, and anatomising so many Pontifical decrees, had quick sense of
the Popes pulse, he knew every string and strain in their breasts. But so
unhappily it falls out, that the Cardinal himself durst not touch this soar;
he passes it over, nay, rather shuffles it from him with deep silence; wot
you why? you may be sure he knew there was a padde in this straw, which had
the Cardinal uncovered, his own friends could not have endured the loathsome
sent of the Pontifical Constitution, but for very shame would have swept it
out of the Church of God. Now because it were great pity that so many
mysteries as lie hid in this part of the Popes decree should be unknown to the
world, and because the very explication of the Popes words, is a full
conviction of his heresy, for want of a better, I will lend them my best
endeavors to supply the defect of the Cardinals Commentary in this point: And
although all that I can say is, nihil ad Parmenonis suem, nothing to that which
you should have applauded, si ipsam belluam audissetis, if the Popes
commentator had been himself pleased to write hereof; yet truly, by long
contemplation of the Popes works, and industrious observing the Cardinals
artificium in explaning the like decrees, I well hope that I shall be able
dolare, and after a rude fashion to rough-hew a piece of a commentary at this
time; only not being trained up in their Roman Schools, where they learn to
speak silken and sugered words of their Popes, and sow the softest Pillowes
under their elbowes; I must crave pardon, if according to the Macedonia^
rudeness of our dialect I call a spade, a spade a slander, a slander, and
heresy, heresy, though it happen to be found even in his Holiness himself,
and in his Pontifical and Cathedral decree: In hope of which pardon
(specially since the fault is so venial) I will now address my self to an
unaccustomed task of making a Commentary upon the Popes writings.

8. The scope and purpose of Vigilius in this whole passage, is, to prove not
only Ibas himself, but his faith and profession also to have been Catholic,
not only when he writ this Epistle, but ever since Cyrill explaned his
Chapters, and Ibas understood the same, which was before this Epistle was writ.
And this appears by the very words of Vigilius, who Vig. nu. 193.
^^^th, that after Cyrils Chapters were explaned, and understood by Ibas, in
communionem ejus devote concurrerit; he ran, and hastened with devotion to
embrace the communion with Cyrill; and having once embraced it, in Jbid nu. 194.
communione ipsius usque ad exitum permansisse; that he continued in the same
communion with Cyrill, even to the end of his life: and as he was then a
Catholic, so in this Epistle, which was writ after Cyrils explanation,
understood by him, he expressed that Catholic faith and profession, seeing
Ibid. nu. 193.
Iuvenalis, ex verbis Epistolae, ejus confessionem fidei orthodoxam
comprobavit; proved the confession of Ibas to be orthodoxall by the very words
of this Epistle. This is the purpose then of my author, to show both Ibas and
his confession of faith, when he writ this Epistle, to have been Catholic: To
prove this he uses three principal reasons; the first is drawn from the
explanation of Cyrils Chapters, which Ibas devoutly embraced; and this he
harps upon almost in every part of his text, as you may easily see. The second
is taken from his approbation of the holy Ephesine Council before Photius and
Eustathius; in these words, For the same venerable Ibas, etc. The third is
drawn from the very profession it self, and words thereof set down in the
Epistle of Ibas, where he confesses two natures, and one person; and though
there be a touch and taste of this throughout the whole text, yet is it
specially and more expressly set down in those words, Further, it does without
all doubt appear, etc. I must be enforced, for more perspicuities sake, to
invert the order of mine author, and begin with the exposition of his third
reason, because, if that be well understood, it will serve for a torch to
direct us in both the other.

9. In his third reason the Pope both affirms, and by diverse means proves
that confession of Ibas, which in his Epistle he makes to be orthodoxall, and
before we handle his proofs hereof we must diligently consider the position
it self, or confession made by Ibas: Ibas his confession in his Epistle is,
that there are two natures, and one person in Christ: This confession in his
Epistle, says Vigilius Et ob hoc aliquos Orientales Episcopos, qui unius
naturae praedicationem noluerunt suscipere Dioscorus condemnavit, inter quoset
Ibam, propter hanc specialiter fidei ejus professionem, qua duas naturas, unam
virtutem, unam personam apertissime confitetur, haereticum condemnavit. Vig.
nu. 195.
, is orthodoxall; and for this was Ibas unjustly condemned by Dioscorus, but
justly commended by the Council at Chalcedon. I must set an unpleasant, but a
very true and certain gloss upon these words, Both Ibas, and Vigilius
commending him, and Baronius defending Vigilius herein, do all Nestorianize;
or, to speak more plainly, Ibas by that confession in his Epistle teaches,
Vigilius by his Cathedral decree confirms; Baronius gnatonically applaudeth,
and they all three conspire in defending the condemned heresy of Nestorius.

10. For the full manifestation whereof it must be observed, that the
Nestorians, the more plausibly to convey their heresy, wherein they denied
Christ the son of Mary to be God, used the very same words altogether which
Chatholikes did. As Catholics said that there are two natures in Christ, the
divinity, and the humanity, so said, the Nestorians also: As Catholics
confessed Christ to be our Lord, so confessed the Nestorians likewise. In words
they both agreed and said the same, but in the sense and meaning of those words
they were quite contrary.

11. When Catholics said, that there are two natures in Christ, they meant
truly and orthodoxally, that the divinity and humanity in Christ were different
in essence and substance, and yet they both made but one hypostasis, that is,
but one, and not two subsistent persons: But when the Nestorians said, that
there are two natures in Christ, they meant that either nature made a several
and distinct person by it self, and so they made Christ to be two distinct
persons, each subsisting by it self, two Sons, two Christ's, that is, in
truth, no Christ, no Savior at all; for a Savior he cannot be, unless the
self same person which is man be God also.

12. Again, when Catholics said, that Christ is one person, they meant truly
and orthodoxally, that both natures together make but one personal
subsistence, as the humane soul and body make but one person, or one man: but
when the Nestorians said, that Christ was one person, they meant not of that
unity which is by natural or personal subsistence, but of unity in affection,
of unity by consent and liking, of unity by cohabitation; the person of the
Son of God, so affecting and liking the son of Marie, that it inhabited and
dwelt therein, as in a holy temple or house; but yet, as neither the house is
the inhabitant, nor the inhabitant the house; so neither was God (by their
doctrine) the son of Mary, or man; nor yet was that man which was the son
of Mary, God; but only the house or temple of God.

13. When Catholics called Jesus Christ our Lord, they meant truly and
orthodoxally, that the man Jesus Christ, who took flesh of the Virgin Mary, is
in truth very God, the Godhead being hypostatically united unto the manhood,
and both of them making but one person, who is both God and man: but the
Nestoria^s in calling Jesus Christ our Lord, meant not that the man Christ was
truly and personally God or Lord, but that he was God, and the Lord, only by
having God and the Lord inhabiting in him, and united, not personally, but
only affectually unto him; whereupon it followed, that they in adoring Christ,
and giving divine honors unto him, were indeed (...); for they gave the honor
proper only to God, unto that person, or that man, which, according to their
doctrine, they held not to be God.

14. And, which of all may seem most strange; whereas Catholics not only
professed the Virgin Mary to be the Mother of God, but under those very
terms, and by that form of words, as being most easy and perspicuous,
contradicted and condemned all the heresies of Nestorius, which were all by
consequent included in their denying Mary to be (...), the Mother of God; The
Nestorians, to avoid the hatred of this speech, if they should deny it, and
more plausibly to convay their heresy, said, and in words professed even this
also, that Mary was the Mother of God; but they meant not thereby, as
Catholics did, that Christ, who took flesh of the Virgin Mary, was the same
person or one personal subsistence with the Son of God; or, that God was
incarnate, and assumed the manhood to make one person with the Godhead, but all
that they meant was, that the Son of God, was only by affection, and love
united unto the son of Marie, being already perfect man in the womb of his
mother, and that God was borne of her, not by assuming flesh unto him, but by
inhabiting that man who took flesh of her. Thus in show of words the
Nestorians seemed to be Catholics, and to say the same with Catholics, but
their sense and meaning in those words was most heretical, and therefore
indeed and in truth themselves notwithstanding all these speeches, were
heretics.

15. For the full and ample proof of all these, I must refer my self to
another Treatise, if it ever happen to see the light: wherein I have at large
handled this point, and proved another of their Popes somewhat more ancient
then Vigilius, I mean Hormisda, to have been as deep in the heresy of
Nestorius, and to have as firmly by his Cathedral and Apostolical sentence
confirmed the same, as Vigilius himself has done, who as I think, by the
example and authority of his predecessor was the more emboldned to plead for
Nestorianisme, it being of all heresies which ever sprung up in the Church,
most full of all sophistical subtilties, and colorable pretenses of wit, was
most fit of all the rest, to be commended by such as under the show of
learning, and truth; meant to defend and uphold heresy. But for this time I
will now allege only a few evident testimonies, to declare the truth of that
concurrence in words, and difference in sense, between Catholics and
Nestorians, which even now I mentioned.

16. Nestorius in his Epistle Extat in Conc. 5 Coll. 6. pa 57^. b.
to Alexander signifying that the two natures in Christ are also two persons,
says thus; Non duas personas unam personam facimus, we do not make two
persons, one person; but by this one name of Christ, we signify two natures
(to wit, making two persons.) And to show how these two persons are called by
them one person; thou may, says he Nestorij verba citata ibidem. pa. 576. a.
and in Actis Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. ca. 8. pa. 747. a.
, call him that was borne of Mary, by the name of the Son of God, for the
Virgin which bare Christ, filium Dei genuit, bare the Son of God, but because
the Son according to the Natures is double, non genuit quidem Negat Nestorius
Mariam genuisse filium, ita ut ex ipsa carnem sumpserit, affirmat genuisse, ita
ut ex ipsa prodierit. Hoc declarant Nestorij verba apud Cyrillum citata in
Epist. ad Acatium. to. 3. Act. Ephesians. ca. 7 vbi ita ait Nestorius; Deum ex
Christipaera virgin prodijsse ex divina scriptura edoctus sum, at vero Deum ex
ipsa genitum esse (eo quo dixi sexsu) id nusquam edoctus sum.
filium Dei she did not truly bear the Son of God (as taking flesh from her)
but she bare the man or humane nature, quae propter filium adjunctum, filij
quoque appellatione afficitur, which is called the Son of God, because the
Son God is united and joined unto him: and in another place Non per se and
secundum se Deus est, quod in utero formatum est, non per se and secundum se
Deus est, quod spiritus sancti opera effectum est: non per se and secundum se
Deus est, quod in monumento conditum est. At quia Deus in homine assumpto
extitit, assumptus assumenti conjunctus, propter assumentum Deus appellatur.
verba Nestorij citata in Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. ca. 8. pa. 748. a.
, He that was framed in the womb, and laid in the grave, is not of himself
God: at quia Deus in homine assumpto existit, but because God is in the man
whom he assumes unto him, the man assumed is called God, because he is
assumed of God. So Nestorius; plainly calling Christ, God, and the Son of God,
and Marie, the mother of God, and yet denying God and man to be one person; but
the person of God to assume a perfect man, or the person of Man.

17. Theodorus the master of Nestorius declares the same; In ipso Theodori
verba citata in Conc. 5. Coll. 4. pa. 528. a.
plasmato Deus verbum factus est. The Word or Son of God was united to the
man Christ, being framed and formed, showing plainly that Christ was first made
a perfect man, and person, and that then the Son of God as another person was
united unto him. And showing that the unity of the two natures is not
personal, but only affectuall; he compares the unity which is betwixt the
Godhead, and the manhood in Christ, to that unity which is bewixt man and
wife, who though they be called one, yet are they in natural subsistence two
distinct persons. Even so says he Coll. eadem. pa. 532. a. and Coll. 6. pa.
576. a.
in Christ, non nocet naturarum differentiae unitas personae, the unity of
person does not take away the distinction of the natures. And the two natures
joined together, unam personam dicimus, we call one person: which unity not to
be personal no more then it is in man and wife, but affectuall, he
immediately explaneth, expressly affirming either nature in Christ, to be a
perfect and distinct person, or personal subsistence by it self, saying, for
when we discern or teach two natures, perfectam naturam verbi Dei dicimus and
perfectam personam, perfectam autem and hominis naturam and personam similiter:
we affirm both the perfect nature, and the perfect person of the Son of God,
and also the perfect nature, and perfect person of man to be in Christ: but
when we look at the conjunction of these (natures) unam personam tunc dicimus,
then we call them one person, (to wit one by affectuall, but not by natural
and personal unity, for he said plainly before, that they were two perfect
distinct persons.) Thus Theodorus.

18. This is to have been the very true meaning of the Nestorians, Justinian
in his Edict manifestly declares, writing thus and most divinely; In Edict.
J^stir.. Credimus autem.
that the Apostle says of the Son of God, that he took the form of a
servant, he shows that the Word was united to the Nature of Man: but not to
any subsistence or person: for he does not say; he took him, who was in the
form of a servant, least he should imply thereby, that the Word was united
unto the man being formerly formed, as impious Theodorus and Nestorius did
blaspheme: affectualem dicentes unitatem, teaching an affectuall (and no
personal) unity betwixt them. The fifth Council after most exact sifting of
this matter does witness the same, writing thus; Theodorus Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa.
575. b.
and Nestorius teaching two persons, two Christ's, two sons, would hide their
impiety by calling them two natures, and one son. And a little after,
Theodorus affectualem unitatem dicens, naturas pro personis and subsistentijs
accipit. Theodorus teaching an affectuall union (only) to be betwixt the two
natures, uses the word Nature for Person: and so indeed teaches two persons;
Quomodo Nestorius duas dicit naturas: in which same sense also Nestorius
teaches two natures to be in Christ: sed pro personis eas accipit, but he
takes twose two natures for two persons. So the general Council.

19. Pope John the second, does clearly express this, setting down the faith
of the Roman Church. We Joh. 2. Epist. pra^ Senatore.
profess Christ to be perfect in deity, and perfect in the humanity: non antea
existente carne, and postea unita verbo, sed in ipso Deo verbo initium ut esset
accipiens, his flesh, (or humane nature) not first existing; and then the Word
being united unto it: but his flesh taking beginning in the very Word: nec duas
personas in Christo intelligimus: neither do we understand two persons to be
in Christ, when we say two natures to be in him; as mad Nestorius thought.
Thus the Pope. But no where is this more clearly and fully explained then in
the Dialogue of Maxentius, where the Catholic disputing with the Nestorian;
says thus: This is Ioh. Maxent. Dial. 1. ca. 12.
the cause of your errror, you cannot discern the difference betwixt Person
and Nature: But understanding Nature to be all one with Person, ye confound (or
use for one and the same thing) these two: and duas omnino personas, sicut duas
naturas unius filij Dei sine dubio praedicatis: and without all doubt, you
teach two persons to be in the Son of God, when ye profess two natures to
be in him.

20. By this which I have said, it is now evident, that the Nestorians spoke
like Catholics, but they thought contrary to Catholics: their words were
holy and orthodoxall, but their sense, and meaning, was blasphemous, and
heretical. Neither was this any new policy of the Nestorians; The Arians, the
Pelagians, almost all heretics, have practiced the like: out of them all, I
will here allege but one example. Vitalis Elias Cretens. in Greg. Nazian. Epi.
2. ad Clidon.
a Presbyter of Antioch, was accused unto Damasus to maintain in some part the
heresy of Apollinaris, as denying Christ to have a soul or mind; At the
motion Poscente illo (Damaso) ut fidem suam exponeret, eam scriptis ma^datam
edidit. ibid.
of Damasus, he delivered in writing a confession of his faith. In that
confession, disertis verbis confessus est in Christo, sicut carnem ita and
mentem Baron. an. 373. nu. 3.
: he in plain terms professed Christ to have as well a soul as a body. This
his confession seeming at the first to be sound Prima front recta and sana
visa (ea professio) idcirco and Damasus and hic divinus ma^ister (Gregorius)
eam admiserunt, quod abditam and occultam fraude^ nullo modo deprehendissent,
nec versutam malignitatem sub verbis latentem. Elias Cret. loc. cit.
and good, was approved for catholic, both by Pope Damasus, by Gregory
Nazianzen and other Catholics, who suspectd no heretical fraud to lie hid
under such fair and orthodoxall words, for in his confession of faith,
Scripturae Elias Cret. ibid.
verba sine ulla depravatione collocabat, nihil prorsus immutans, nec orationis
seriem adulterans: Vitalis had placed the very words of the Scripture; not
depraved, not any way changed, neither the order, nor writing of them being
corrupted. But when Vitalis Hi cum discipulis suis abditis. and mystis, de
absconditis theologicum instillant sermonem, quemadmodum and Manichei, totam
eis morbum revelantes. Greg. Nazian. Epist. 2. ad Clidon.
came among his own fellows, to whom he opened his secret meaning and his
fraud, as the Manichees were wont to do among their electi, he then told them,
That by the soul Animam and rationem ac mentem, (Christi) divinitatem ipsam
introducunt, tanquam ipsa, sola carni sit admistae Mentem, divinitatem Christi
dicenter. Greg. ibid.
and mind which he had acknowledged in Christ, he meant nothing but the very
Deity it self, which unto Christ's body, was as the soul and mind, to animate
it with life, sense, and reason, which was one part of the heresy of
Apollinaris. As soon Statim ac dolum sens^runt, fraudulentum hominem ab
ecclesia proscribunt. Elias Cret. loc. cit.
as Pope Damasus, and Gregory Nazianzen knew of this fraud, they not only
rejected Vitalis out of their communion, but condemned as heretical, and that
also with an Anathema denounced against it, Fidei libellum, that very same
profession of faith made by Vitalis, which themselves before had approved,
which fact Gregory Ne nos accusent quod Vitalis fidem prius quidem
probaverimus, nunc vero repudiemus. Greg. Naz. Epist. 2. ad Clidon. and similia
habet in Epi. 2. ad Hollod.
defends as just and right, both for himself, and for Damasus.

21. From this, two things are specially for our present purpose to be
observed. The former, that an heretical profession may be made in most
orthodoxall terms, yea in the very words of the holy Scripture, not corrupted,
not altered, not changed, for so was this heretical confession of Vitalis. The
other is, that the self same profession of faith, if we look only at the
words, may be allowed for orthodoxall, when the sense thereof is and appears
to be orthodoxall, and when there is no evidence to the contrary, but that the
party who makes that profession, as he speaks orthodoxally, so also means
orthodoxally: and that same profession also, may justly be condemned for
heretical, when by any overt act, or outward evidence, it does certainly
appear, that the party who made that confession, by, and under those
orthodoxall words, meant by a fraudulent, and equivocating collusion, to
express an heretical sense: for while there appeared no cause to mistrust
Vitalis, Pope Damasus and others approved his profession, as orthodoxall: but
as soon as they knew he meant heretically they condemned, and anathematized,
the very self same profession as heretical. The reason of all which is, that
which the same Gregory Greg. Epist. 2. ad Clid.
, and after him Justinian Just. in Edict.. Tali.
expresses, quoniam eaedem voces, because the very same words, if they be
rightly expounded, and understood, are pious, but if they be taken in an
heretical sense, they are impious.

22. That which Damasus and Gregory did in the confession of Vitalis, must be
done in the profession of the Nestorians: when Catholics say there are in
Christ two natures, and one person, their confession is orthodoxall, because
they say it in an orthodoxall sense, using the words as they ought to be in
their right, natural, and usual signification: But when the Nestorians say
the very fame words, their saying is heretical, because they say it in an
heretical sense, abusing the words, to an equivocall, unnatural, and unusual
signification. Nay, it not only must, but it was said, it was decreed in this
very case of Nestorius, and that by the whole general Council at Ephesus,
themselves being Catholics professed in Christ, two natures, and one person,
and yet they condemned Nestorium duas quidem naturas, et unam personam dicentem
Ephesina prima Synodus condemnavit. Just. in Edict.. Tali.
and accursed Nestorius, who in words said the very same, acknowledging in
Christ two natures, and one person. Whose judgment herein being followed both
by the Council at Chalcedon, and this 5. Synod, and in a word, by the whole
Catholic Church, is a warrant authentical, that a profession being for words,
one, and the self same, may and ought in some to be judged orthodoxal, and in
others condemned as heretical, and the saying of old Ennius apud Gell. lib.
11. ca. 4.
though spoken to another purpose, is verified in this, Eadem dicta, eademque
oration aequa non aeque valet.

23. It is not enough then to prove either Ibas to be a Catholic, or his
Epistle orthodoxall, because in it Ibas professes two natures, and one person
in Christ, (for Theodorus, and Nestorius professed the very same) but the sense
and meaning of his words, set down in that Epistle, must be exactly
considered, whether he meant not as other Nestorians, and even as Nestorius
himself did; two such natures, as make two distinct persons also, and whether
he called them not one person, in such a sense, as meaning that they were one,
not by natural, or personal subsistence, but only by affection, and
cohabitation. If it may appear that this was indeed the meaning of Ibas in his
Epistle, then will those words of his profession, be so far from proving
either him or his Epistle to be Catholic, as Vigilius and Baronius do thence
infer, that it will demonstrate both Ibas in making that profession, and
Vigilius and Baronius in defending it, to approve and maintain Nestorianisme
as the only Catholic Faith.

24. But can this think you be showed indeed? It may: and that most clearly,
and most certainly. The Emperor Justinian in his religious Edict both
testifies and demonstrates this. Heretics, says he Edict. Just.. Tali
, omitting other blasphemies in this Epistle of Ibas, allege this only, which
the Author of that Epistle spoke to beguile the simple thereby, in that he
professes duas naturas, unam virtute^, una^ persona^, two natures, one power,
one person, which we our selves also do confess. Sed certum est, quod
unicuique naturae suam personam attribuit; but it is certain, that the Author
of that Epistle (Ibas) does attribute to either nature a several person, even
as do Theodorus and Nestorius, whom this Writer does defend: For, they plainly
teaching two natures of the Word of God, or of Christ, whom they esteem to be
no more then a man, do call them (those two natures) one person, per
affectualem conjunctionem, by an affectuall conjunction, and as having one
dignity, and one honor. And it is clear that the writer of this Epistle,
saying that there is one virtue, and one power of the two natures; does herein
follow the foresaid heretics, Theodorus in his impious book of the
incarnation, and Nestorius in many of his writings, but specially in his
Epistle to Alexander, where he says that there is one authority, one virtue,
one power, one person, in respect of dignity and honor due unto them, whereby
it is declared that the author of this Epistle, did according to their
perfidious impiety, use vocabulo naturarum pro personis, this word Natures, for
Persons: for one authority, one power, one dignity and honor, non in diversis
naturis, sed in diversis personis dicitur, is not said to be in diverse
natures, but in diverse persons, of the same nature, as in the Trinity we
profess. Thus Justinian both truly, and profoundly.

25. The fifth general Council witnesses the same, and almost in the same
words. The author (say they Con. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 575.
) of this Epistle, teaches two natures, one virtue, one person, one son. Sed
certum est quod pro personis naturas ponit, and affectualem unitatem dicit, but
it is certain that he takes the name of natures, for persons, and
understands an affectuall unity, even as do Theodorus, and Nestorius, whom
this writer does defend and praise: Thus both the Emperor and the whole
general approved Council, witness Ibas to mean by two natures, two persons,
and by one person, one by affectuall, not by personal unity, and they
witness this not as a thing doubtful, or uncertain; but they seal it with a
Certum est, this is certain,

26. The Epistle it self does so abundantly declare this truth, that none I
think but a Nestorian, can make any doubt thereof. Maris to whom Ibas writ
this was a Nestorian heretic: The end of his writing was to confirm, both
Maris and the rest of that sect in their heresy. Had Ibas writ this touching
two natures, and one person, in an orthodoxall sense, he had utterly condemned
that same doctrine, which he purposely commends; he had overthrown
Nestorianisme, which he by this Epistle, meant to establish. Again, how could
he have condemned Cyrill or the Ephesine Council as heretical, had he
believed the two natures to be personally united in Christ? for that is the
self same which Cyrill, and the Council defends. Or how could he have
commended Theodorus, for a teacher of the truth, who denies the personal, and
holds only an affectuall unity of those two natures, had Ibas meant that
there had been a true personal and Hypostaticall union of them? Take the
words in the Nestorian sense, there is a perfect harmony in the whole Epistle:
take them in the orthodoxall sense, the beginning will then jarre from the
middle and end, this makes a discord in the whole writing, yea, it makes the
profession of Ibas to fight with the maine scope and purpose of Ibas.

27. That one place in the end of the Epistle, concerning the union, makes this
most evident, Ibas says that among other things Paulus Emisenus required, and
Cyrill consented to anathematize those who profess, quia una natura est
divinitatis, and humanitatis, that there is one nature of the deity and
humanity in Christ. Had Ibas by one nature, meant one essence, so that both
the humanity, and deity were one essence, why should they require Cyrill to
anathematize that? for neither Cyrill, nor any Catholic ever affirmed there
was only one nature, that is, one only essence in Christ. But by nature, Ibas
understood Person, and so its true that Cyrill taught one nature, that is, one
only person in Christ, whereas Nestorius, Ibas and all the Nestorians affirmed
two such Natures, that is, two persons to be in Christ: according to which
sense Ibas says, that Paulus dealing with Cyrill to yield to Nestorianisme,
and on the behalf of the Nestorians, required him to anathematize those who
say there is but one Nature, that is, but one person in Christ: and he
slanderously adds, that Cyrill consented so to do: that is, that he subscribed
indeed to all Nestorianisme, and renounced the Catholic faith, the decree of
the Ephesine Council, and his own twelve Chapters. In which slanderous report
Ibas insulting says, Non enim quisquam audet dicere quia una est natura, None
dare now say that there is one nature of the divinity and humanity, one
nature, that is, one essence: no Catholic then, or ever, did say, but none
dare now say, that there is one Nature, that is, one person in Christ, which
all Catholics both then, and ever said, and this the very next words do
declare; but now they do profess to believe in templum, and in eum qui in hoc
habitat, in the temple, and in him who dwells in the temple, which was the
very comparison of Nestorius Si quis dixerit Christum Deum verum esse, and non
potius nobiscum deum, hoc est, inhabitasse naturam nostra per id quod unitus
est nostrae, anathema sit, Nestorius in anathematismo 1. co^tra Cyrill. anath..
1. in Act. Conc. Ephesians 2. to. ca. 5. in Appen. pa. 768.
, to express that the two natures in Christ, are two persons, as are the house
and inhabiters, and one not by personal, but only by affectuall unity and
cohabitation. So clear it is that Ibas by his confessing of two natures meant
two persons, and by confessing one person, meant one by affection, but not by
personal union: that is, meant all in an heretical, and Nestorian sense, and
nothing in the true Catholic, and orthodoxall meaning.

28. But what seek I further proof of this matter, seeing the fifth Council,
approved by the whole catholic Church, has defined the whole Tota Epistola
haeretica est, Epistola per omnia contraria est definitioni a Synodo Chalced.
factae. Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 576. a. b.
Epistle to be heretical, accursing every one who defends it, or any part
of it. An undeniable proof, not only that the profession of Ibas made therein
of two natures and one person, is heretical, but that Vigilius and Baronius,
for this very point are anathematized by the whole Church, because they defend
that profession in this Epistle as Catholic and orthodoxall, which by so many,
so evident demonstrations, and even by the consenting judgment of the whole
Church, is condemned for heretical. And this I hope may suffice to explain or
illustrate the Popes meaning in the Position or conclusion which he undertakes
to prove in his reason, that Ibas was a Catholic, in making this so
orthodoxall, and Catholic a profession in his Epistle, of two natures and one
person.

29. Let us now come unto the reasons, whereby our Author Vigilius proves this
profession to be Catholic. Those are specially three, in which, because they
all depend on that which has been declared in the position, we may be the
more brief. The first is, because Dioscorus Dioscorus Ibam propter hanc
specialiter fidei professionem qua duas naturas, unam virtutem, unam personam
apertissime confit^tur, haereticum conde^navit. Constable. Vig. nu. 195.
, and the Ephesine Latrocinie did judge both this profession of Ibas, and Ibas
himself for making this profession, to be heretical, propter hanc fidei
professionem, for this profession of two natures and one person, he condemned
and deposed Ibas. Now the judgment of Dioscorus to have been unjust, and
heretical there is so doubt, and therefore the confession of Ibas which he
condemned must be acknowledged as orthodoxall, and Catholic, as being
repugnant to the heretical doctrine of Dioscorus. A very poor and silly
collection for a Pope: and I doubt not but Vigilius would have derided it, had
not Nestorianisme at this time bereft him of all sound reason and judgment.
Dioscorus and his Ephesine conspiracy maintained the heresy of Eutiches,
which denies Eutiches dixit, co^fitemur ex duabus naturis fuisse dominum
nostrum ante adunatione^, post vero adunatione^ unam naturam confiteor.
Dioscorus and Synodus (Ephesina 2.) dixit, consentimus huic and nos omnes. Act.
Conc. Ephesians. recitata in Conc. Chal. Act. 1. pa 28. b.
two natures at all, or any way either making one or two persons, to be in
Christ after the incarnation. So whether one held the same two natures, to make
but one person, as the Catholics said, or to make two distinct persons as the
Nestorians affirmed, it was all one to Dioscorus; The very holding of two
natures to be in Christ, either of those ways made one an heretic in the
judgment of Eutiches, Dioscorus, and their Ephesine Synod. The heresy of
Eutiches did equally contradict both the Catholic truth and the Nestorian
heresy, because they both consented in one common truth, that there are two
distinct natures, or essences abiding in Christ. If this judgment of Dioscorus
against Ibas, will prove either him or his Epistle to be Catholic, the very
like effect it must have in Theodorus, in Nestorius, in all Nestorians, and in
all their writings; they all with Ibas, profess two natures to abide in
Christ, they all by the judgment of Dioscorus and his Synod, are heretical.
So either must Vigilius approve all Nestorians for Catholics, if this reason
for Ibas be effectual, or if they be truly heretics, whom Dioscorus yet
has condemned, as well as Ibas, then is this his reason ineffectuall to prove
from the condemnation of Dioscorus, Ibas or his profession to be Catholic.

30. His second reason is drawn from the likeness and identitie of faith in
Flavianus, and Ibas, damnat Vigil. Constable. nu. 195.
quoque propter duarum naturarum vocem, Dioscorus did also, or for the same
cause, condemn Flavianus, for which Ibas was condemned, to wit, for professing
two natures in Christ. Seeing then it is known, that the profession of
Flavianus was Catholic, the profession also of Ibas made in this Epistle,
being like to that of Flavianus, must needs be Catholic; My annotation on
this reason of Vigilius is, that it is inconsequent, sophistical, and worth
nothing at all, Ibas indeed in words said the like with Flavianus, but
Flavianus said it in a Chatholike sense, holding those two natures to make but
one person or personal subsistence, and Ibas said it in this Epistle in an
heretical sense, holding those two natures to make two distinct persons, or
two personal subsistences. To Dioscorus it was all one to say as Flavianus
did, or as Ibas in this Epistle does; for seeing they both jumpe in this, that
two natures or essences do remain after the incarnation, they are both alike
heretics to Dioscorus, though in truth the profession of Flavianus made him a
Martyr, and the profession of Ibas, set down in this Epistle, being in words
the same, make him an heretic. Or if Ibas be a Catholic for professing in
words the same which Flavianus did, then by this reason of our Author Vigilius,
Theodorus, Nestorius, and all the Nestorians, are Catholics, because they all
profess with Flavianus, two natures, and one person to be in Christ in the
same manner as Ibas here does.

31. His third and last reason is drawn from the judgment of the Council at
Chalcedon; they Vig. Constable. nu. 195
condemned Dioscorus and Eutiches, but they embraced Ibas: an evidence, that as
they judged the profession of Dioscorus to be heretical, so they esteemed the
profession of Ibas to be orthodoxall; yea, even this which he makes in this
Epistle; for after that Cyrill had once explaned his Chapters, which was before
this Epistle was writ, after that time, in Catholicae fidei rectitudine ab
eadem Chalcedonensi Synodo judicatus est Ibas permansisse; Ibas was by the
Synod at Chalcedon judged to have continued in the right profession of the
faith. The only gloss fit for this reason is, that it is fallacious, untrue,
and slanderous: fallacious; for the Council of Chalcedon received Ibas indeed,
but not for this profession made in his Epistle, which that holy Council both
knew, and condemned as heretical, but, as before we have declared; for his
consenting to the Ephesine Council, and condemning of Nestorius first before
Photius, and Eustathius, and before then themselves in the Council at
Chalcedon; upon this, whereby Ibas did intruth condemn his own profession
made in this Epistle, and this whole Epistle, upon this I say; and not for
professing in this Epistle two natures and one person, was Ibas received by the
Council at Chalcedon: untrue; for neither did the Council of Chalcedon judge
Ibas to have been a Catholic, or hold the Catholic faith, upon the
declaration of Cyrils Chapters; much less did they judge him to have continued
ever after that time, in the orthodoxie of faith: slanderous; for Vigilius by
saying that the Council of Chalcedon held Ibas for a Catholic, upon, or
shortly after the declaration of Cyrils Chapters, makes them all guilty of
Nestorianisme: long after that explanation did Ibas write this Epistle, wherein
all the blasphemies of Nestorius, are maintained. Had they judged him, since
that Explanation to be a Catholic; they must approve this Epistle for
Catholic, and so prove themselves to be heretical, to be Nestorians. Thus
Vigilius, to cloak his own heresy, would feign fasten it upon the holy
Council of Chalcedon, which was so far from partaking with Vigilius herein,
that by their definitive sentence this very Tota Epistola haeretica est. Conc.
5. Coll. 6. pa. 576. a. b.
profession of two natures, and one person, made in this Epistle; yea, every
part of this Epistle, is condemned for impious, and heretical. And this I hope
may serve for an explanation of Pope Vigilius his third reason to prove Ibas a
Catholic, (drawn from this profession of faith, made in this Epistle) until
some Annalist like Baronius will help us to a better Commentary.

32. The second reason of Vigilius, set down in the words before recited to
prove Ibas a Catholic, is drawn from his approving of the Ephesine Council
at the judgment before Photius and Eustathius; He there, says Vigilius In
Constable. nu. 194.
, most plainly approved the Ephesine Synod, and the doctrines decreed therein,
he professed them to be equal to the Nicene decrees; Photius the Judge,
exceedingly commended Ibas, that he was so forward to profess the true faith,
and wipe away all suspicion of heresy from him: how could Ibas then be ought
else but a Catholic, who made such a Catholic confession? Truly when Ibas
made this confession before Photius and Eustathius, there is no doubt but he
was then a Catholic; but Vigilius his purpose is to prove him to have been a
Catholic, when he writ this Epistle, ever His Capitulis a Cyrillo explanatis,
devote in ejus communionem concurrit. Vig Constable. nu. 193. post explanationem
12. Capitulorum Ibas professus est se habuisse Cyrillum orthodoxum, et in
co^munione ipsius ad exitum permansisse. Jbid. nu. 194.
since the time that Cyrill explaned his Chapters; and Baronius, who is very
sparing of his speech in this whole matter, yet both saw, and professes this
to be the true intent of Vigilius; for he Bar. an. 553. nu. 193.
telling us, that whereas those words in the end of the Epistle of Ibas, [None
dare now say, there is one nature, but they profess to believe in the Temple,
and in him who dwells in the Temple] were wont to be taken by the Nestorians
in such a sense, as if in Christ there were two persons, ne Ibas putaretur
ejusdem esse in verbis illis sententiae cum Nestorianis; lest Ibas might be
thought to have the same meaning with the Nestorians in those words; Vigilius
brings a declaration of those words, how they are to be brought to a right
sense, and this he teaches, by showing how Ibas in the Acts (before Photius
and Eustathius) embraced the Ephesine Council. So Baronius: by whose help,
besides the evidence in the text it self; it now appears, that Vigilius, by
this profession of Ibas, made before Photius and Eustathius, would prove Ibas
to have been a Catholic when he writ this Epistle, and that in it Ibas was
not ejusdem sententiae cum Nestorianis; of the same opinion with the Nestorians.

33. A reason so void of reason, that I could not have held patience with the
Popes Holiness, had not Nestorianisme dulled his wit and judgment at this
time. The judgment before Photius and Eustathius, was in the year when
Posthumianus and Zeno were Consuls, or in the next unto it, as the Acts
Iudicium illud Photij, et Eustathij extat cum Actis in eo, in Conc. Chal. Act.
9. et 10.
do testify, that is, according to Baronius account, an. 448. The union Vt
supra probatum est. Ca. 11.
betwixt John and Cyrill was made in the next year after the Ephesine
Council, that is, an. 432. The Epistle of Ibas was writ by Baronius Almanacke
in the very moment of the union; Bar. illo an. nu. 57
but in truth, two or three years at the least after the union, as before we
have proved. Now I pray you, what a consequent, or collection call you this?
Ibas being suspected of Nestorianisme, to clear himself, consented to the
Ephesine Council, and showed himself to be a Catholic, sixteen years
after the union, or thirteen years after he writ this Epistle: therefore at
the time of the union, and of the writing of this Epistle, he was a Catholic
also, and not a Nestorian. Why, twelve or sixteen years might have a strange
operation in Ibas; and there is no doubt but so it had? In so many revolutions
Ibas saw, how both himself and other Nestorians were publicly condemned by
the Church, and by the Emperor, and hated of all, who had any love to the
Catholic faith: He saw that himself was personally called cora^ nobis, for
maintaining that heresy: he knew, that unless he cleared himself before
those Judges, deputed by the Emperor to hear and examine his cause; he was in
danger of the like deprivation, as Nestorius, and some others had justly felt.
The serious and often meditation of these matters wrought effectually upon
Ibas, and therefore before Photius and Eustathius he renounced, disclamed, and
condemned Nestorianisme, and so at that time proved himself, by his profession
before them, to be a Catholic, as he had before that time, and specially when
he writ this Epistle, demonstrated himself to be, not only an earnest, but a
malicious and slanderous heretic. I cannot illustrate the Pope, my Authors
reason, by a more fit similitude, than of a man once deadly sick of the
Pestilence, but afterward fully cured and amended; for Vigilius his reason is,
as if one should say, This man was not sick of the Pestilence, no not when the
sore was running upon him, and he at the very point of death, because some
twelve or sixteen years after, he was a sound man, clear from all suspicion
of the Pestilence. Nor needs this second reason of Vigilius any further
explanation.

34. We come now, in the last place, to that which Vigilius makes his first
reason in the former text; into which, because he has compacted the very
venom of the Nestorians, we must be enforced to take somewhat the more
pains, in our Commentary upon it. This reason (in which, it seems, the Pope
puts his greatest confidence) is drawn from the explanation of Cyrils
Chapters, of which Vig. Constable. nu. 192 193, 194.
Vigilius says, that Ibas at the first, and before Cyrill had explaned them,
misconceived the meaning of Cyrill, and therefore seemed to speak against
Cyrill: but so soon as Cyrill had explaned them, and decared his own meaning,
then Ibas, and all the Eastern Bishops forthwith embraced the communion with
Cyrill; and ever after that, Ibas continued a Catholic. This Epistle then of
Ibas, and profession of faith made therein, which certainly followed the
Explanation of Cyrils Chapters, must needs be Catholic, and declare Ibas, when
he writ it, to have been a Catholic; seeing, when he made this confession of
faith, and writ this Epistle, he held the same faith with Cyrill; and therefore
no doubt held the Catholic faith. This is the full sum and effect of the
Popes reason, taken from the Explanation of Cyrils Chapters, and for the
excellency of it, it spreads it self into every part of the two other
reasons also, as containing an explication of them, or giving strength unto
them; for which cause we are with more diligence and circumspection to examine
the pith of it.

35. And that we may more clearly behold and admire the Popes Artificium, in
handling this reason, we are to observe five several points thereof. The
first, a piece of the Popes Rhetoric, in that he says Nu. 193.
that Ibas before the Explanation and union, whilst he doubted, and
misconceived the meaning of Cyrill, visus est ei obloqui, he seemed to speak
against Cyrill at that time. He seeemed: Now Ibas professes of himself, that
he then called Donec seipsum interpretatus fuisset, quia Orientale Concilium
eum vocabat haereticum, et ut haereticum condemnavit, haereticum eum et ego
putavi. verba Ibae, in Act. Conc. Chal. Act. 10. pa. 113. a.
Cyrill an heretic, that he followed John Quando Orientale Concilium eum,
quasi haereticum anathematizavit, sequutus sum primatem meum: verba Ibae, ibid.
pa. 112. b.
, and the Conventicle, which held with him, and so that with them he counted,
and in plain terms, called Cyrill Ita Cyrillum vocatum a Conciliabulo Iohannis,
supra oftendi ca 11.
an author of schism, a disturber of the peace of the Church, a despiser of
imperial authority, an upholder of open tyranny, an Arch-hereticke, and
chief of the conspiracy, that he condemned, accursed, anathematized him, and
that with such a detestation, that though Cyrill Et juravimus quod Cyrillus,
etiamsi rejecerit Capitula, a nobis suscipiendus non sit, eo quod Haeresiarches
factus sit. Epist. Legatoru^ Conciliabuli Ephesini. to. 3. Act. ca 10. Append.
should disclaim his heresy, yet he should never be received into their
communion. These and many like intolerable calumnies, and slanders, were the
usual liveries, that Ibas and the rest of that Conventicle, during the time of
the disunion bestowed upon Cyrill; so vile, and malicious, that no
hyperbolicall exaggeration, can sufficiently express the impiety of them, and
yet the Popes holiness, by the figure called Meicosis, does so artificially
extenuate, and almost annihilate them, as if in all these, Ibas did but seem to
speak against Cyrill, He seemed, what, to revile? nay, he seemed but to speak
against him: Vigilius was too sparing and diminutive in his reproof, Non laudo.

36. The second part of his Artificium concerns Chronology; where he Vig
Constable. nu. 193.
says, that when Cyrill had explaned his Chapters, Ibas in ejus communionem
devote concurrit; Ibas then ran, and hastened to communicate with Cyril. Nor
did Ibas alone at that time accord with Cyrill, but he, cum Ibid. nu. 194.
omnibus Orientalibus Episcopis, with all the Eastern Bishops; they all then
embraced Cyrill for a Catholic; and Ibas ever after that, Ibid. et in
Catholica fidei rectitudine judicatus est permansisse. Nu. 195.
usque ad exitum, even to his dying day, continued in the Catholic communion
with Cyrill. Thus Vigilius. I cannot flatter the Pope, nor set any gloss upon
this text, but this, that is utterly untrue. All the Eastern Bishops did not,
at the time of the union betwixt John and Cyrill, much less at the time when
Cyrill declared his Chapters, consent, or hold communion with Cyrill. Of
Theodoret it is as evident as the Sun; for he, after the union, writ Epistola
illa Theod. extat in Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 558. b.
to Nestorius, that he then held Cyrils Chapters heretical, and that he would
not consent to that which was done against Nestorius, no, not though his hands
should be cut off. The like is certain of Ibas, for that he continued a
malicious and slanderous defender of Nestorianisme, after the union; this, his
impious Epistle, written, at least, two whole years after that union, wherein
he maintains all the impieties of Nestorius, does demonstrate. So untrue it
is which Vigilius affirms, both in general, that all the Eastern Bishops,
and particularly, that Ibas, upon the Explanation of Cyrils Chapters, which was
before the union, consented to Cyrill, and communicated with him: and much more
untrue it is, that Ibas, ever after that Explanation, even to his dying day,
remained a Catholic.

37. I say yet more for the further clearing of this matter, that neither all,
nor so much as any one of all those Eastern Bishops, who took part with John,
consented to Cyrill upon his declaration of the twelve Chapters, for Cyrill set
forth his explanation during the time of the Ephesine Council, while he was
imprisoned at Ephesus, Cyrill, says Baronius Bar. an. 431. nu. 153.
, being left at Ephesus, was not idle there, but knowing that his twelve
Chapters were carped at by adversaries, lest by their mis-interpretations they
might be infringed: ipse illis explanationem adjecit, himself set out an
explanation of them. The very title prefixed to that explanation declares the
same: which is Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 1.
, Cyrills explanation of the twelve Chapters, Edita Ephesi, sacra Synodo
exigente, published at Ephesus, the holy Synod requiring Cyrill to do the
same. The Nestorians and their Conventicle witness this most clearly: for they
who stayed at Ephesus, writ thus to the Legates, whom they sent to the Emperor
at Constantinople. We Eorum Epist. extat in Append. ad to. 3. Act. Conc. Ephesians.
ca. 7. append.
have sent unto you, recens factam expositionem ab Alexandrino, haereticorum
capitulorum, the Explanation of the heretical Chapters lately made by Cyrill
of Alexandria. This was writ by the Ephesine Conventicle, before the
dissolutio^ of the Synod, which ended about the eight day Bin. in Not. ad Conc.
Ephesians. pa. 922. a.
of November.

38. Now that upon this explanation published by Cyrill, the Eastern Bishops
did not consent to Cyrill, nor run to communicate with him, their own words
in the Epistle of the Conventicle last cited, do make manifest, To. 3. Act.
Ephesians. in append. ca. 7.
where they say s of this explanation of Cyrill, that he does evidentius per
illam ostendere suam impietatem, more plainly by it show his impiety, then by
the Chapters themselves. So they more detested that explanation then the
Chapters explaned, it was more heretical in their judgment then the other.
And John himself with the other Legates, assented to the judgment of their
fellows: we are ready Epist. legatorum ad suos in Epheso. in append. to. 3.
Act. ca. 10. pa. 791. b.
say they to strive unto death, and neither receive Cyrill, neque capitula ab
eo exposita, neither the Chapters by him explained. Whence it is without all
doubt, that neither all, nor any at all, not John himself, who was the
ringleader to the rest, did consent to Cyrill and hold communion with him, upon
his publishing that Explanation of his Chapters, or upon their knowing thereof.

39. But how long after this explanation, was it before their union and
communion with Cyrill? Peltanus and Binius say Duravit hac controversia duos
aut tres annos post Con^^ Ephesinum dissolutum. Pax quarto demum anno impotrata
est. Bin. Not. ante cap. 1. to. 5. Act. Ephesians.
that those jarres continued for three years after the end of the Council. So
directly do they control the Popes Constitution, wherein Vigilius so often
affirms, that upon the publishing of Cyrills explanation they ran to
communicate with Cyrill: But because the account of Peltanus and Binius is
certainly false, we will not press the Pope therewith. Thus much is evident,
that the union betwixt John and Cyrill was not concluded till December; in the
next year after the Council was ended. For Cyrill received neither John, nor
any of the rest (save only Paulus Emisenus) till Paulus came the second time
to Alexandria, bringing with him the orthodoxall profession of John Vid. sup.
ca. 11.
, and the other Bishops with him, at which time the union was fully concluded,
and in token thereof both Paulus made that his memorable Sermon at Alexandria,
on the twenty and ninth day of the month Chiath mensis Aegyptiacus quartus a
Thoth, in quo est Aequinoctium aestivum vid. Joseph. Scalig. lib. 4. de Emend.
temp. in Anno Egypt. and lib. 7. in mensium divis. pa. 378.
Chyath, which answers to our December; and Cyrill writ that Epist. Cyril. 28.
Epistle, as an hymn of joy, which begins latentur coeli, so far were the
Eastern Bishops from hastening or running as Vigilius says to the communion
with Cyrill upon his explanation made known unto them, that they all save
Paul, stayed a full year and more after that explanation, before they made
peace or consented with Cyrill.

40. The third part of the Popes Artificium is his Logic, which in very truth
is nothing else but trifling sophistication: he supposes that Cyrills
explanation of the twelve Chapters, was the cause and occasion of the union
betwixt Cyrill, and the rest. It was not, for that was published, and known
unto them, more then an whole year before the union: nay that explanation did
more alienate their minds from Cyrill, they detested that, more then the
Chapters themselves, as we have clearly proved; so far was it from effecting
the union, that it increased the breach and disunion. The only true, and
certain cause of the union, was the relenting of the Eastern Bishops, from
their former stomach, obstinacy, and heresy: their subscribing to all that
Cyrill required of them, to wit, to the condemning of Nestorius, and his
heresies: till they did this, Cyrill was unmovable, inflexible to any union:
as soon as ever this was done, Cyrill most gladly embraced them, and sung his
hymn, Let the heavens rejoice, for their consenting to the Catholic faith.
Vigilius still harps on a wrong string, and fallaciously puts non causam, pro
causa, which was not fitting for the Popes gravitie and judgment.

41. The fourth and fifth which are the chief parts of my Authors Artificium,
concern his Ethicall, and Theological knowledge, which being confused and
mingled together throughout this whole text, and manifesting the Pope to join
to his heresy, slander, I must be forced to handle them both together. These
consist in that which the Pope so often beats upon, that Cyrill explaned his
Chapters, and upon that explanation, Ibas and the other Eastern Bishops ran
to embrace him, and his communion, what think you is that explanation of
Cyrills Chapters, which the Pope so eagerly urges, and makes the cause of the
union with Ibas and the rest? Truly that's a mystery indeed, and contains in
it the pith of Nestorianisme: Baronius was very loath to unfold this secret of
the Popes Art: but I hope to make it so perspicuous, as that none shall bemone
the want of the Cardinals Commentary in this point.

42. The Nestorians being as Cyrill Cyrill. Epist. 28. quae extat etiam in Act.
Conc. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 6.
says, tantum ad calumniandum nati, men composed of lies and slanders, boasted
that at the time of the union, the Catholics had renounced and condemned their
former doctrines, and in all points consented unto them. And in particular they
avouched this of Cyrill who was the chief agent on the Catholics part, and who
most zealously had opposed himself to their heresy. This has been so
clearly proved before Supra ca. 11.
, both by the Epistles of Cyrill, by the writings of Theodoret, and by this
very Epistle of Ibas, that I think it superfluous to add ought thereunto. Now
the same Nestorians being no less subtle, then malicious: when they spoke or
writ of this matter to any of their own consorts, to their Electi, one of
which this Maris was to whom Ibas writ, then they said in plain terms, that
Cyrill (and the other Catholics) had recalled, condemned; or anathematized his
twelve Chapters, and his former doctrine; as in the end of this Epistle Ibas
tells Maris, and wishes him to show the same, Omnibus patribus nostris pacem
amantibus, to all their Fathers, to the whole society of Nestorians, and all
that loved the peace with them, that Cyrill did now, contraria docere priori
doctrinae, teach the contrary to his former doctrine, that he anathematized
it and all that held it. Lo here is plain dealing with Maris. Cyrill now
condemns and anathematizeth his twelve Chapters: but wheh they spoke to men
otherwise affected then themselves, to such as could not endure to hear that
Cyrill had recanted or anathematized his former doctrine, and Chapters, then
they would not use such harsh and homely words of Cyrill, but they would
signify the same thing, by a more facile, fair, and courteous phrase, saying
Cyrill explaned his Chapters, and they upon his explanation, received him into
their communion, and held him for a Catholic.

43. This to be that which Ibas and other Nestorians meant by Cyrills
explanation of his Chapters, the words of Ibas himself uttered in the
judgment, before Photius, and Eustathius, 16 years after the union, do make
clear; for although Ibas had then in the maine point renounced Nestorianisme:
yet he still retained a touch or smack of their Nestorian language, he had not
as yet perfectly learned to pronounce Shibboleth, nor wholly weaned himself, or
disused his tongue from those Nestorian phrases, which were so familiar in
their mouths. In those acts, Maris Extant in Conc. Chalced. Act. 10. pa. 112.
b.
accuses Ibas to have said of himself and the other Eastern Bishops, we
would not have received Cyrill, unless he had anathematized his Non dixisti?
quia nisi anathematizasset Capitula sua, non reciperemus eum. ibid.
Chapters. Ibas answered; I said, that neither I nor they would have received
him, nisi seipsum interpretatus fuisset, unless he had explained himself. And
when Maris again replied, what? Did you not say, quando flagitatum est in
secreto, when you were privately, and in secret demanded, did you not then say,
I received not Cyrill, donec anathematizasset sua capitula, till he had
anathematized his own Chapters? Ibas to this answered: Truly, I remember not
whether I said so or no: Si autem dixi, vere dixi, quia orientale Concilium
recepit eum sua capitula retractantem, but if I said it, I said but the truth,
for the Eastern Council received Cyrill when he had recalled his Chapters,
otherwise I would have accounted him an heretic. So answered Ibas: plainly
calling that in the one place the anathematizing, and retracting of his
Chapters, which in the other he called explaining or interpreting his Chapters;
but the one was spoken in secret, the other openly, and by the one which is
plain, he shows what they meant by that mild phrase of explaining Chapters;
and the like words are there often repeated.

44. Baronius darkely saw, and closely signified this, when reciting the effect
of Ibas answer at that judgment, he says Bar. an. 448. nu. 65.
, that Ibas professed, that he called Cyrill an heretic, before the union was
concluded; postquam vero declarando sua Capitula, Cyrillus ista purgavit, and
ob eam causam inita est inter eos concordia, but after that Cyrill by
explaining his Chapters had purged them, and the union for that cause (of
purging them) was once made, never after that did Ibas call Cyrill an
heretic. So Baronius: declaring evidently, that when Ibas said that Cyrill
expounded, or explained his Chapters, that explanation which he meant, was in
truth a purging of those Chapters. And what was there, or is, in any one of
those twelve Chapters to be purged out? They are all and wholly Quod nulla ex
part ab Euangelica and Apostolica doctrina aberraverim, id, postquam Epistolas
quas ad Nestorium conscripseram (earum una habet illa 12. Capitula (ea extat.
to. 1. act Con. Ephesians. ca. 14.) legissent, communi omnium sententia confessi
sunt omnes. Cyril. Ep. ad. Imper. to. 5. Act. Ephesians. ca. 2. pa. 829. a.
orthodoxall, approved in ever part, both by the holy Ephesine Council, and
after that by the Council at Chalcedon Conc. Chal. in defin. fidei. Act. 5.
. Seeing in them, and every part of them there is not one dram of any dross,
seeing all of them are the pure and refined Catholic faith, if ought at all
be purged out of them, it must needs be a Catholic doctrine, a position of
the Catholic faith: the purging and wiping away of any part, purges out the
whole Catholic faith, every part of it being so connexed with golden linkes
together, that no man can deny one unless he renounce al; nor purge out any
of that vital blood, but in stead thereof will succeed all the blasphemous
humors of the Nestorians; Since the explanation which Ibas meant was joined
with a purging of those Chapters, it was not, nor could it be any other but a
plain denial, condemning and anathematizing of those Chapters, and of the
whole Catholic faith.

45. This will be more clear, if we consider the occasion of this phrase, and
why the Nestorians called that an Explanation, which (as they meant) was a
condemnation of his Chapters. S. Cyrill, as he was most orthodoxall in this
point for his sense, so for his words he was not so strict and precise, but
sometimes took the word Nature in an ample, and catachresticall signification,
for Person, but commonly in the proper and usual signification, for Essence;
whenever he took it in the later sense, he never then said that there was
one only nature in Christ, which was the heresy of Apollinarius, and
Eutiches, but he still professed and maintained two natures, that is, two
essences, against Apollinarius, to be truly in Christ. But when he said that
one Nature was in Christ, he then ever meant one Person, and not one Essence.
And in this use of the word [Nature] he followed Athanasius, whose words he
alleges and approves, we Athanasii verba apud Cyrillu^ lib. de rect. fide ad
Imper. to. 1. Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 5.. Porro. pa. 672. a.
confess Christ to be the Son of God, according to the spirit; and to be the
Son of Man, according to the flesh, (...), not two natures to be one Son,
(...); but one nature of the Word incarnate: Did Athanasius deny two essences;
either the divinity or humanity in Christ? Nothing less: in that very
sentence he professes him to be truly God, and truly Man: but taking the word
Nature for Person, he in that sense truly denies two, and professes but one
Nature; that is, one natural subsistence or Person to be in him. In like sort
Cyrill himself, in his Epistle Ea Epistola Cyril. citatura ae Iustiniano in
Edict.. Credimus.
to Successus, affirms that there is, una natura Dei verbi incarnati, one
Nature of the Son of God incarnate: that is, the Son of God, being now
incarnate is one Nature, or natural subsistence, or one, and not two persons,
and yet one consisting of two natures, that is, two essences, the divine nature
assuming flesh, and the humane nature being personally united unto the Godhead:
which to be his true meaning, besides Justinians Ipse pater (Cyril.) quoties
unam naturam dixit verbi incarnatam, Naturae nomine prosubsiste^tia usus est,
Justin. in Edict.. Credimus, pa. 493. a.
testimony, infinite places do make evident, those especially in his book de
Extat to. 1. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 5.
fide recta ad Theodosium, where he says Ibid.. Quin. pa. 666. a.
the scripture sometimes ascribes all that is spoken of Christ, to the man,
sometimes all, unto God, and speaks right in both, propter utriusque naturae
in unam, eandemque personam coitionem, by reason that both the natures do
meet in one, and the self same person. Nor may we think this diverse use of
the same word, to be strange or unlawful, but as the name of Father, is given
even in Scripture unto the Son Tota Trinitas est Pater noster per creationem et
guhernationem; ut Esa. 63. Et nunc Domine; Pater nosteres: licet persona Patris
dicatur Pater Christi per naturam. Aquin. in ca. 1. Epist. 2. ad Cor. v. 1. Et
Paternitas in divinis prius importat respectum personae ad personam, quam
respectum Dei ad creaturam. Aquin. p. 1. q. 33. art. 3.
, when it is taken essentially, or put in opposition to the creatures, but
never when it is taken personally, or put in opposition to the Son; Even so,
when the name of Nature is taken, (as in Athanasius, Cyrill, and others
sometimes it is) without an opposition to Person, it may there signify the
same with Person, and note any natural subsistence: but when in any speech
there is expressed, or implied an opposition of Nature unto Person, there it
ought only to signify the substances, or essences concurrant in in that
person, and not the Person it self. Nor was it so great a fault in the
Nestorians to take the word Nature for Person, but partly in drawing that which
was the unproper, and abusive, into the ordinary and usual signification,
(they seldom by Nature noting ought but Person) and specially for that they
took Nature for Person, even in those very speeches wherein was noted and
expressed an opposition of Nature unto Person, as in that profession which they
made, acknowledging in Christ two natures and one person: where taking Nature
for Person, they were enforced to take one Person, for one by affection, or
cohabitation: neither of which truly making one person, they called that, one
person, which in truth was not one, but diverse distinct persons.

46. This profession of one Nature, that is, of one natural subsistence, or of
one person, the Nestorions disliked in Cyrill; and in his Chapters, and thought
it (but very falsely) to be the same which Apollinarius taught, as appears by
the Epistle of Ibas, where he Ibas in Epist. apud Conc. Chal. Act. 10.
thus writes, Cyrill confuting the Books of Nestorius has written, as
Apollinaris did, that God himself, or the Word, is made man, so that there is
no difference betwixt the Temple, and him who dwells in the Temple, for he
has written twelve Chapters, to show, quia una est natura divinitatis, and
humanitatis, that there is one nature of the Deity, and humanity in Christ,
which thing is full of impiety. So Ibas, reproving Cyrill and condemning in his
Chapters the teaching of one Nature (to wit of one person) so that according to
him the temple and inhabiter in it, are one and the same person. And Cyrill so
taught Locis citatis paulo ante.
indeed, that they were one nature in that sense, howbeit in his Chapters he
does not call them one nature; but the Nestorians confounding Nature with
person, upon Cyrils words, where in his Chapters he plainly teaches them, to
be one person Si quis Dei verbu^ carnisecundum Hypostasim unitum non
confitetur, anathema sit, Ana h. Cyr. 2 Si quis Hypostases (.i. Personas) in
Christo distinguit et non connectit eas commistione illa quae est (...),
anathema sit. Idem anath. 3. to. 1. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 14.
, or one natural subsistence, affirmed him to say in them, that they were one
Nature as they took Nature, which is true, for in his Chapters, he teaches
them indeed to be one person, which in the Nestorian language is one Nature.
The very same by Theodorets words is most clear, who Theod. repreh. Capit.
Cyrill. Anath. 3. extant ejus verba in Append tom. 5. Act. Con. Ephesians. ca. 2.
pa. 861 b.
for this cause reproved Cyrils Chapters, because he taught in them, non
oportere subsistentias sive naturas dividere, that the subsistences, that is,
the Natures ought not to be divided, and then he against Cyrill, having
opposed that there is in Christ, both the perfect subsistence of God, and the
perfect form or subsistence of man, he adds, that it is pious to confess
them both to be one Person, one Son, one Christ, and withal not amiss to
call them duas subsistentias, sive Naturas, two distinct subsistencies or
Natures united, and often does he teach the like, manifestly showing, that both
himself, as the other Nestorians, took Natures for Person, or personal
subsistence, and that they condemned Cyrils Chapters for this cause, for that
he denied two Natures (in that sense) to be in Christ, that is, two persons to
be in him.

47. Now it is clear and certain, that Cyrill as well before Voces quas de se
Servator utitur, duabus subsiste^^ijs aut personis, nequaqua^ tribuimus. Nam
etsi and ex duabus rebus ijsque diversis in unitatem inseparabilem coaluerit.
etc. Cyril. Epist. ad Nestorium ante Conc. Ephesians. extat tom. 1. Act. Conc.
Ephesians. ca. 14.. Porro.
, as at Duarum naturarum facta est unio, Cyrill. Epist. ad Johan. Antioch. cu^
siet unio. to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 6.. confitemur.
, and after Vnam verbi Dei subsistentiam esse certissimu^ est, quam incarnata^
novimus, -- secundum hoc unum and solli Naturarum vel substantiarum discrimen
observatur Cyril. Epist. ad Acat. post unionem. to. 5. ca. 7.
the union professed two natures, that is, two distinct essences, or substances
to be in Christ, but so, that they both concurred to make but one person, which
is both God and Man. And it is not unlike, but that Cyrill, as in his writings,
so in his speeches (even to Paulus B. of Emisa) professed thus Scilicet duas
esse in Christo naturas, and substantias, quas nonnunquam etiam subsistentias
vocat, ut in defens. anath. 1. Contra Theod. Rerum inquit ipsarum sive
subsistentiarum conventus est factus. to. 5. ca. 1. pa. 860. b. and, licet nos
intelligamus unitas esse subsistentias, def. anathe^. 3. ib. pa. 862. a. Vbi
clarum est Cyrillum uti voce subsistentiarum non propersonis, sed pro
substantiis and Naturis, et sit loquitur juxta usum haereticorum, nam ut
habetur apud Theod. lib. 2. hist ca. 8. Sardicense contilium ita dicebat. Nos
hanc habemus catholicam fidem, (...) profitentur in deo patre et filio unam
hypostasim vel subsistentiam, sed aiunt se utica voce insensu hareticis vulgato
et vulgariter intellecto, scilicet quod una sit essentiae et substantia eorum
non quod una sit persona.
much, when he came to deal about the union, and in that defense of his
Chapters, which he made in his refutation of Theodoret, this is often
signified. Hence now the Nestorians took occasion of their speech. They
knowing that Cyrill professed two Natures, took him to mean as themselves
did, two Persons thereby; maliciously suppressing what Cyrill added, for the
declaration of his meaning, that those two natures did both make but one
Person, or personal subsistence. This being concealed, and the words (Natures)
being taken not for essences, or substances, (as Cyrill meant) but, as the
Nestorians misconstrued him, for Persons, they with great ostentation gave out
amongst their friends, and slandered Cyrill, to have now so expounded, and
explaned his Chapters, as that he thereby wholly consented unto them, and
recalled and condemned all his former Chapters, and doctrine. That this was the
meaning of the Nestorians, in saying Cyrill explained his Chapters, the words
of Ibas spoken before Photius and Eustathius compared with his Epistle, makes
undoubted. For what there In Act. apud Photium quae habentur in Conc. Chal.
Act. 10.
he calls, three or four times before them, interpreting, saying Ibid. pa.
113. a.
, I my self and the Eastern Bishops did not nor would receive Cyrill: nor make
union, nor hold communion with him, donec interpretatus est, till he had
explained his meaning, and interpreted those Chapters, that, in other places of
those acts Ibid. pa. 112. b.
, as also in his Epistle (...) he in plain terms calls anathematizing his
Chapters, Iba Epist. in fine.
(...) the doctrine of one Person taught therein, saying, Paulus required
Cyrill, to anathematize such as profess one Nature (that is by the Nestorian
dialect) one person in Christ, and God inclined the heart of the Egyptian to
consent hereunto, and so contention ceased, and peace was made, and Cyrill, and
the rest do now teach Contraria priori doctrinae, the quite contrary to their
former doctrine, for before Cyrill taught in his Chapters, as Ibas Ibas in
principio Epistolae.
said, that there is one Nature (that is one person) and that there is no
(personal) difference betwixt the temple, and him that dwells in the temple;
but now no man (not Cyrill himself nor any other) dare say that there is one
Nature, (that is one Person) of the deity and humanity, but all do now
profess to believe in the temple (as one person.) and in him who dwells in
the temple (as another distinct person.) So Ibas; expressly calling that in one
place Cyrils anathematizing of his Chapters, which in the other he calls the
explanation of his chapters. And this the Epistle of Cyrill to Acatius Cyr
epist. ad Acat. quae est 29. et extat, to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 7.
does further witness, for he hearing how the Nestorians slandered him in this
point, does there at large declare, how by his profession of two natures, he
did not consent with them, in teaching two persons, but did ever both before
and after the union, teach the same truth herein, to wit, that in Christ there
are two Scripsi, me neque cum Ario, neque cu^ Apollinario sensisse unquam --
sed opus esse Naturaru^ observare differentiam, ib.. Audivi.
natures, (that is essences or subsistences) against the Appollinarians, and
yet that Christ is but one Nestorij cacodoxia ab hac doctrinae long diversa
est, nam duas Naturas nominat, easque a se invicem divellit. Deu^ seorsimponit
(ut una^ personam) et hominem itidem seorsim, (ut aliam personam) ibid.. Verum
dicent.
Person, or personal subsistence, against the Nestorians. So untruly did they
slander him to teach contrary to his Chapters, or by his explaining of them,
to have condemned, recalled, and anathematized his Chapters.

48. We do now clearly see, not only that the explanation of Cyrils Chapters,
which Ibas, and the other Nestorians of his time meant, is an utter condemning
of them all; but upon what pretense and occasion they called his
anathematizing, an Explation of his Chapters. If now it may further appear,
that Vigilius in his Constitution meant this Nestorian, and slanderous
Explanation; I doubt not, but his text will be sufficient, easy, and clear
in this point: And though none, who diligently peruseth the Popes words, can,
as I think, doubt hereof; yet because it is not fit, in a just Commentary, to
give naked asseverations, specially in a point of such moment, I will propose
three or four reasons to make evident the same. The first is taken from the
correspondence and parity of the effect, which followed upon this Explanation,
as the cause thereof: It is no doubt but Vigilius meant such an explanation of
Cyrils Chapters, as upon which, that union which Ibas held with Cyrill, at the
time when he writ this Epist. ensued; for Vigilius proves Ibas His ab eo
explanatis, in communionem ejus devote concurrit. Vig. Constable. nu. 193.
at that time to have bin a Catholic, because upon Cyrils Explanation, he
forthwith embraced the union with Cyrill, and ran to communicate with him. Now
it is certain Vt ante probatum est ca. 11.
, that Ibas, when he writ this Epistle, approved not the orthodoxall, and true
uni^^ which Cyrill truly made with John, and the rest, upon their p^^fession of
the orthodoxall faith, sent unto him; but only the union in Nestorianisme, the
slanderous union, which they falsely affirmed Cyrill to have made; wherefore it
certainly follows, that the Explanation of Cyrill, which Vigilius intends,
as a cause of that union, can be no other then the slanderous explanation,
wherein Cyrill was falsely said to have explaned his Chapters; that is,
anathematized them, and the doctrine delivered in them: for the true and
orthodoxal explanatio^ neither did, nor could effect that unio^ in
Nestorianisme, which Ibas embraced at the time when he writ this Epistle; it was
the condemning of his Chapters, and in such sort to explane them, that they
were anathematized; it was this, and no other explanation, which did make the
union, whereof Ibas boasts. Seeing then the heretical union of Ibas,
followed upon that explanation which Vigilius here means, it is doubtless,
that the explanation also which he intends, is the same slanderous, and
heretical explanation, which Ibas, and the other Nestorians ascribed to Cyril,
and upon which they joined in union and communion with him. The cause was like
the effect; the effect, an heretical, and slanderous union; the cause, an
heretical and slanderous explanation.

49. The other reason is taken from the words of Vigilius, which, being very
pregnant to this purpose, I shall desire the reader diligently to consider the
same. Vigilius having said Vig. Constable. nu. 194
, that, upon Cyrils Explanation, Ibas, with all the Eastern Bishops, held
Cyrill for a Catholic; adds this collection thereupon, Ex quo apparet, By
this it appears, Ibas, both before he understood the twelve Chapters of
Cyrils, and when he suspected one Nature to be taught thereby, orthodoxo sensu,
quod male dictum existimabat, reprobasse; then to have reproved those Chapters
in an orthodoxall sense; and also after the Explanation of them, orthodoxo
sensu, quae recte dicta cognoverat, venerabiliter suscepisse; then to have
approved them very reverently, and in an orthodoxall sense embraced that which
he knew to be rightly spoken therein. So Vigilius: plainly affirming the sense
of Ibas to have been orthodoxall, both before, and after the Explanation, or
union (made by John, and all the Cum omnibus Orientalibus Episcopis. Ibid.
rest,) with Cyrill: At both those times the doctrine, sense, and meaning of
Ibas was the same, and at both orthodoxal: and Cyrill, by that Explanation
which Vigilius means, declared his Chapters to have the very same meaning,
and orthodoxall sense which Ibas had; which, when Ibas perceived to be the
sense of Cyrill, forthwith he held Cyrill for a Catholic, and joined communion
with him, and reverently received his doctrine, as being consonant to the sense
of Ibas, which was still orthodoxall; so there was no alteration in the sense
of Ibas, that both before, and after Cyrils Explanation, was orthodoxall, only
before the union, or Explanation Ibas mis-understood Cyrils meaning, and
thought he had taught one Nature to be in Christ, whereas Cyrill by his
Explanation showed, that he meant just as Ibas did, that there were in Christ
two Natures, even in that orthodoxall sense which Ibas had held, as well
before, as after the Explanation.

50. Oh what a Circean Cup is Heresy? specially Nestorianisme? Pope Vigilius
does now show himself in his colors, and demonstrates that he is, as by some
(...), quite transformed into Nestorius, Theodorus, or if there be any more
heretical than they in that kind; for what, think you, was that sense of
Ibas, which the Pope commends for orthodoxall? what was it first after the
Explanation and union made betwixt John and Cyrill? I have manifested this
before, and the Epistle of Ibas, written two years at least after that union,
does make it undeniably evident, that his sense was then, that there Vt liquet
ex Ibae Epist.
are two natures, making two persons in Christ, that the temple, and the
inhabiter in the temple are two distinct persons, that Cyrils Chapters were
heretical, in teaching one Nature, that is, one Person in Christ; in a word,
his sense then was, that Nestorianisme, and nothing but Nestorianisme was
Catholic, and that the decree at Ephesus, against Nestorius was heretical
doctrine. This sense of Ibas, Vigilius, by his Pontifical and Cathedral
Constitution, adjudgeth, and decrees to be orthodoxall, and Catholic. Could
Nestorius judge otherwise, or wish any other judgment?

51. It may be the sense of Ibas was better before the union, and Explanation;
what was it then? Truly it was the very self same: So long, says Ibas Verba
Ibae in Actis apud Photium in Conc. Chal. Act. 10. pa. 112. b.
, as the Eastern Council anathematized Cyrill, (which was still, till the
union) sequutus sum Primatem meum, I followed my Primate, that was, John of
Antioch; what his sense was, and the Synods with him, that was my sense. Now
the sense of John, and his Conventicle, set down in more than twenty Synodall
Epistles Vid. decretum Conciliabuli tom. 3. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 2. et
reliqui^ cap.
of theirs, was, that Cyrils twelve Chapters were heretical, contrary to the
Evangelical and Apostolical doctrine, that there are two Natures, making two
Persons in Christ; that to teach one Nature, that is, one Person in Christ, was
heretical: that Cyrill, and all that took part with him, or consented to his
Chapters, were heretics; yea, condemned and anathematized heretics; that the
holy Ephesine Council was a Conspiracy of heretics, of seditious and
factious persons. This was the sense of John, this the sense of Ibas before the
union: and this sense the Popes Holiness has decreed to be a Catholic and
orthodoxall sense: The sense of Ibas, says he, both before the Explanation,
or union, and after it, was orthodoxall; so, by the Pope Vigilius his decree,
it is good Catholic doctrine to teach two Persons in Christ; to teach, Cyrill,
Caelestine, the whole Ephesine Council, to be heretics, that is, in a word,
to teach Nestorianisme, and nothing but Nestorianisme to be the Catholic faith.

52. But that which I principally aimed at, out of those words of Vigilius,
was, to observe, that Cyrils Explanation here mentioned, and meant by Vigilius,
neither is, nor can be ought else but an absolute condemning, and
anathematizing of his twelve Chapters; for by that explanation, which Vigilius
intends, Cyrill showed, that his sense was the very same with that which Ibas
had before, and after the union, but that sense which Ibas had before, and
diverse years after the union, was, that the two Natures in Christ make two
distinct Persons, and that Cyrils twelve Chapters, in which it is constantly
taught, that there is but one Person (or, as the Nestorians spoke, but one
nature) in Christ, are heretical, and to be anathematized, as being contrary
to the Catholic faith; wherefore, that Explanation of Cyrils Chapters, which
Vigilius intends, is certainly a declaring and acknowledgment, that there is
not one, but two distinct Persons in Christ; and that his own twelve Chapters,
for teaching but one Person, are all of them heretical, and to be
anathematized.

53. The third reason is taken from Vigilius his scope and purpose in this
whole passage: Suppose Vigilius to have meant the orthodoxall Explanation Quae
extat in Actis Conc. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 1.
set out by Cyrill, seeing that is wholly repugnant to the Epistle of Ibas,
which is full fraught with Nestorianisme: Non diceret Iuvenalis Jbam esse
orthodoxum, nisi ex verbis Epistolae, ejus confessionem fidei orthodoxam
comprobaret. Vig. Constable. nu. 193.
Vigilius by approving that Explanation, had condemned this Epistle of Ibas,
and every part thereof. Seeing then by that Explanation which Vigilius
intends, his purpose is, to confirm, and strengthen this Epistle of Ibas,
and prove it to be orthodoxall, which is only done by approving the
slanderous Explanation of Cyrill to be orthodoxall; the very scope, and maine
purpose of Vigilius does declare, that it is not, nor can be the orthodoxall,
but the slanderous and heretical Explanation only of Cyrils Chapters, which
the Pope here meant, and by which, being commended for Catholic, he
indevoureth to prove the Epistle, which shows Ibas to have consented most
gladly, and reverently, as the Pope says, to it, to be indeed Catholic.

54. The fourth and last reason is taken from the fit coherence, and congruity,
which this exposition of Vigilius meaning, has, with his whole text concerning
this matter. Take him to speak of the true and orthodoxall explanation of
Cyrill, his words are riddles, more obscure than Plato's numbers, yea, they are
unreconciliable to the truth of the story: Ibas, says the Pope Jn Constable. nu.
193
, upon Cyrils Explanation, hastened and ran to communicate with Cyrill: Expound
this of Cyrils orthodoxall Explanation, it is utterly untrue; Ibas detested
Misimus vestrae sanctitati recens sa^ctam expositionem ab Alexandrino,
haereticorum Capitulorum, evidentius etiam per illam ostende^te suam
impictate^, ait Conciliabulum Ephesians. in quo Ibas in Epist. missa Iohanni, et
alijs, in Appen. ad to. 3. Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 7. pa. 790. a. Nos ad mortem
instare parati sumus, et neque Cyrillum, neque capitula ab e^ exposita
suscipere. Jbid. ca. 10. pa. 791. b.
that, more than the Chapters themselves; he neither ran to embrace that,
nor Cyrill for that, he fled from it as a serpent: and the like may be said of
the rest. But take Vigilius to speak (as indeed he does) of this slanderous
and heretical Explanation, and then all the words of Vigilius are not only
coherent among themselves, but perspicuous and easy. Ibas by an error Jlla
quae in Ibae Epistola, in injurijs beati Cyrilli per errorum intell gentiae
dicta sunt. Vig. Constable. nu. 192. et quod de Cyrillo, Capitula ejus aliter
intelligendo detraxcrat. Nu. 193.
mis-understood the words of Cyrill, (as thinkking him to teach one Nature,
that is, one Person in Christ) and then he spoke injuriously against him, and
called him an heretic; sed intellectu Ibid. nu. 192. Postea professus quia his
ab eo explanatis, ec a se intellectis, in communionem ejus devote concurrerit;
et de his, quae prius aliter intellexerat, sit co^versus. Ibid. nu. 193.
Capitulorum meliore recepto; but when Ibas better understood the Chapters of
Cyrill, (when he knew that Cyrill professed two Natures, that is, two persons
in Christ; and that Cyrill expounded his Chapters in such sort, that the
humanity and deity, were each a distinct person) then Ibas amended all that
he had said amiss of Cyrill, and called him no more an heretic, but embraced
Post explanatione^ beati Cyrilli factam, et intellectum Cyrilli sibi (Ibae)
declaratum, Jbas, Cyrillum, ut orthodoxum habuit, et in co^munione ipsius
permansit. Ib. nu. 194.
him as a Catholic. Again, Ibas Ibid. nu. 193.
blamed Cyrill, while he understood not his Chapters aright, (while he thought,
that but one person had been taught therein) but afterward, his ab eo
explanatis and intellectis; when Cyrill had explaned himself, and Ibas
understood his meaning, (that he meant either nature to a several person, and
so that there were two natures in Ibas sense, that is, two persons in Christ)
then, devote concurrit, Ibas ran to communicate, and shake hands with Cyrill.
Again Ibid.
, how should we not receive Ibas, being a Catholic, who though he seemed to
speak against Cyrill, while he mis-understood his Chapters; nunc ab eo in quo
fallebatur intellectu conversus; Now upon Cyrils Explanation, he is converted
from that error, whereby he was deceived: (for now he sees Cyrill to profess
two Natures, in the Nestorian sense, that is, two persons, whereas he
erroniously thought Cyrill to teach but one Person in Christ:) Again Ex quibus
evidenter declaratur in Iba Episcopo nihil de confessione fidei reprehensum,
quam constat esse laudatam, sed eundem, etc. Ibid nu. 193.
, nothing is reproved of the confession of Ibas, (that is orthodoxall, as
teaching two natures, that is, two persons in Christ) but Ibas has refuted
all, quod fallente intelligentia de Cyrillo male senserat; which he thought
amiss of Cyrill, by the error of his misconceiving Cyrils meaning, (as
thinking Cyrill to have taught but one Nature, that is, one Person in Christ.)
Lastly, the comparison which Ibid. nu. 195.
Vigilius sets down, betwixt Ibas, and Dioscorus, is hereby made easy and
clear. Dioscorus, though he commended Inventus est Dioscorus magis conari
Ephesinam primam Synodum destruere, qui eam sub execrabilis intellectus imagine
defendebat, and amplius B. Cirillum criminatus est, laudans eam Dioscorus, quam
Ibas sub falsi intellectus errore vituperans. Vig. Constable. Ibid.
Cyrill, and the Ephesine Council, for teaching one Nature in Christ, (to wit,
one Nature in Dioscorus sense, that is, one Essence) did more wrong Cyrill, and
the Council, than Ibas, who condemned them both, teaching one Nature (to wit,
one in Ibas his sense, that is, one person) in Christ: For Dioscorus commended
them in an execrable and heretical Haeretico spiritu Ephesinam Synodum, and
Cyrillum laudasse reperti sunt Dioscorus, et Eutiches. Jbid.
sense, (as teaching one nature (in Dioscorus sense, that is, one essence,
which to affirm is heretical) but Ibas At vero Ibas, qui per errorem unam
putans in his praedicari naturam ( id est personam) prius vituperavit Capitula,
et post declaratum sibi intellectum eorum (quod duas naturas Ibae sensu
doceret) communicatorem se B. Cyrilli cum omnibus Orientalibus professus est.
Ibid. nu. 195.
condemned them in an orthodoxall sense, (as thinking them to teach one nature,
in Ibas his sense, that is, one person in Christ) which to condemn is
orthodoxall.) Again, Dioscorus, though it was explaned unto him, that neither
Cyrill, nor the Ephesine Council taught one nature, in his sense; yet did he
by his heretical spirit persist in commending them, as agreeing with him in
that heretical doctrine; but Ibas Ibid.
, when it was explaned unto him, that Cyrill and the Ephesine Council taught
not one, but two natures, (in Ibas his sense) by his orthodoxall spirit
desisted presently to condemn them, and then embraced them both, as agreeing
with him in his orthodoxall doctrine, of two natures, that is, of two persons
in Christ. Lastly, Dioscorus, though he commended them, yet because he did it
in an heretical sense, and with an heretical spirit, was justly condemned by
the Council at Chalcedon; but Ibas, though he condemned them, yet because he
did it in an orthodoxall sense, and with an orthodoxall spirit, amending what
by an error, and misunderstanding he had done amiss, was approved by the
Council of Chalcedon, and judged by them to have continued in the right
Catholic faith. Thus by our exposition, that Vigilius meant the slanderous,
and heretical explanation of Cyrils Chapters, is his whole text both coherent,
and congruous to it self, and very perspicuous, and easy; which, if Vigilius
should mean, or be expounded to have understood of the true and orthodoxall
Explanation of Cyrill, would be, not only obscure, and inextricable, but even
repugnant, as well to the scope as to the words and text of Vigilius.

55. Thus the whole text of Vigilius being elucidated, it is now easy to
discern the two last parts of the Popes Artificium which before I mentioned,
for now you see that his Divinity is mere heresy, and Nestorianisme, and that
his morality is unjustice, falsehood, and calumny, most injuriously slandering,
not only Saint Cyrill; but the holy general Counsels of Ephesus, and
Chalcedon to have (like himself) defended and embraced the same heresies of
Nestorius, which by them all, is together with this decree of Vigilius
anathematized and condemned to the very pit of hell. There needs not, nor
will I seek any other censure of this most shameful dealing of Vigilius; then
the very words of Baronius Bar. an. 433. nu. 10.
concerning the Nestorians. Haec cum sciveris, perfacile intelliges: Seeing you
have known these things, you may easily perceive, under whose banner and
ensign these men fight. For seeing you have seen them by calumnies, lies, and
impostures, publishing counterfeit Epistles, (counterfeit explanations) in the
names of renowned men (such as Cyrill was) and patching lies unto lies, you may
well know whose soldiers they are, even the ministers of Satan, transfiguring
themselves into Angels of Light. Nescit enim pura religio imposturas, for true
Religion is void of frauds and impostures: nor does the truth seek lying
pretenses, nor the catholic faith support it self by calumnies and slanders:
sincerity goes secure, attended, only with simplicity; with which censure of
Baronius (agreeing indeed to all Nestorians: but in an eminency, and (...) to
Vigilius he being the Captain and King of them all) I end my Commentary on
the Constitution of Vigilius; which although it be not so plausibly set down
as Baronius would have done, had he thought good to have undertaken that
office: yet I dare boldly affirm, it is delivered far more truly, faithfully
and agreeably to the text, then either the Cardinal himself, or any other of
the Popes Gnathoes would ever have performed: for as I have not wittingly
omitted any one clause, which might breed a doubt in this obscure passage; so
have I not wrested the words of Vigilius to any other sense, then the coherence
of his text: the evidence of reason, and manifold proof out of the historical
narration and circumstances thereof do necessarily infer, and even enforce.

56. My conclusion now of this second reason of Vigilius and Baronius, for
defense of this Epistle of Ibas, is this: seeing the one defines, and the
other defends both Ibas himself, and his profession in this Epistle, in this
point, and in the sense of Ibas to be orthodoxall, because Ibas professes
therein two natures, and one person to be in Christ; and seeing as we have
certainly proved, Ibas meant two such natures, as make two distinct persons,
and one person, not by a natural, and hypostaticall union, but only by
affection, liking and cohabitation, which is the very heresy condemned in
Nestorius: It does hence clearly and unavoidably ensue, not only that this
third Chapter touching the approving of the Epistle of Ibas, does concern the
faith, and is a question, and cause of faith, but that Vigilius first, and next
Baronius, and then all who by word or writing, do defend either Vigilius or
Baronius, or the Popes judgment in causes of faith to be infallible, that they
all by defending this Epistle as orthodoxall; or that Ibas by it ought to be
judged a Catholic, do thereby maintain the condemned heresy of Nestorius to
be the only Catholic faith.

CHAP. XIII. Two assertions of Baronius, about the defenders of the Three
Chapters, refuted: and two other against them, confirmed: the one. That to
dissent from the Pope in a cause of faith, makes one neither an Heretic, nor a
Schismatike: the other, That to assent absolutely in faith to the Pope or
present Church of Rome, makes one both an Heretic, and a Schismatike.
1. HAving now demonstratively refuted the first evasion of Baronius, I would
proceed to the second, but that Baronius does enforce me to stay a little, in
the examining of two Positions, which he collects and sets down touching this
cause, the former concerning heresy, the later concerning schism.

2. His former is this, That An. 547. nu. 36.
both the defenders, and the condemners of these three Chapters were
Catholics, neither of both were Heretics. Negatio vel assertio non
constituebat quemquam haereticum; neither the condemning of these Chapters, nor
the defending of them made one an heretic, unless there were some other error
joined with it. Again, in An. 553. nu. 23.
these disputations about the three Chapters, the question was not such, ut
alter ab altero aliter sentiens, dici posset haereticus: that one dissenting
from another herein, might be called an heretic. So Baronius; who to free
Vigilius from heresy, acquits all that deal either pro or contra in this
cause, neither one side, nor the other are heretics.

3. See how heresy makes a man to dote. That this question about the three
Chapters is a cause of faith, we have clearly and unanswerably confirmed; and
Baronius himself has confessed; That the defenders of them, and condemners,
were in a manifest contradiction in this cause, (the former, by an evident
consequent and cunningly defending; the other condemning the heresies of
Nestorius) is most evident, and yet both of them in the Cardinals judgment are
good Catholics: neither the one, who with the Nestorians deny Christ to be
God: nor the other, who affirm him to be God, may be called heretics. This
truly is either the same heresy which the Rhetorians maintained, who as
Philastrius says Haeres. 43. Prateol. lib. 17. Haeres. 3.
praised all sects and opinions, and said they all went the right way; or else
it is an heresy peculiar to Baronius, such as none before him ever dreamed of;
That two contradictories in a cause of faith may be held, and yet neither of
them be an heresy, nor the pertinacious defenders of either of them both be
heretics. Baronius would be famous for a piece of new found learning, and an
heretical quirke, above all that ever went before him, such as by which he
has ex condigno, merited an applause of all heretics which either have been
or shall arise hereafter. For seeing in this cause of faith two contradictories
may be held without heresy, the like may be in every other point of faith; and
so with Vigilius, the Arians, Eutycheans, and all heretics shall have their
quietus est: say what they will in any cause of faith, none may call them
heretics. I commend the Cardinal for his wit. This makes all cock sure, it
is an unexpugnable bulwark to defend the Constitution of Pope Vigilius.

4. Say you, neither the defenders, nor the condemners of these Chapters may
for that cause be called heretics? For the condemners of them, trouble not
your wit, they are and shall be ever acknowledged for Catholics. But for the
defenders of them, who are the only men, that the Cardinal would gratify by
this assertion, I may boldly say with the Prophet Ier. 2.22.
, Though thou wash them with nitre and much soap, yet is their iniquity marked
out: All the water in Tyber and Euphrates cannot wash away their heresy: for
as we have before fully declared, the defending of any one, much more of all
these three Chapters, is the defending of Nestorianisme, and all the
blasphemies thereof, the condemning of the holy Councels of Ephesus and
Chalcedon, and of all that approve them, that is, of the whole catholic
Church, and of the whole Catholic Faith. All these must be heretical, if the
defenders of those three Chapters be not heretics.

5. Now against this assertion of Baronius, whereby he would acquit Vigilius
and all that defend him from heresy: I will oppose another and true assertion,
ensuing of that which we have clearly proved; and this it is: That, one or
more, either men or Churches may dissent from the Popes Cathedral and
definitive sentence in a cause of faith, made known unto them, and yet be no
heretics. For to omit other instances no less effectual, this one concerning
Vigilius, does make this most evident. The cause was a cause of faith, as
Baronius himself often professes. Vid. sup. ca. 5. nu. 14.
The Popes definitive and Apostolical sentence in that cause of faith, made
for defense of those three Chapters, was published and made known to the fifth
general Council, and to the whole Church: this also Baronius confesses An.
553. nu. 47. vid. sup. ca. 3. nu. 6.
, and yet they who contradicted the Popes Apostolical sentence in this cause
of faith, made known unto them, were not heretics: this also is the
confession of Baronius, whose assertion as you have seen is, that neither the
condemners of these Chapters, nor the defenders of them were heretics. So by
the Cardinals own assertions: one may contradict and oppugn the Popes
known, Cathedral, and Apostolical sentence in cause of faith, and yet be no
heretic. But what speak I of Baronius, the evidence and force of reason does
unresistably confirm this. For the whole fifth general Council contradicted,
yea condemned and accursed the Popes Cathedral and definitive sentence in this
cause of faith made known unto them. The whole Catholic Church ever since
has approved the fifth Council, and the decree thereof, and therefore has
contradicted, condemned and accursed the Popes sentence as the Council had
done. And none I hope will be so impudently heretical, as to call not only
the fifth general and holy Council, but the whole Catholic Church of God,
heretics: who yet must all be heretics, or else the dissenting from, yea the
detesting, and accursing the Popes Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith,
cannot make one an heretic.

6. I say more, and add this as a further consequent on that which has been
declared, That none can now assent to their Popes, or to their Cathedral
definitions and doctrines maintained by the present Roman Church, but co
nomine, even for that very cause, they are convicted, condemned, and accursed
heretics. For the manifesting of which conclusion, I will begin with that
their fundamental position of the Popes Cathedral infallibility in defining
causes of faith, whereof before I have so often made mention. And to prove the
present Roman Church to be heretical herein, two things are to be declared:
the one that this is indeed the position or doctrine of their Church: the
other, that this doctrine is heretical, and for such condemned by the
Catholic Church.

7. For the former; that the assertion of Popes infallibility in defining
causes of faith, is the doctrine of the present Roman Church, I think none
conversant in their writings will make doubt. Give me leave to propose some
testimonies of their own. The Pope says Bellarmine Lib. 4. de pont. ca. 3..
Sic.
, when he teaches the whole Church those things which belong to faith, nullo
casu errare potest, he can by no possible means then err. And this, as he
says, is, certissimum, a most certain truth: and in the end he adds, this
is a sign, Ecclesiam totam sentire, that the whole Church does believe the
Pope to be in such causes infallible. So he testifying this to be the judgment
and doctrine of their whole Church. The Jesuit Coster, for himself and their
whole Church says; We Ench. tit. de summo pont.. Fatemur.
do constantly deny the Popes vel haeresim docere posse vel errorem proponere,
to be able either to teach an heresy, or to propose an error to be believed.
When the Pope, says Bozius Th. Boz lib 18. de Sig. Eccl. ca. 6.. Sequitur.
, teaches the Church, or sets forth a decree of faith, Divinitus illi
praeclusa est omnis via, God then stops every way unto him, which might
bring him into error. Again Idem. lib. 16. ca. 8.. Rursus.
, in making such decrees, nunquam valuit aut valebit facere contra fidem, he
never was, he never shall be able to do ought against the faith. We believe
says Gretzer Def. ca. 3. lib. 4. de Romans Pont.. Terius.
, the judgment of him who succeeds Peter in the Chair, non secus ac olim
Petri infallibile; to be no otherwise infallible, then the judgment of Peter
was. And the Idem def. ca. 28. lib. 1. de pontif.. Quocirca.
gates of hell shall never be able to drive Peter's successors, ut errorem
quempiam ex cathedra definiant, that they shall define any error out of the
Chair. This is says Stapleton Relect. Cont. 3. qu. 4.. Circa.
, a certain and received truth among Catholics, That the Pope when he
decrees ought out of his pontifical office, has never yet taught any
heretical doctrine, nec tradere potest, nor can he deliver any error: yea if
it be a judgment Rel. Conc. 6. q. 3. Art. 5.. Respondeo.
of faith, it is not only false but heretical, to say that the Pope can err
therein. They, says Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 6. ca. 7.. Quid.
, who reject the Popes judgment in a cause of faith, are heretics. To this
accords Bellarmine Lib. 3. de verb. Dei ca. 8.. Excutimus.
, It is lawful to hold either part in a doubtful matter, without note of
heresy, before the Popes definition be given: but after the Popes sentence, he
who then dissenteth from him is an heretic. To these may be added, as
Bellarmine testifies Lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 2. Quarto.
, St. Thomas, Thomas Waldensis, Cardinal Turrecremata, Cardinal Cajetane,
Cardinal Hosius, Driedo, Eccius, Johannes a Lovanio, and Peter Soto, all these
teach it to be impossible, that the Pope should define any heretical doctrine.
And after them all, the saying of Gregory de Valentia, is most remarkable to
this purpose: It now appears, says he In 2. 2. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1 part.
30.
, that Saint Thomas did truly, and orthodoxally teach, that the proposal or
explication of our Creed, that is, of those things which are to be believed,
does belong unto the Pope: which truth contains so clearly the sum and
chief point of Catholic religion, ut nemo Catholicus esse possit, qui illam
non amplectatur, that none can be a Catholic, unless he hold and embrace
this. So he: professing that none are to be held with them for Catholics, but
such as maintain the Popes infallibility in proposing or defining causes of
faith.

8. They have yet another more plausible manner of teaching the Popes
Infallibility in such causes; and that is by commending the judgment of the
Church, and of general Councels to be infallible. All Catholics, says
Bellarmine Lib 2. de Conc. ca. 2. Ac ut.
, do constantly teach that general Councels, confirmed by the Pope, cannot
possibly err, in delivering doctrines of faith or good life: And this he
says, is so certain, that fide catholica tenendum est, it is to be embraced
by the Catholic faith: and so all Catholics are bound to believe it. Likewise
concerning the Church, he thus writes Lib. de. Eccles. milit. ca. 14.. Nostra.
, Nostra sententia est, it is our sentence, that the Church cannot absolutely
err, in proposing things which are to be believed. The same is taught by the
rest of their present Church. Now when they have said all, and set it out with
great pomp, and ostentation of words, for the infallibility of the Church, and
Council; it is all but a mere collusion, a very mask, under which they cover
and convaie the Popes Infallibility into the hearts of the simple. Try them
seriously who list, sound the depth of their meaning, and it will appear, that
when they say; The Church is infallible, General Councels are infallible, The
Pope is infallible, they never mean to make three distinct infallible Judges,
in matters of faith, but one only infallible, and that one is the Pope.

9. This to be their meaning, sometimes they will not let to profess: When we
teach, says Gretzer Def. ca. 10. lib. 3. de verb. Dei.. Iam. pa. 1450.
, that the Church is the (infallible) Judge in causes of faith, per Ecclesia^
intelligimus Pontificem Romanum, we by the Church do mean the Pope for the
time being, or him with a Council. Again Ibid.. An. pd: 1451.
, They object unto us, that by the Church we understand the Pope, Non abnuo, I
confess we mean so in deed, This is plain dealing: by the Church they mean
the Pope. So Gregory de Valentia In 2. 2. disp. 1. q. 1.
, By the name of the Church we understand the head of Church, that is, the
Pope. So Bozius Lib. 2. de sig. eccl. ca. 21.. His. and lib. 14. ca. 16.. His.
, The Pope universorum personam sustinet, sustaineth the person of all Bishops,
of all Councels, of all the whole Church, he is in stead of them all. As the
whole multitude of the faithful is the Church formally, and the general
Council is the Church representatively, so the Pope also is the Church
Vertually, as sustaining the person of all, and having the power, virtue, and
authority of all, both the formal and representative Church; and so the
Churches or Councels judgment, is the Popes judgment; and the Churches or
Councels infallibility, is in plain speech, the Popes infallibility.

10. This will further appear by those comparisons, which they make betwixt
the Church, or Councels, and the Pope. It is the assertion of Card. Bellarmine
Li 2. de Conc. ca. 13. Haec.
, as also of their best Omnium qui doce^t papam esse supra Concilium. ibid.
quos recenset ca. 14.. ultima.
writers, that there is as much authority Intensive, in the Pope alone, as in
the Pope with a general Council, or with the whole Church; though Extensive
it is more in them, then in him alone: Even as the light is Intensive, and for
degrees of brightness, as great in the Sun alone, as in it with all the Stars,
though it is Extensive more in the^, that is, more diffused, or spread abroad
into more, being in them, then in the Sun alone; Neither only is all the
authority, which either Counsel or Church has, in the Pope, but is in a far
more eminent manner in him, then in them. In him it is Primitively, or
originally, as water in the fountain, or as light in the Sun; Omnis authoritas
est in uno, says Bellarmine Lib. 4. de. Ron. Romans ca. 24.. Secundo.
, seeing the government of the Church is Monarchical, all ecclesiastical
power is in one, (he means the Pope) and from him it is derived unto others.
In the Council, and the rest of the Church, it is but derivatively, borrowed
from the Pope, as waters in little brooks, or as light in the moon and
stars. In him is Plenitudo potestatis, as Innocentius teaches Inn. 3. ca. 1.
Cum ex eo. Ex. de. Penit. and cap. Proposuit et de Concess. prebend.
, the fullness of Ecclesiastical power and authority dwells in him, in the
rest whether Councels, or Church, it is only by Participation, and measure,
they have no more then either their narrow channels can contain, or his
holiness will permit to distill or drop down upon their heads, from the
lowest skirts of his garment. So whatsoever authority either Church, or
general Council has, the same has the Pope, and that more eminently, and
more abundantly then they either have or can have.

11. But for Infallibility in judgment that's so peculiar to him, that as they
teach, neither the Pope can communicate it, unto Church or Council, nor can
they receive it, but only by their connection or coherence to the Pope, in whom
alone it resideth. Potestas and infallibilitas papalis, est potestas and gratia
personalis, says Stapleton Relect. Conc. 6. q 3. art. 5. opin. 5.
, Papal, power and infallibility is a personal gift, and grace, given to the
person of Peter, and his successors; and personal gifts cannot be transferred
to others. In like sort Pighius Lib. 6. de Eccles. Hier. ca. 1. Et quanquam.
, Vni Petro, atque ejus Cathedrae, non Sacerdotali quantocunque Concilio; the
privilege of never erring in faith, was obtained, by the prayer of Christ, for
Peter alone, and his Chair; not for any Council, though it be never so great.
To the same purpose says Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 11. De secundo
, If a general Council could not err in their sentence, the judgment of
such a Council should be the last, and highest judgment of the Church; but
that judgment is not the last, for the Pope may either approve, or reject
their sentence. So Bellarmine; professing the Popes only judgment to be
infallible; seeing it alone is the last, and highest, after, and above both
Church, and general Council. All the infallibility which they have, is only
by reason of his judgment to which they accord, and consent. It hence
appears, says Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 3.. Contra.
, tot am firmitatem, that the whole strength, and certainty of judgment, which
is even in lawful Councels, is from the Pope, non partim a Concilio, partim a
Pontifice; it is not partly from the Council, and partly from the Pope; it is
wholly, and only from the Pope, and in no part from the Council. When the
Council, and Pope consent in judgment, says Gretzer Defen. ca. 2. lib. 4 de
Pont. Recensent
, omnis infallibilitas Concilij derivatur a Papa; all the infallibility of the
Council is derived from the Pope: and a little after, when the Pope consents
with the Council, ideo non errat, quia est Papa; he is therefore free from
erring, because he is the Pope; and not because he consents with the
Council. In like sort Melchior Loc. Theod. lib. 6. ca. 7. Quid.
Canus; The strength and firmitude, both of the whole Church, and of Councels,
is derived from the Pope: and again Lib. 5. ca. 5.. Non.
, In general Councels, matters are not to be judged by number of suffrages,
but by the weight of them; Pondus autem dat summi Pontificis authoritas; and it
is the Popes gravity, and authority, which gives weight to that part whereunto
he inclines: If he say it, one hundred Fathers with him are sufficient; but if
his assent be wanting, a thousand, a million, ten thousand millions; Nulli
satis sunt, no number is sufficient: Nay, if all the whole world be of a
contrary judgment to the Pope, yet, as the Canonist Cupers Com. in cap.
Oportebat. pa. 11.
tells us, the Popes sentence, totius orbis placito praefertur; is of more
weight and worth, than the judgment of the whole world: So clear it is, that
all their boasting of the authority, and infallible judgment of the Church,
and of general Councels, wherein they please themselves, more than ever the
Jews did in crying Ier.
so often, Templu^ Domini, the Temple of the Lord: that all this is nothing else
but a Viser, to hide, or actually to draw into men's minds the Popes
infallibility: they having no meaning at all to give, or allow, either to
Church, or general Council, any infallibility, but only with a reference to
the Pope, to whom alone they annex it as a personal gift, and peculiar
prerogative; and who, like those lean and ill favored Kine of Pharaoh, has
devoured, and quite swallowed up all the authority, and infallibility, both of
Church, and Councels: yet thus much now is evident, that seeing all, who are of
their present Roman Church, believe, and profess the Church, and general
Councels to be infallible; and seeing their infallibility is none, but only by
adhering, and consenting to the Pope; it necessarily ensues, that they all, a
fortiori, do believe, and must profess the Pope to be infallible, seeing on
his, the infallibility of both the other, does wholly, and solely depend.

12. Let me add but one other proof hereof, taken from Supremacy of
authority and judgment: It is a ruled case in their learning, Si Bell. lib.
3. de verb. Dei ca. 5. Quintu^ et lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 1. Denique. et lib. 2.
de Conc. ca. 11. De tertio.
errare non potest, debet esse summus judex; He who is infallible, must be the
highest, and last Judge; and, Vice versa, He Affirmant ejus judicium esse
ultimu^. Hinc autem aperte sequitur non errare. Bell. lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 3
Accedat.
who is the last, and highest judge, must be infallible. Supremacy and
infallibility of judgment are inseparably linked: To whomsoever Supremacy is
given, even for that cause infallibility of judgment is granted unto him also;
for seeing from the last or supreme Judge, there can be no appeal, it were
most unjust to bind Christians to believe his sentence, who might be deceived;
most unjust to bind them from appealing from a judge that were fallible, or
from an erroneous judgment. Consider now to whom Supremacy of judgment in
causes of faith, belongs: To whom else but to the Pope? whereas some dare
affirm, says the Canonist Cupers com. ad cap. oporteb. pa. 4. nu. 33.
, that a Council is above the Pope; Falsissimum est, This is most false: The
Successor of Peter, says Stapleton, Rel Cont. 6. q. 3. art. 5. opin. 10.
supra omnes est, is above all; Bishops, Church, general Councels; above all.
The Pope, says Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 17.
, is simply and absolutely above the whole Church, and above a general
Council. Lib. eod. ca. 14. Vltimae.
He further tells us, that this assertion, That the Pope is above a general
Council, is, not only the judgment of all the ancient School Divines, and the
common sentence of their Writers, (of whom he reckons thirteen, and, if it
were fit, three times thirty might be scored up with them) but that it is the
public doctrine of their Church, decreed in their Laterane Synod, under Leo
the tenth: There the Council, says he Lib. eod. ca. 17. Denique.
, diserte and ex professo docuit, did plainly, and of set purpose teach, the
Pope to be above all Councels: yea, expressissime Lib. eod. ca. 13. Deinde.
rem definivit; that Laterane Council did most expressly define this: and their
definition hereof, is, Decretum de fide, a Decree of faith: for which cause, in
his Apology, bearing the name of Schulkenius, he professes Ca. 6. Probo. pa.
227.
, that this is, Articulus fidei, an Article of faith, such as every Christian
is bound to believe, that the Pope is, Summus in terris totius Ecclesiae Iudex;
the Supreme, last, and highest Judge of the whole Church, here upon earth;
which he proves, besides many other authorities, by this very Laterane Cap.
eodem. Lateran. pa. 249.
decree, and by their Trent Council. The words themselves, of those Councels,
make the matter plain; in that at the Laterane Council they thus decree;
Solum Sess. 11. pa. 639. b.
Romanum Pontificem supra omnia Concilia authoritatem habere; that the Pope
alone has authority above all Councels; and this, they say, is taught, not
Nedum ex Scripturae sacrae testimonio, dictis sanctorum patrum etc. Ibid.
only by Fathers, and Councels, but by the holy Scriptures; thereby showing,
that in this decree they explicate and declare the Catholic faith, which is
one of the Cardinals notes, to know when a decree is published by a Council,
tanquam de fide, as a decree of faith; and they threaten, the Ibid. pa. 340.
indignation of God, and the blessed Apostles, to the gainsayers of their
decree: A censure as heavy as any Anathema, the denouncing whereof, is another
of the Cardinals notes, that they proposed this decree, as a decree of faith.
In the other at Trent, the Council teaches Sess. 14. ca. 7.
, that unto the Pope is given, Suprema potestas in universa Ecclesia; the
Supreme power in the whole Church. And this Supremacy is such, that from all
Councels, all other Judges, you may appeal to him, and he may reverse
Pontifex ut Princeps Ecclesiae summus potest retractare illud judicium
Concilij. Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 18. Dico. Potest approbare vel reprobare.
Ide^ lib. 2. ca. 11. De tertio.
, adnull, or repeal their judgment; but from him, as being the last, and
highest Judge, as having supreme power, qua Bell. lib. eodem 2. ca. 18.
Praeterea.
nulla est major, and cui nulla est aequalis, then which none is greater, and
to which none is equal; you may appeal to none, no, not (as some Aug. Triump.
de potest. Eccl. q. 6. ar 8.
of them teach) unto God himself. The reason whereof is plain; for seeing the
Popes sentence in such causes, is the Sententia Concilij cui praest Petrus, est
sententia Spiritus sancti. Bell. lib. 3 de verb. Dei. ca. 5. Sextum.

Idem asserere possunt caetera legitima Concilia. Bell. lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 2.
Tertius.


sentence of God, uttered indeed by man; but, assistente Bell. lib. 3. de verb.
Dei, ca. 10. Decimum.
, and gubernante Spiritu; Gods Spirit assisting, and guiding him therein; if
you appeal from him, or his sentence, you appeal even from God himself, and
Gods sentence. Such sovereignty they give unto the Pope in his Cathedral
judgment. Now because Infallibility is essentially, and inseperably annexed to
supremacy of judgment, it hence evidently ensues, that as their Laterane,
and Trent Councels (and, with them, all, who hold their doctrine; that is, all,
who are members of their present Roman Church,) do give supremacy of
authority and judgment, unto the Pope; so with it they give also infallibility
of judgment unto him; their best Writers professing, their general Councels
desining, and decreeing, their whole Church maintaining him, and his Cathedral
judgment in causes of faith to be infallible, which was the former point that
I undertook to declare.

13. Suffer me to go yet one step further. This assertion of the Popes
Cathedral infallibility in causes of faith, is, not only a position of their
Church, (which hitherto we have declared) but it is the very maine ground, and
fundamental position, on which all the faith, doctrines, and religion of the
present Roman Church, and of every member thereof, does rely. For the
manifesting whereof, that must diligently be remembered, which we before have
showed; that, as when they commend the infallibility of the Church, or
Council, they mean nothing else, then the Popes infallibility, by consenting
to whom, the Church and Council is infallible; even so, to the point, that now
I undertake to show, it is all one to declare them to teach, that the Church,
or general Council, is the foundation of faith, as to say, the Pope is the
foundation thereof, seeing neither the Church, or Council is such a
foundation, but only by their consenting with, and adhering to the Pope, who
is that foundation.

14. This sometimes they will not let in plain terms to profess. Peter,
says Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 3. Secundo.
, and every one of his successors, est petra, and fundamentum Ecclesiae; is the
rock, and foundation of the Church. In another place Praef. in lib de Pont.
Quae.
he calls the Pope, that very foundation, of which God prophesied in Isaiah,
I Isa. 28.16. 1 Pet. 2.8.
lay in the foundations of Sion, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner
stone, a sure foundation: Ecce vobis lapidem in fundamentis Sion, says
Bellarmine, pointing at the Pope; behold, the Pope is this stone, laid in the
foundations of Sion: And in his Apology under the name of Schulkenius Ca. 6.
pa. 255.
he calls these positio^s of the Popes supremacy, Cardine^, fundamentu^, and
summa^ fidei Christianae; the Hinge, the foundation, the very sum of the
Christian faith. To the like purpose Pighius calls Lib. 4 Hier. ca. 6. Habes.
the Popes judgment, Principium indubiae veritatis, a principle of undoubted
verity; and that he means the last and highest principle, his whole Treatise
does delare. Coster observes Euch ca. de sum. Pont Nequc.
, that the Pope is not only the foundation, but, which is more, the Rock:
other Apostles were foundations, other Bishops are pillars of the Church; but
Peter, and his Successor, is that solid Rock, quae fundamenta ipsa continet;
which supporteth all other pillars and foundations. To this purpose tends that
assertion which is so frequent in their mouths, and writings Bell. li. 4. de
Pont. ca. 1. et. l. 2. de Conc. ca. 14. Vltima. et Gretz. def. ca. 1. lib. 1.
de verbo Dei. pa. 16.
, that in causes of faith, ultimum judicium est summi Pontificis, the last
judgment belongs to the Pope: Now if it be the last in such causes, then upon
it, as on the last, and lowest foundation, must every doctrine of their Church
rely; into his judgment it must last of all be resolved; but it, (because it
is the last) into any higher judgment, or lower foundation, cannot possibly
be resolved.

15. But their most ordinary, and also most plausible way to express this, is
under the name of the Church, teaching men to rest, and stay their faith on it;
although, in very truth, as we have showed before, all which they herein say
of the Church, does in right, and properly belong to the Pope only, and to the
Church but only by reason of him, who is the head thereof: The Lib. de Eccl.
milit. ca. 10 Ad haec.
tradition of the Scriptures, and all doctrines of faith whatsoever, do depend
of the testimony of the Church, says Bellarmine. Again, The Lib. de effect.
Sacr. ca. 25 Tertium.
certainty of all ancient Councels, and of all doctrines, does depend on the
authority of the present Church: And yet more fully Lib. 6. de great. et lib.
arb. ca. 3. At Catholici.
, The faith which Catholics have, is altogether certain, and infallible: for
what they believe, they do therefore believe it, because God has revealed it;
and they believe God to have revealed it, quoniam Eccl^siam ita dicentem, vel
declarantem, audiunt; because they hear the Church telling them, that God
revealed it. So Bellarmine; who plainly professes the testimony of the present
Church, that is, of the Pope, to be the last reason, why they believe any
doctrine; and so the very last, and lowest foundation, on which their faith does
rely. None more plentiful in this point, than Stapleto^; The external
testimony of the Church, says he Tripl. cont. Whit. ca. 11. Venies.
, Fundamentum quoddam fidei nostrae vere and proprie est; is truly and properly
a foundation of our faith. Again Dupl. cont. Whit. ca. 16. sect. 4.
, the voice of the Church, est regula omnium quae creduntur; the rule and
measure of all things which are believed. Again Tripl. ca. 16. At qui.
, whatsoever is believed by the Catholic faith, we Catholics believe that,
propter Ecclesiae authoritatem, by reason of the Churches authority: we Relect.
Cont. 4 q. 1 art. 3. ad 8.
believe the Church, tanquam Medium credendi omnia; as the Medium or reason why
we believe all other things: And yet more fully in his doctrinall principles
Doct. Prin. lib. 8. ca. 21 Hic.
; when we profess in our Creed to believe the Catholic Church, the sense
hereof, though perhaps not Grammatical, (for the Pope and his divinity is not
subject to Grammar rules) yet certainly the Theological sense is this, Credo
illa omnia quae Deus per Ecclesiam me docuit; I believe all those things which
God has revealed, and taught me by the Church. But how know you, or why
believe you this, Deum per Ecclesiam revelare; that all those things which the
Church teaches, are revealed and taught of GOD? What say you to this, which is
one piece of your Creed? To this Stapleton, both in that place Ca. Eod.
Adsecundam.
, and again in his Relections Re^ Cont 4. q. 3. art. 2. ad 8.
, gives a most remarkable answer; This, (that God reveals those things by
the Church,) is no distinct Article of faith, sed est quoddam transcendens
fidei Axioma atque principium, ex quo, and hic, and alij omnes Articuli
deducuntur; but this is a transcendent Maxim, and principle of faith, upon
which, both this it own self, (note this especially) and all other Articles
of faith do depend: upon this all Articles of faith do hang, hoc unum
praesupponunt, they all praesuppose this, and take it for granted. This, and
much more has Stapleton.

16. But what speak I of Bellarmine or Stapleton, though the latter has most
diligently sifted this cause? This position, that the Church is the last Judge,
and so the lowest foundation of their faith, is the decreed doctrine of their
Trent Council, and therefore the consenting voice of their whole Church, and
of every member thereof: For in that Council Sess. 4. Praeterea.
, the Church is defined to be the Judge of the sense, and interpretation of
the Scriptures: and by the like reason it is to judge of traditions, and of the
sense of them. Now because all doubts and controversies of faith, depend on the
one of these, it clearly follows upon that decree, that the very last stay in
all doubts of faith, is the Churches judgment; but that, upon no other, nor
higher stay, does, or can rely; for whatsoever you take besides this, the
truth, the weight, and validity of all must be tried in the Church, at her
judgment it must stand or fall; yea, if you make a doubt of the Churches
judgment it self, even that, as all other, must be ended by the judgment of
the Church; it is the last Judge of all. This, to be the true meaning of the
Trent Council, Bellarmine both saw, and professes, when he says Lib. 3. de
verbo Dei. ca. 3. Tota
, The Church, that is, the Pope, with a Council, is Judge of the sense of the
Scripture, and omnium controversiarum, and of all controversies of faith; and
in this all Catholics do agree, and it is expressly set down in the Trent
Council: So Bellarmine testifying this to be, both the decreed doctrine of
their general and approved Council, and the consenting judgment of all that
are Roman Catholics.

17. Now all this which they have said of the Church, if you will have it in
plain terms and without circumloquution, belongs only to the Pope, who is
vertually both Church and Council. As the Church or Council is called
infallible, no otherwise but by a Synechdoche, because the Pope, who is the
head both of Church and Council, is infallible: So is the Church or Council
called the foundation of faith, or last principle on which their faith must
rely, by the same figure Synechdoche, because the Pope who is the head of them
both, is the foundation of faith. And whosoever is a true Roman Catholic or
member of their present Church, he believes all other doctrines, because the
Church, that is, the Pope does teach them; and the Pope to teach them
infallibly, he believes for it self, because the Pope says he, is in such
teaching infallible. This infallibility of the Pope is the (...), the very
corner stone; the foundation on stone, the rock and fundamental position of
their whole faith and religion, which was the point that I purposed to declare.

18. I have hitherto declared, and I fear too abundantly, that the assertion
of the Popes Cathedral infallibility in causes of faith, is not only a
position, but the very fundamental position of all the doctrines of the
present Roman Church. In the next place we are to prove that this position is
heretical, and that for such it was adjudged and condemned by the Catholic
Church. In the proof whereof I shall not need to stay long. This whole
treatise, and even that which has already been declared touching the
Constitution of Pope Vigilius does evidently confirm the same. For seeing the
defending of the Three Chapters has been proved Ca. 3. and 4.
to be heretical, the Constitution of Vigilius made in defense of those
Chapters, must of necessity be confessed to be heretical. Nay if you well
consider, you shall see, that this very position of the Popes Cathedral
infallibility, is adjudged to be heretical. For the fifth general Council
knew this cause of the Three Chapters to be a cause of faith. They knew
further that Pope Vigilius by his Apostolical decree, and Cathedral
Constitution had defined that those Three Chapters ought to be defended. Now
seeing they knew both these, and yet judicially defined the defense of those
Three Chapters to be heretical, and for such accursed it, even in doing this,
they define the Cathedral judgment of Vigilius in this cause of Faith, to be
heretical; and therefore most certainly and a fortiori define this position
[That the Popes Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith is infallible] to be
heretical, and for such they anathematize both it, and all that defend it. And
because the judgment and definitive sentence of the fifth Council is consonant
to all former, and confirmed by all subsequent Councels till the Laterane Synod
under Leo the tenth, it unavoydably hence ensues, that the same position of
the Popes Cathedral infallibility in causes of faith, is by the judgment of
all general Counsels until that time, that is, by the constant, and uniforme
consent of the whole Catholic Church, adjudged, condemned, and accursed for
heretical, and all who defend it for heretics. And seeing we have clearly
proved the whole present Roman Church, and all that are members thereof, to
defend this position, yea to defend it as the maine foundation of their whole
faith; the evidence of that assertion which I proposed Sup. hoc. cap. nu. 6.
, does now manifestly appear: That none can now assent to the Pope, or to the
doctrines of the present Church of Rome, but he is, eo nomine, even for that
very cause, adjudged and condemned for heretical, and that even in the very
ground and foundation of his faith.

19. From the foundation let us proceed to the walls and roof of their
religion. Think you the foundation thereof is only heretical; and the
doctrines which they build thereon orthodoxall? Nothing less; They are both
suitable, both heretical. That one fundamental position is like the Trojan
horse, in the womb of it are hid many troops of heresies. If Liberius
confirm Arianisme, Honorius Monothelitisme, Vigilius Nestorianisme, these all
by virtue of that one assertion must pass current for Catholic truths. Nay,
who can comprehend, I say not in words, or writing, but in his thought, and
imagination all the blasphemous and heretical doctrines, which by all their
Popes have been, or if as yet they have not, which hereafter may be by
succeeding Popes defined to be doctrines of faith? Seeing Stapleton Lib. 9.
doct. prin. ca. 14.. Manet.
assures us, That the Church of this, or any succeeding age may put into the
Canon and number of sacred and undoubtedly Canonical books, the book of
Hermas called Pastor, and the Constitutions of Clement: the former being, as
their own notes censure it, Notae in lib. Hermae. to. 5. Bibl. S. patr.
haeresibus and fabulis oppletus, full of heresies and fables, rejected by Pope
Gelasius Council. Romans primu^ sub Gelasio.
with his Roman Synod; the later being stuffed also with many impious
doctrines, condemning Constable. Clem. lib. 3. ca. 2.
lawful marriage as fornication, and allowing Idem lib. 8. ca. 32.
fornication as lawful, with many the like impieties, which in Possevine Bibl.
in verbo Clemens Romans
are to be seen together, for which cause they are worthily rejected in the
Canons Can. 2.
of the sixth Council; seeing the Pope may canonize these, what blasphemies,
what heresies, what lies may not with them be canonized? why may not their very
Legend in the next Session be declared to be Canonical? And yet by that
fundamental position, they are bound (and now do implicit) believe
whatsoever any Pope either by word or writing, either has already, or shall at
any time hereafter define to be a doctrine of faith. Because I will not stay on
particulars, if any please seriously to consider this matter, he shall
perceive (that which now I intend to prove) such venom of infidelity to lie in
that one fundamental position of the Popes Cathedral infallibility, that by
reason of holding it, they neither do nor can believe or hold with certainty
of faith, any one point or doctrine, which they profess to believe, and hold
upon that Foundation.

20. For the clearing of which point (being very material) it is to be
observed, that unto certainty of faith, two things are of necessity required;
The one ex part objecti, on the part of thing believed, which must be so true
and certain in it self, that it cannot possibly be or have been otherwise
then it is believed to be, to have been, or to be hereafter. And therefore
none can truly believe any untruth, for nothing which is untrue, is or can be
the object of faith. The other thing is required, ex part subjecti, on the
part of him who believes. Now faith being only of such things as are
inevident, that is, which neither by sense can be perceived, nor by natural
reason collected or found out; but which are only by the testimony of such as
first knew them, made known unto us, and none does or can know that which is
supernatural, unless God himself reveal the same unto him, it hence
follows that whatsoever is by any believed, the same is revealed and
testified to him by God himself, who is infallible: and further, that it is
certainly known unto him who believes, that it is God himself, who does
reveal and testify that thing unto him. For otherwise though the doctrine
proposed, be in it self never so certain and divine, yet unto thee, or me, it
cannot be certain, nor held by certainty of faith, unless first we be sure
and infallibly certain, that he who testifies it unto us is himself
infallible, that is, that he is God. Let us for perspicuity, call the former of
these two, materiale fidei, the material in faith or the thing believed: and
the later, formale fidei, that which is formal in faith, seeing as the former
is the thing believed, so the later contains the reason, the ground or
foundation upon which, and for which it is believed.

21. Consider now first the materials in their faith. In them there is a great
difference; for some of them are in themselves credible, as being divine
truths, and true objects of faith. Such are all those Catholic truths common
to us and them, as that there is a Trinity, that Christ was borne of a Virgin,
dyed, rose again, and the like. Others are in themselves untrue, such as
cannot be the object of faith: Of this sort are all those doctrines wherein they
dissent from us, Transubstantiation, real and proper sacrifice, worshipping of
Images, Purgatory, Justification by the merit or dignity of our works, and the
like, which may rightly be called popish doctrines. The later sort of these
they neither do nor can believe. The former they might, but they do not
believe. The reason whereof will appear by considering that which is formal
or the fundamental ground of their faith: where it is first to be observed,
that a man may hold many, yea all the doctrines professed by the present
Church, except that one of the Popes Cathedral infallibility, and yet be no
Papist or member of their present Church. For although the things professed, or
the Materials be the self same, yet the formalitie or diverse reason of
holding them, causes a maine difference in the parties that hold them. And for
our present purpose it may suffice to note three diverse ways, whereby their
doctrines are or may be held.

22. The first is, of them, who build all those doctrines upon the Scripture as
the Foundation thereof: upon that ground, holding not only many Catholic
truths, which they most firmly believe, the Church inducing, the Scriptures
outwardly teaching, and the holy Spirit inwardly sealing, the same unto them:
but together with those truths hold some errors also of the Roman Church (take
for example Transubstantiation;) which although for the inducement of that
present Church wherein they live, they think to be taught in the Scriptures,
and therefore hold and profess them, and think they believe them, yet because
they are neither in truth taught in the Scriptures, nor sealed by Gods Spirit
unto their hearts, therefore they hold not these; nor in truth can they hold
them with that firmness and certainty of faith, as they do the former truths,
but they have a faintnes and fear in their assent unto these, and so a
readiness and willing preparation of heart, to disclaim these, and to hold or
profess the contrary, if ever it may be fully cleared and manifested out of
the Scriptures unto them. Of this sort we doubt not but many thousands of our
fathers were; who living in the darkness and thick mists of their
Antichristian superstition, upon the Scriptures and word of God which they held
for the foundation of their says, builded indeed much gold and precious
stones, but with a mixture of much hay, stubble and dross, thinking (but very
erroneously) the later as well as the former to be contained in that
foundation. The state of all these is very like to S. Cyprians, and those other
Africane Bishops, which were so earnest for Rebaptizatio^, supposing it to be
taught in the Scriptures, and though the foundation of it, and of those
catholic truths that Christ was God, or the like, was one and the same unto
them, yet they held not both with like firmnes and certainty of faith. The
doctrine of Christ's deity and manhood they so believed, that they would not
communicate with any that denied this, nay they would rather die then deny it.
But Rebaptization they so held, as not thinking their opposites to be
heretics, nor refusing Haecre scripsimus, nemini praescribentes, aut
praejudicantes quo minus unusquisque quod putaverit faciat, habent liberam
arbitrij sui facultate^. Nos autem cum Collegis nostris non contendimus, cum
quibus divinam and dominicam pacem tenemus. Cyp. Epist. ad Iubaian. in fine.
vid. August lib. 5. de Baptis. ca. 17.
to communicate with the^ that denied it; so they held this with a certain
faintnes of faith; or rather (as indeed it was) of opinion and not of faith,
having a preparation in heart to believe, and profess the contrary, if it
might at any time, be made manifest unto them. This S. Austen often witnesses
of Cyprian, Satis Lib. 2. de Baptis. ca. 4.
ostendit se facillime correcturum, he sufficiently declares that he would
most easily have altered his opinion, if any would have demonstrated the truth
unto him. Again Lib. 4 ca. 5.
, That holy man Cyprian, being non solum doctus, sed docilis, not only
learned, but willing to learn, and who sets this among the praises of a
Bishop, that he ought not only to teach with knowledge, but learn with
patience, he I doubt not would readily have demonstrated not only how
learned, but how willing to learn himself had been, had this question in his
life time been debated, by such learned and holy men, as afterward it was. I
often admire that one observation, among many, which the same Lib. 1. ca. 18.
Augustine makes touching this error in Cyprian, of whom being so very learned,
he says, Propterea non vidit aliquid ut per eum aliud eminentius videretur; He
therefore saw not this one truth touching Rebaptization, that others might see
in him a more eminent and excellent truth. And what truth is that? In him we
may see the truth of Humility, the truth of modesty, the truth of Charity
and ardent love to the peace, and unity of the Church: but the most excellent
truth that I can see, or as I think, can be seen in erring Cyprian is this,
that one may be a true Catholic, a Catholic Bishop, a pillar of Gods Church,
yea even a Saint and glorious Martyr, and yet hold an error in faith, as did
that holy Catholic Bishop, and blessed Martyr Saint Cyprian. To him then and
the other Africane Bishops, who in like sort erred as he did; may fitly be
compared the state of those servants of God, who in the blindness and
invincible ignorance of those times of Antichrist, together with many golden
truths, which they most firmly believed, upon that solid foundation of the
Scriptures, held either Transubstantiation, or the like errors, thinking them
(as Cyprian did, of Rebaptization) to be taught in that foundation also. They
erred in some doctrines of faith, as Cyprian did: yet notwithstanding those
errors, they may be Catholics, and blessed as Cyprian was, because they both
firmly believed many Catholic truths, and their error was without pertinacie
as Cyprians was. For none, who truly believes the Scripture, and holds it for
the foundation of his faith, can with pertinacie hold any doctrine repugnant to
the Scripture, seeing in his very beleeveing of the Scripture, and holding it
as the foundation, he does in truth, though implicitie, and in radice, as I may
say, believe the flat contrary to that error, which explicit he professes.
And because he does implicit believe the contrary thereof, he has, (even all
the time while he so erreth) a readiness and preparation of heart to profess
the contrary whenever out of the Scripture it shall be deduced and
manifested unto him.

23. A second way of holding those doctrines, is of them, who together with the
truths, hold the errors also of their Church, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
or the like, thinking them to be taught in Scriptures, as did the former, but
adding obstinacy, or pertinacie to their holding of them, which the former did
not. And their pertinacie is apparent hereby, if either they will not yield to
the truth, being manifested out of the Scriptures unto them, or if before such
manifestation, they be so addicted and wedded to their own wills, and
conceits, that they resolve either not to hear, or if they do hear, not to
yield to the evidence of reason, when they are convinced by it. For it is
certain, that one may be truly pertinacious not only after conviction, and
manifestation of the truth, but even before it also, if he have a resolution
not to yield to the authority, and weight of convincing reasons. Of this sort
were all those who ever since their second Nicen Synod (about which time, the
Roman Church made their first public defection from the true and ancient
faith) took part with that faction in the Church, which maintained the
adoration of Images, and after that, Deposing of Princes, then
Transubstantiation, and other like heresies, as they crept by degrees into the
Church, in several ages. From that time until Leo the tenth, the Church was
like a confused lump, wherein both gold and dross were mingled together: or
like a great City infected with the plague. All as well the sick as sound,
lived together within the walls, and bounds of that City, but all were not
infected; and of those that were, not all alike infected, with those heretical
diseases which then reigned, and more, and more prevaled in the Church. Some
openly, and constantly withstood the corruptions, and heresies of their time,
and being worthy Martyrs, sealed with their blood that truth which they
professed. Others dissented from the same errors, but durst not with courage,
and sortitude oppose themselves; such as would say to their friends in private:
Thus Paralip. ad Abb. Vsperg. pa. 448.
I would say in the schools and openly, sed maneat inter nos, diversum sentio,
but keep my counsel, I think the contrary. Many were tainted with those
Epidemicall diseases by the very contagion of those with whom they did
converse, but that strong Antidote in the foundation, which preserved Cyprian
and the Africane Bishops, kept from their hearts, and at last overcame all the
poison wherewith they were infected. Only that violent, and strong faction,
which pertinaciously adhered to the heretical doctrines, which then sprung up,
(the head of which faction was the Pope) and who preferred their own opinions,
before the truth, out of the Scriptures manifested unto them, and by some
Councels, also decreed, as namely by that at Constantinople in the time of
Constantinus Iconomachus, and that at Frankford, these I say who wilfully and
maliciously resisted, yea persecuted the truth and such as stood in defense of
it, are those, who are ranked in this second order, who though they are not in
propriety of speech to be called Papists, yet because the errors which they
held are the same, which the Popish Church now maintains, they are truly and
properly to be termed Popish Heretics.

24. The third way of holding their doctrines, began with their Lateran
decree, under Leo the tenth, at which time they held the same doctrines which
they did before, but they held the^ now upon another Foundation. For the^ they
cast away the old and sure Foundation, and laid a new one of their own in the
room thereof, The Popes word, in stead of Gods, and Antichrists in stead of
Christ's. For although the Pope long before that time, had made no small
progress in Antichristianisme, first in usurping an universal authority over
all Bishops, next in upholding their impious doctrines of Adoration of Images,
and the like, and after that in exalting himself above all Kings and Emperors,
giving and taking away their Crowns at his pleasure; yet the height of the
Antichristian mystery consisted in none of these, nor did he ever attain unto
it, till by virtue of that Laterane decree he had justled out Christ and his
word, and laid himself and his own word in the stead thereof, for the Rock
and Foundation of the Catholic faith. In the first, the Pope was but
Antichrist nascent; In the second, Antichrist crescent; In the third,
Antichrist regnant; but in this fourth, he is made Lord of the Catholic faith,
and Antichrist triumphant; set up as God in the Church of God, ruling, nay
tyrannizing, not only in the external and temporal estates, but even in the
faith, and Consciences of all men; so that they may believe neither more, nor
less, nor otherwise then he prescribes, nay that they may not believe the
very Scriptures themselves, and word of God, or that there are any Scriptures
at all, or that there is a God, but for this reason, ipse dixit, because he
says so, and his saying, being a Transce^dent principle of faith, they must
believe for it self, quia ipse dixit, because he says so. In the first, and
second, he usurped the authority and place but of Bishops; in the third, but
of Kings: but in making himself the Rock and Foundation of faith, he intrudes
himself into the most proper office and prerogative of Jesus Christ, For 1
Cor. 3.11.
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ.

25. Here was now quite a new face of the Roman Church, yea, it was now made a
new Church of it self, in the very essence thereof distinct from the other
part of the Church, and from that which it was before. For although most of the
Materials, as Adoration of Images, Transubstantiation, and the rest, were the
same, yet the Formalitie and foundation of their faith and Church was quite
altered. Before they believed the Pope to do rightly, in decreeing
Transubstantiation, because they believed the Scriptures, and word of God, to
teach and warrant that doctrine: but now vice versa they believe the
Scriptures, and word of God, to teach Transubstantiation, because the Pope has
decreed and warranted the same. Till then one might be a good Catholic, and
member of their Church, such as were the Bishops in the general Councels of
Constance and Basil, and those of the fifth, sixth, seventh, and succeding
Councels, and yet hold the Popes Cathedral judgment in causes of faith to be
not only fallible, but heretical and accursed, as all those Councels did: But
since Supremacy, and with it Infallibility of judgment, is, by their
Laterane decree, transferred to the Pope: he who now gainsayeth the Popes
sentence, in a cause of faith, is none of their Church, as out of Gregory de
Valentia, he is an heretic, as out of Stapleton, Canus, and Bellarmine was
Sup. hoc cap. nu. 7
declared: He may as well deny all the Articles of his Creed, and every text in
the whole Bible, as deny this one point; for in denying it, he does eo ipso, by
their doctrine implicit, and in effect, deny them all, seeing he rejects that
formal reason, for which, and that foundation upon which, they are all to be
believed; and without belief of which, not one of them all can be now believed.

26. These then of this third sort are truly to he counted members of their
present Roman Church; these, who lay this new, and Laterane foundation, for
the ground of their faith, whether explicit, as do the learned, or implicit,
as do the simpler sort in their Church, who wilfully blind-folding themselves,
and gladly persisting in their affectate and supine ignorance, either will not
use the means to see, or seeing, will not embrace the truth, but content
themselves with the Colliars Hos. de author. sac. Script. lib. 3. Quaerit.
Catechism, and wrap up their own in the Churches faith, saying, I believe as
the Church believes, and the Church believes what the Pope teaches. All
these, and only these are members of their present Church, unto whom, of all
names, as that of Catholics, is most unsuitable, and most unjustly arrogated by
themselves; so, the name of Papists, or, which is equivalent, Antichristians,
does most fitly, truly, and in propriety of speech, belong unto them: For
seeing forma dat nomen, and esse, whence rather should they have their
essential appellation, then from him, who gives life, formality, and essence
to their faith, on whom, as on the Rock, and cornerstone, their whole faith
depends. The saying of Cassander to this purpose, is worthy remembering: There
are some, says he Lib. de offic. viri ^ij. Sunt alij.
, who will not permit the present state of the Church, though it be corrupted,
to be changed, or reformed; and who, Pontificem Romanum quem Papam dicimus,
tantum non deum faciunt; make the Bishop of Rome, whom we call the Pope, almost
a god; preferring his authority, not only above the whole Church, but above
the Sacred Scripture, holding his judgment equal to the divine Oracles, and
an infallible rule of faith; Hos non video, cur minus Pseudo-catholicos, and
Papistas appellare possis; I see no reason, but that these men should be called
Pseudo-catholikes, or Papists. Thus Cassander, upon whose judicious observatio^
it follows, that seeing their whole Church, and all the members thereof,
prefer the Popes authority above the whole Church, above all general
Councels, and quoad nos, (which is Cassanders meaning) above Ecce potestas
Ecclesiae supra Script. Enchyr. tit. de Eccles.
the Scriptures also; defending them not to be Enchyr. Ibid.
authentical, but by the authority of the Church; that there is, multo Th. Boz
lib. de signis Eccl. 16. ca. 10. Illud.
major authoritas, much more authority in the Church, than in them; that it is
no Non adeo absurd dictum est, etc. Gretz. Appen. 2. ad lib. 1. de verb. dei
pa. 396.
absurd, nay, Potuit illud pio sensu dici. Hos. lib. 3. de author. Script.
Fingamus.
it may be a pious d saying, That the Scriptures without the authority of the
Church, are no more worth than Aesops Fables: seeing they all, with one consent
make the Pope the last, supreme, and infallible Judge in all causes of faith;
there can be no name devised more proper and fit for them, than that of
Papists; or; which is all one, Antichristians, both which express their
essential dependence on the Pope, or Antichrist, as on the foundation of their
faith; which name most essentially also differenceth them from all others,
which are not of their present Church; especially from true Catholics, or the
Reformed Churches; seeing, as we make Christ and his word, so they on the
contrary, make the Pope, that is to say, Antichrist, and his word, the ground
and foundation of faith: In regard whereof, as the faith and religion of the one
is from Christ truly called, Christian, and they truly, Christians; so the
faith and religion of the other, is from the Pope, or Antichrist, truly, and
properly called Papisme, or Antichristianisme, and the professors of it
Papists, or Antichristians. And whereas Bellarmine Lib. de. not. Eccl. ca. 4.
glories of this very name of Papists, that it does, attestari veritati, give
testimony to that truth which they profess; truly we envy not so apt a name
unto them: Only the Cardinal shows himself a very unskilful Herald in the
blazony of this coat, and the desce^t of this title unto them. He fetches
Papista deducitur a Papa, qualis fuit Petrus, and Christus ipse. ibid.
it forsooth from Pope Clement, Pope Peter, and Pope Christ: Phy, it is of no
such antiquity, nor of so honorable a race. Their own Bristow will assure
Demand. ^.
him, that this name was never heard of till the days of Leo the tenth.
Neither are they so called, (as the Cardinal fancieth) because they hold
communion in faith with the Pope, which, for six hundred years and more, all
Christians did, and yet were not Papists, nor ever so called; but because they
hold the Popes judgment to be supreme, and infallible; and so build their
faith on him, as on the foundation thereof, which their own Church never did,
till the time of Leo the tenth. It is not then the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
but the Lion of that Laterane Synod, who is the first God father of that name
unto them, when he had once laid the Pope as the foundation of faith in stead
of Christ; they who then builded their faith upon this new foundation, were
fitly christened with this name of Papists, to distinguish them, and their
present Roman Church from all others, who held the old, good, and sure
foundation.

26. You see now the great diversity which arises from the diverse manner of
holding the same doctrines. The errors maintained by all those three sorts, of
which I have spoken, are almost the same, and materially they are Popish
heresies; and yet the first sort did only err therein, but were not
heretics, because not pertinacious. The second do not only err, but by
adding pertinacy to error, are truly heretics, but yet not Papists, because
they hold those Popish heresies in another manner, and on another foundation
then Papists do. The third, and last sort, which contains all, and only
those who are members of the present Roman Church, do both err, and are
heretics; and, which is the worst degree of heresy, are Papists, that is,
Antichristian heretics; not only holding, and that in the highest degree of
pertinacy, those heresies which are contrary to the faith, but holding them
upon that foundation which quite overthrows the faith.

27. By this now does the evidence of that truth appear, which before Sup. nu.
19.
I proposed, that none who hold the Popes infallibility in causes of faith for
their foundation, (that is, none of the present Roman Church) either does, or
can believe any one doctrine of faith, which they profess: For seeing the
belief of all other points relyes upon this, so that they believe the^,
because they first believe this, it follows by that true rule of the
Philosopher Arist. lib. 1. demon. ca. 2.
, Propter quod unumquodque, illud magis; that they do more firmly and
certainly believe this, which is the foundation, than they do, or can believe
any other doctrine; I say not Transubstantiation, or Purgatory, but more tha^
that Article of their Creed, that Christ is God, or that there is a God, or any
the like, which is builded upon this foundation. And seeing we have clearly
demonstrated that foundation to be, not only untrue, but heretical; and
therefore such as cannot be apprehended by faith, it being no true object of
faith; it does evidently hence ensue, that they neither do, nor can believe
any one doctrine, position or point of faith. Impossible it is, that the roof
should be more firm than the foundation which supports the roof; or the
conclusion more certain unto us than those premises which cause us to assent,
and make us certain of the conclusion: That one fundamental uncertainty, and
contrariety to the faith, which is vertually in all the rest, breeds the like
uncertainty, and contrariety to faith, in them all; and, like a Radical
poison, spreads it self into the whole body of their religion, infecting every
arm, branch, and twigge of their doctrine, and faith; whatsoever error or
heresy they maintain, (and those are not a few) those they neither do, nor
can believe, because they are no objects of faith, whatsoever truths they
maintain, (and no doubt they do many) those they think they do, and they
might do, but indeed they do not believe, because they hold them for that
reason, and upon that foundation which is contrary to faith, and which
overthrows the faith: For to hold or profess that Christ is God, or that
there is a God, eo nomine, because the Devil, or Antichrist, or a fallible man
testifies it unto us, is not truly to believe, but to overthrow the faith.

28. This may be further cleared by returning to our example of Vigilius. If,
because the Pope judicially defines a doctrine of faith, they do therefore
believe it, then must they believe Nestorianisme to be the truth, and Christ
not to be God, because Pope Vigilius, by his judicial and Apostolical
sentence, has decreed this, in decreeing that the three Chapters, are to be
defended: If they believe not this, then can they believe nothing at all, eo
nomine, because the Pope has defined it; and then the foundation of their
faith being abolished, their whole faith, together with it, must needs be
abolished also. Again, if because the Pope defines a doctrine, they do
therefore believe it; then seeing Pope Caelestine, with the Ephesine, and Pope
Leo, with the Chalcedon Council, decreed Nestorianisme to be heresy, they, by
the strength of their fundamental positio^ of the Popes infallibility, must, at
one and the same time, believe, both Nestorianisme to be truth, as Pope
Vigilius defined, and Nestorianisme to be heresy, as Pope Caelestine and Leo
defined; and so they must either believe two contradictories to be both true,
yea, to be truths of the Catholic faith, which, to believe, is impossible; or
else they must believe, that it is impossible to believe, either the one or the
other, eo nomine, because the Pope has defined it, and so believe it to be
impossible to believe that, which is the foundation of their whole faith.
Neither is this true only in other points, but even in this very foundation it
self: for the fifth Council, which decreed the Cathedral and Apostolical
sentence in the cause of the Three Chapters, to be heretical, was approved by
the decrees of Pope Gregory, Agatho, and the rest, unto Leo the tenth. If then
they believe a doctrine to be true, because the Pope has defined it, then must
they believe the Popes Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith, to be, not
only fallible, but heretical; and so believe, that upon this fallible and
heretical foundation, they can build no doctrine of faith, nor hold thereupon
any thing with certainty of faith: So, if the Pope in defining such causes be
fallible, then, for this cause, can they have no faith, nor believe ought with
certainty of faith, seeing all relies upon a fallible foundation. If the Pope,
in defining such causes, be infallible, then also can they have no faith,
seeing, by the infallble decrees of Pope Gregory, Agatho, and the rest unto Leo
the tenth, the Popes Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith, may be
heretical, as this of Pope Vigilius, by their judgment, was: So, whether the
Pope in such causes, be fallible, or infallible, it infallibly follows upon
either, that none who builds his faith upon that foundation, that is, none who
are members of their present Roman Church, can believe, or hold with certainty
of faith, any doctrine whatsoever, which he professes to believe.

29. Here I cannot choose, but, to the unspeakeable comfort of all true
believers, observe a wonderful difference betwixt us, and them, arising from
that diversity of the foundation, which they and we hold; their foundation
being not only uncertain, but heretical and Antichristian, poysoneth all
which they build thereon; it being vertually in them all, makes them all, like
it self, uncertain, heretical, and Antichristian; and so those very
doctrines, which, in themselves, are most certain, and orthodoxall, by the
uncertainty of that ground, upon which, and for which they are believed, are
overthrown; with us, and all Catholics it falls out otherwise. Though such
happen to err in some one, or more doctrines of faith, (say, in
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, or, as Cyprian did, in Rebaptization) yet seeing
they hold those errors, because they think them to be taught in the
Scriptures, and Word of God, on which alone their faith relyeth; most firmly,
and undoubtedly believing whatsoever is taught therein; (among which things are
the contrary doctrines to Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and Rebaptization:)
such, I say, even while they do thus err in their Explicit profession, do
truly, though implicit, by consequent, and in radice, or fundamento, believe,
and that most firmly, the quite contrary to those errors, which they do
outwardly profess, and think they do, but indeed do not believe. The virtue
and strength of that fundamental truth, which they indeed and truly believe,
overcommeth all their errors, which in very deed they do not, though they
think they do believe, whereas, in very truth, they believe the quite
contrary. And this golden foundation in Christ, which such men, though erring
in some points, do constantly hold, shall more prevail to their salvation,
than the Hay and Stubble of those errors, which ignorantly, but not
pertinaciously, they build thereon, can prevail to their destruction: and
therefore if such a man happen to die, without explicit notice, and repentance
of those errors in particular, (as the saying of Saint Austen Lib. 1. de
baptism. ca. 18.
, that what faults Saint Cyprian had contracted by humane imbecility, the
same, by his glorious Martyrdom, was washed away, persuades me that Cyprian
did: and as of Irene, Nepos, Iustine Martyr, and others, who held the error of
the Chiliasts, I think none makes doubt:) it is not to be doubted, but the
abundance of this man's faith and love unto Christ, to whom in the foundation
he most firmly adhereth, shall work the like effect in him, as did the blood
of martyrdom in Saint Cypran: For the baptism of martyrdom washes away
sin, not because it is a washing in blood, but because it testifies the
inward washing of his heart by faith, and by the purging Spirit of God. This
inward washing in whomsoever it is found, (and found it is in all who truly
believe, though in some point of faith they err) it is as forcible and
effectual to save Valentinian Ablutus ascendit. que^ sua fides lavit. Amb.
Orat. de obitu Valent.
, neither baptized with water, nor with blood; and Nepos Qui jam ad quietem
processit, ait Dionys. apud Eusebius. l. 1. ca. 23.
, baptized with water, but not with blood, as to save Cyprian, baptized both
with water, and with blood. Such a comfort and happiness it is to hold the
right and true foundation of faith.

30. The quite contrary is to be seen in them: Though they explicit profess
Christ to be God, which is a most orthodoxall truth, yet because they hold this,
as all other points, upon that foundation of the Popes infallible judgment in
causes of faith, and in that foundation this is denied, Pope Vigilius, by his
Cathedral Constitution defining Nestorianisme to be truth, and so Christ not
to be God; it must needs be confessed, that even while they do explicit
profess Christ to be God, they do implicit, in radice, and in fundamento,
deny Christ to be God* and because, by the Philosophers rule, they do more
firmly. believe that foundation, than they do, or can believe any doctrine
depending thereon; it must needs ensue hence, that they do, and must by their
doctrine more firmly believe the Negative, that Christ is not God, which in
the foundation is decreed, then they do, or can believe the Affirmative, that
Christ is God, which upon that foundation is builded. The truth, which upon
that foundation they do explicit profess, cannot possibly be so strong to
salvation, as the error of the foundation, upon which they build it, will be
to destruction: For the fundamental error is never amended by any truth
superedified and laid thereon, no more than the rotten foundation of an house
is made sound by laying upon it rafters of gold or silver, but all the truths
that are superedified, are ruinated by that fundamental error and uncertainty
on which they all rely, even as the beams and rafters of gold are ruinated by
that rottenness and unsoundnesse which rests in the foundation: Or if they
say, that both the assertions (which are directly contradictory) are from that
foundation deduced, Caelestine and Leo decreeing the one, that Christ is God,
as Vigilius decreed the other, that Christ is not God, then does it inevitably
follow, that they can truly believe neither the one, nor the other, seeing, by
believing that foundation, they must equally believe them both, which is
impossible. Such an unhappy, and wretched thing it is, to hold that erroneous,
heretical, and Antichristian foundation of faith.

31. My conclusion of this point is this. Seeing we have first declared, that
all who are members of the present Roman Church, do hold the Popes Cathedral
infallibility in causes of faith, yea, hold it as the very foundation on which
all their other doctrines, faith and religion does rely; and seeing we have
next demonstrated this to be a fundamental heresy, and not only an
heretical, but an Antichristian foundation, condemned by Scriptures, by
general Councels, by ancient Fathers, and by the consenting judgment of the
whole Catholic Church; that now hence follows which I proposed Sup. nu. 6.
to prove, that none is, or can be a member of their present Church, but the
same is convicted and condemned for an heretic, by Scriptures, general
Councels, Fathers, and by the uniforme consent of the Catholic Church. An
heretic, first, in the very foundation of his faith, which being
Antichristian, is heretical in the highest, and worst degree that may be,
razing the true foundation of faith, in regard whereof the mystery of
Antichristianisme far surpasses all the heresies that ever went before, or
shall ever follow after it. An heretic, secondly, in many particular doctrines
depending on that Foundation, among which are the heresies and blasphemies of
the Nestorians; all which by the Cathedral constitution of Vigilius, are
decreed to be truths, and by all men to be defended. Lastly, an heretic
vertually and quoad radicem, in every doctrine of faith which he holds or
professes, and so heretical therein, that the very holding of Catholic
truths becomes unto him heretical, seeing he holds them upon that Foundation,
which is not only contrary to faith, but which overthrows the whole faith.
Reward Rev. 18 6.
Babylon, O ye servants of the Lord, as she has rewarded you, give her double
according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her
the double.

32. From hence there ensues one other conclusion, which being worthy observing,
I may not well omit. And this it is, That in none at all, of their Church, or
of the same faith with it, there neither is nor can be (so long as they remain
such) any piety or holiness, either in their life, or in any of their actions:
nor any act which is truly good and acceptable unto God is or can be performed
by any of them. For true faith is the Foundation and fountain of all true
piety, and good actions, it being impossible, as the Apostle teaches, without
Heb. 11.6.
faith to please God: and, to the Tit. 1.15.
unbeleevers all things are impure, even their minds and consciences are
defiled; How much more their outward actions, speeches, writings, and thoughts,
which all spring from the heart. To this purpose is that in the Prophet Haggai
Ca. 2.14.15.
, who demands of the Priests, If a polluted person (such are all whose hearts
are not purified Act. 15.9.
by faith) touch any of these things, either holy bread, or holy wine, or any
holy thing, shall it be unclean? And the Priests answered and said, It shall
be unclean. The pollution of him that touches it, pollutes all, even the most
holy things that are. Then answered Haggai, and said; So is this people, and so
is this Nation before me, says the Lord. So are all the works of their hands,
and that which they offer is unclean. The same agrees to those of whom we
entreat. The infidelity of their hearts, pollutes all their actions, seem they
never so holy: their almes-deedes and works of charity, their righteousness,
and works of justice, their fastings, continency, and works of temperance,
their prayers, sacraments, sacrifices, and works of piety: the fountain
being poisoned with infidelity, and want of true faith, all the waters, every
river, and little brook derived from it, carries the same infection in it,
which it took at the spring. Saint Austen is plentiful in this point: Where
the faith, says he Lib. 5. cont. Faust. ca. 11.
, is fained or unsound, non potest ex ea bona vita existere, there can no good
life be or arise from it. In another place Lib. 1. de Nup. and Conc. ca. 3.
he shows, that even to keep ones self chaste or continent, and yet to do
this without faith, is a sin, and that thereby, non peccata coercentur, sed
alijs peccatis alia peccata vincuntur, sins are not expelled, but one sin
(of intemperancy) is overcome by another sin, (of continency wanting faith.)
To omit many the like, hear what he says to the Manichees, boasting, as they
Potest homo facere plus qua^ Deus praecipit, igitur multo magis potest implere
praeceptum. Bell. lib. 4. de Iustif. ca. 13.. Accedant; and Catholici omnes
docent, legem dei justis hominibus esse absolute possibilem, lib. eod. ca. 10.
Porr^.
of the Roman Church do, that they fulfilled the Law. Why Aust. lib. 5.
contra Faust. ca. 5.
do ye boast so much of fulfilling the Law, and commandments of God? Quid
illa prodessent omnia ubi non est fides vera, etiamsi vere implerentur a vobis?
what could all the commandments profit you, who have not a true faith, though
ye did truly fulfill them all? Thus and much more Saint Austen. Seeing then we
have proved, their faith to be not only unsound but heretical and
Antichristian, (worse then which, the faith of the Manichees could not be:)
impossible it is that from such a faith, either true virtue, or any godly act
should ever arise. The best that can be said of those which they call good
works, is that which Lactantius says In lib. Inst. divin. ca. 6,
of the works of the Ethnikes, which like theirs, quoad substantiam operis,
were good. Vmbra est and imago justitiae, quam illi justitiam putaverunt: It is
but a shadow and show of justice, which they think to be justice. Omnis Lib.
eod. ca. 9.
doctrina and virtus eorum sine capite est, all the knowledge and virtue which
they have, wants the head of true knowledge and virtue: It wants true faith
in Christ, which is the head of all knowledge, and virtue. This head whosoever
wants, Non dubium est, quin impius sit, omnesque virtutes ejus in illa
mortifera via reperiantur, quae est tota tenebrarum, there is no doub^ to be
made, but such an one is impious, and all the virtues which he thinks he
has, are mortiferous and deadly.

33. Where again I cannot but observe to the comfort of all true believers,
another exceeding difference betwixt us and them, even in these matters
concerning life, and good works: whatsoever things are either in themselves
good, or being of themselves indifferent, are by the lawful authority either
of civil, or ecclesiastical governors, commanded, we in doing any of those
things, and showing our willing obedience thereunto, perform an act not only
lawful, but laudable and acceptable unto God. For in doing any of these, we
do vertually perform obedience unto Christ, who by them commands the doing
of all such things: and in our religious performing of them, we hold firm that
holy foundation, not only of faith, but of good works, which the scriptures
teach. Neither only are such works acceptable unto God, but even those acts
also which are wicked and ungodly, being committed by such as do truly
believe, though they be as heinous as was the crime of David, or the abjuration
of Peter, even those, I say, by the strength and virtue of that foundation, if
one do rightly hold and believe it, are so covered Peccatum tectum est. Psalm.
32.1.
, put Isa, 43.25.
away and forgotten, that God Numb. 23.21.
sees none iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel. Such, so infinite
is the goodness, and so sovereign is the virtue which is in holding the true
foundation of faith. The contrary of all this falls out unto them, of the
present Roman Church. For not only their sins are made more sinful unto
them, there being no mantle to cover, or hide them from the eyes of God, and
shield them from his vengeance, but even their best and most holy actions which
they do, or can perform, though they should do nothing but sing hymns with
David, or feed Christ's flock with Peter, or give their goods to the poor, and
their bodies to be burned for Christ, even these, I say, are so tainted with
the venom of that Apostaticall foundation, that being of themselves holy
actions, yet unto them they are turned into sin, and become pernicious and
mortiferous. For whatsoever act being in it self either good or indifferent,
any of their Church (except only the Pope himself, who is a member
transcendent) does perform, because they do it in obedience unto him, whose
supreme authority they make the foundation, not only of their faith, but of
all good actions: in doing any such act, there is a vertuall and implicit
obedience to Antichrist, an acknowledgement of his supreme power to teach and
command what is to be done, a receiving his mark, either in their hand or
forehead: so that every such act, is not only impious, but even Antichristian,
and contains in it a vertuall and implicit renouncing of the whole faith. In
regard whereof none can ever sufficiently, I say, not commend, but admire the
zeal of Luther: who though he was so earnest to have the Communion in both
kinds, contrary to the doctrine and custom of the Roman Church, yet withal
he Kemnit. Exa. Conc. Trid. 1. Tract. de communi. sub utraque specie. pa, 136.
professed that, if the Pope as Pope should command it to be received in both
kinds, he then would receive it not in both, but in one kind only. Blessed
Luther! it was never thy meaning either to receive it, only in one, or to deny
it to be necessary for Gods Church and people to receive it in both kinds.
Thou knew right well, that Bibite ex hoc omnes, was Christ's own ordinance,
with which none might dispense; Thou for defense of this truth among many, was
set up as a sign of contradiction unto them, and as a mark at which they
directed all their darts of malicious and malignant reproaches. Far was it
from thee to relent one hare-bredth in this truth. But whereas they Conc.
Constant. Sess. 13. Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. in decreto super petit. de
concessione calici^ Bell. lib. 4. de Euchar. ca. 28.
taught the use of the Cup to be indifferent and arbitrarie; such as the Church
(that is, the Pope) might either allow, or take away, as he should think fit:
upon this supposall and no otherwise, did thou in thine ardent zeal to
Christ, and detestation of Antichrist, say, that were the use of both or one
kind only, a thing indeed indifferent, as they taught it to be, if the Pope
as Pope should command the receiving in both kinds, thou would not then
receive it so, lest whilst thou might seem to obey Christ commanding that, but
yet (upon their supposall) as a thing indifferent, thou should certainly
perform obedience to Antichrist, by his authority limiting, and restraining
that indifferency, unto both kinds, as now by his authority he restraines it
unto one. The sum is this, To do any act whether in it self good, or
indifferent, but commanded to be done by the Pope as Pope, to pray, to preach,
to receive the Sacraments, yea but to lift your eyes, or hold up your finger,
or say your Pater noster, or your Ave Maria, or wear a bead, a model, a lace,
or any garment white, or black, or use any crossing, either at Baptism, or
any other time, to do any one of these, or any the like, eo nomine, because the
Pope, as Pope, teaches that they are to be done, or commands the doing of
them, is in very deed a yielding one self to be a vassal of Antichrist, a
receiving the mark of the beast, and a vertuall or implicit denial of the
faith in Christ. So extremly venomous is that poison which lies in the root of
that fundamental heresy which they have laid as the very rock and Foundation
of their faith.

34. Hitherto we have examined the former position of Baronius which concerned
Heresy. His other concerning Schism, is this: Esse schismatici convicti sunt,
qui diversam a Romano Pontifice, his decernendis, sententiam sectati essent.
Bar. an. 547. nu. 30.
That they who dissented from Pope Vigilius when he decreed that the Three
Chapters ought to be defended, were Schismatikes. A most strange assertion:
that the whole Catholic Church should be schismatic, for they all
dissented from Vigilius in this cause; that Catholics should all at once
become Schismatikes, yea and that also for the very defense of the Catholic
faith. I oppose to this, another and true assertion, That not only Pope
Vigilius when he defended the Three Chapters, and forsook communion with the
condemners of them, was a Schismatike himself, and chief of the Schism, but
that all who as yet defend Vigilius, that is, who maintain the Popes
Cathedral infallibility in causes of faith, and forsake communion with those
that condemn it, that those all are, and that for this very cause,
Schismatikes, and the Pope, the ringleader in the Schism.

35. For the manifesting whereof, certain it is, that after Pope Vigilius had
so solemnly, and judicially by his Apostolical authority defined, that the
Three Chapters ought to be defended, there was a great rent and Schism in the
Church, either part separating it self from the other, and forsaking communion
with the other. First, the holy Council, and they who took part with it,
anathematized Coll. 8. talis anathema sit. saepe ibid.
the defenders of those Chapters, thereby (as themselves expound it) declaring
their opposites to be separated Nihil aliud significat anathema, nisi a Deo
separationem. Coll. 5. pa. 551. b.
from God, and therefore from the society of the church of God. On the other
side, Pope Vigilius and they who were on his part, were so averse from the
others, that they would rather endure disgrace, yea banishment as Baronius An.
553. nu. 221.
shows, the^ communicate with their opposites. But I shall not need to stay in
proving that there was a rent and schism at this time between the defenders
and condemners of those chapters. Baronius professes it, saying Ibid.
, The whole Church was then schismate dilacerata, torn asunder by a schism.
Again An. eodem 553. nu. 250.
, After the end of the Council there arose a greater war then was before.
Catholics (so he falsely calls both parts) being then divided among themselves,
some adhaering to the Council, others holding with Vigilius and his
Constitution. Again, Many An. eodem nu. 229.
relying upon the authority of Vigilius, did not receive the fifth Synod, atque
a contraria illis sentientibus sese diviserunt, and separated or divided
themselves from those who thought the contrary: Such were the Italian,
Africane, Illirian, and other neighbor Bishops. So Baronius: truly professing
a schism to have bin then in the Church, and Pope Vigilius to have been the
leader of the one part.

36. But whether of these two parts were Schismatickes? As the name of heresy,
though it be common to any opinion, whereof one makes choice, whether it be
true or false, (in which sense Constantine the great, called Epist. ad Crestum
apud Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 5.
the true faith, Catholicam and sanctissimam haeresim) yet in the ordinary use
it is now applied only to the choice of such opinions, as are repugnant to the
faith: So the name of Schism though it import any scissure or renting of one
from another, yet now by the vulgar use of Divines, it is appropriated only to
such a rent or division as is made for an unjust cause, and from those, to
whom, he or they who are separated, ought to unite themselves and hold
communion with them. This, whosoever do, whether they be more, or fewer then
those from whom they separate themselves, they are truly and properly to be
termed Schismatikes, and factious. For it is neither multitude, nor paucitie,
nor the holding with, or against any visible head, or governor whatsoever, nor
the bare act of separating ones self from others; but only the cause, for
which the separation is made, which makes a Schism or faction, and truly
denounces one to be factious, or a Schismatike. If Elijah separate himself
from the four hundredth Baalites and the whole kingdom of Israel, because they
are Idolaters; and they sever themselves from him because he will not worship
Baal, as they did; If the three children for the like cause, separate
themselves from all the Idolatrous Babylonians, in separation they are both
like, but in the cause being most unlike, the Baalites only, and not Elijah,
and the Babylonians only, and not the three children, are Schismatikes. Now
because every one is bound to unite himself to the Catholic and orthodoxall
Church, and hold communion with them in faith, hence it is that, as out of
Austine Lib. de unit. Eccl. ca. 4.
Stapleton rightly observes Lib. 6. doct. princ. ca. 7.. Istud.
Tota ratio Schismatis, the very essence of a Schism consists in the
separating from the Church, I say from the true and orthodoxall Church, for as
Saint Augustine in the same place reaches, whosoever dissents from the
Scriptures, and so from the true faith, though they be spread throughout the
whole world, Lib. 10. ca. 7.. Nempe.
yet such are not in the (sound) Church, much less are they the Church. And
therefore from them, be they never so many, never so eminent, one may, and must
separate himself. But if any sever himself from the orthodoxall Church, or,
to speak in Stapletons words, si renuit operari in ratione fidei ut pars
ecclesiae catholicae, if he will not cooperate or join together in maintaining
the faith, as a member of the Catholic or orthodoxall Church, Schismaticus hoc
ipso est, he is for this very cause a Schismatike.

37. Apply now this to Vigilius and the fifth general Council, and the case
will be clear. The only cause of separation on the Councels part, was, for
that Vigilius with all his adherents were Heretics, convicted, condemned; and
accursed for such, by that, true sentence, and judgment of the fifth general
Council, which was consonant both to Scriptures, Fathers, and the four former
general Councels, and approved by all succeeding general Councels, Popes, and
Bishops, that is, by the judgment of the whole Catholic Church, for more then
fifteen hundredth years together. A cause not only most just, but commanded
by the holy Apostle Tit. 3.10.
, Shun him that is an heretic, after once or twice admonition, much more
after public conviction and condemnation, by the upright judgment of the
whole Catholic Church. On the other side, Vigilius and his Faction separated
themselves from the Council, and all that took part with it, for this only
reason, because they were Catholics; because they embraced and constantly
defended the Catholic faith; because he would not cooperate (as Stapleton
speaks) with them, to maintain the true Catholic faith, and so on their
part, there was that which essentially made them Schismatickes. Baronius in
saying that those who then dissented from Vigilius, were Schismatickes, speaks
sutably to all his former assertions; For in saying this, he in effect says,
that Catholics to avoid a Schism, should have turned Heretics, should have
embraced Nestorianisme, and so have renounced and condemned the whole Catholic
faith, as Vigilius then did. Had they so done, they should have been no
Schismatikes with Baronius: But now for not condemning the Catholic faith with
Vigilius, they must all be condemned by the Cardinal, for Schismatickes.

38. For the very same reason, the whole present Roman Church are
Schismatickes at this day; and not the Reformed Churches from whom they
separate themselves. For the cause of separation on their part, is the same for
which Vigilius and his schismatic faction separated themselves from the fifth
Council, and the Catholics of those times who all took part with it, even
because we refuse to embrace the Popes Cathedral sentence in causes of faith,
as the fifth Council refused that of Vigilius. The cause on our part is the
same which the fifth Council then had, for that they defend the Popes
heretical constitution: nay not only that of Vigilius (which yet were cause
enough) but many other like unto that, and especially that one of Leo the tenth
with his Laterane Council, whereby Supremacy and with it Infallibility of
judgment is given unto the Pope in all his decrees of faith: In which one
Cathedral decree (condemned for heretical by the fifth Council, and constant
judgment both of precedent and subsequent Counsels, as before we have
declared) not only innumerable heresies such as none yet does dream of, are
included, but by the venom and poison of that one fundame^tall heresy, not
only all the other doctrines are corrupted, but the very foundation of faith is
utterly overthrown. Let them boast of multitudes, and universalitie never so
much, (which at this day is but a vain brag) say they were far more, even
four hundredth to one Luther, or the whole kingdom of Babylon to the two
witnesses of God; yet seeing it is the cause which makes a schismaticke; and
the cause of separation on their part is most unjust, but on ours most
warrantable and holy, for that they will not cooperate with us, in upholding
the ancient and Catholic faith, that especially of the fifth Council,
condemning and accursing the Cathedral sentence of Pope Vigilius, as
heretical, and all that defend it, as Heretics, it evidently follows, that
they are the only, and essentially schismatickes, at this time, and in this
great rent of the Church,

39. Whence again does ensue another Conclusion of no small importance. For it
is a ruled case among them, such as Bellarmine Lib. de Eccles. milit ca. 5.
avoucheth to be proved both by Scriptures, by Fathers, by pontifical decrees,
and sound reason, that no schismatickes are in the Church, or of the Church,
Now because out of Extra quam (Ecclesiam) nullus omnino salvatur. Conc.
Lateran. ca. 1.
the Church there is no salvation, it nearly concerns them, to bethink
themselves seriously what hope there is or can be unto them, who being, (as we
have proved) schismatickes, are for this cause by their own doctrine, utterly
excluded from the Church. But I will proceed no further in this matter, wherein
I have stayed much longer then I intended, yet my hope is, that I have now
abundantly cleared against Baronius, not only, That one may dissent in faith,
and be disioyned in communion from the Pope, and yet neither be Heretics nor
Schismatickes: but, That none can now consent in faith, and hold communion with
the Pope, but for that very cause he is by the judgment of the Catholic
Church, both an heretic and a schismaticke.

CHAP. XIIII. The second Exception of Baronius, excusing Vigilius from heresy,
for that he often professes to hold the Counsel of Chalcedon, and the faith
thereof, refuted.
1. HIs second excuse for Vigilius is taken from that profession which both
other defenders of the three Chapters, and Vigilius himself often makes in
his Constitution, that he holds the faith of the Council of Chalcedon, and
did all for the safety of that Council. Both parties says Baronius An. 547.
nu. 47.
, as well the defenders as the condemners of those three Chapters did testify,
that they desired nothing more, quam consultum esse catholica fidei, probatae a
S. Concilio Chalcedonensi, then to provide that the Catholic faith decreed at
Chalcedon might be safe. Again An. 546. nu. 33.
liquet omnes, it is manifest that all Catholics (in defense of the three
Chapters) at once contradicted this noveltie, (set down in the Emperors Edict
for condemning those chapters) vindicesque se Concilij Chalcedonensis
exhibuisse, and showed themselves to be defenders of the Council of
Chalcedon, Of Vigilius in particular, he not so little as forty times
ingeminates this: Vigilius An. 553. nu. 197.
writ these things, pro defensione and integritate Synodi Chalcedonensis, for
the defense and safety of the Council at Chalcedon. Vigilius Ibid. nu. 47.
writ his constitution for no other cause (as by it is evident) but to the end
that all things which were defined by the Council at Chalcedon, firma
consisterent, might remain firm and by no means be infringed. Again Ibid.
nu. 231.
, All that Vigilius or the rest did in this cause, did tend hereunto, ut
consultum esset dignitati and authoritati Synodi Chalcedonensis, that the
dignity and authority of the Council at Chalcedon might be kept safe and
sound, Thus Baronius.

2. The writings of those who defended those Chapters declare the same. Victor
in plain terms affirms In Chron. an. 2. post Coss. Basil.
, the three Chapters to have been approved and judged orthodoxall by the
Council of Chalcedon, and the condemning of them, to be the condemning of
that Council; and that for this cause, he refused to condemn them, least in
so doing he should condemn the Council of Chalcedon. The like he witnesses
An. 10. post Coss. Basilij.
of Facundus: whose own words set down by Baronius An. 545. nu. 28.
show, that he disliked the condemners of those three Chapters, because by
condemning them, Synodum improbarent, they condemned the Council of Chalcedon.
But none shows the like love to that Council, and care for it as does Pope
Vigilius in his Constitution, we decree says he Apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 196.
, That the judgment of the Fathers at Chalcedon, shall be kept inviolable in
all things, and particularly in this, touching the Epistle of Ibas: we dare
not call into question their judgment: their judgment in omnibus
conservantes, we keep in all things. Again Ibid. nu. 197:
, we permit no man to innovate either by addition, or detraction, or
alteration, any thing which is ordained and set down by the Council at
Chalcedon. Again Ibid. nu. 207.
, Behold, O Emperor, it is more clear then the light, that we have always
been desirous to reverence the four Councels, and that all things might
remain inviolable which by them are defined and judged. This, and much more to
the like purpose says Vigilius: Who now reading these things in his
Co^stitution, and seeing him so fervent and zealous for the Council at
Chalcedon, and the faith therein declared, would not think, nay proclaim
Vigilius to be a most sound Catholic, an utter enemy to Nestorianisme, as
that holy Council at Chalcedon was? Or who would not applaud Baronius for his
devise to defend and excuse Vigilius from heresy, because he was so earnest
for the Council of Chalcedon and the faith declared therein, which none can
embrace, and be guilty of Nestorianisme? This is his plea for Vigilius.

3. For answer whereunto, I am ashamed that Baronius, a Cardinal, and man of
rare knowledge, as he is supposed, should show himself so inconsiderate in
this cause, as to seek to excuse or defend Vigilius, by alleging the name,
credit, or authority of the Council of Chalcedon. For even that alone, if
there were nothing else, pulls upon him that just Anathema denounced by the fifth
Council, who thus decree, We Coll. 8. pa. 586. b. and 588. a.
anathematize the defenders of these Three Chapters, and those who have
written, or do write for them, or who do defend, or endeavor to defend the
impiety of them, nomine sanctorum Patrum, aut sancti Chalcedonensis Concilij;
by the name of the holy fathers, or of the Council at Chalcedon. The more then
that either Vigilius pretends that Council for defense of the Three Chapters,
or, that Baronius pretends it for the defense of Vigilius, the more they are
still involved in the Councels Anathema: and no marvel, for by alleging that
Council as a patron of those Three Chapters, they slander that most holy
Council, and all that approve it, that is, the whole Catholic Church to be
heretical, and patrons of the most blasphemous, and condemned heresy of
Nestorius.

4. Let this pass: Is this reason, think you, of Baronius of any force to
excuse Vigilius; he professes to defend the Council of Chalcedon, therefore
he is not an heretic? Truly of none at all; for who knows not that heretics
are as forward in chalenging to themselves the names and authority of ancient
Councels, and in professing to defend the same faith and doctrine which they
taught. Take a view but of three or four examples, and then you will pity
Baronius for this so weak and silly excuse for Vigilius.

5. In the Ephesine Latrocinie there came Act. Council. Ephesians. recitat. in Conc.
Chal. Act. 1. pa. 45.
certain Eutychean heretics, to the number of 35. who being justly
excommunicated by that holy Bishop Flavianus, desired to be restored to the
communion of the Church: Dioscorus and his Synod willed them to make a
profession of their faith; they did so; and their confession was this, Sic
sapimus, sicut 318. Patres in Nicea sanxerunt, and sicut hic congregata sancta
Synodus confirmarunt; we believe as the Nicene Fathers decreed; and the
(former) holy Synod at Ephesus confirmed, nor did we ever believe, or think
otherwise than those holy Councels decreed: we believe as S. Athanasius, S.
Cyrill, S. Gregory, and omnes Catholici Episcopi, and as all Catholic Bishops
have believed; and we accurse all that believe otherwise. Thus professed those
Eutychean heretics, and upon this profession they were by Dioscorus and his
Synod restored to the communion of the Church; yea, which is more, that same
Latrocinie or heretical Synod at Ephesus, professing Ibid. pa. 46.
the former Councels to be, tutelam nostrae Catholica fidei, the stay and prop
of their Catholic faith, (so they call their heresy) commanded the Nicene
Creed, which was confirmed in the holy Ephesine Council, to be read before
them; and the testimonies of many holy Fathers Jbid. pa. 47.
consenting thereunto, Peter, Athanasius, Poelix, Julius, Cyprian, and others,
together with the decree of the Ephesine Council, Nulli Ibid. pa. 50.
licere proferre, vel conscribere, vel componere aliam fidem praeter eam; that
it should not be lawful for any to utter, write, or compose any other faith,
or Creed, but that which was decreed at Nice. After all these read before them,
Dioscorus said, Existimo Ibid. pa. 57.
omnibus placere, I think that this faith decreed at Nice, and confirmed at
Ephesus, is approved by us all; for we may not either retract, or make doubt of
what they have done: and let every man say his judgment hereof: Then said
Thalassius, I think the same, and qui contraria eis sapiunt, abominor; and I
abhor all who think the contrary. John of Sebastia, I detest all heresies,
and colo hanc solam fidem, and embrace this faith only which was decreed at
Nice. Stephanus, If any believe otherwise than the Nicene Fathers decreed, let
him be accursed, because this is the true and Catholic faith. and the whole
Council said, Omnes sumus ejusdem fidei, we are all of the same faith, which
the Nicene Fathers decreed. Thus professed that whole Ephesine Latrocinie
consisting of 128 Bishops, they all said, they held the Nicene faith, and none
but that; accursing all that received not that: while yet at that very time
when they thus professed, they were most damnable heretics, and conspired
together to abolish for ever the holy Nicene says: They being Eutycheans,
learned to make such a dissembling profession of Eutyches himself, who
delivered up to that Synod Conciliab. Ephesians. in Act. Conc. Chal. Act. 1. pa. 11.
a confession of his faith, bemoaning, that he was persecuted, because he would
not deny the Nicene faith, nor believe otherwise then those holy fathers had
decreed, and the Ephesine Council had confirmed; and who having repeated
verbatim the Nicene Creed, adds this, Thus was I taught by my progenitors,
thus have I believed, in this faith was I borne, in this faith was I baptized,
and signed, (with the Cross) in this faith was I consecrated, in this faith
have I lived to this day, and in this faith do I desire to dye: And this
confession do I make, attestante mihi tam Deo, quam vestra sanctitate; both
God and this holy Council being my witness hereof. Thus Eutyches; of whom
(notwithstanding this so holy a profession) and all his partakers, their second
Nicene Council truly says Act. 6. pa. 561.
, Eutiches, Dioscorus, and the heretics of that branne approved the Nicene
faith, confirmed in the holy Council at Ephesus, sed tamen haeretici
permanserunt, yet for all that they remained heretics.

6. What can the Cardinal, or any of his friends oppose to this Example? If
Vigilius be no heretic, because he professes to hold the faith of the
Council at Chalcedon, then neither Dioscorus, nor the Eutycheans, nor Eutyches
himself, is an heretic, because they all with as great earnestness professed
to keep inviolable the Councels at Nice, and Ephesus, and the Catholic faith
explaned in them, accursing all who believe the contrary thereunto: If
notwithstanding this so resolute and earnest profession, Dioscorus and the
Eutycheans, with that Ephesine co^spiracy, were heretics, and Eutyches himself
an archheretike, as they al undoubtedly were; for even while they thus
professed, they all denied Consiteor ex duabus naturis fuisse Dominum ante
adunationem, post vero adunationem unam naturam confiteor, Dixit Eutyches:
sanctae Synodus dixit, consentimus. Act. Conc. Ephesians. in Act. Conc. Chal. Act.
1. pa. 28. b.
two natures to remain in Christ, after the union, as the very acts of that
Latrocinie do expressly declare; then was it a very silly reason of Baronius,
to conclude, that Vigilius was no heretic, because in his decree, for defense
of the Three Chapters, he is so resolute to keep inviolable the Council of
Chalcedon, and the faith there decreed.

7. The like may be seen in the Monothelites, of whom their second Nicen
Synod says Act. 6. pa. 5^1.
thus. Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, Honorius
Bishop of Rome, and all who are called Monothelites, embraced both the Council
of Chalcedon, and the next which followed it (which is this fifth) and the
general Councels which went before these, to wit, the Nicen,
Constantinopolitane, and Ephesine: veruntamen ut haeretici a Catholica ecclesia
dammati sunt, yet for all this they were condemned for heretics, by the whole
Church; Why may not the Catholic Church, give the like doom of Vigilius for
defending the three Chapters, though he profess and embrace all the same
Councels, and particularly that of Chalcedon, as they did?

8. Perhaps other Heretics would dissemble in their profession, but the
Nestorians (of which rank Vigilius was) they were men of a better fashion,
they would never profess to hold the decrees and faith of an holy Council,
unless they did so indeed. Fie, of all heretics they were most vile in this
kind: Read the acts of their Conventicle held in an Inn at Ephesus, during
the time of the holy Ephesine Council, and you shall see, that as by lies,
slanders and all base revilings they sought to disgrace Cyrill, and all other
orthodoxall Bishops, calumniating them as heretics, and oppugners of the
Nicen faith, so they boasted of themselves, that they forsooth were the only
men who defended and upheld the Council of Nice and the faith there explaned;
Witness besides their second Nicen Ibid.
Synod, their own words, and writings, Nestorius himself and others of his
sect, writ To. 3. Act. Conc. Epist. ca. 20
thus to the Emperor, we obeying your imperial command, came to Ephesus, and
our intent and desire was, communi omnium calculo sanctorum Patrum Nicenorum
fidem confirmare, to confirm with one consent the faith of the Nicen Fathers.
In those instructions, which they gave to their Legates, they subscribed in
Ibid. ca. 19.
this manner, I Alexander Bishop of Hierapolis Nicenae fidei expositioni
subscripsi, have subscribed to the Nicen Faith, and of you shall do any thing
according to the faith expounded at Nice, to that I assent: in the like sort
subscribed they all. To the Emperor that Conventicle thus writ Ibid. ca 11.
, we do earnestly by desire your piety, that you would command; that all men
should subscribe to the faith expounded at Nice, and that they may teach
nothing quod sit ab ea alienum, which is contrary to that faith. In another
Epistle to the Emperor, we came, say Append. 2. ad tom. 3. Act. Conc. Ephesians.
ca. 3.
they, to Ephesus without delay, manentes in sola expositione fidei Patrum qui
in Nicea convenerant, abiding in that profession of faith only, which was
decreed at Nice. In another Epistle having repeared the Nicen Creed, they add
To. 3. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 12.
this, In hanc fidei expositionem nos omnes acquiescimus, we all do rest our
selves in this declaration of faith made at Nice, we constantly persever in it.
In their Ibid. ca. 13.
Epistle to Rufus, we resist them, nihil aliud spectantes, quam ut fidei
Symbolum a patribus Nicenis editum, suum locum perfect obtineat, intending or
aiming at nothing else, but that the faith of the Nicene Creed, may fully and
perfectly obtain his due place and honor. In their very Synodall sentence
against Cyrill, and other orthodoxall Bishops, they express Jbid ca. 2.
this, That they shall remain excommunicate, until they do integre
suscipere, entirely embrace the Nicene faith, adding nothing unto it; which
they repeat again in their Epistle to the Senate of Constantinople, saying: If
Ibid. ca. 6.
Cyrill and the rest will repent, and forsake their heretical doctrines, and
embrace the faith of the Nicene Fathers, they shall straight be absolved; and
twenty times the like. Who reading no more but these so many, so earnest
professions of Nestorius and the Nestorians, to defend in every point the
Nicene faith, without addition or alteration, would not almost swear that
these doubtless were the only men that stood firm and constant for the
Nicene Council; and that Cyrill and they who took part with him (which was
the whole Catholic Church) were the maine oppugners of that Council, and the
faith there decreed? And yet notwithstanding all these professions, these were
blasphemous heretics at that time, and most eagerly oppugned and sought to
abolish that very Nicene faith, which in words they so professed and boasted of.

9. Vigilius and the defenders of the Three Chapters, as they followed the
Nestorians in their heresy, so did they in seeking to countenance and grace
their heresy, by professing to defend the Council of Chalcedon, and the faith
there decreed, yea to defend it so constantly as that it might not in any part
or syllable be violated, pretending their opposites, who condemned those
Chapters, to oppugn and condemn the Council of Chalcedon, as the old
Nestorians slandered Cyrill, and other Catholics of those times, to condemn
the Council of Nice. And yet notwithstanding all these professions, Vigilius
and his adherents were as deep in Nestorianisme as Nestorius himself, and
even while he pretends to maintain, he does quite overthrow the holy Council
of Chalcedon; and the faith therein explained.

10. But neither the old, nor later Nestorians are in this kind comparable to
the modern Romanists, the last and worst sect of heretics that ever the Church
was pestered withal. Their profession is not so minute, as to boast of this or
that one Council, or of some few fathers. All Scriptures make for them, All
the Fathers are theirs, All general Councels confirm what they teach. Their
books do swell with this ventositie. I pray you hear the words but of one of
them, but such an one, as puts down all Nestorians, Eutycheans, Monothelites,
and al heretics that went before him; We, says he An Apologicall Epistle
published an. 1601. pa. 118.
, have All authorities, Times, and places for our defense: Our enemies have
none at all. Our Ibid. pa. 113.
doctrine is taught by all godly and famous professors of Divinity; All Popes,
Fathers and Doctors that ever were in the Church, All Counsels, particular and
general, All Universities, Schools, Colleges and places of learning, since
the time of Christ to Martin Luther: It is Ibid. pa. 38.
ratified by all authority, all Scriptures, Traditions, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Sibylls, Rabbis: All holy and learned Fathers, Historians,
Antiquaries, and Monuments: All Synods, Counsels, Laws, Parliaments, Canons
and Decrees of Popes, of Emperors, of Kings, and Rulers: All Martyrs,
Confessors, and holy witnesses; by all friends and enemies, even Mahumetanes,
Jews, Pagans, Infidells; All former Heretics, and schismatikes, by all
testimonies that can be devised, not only in this world, but of God, of
Angels and glorious souls, of Devils and damned spirits in hell. (The
fittest witnesses of all.) What, any more? yes, the best is yet behind. I have,
says he Ibid. pa. 119.
, read and studied all the Scriptures, the old Testament in the Hebrew Text,
the new in the Greek; I have studied the ancient Glosses and Scholies, Latin
and Greek. I have perused the most ancient Historians, Eusebius, Ruffinus,
Socrates, Sozomene, Palladius, Saint Jerome, Saint Bede, and others; I have
often with diligence considered the Decrees of the Popes, both of all that were
before the Nicene Council and after, (then no doubt but he diligently
considered of this Apostolical Constitution of Pope Vigilius.) I have been an
auditor both of Scholasticall and Controversall questions, where all doubts and
difficulties that wit or learning can devise, and invent, are handled, and most
exquisitely debated; I have seen and read all the general Counsels; from the
first at Nice, to the last at Trent, (then doubt not but he read this fifth
Council:) as also all approved particular and Provincial Counsels which be
extant and ordinarily used; I have carefully read over all the works and
writings which be to be had of Dionysius the Areopagite, Saint Ignatius, Saint
Policarp, Saint Clement, Martialis, Saint Iustine, Origin, Saint Basil, Saint
Athanasius, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, Saint Gregory Nissene, Saint Gregory the
Great, Saint Irene, Saint Cyprian, Fulgentius, Pamphilus the Martyr, Palladius,
Theodoret, Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomene, Evagrius, Cassianus, Lactantius,
Vincentius Lyrinensis; all the works of all these have I read and examined,
and conferred them with Saint Augustine, Saint Jerome, Saint Ambrose, Saint
Leo, Papius, Theophilact, Tertullian, Eusebius, Prudentius, and others most
excellent Divines. And I take God and the whole Court of heaven to witness
(before whom I must render an account of this protestation) that the same faith
and religion which I defend, is taught and confirmed by those Hebrew and Greek
Scriptures, those Historians, Popes, Decrees, Scholies, and Expositions,
Counsels, Schools and Fathers, and the profession of Protestants condemned by
the same. Thus he.

11. Did ever mortal man read or hear of such a braggadochio? For learning
and languages Jerome is but a baby to him; more industrious and adamantine then
Origin, then Adamantius himself. A shop, a storehouse of all knowledge; his
head a Library of all Fathers, Councels, Decrees, of all writings, an Heluo,
nay a very hell of books, he devoures up all. Rabsecha, Thraso, Pyrgopolinices,
Therapontigonus; all ye Magnificoes and Gloriosoes, come sit at his feet, and
learn of him the exact form of vaunting and reviling. What silly men were
Eutiches, Nestorius, and the old heretics? they boasted but of one or two
Counsels. All Counsels, all Fathers, all Decrees, all books, writings, and
records, are witnesses of his faith. They said it, he swears it before God and
the whole Court of Heaven, that all Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, all
witnesses in heaven, earth and hell, yea the Devil and all, are his, and
confirm their Roman faith, and condemn the doctrine of Protestants. Alas
what shall we do, but even hide our selves in caves of the earth, and clifts
of the rocks, from the force and fury of this Goliath, who thus braves it out in
the open field, as who with the only breath of his mouth can blow away whole
legions, quasi ventus folia, aut pannicula tectoria.

12. But let no man's heart faint because of this proud anonymall Philistim. Thy
servant, O Lord, though the meanest in the host of Israel, will fight with him;
nor will I desire any other weapons, but this one pible stone of the judicial
sentence of the fifth general Council against Vigilius. This being taken out
of David's bag, that is, derived from Scriptures, consonant to all former, and
confirmed by all succeeding Catholic Counsels and Fathers, directly and
unavoydably hits him in the forehead, it gives a mortal and uncurable wound
unto him; for it demonstrates not only the foundation of their faith to be
heretical, and for such to be condemned and accursed by the judgment of the
whole Catholic Church, but all their doctrines, whatsoever they teach, because
they all rely on this foundation of the Popes infallibility, are not only
unsound, and in the root heretical, but even Antichristian also, such as
utterly overthrow the whole Catholic faith. This, being one part of the
Philistimes weapons, wherein he trusted and vanted, with his own sword is his
head, (the head and foundation of all their faith) cut off, so that of him and
the whole body of their Church it may be truly said, Iacet ingens littore
truncus, Avulsumque humeris caput, and sine nomine corpus.

13. You see now how both ancient and modern heretics boast of Counsels, and
therefore, that the reason of Baronius is most inconsequent, that Vigilius was
no heretic because he professes to hold the Council of Chalcedon. Nay I say
more, though one profess to hold the whole Scripture, yet if with pertinacy
he hold any one doctrine repugnant thereunto, the profession of the Scriptures
themselves cannot excuse such a man from being an heretic; If it could, then
not any of the old heretics would want this pretense: or, to omit them, seeing
both Protestants and Papists make profession to believe the Scriptures, and
whatsoever is taught therein; would this profession exempt one from heresy,
neither they, nor we, should be, or be called heretics. But seeing in truth
they are, and we in their Antichristian language are called heretics, as
Cyrill, and the orthodoxall believers in his time, were by the Nestorians, it
is without question that this profession to hold the whole Scriptures, much
less to hold one or two Counsels (as Vigilius did) cannot free one from being
an heretic.

14. You will perhaps say, can one then believe the whole Scripture, and be an
heretic, or believe the faith decreed at Nice, Ephesus; or Chalcedon; and be
an Arian, Eutychean or Nestorian heretic? No verily, for as the Scripture
contains a contradiction to every heresy, seeing as Saint Austen truly says
Lib. 2. de doct. Christ. ca. 9.
, all doctrines concerning faith, are set down, and that also perspicuously
therein: so do every one of those three Councels contain a contradiction to
every one of those three heresies, and to all other which concern the divinity
or humanity of Christ. But it is one thing to profess the scriptures, or those
three Counsels, and say that he believes them, which many heretics may do;
and another thing to believe them indeed, which none can do and be an
heretic, for whosoever truly believes the scriptures, cannot possibly with
pertinacy hold any doctrine repugnant to scriptures; but such a man upon
evident declaration that this is taught in them (though before he held the
contrary) presently submits his wit and will to the truth which out of them is
manifested unto him. If this he do not, he manifestly declares, that he holds
his error with pertinacy, and with an obstinate resolution not to yield to the
truth of the scriptures, and so he is certainly an heretic, notwithstanding
his profession of the scriptures, which he falsely said he believed, and held,
when in very truth he held, and that pertinaciously the quite contrary unto
them. The very like must be said of those three Counsels, and them who either
truly believe, or falsely say, that they believe the faith explained in them, or
any one of them.

15. Whence two things are evidently consequent, the former, that all heretics
are liars in their profession: not only because they profess that doctrine
which is untrue, and heretical, but because in words they profess to believe
and hold that doctrine which they do not, but hold, and that for a point of
their faith, the quite contrary: All of them will and do profess that they
believe the scriptures, and the doctrines therein contained: and yet every one
of them lie herein, for they believe one, if not more doctrines contrary to the
scriptures. The Nestorians professed to hold the Nicene faith, and so they
professed two natures and but one person to be in Christ, for that in the
Nicene faith is certainly decreed: but they lied in making this profession, for
they believed not one person, but pertinaciously held two persons to be in
Christ. The Eutycheans in professing the Ephesine Council, professed in effect
two natures to abide in Christ after the union, for this was certainly the
faith of that holy Council, but they lied in this profession, for they held
that after the union two natures did not abide in Christ, but one only. The
Church of Rome and members thereof profess to hold the faith of the fifth
general Council, and so profess implicit the Popes Cathedral sentence in a
cause of faith to be fallible and heretical: but they lie in making this
profession, for they believe not the Popes sentence in such causes to be
fallible, but with the Laterane and Trent Councels, they hold it to be
infallible. It is the practice of all heretics to make such fair, though
lying professions. For should they say in plain terms, (that which is truth
indeed) we believe not the scriptures, nor the Counsels of Nice, Ephesus, or
Chalcedon; every man would spit at them, and detest them, cane pejus and angue,
nor could they ever deceive any, or gain one proselyte. But when they commend
their faith (that is, their heresy) to be the same doctrine with the
scriptures, which the Counsels of Nice, Ephesus and Chalcedon taught, by these
fair pretenses, and this lying profession, they insinuate themselves into the
hearts of the simple, deceiving hereby both themselves and others.

16. The other consequent is this, That the profession of all heretics is
contradictory to it self. For they profess to hold the scriptures, and so to
condemn every heresy, and yet withal they profess one private doctrine
repugnant to scripture, and which is an heresy. The like may be said of the
Counsels. The Nestorians by professing to hold the faith decreed at Nice,
profess Christ to be but one person, and yet withal by holding
Nestorianisme, they profess Christ to be two persons. The Eutycheans by
professing to hold the Council of Ephesus, profess two natures to remain in
Christ after the union; which in that Council is certainly decreed, and yet by
professing the heresy of Eutyches, they profess the quite contradictory, that
one nature only remains after the union. The Church of Rome and members
thereof, by professing the faith of the fifth Council, profess the Popes
Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith to be fallible, and de facto to have
been heretical; and yet they profess the direct contradictory, as the
Council of Laterane has defined, that the Popes sentence in such causes is
infallible, and neither has been nor can be heretical. So repugnant to it
self, and incoherent is the profession of all heretics, that it sighteth both
with the truth, and with it own self also. The very same is to be seen in
Vigilius and his Constitution. For in professing to defend the three Chapters,
and in decreeing that all shall defend them, he professes all the blasphemies
of Nestorius, and decrees that all shall maintain them, and professing to
hold the faith decreed at Chalcedon, and decreeing that all shall hold it, he
professes that Nestorianisme is heresy, and decrees that all shall condemn
it for heresy: and so decreeing both these, he decrees that all men in the
world shall believe two contradictories, and believe them as Catholic Truths.
Such a worthy Apostolical decree is this of Vigilius, for defending whereof
Baronius does more then toil himself.

17. You will again demand: Seeing Vigilius does so earnestly and plainly
profess both these, why shall not his express profession to hold the Council
of Chalcedon, make him or show him to be a Catholic, rather then his other
express profession, to defend the Three Chapters, make or show him to be an
heretic? Why rather shall his heretical, then his orthodoxall profession
give denomination unto him? I also demand of you, Seeing every heretic in
express words professes to believe the whole Scripture, which is in effect a
condemning of every heresy, why shall not this orthodoxall profession make or
show him to be a Catholic, rather then his express profession of some one
doctrine contrary to Scripture (say for example sake, of Arianisme) make or
show him to be an Arian heretic? The reason of both is one and the same. Did
an Arian so profess to hold the Scriptures, that he were resolved to forsake
his Arianisme, and confess Christ to be (...), upon manifestation that the
Scriptures taught this, certainly his profession of Arianisme, with such a
profession to hold the Scriptures, could not make him an heretic, no more
then Cyprians profession of Rebaptization, or Irenees of the millenarie
heresy, did make them heretics: Err he should, as they did, but being not
pertinacious in error, heretic he could not be, as they were not. But it
falls out otherwise with all heretics. They profess to hold the Scripture,
yet so that they resolve not to forsake that private doctrine which they have
chosen to maintain: That they will hold, and they will have that to be the
doctrine of the Scripture, notwithstanding all manifestation to the contrary,
even of the Scriptures themselves. They resolve of this, that whosoever,
Bishops, Counsels, or Church, teach the contrary to that, or say and judge
that the Scripture so teaches, they all err or mistake the meaning of the
Scriptures. Thus did not Cyprian, nor Irenee. And this wilful and pertinacious
resolution it is, which evidently shows that in truth they believe not the
Scriptures, but believe their own fancies, though they say a thousand times,
that they believe and embrace whatsoever the Scriptures teach, for did they
believe any doctrine, say Arianisme, eo nomine, because the Scripture teaches
it, they would presently believe the contrary thereunto, when it were
manifested unto them (as is was to the Arians, by the Nicen Counsel) that the
Scripture taught the contrary to their error. Seeing this they will not do,
It is certain that they hold their private opinion, eo nomine because they
will hold it; and they hold it to be the doctrine of scripture, not because it
is so, but because they will have it to be so, say what any will or can to the
contrary. So their own will, and not Scripture, is the reason why they
believe it, nay why they hold it with such a stiff opinion, for belief it is
not, it cannot be. This pertinacie to have been in the Nestorians, Eutycheans
and the rest, is evident. Had they believed, as they professed, the faith
decreed at Nice and Ephesus, then upon manifestation of their errors out of
those Councels, they would have renounced their heresies: but seeing the
Nestorians persisted to hold two persons in Christ, notwithstanding, that the
whole Council of Ephesus manifested unto them that the Nicene Council held but
one person, and seeing the Eutycheans persisted to hold but one nature after
the union, notwithstanding that the whole Council at Chalcedon manifested unto
them, that the holy Ephesine Synod held two natures to abide in him after the
union, they did hereby make it evident unto all, that they so professed to hold
those Councels, as that they resolved not to forsake their Nestorian and
Eutichean heresies for any manifestation of the truth, or conviction of their
error out of those Councels, and their profession of them was in effect as if
they had said, we hold those Councels, and will have them to teach what we
affirm, whatsoever any manor Council says, or can say to the contrary. The
like must be said of Pope Vigilius in this cause: Had he so professed to hold
the Council of Chalcedon, as that upon manifestion that the Three Chapters
were condemned by it, he would have forsaken the defense of them, then
certainly his defending of these 3. Chapters had not bin pertinacious, nor
should have made him an heretic, but his profession to hold the faith decreed
at Chalcedon, notwithstanding his error about the 3. Chapters, should have made
him a catholic. But seeing Vig. persisted to defend the 3. Chapt. though it
was made evide^t unto him by the Synodall judgment of the fifth Council, that
the definition of says decreed at Chalcedon condemned them all, he by this
persisting in heresy did demonstrate to all, that he professed to hold the
Council at Chalcedon, no otherwise then with a pertinacious resolution not to
forsake the defense of those Three heretical Chapters, although the whole
Church of God should manifest unto him, that the Council of Chalcedon
condemned the same: and for this cause his defending of those three Chapters,
with this pertinacie and wilful resolution declares him to be indeed an
heretic, notwithstanding his profession to hold the Council of Chalcedon and
faith thereof, whereby all those Chapters are condemned, which profession being
joined with the former pertinacie, could not now either make or declare him to
be a Catholic.

18. The very same must be said of the present Roman Church and members
thereof. Did they in such sort profess to hold the fifth Council, and faith
thereof, as that upon manifestation that this Council believed, taught and
decreed that the Popes Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith is fallible, and
de facto has been heretical, they would condemn that their fundamental
heresy of the Popes Cathedral infallibility decreed in their Laterane and
Trent assemblies, then should they much rather, for their profession of the
fifth Council and faith thereof, be orthodoxall, then for professing (together
with this) the Popes Cathedral infallibility, be heretical. But seeing they
know by the very Acts and judicial sentence of that fifth Council, by which
the Cathedral Constitution of Vigilius is condemned and accursed for
heretical in this cause of faith, touching the Three Chapters, that the fifth
Council believed this, and decreed, under the censure of an Anathema, that all
others should believe it, and that all who believe the contrary, are heretics:
seeing, I say, notwithstanding this manifestation of the faith of that
Council, they persist to defend the Popes Cathedral infallibility in those
causes, yea, defend it as the very foundation of their faith; this makes it
evident to all, that they do no otherwise profess to hold this fifth Council,
or the other, whether precedent, or following, (for they all are consonant to
this) but with this pertinacious resolution, not to forsake that their
fundamental heresy; and therefore their express profession of this fifth, and
other general Councels, yea, of the Scriptures themselves, cannot be so
effectual to make them Catholics, as the profession of the Popes
infallibility, which is joined with this pertinacy, is to make and demonstrate
them to be heretics.

19. There is yet a further point to be observed touching the pertinacy of
Vigilius: For one may be, and often is pertinacious in his error, not only
after, but even before conviction, or manifestation of the truth made unto him;
and this happens whenever he is not paratus corrigi, prepared, or ready to
be informed of the truth, and corrected thereby, or when he does nor, or will
not, tanta solicitudine quaerere veritatem, with care and diligence seek to
know the truth, as after S. Austen Epist. 162.
, and out of him Occham Lib. 4. part. 1. ca. 2.
, Gerson Cons. 12. de pertinacia. part. 1. pa. 430.
, Navar Ench. ca. 11. nu. 22.
, Alphonsus a Castro Lib. 1. de justa punit. haeret. ca. 7
, and many others do truly teach. See now, I pray you, how far Vigilius was
from this care of seeking, and preparation to embrace the truth. He by his
Apostolical authority decreed Constable. Vigil. apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 208.
that none should either write, or speak, or teach ought contrary to his
Constitution; or if they did, that his decree should stand for a condemnation
and refutation of whatsoever they should either write or speak. Here was a
trick of Papal, that is, of the most supreme pertinacy that can be devised:
He takes order before hand, that none shall ever, I say, not convict him, but,
so much as manifest the truth unto him, or open his mouth, or write a syllable
for the manifestation thereof: and so, being not prepared to be corrected, no
nor informed neither, he was pertinacious, and is justly to be so accounted
before ever either Bishop, or Council manifested the truth unto him. Even as
he is far more wilfully and obstinately delighted in darkness, who dammes up
all the windows, chinkes, and passages, whereby any light might enter into the
house, wherein he is, than he, who lies asleep, and is willing to be
awaked, when the light shines about him: So was it with Pope Vigilius at this
time; his tying of al men's tongues, and hands, that they should not manifest by
word, or writing, the truth unto him; his damming up of the light, that never
any glimpse of the truth might shine unto him, argues a mind most damnably
pertinacious in error, and so far from being prepared and ready to embrace the
truth, that it is obdurate against the same, and will not permit it so much as
to come near unto him.

20. The very like pertinacy is at this day in the Roman Church, and all the
members thereof: for having once set down this transcendent principle, the
foundation of all which they believe; that the Popes judgment, in causes of
faith, is infallible, they do by this exclude and utterly shut out all
manifestation of the truth, that can possibly be made unto them: Oppose
whatsoever you will against their error, Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, reason
and sense it self, it is all refuted before it be proposed, seeing the Pope,
who is infallible, says the contrary to that which you would prove, you, in
disputing from those places, do either mis-cite them, or mis-interpret the
Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, or your reason from them is sophistical,
and your sense of sight, of touching, of tasting, is deceived, some one defect
or other there is in your opposition; but an error in that which they hold,
there is, nay, there can be none, because the Pope teaches that, and the Pope,
in his teaching is infallible. Here is a charm, which causes one to hear
with a deaf ear, whatsoever is opposed: the very head of Medusa, if you come
against it, it stunnes you at the first, and turns both your reason, your
sense, and your self also, into a very stone. By holding this one fundamental
position, they are pertinacious in all their errors, and that in the highest
degree of pertinacy, which the wit of man can devise; yea, and pertinacious
before all conviction, and that also though the truth should never by any
means be manifested unto them: For by setting this down, they are so far from
being prepared to embrace the truth, though it should be manifested unto them,
that hereby they have made a fundamental law for themselves, that they never
will be convicted, nor ever have the truth manifested unto them. The only
means in likelihood to persuade them, that the doctrines which they maintain,
are heresies, were first to persuade the Pope, who has decreed them to be
orthodoxall, to make a contrary decree, that they are heretical. Now although
this may be morally judged, to be a matter of impossibility; yet, if his
Holiness could be induced hereunto, and would so far stoop to Gods truth,
as to make such a decree; even this also could not persuade them, so long as
they hold that foundation. They would say, either the Pope were not the true
Pope, or that he defined it not as Pope, and ex Cathedra; or that, by
consenting to such an heretical decree, he ceased ipso facto to be Pope, or
the like; some one or other evasion they would have still: but, grant the Popes
sentence to be fallible, or heretical, whose infallibility they hold as a
doctrine of faith, yea, as the foundation of their faith, they would not. Such,
and so unconquerable pertinacy is annexed, and that essentially, to that one
Position, that so long as one holds it, (and whenever he cease to hold it,
he cease to be a member of their Church,) there is no possible means in the
world to convict him, or convert him to the truth.

21. You do now clearly see, how feeble, and inconsequent that Collection is,
which Baronius here uses in excuse of Pope Vigilius, for that he often
professes to defend the Council of Chalcedon, and the faith therein explaned:
He did but herein that which is the usual custom of all other heretics,
both ancient and modern: Quit him for this cause, and quit them all; condemn
them, and then, this pretense can no way excuse Vigilius from heresy. They all
with him profess, with great ostentation to hold the doctrines of the
Scriptures, of Fathers, of general Councels, but because their profession is
not only lying, and contradictorie to it self, but always such, as that they
retain a wilful and pertinacious resolution, not to forsake that heresy
which themselves embrace, as Vigilius had, not to forsake his defense of the
Three Chapters: Hence it is that their verbal profession of Scriptures,
Fathers, and Councels, cannot make any of them, nor Vigilius among them, to be
esteemed orthodoxall, or Catholic: but the real and cordial profession of
any one doctrine, which they, with such pertinacy hold against the Scriptures,
or holy general Councels, as Vigilius did this of the Three Chapters, does
truly demonstrate them all, and Vigilius among them, to be heretics. And this
may suffice for answer to the second exception, or evasion of Baronius.

CAP. 15. The third exception of Baronius in excuse of Vigilius, taken from his
confirming of the fifth Council, answered; and how Pope Vigilius, three or
four times changed his judgment in this cause of faith.
1. IN the third place Baronius comes to excuse Vigilius, by his act of
confirming and approving the fifth Council, and the decree thereof for
condemning the Three Chapters, It appears, says he An. 554. nu. 7.
, that Vigilius, to the end he might take away the schism, and unite the
Eastern Churches to the Catholic communion, quintam Synodum authoritate
Apostolica comprobavit, did approve the fifth Synod by his Apostolical
authority. Again An. 553. nu. 235.
, when Vigilius saw, that the Eastern Church would be rent from the West,
unless he consented to the fifth Synod, eam probavit, he approved it: Again
Ibid. nu. 236.
, Pelagius thought it sit, as Vigilius had thought before, that the fifth Synod,
wherein the three Chapters were condemned, should be approved: and again An.
556. nu. 1.
, Cognitum fuit, it was publicly known, that Vigilius had approved the fifth
Synod, and condemned the three Chapters. The like is affirmed by Bellarmine
Lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5. Coacta.
, Vigilius confirmed the fifth Synod, per libellum, by a book, or writing.
Binius is so resolute herein, that he says Not in Conc. 5. Praestitit.
, A Vigilio (quintam) Synodum confirmatam et approbatam esse nemo dubitat; none
doubts but that Vigilius confirmed and approved the fifth Council. Now if
Vigilius approved the fifth Council, and condemned the Three Chapters, it
seems that all which we have said of his contradicting the fifth Synod, and of
his defending those Three Chapters, is of no force, and that by his assent to
the Synod he is a good Catholic. This is the Exception, the validity whereof
we are now to examine.

2. For the clearing of which whole matter, it must be remembered, that all,
which hitherto we have spoken of Vigilius, has reference to his Apostolical
decree, published in defense of those Three Chapters, that is, to Vigilius,
being such as that decree does show, and demonstrate him to have been, even a
pertinacious oppugner of the faith, and a condemned heretic by the judicial
sentence of the fifth Council: but now Baronius draws us to a further
examination of the carriage of Vigilius in this whole business, and how he
behaved himself from the first publishing of the Emperors Edict, which was in
the twentieth Bar. an. 546. nu. 8.
year of Justinian, unto the death of Vigilius, which was, as Baronius
accounts An. 555. nu. 1.
, in the 29 of Justinian, and second year after the fifth Council was ended;
but, as Victor, (who then lived) accounts In Chron. an. 17. post Coss. Basil.
, in the 31 of Justinian, and fourth year after the Synod: And, for the more
clear view of his carriage, we must observe four several periods of time,
wherein Vigilius, during those nine or ten years, gave diverse several
judgments, and made three or four eminent changes in this cause of faith. The
first, from the promulgation of the Emperors Edict, while he remained at Rome,
and was absent from the Emperor. The second, after he came to Constantinople,
and to the Emperors presence, but before the fifth Synod was begun. The third,
in the time of the fifth Synod, and about a year after the end and dissolution
thereof. The fourth, from thence, that is, from the year after the Synod, unto
his death.

3. At the first Ipso exordio asser^ae ab Imperatore sententiae. Bar. an. 546
nu. 38. et 39.
publishing of the Edict, many of the Western Churches, impugnabant Edictum,
did oppose themselves to it, and, as Baronius says, insurrexere, made an
insurrection against it, and the Emperor: Pope Vigilius, as in place and
dignity he was more eminent, so in this Insurrection he was more forward, and
a ringleader unto them all: And because the conflict was likely to be
troublesome, Vigilius used all his authority and art in managing of this cause.
First, he proclameth the Edict, and condemning of the Three Chapters to be a
profane Jlle (Vigilius) prophanas vocum novitates sibi vendicavit arguendas.
Ait Facund. apud Bar. an. 546. nu. 57.
novelty, judging Nisi contrarium Synodo Chalcedonensi judicaret. Ibid. nu. 58.
it to be contrary to the holy faith, and Council at Chalcedon: To this he
adds writings, threats, and punishments: Literas scripsit adversus eos, says
Baronius An. 547. nu. ^4. et 32.
, Vigilius writ letters against all that held with the Emperor, and his Edict:
in those letters, comminatus Ibid.
est eis qui consenserunt; he threatened those that consented to the Emperor;
edixit Facund. loco cit. nu. 56.
and indixit correctionem; he decreed punishment unto them, and forewarned them
thereof; telling them, that unless they did amend their fault, he would draw
out his Apostolic blade against them, protesting with the Apostle 2 Cor. 12.
v. 22.
, I fear when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall
be found of you such as ye would not. Nor were his threats in vain, as it
seems, seeing Baronius An. 546. nu. 47. et 547. nu. 45.
tells us, that for this very cause, either he or Stephanus his Legate, in his
name did excommunicate, besides others, two Patriarchs, Mennas of
Constantinople, and Zoilus of Alexandria, and with them Theodorus Bishop of
Cesarea.

4. Thus he dealt with inferior persons, but for the Emperor he took another
course with him: He saw what danger it was to write against Emperors, that he
would not do himself: But when, like Pirrhus, ipse sibi cavit loco, he had
provided for his own safety; then he thrusts forward Facundus Bishop of
Hermian into that business. Facundus an eloquent man indeed, as his name also
imports, but a most obstinate heretic and Schismatike, seeing he persisted in
defense of the three Chapters, not only before, but after the judicial sentence
of the general Council; and yet is he commended by Baronius An. 546. nu. 44
to be prudentissimus agonistes, a most wise champion for the Church: but the
more heretical he is, the more like, and better liked is he to Baronius. Him
does Vigilius Haec Facundus jubente Vigilio. Bar. ibid.
egg, and even command to write against the Emperor; yea, sugillare, (it is
the Cardinals word) to taunt and flout him, for his Edict; nor him only, but
in him to reprove, omnes simul Principes, all Princes whosoever do presume to
meddle with a cause of faith, or make laws therein, as Justinian had done.
Facundus being thus directed, encouraged, and warranted by Pope Vigilius, and
being but his instrument in this matter, writes Scriptum adversus Jmperatorem
edidit. An. eod. nu. 39.
a large volume containing twelve books, against the Emperor, in defense of
the three Chapters. A work stuffed with heresy, yet highly commended by
Possevine Opus grande and elegans, et patrum authoritatibus munitum. Poss.
Bibl. in Facund.
the Jesuit, as being a brave book strengthened with the authorities of the
Fathers. There he takes upon him to revile the Emperor in most uncivil and
undutifull manner, as if, forsooth, fides Facund. lib. 12 ejus verba citantur a
Bar. an. 546. nu. 41.
omnium ex ejus voluntate penderet; the faith of all Churches did hang on the
Emperors sleeve; and as if none might believe otherwise, quam praeciperet
imperator, then the Emperor commanded; telling him, that it were more meet for
him, se infra limitem suum continere, to keep himself within his own bounds,
as other Artificers kept their own shops; the Weaver not meddling with the Forge
and Anvill, nor the Cobbler with a Carpenters office. Such rude, homely, and
undutifull comparisons does the Popes Orator use in this cause: And, as if
Facundus had not paid the Emperor half enough, Baronius helps him with a
whole Cart-load of such Romish eloquence; calling the Emperor, utterly An.
546. nu. 41
unlearned, qui An. 528. nu. 2. ut qui nec prima elementa calleret ut legere
posset. An. 446. nu. 43.
nec Alphabetum aliquando didi cisset; who never had learned so much as his A,
B, C, nor could An. 551. nu. 4
ever read the Title of the Bible: a Punie Repent apparere palliatum
Theologum. An. 551. nu. 43.
, a palliated Theologue, a sacrilegious An. 552. nu. 8.
person, a witless Jlle furore percitus, mente dimotus, correptu^ maligno
spiritu, agitatus a Satana. An. 551. nu. 2.
, furious, and frantike fellow, possessed with an evil spirit, and driven by
the Devil himself: Such an one to Praeter ju^ fasque praesumens. An. 528. nu.
2.
presume against all right, to make laws concerning matters of faith,
concerning Priests, and the punishments of them? adding An. 546. nu. 43.
, that the whole Catholic faith would be in jeopardie, si qui ejusmodi esset;
if such as Justinian should makes laws of faith; yea, such laws, quas Ibid.
nu. 41.
dolose conscripsissent haeretic^, as heretics had craftily penned; telling
An. 550. nu. 14.
him, (as Facundus had before) that it were more fit for him to look to the
government of the Empire; and upbraiding him with that proverbiall admonition,
Ne ultra Crepidam, Sr Cobbler go not beyond your Last and Latchet. This
scurrility does the Cardinal use against the most religious and prudent
Emperor, and his holy and orthodoxall Edict; and he says, that he was Haec
addidisse voluimus. An. 546. nu. 43.
willing to add these, ad roborandam Facundi sententiam, to fortify the
sentence of Facundus, whereby he, with Vigilius, did defend the Three Chapters.

5. Were one disposed to make sport with the Cardinal, himself here offers
a large field, wherein one may exspaciate; and seeing he uses not others as
Kings, he might expect, lege talionis, not to be used himself as a
Cardinal: But because we shall in another place more fitly convince the
Cardinal, both for his reviling the Emperor, and raling at his Edict, as
penned by heretics, for this time I will but by the way observe two or three
points touching this passage. The first, that Facundus by defending the Three
Chapters, and Baronius by fortifying his defense, do unavoydably pull upon
themselves the just censure of Anathema, denounced by the holy Council against
the defenders of those Chapters, and those who are abetters of them: So, the
more Baronius does labor to fortify the sentence of Facundus, the more he
entangles himself in that curse of the general Council. The second, that both
Facundus and Baronius do quite mistake the matter, in carping at the Emperor,
as if by his Edict, or in condemning those Three Chapters, he had taught or
published some new doctrine of faith; he did not: He taught and commanded all
others to embrace that true, ancient, and Apostolical faith, which was decreed
and explaned at Chalcedon, as both the whole fifth Council witnesses, which
shows, that all those Chapters were implicit, but yet truly, and indeed
condemned in the definition of faith made at Chalcedon; and Pope Gregory also
testifies the same, saying of this fifth Council, that it was in omnibus
sequax, in every point a follower of the Council at Chalcedon. This the
religious Emperor wisely discerning, did by his imperial edict, and
authority (as Constantine, and Theodosius had done before him) ratify that
old and Catholic faith, which the Nestorians by defending those Chapters
craftily undermined at that time. The third and special point which I observe,
is that which Baronius notes, as the cause why Pope Vigil. was so eager
against the Emperor and his edict. And what think you was it? Forsooth
because, Justinian primus An. 553. nu. 237.
legem sancivit, was the first who made a law, and published a Decree for
condemning of those three Chapters. Had the Pope first done this, and Justinian
seconded his holiness therein, he had been another Constantine, a second
Theodosius, the dearest child of the Church. But for Princes to presume to
teach the Pope, or make any laws concerning the faith, before they consult
with the Roman Apollo, or make him acquainted therewith, that's Vel si rectum
fuisset, recte non fieret, quia nulli Regum hinc aliquid agere, sed solis est
sacerdotibus datum. Facund. and Bar. an. 547. nu. 35. Imperator. est fidem
coram sacerdotibus profiteri, non eandem praescribere sacerdotibus Bar. ibid.
piaculum, a capital, a^ irremissible sin, the Pope may not endure it. So
then, is was neither zeal, not piety, nor love to the truth, but mere
stomach and pride in Vigilius to oppose himself to the Emperors edict, and
make an insurrection against him. A sorry reason God wot for any wise man in the
world, much more for the Pope, to contradict the truth and oppugn the
Catholic faith. Now if Justinian for doing this which was an act of prudence
and piety, tending wholly to the good and peace of the Church, if he could not
escape so undutifull usage at the Pope, and his orators in those better times,
religious Kings may not think it strange, to find the like or far worse
entertainment at the Popes of these days and their instruments, men so exact
and eloquent in reviling, that in all such base and uncivil usage they go as
far beyond Facundus, Tertullus, and them of former ages, as dross or the
most abject mettle is inferior to refined gold. This is the first Period, and
first judgment of Vigilius touching this cause of the three Chapters: in
defense of which, and oppugning of the Emperors edict, he continued more then
a year after the publishing of the Edict, even all that time while he
remained at Rome, and was absent from the Emperor.

6. As soon almost as Vigilius was come to Constantinople, and had saluted the
Emperor, and conferred with them who stood for the Edict, he was quite another
man, he changed cum caelo animum, the air of the Emperors Court altered the
Popes judgment, and this was about a year after Edictu^ editu^ fuit anno.
546. Bar. eo anno nu. 8. Constantinopolin ingressus est an. 547. propedie^
Natalis Domini. Bar. an. illo. nu. 26.
the publishing of the Edict: Now that all things might be done with more
solemnity and advise, there was a Synod Bar. an. eod. nu. 31. 32.
held shortly after his coming, at Constantinople, wherein Vigilius with
thirty Bishops condemned the Three Chapters, and consented to the Emperors
Edict. This Facundus expressly witnesses, saying Ibid. nu. 37.
, How shall not this be a prejudice to the cause, if it be demonstrated that
Pope Vigilius with thirty Bishops or therabouts, have condemned the Epistle (of
Ibas) approved by the Council of Chalcedon, and anathematized that Bishop
(Theodorus of Mopsvestia) with his doctrines, the praises whereof are set down
in that Council? Thus Facundus. Besides all this, Vigilius was now so forward
in this cause, that as before he had written books against the Edict, in
defense of the three Chapters; and excommunicated those who condemned those
Chapters; so now on the Emperors side, he writ books, and gave judgment, for
the condemning of those Chapters, and excommunicated some, by name, Rusticus
and Sebastianus, two Roman Deacons, because they would not condemn them. None
can deny says Baronius An. 547. nu. 40.
that Vigilius writ a book against the three chapters, and sent it unto Mennas
Bishop of Constantinople. Again, there Ibid.
is certain proof, latae ab eo sententiae, of the sentence (of
excommunication) pronounced by Vigilius, against Rusticus, Sebastianus, and
other defenders of those chapters: and this is so clear, ut nulla dubitatio
esse possit, that there can be no doubt at all, but that Vigilius approved by a
Constitution the Emperors sentence, and condemned the three Chapters. So
Baronius. The Epistles of Vigilius do testify the same. In that Extat in
Coll. 7. Conc. 5. pa. 578.
to Rusticus and Sebastianus he very often makes mention, Iudicati nostri,
Constituti nostri, of our judgment, of our constitution against the three
chapters, concerning which he adds Ibid. pa. 580.
; that it was ratified by his Apostolical authority, saying, that no man may
do, contra constitutum nostrum quod ex beati Petri authoritate proferimus,
against this our Constitution which we set forth by the authority of Saint
Peter. The like he testifies; in his Epistle Ibid.
to Valentinianus, We believe says he, that those things may suffice the
children of the Church, which we writ to Mennas, concerning the blasphemies of
Theodorus of Mopsvestia and his person, concerning the Epistle of Ibas, and the
writings of Theodoret against the right faith. Thus Vigilius consenting now
with the Emperor, defending his Imperial Edict, and condemning the three
Chapters; in all which, his profession was Catholic and orthodoxall.

7. When Vigilius was thus turned an Imperialist, and in regard of his outward
profession declared in his Constitution, become orthodoxall, (though as it
seems he remained in heart heretical) he fell into so great dislike of
those who defended the three Chapters, that they Bar. an. 547. nu. 49.
did proclamare, proclaim him to be a colluder, a prevaricator or betrayer of
the faith; one, who to please the Emperor revolted from his former judgment;
yea the Africane In Chron. an. 10. post Coss. Basilij.
Bishops proceeded so far against him, that, as Victor Bishop of Tunen
testifies, Synodaliter eum a catholica communione recludunt, they in a Synod,
and synodally excommunicated him, or shut him from the Catholic communion. A
thing worthy observing, being done by those whom the Cardinal professes An.
547. nu. 30. and 39.
to have been Catholics at that time. But let that pass: Baronius to excuse
Ad haec omnia excusanda, illud satis superque est, Bar. ibi. nu. 49.
Vigilius from those imputations of colluder and prevaricator, and to show that
hoe was not in heart affected with the truth, which in his Constitution he
declared, tells us a rare policy of the Pope, which for this time we omit, but
hereafter will examine the truth and validity thereof, and this it was. Mox An.
eodem nu. 41.
, presently after Vigilius had made that Apostolical decree for condemning the
three Chapters, he revoked the same, (touched be like with remorse for so
heinous a crime, as to profess the Catholic faith) and he suspended it, and
his own judgment in that cause, till the time of a general Council:
decreeing Rursus a Vigilio promulgatum decretum est, quo decernebatur, ut de
controversia de tribus Capitulis penitus taceretur, ibid.
, that until that time all men should be whisht and silent in this cause of
faith; they must neither say that the Three Chapters were to be defended, nor
condemned; they must neither speak one word for the truth, nor against the
truth, they must all (during that time) be like himself, lukewarm Laodiceans,
neither hot nor cold, neither fish nor flesh. This was the great wisdom and
policy of the Pope, as Baronius at large declares, and makes no small boast
thereof, adding Ab hoc anno (547) ad tempus Concilij indictum (fuit autem an.
553) fuit inea causa silentium, ibid. nu. 43.
that the Pope remained in this mood till the time of the general Council. Thus
you see the second judgment of Pope Vigilius in this cause, and his carriage
during the second period, for a fit (which perhaps lasted a week or a month)
he was in outward profession orthodoxall, but being weary of such an ague, he
presently becomes a mere neutralist in the faith: and in this sort he
continued till the assembling of the general Council, that is, for the space
of six years and more.

8. The third period begins at the time of the fifth general Council: Of what
judgment the Pope then was, it has before Sup. ca. 3. nu. 4. and seq.
been sufficiently declared. Then Vigilius turned to his old byas, he
condemned the Emperors Edict, and all that with it condemned the three
Chapters: he defends those three heretical chapters, and that after a most
authentical manner, publishing a Synodall, a Cathedral and Apostolical
constitution in defense of the same. And whereas not only others, but himself
also, had written, and some six years before, made a Constitution to condemn
those Chapters: Now after long and diligent ponderation of the cause, when he
had examined all matters, cum omni undique cautela, with all wariness and
circumspection that could possible be used: he quite casheires, repeales, and
for ever adnuls Si quid de ^isdem capitulis contra haec quae hic asseruimus nel
statuimus -- factum, dictum atque conscriptum est, vel fuerit, -- hoc modis
omnibus ex authoritate sedis Apostolicae refutamus. Constable. Vigil. in fine.
that former Constitution, and whatsoever either himself or any other, either
had before written or should after that time, write contrary to this present
Decree. And this no doubt was the reason why Baronius never so much as once
endeavors to excuse Vigilius by that former decree, or to prove him to have
been orthodoxall, by it: seeing by this later the whole force and virtue of
that former is utterly made void, frustrate and of no effect in the world. In
this judgment Vigilius was so resolute, that he was ready to endure any
disgrace and punishment, rather then consent to the condemning of the three
Chapters: and if we may believe Baronius or Binius, he did for this very cause
endure banishment. It is manifest says Binius Not. in Conc. 5.. Praestitit.
, that after the end of the fifth Council Justinian did cast into banishment
both Vigilius and other orthodoxall Bishops, (so he terms convicted and
condemned heretics) because they would not consent to the decrees of the
Synod, and condemning of the three Chapters. In like sort Baronius An. 553. nu.
222.
, Liquet ex Anastasio, it is manifest by Anastasius, that Vigilius and those
who held with him were carried into banishment. Again Ibid. nu. 251.
, Others thought they had a just quarrel in defending the three Chapters: when
they saw Vigilius even in banishment to maintain the same, and they thought,
se pro sacrosanctis pugnare legibus, that they fought for the holy faith; when
they saw Pope Vigilius himself, for the same cause, constanti animo exilium
far, to endure banishment with a constant mind. Again An. 554. nu. 6.
, Horum solum causae, for this cause only was Vigilius driven into banishment,
because he would not condemn the Three Chapters. So Baronius: who often
calls this exiling of Vigilius and others, who defended those Chapters;
persecution Illi tantum immunes a persecutione erant, etc. an. 553. nu. 222.
, yea, an heavy Quod monstrosus accessit, ab Imperatore persecutio excitata
est, and baud quidem levis. ibid. nu. 221.
and monstrous persecution, complaining that the Church under Justinian and
from him, endured more hard conditions, and was in worse case then under the
Heathen Emperors.

9. Now this demonstrates that which before I touched, that though the Pope
upon his coming to Constantinople, made a decree for condemning the Three
Chapters, yet still he was in heart an affectionate lover of Nestorianisme,
and a defender of those Chapters, seeing for his love to them, and defense of
them, he is ready not only to be bound, but to go, and dye in banishment for
his zeal unto them. For had he sincerely embraced the truth, (as in his former
Constitution he professed,) why does he now at the time of the fifth Council,
disclame the same? Of all times this was the fittest to stand constanly to the
faith, seeing now both the glory of God, the good and peace of the Church, the
authority of the Emperor, the example of orthodoxall Bishops, and the whole
Council invited, urged, and provoked him to this holy duty. What was there or
could there be to move him at this time, to defend the 3. Chapters, save only
his ardent and inward love to Nestorianisme? Indeed had he continued in defense
of those Chapters until this time; and now relented or changed his judgment,
it would have bin vehemently suspected, that not the hatred of those chapters,
or of Nestorianisme, but either the favor of the Emperor, or the importunity
of the Eastern Bishops, or the fear of exile, or deprivation, or some such
punishment had extorted that sentence and confession from him: But now when he
decrees contrary to the Emperor, to the general Council, and to his own
former and true judgment; when by publishing this Decree, he was sure to gain
nothing, but the censure of an unconstant and wavering minded man, the Anathema
of the whole general Council, and tht heavy indignation of the Emperor; when
he goes thus against the maine current and stream of the time, who can think,
but that his only motive to do this, was his zeal and love to Nestorianisme?
Love Cant. 8.6.
(specially of heresy) is strong as death. It will cause Vigilius, or any like
him, when it has once got possession of their heart, with the Baalites and
Donatists, to contemn launcing, whipping, and tearing of their flesh; yea to
delight as much in Phalaris Bull, as in a bed of down, and in the midst of all
tortures to sing with him in the Orator Tusc. quaest. lib. 2.
, Quam suave est hoc? Quam nihil curo? O how glad and merry a man am I, that
suffer all these for the love of my Three Chapters? Loss of fame, loss of
goods, loss of liberty, loss of my Country, loss of my pontifical See,
loss of communion and society of the Catholic Church, and of God himself:
Farewell all these, and all things else, rather then the Three Chapters, then
Nestorianisme shall want a defender, or a Martyr to seal it with blood.

10. You see now the third period, and the third judgment of Pope Vigilius in
this cause. A judgment, which being delivered ex Tripode, and with all
possible circumspection, puts down for many respects both the former, what he
spoke the first time in defense of these Three Chapters, was spoken in
stomach, and in his heat and choler against the Emperor. What he spoke the
second time for condemning those Chapters, he did therein but temporize and
curry favor with the Emperor. But what he spoke now this third time, after
seven years ventilating of the cause, when all heat and passion being abated,
he was in cold blood, and in such a calm, that no perturbation did trouble his
mind, or darken his judgment, that I say, proceeded from the very bottom of
the heart, and from the Apostolical authority of his infallible Chair, which
to be a true and divine judgment, he like a worthy Confessor, sealed with his
banishment. And of this judgment he continued in likelihood more, but as
Baronius (whom I now follow) tells An. 554. and 555.
us, about the space of a year after the end of the fifth Council, even till
he returned out of exile unto Constantinople.

11. The fourth and last changing of Vigilius was after his return from
banishment, as Baronius and Binius tell us. For while h^^ was there, he saw
there was urgentissima causa, Bar. an. 553. nu. 235.
a most urgent cause why he should consent to the Emperor, and approve the
judgment of the holy Council; and therefore he was pleased once again to
make another Apostolical Synodum 5. eadem Apostolica authoritate comprobasse
satis apparet. Bar. an. 554. nu. 7. and Bini. loc. cit.. Praestitit.
Decree, for adnulling his former Apostolical judgment, and for condemning
the Three Chapters, and confirming the fifth Synod. I think, says Binius Ibid.
, that Vigilius confirmed the fifth Synod by his Decree and Pontifical
authority, and abrogated his former Constitution made in defense of the Three
Chapters in the next year after the Council was ended, when he being loosed
from banishment, was suffered to return into Italy, being adorned with sundry
gifts and privileges. Neither does he only opinari, but he is certain of it.
Dubium Ibid.. Tunc.
non est, there is no doubt, but Vigilius being delivered from exile, by the
entreatie of Narses, did confirm the fifth Synod. We think, says Baronius,
that An. 554. nu. 4.
when Vigilius was by the entreaty of Narses freed from exile, he did then
assent to the Emperor, and recalling his former sentence, in his Constitution
declared, did approve the fifth Synod. Again Ibidem.
, Seeing we have declared, that Vigilius did not approve the fifth Synod, when
he was driven into banishment, for he was exiled for no other cause, but for
that he would not approve that Synod: Necesse est affirmare, it must of
necessity be said, that he did this (approve the fifth Synod;) at this time,
when being loosed out of exile, he was sent home to his own Church. So
Baronius. Now seeing he returned home after he had obtained those ample gifts
and privileges, which they so magnify, and which are set down in that
pragmaticall sanction of Justinian Extat in sine Novell.
, which was dated on the twelfth day of August, in the eight and twentieth
year of his Empire: and the fifth Council was ended on the second Conc. 5.
Coll. 8.
day of June in his seven and twentieth year; it is clear, that this his last
change was made about an whole year after the end of the fifth Council, after
he had remained a year or thereabouts in banishment. And in this mind, as
they Bar. and Bin. locis cit.
tell us, he returned toward Rome, but by the way Bar. an. 555. nu. 2.
, while he was ye^, but in Sicily, being afflicted with the stone, he dyed.

12. Here is now the Catastrophe of the Popes turnings and returnings, and
often changing in this cause of faith: Concerning which this is especially to
be remembered, that whereas all the three former judgments of Vigilius, the
first, when he defended those three Chapters, being in Italy, the second, when
he condemned them upon his coming to Constantinople, and the third, when he
again defended them at the time of the Council, and after, have all of them
certain and undeniable proofs out of antiquity, such as the testimonies of
Facundus, Victor, Liberatus, the Popes own letters and Constitutions, together
with the witness of the Emperor, and the whole fifth Council; only this last
period, and this last change, when he consented to the fifth Council, and
condemned the Three Chapters, This I say, which is the only judgment whereby
Vigilius is excused from heresy, is utterly destitute of all ancient
witnesses, not any one that I can find makes mention of this change, or of
ought that can any way enforce the same, and therefore this may and must be
called the Baronian change or Period, he being the first man, that I can learn
of, who ever mentioned or dreamed of this change. And although this alone were
sufficient to oppose to all that the Cardinal or any other can hence collect
in excuse of Vigilius, reason and equity forbidding us to be too credulous
upon the Cardinals bare word, (which even in this one cause touching the Three
Chapters, and this fifth Council, besides many the like, demonstratively to be
proved untrue and false, I speak it confidently and within compass, in six
hundredth sayings at the least) yet that they may not say we decline the force
of this so pregnant an exception, we will for a little while admit and suppose
it to be true, and try, whether by this being yielded unto them, there can
accrue any advantage to their cause, or any help to excuse either Vigilius
himself, or his Constitution set forth in defense of the Three Chapters, from
being heretical.

13. Say you Vigilius by his last decree confirmed the fifth Council and
approved the Catholic faith? Be it so, we deny not but that Vigilius, or any
other of their Popes may decree, and have decreed a truth, that's not the doubt
betwixt us and them. The question is, whether any of their Popes have at any
time by his Cathedral authority, and teaching, as Popes, decreed an heresy,
or untruth. That Pope Vigilius did so, his Apostolical Constitution in defense
of the Three Chapters, is an eternal witness against them, a monument aere
perennius, Had Baronius said that Vigilius never decreed the defending of those
Chapters, he had fully cleared him in this matter, if he could have proved what
he had said. But seeing undeniable records testify, and the Cardinal himself
with a Stentors voice proclameth, this to be the true and undoubted
Constitution of Pope Vigilius, though he had revoked and repealed it a
thousand times, yet can not this quit his former Apostolical Decree from being
heretical, nor excuse their pontifical chair from being fallible. It is
nothing at all material which of the Popes Cathedral Decrees, the first,
last, or middle be heretical: If any one of them all be: we desire no more,
the field is won.

14. Say you Vigilius by an Apostolical decree, confirmed the fifth Council?
Then did he certainly decree that all writings defending the Three Chapters,
do defend heresy: and that all persons who defend those Chapters, for so long
time as they defend them, after the judgment of that Council, are convicted
and condemned heretics. Then the former Constitution of Pope Vigilius, set
forth by his Apostolical authority in the time of the Council, in defense of
those Chapters, is now by Popes Vigilius himself and by his Apostolical
authority and infallible Chair declared to be heretical; and Vigilius
himself for that year after the Council, is now by Vigilius himself
pronounced to be an Heretic; yea a definer of heresy, Vigilius now
orthodoxal decrees himself to have been before heretical. Nay it further
follows, that by confirming that Council, he confirms, and that by an
Apostolical and infallible Decree, that all who defend the Popes Cathedral
sentence in causes of faith, to be infallible, are convicted and accursed
heretics, for by defending that position, they do eo ipso defend that
Constitution of Vigilius made in defense of the Three Chapters to be true,
infallible, and orthodoxall, which Vigilius himself by an infallible decree
has declared to be erroneous, and heretical. So far is this last and
Baronian change from excusing Vigilius in this cause, that upon the admission
thereof it does inevitably ensue, both that Vigilius was an heretic and a
definer of heresy, and that all who defend the Popes Cathedral infallibitie,
in causes of faith, that is, al who are members of their present Roman Church,
to be not only heretics, and for such condemned and accursed, but defenders
also of a condemned and accursed heresy, even by the infallible judgment and
decree of Pope Vigilius.

15. Their whole reason whereby Vigilius might be excused, being now fully
dissolved; There remains one point, which Baronius, and after him Binius,
observes, touching this often changing of Vigilius: which being a point of
special note, I should wrong both Vigilius and Baronius if I should over-passe
the same. Some men when they hear of these often changings, windings, and
turnings of Pope Vigilius in this cause of faith, and of his banishment for
defending a condemned heresy, will perhaps imagine this to be a token of some
levitie, unconstancie, or folly in the Pope. O fie! It was not so, says Cum
saepe sententia mutavit, haud arguendus est levitatis. an. 553. nu. 235.
Baronius; What he did was not only lawful Cur ei no^lleuit mutato rerum
statu mutare se^tentiam? ibid. nu. 231, and, jure meritoque mutavit sententiam.
Bin. Cum igitur.
, done by good right and reason, but it was laudable also, done with great
Vigilius magna consideratione adhibita atque prudentia, diverso modo pugnabat.
an. ^4^. nu. ^0.
advise, wisdom, and consideration. Vigilius, a man of Summa consta^tiae
specimen edidit. ibid. nu. 49.
greatest constancy; One who stood An. 551. nu. 5.
up with courage for defense of the Church, adversus violentum ecclesiae
grassatorem, against Justinian, a violent oppressor thereof: one An. 553. nu.
251.
who fought for the sacred laws, enduring exile, constanti animo, with a
constant mind for the same. One who did by this means wisely An. 547. nu. 41.
, yea, prudentissime, most wisely provide for the good of the Church. One who
in thus doing did wisely Prude^s and piu^ pontifex hac in re prudenter est
imitatus S. Paulum. Bin. in Edict. nu. 11. to. 2. pa. 499.. Cum, and Bar. an.
553. nu. 235.
imitate Saint Paul, who condemned circumcision, and yet when he circumcised
Timothy, approved circumcision. And though there be a mavelous
dissimilitude in their actions, the one change being in a mutable, and, at that
time, an indifferent ceremony, the other being in an immutable doctrine of
faith; Yet thus do they please themselves, and applaud the Pope in these his
wise and worthy changes.

16. Now in stead of a better conclusion to this Chapter, I will entreat the
reader to observe with me two things touching their commending Vigilius in this
manner. The former is, what an happy thing it is to be a Pope, or have a
Cardinal for his spokesman. Let Luther, Cranmer, or a Protestant make far
less change the^ did Vigilius, what shall they not hear? An Apostate,
unconstant, inconsiderate, a Chamelion, a Polipus, another Proteus, even
Vertumnus himself. Let the Pope say and gainesay the same doctrine of faith,
and then ex Cathedra define both his sayings being contradictorie, to be not
only true, but infallible truths of the Catholic faith: O, It is all done
with rare wisdom, with great reason, and consideration, The Pope in all this
deals wisely, and that in the superlative degree. If when he is absent from
the Emperor, he oppugn the truth published by the Emperors edict, It is wisely
done; Kings and Emperors may not make Laws in causes of faith, no not for the
faith; The Cobbler must not go beyond his latcher. If when he is brought
before the Emperor, he sing a new song, and say just as the Emperor says, Ait,
aio: Negat, nego: It is wisely done, principibus placuisse viris, for the Kings
wrath is the messenger of death. If after both these he become a mere
Neutralist and Ambodexter in faith, holding communion with all sides,
Catholics, heretics, and all, this is also an act of rare wisdom, the Pope
is now become another Saint Paul, factus est omnia omnibus, with Catholics
he is a Catholic, that he may gain Catholics, with Heretics, he is an
Heretic, that he may gain heretics, he is all with all, that he may gain
them all. If when the Emperor, the general Council, the whole Church calls
for his resolution in a cause of faith, if then he step into his infallible
Chair, and thence by his Apostolical authority define, that the three
Chapters, that is, that Nestorianisme shall for ever be held for the Catholic
faith, O wisely done, he now drops oracles from heaven, in Cathedra sedet, the
voice of God, and not of man. If, when he is banished for his obstinacy
against the truth, upon some urgent cause which then he discernes, he calls
again for his holy Trevit, and thence decrees the quite contradictorie to his
former Apostolical sentence, In this he is wiser then in all the rest: for by
this he shows that he is more wise and powerful then all the Prophets and
Apostles ever were; They silly men could make but the one part of a
contradiction to be true, but the Pope he is tanto Tanto ipse potentior est
Prophetis effectus, quanto differentius prae illis nomen haereditavit. Nam cui
prophetarum aliquando dictu^ est, Tu es Petra? Bar. an. 552. nu. 9.
potentior Prophetis, so much more wise and powerful then all the Prophets,
that he can make both parts of a contradiction to be infallible truths; and
unto which of the Prophets was it ever said, Tu es Petra? But the Pope is a
Rock indeed, a Rock upon which you may build two contradictories in the
doctrine of faith, and in them both say unto him, Tu es Petra. Such a Rock
neither the Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Christ himself ever was. So wise, so
exceeding wise is the Pope, in all his turnings, even as wise as a wethercocke
for turning with the wind and weather.

17. Again, when the Pope, his instruments or Inquisitors (to whom Phalaris,
Busiris, and all the heathen persecutors may yield) exercise against us for
maintaining the truth of God, all exquisite and hellish tortures (to which the
old heathenish were but ludus and jocus) all which they do must be extolled as
due punishments, and just censures of the Holy Father of the holy Church, of
the Holy inquisition, of the Holy house, all must be covered with the mantle
of holiness. On the other side, when they resist the most religious laws, or
Edicts of Kings or Emperors, when Vigilius or any of them (being by an holy
general Council declared, and condemned for an Heretic,) are for their
obstinate rebellion against the truth justly punished, though Justinian yea
Justice it self, shall use rather moderate then severe correction against
them; they forsooth must be accoumpted catholics: Co^fessers, and holy
Martyrs, such as suffer for religion, for the sacred laws, and for the
Catholic faith; but Justinian the Defender of the faith, must be called
Julian, Justice be termed Scelus Vidisti Scelus, etc. Bar. an. 554. nu. 2.
, and the Church for that cause said to be in far worse condition, then in
the times of Nero, Dioclesian, or any of the heathen Tyrants. Such an happy
thing it is to be a Pope, or Papist, for then their wavering shall be
Constancy; their rebellion, Religion and fortitude: their folly, great and
rare wisdom: their heresy, Catholic doctrine: and their most condign
punishments shall be crowned with Martyrdom.

18. The other thing which I observe, is, what a strong faith, Papists had need
to have, who rely upon the Popes judgment, which changes out and in, in and
out so many times: who yet are bound to believe all the Pope definitive
sentences in causes of faith, that is, to speak in plain terms, who are
bound to believe two contradictories to be both true, both of them the
infallible oracles of God. Or if any of them have so weak a faith, that he can
but believe the one, I would gladly learn of some who is an Oedipus among
them, In this case of two Contradictorie Cathedral decrees, such as were these
of Pope Vigilius, whether of the Popes definitive judgments, that is,
according to their language, whether of the sayings of God is true, and whether
false, or what strength the one has, more then the other. If the Apostolical
sentence of Vigilius delivered cum omni undique cautela, and by his Cathedral
authority, in defense of the Three Chapters, be repealeable by a second, why
may not the second (which cannot possibly have more authority) be repealed by
a third, and the third by a fourth, and fourth by a fifth, and so in Infinitum?
If the Pope after seven years deliberation and ventilating of the cause,
while he is all that time in peace, and liberty, may be deceived in his
judicial and Cathedral sentence in a cause of faith, how may we be assured,
that when some years after that, the tediousness of exile and desire of his
pristine liberty and honor persuades him to make a contrary decree, he may
not therein also be deceived? If the Popes decrees made in liberty, peace and
prosperity be of force, why shall not the decree of Vigilius in defense of the
Three Chapters, be an article of faith? If those free decrees may be admitted
by a stronger sentence when the Pope is in banishment, how may any believe
their Laterane and Trent decrees, as doctrines of faith? For why may there not
once again, come some other Justinian, into the world, (as great pity it is
but there should) who in these, or future times may minister that sovereign
medicine to clear the Popes judgment, and restrain, or close him up in some
meaner estate, and far lower place, whence, as out of a dark and low pit, he
may discern those celestial truths in the Word of God, like so many Stars
in heaven, which now being environed with the circumfused splendour of the
Roman Court, he cannot possibly behold. If those Three Chapters were to be
condemned, why did the Pope defend them at the time of the Council? If they
were to be defended, why did he condemn them after his return from exile?
Nay, if the Three Chapters were orthodoxall, why did the Pope at any time first
or last by his Apostolical sentence condemn them? If they were heretical,
why did he at any time, first or last, by his Cathedral and Apostolical
sentence defend them? I confess I am here in a Labyrinth; if any of the
Cardinals friends will wind me out, he shall for ever be Theseus unto me.

CAP. XVI. That the Decree of Vigilius for Taciturnity touching the Three
Chapters, and the Council, wherein it is supposed to be made, and all the
Consequents upon that Decree, painted out by Baronius, are all fictitious, and
Poetical.
1. THE whole reason of Baronius drawn from Vigilius his confirming of the
fifth Council, being now fully dissolved, we might without further stay, and I
gladly would, according to my intended order in the Treatise, proceed to his
next exception: but there are two points in this last passage, touching the
cha^gings of Vigilius, which, even against my will, pull me back, and call me
to examine what Baronius sets down, and with exceeding ostentation paints out,
in his Annals, concerning them; the due consideration whereof will cause any
man to admire the Cardinals most audacious, and shameless dealing in Synodall
affairs, and causes of the Church: The one of them concerns the second, the
other the fourth period in Vigilius changings. The former is this.

2. As soon as the defenders of the Three Chapters had notice of that
Judicial sentence, and Decree published by Vigilius against the same Chapters,
upon his coming to Constantinople, they began to storm thereat, and condemn
Vigilius Obid, ipsum (Vigilium) colluforem, praevaricatoremque abadversarijs
co^clamatum. Bar. an. 547. nu. 49.
as a Prevaricator, or revolter from the faith; whereupon Vigilius, as the
Cardinal tells us, put in practice a rare piece of wisdom Prudenter
perielitanti Ecclesiae visus est consuluisse Vigilius. Jbid. nu. 41.
, and of his Pontifical policy; sententiam emissam Ibid.
mox suspendit, seu potius revocavit; be suspends and revokes that his late
judgment; and rursum ab eo promulgatum decretum, quo decernebatur ut penitus
taceretur; and he published a new Decree, wherein he decreed, that every man
should be silent, and say never a word, either pro, or contra, touching that
question of the Three Chapters, till the time of the general Council, from Ab
hoc anno, ad illud usque tempus. Jbid. nu. 43.
this year (which was the 21 Bar. ibid. nu. 26
of Justinian, and the same wherein Vigilius came to Constantinople) until the
time of the general Council, in ea causa ab ipso Vigilio indictu^ fuit
Silentiu^; Silence was enjoined every man in that cause, by Pope Vigilius: and
again Ibid. nu. 48
, Tacendu^ indixit, he enjoined Silence in that cause; and very often does the
Cardinal, with no small comfort, mention this Decree of Taciturnity. And, for
the more solemnity of the matter, Vigilius decreed this in a Council, it was
not only his, but, decretum Bar. an. 551. nu. 2.
Synodi, the decree of a Council, together with the Pope. Vigilius Ibid. nu. 3.
Synodice statuit tacendum esse; Vigilius decreed in, and with a Synod, that
there should be a Silence in this cause, Bar. an. 547. nu. 43.
until the general Council: To which Synodall decree, not only Mennas i,
and Theodorus Bishop of Cesarea, but Justinianus contra praecedentis Synodi
decretu^, et emissam sponsionem de servando usque ad Concilium universale
sile^tio, appendi jussit Edictum. Bar. an. 551. nu. 2.
Justinian himself also consented, and promised to observe the same. This was
the Decree; see now the effects, and Co^sequents which ensued thereupon,
declared also by Baronius.

3. This Decree took so good effect at the first, that, res aliquandiu^
consopita Bar. an. 547. nu. 41.
siluit, for a space, all matters, touching the Three Chapters, were hushed
asleep, not a word spoken of that Controversy: But some four years Nam
decretu^ editum an. 547. Bar. eo an. nu. 43. ista autem gesta an. 551 Bar. eo
an. nu. 2. 5, 6. et seq.
after the publishing thereof, when Vigilius saw diverse contrary to his decree,
to condemn the Three Chapters, Bar. an. 551. nu. 5.
erigit se, he rouzeth up himself for defense thereof, and Sententiam
excommunicationis int^rquet. Ibid. Verba exco^municationis extant. Ibid. nu. 11
et 12.
excommunicated Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople, Theodorus Bishop of
Cesarea, and many more; and this also he did in another Council consisting of
thirteen Jbid. nu. 11.
Bishops besides himself. Yea and whereas the Emperor in that year
published, or hung out his Edict against the same Chapters contrary to his own
promise, and the Decree for Taciturnity, the Pope withstood him so long, and so
eagerly, that Justinian began to rage, to use threats, and violence against
him, so that the Pope, in Ibid. et confugere coactus est. An. 552. nu. 8.
fuga tantum spem posuit, was forced to flee from him out of the Bar. an. 551.
nu. 2.
house where he dwelled, called (for good luck sake) Placidiana, unto the
Church of Saint Peter, where he remained a time, in adversarios sententiam
ferens; thundering out his censures against his adversaries. But that sacred
place Nec sacer ille locus asylum tanto Pontifici fuit. An. 552. nu. 8.
could be no Sanctuary for Vigilius; they buffeted Dedit alapam infaciem, etc.
Ibid.
and beat him on his face; Iustinianus contra Synodi decretum public appendi
jussit Edictum. Ibid. nu. 2.
they called him an homicide, a murderer of Sylverius, and of the widows
son: whereupon he, to avoid the fury Ab Imperatoris furore; and ab
Imperatoris sacrilegi violentia. Ibid.
and violence of the sacrilegious Emperor, fled Trans mare quaesivit effugium,
et in Basilicam S. Euphemia apud Chalcedonem habitare disposuit. An. 552. nu. 8.
from Constantinople to Chalcedon, and there lived in the Church of Saint
Euphemia, taking hold of a Pillar or Horn of the Altar: And even there, though
in persecution, and affliction, he bated Nihil penitus remisit Apostolicae
authoritatis. Ibid. nu. 9. et 10.
not one Ace of his Apostolical authority; but, as if he had lived in peace,
and been in the Laterane or Vaticane, he ascends into his Apostolic Throne
Idem ille locus effectus est, Pontificis Romani praesentia, eminent cunctisque
perspicuum ad judicandum tribunal, etc. Ibid. nu. 10.
, and high Tribunal; and thence, by the fullness of his Apostolical power, he
Missilia in hosts jacit, potentissimaque spiritalia spicula jacit in hosts
feritque. Ibid.
throws out his darts, represseth and prostrateth his adversaries; pronounces
sentence Summa potestatis plenitudine adversus metropolitanos Episcopos, i^o in
ipsum Patriarcham Constantinopolitanum far sententiam, insuper et perperam
facta Imperatoris rescindere magno animo ^ggressus est. An. 552. nu. 9.
against Bishops, yea, against a Patriarch; adnulleth the acts of the Emperor,
knowing his authority to be greater than that Prophets was, to whom God said
Jer. 1.
, I have set thee above Nations and kingdoms.

4. Now behold a miracle Ita plane magno veluti miraculo factum est, etc. Ibid.
nu. 11.
indeed; by fleeing away, Vigilius overcommeth, by being persecuted he is
victorious; all humane power, even hell gates, does, and must yeed to him: For
the Emperor understanding that he was fled away, repented Iustinianus facti
poenitens dignam tanto Pontifice legationem ^rnavit, etc. Ib.
him of that which he had done against the Pope, and therefore sent messengers
to recall him from Chalcedon, and those not ordinary soldiers, sed dignam
tanto Pontifice legationem; but honorable ambassadors, worthy the estate of
so great a Bishop, who should assure him, even upon their oaths Iuramento
praestito honorifice revocaret. Ibid.
, that he should be honorably received. But, so stout, nay, magnanimous, was
the Pope, and so very circumspect and wise Nuncijs licet magna pollicentibus
haud putaevit esse credendum, utpote (quod in proverbio est) Graecorum fides.
Bar. 552. nu. 12.
, as, remembering the proverb, Graecorum fides, that he would neither come out
of the Church, nor believe Neque juratis patricijs voluit fidem adhibere, nisi
Imperator quae contra Romans Pontificis voluntatem de tribus Capitulis
appendisset Edicta protinus revocaret, atque penitus aboleret. Ibid. nu. 12.
the messengers, though swearing unto him, unles the Emperor would presently
recall and abolish his Edicts against the Three Chapters. The Emperor yielded
Constat cessisse tandem Vigilio Jmperatorem, atque appensa amoveri jussisse a
se prolata de tribus Capitulis Edicta. etc. Ibid. an. 552. nu. 15. et,
Jmperator appensa antea de tribus Capitulis tolli jussit Edicta. Ibid. nu. 19.
to all that the Pope prescribed; yea, constat cessisse, it is certain and
evident, that he submitted himself to the Popes pleasure, and that penitus in
every point: he commands the Edicts, which he had published, to be taken
away, to be removed: and ex sontentia Ibid. an. 552. nu. 19.
Vigilii, quod fecerat, abrogavit; and according to Vigilius direction, he
abrogated what before he had done. Nor only did the Emperor repent, but
Theodorus Theodorus facti poenitens ad eum accedens humilis libellum supplicem
ipsi Vigilio offert. Ibid. an. 552. nu. 19. Praestitit id ipsum etiam Mennas.
Ibid. nu. 20.
also, and Mennas, they came and offered, libellum supplicem Vigilio, a book
of supplication to entreat Vigilius, that he would be appeased toward them,
and crying, Peccavi, suppliciter Ibid. nu. 29.
veniam petunt; they beseech him in a suppliant manner to forgive their Quis
ista considerans non miretur, atque obstupescat, etc. Ibid. nu. 20.
offense. Oh how admirable is this in our eyes! the Rock which the builders
refused, is now laid again in the head of the Corner; and those Princes and
Prelates which opposed themselves to the Pope, do now submit, supplicate, and
yield themselves unto him. The Pope Tali praemissa satisfactione, Vigilius
eosdem in communionem accepit, redditaque est Ecclesiae pax. Ibid. nu. 20.
, after this so ample satisfaction, was pleased to be reconciled to them all,
and admitted them into his communion; and so the storm of persecution being
past, the Church enjoyed tranquillity, the Pope was brought again with great
joy from Chalcedon to Constantinople: For the joy Hoc ipso anno (552) Mennas
Constable. Episcopus a Vigilio in communionem admissus Encae^ia celebravit, etc.
Bar. ibid. an. 552. nu. 22.
and solemnity whereof Mennas that same year (which was the 26 Anno hoc 552.
exordio mensis Aprilis incipit numerari Justiniani annus 26.
of Justinian, and next before the general Council) celebrated a feast of the
Encaenia, or dedication of the Church, of three Apostles, Andrew, Luke, and
Timothy, and the holy relics Cum sacrae reliquiae curru a^reo circumvectae ab
^edem Menna reconditae sunt. Bar. Ibid. nu. 22.
of their bodies being then found, Mennas carried them round about the City in
a Chariot of Gold, and then laid them up in the Church: After all which,
Mennas, in the peace of the Church, and communion with Vigilius, in an happy
manner gave up the ghost: and Bar. an. 552. nu. 23.
so the Pope Sic itaque animis junctis, restitutoque in pristina^ dignitatem
atque honorem Vigilio, indicta est Synodus, etc. Bar. an. 553. nu. 14.
being restored to his former dignity, animis junctis, their minds being
joined together; the general Council, long wished for by Vigilius, was
summoned against the month of May, in the twenty seventh year of Justinian.
This is the sum of the narration of Baronius, touching the Decree of
Taciturnity, and the manifold consequents thereof.

5. Concerning which, none I think can judge otherwise, but that Baronius, as
he is miserably infatuated in this whole cause of the Three Chapters; so, in
this passage, he was grown to that extremity of dotage, that he seems
utterly to have been bereft, both of common sense, and reason: For I do
constantly avouch, that in no part of all this his narration, (which, as you
see, is very large and copious, and runs, like a great stream, through
diverse years in Baronius Annals) there is any truth at al. No such Decree of
Taciturnity, ever made by Vigilius; no Synod wherein it was decreed; no assent,
either of Mennas, or Theodorus, or the Emperor unto it; no violating of that
Decree by Mennas, or Theodorus; no excommunication of them, or other Bishops,
for doing contrary to it; no hanging up of the Emperors Edict after it; no
resistance made by Vigilius against the Emperor; no persecuting of Vigilius,
no buffeting of him, no objecting of murder unto him; no fleeing either to
Saint Peter's Church, or to Chalcedon; no thundering out from thence of his
Pontifical Censures; no embassage sent from the Emperor to call him thence;
no such magnanimity in Vigilius as to refuse to return; no recalling, or
abrogating of the Imperial Edict by the Emperor; no submission of Mennas, or
Theodorus to the Pope; no solemnizing of the Encaenia for those three Apostles
at that time by Mennas; no carrying of those holy relics in a triumphing
manner, and in a golden Chariot; no laying them up by Mennas; and, in a word,
in that whole passage of Baronius, there is not so much as one dram, nor one
syllable of truth. The Cardinal from an Historian is here quite metamorphozed
into a Poet, into a Fabler, and in stead of writing Annals, matters of fact,
and real truths, he guls his readers with fictitious, anile, and more than
Aesopicall fables.

6. For the clearing whereof I will begin with the Decree it self, which is
the ground of the whole fiction, and therefore if it be demonstrated to be
but an idle dream and fancy, all the rest, which hang on it like so many
consequents, and appendices, will of themselves fall to the ground. Nor do I
speak to disgrace this Decree, as if Baronius could gain ought thereby,
though it were admitted and granted unto him: For alas, what a poor policy or
piece of wisdom was this in the Pope, being a Judge infallible, to command,
and decree by his Apostolical authority, that for five or six, or, as it
might have happened, for forty or sixty years together, no man should speak a
word in this cause of faith, neither condemn the three Chapters, nor defend
the same; which is in effect, that they should neither speak against, nor for
Nestorianisme; neither dare to say, that Christ is God, nor, that he is not
God, but suspend their judgment in them both; that for all that time none
should either be Catholics, or heretics, but be like Vigilius, mere
Neutralists in the faith, what other wisdom is this but that of the
Laodiceans, which Christ condemns Apoc. 3.15, 16.
? I would thou werst either hot or cold, but because thou art neither hot nor
cold, it will come to pass that I will spue thee out of my mouth: what other
then that which Elias reproves 1 King. 18.21.
? Why halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God follow him, but if
Baal, or Nestorianisme, be he, go after it. By this Decree of Taciturnity
Vigilius provideth that neither himself nor others should speak against the
truth or condemn it. True, but that is not enough; He should have defended it
also, and caused others by his instruction and example to do the like. A
neutralist, one that is not Matthew. 12.30.
with Christ, is against Christ: He that is not with the truth is against the
truth. Silence where God commands to speak, is betraying of Gods truth. If the
Heathen wise man Solonis lex apud A. Gellium lib. 2. ca. 12.
set this, and that justly among his eternal laws; That he who in a public
division of the Commonwealth, took part with neither side, should be
punished with loss of goods and banishment: how much more ought this to take
place in Vigilius, and all such Metij Suffetij, who in the public rent of the
Church, and that for a cause of faith, will be of neither part, neither for God
nor against him? Nay if we well consider, even for this very decree of silence,
Vigilius is to be judged an heretic, for the whole Council of Chalcedon
condemned Domnus. Patriarch of Antioch as an Heretic, only for this cause
Chalcedonensis S. Synodus Domnum condemnavit, quod ausus est scribere, oportere
solum tacere 12. Capitula S. Cyrillij. Just. in Aedict.. Quod autem.
, for that he writ that men should be silent, and say nothing of the twelve
Chapters of Cyrill, as both Justinian and the fifth Council Idem asserit plane
Conc. 5. Col. 6. pa. 575. b
do testify. Did not Vigilius, if the Cardinal say true, teach, nay decree
the very like silence concerning the Three Chapters, as Domnus did concerning
those twelve of Cyrill? These Three do as nearly concern the faith, as did
the other twelve. These three were as certainly condemned by the Council of
Chalcedon, as the other twelve were approved by the Council of Ephesus. As
Domnus by teaching silence in those of Cyrill, even thereby taught that men
should not allow them, nor say that they might be allowed, and therein
overthrew the faith of the Ephesine Council, which approved them, and taught
all men to approve them: Even so, Vigilius by decreeing silence in these Three
Chapters, decrees that none shall condemn them, or say they are to be
condemned, and so overthrows the Catholic faith which was declared at
Chalcedon, whereby they are all three condemned, and taught that they ought to
be condemned. If the teaching of silence in the one can make Domnus an
heretic, certainly the decreeing of silence in the other, cannot choose but
make Vigilius an heretic. O but this decree was to continue but for a time,
Vigilius would expect the assembling of a general Council, and then he would
resolve the matter to the full. And you have seen how well he resolved it then.
But what? Expect a Council? why is not his Holiness able to decide a doubt in
faith, without a general Council? Is he not of himself infallible? Does his
infallibility like an Ague go away, and come by fits upon him? Is the
general Council that Angel which must move the Pole in the Popes breast,
before he can teach infallibly? The Pope scorns to hold his infallibility
precario, by the courtesy either of the whole Church, or of any general
Council: He is all-sufficient in himself, he gives to them infallibility, he
receives none from them; what think you then was become of Vigilius his
infallibility, that for deciding a doubt in faith, he must suspend all in
silence; and stay till the general Council be assembled, which, for ought he
knew, might be 60. or 100. years after? If of himself he was infallible, why
did he hold men in suspense in the doctrine of faith? why did he not presently,
and without the Council infallibly decide it, and so set the Church at quiet?
If of himself he was not infallible, how could he at the time of the Council
infallibly decide it? for they make not him or his sentence infallible, but all
their infallibility is borrowed from him. So little help is there for them in
this decree of taciturnity, (if we should admit thereof) that in very deed, it
does many ways prejudice their cause. It is not then the preventing of any
advantage which hence they might have, that causes me to reject this decree,
but the only love of the truth persuades, nay enforces me hereunto. For I
profess I was not a little moved to see the Cardinals Annalls so stuffed with
untruths and figments, and see him also not only by these to abuse, and that
most vilely, his Readers, but even to vaunt and glory (as you have seen he
does) in that which is, and will be an eternal ignominy unto him. But let us
come to make evident the fiction of this Decree.

7. That Vigilius made no such decree of Taciturnitie, first the Emperor
Justinian in his Letters to the fifth general Council is a witness above
exception, When Pope Vigilius, says he Justin. Epist. ad 5. Synod. Coll. 1.
pa. 520. a.
, was come to this our Princely City, we did accurately manifest unto him all
things touching these three Chapters, and we demanded of him what he thought
hereof: and he not once or twice, but often in writing, without writing, did
anathematize the same Chapters. Quod vero ejusdem voluntatis semper fuit de
condemnatione trium Capitulorum, per plurima declaravit, and that he has
always, (ever since his coming hither) continued in the same mind of
condemning those three Chapters, he has very many ways declared. And after,
repeating some of those particulars, he adds, Et compendiose dicere, semper in
eadem voluntate perseveravit, and to speak briefly, he has ever since
persevered in this mind. So writ and testified the Emperor. In the seventh
Collation the Emperor sent Constantine the most glorious Quaestor of his
Palace, unto the Synod, to deliver unto them certain letters of Vigilius, who
again testified this from the Emperor before the whole Council: Vigilius,
says he Coll. 7. Conc. 5. pa. 578. a.
, has very often manifested by writings his mind, that he condemns the
Three Chapters, which also without writing, he has said before the Emperor in
the presence of the most glorious Judges, and of very many of your selves, who
are here in the Council: et non intermisit, semper anathematizans Theodorum,
and he has not intermitted or ever ceased (since his first coming almost to
Constantinople) to anathematize the defenders of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and
the Epistle of Ibas, and the writings of Theodoret against Cyrill: and then
delivering the letters of Vigilius unto them, he adds, Vigilius does by these
make manifest, quod per totum tempus, eorundem trium Capituloru^ impietatem
aversatur, that for this whole time (since his first consenting to the Edict
upon his coming to Constantinople, until the assembling of the general
Council) he has detested the impiety of those Three Chapters. Thus said and
testified Constantine from the Emperor.

8. If I should say no more at all, even this one testimony being so pregnant,
and withal so certain, that there can be no doubt but the Emperor both knew
and testified the truth herein, this alone, I say, is sufficient to demonstrate
the vanity of that fictitious Synod and decree of Taciturnity. For seeing it is
hence certain, that Vigilius persisted and persevered to condemn the Three
Chapters, after the time of his consenting to the Emperors Edict, upon his
coming to Constantinople, till the time of the fifth Council; it must needs be
acknowledged for certain, that in that time he made no decree to forbid men
to condemn the fame; and then, not this decree of Taciturnity, which ties all
men's tongues that they shall neither defend, nor yet condemn them. And if the
decree be fictitious, such as was never made, as by this testimony it is now
certain: then is the Council fictitious wherein it was decreed; then the
whole fable of Baronius; how the Emperor and Mennas violated that decree, how
the Pope endured persecution for maintaining that Decree, and the other
Consequents, they all are certainly fictitious, this one testimony
overthrows the^ all. But I will add a second reason drawn from the
consideration of the observing and putting in execution this Synodall and
pontifical Decree. For it is not to be doubted, but if such a Decree had
been made, especially, with the consent of a Synod, and of the Emperor also,
but some one or other would have observed the same; the rather, because
Baronius Bar. an. 547. nu. 41.
tells us, that upon the publishing of this Decree in the one and twentieth
year of Justinian, res consopita siluit; the controversy was for a while
hushed. Let us then see who those were whom this Decree made silent or
tongue-tyed in this cause, and it will appear that none at all observed it.

9. Let us begin with the Pope himself, who of all is most likely to have kept
his own decree; but he was so far from observing it, that he practiced the
quite contrary. In the two and twentieth year of Justinian, the very next unto
that wherein this decree is supposed to be made, Rusticus and Sebastianus two
Roman Deacons remaning then at Constantinople, and being earnest defenders of
the Three Chapters, writ letters unto diverse Bishops, and into diverse Provinces
against Hi adversus Romans Pontifice^ in diversas provincias literas dedere, Bar.
an. 548. nu. 2. is est juxta. Bar. an. Justin. 22.
Pope Vigilius, and the cause was, for that he condemned Schismatici scriptis
ubique vulgaverant, Vigilium tria damnando Caepitula impugnare Chalcedonense
Concilium. Bar. an 550. nu. 1.
the Three Chapters, and thereby as they pretended, condemned also the Council
of Chalcedon, and for a proof of their accusation they dispersed Exemplaria
(Iudicati nostri) per plurimos sacerdotes et laicos in Africana Provincia
destinares ait Vig. Rustico et Sebastiano, in sua Epist. ad eos in Conc. 5.
Coll. 7 pa. 578 b.
the copies of Vigilius his Constitution sent unto Mennas against the Three
Chapters. A clear proof that as then Vigilius neither had made this Decree,
nor revoked his judgment for condemning of those Chapters. In the 23. Epistola
Vigilij ad Valentin. data est 1 5. K^l. April. anno 23. Iustiniani. extat in
Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 580. et seq.
year, Vigilius writ to Valentinianus, to purge himself of those slanders
Etiam hoc mentiti sunt, etc. Epist. Vig. ib. pa. 581. a.
and untruths; and that he does by referring himself to his judgment Legant
quae de causa quae hic mota est ad fratrem nostrum Mennam scribentes legimur
definivisse, ibid.
, sent to Mennas against the 3. Chapters, wherein he then plainly professes,
that what he had therein defined was consonant Ibid.
to the faith of the 4. former Councels, and to the decrees of his
predecessors, and he is so resolute in maintaining the same judgment that he
adds of it, that it is abundant Credimus enim, Catholicae ecclesiae filijs,
ea quae tunc ad Me^nam scripsimus de blasphemijs Theodori, ejusque persona,
deque Epistola Ibae, and scriptis Theodoreti co^tra rectam fidem, abunde posse
sufficere, ibid.
to satisfy any man. An infallible evidence that as yet, nor till that year he
had neither revoked his former sentence, nor made any decree of silence to
forbid men to condemn the same Chapters. In the four and twentieth Epistola
Vigilij ad Aurel. data est Kal. Maijs an. 24. Iustiniani Augusti, extat in
Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 581. b.
year he writ the like Apology to Aurelianus Bishop of Arles, yea which is
more, Baronius Ista hoc anno Constantinopoli a Vigilio adversus schismaticos
decreta fuerunt. Bar. an. 550. (qui est Iustiniani 24.) nu. 36.
shows that in that 24. year, he published his judicial sentence of
condemnation and deposition against Ea extat in Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 578. and
seq. and eam recitat. Bar. an. 550. nu. 16. and seq.
Rusticus, Sebastianus, Gerontius, Hi in sente^tia papae and decreto
nominantur, apud Bar. an. eodem, nu. 34.
Severus, Importunus, John, and Deusdedit; for that they Immutatum te
comperimus, and cum adversarijs ecclesiae qui contra Iudicati nostri seriem
nitebantur se, caute tractare, etc. Vigil. in suo decreto contra Rust. and
Sebast. apud Bar. an. 550. nu. 22.
by defending the Three Chapters, and communicating with such as defended them,
contra Iudicati nostri seriem nitebantur, dealt against the tenor of his
judgment: showing plainly that till then, and in that year his judgment
against the Three Chapters stood so firmly in force, that by a judicial
sentence he deposed the contradictors thereof, which had himself revoked, and
by a Decree of silence adnulled, in likelihood he would not, certainly in
justice he could not have done; and seeing he censured them not for speaking
of that controversy, but for speaking in defense of those Chapters: it is
evident, that as then he had not made any Decree for silence in that cause, for
then his censure should have been, because they had done contrary to it, not
because they had contradicted his judgment in condemning those Chapters.

10. Is not Baronius think you a very wise and worthy Annalist, who persuades
you that Vigilius made this Decree of silence in the 21. year of Justinian,
forbidding all thereby to condemn the Three Chapters, which not to have been
made either in the 22, or 23, or 24. years, the undoubted writing and censures
of Vigilius expressed by Baronius himself do make evident, and testify that
the Pope himself was so far from being silent therein, that both by words, by
writings, by pontisicall censures and judgments, himself condemned the 3,
Chapters? who will again persuade you that the Pope suffered very heavy
persecution at the Emperors hands, because he would not permit the 3. Chapters
to be condemned, whereas the Pope himself, not only condemned them all that
time, as well as the Emperor did, but both by writings reproved, and by
judicial censures punished, condemned, and deposed such as would not condemn
them, and that also eo nomine, because they would not condemn them, nor
consent to his judgment whereby he had condemned them. Now that Vigilius
continued of the same mind, both in the 25. and 26. years of Justinian, that
is, until the time that the fifth Council was assembled, though there be no
particulars to explain, yet by the Emperors words before remembered, that per
totum tempus perseveravit, and ejusdem semper voluntatis fuit, it is abundantly
testified. So that it is most certain, that Vigilius at no time observed this
decree of Taciturnity: and because had there been any, he of all men was the
most likely to observe it, who as Baronius fableth, was so rigorous against
others, even the Emperor also, for not observing thereof, his not observing of
it, is an evidence that he made no such Decree at all, but that the whole
narration concerning it, and the consequents upon it, is a very fiction and
fable.

11. Next after the Pope let us see if the Emperor (who as Baronius says Bar.
in 551. nu. 2. emissu^ spo^sione^ de servado silentio, etc.
, promised to observe this law, of Taciturnity) was silent and quiet in this
cause. And truly there is a strong presumption that he neither did nor would
now refuse or forbear to condemn the 3. Chapters, seeing by so doing, he
should have anathematized himself: for by his Imperial Edict, he denou^ced
all those to be an Anathema, who do not condemn and Si quis no^ anathematizat
Theodoric et. Theodoreti scripta, etc. and Apistola Ibae, Anathema sit Edict.
Justin.
anathematize the same Chapters. The very silence in this cause, and ceasing or
refusing to anathematize the Chapters, had made him guilty of his own just
Anathema. But to leave presumptions, Certain it is that Justinian continued
the same man, constant in condemning those Chapters, and that not only for the
time after this supposed Decree, but from the first publishing of his own
Edict, whereof the whole fifth Council is a most ample witness, who thus say
Conc. 5. Coll. 7. in sine.
, omnia semper fecit, and facit, quae sanctam Ecclesiam and recta dogmata
conservant, The most pious Emperor has ever done (concerning this cause of the
three Chapters,) and now does those things which preserve the holy Church, and
sound doctrine, and that to be the condemning of these Chapters, they by their
Synodall sentence do make evident, where they profess the condemning thereof
to be the preserving of the good seed Festinantes bonu^ fidei seme^ purum
conservare ab impietatis Zizaniis. Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 584. a.
of faith, the preserving of the Council of Chalcedon, and the rooting out of
heretical tares.

12. And if we desire particulars of his constant dealing herein, Victor
Tunavensis declares the earnestness of Justinian, in condemning these
Chapters for every year since this Decree of Taciturnity is supposed to have
been made. The Decree, as Bar. an. 547. nu. 1. and 41.
Baronius shows, was set out in the sixth year after the Consulship of
Basilius (which account by Consalar years Victor uses) and it answers to
the end of twenty one, and most of the 22. year of Justinian. In the seventh
year after Basilius Victo. Tun. in Chron. sed vitio Typogra scribitur an. 8.
pro. 7 nam proxime praecedens a^nus apud cu^ read numeratur an. 6. post. Coss.
Bas. neque ullum annum omitti ab eo certum est.
Coss. that is, in the very next to that wherein the Decree was made; Justinian
writ most earnestly says Victor Vict. loc. citat.
into diverse provinces, and antistites cunctos praefata tria Capitula damnare
compellit, and he compelled all Bishops to condemn the Three Chapters. In the
eight he shows that the Illyrian Bishops held a Synod, and writ unto the
Emperor to dissuade him from condemning those Chapters. In the ninth he shows
that Facundus did the like, and further in this year Na sacra Imperatoris ad
Ioha^. datae st an. Just. 24. post. Co^s. Bas. a 9. extat in Co^c. 5 Col. 6.
pa. 553. a.
the Emperor commanded the Synod at Mopsvestia to be held against Theodorus,
that it might appear how, and from how long time before then, the name of
Theodorus had been blotted out of the Ecclesiastical tables, the judgment of
which Synod the Emperor sent Facta est suggestio ad sanct. papam Vigiliu^ ab
eisdem episcopis (Council. Mopsvesteni.) Conc. 5. Coll. 5. pa. 557. a. Acta in
Concilio Mopsvesteno ad Vigilium Iustiniani Concilio and opera missa fuere ne
in futura generali Synodo Theodorum ipse damnare aliquo modo detrectaret. Bar.
anno. 550. nu. 39.
to Vigilius to assure him of the truth thereof, that he might with more
constancy continue to condemn the Three Chapters. In the tenth Victor
declares that the Emperor sent for Reparatus and Firmus two Primates, for
Primasius, and Verecundus, two Bishops to deal with them, that they would
condemn the same Chapters, and that Zoilus Patriarch of Alexandria, for
refusing to condemn them was deposed, which to have been done by the Emperors
command, Zoilum Imperator deposuit. Liber. ca. 23.
Liberatus shows. In the eleventh, which was the next before the general
Council, Victor tells us both that Firmus Primate of Numidia being won
Firmus donis principis corruptus, damnationi 3. Capitulorum assensu^ praebuit.
Vict. an. 11 (corrupe. scribitur 12) post. Co^s. Bas.
by the Emperors gifts (so he partially writes) consented to condemn the
Chapters, but Primasius, Verecundus, and Macarius for not consenting, were all
banished. So clear and undoubted it is that the Emperor continued so constant
in his condemning of these Chapters, that for every year since the Decree of
Silence is supposed to be made, he was resolute in this cause, condemning and
banishing such as consented not to the condemning of them.

13. Whence the shameless untruths of the Baronian narration is demonstrated.
He tells you, and tells it with a Constat, that in the next year before the
fifth Council, the Emperor recalled his Edict, and abrogated what he had done
in this cause of the 3. Chapters, whereas not only the whole general Council
testifies on the contrary, that he still persisted constant in condemning of
them, but Victor (one who had good reason to know these matters, as feeling the
smart of the Emperors severity for his obstinacy in defending those Chapters)
particularly witnesses of that very year, that the Emperor was so eager in
maintaining his Edict, and condemning the Chapters, that he both drew Firmus,
the Primate of Numidia to his opinion, and banished Macarius Patriarch of
Jerusalem, Verecundus Bishop of Nica, and Primasius another Bishop, because
they would not consent to his Edict, and condemn the same Chapters. And what a
brainlesse devise was this, that the Emperor in his 25. year should hang out
his Edict, at Constantinople, so the Cardinal Iustinianus Imp. contra tria
Capitula public (Constantinopoli) appendi jussit edictum. Bar. an. 551. (qui
est 10. post Coss. Basil.) nu. 2.
fableth, as a matter of some great noveltie, to be published to the City,
whereas his Edict four or five years before, was so divulged throughout the
whole Church, that none may be thought to have been ignorant thereof, seeing
universus Bin. not. in Conc. 5. Concilium. and Bar. an. 547. nu. 29.
orbis Catholicus, the whole Catholic Church was divided and rent into a
schism about that Edict, the one half defending, the other oppugning the
same? Or what reason can the fabler give, why Vigilius should in the 25. year
quarrel with the Emperor, rather then in the 24.23.22. in every one of which,
Justinian was the same man, constant in maintaining the truth published by his
Edict? Did the hanging out of the Edict, more provoke the Popes zeal then the
banishing, imprisoning of those who withstood the Edict? more then the Emperors
enforcing, and compelling, omnes antistites, all the Bishops to condemn the
Three Chapters? But enough of Justinian, to manifest that he never observed
this fictitious Decree of Taciturnitie.

14. After the Emperor and Pope, let us see if Catholics, that is, those who
condemned the three Chapters, did observe this Decree. They did not: but like
the Emperor, they constantly continued to speak, to write against them as
well after as before the time of this supposed Decree, it stopped not the mouth
of any one of them; Not of Mennas, not of Theodorus Bar. an. 551. nu. 5.
Theodorus adversus tria capitula cuncta public agere non destitit.
, whom, Excommunicatio refertur a Bar. an. 551. nu. 11.12.
for talking so much against those Chapters Vigilius suspended, and
excommunicated, as the Baronian narration tells you, not of the other Bishops,
subject to the^, for Vigilius used the very same censure against them also, for
their condemning of those Chapters, We, says Jbid. nu. 12.
Vigilius, condemn thee O Mennas, with all the Bishops pertaining to thy
Diocese, yea, we condemn also thy fellow Eastern Bishops though of diverse
provinces, be they of greater or lesser Cities, we condemn and excommunicate
them all. Neither did they begin to condemn the Chapters, in that 25. year,
wherein this sentence, by the accoumpt of Baronius was pronounced, but they did
this ever since the time, that the Decree of Silence is supposed to be made;
for Vigilius there says Ibid. nu. 7.
to Theodorus, we have declared pene hoc quinquennio elapso, almost these five
years last past, our longanimitie and patience both toward you, and toward
those who have been seduced by you; which five years being reckned back,
will fall out in the 21. year of Justinian, even from that year (and then was
the decree of Silence said to be published) did the Eastern Bishops continue
to speak against, and condemn the three Chapters. Now although this against
Baronius, who applaudes that sentence and writing of Vigilius, be sufficient,
yet because it is only argumentum ad hominem, I will add a more weighty
testimony to clear this matter, concerning Catholics, and that is, of the
whole fifth general Council, which says Conc. 5. Coll. 7 in fine.
, the Emperor does manifest quod nec quenquam latuit, that whereof no man is
ignorant, that the impiety of these Chapters, ab initio aliena est a sancta
Dei ecclesia, is strange, and has been disliked by the holy Church, ever
since the controversy about them has been moved. Then certainly no
Catholic, none Catholikely affected at any time forbore to condemn them, not
one of them observed that Decree of Silence.

15. All the Cardinals hope is now in the Defenders of these Chapters; they no
doubt would be willing to obey this Pontifical and Synodall Decree; seeing
for the most part, they were Africane, Illyrian, and Western Bishops. Among
them, if any where, the Pope might hope to have his Decree observed. They
observe it? They are silent in this cause; Nay you shall see them, after the
time that this Decree is supposed to be made, to be far more eager in
defending the Three Chapters, then ever they were before. For now, besides the
defending of those Chapters, they boldly and bitterly invaighed against
Vigilius himself, because he condemned the same. This Bar. ann. 548. nu. 6.
Non tantu^ Rusticus acuit stilum contra Vigilium, sed alij plures, Liberatus,
Victor, etc.
did Liberatus at Carthage, at Tunen Victor, at Constantinople Facundus, the
Popes own orator, (who now having turned his style, whetted it as sharp
against the Pope, as before he had done at the Popes command against the
Emperor) yea the Popes own Roman Deacons, Rusticus and Sebastianus, besides
others, freely, and openly declamed Vbique vulgarunt ipsum Vigilium tria
damnando capitula impugnare Concilium Chalc. Bar. an. 550. nu. 1.
against the Pope, as one, who by condemning the 3. Chapters, did condemn the
Council of Chalcedon: nay, they proceeded even to flout and taunt the Pope,
for his condemning of those Chapters, deriding his sentence against Theodorus
of Mopsvestia being dead, in this manner Vigilius in sua sententia, seu
Epistola Rustico et Sebastiano in Conc. 5. Coll. 7. pa. 578. b.
, the Pope should have condemned not only the person, and writings of
Theodorus, sed and territorium ipsum ubi positus est, but even the very ground
also where he was buried, adding, that if any could find but the bones of
Theodorus, (though now accursed by the Pope) gratanter acciperent, they would
very lovingly embrace them and keep them for holy relickes.

16. And what speak I of a few particular men? In the 23. year of Justinian,
that is, in the second year after the supposed Decree, the Illyrian Vict. Tun.
an. 8. post Cons. Bas. sed corrupt legitur 9.
Bishops held a Synod, by which was both writ a book in defense of those
Chapters, and sent unto the Emperor, and Benenatus Bishop of Iustineanea, was
condemned by the same Synod, because he spoke against those Chapters. The next
year Vict. Tun. an. 9 post Cons. Basil.
after that, did the Africane Bishops hold a Synod, wherein they did nominatim,
and expressly condemn Pope Vigilius, excommunicate him, and shut him out of
their communion, because he was one of those who condemned the Three Chapters,
as Victor Bishop of Tunea, who as it seems was present in that Synod, does
testify. Now seeing the Cardinal professes Bar. an. 548. nu. 6.
that these divisions, and contentions were among Catholics, pugnantibus inter
se orthodoxis, orthodoxall Bishops and Catholics they were, who at this time
fought one against another, yea and by his position, Schismatic they were
not, because Qui postea (post ultimum judicium Papae) ab his dissensere,
Schismatici habiti sunt. Cum tamen interea ^nte novissimum Apostolicae sedis
assensum, non esset piaculum pro tribus pugnare capitulis. Bar. an. 546. nu. 38.
the Pope had not yet given his last sentence. If one listed to digress, here
were a fit occasion to make a little sport with his Cardinalship, upon whose
assertion it clearly ensues, that a Synod, even an Africane Synod (which with
them is more) yea the whole Church of Afric, may (and de facto has so done)
judge, censure, excommunicate and exclude from their communion the Pope; and
yet for all this, themselves at the same time may be, and have de facto been
very good Catholics, and neither heretics, nor schismatickes. But of that
point I have before entreated. This only I do now observe, that by the view
and consideration of all sorts, and degrees of men in the Church, none at all
observed that decree of Silence in this cause, not the Pope, not the Emperor,
not the Orthodoxall professors, and such as before condemned the Chapters, not
the heretical defenders of them: All these (and in one of these ranks, were
comprehended all Christians at that time) by their speeches, by their writings,
by their actions, by their Synodall decrees and judgments, do evidently
witness that there was no such decree of Silence ever made, which without all
question amongst some one order and degree or other, would have been observed,
and taken effect.

17. To these I will add one other reason, taken from the weakness, and
unsoundnesse of that ground whereon the Cardinal has framed this whole
narration. He tells De hoc Vigilij decreto (pro Silentio) et inita cu^ Theodoro
and Menna transactione teste^ sunt acta publica. Bar. an. 547. nu. 42. Ista
Acta vocat, Constitutum Vigilij de Anathemate. an. 551. nu. 12.
us that this Decree of Silence, the Synod wherein it was made, and diverse of
the consequents (for some are of the Cardinals own invention) are testified
by certain public acts or Records, to wit, those which contained the sentence
and Pontifical Constitution Extat tum apud Bar. an. 551 nu. 6. et seq. tum
apud Bin. post. Epist. 16. Vigilij.
of Pope Vigilius against Mennas, Theodorus, and the rest. In those acts indeed
a good part of this Baronian fable is related, how Mennas, Dacius, and many
other both Greek and Latin Bishops were present in this Synod, at the making
of this Decree: how Theodorus, Ibid. nu. 3. pene hoc quinquennio.
and other Eastern Bishops had dealt for the space of five years against that
Decree: how the Pope Ib. nu. 11. et 12
after five years toleration and longanimitie, called an other Synod, and
therein pronounced a sentence of Excommunication against Theodorus, Mennas, and
the rest, till they should acknowledge their fault, and make a satisfaction for
the same. These and some other particulars are there expressed. Now if we can
demonstrate these public Acts of Baronius to be no other than forgeries, I
think none will make doubt, but that all the rest of the Baronian narration
which relyes hereon, is a very fiction.

18. But can those public Acts be convinced for such? they may; and that most
evidently, besides many other means, by comparing the date of this sentence
against Mennas, with the time of the death of Mennas. These Acts, Records,
Sentence, or Constitution against Mennas (call them what you list) were made in
the 25 year of Justinian, for so in the date Data 19. Kal. September. Imperante
Domino Justiniano an. 25. post. Cons. Basilij anno decimo. Bar. an. 551 nu. 12.
of them is expressed; nor can it be supposed that there is any error either
in the writer or Printer, for both the Consular year is also added Ibid.
, to wit, the tenth after the Coss. of Basilius, which answers to the 25 of
Justinian, and the Pope accounts there almost five Pene hoc quinquennio elapso
monstravimus. Ibid. nu. 7.
years, since the Decree of Silence was made; which being placed by Baronius
Bar. an. 547. (qui est Iustiniaeni. 21.) nu. 41. et 43.
in the 21, the fifth current year after it, will directly fall to be the 25
year. So in the 25 of Justinian did the Pope excommunicate Mennas; yea, write
and send this Excommunication unto him, saying unto him in this Apud Bar. an.
551. nu. 12.
manner, Teque Mennam tamdiu a sacra communione suspendimus; we suspend thee O
Mennas, and all the other Bishops in thy Diocese, so long until every one of
you acknowledging his error shall make competent satisfaction for his own
fault, which satisfaction, and submission to have been performed by Mennas in
the next year, to wit, the 26 of Justinian, Baronius Bar. an. 552. nu. 20.
Jpse Mennas libellum supplicem Vigilio obtulit.
with great pomp declares. Now Mennas dyed five years before he offered this
book of supplication, or submitted himself to Vigilius; and 4. before the Pope
sent out this Excommunication unto him, with that admonition to submit
himself; for it is certainly testified by the Popes Legates in the sixth
general Council, that Mennas dyed in the 21 year of Justinian. In that
Council Conc. 6. Act. 3.
a sermon or speech going under the name of Mennas, to Vigilius, was produced
as a part of the Acts of the fifth Council, the Legates of Pope Agatho cried
out before the Emperor and the whole Council, that it was a forgery: which
they proved Eo argumento manifestissime comprobarunt, quod Mennas sex annis
ante quintam Synodum sub Vigilio celebratam ex hac vita migrasset. Bin. not. in
Conc. 6. in Act. 3.
, and that most manifestly, because Mennas dyed in the 21 year of Justinian,
but the fifth Synod was congregated in the 26 year, which ended on the first of
April, though the first Session of the Synod was not held till the May next
after, which was in the 27 year of Justinian. Thus testified the Popes own
Legates; and the Emperor, with the whole Synod, upon their evidence, rejected
their writing for a forgerie.

19. Said I not truly unto you, that the Baronian narration was a piece of rare
Poetry? might not a mean Poet make an excellent Tragedy of it? were it not a
fine Pageant, to see the Pope, and so many Bishops sit in Vtopia, and there
make a law for Taciturnity, the Emperor, the Senate, and people consenting
unto it? would it not be another, and far more delightful Act, to see the
Pope and Emperor quarrelling about this law; the one beating, buffeting, and
persecuting; the other fleeing both by Sea and land, from Placidiana to Saint
Peter, from him to Euphemia, from Constantinople to Chalcedon? what a sport
were it to see the Roman Apollo ascend into his Delphian throne, and thence,
as from Olympus, cast his fiery darts, his thunders and lightnings against
that Typhoean generation, which durst speak when he enjoined silence? Now the
embassage which the Emperor sent to Chalcedon to entreat his Holiness to
return; the magnanimity of the Pope in refusing to come from the Altar, the
Emperors yielding to all that he prescribed; this of it self would encourage
a Poet, and cause him to presume of an applause: But the most rare Pageant of
all would be, to see and hear Mennas, four years after he was dead and
rotten, to speak and dispute against the Decree of Silence (the Silentes
umbrae, to declame against Silence) to see him a Bishop, a Patriarch, at the
voice of the Popes sentence; Audisne haec Amphiarai sub terram abditae; to come
ab inferis, to come with a Bill of supplication in his hand, with a song of
Miserere in his mouth, to the Roman Jove, and entreat pardon for his talking
so much in the grave, and among the infernal ghosts, against the Popes Decree
of Silence; and after all this to see the Pope shake hands with him, and all
his Metropolitanes, and Micropolitanes Tu cum omnibus Metropolitanis et
Micropolitanis Episcopis. Vigil. sententia apud Bar. an. 551. nu. 12.
, (note the eloquence of the Pope), and so, after a most joyful reconcilement,
to see the holy Relics carried in a golden Chariot (an excellent dumb show)
about the City, and that by a dead man; Can you do less than give the Poet
Baronius a Plaudite for his so rare invention, or contriving of this Fable?

20. Why, but is it credible that Cardinal Baronius, the great Annalist of our
age, he who bestowed thirty Hoc opus ante annos circiter 30 aggressus sum.
Bar. in praefat. dedic. ante tom. 1. Annalium.
years in the study of these Ecclesiastical affairs, that he should so
foully be overseene in a computation so easy, and so obvious, as to think
Mennas to be excommunicated, to come with a supplication to the Pope, and to
ride in a triumphant Chariot, with those holy relics, four or five years
after he was dead and rotten? Overseene? nothing less: It was no ignorance, no
oversight in him; he knew all this matter ad unguem, he knew that Mennas was
dead long before that submission, and triumph: But the Cardinal was disposed,
either to recreate the reader with the contemplation of this his Poetical
fiction, or else for to show you, that, with the charm of those forgeries, and
counterfeit writings, with which he has stuffed his Annals, he is able to
metamorphoze all other men into very blocks and beetles, that they shall
applaud his most absurd dotages as undoubted and historical truths; which,
that every man may perceive, it must be observed, that though in this place,
where the cause betwixt Vigilius and the Emperor, is debated, the Cardinal is
content that you should think Mennas to have been alive in the 26. Hoc anno (
26. Iustiniani) finem vivendi fecit Mennas. Bar. an. 552. nu. 21.
year of Justinian, that is, five years after he was dead, for otherwise all
his narration, even the whole play had been spoiled, there had neither been
any Decree of Silence, nor any persecution by Justinian, nor any flight of
Vigilius, nor any excommunication of Mennas or Theodorus, nor any submission of
them, and of the Emperor also to the Pope, the Pope had not been known to
be so far above Bishops, Patriarks, and Emperors, that they must all stoop
to him, and, laying their necks at his feet, say unto him, Calcate me salem
insipidum, punish me as you please for speaking without your Holiness leave
and license, yea, that Kings must pull down, abrogate, and adnull their
imperial Edicts, if the Pope do but beck unto them; though, for these
considerations, he is here willing that you believe that untruth concerning
Mennas, for all these depend on that one sentence of Anathema against Mennas;
yet, when this matter is over-past, when the Cardinal comes to a new argument,
where he hopes, this, which is said about the cause of Vigilius, will be
forgotten, there he confesses the truth indeed concerning Mennas, and tells you
a quite contrary tale: For entreating of the Acts of the sixth Council, and
particularly of that reason of the Popes Legates against the forged Epistle in
Mennas name, he thus Bar. an. 680. nu. 46.
says, Ejusque rei certum illud attulerunt argumentum, quod Mennas diem obijt
anno 21 Iustiniani Imperatoris: The Legates give a certain proof, that the
writing was forged, because Mennas dyed in the 21 year of Justinian the
Emperor. Lo, the Cardinal knew, and professes it to be, not only true,
but certain, that Mennas dyed in the 21 year of Justinian, and yet against
his own certain knowledge, for maintaining this fictitious Decree of Silence,
and the fables thereon depending, he persuades you to believe that Mennas dealt
against this Decree, was excommunicated by Vigilius, and submitted himself to
the Pope, and rode with the relikes five years after he was dead.

21. Truly this was scarce fair and honest dealing in the Cardinal, by
untruths to strive to bolster out forged Acts and writing: But the Cardinals
Annals are so full of such like stuff, that, if you divide them into four
parts, I do constantly affirm there is no more truth in three of those four,
than you have seen to be in this fable, which from a most base forgery,
known also to the Cardinal for such, he has commended for a grave and
authentike history unto us: And I should grow somewhat out of patience to see
the Cardinal so grossly contradict, both the truth, and his own writings also,
but that, by my long and serious tossing of his books, I perceive this is so
familiar a trick with him, that, for the usual meeting of it, I have long
since forgotten to be angry with him for such petty faults. This I hope, which
has been declared, will serve for a caveat unto all, to take heed how they
credit any matter whatsoever upon the Cardinals relation: either it is in it
self untrue, or it springs from some untruth, or by his purpose in relating
it, it is made to serve but for a pully to draw you into some untruth, aut
aliquis latet dolus, either in the header tail there is a sting, believe him
not. And I would also have added somewhat for Binius, who in this Bin. Not. in
Vigilij sententiam contra Theodorum, tom. ^. Conc. pa. 504.
, as in other fancies and fables, applauds Baronius; but I suppose, that as he
sucketh his errors from Baronius, so he will think, that the refuting of
Baronius is a sufficient warning for him to purge his Edition of the Councels
from such vile and shameless untruths. Thus much of that former point which
concerns the second Period in Vigilius changings.

CAP. XVII. That Vigilius, neither by his Pontifical Decree, nor so much as by
a personal profession consented to, or confirmed the fifth Council, after the
end thereof, or after his supposed exile.
1. THE other point proposed concerns that fourth and last change of Vigilius
judgment, whereby, as Baronius Cum vero Vigilius graviori damno universum
Orientem ab Ecclesia Romans divisum cerneret, nisi Synodo quintae consentiret,
eam probavit. Bar. an. 553 nu. 235.
tells us, he, by his Apostolical Decree Vigilius abrogato quod pro 3.
Capitulis ediderat Constituto, quinta Synodo adversanti, eandem Synodum
authoritate Apostolica comprobavit. Bar. 554. nu. 7. Vigilius hanc Synodum
quintam, suo Decreto, suaque authoritate Pontificia confirmavit. Bin. not. in
Conc. 5. Praestitit; et Decretu^ Vigilij vocat Bar. an. 553. nu. 231.
confirmed the fifth Council, when, about a year Quo anno (554.) Vigilius
praecibus Narsetis liberatur exilio. Bar. an. 554. nu. 1. necesse est dicere id
a Vigilio factum (id est quintam Synodum comprobatam) hoc tempore (an. 554.)
cum ab exili^ solutus est. Bar. ibid. nu. 4. Idem ait Bin. not. in Conc. 5.
Praestitit.
after the end thereof, he returned out of exile. That such a change of
Vigilius can no way help Baronius, or his cause, though it should be granted
unto him, we have before Sup. ca. 15.
declared; but because al which we then said was only spoken upon a supposall
and admission of this Baronian change, we will now more nearly examine the
whole matter, and try whether there was indeed any such Decree ever made by
Vigilius, and whether he did at any time after the end of the fifth Council
change his judgment, in such sort, that he became a condemner of the Three
Chapters, and an approver of the fifth Synod. And truly I could wish so much
good to Vigilius, as that there might appear some clear, and ancient records,
to testify his renouncing of heresy, and condemning of his own heretical
and Cathedral decree, published in the time of the Council, for defense of
the Three Chapters: But the truth is more precious unto me than the love of
Vigilius or any Pope whatsoever; and because it is the truth alone which
causes me to discuss this point, I must needs confess, that I can find
nothing at all, which can effectually induce me to believe it, but there are
many and pregnant reasons which enforce me to think, that Vigilius never made
any such Decree or Change, as Baronius fancieth, but that this whole fourth
Period and change of Vigilius, so gloriously painted out by Baronius, is
nothing else but another fiction, and piece of the Cardinals own Poetry,
which, without all warrant or ground from any ancient writer, he, like a
Spider, only out of his own brain has woven and devised.

2. That Vigilius made no such Decree, the reason which Bar. gives in this very
case, may declare: he, to prove that Vigilius made not this decree, either
during the time of the Synod, or shortly after the end thereof, has these
words Bar. an. 553. nu. 223.
, If Vigilius had then assented by his letters, utique literae illae Actis
fuissent intextae; verily those letters, purchased with so great labor, would
have been inserted among the Acts of the fifth Synod, and a great number of
copies would have been taken thereof, spread abroad, and made known to all
Churches, as well in the East, as West, (even as the Epistle of Leo was)
because by those letters, validarentur quae a Synodo sancita; those things
which the fifth Synod had decreed, the Pope contradicting them, and thereby they
being invalid, should now be made of force, the Pope consenting to them. Thus
Baronius. Does not the same reason as effectually prove, that he made no such
decree at al, or not a year after, as that he made it not within one or two
months after the end of the Synod? with what labor, at what price would not
the Bishops of the fifth Synod have purchased that decree? how gladly would they
have annexed it to their Acts, as the Decree of Leo is to the acts at
Chalcedon? How many copies and extracts would they have taken of it, and
dispersed them every where, both in the West and East, to testify the truth of
their Synodall judgment, and that the infallible Judge had consented to their
sentence, and confirmed the same. Or would they have done this within a month,
and not a year after the end of the Synod? what odds to the point in hand can
that small difference of time make in the cause? specially considering that the
very Epistle of Leo Ea est Epist. Leonis 61. quae incipit, Omnem fraternitatem.
, whereof the Cardinal speaks, was not written till five Conc. Chalc. desijt
28. Oct. Coss. Martiano. aut 1. November. ut patet ex ult. Sess. Epistola vero
Leonis scripta est 21. Martij Coss. Opilione, ut patet ex sine Epist.
months after the end of the Council at Chalcedon, and yet was it annexed to
the acts thereof. If then the Cardinals reason be of force to prove that he
writ not this Decree shortly after the Synod, it is altogether as effectual to
prove he writ it not at all, nor after his return about a year after out of
exile.

3. The Cardinal gives yet another evidence hereof, Pelagius, says he Bar.
an. 553. nu. 236.
, the successor of Vigilius did think it fit, that the fifth Synod should be
approved, and the three Chapters condemned, moved especially hereunto by this
reason, that the Eastern Church, ob Vigilij constitutum schismate scissa,
being rent and divided from the Roman by reason of the Constitution of
Vigilius, might be united unto it. How was the Eastern Church divided from the
Roman in the time of Pelagius, by reason of that decree of Vigilius in defense
of the Three Chapters, if Vigilius by another decree published after it had
recalled, and adnulled it? If the Popes condemning of those Chapters, and
approving of the fifth Council could unite the Churches, then the decree of
Vigilius (had there been any such) would have effected that union. If the
Apostolic Decree of Vigilius could not effect it, in vain it was for Pelagius
to think by his approbation, which could have no more authority then
Apostolical, to effect that union. If the cause of the breach and disunion of
those Churches was, as Baronius truly says, the Constitution of Vigilius in
defense of the Three Chapters, against the judgment of the fifth Synod, seeing
it is clear by the Cardinals own confession, that the disunion continued
till after the death of Vigilius, it certainly hence follows, that the
Constitution of Vigilius, which was the cause of that breach, was never by
himself repealed, which even in Pelagius time remained in force, and was then
a wall of separation of the Eastern, from the Western Church. Again, if the
Popes approving the fifth Council, and condemning the three Chapters was, as in
truth it was, and as the Cardinal notes Cujus (Vigilij) postremam sententiam
(pro approbatione 5. Conc. and condemnatione triu^ Capitulorum) posteri omnes
sequuti, universa Dei Ecclesia paucis schismaticis exceptis, eandem Synodum ut
oecumenicam semper novit. Bar. an. 554. nu. 7.
it to have been, the cause to unite those Churches, seeing by his own
confession in Vigilius time they were not united (for Pelagius Bar. an. 553.
nu. 236.
after Vigilius his death, sought to take away that schism) it certainly hence
follows, that Vigilius never by any Decree approved that Synod, and their
Synodall condemning of those Chapters: for had he so done, the union had in his
time presently been effected.

4. The same may be perceived also by the Western Church. For as that
Pontifical decree of Vigilius (had there been any such) would have united the
Eastern, so much more would it have drawn the Western, the Italian, and
specially the Roman Church, to consent to the fifth Council, and condemning of
the three Chapters: but that they persisted in the defense of the three
Chapters, and that also to the very end of Vigilius his life, may diverse ways
be made evident. When Pelagius being then but a Deacon was chosen Pope after
the death of Vigilius, and was to be consecrated Bishop, there could no more
then two Bishops Dum non essent Episcopi qui eum ordinarent, inventi sunt duo,
Johannes, and Bonus, and Andreas Presbyter de Ostia, and ordinaverunt eum
Episcopum, Anast. in vita Pelagij. 1.
be found in the Western Church that would consecrate or ordain him Bishop:
wherefore contrary to that Canon both of the Apostles Can. Apost. 1
and Nicene Fathers Conc. Nic. Can. 4.
, requiring three Certe omnimodo 3 Episcopi debent esse congregati, -- and ita
faciant ordinationem. Can. 4. Conc. Nic.
Bishops to the consecration of a Bishop (which they so often boast Bell. lib.
de Notis Ecclesiae, ca. 8.. Ex quo. Et Bin. in Notis ad Can. 1. Apost. alijque
of in their disputes against us) the Pope himself was feign to be ordained
only by two Bishops, with a Presbyter of Ostia in stead of the third.
Anastasius very ignorantly, (if not worse) sets down the reason thereof to
have been, for that Pelagius was suspected Subduxerunt se a communione ejus,
dicentes, quia in morte Vigilij se miscuit. Anast. in vitae Pelag. 1.
to have been guilty (by poison or some other way) of the death of Vigilius. A
very idle fancy, as is the most in Anastasius; for Pelagius was in banishment
long before the death of Vigilius, and there continued till Vigilius Nam
Vigilius obijt anno praecedente quum Pelagius de exilio revocatus est. Vict.
Tun. in Chron. ad an. 16. (corrupt legitur 17.) Basilij, et ad an. sequentem.
was dead, he had little leisure nor opportunity to think of poisoning or
murdering his own Bishop; by whose death he could expect no gain. The true
cause why the Western Bishops distasted Pelagius, is noted by Victor who then
lived. He Pelagius condemnans ea (tria Capitula) quae dudum constantissime
defendebat, a praevaricatoribus ordinatus est. Vict. ad an. 17. (corrupt
legitur 18.) post Cons. Basilij.
before he came from Constantinople consented to the fifth Synod, and condemned
the Three Chapters. Now the Western Adeo exhor ruisse visi sunt Antistites
occidentales fere omnes, aliam post 4. admittere Oecumenicam Synodum, ut non
potuerit Pelagius reperire Episcopos Romae, a quibus consecraretur. Bar. an.
556. nu. 1.
Bishops so detested the fifth Synod, and those who with it condemned those
Chapters, that among them all there could be found but two Bishops who held
with the Synod, and so allowed of Pelagius and his act in consenting thereunto,
and those two with the Presbyter of Ostia, were the ordainers of Pelagius, whom
Victor in his corrupted language calls prevaricators. Let any man now consider
with himself, whether it be credible that in all Italy, and some Provinces
adjoining, there should be but two Bishops who would consent to the
Apostolical decree of Vigilius, for approving the fifth Council, if he had
indeed published such a decree. If they knew nor the Popes sentence in this
cause (which they held, and that rightly, for a cause of faith) to be
infallible, how was not the western or the Roman Church heretical at this
time, not knowing that point of faith, which is the transcendent principle and
foundation of all doctrines of faith? If they knew it to be infallible, seeing
his judgment must then over-sway their own, how could there be no more but
two bishops found among them all, who approved the Popes Cathedral sentence,
and consented to his infallible judgment? Seeing then it is certain that the
Western Church did generally reject the fifth Synod, after the death of
Vigilius, and seeing it is not to be thought that they would have persisted in
such a general dislike thereof had they known Vigilius to have by his
Apostolical sentence decreed, that all should approve the same, of which his
sentence (had there been any such) they could not have been ignorant (for if
by no other means, which were very many; Pelagius himself would have brought
and assuredly made known the same unto them) this their general rejection of
the fifth Synod, is an evident proof that this Baronian decree which he
ascribes to Vigilius is no better then the former of silence, both untrue,
both fictitious; and of the two, this the far worse, seeing for this the
Cardinal has not so much as any one, no not a forged writing, on which he may
ground it, it is wholly devised by himself, he the only Poet or maker of this
fable.

5. To this may be added that which is mentioned in Bell. lib. de sex Aetatib.
anno mundi, 46 57.
Bid concerning the Council of Aquileia in Italy. That Council was held
near about, or rather, as by Sigon. lib. 20. de Occid. Imper. an. 554. in sine.
Sigonius narration it appears, after the death of Vigilius; and in it were
present Honoratus Bishop of Millan, Macedonius B. of Aquileia, Maximianus B. of
Ravenna, besides many other Bishops of Liguria, Venice and Istria. These being
as Bede Ob imperitiam fidei 5. Conciliu^ suscipere diffidit Synodus Aquileiae.
Bed. loc. cit.
says, unskilful of the faith, doubted to approve the fifth Synod; nay,
Concilium illud Sigon. loc. cit.
non observandum esse statuere, they decreed that the fifth Synod should not be
allowed or received. What? would so many Italian Bishops in an Italian Council
decree the quite contradictory to the Popes known judicial sentence in a cause
of faith? the Pope decreed (as Baronius says) that the fifth Council ought to
be embraced. The Italian Synod decrees that the fifth Council ought to be
rejected. Neither only did they thus decree, but as Bede Bed. loc. cit.
notes, they continued in this opinion, donec salutaribus beati Pelagij Apud
Bedam legitur (beati Sergij) qui vixit annis 130. post Vigilium, eunde^ errorem
sequitur Platina, and alij. Sed legendum esse Pelagij non Sergij, constat ex
Ivone, cujus verba ex decreto citat Sigonius, loco citat. and ibid. ex Beda
legitur Pelagij.
monitis instructa consensit, until being instructed by the wholesome
admonitions of Pope Pelagius, they consented to the fifth Council, as other
Churches did. Now this Pelagius of whom Bid speaks, was Pelagius the second,
who was not Pope till more then 20. Vigilius obijt, an. 556. juxta Baron.
Pelagius autem 2. caepit an. 577. juxta) eundem Bar.
years after the death of Vigilius. He to reclame those Bishops of Istria,
Venice, and Liguria, writ a very large and decretall Epistle Ea est 7. Pelagij
2.
(which Binius Bin. Not. ad eam Epistolam Pelagij.
compares to that of Leo to Flavianus) wherein he declares every one of those
Three Chapters, to be repugnant to the faith and decrees of the ancient
Counsels. By this decretall instruction of Pelagius the second, were those
Italian defenders of the Three Chapters, after twenty years, and more, reduced
as Bede notes, to the unity of the Church, and to approve of the fifth
Council. Had Vigilius made, as Baronius fancieth, the like decree, why took
it not the like effect in those Western Bishops? was there more then
Apostolical authority and instruction in the decree of Pelagius? or was there
less then that in the decree of Vigilius?

6. Nay there is another special point to be observed concerning that Epistle
of Pelagius, Elias Bishop of Aquileia, and the rest who defended the three
Chapters, among other reasons urged the authority of Vigilius Rursus per
Epistolam vestram dicitur. A sede Apostolica vos doctos and confirmatos ne huic
rei (i. Synodo quintae and condemnationi trium Capituloru^) consentire
debeatis, -- Seeds Apostolica per Vigilium restitit. Pelag. Epist. 7.. Rursum.
on their part, thereby countenancing their error, in that they taught no other
doctrine in defending those Chapters then the Apostolical See had taught by
Vigilius; thus writ they in their Apology which they sent to Pelagius, aiming
no doubt at that Apostolical Constitution of Vigilius published in the time of
the Council, whereby he decreed that the Three Chapters ought by all to be
defended: for that was it as the Cardinal Vigilius amplissimis scriptis
contrariam sententiam (ei quae in quinta Synodo definita est,) professus est,
and ad eam sectandam universam ecclesiam catholicam impulit. Bar. an. 554. nu.
6.
says, which moved, nay enforced all to follow that opinion, and to defend the
Three Chapters. What does Pelagius now answer to this reason? Truly had
Vigilius made any such later Decree, as the Cardinal fancieth, by which he had
approved the fifth Synod, and so both condemned the three Chapters, and repealed
his own former judgment in defense thereof; neither could Pelagius have been
ignorant of that decree, neither would he, being so earnestly pressed
therewith, have omitted that opportunity, both to grace Vigilius, and most
effectually confute that which was the special reason on which his opposites
did rely. Could he have truly replied, that Vigilius himself upon better
advise had recalled his Decree made in defense of those Chapters, and by his
last Apostolical judgment condemned the same Chapters, this had cut insunder
the very sinews of that objection. But Pelagius returns them not this answer,
but knowing that to be true which they said of Vigilius, he tells them (which
is a point worthy observing) that the Apostolic See might change Cur mutatio
sententiae huic sedi in crimine obijcitur. Pelag. Epist. 7.. Debet.
their judgment in this cause (and this even by Pelagius himself is a cause
of faith,) and that the ignorance of the Greek Latini homines and Graecitatis
ignari dum linguam nesciunt, errorem tarde cognoverunt. Pelag. ibid.. Rursum.
in the Western Bishops was the cause why they so lately consented to the fifth
Synod. And so though Vigilius had judged that the Three Chapters ought to be
defended, yet the successors of Vigilius might long after, as they did,
Praedecessorum nostrorum in hac causa consensus tanto post inanis non fuit,
ibid. Debet. An illud Tanto post, referri potuit ad decretum Vigilij editum
anno proxime sequenti post Concilium (...) non potest.
teach, and himself define, that the same Chapters ought to be condemned, and
that the fifth Council wherein they were condemned, ought to be approved. A
very strong inducement, that Pelagius knew not, and then that Vigilius made not
any such Decree as the Cardinal commends unto us.

7. For any Apostolical Decree then, whereby Vigilius after his exile recalled
his former judgment, or approved the fifth Council, there was none, as besides
those reasons which the Cardinal himself gives, the persisting of the
Western Churches in defense of those Chapters, not only after the death of
Vigilius; but till the time of Pelagius the second, makes evident. If Vigilius
at all consented to the Synod after the end thereof, it was only by some
private or personal, but not by any decretall or Pontifical approbation. And
if the reasons or pretenses of Baronius prove ought at all, this is the most
that can be collected from them. And this though we should grant and yield
unto them, yet can it no way help their cause, or excuse the Popes Cathedral
judgment from being fallible, only it would serve, to save Vigilius himself
from dying an heretic, or under the Anathema of the holy Council. For as they
teach, and teach it with ostentation, as a matter of great wit and subtilty,
that the Pope may err personally, or in his own person hold an heresy, which
only hurts himself, and not the Church, but err doctrinally, or judicially
define an heresy he cannot, even so (to pay them with their own coin) might
it fall out at this time with Vigilius; he being wearied with long exile,
might perhaps for his own person condemn the Three Chapters, and approve the
Synod, which may be called a personal truth, or a personal profession in the
Pope, the benefit whereof was only to redound to himself, either to free him
from the censure of the Synod, or procure the Emperors favor, and goodwill,
that he might return home to his See, but that this professing (supposing he
made it) was doctrinall or Cathedral, delivered ex officio by the Pope as
Pope, so that by it he intended to bind the whole Church to do the like,
neither Baronius, nor any of all his favorers can ever prove. Now were I sure
that the Cardinal, or his friends, would be content with this grant of a
personal truth in Pope Vigilius, I could be willing to let it pass for
current without further examination. But alas, they are no men of such low
thoughts and looks, their eyes are ever upon the Supremacy and Infallibility
of the Popes judgment: As personal errors hurt them not, so personal truths
help them not, Baronius will either have this consent of Vigilius to be
Judicial, Doctrinall, Apostolical Ante novissimu^ Apostolicae sed^^ assensum.
Bar. an. 546. nu. 38. itidemque ejus successoribus licuit. in ipsius Vigilij
abire Decretum. Bar. an. 553. nu. 231. Quintam Synodum Apostolica authoritate
comprobavit. an. 554. nu. 7.
, and Cathedral, or he will have none at all. And therefore to demonstrate how
far Vigilius was from decreeing this, I will now enter into a further
discussion of this point then I first intended, not doubting to make it
evident, that none of all the Cardinals reasons are of force to prove so much
as a private or personal consent in Vigilius to condemn the Three Chapters,
and approve the fifth Council, after the end of the fifth Synod, or after that
exile which the Cardinal so often mentions.

8. The Cardinals reasons to prove this, are three: The first is taken from
the testimony of Evagrius Bar. an. 553. nu. 223.
, who then lived. Nicephorus, Cedrenus, Zonaras, Photius, and all Greek
writers, Graeci Bar. an. 554. nu 4.
omnes affirmant, they all testify Vigilius to have assented to this fifth
Council, and that by letters, or by a book, whence the Cardinal collects,
that seeing he consented not either during the time of the Synod, or shortly
after, for he was sent into banishment, because he would not consent unto it,
necesse est affirmare Ibid.
id ab ipso factu^ esse hoc tempore, cum ab exilio solutus est, liberque
dimissus; It must of necessity be affirmed, that he consented at that time
when he was freed from exile, and dismissed home to Rome. Thus Baronius: whom I
will never believe to have been so simple and ignorant, as that he knew not,
how lame, defective, and unsound this his necessary collection was. That his
Necesse est, is merely inconsequent, it is not so good as Contingens est. That
Vigilius consented by a book, or letters, to the Synod, is certain, none that
I know makes doubt of it, and that is all that Evagrius, or any of his other
witnesses affirm: but neither Evagrius, nor any one of them says, that
Vigilius consented to the Synod after the end thereof, or after he was sent
into banishment: this and this only is it which we deny, and which Baronius
undertakes to prove: but when he comes to his proof, he still, and that most
fraudulently, omitteth this which is the principal, nay the only verb in the
sentence. And to prove that Vigilius consented to the Synod in condemning the
three Chapters, what needed the Cardinal to cite all, or any one of the Greek
writers? The ver^ Acts of the fifth Council do often and expressly testify
this, Act. Conc. 5. Coll. 1. pa 520. a. and Coll. 7. pa. 578. a.
Vigilius has p often by writings, without writing condemned, and
anathematized the Three Chapters. In the very Synodall sentence, Collat. 8. pa.
584. a.
it is said, It has happened that Vigilius, living in this City, has been
present at those things which are noted concerning these Chapters, and tam sine
scriptis, quam in scriptis ea saepius condemnasse, and to have condemned the
same as well by writing as by word. The whole purpose of the seventh Collation
is no other but to show out of Vigilius own writings, that he consented with
the Council in condemning the three Chapters, the very letters of Vigilius,
which were read in that seventh Collation, do clearly witness his consent and
judgment in condemning those Chapters. The Council condemns them, Vigilius
condemns them; Does not Vigilius consent to, and with the Synod? Did he not
per libellum, and literas, express that assent, when his own Epistles
testify that he condemned those Chapters, as did also the Synod: wherefore of
his consent to the Synod there is no doubt. But this consent of his was before
the time that the Council made their Synodall Decree, yea before they
assembled in the Synod, it was during the time of the second Period, before
mentioned, shortly after his coming to Constantinople, until the Council met
together, all that time he consented in judgment with the Council, he
condemned the Chapters, as the Council did. But at the time of the Council,
when Vigilius should have consented also in making the Synodall Decree for
condemning of those Chapters, then he dissented from the Synod and published
an Apostolical Constitution in defense of the Three Chapters. So he both
consented and that by letters, yea by his Decree, with the Synod, and withal
he dissented, and that also by his Decree, from the Synod. His consent, which
the Synodall Acts do show and testify, Evagrius and the rest who saw and
therein followed the Acts, report and that truly. His dissent, which his own
Apostolical Constitution kept in their Vaticane does show and testify, and
which in likelihood Evagrius saw not, nor knew thereof, they report not, but
they deny it not. But for that Baronian consent after the end of the Synod, or
after his exile, of that in Evagrius and the rest there is no mention, nor any
small signification.

9. It is the precedent consent of Vigilius, not that Baronian and subsequent
consent, of which Evagrius and the rest entreat, which may appear even by the
very words of Evagrius. Vigilius Evag. lib. 4. ca. 37.
per literas consensit Concilio, non tamen interesse voluit. He says not,
Vigilius would not be present at the Council, but after the end of it he
consented by letters, unto it, (this is the false and corrupt gloss of
Baronius) but Vigilius consented to the Council by his letters, but would not
be present. His consent by letters was the former, his denial to come was the
later. For when Evagrius says, consensit, sed noluit interesse, he plainly
shows that Vigilius might have been present in the Council, as well as have
consented by his letters, he might, but he would not: now had his consent been
after his return from exile, that is, an whole year after the end of the
Council, Vigilius could not possibly, though he would never so gladly, have
been present in the Council, nor would Evagrius have said, consensit sed
noluit interesse, but he should have said, consensit sed non potuit interesse,
he consented indeed with the Synod, but he could not be present in it, because
when he consented, the Synod was dissolved, and ended a year before. The sense
in Nicephorus is the very same, but his words a little more clear, Vigilius,
says he Nicep^ lib. 17. ca. 27.
, et si scripto interveniente cum Eutichio conveniret, assidere tamen illi
noluit, although he agreed with Eutichius, by a writing, (this as it seems was
his Epistle to Rusticus and Sebastianus read in the Synod) yet he would not
sit with him in the Council. Importing hereby that Vigilius might also have
sitten with Eutichius, when he consented in doctrine with him, but he would
not: which is evidently to be understood of his precedent, not of any
subsequent consent after the end of the Synod. The very same is the meaning of
Photius, Though Ph^t. lib. de 7. Synod. in Conc. 5
Vigilius was not forward to come to the sacred assembly, communem tamen patrum
fidem libello confirmavit, yet he confirmed the same common faith, (mark, the
same faith, so he accounts the cause of the Three Chapters to be a cause of
faith, and the condemning of them to be the confirming of the faith) by a
book, which book is the same that Evagrius and Nicephorus meant, the book,
Epistle, or Constitution of Vigilius, made before the time of the Council, and
then read therein; but of any confirming that common faith by Vigilius after
the end of the Synod, Photius has not one syllable.

10. Now whereas the Cardinal Bar. an. 554. nu. 4.
adds, that Graeci omnes de consensione Vigilij affirment, that all Greek
writers affirm Vigilius to have consented to the Council, it is nothing but
an untrue, and vain brag of Baronius to downeface the truth, for Zonaras
affirms it not, nor Cedrenus (and yet both these are expressly named by the
Cardinal to write this) nor Glicas, nor Constantinus Manasses, nor the
Cardinals own Theophanes. And yet if we should admit them to say the like, or
the same with Evagrius, Nicephorus, and Photius, that Vigilius did consent to
the Synod by a book or letters, yet what one of all the Greek writers, yea or
Latin either, can the Cardinal produce to say that which he does, that
Vigilius after the end of the Synod, or after he was sent into banishment,
consented to the Synod? That by his precedent letters, and judicial sentence
he consented to the same faith, which the Synod decreed, is true; this the
Cardinal does, but should not prove; but that by a subsequent consent or
writing he approved the Synod after his own exile, this none of the Cardinals
witnesses affirm, this the Cardinal should, but neither does nor can prove.

11. His second reason is taken from the fact of Justinian in restoreing
Vigilius. The Emperor, says he Bar. an. 5^4. nu. 6.
, was most careful for the condemning of the Three Chapters, and therefore
punished severely such as withstood his Edict and the Decree of the Synod: how
then could he have endured Vigilius to have been freed from exile, and to
return into the West, nisi consensisset, unless he had consented to the
Synod? Seeing otherwise Vigilius would have stird up all the Bishops in the
West against the Emperors Edict, and the Synodall sentence. Now that the
Emperor did free Vigilius from exile, and permit him to return to the West,
Baronius An. eodem nu. 1. et an. 553. nu. 222. liquet ex Anastasio Vigilium
fuisse in exilium deportatum, etc.
proves that, by Anastasius Anast. in vita Vigilij.
, out of whom he relates, that the whole Roman Clergy entreated Narses that
he would be a means to the Emperor to restore unto the^ Vigilius, and the rest
who were banished with him. The Emperor at the entreatie of Narses sent
presently to Gissa, Proconesus, and other places, and called them to him who
were banished, and put it to their choice, whether Vultis habere Vigilium, ut
fuit, Papa vester? Minusvel Hic habetis Pelagium Archidiaconum etc. Anast. ibid.
they would have Vigilius to be their Pope, or Pelagius there present among
them: and when they desired Vigilius, dimisit omnes cum Vigilio, he sent them
all Liquet ex Anastasio omnes ab exillo pariter revocatos. Bar. an. 553. nu. 222
home with Vigilius. Nay the Emperor did not only restore him, and send him
home, but granted Alia non nulla eidem percuti co^cessit, and ipso exigente
sanctione^ promulgavit. Bar. an. 554. nu. 6.
diverse matters (gifts, rewards, and Privileges, as Binius Donis, muneribus,
ac privilegijs ornatus in Italia^ redire permissus fuit. Bin. notis in Conc.
5.. Praestitit.
calls them) and at his entreatie published a pragmaticall sanction for the
affairs of Italy, as the words of the sanction, Pro petitione Vigilij, do
declare. Hence now does the Card: make his inference, that absque Bar. an. 554:
nu. 6.
dubio, without all doubt Vigilius was very dear to the Emperor, seeing he
granted such favors unto him, but there could have been no friendship at all
betwixt the^, unless Vigilius after his return from exile, had consented to
the Synod, and condemned the Three Chapters, seeing Quorum solum causa odium
conflatum erat, and exilium irrogatum. Bar. ibid.
his not consenting thereunto, was the cause of his banishment, Thus Baronius:
who has very hansomely concluded, that absque dubio, Vigilius after his
return out of exile, consented to the fifth Council. If now we can clear this
reason, wherein consists the whole pith of the Cardinals cause, I well hope
that this consent of Vigilius, of which he so much boasts, will be
acknowledged to be nothing else then a Baronian dream.

12. And first admitting for a while the Cardinals antecedent; the consequent
sure is inconsequent. Justinian might upon the entreatie of Narses, send
Vigilius home, though Vigilius had not consented to the Synod after the end
thereof. Narses was a man for his piety, prudence, fortitude, and felicity in
war, exceedingly beloved and honored by Justinian. They who are conversant in
histories, are not ignorant that Emperors do yield many times greater matters
then the restoring of Vigilius, at the entreatie of such as Narses was. When
the Roman Matrones Theod. histor. lib. 2. ca. 17.
(their husbands not daring to motion such a matter) entreated Constantius to
restore Liberius to his See, from which he was then banished, the Emperor,
though he was most violently bent against Liberius, and had placed an other
Bishop in his See, yet, as Theodoret writes, sic inflectebatur, he was so
affected with their entreatie, that he yielded to their request, thinking it
sitter that there should be two Bishops at once in Rome, rather then he would
seem so obdurate and unkind, as to deny that petition in the time of his
triumph. It was as great incongruitie and disproportion in the government of
Constantius an Arian, to restore Liberius, then a Catholic, as for Justinian
being a Catholic Emperor, to restore Vigilius being now an heretical Bishop.
The hatred of Constantius to Liberius was far greater, then Justinians
against Vigilius. The parties entreating are so unequal, that Constantius
seems to have yielded only for popularitie, and to get the opinion of
courtisie, they having done nothing to merit such favor at his hands: but
Narses had by his valor and late victories, not only won great honor to
Justinian, and to the whole Empire, but had freed Italy from the servitude of
the Goths, and by that means, besides many other, had merited the love and
favor of Justinian, who might have seemed not only unkind, but unjust in
denying the petition of one so well deserving.

13. Nay, what if the entreaty of Narses, and narration of Anastasius do prove
the quite contrary to that which Baronius from them collects, that Vigilius had
not consented to the Synod when he was restored upon that entreaty? Narses did
this to gratify Tunc adunatus clerus rogaverunt Narsete, ut rogaret Principem,
etc. Anast. in vita Vig.
the Roman Clergy, and the Italian Bishops, who entreated him to be a means
for the restoring of Vigilius unto them. And who, I pray you, were they, or how
affected in this cause of the three Chapters? Truly they were eager in
defending of them, and for that cause rent and divided from the Eastern
Churches, as Baronius Cum (Vigilius) cerneret universum Orientem ab Ecclesia
Romana divisum, nisi Synodo consentiret. Bar. an. 553. nu. 235
witnesses. It had been no gratifying, but a very heart grief and vexation
to such, to have Vigilius the condemner of those Chapters, that is, in their
judgment, an heretic, restored unto them. It was Vigilius, the defender of
those Chapters, whom they desired, for whom Narses entreated, and whom, if any,
the Emperor upon his entreaty restored; which, by the Anastasian narration, is
made very evident, for he Anast. in vita Vig.
shows, how the Emperor upon his suggestion, mox misit jussiones suas,
presently sent forth his command, to bring Vigilius and the rest from exile. He
sent not to see if they would consent to the Synod, and upon their consent to
release them; but, without any questioning of that matter, he commands that
they, howsoever they stood affected, should be free, and brought out of
banishment; when they were returned, did the Emperor ask them one word,
whether they would consent to the Synod, or no? He did not; but all that he
demanded of them was this, vultis habere Vigilium, will ye have Vigilius to
continue your Pope, as he was before, or will you have Pelagius, who is here
among you? A demonstration, that Vigilius had not then consented to the Synod,
when the Emperor said this; for there was no cause, either to deprive Vigilius,
or elect any other in his room, but his persisting in heresy; had he
consented to the Synod; and condemned the Three Chapters, the Emperor should
have done wrong unto him, to have suffered any other to have been chosen: nay,
the Sea being full, Pelagius could not, though all the banished Clergy had
desired it, have been chosen Bishop in his stead. Seeing then, both the
Emperors words, and the answer of the Clergy, as Anastasius relates them, do
show, that if they had pleased they might lawfully have chosen another Pope;
and seeing they could not by right have done that, unless Vigilius had
continued in his pertinacious defense of heresy; even hereby it may be
perceived, that at his restoring he persisted in the same heretical mind of
which he was before, and that he had not then consented to the Synod, nor to
the condemning of those Three Chapters. So blinded was the Cardinal in this
cause, that he could not, or rather would not see how his own reason, drawn
from the entreaty of Narses, and the narration of Anastasius, does quite
overthrow the conclusion which by them he intended to confirm.

14. And all this have I said upon supposall only of the truth of that
narration touching Narses his entreaty, and the Emperors yielding thereupon,
to restore Vigilius out of exile. But now I must add another answer, which I
fear will be much more displeasing to the Cardinal and his friends, and that
is, that this whole narration touching the exile of Vigilius after the Synod,
the entreaty of Narses, the restoring him from that banishment, and the rest
depending thereon, is all untrue, and fictitious, such as has no ground in the
whole world, but only the Cardinals own Poetical pate: For the manifesting
whereof I will insist on the two principal points in the Cardinals narration,
the untruth of which being declared, all the rest will easily be acknowledged
to be untrue and fabulous.

15. The former concerns the restoring of Vigilius out of Banishment. Baronius
Bar. 554. nu. 1.
following Anastasius, says, that the Emperor, together with Vigilius
restored all the rest who were banished with him; Dimisit omnes cum Vigilio;
and by name Pelagius is expressed to be one of them; of whom the Emperor then
said, Hic habetis Pelagium, you have here Pelagius: Vigilius then with him, by
name, among the rest was dismissed home. A very fiction and fable, witness
whereof Victor Bishop of Tunea, who then lived, and who himself Victor
Tunnensis author hujus operis, post custodias simul et plagas primo et secundo
exilio egi Mauritaniae, tertio Alexandrinae, pro trium Capitulorum desensione.
Vict. in Chron. an. 14. (corrupt^ legitur 15.) post Co^sul. Basilij.
, after imprisonment and whipping was banished into three several places, for
defending the Three Chapters; and after that was brought to Constantinople
Isiod. lib. de viris illust. ca. 25. ex Aegypto rursu^ Constantinopolin
evocatus, etc.
, where he was an eye witness of the most things there happening about this
cause. He having set down the time of Vigilius death, that he dyed in Sicily,
in the 16 o year after the Coss. of Basilius, adds in the next year
concerning Pelagius, that he, being that year called from banishment, which he
sustained for defense of the Three Chapters, did then condemn them, and then
was ordained Bishop of Rome, which demonstrateth the vanity of the Anastasian
and Baronian tale: how could the Emperor say, You have Pelagius here, when
Pelagius was then, and after that in exile? How did the Emperor dismiss them
all, and particularly Pelagius, when Vigilius was sent home, seeing Pelagius
remained in exile till Vigilius was dead? But that which I principally collect
is this: Seeing Vigilius, by the Cardinals narration, was not freed from exile,
nor consented to the Synod, but at the same time when Pelagius was released;
Corrupt legitur 17. in Chron. Vict.
and seeing it is certain, by the testimony of Victor, that Vigilius was not
freed, nor consented unto the Synod at that time, (for Vigilius was dead before
Pelagius was released) it hence certainly ensues, that Vigilius neither was
freed from exile, nor at all consented unto the fifth Synod after his exile.

16. The other, which is indeed the special point, concerns the banishment of
Vigilius after the end of the Synod, which Baronius so often mentions, and on
which depends the whole fable; this banishment being in very deed nothing else
than a Baronian fiction; the author, and the only author whom Baronius names
for proof of this banishment, is Anastasius: and because the Cardinal in good
discretion would name the best author, and authority which he had; him, whose
antiquity and name might gain credit to the narration: it is not to be
doubted but Anastasius was the best, most credible, and authentike author,
which the Cardinal had for this banishment: of him then Baronius Bar. an. 553.
nu. 2^2.
says thus, Liquet ex Anastasio Vigilium in exilium deportatum fuisse; It is
evident by Anastasius, that Vigilius and those who were with him were carried
into banishment. True; that is evident indeed by Anastasius: But why did the
Cardinal omit the principal point to be proved? why said he not, Vigilius to
have been carried into banishment after the end of the Synod, or carried for not
consenting with the Synod in their condemning of the Three Chapters? why said
he not, this is evident by Anastasius? Will you be pleased to know the reason
hereof? It is this, because, hoc non liquet ex Anastasio; nay, because,
contrarium liquet ex Anastasio, Anastasius is so far from saying as the
Cardinal does, that Vigilius was banished after the end of the Council, or
for not consenting to the Council, that he says the quite contrary, and
contradicts all that the Cardinal has said touching that banishment, both
for the time, and for the cause thereof. The cause of the Anastasian banishment
Per biennium fuere contentiones de Anthim^, sed Vigil. nullatenus voluit
consentire, etc. Anast. in vit. Vig.
of Vigilius was, for that he refused to restore Anthimus to the Sea of
Constantinople, whence he was justly ejected by Pope Agapetus, and a general
Council, more than ten Conc. illud sub Menna, ubi Anthimus est depositus,
habitum est an. 536. Bar. illo an. nu. 72. Vig. venit Constantinopolin an. 547*
Bar. illo a. nu. 26
years before Vigilius came to Constantinople, and the time of this Anastasian
banishment was two years after Per biennium, etc. Anast. loc. cit.
Vigilius came to Constantinople, and while Theodora Non secerunt me, ut video,
venire adse Justinian. et Theodora, sed Dioclesianus et Eleutheria. Anast. Ibid.
was alive, which was long before the fifth Synod was assembled. This, and no
other banishment of Vigilius is to be found in Anastasius; from this, and no
other it is, that Anastasius says, he was freed by the entreaty of Narses,
remaining an exile until that time. Now this ex diametro fights with that
exile which Baronius has devised, the time of the Baronian banishment was
after the end Bar. an. 553. nu. 221. et seq.
of the fifth Synod, that is, about five Nam Theodora obijt an. 548. Bar. eo an.
nu. 24 Co^c. 5. h^bitu^ an. 553. Bar. eo an.
years after the death of Theodora; til then Baronius will acknowledge no
banishment of Vigilius. The cause of the Baronian banishment was not Anthimus,
nor the restoring of him, but only Pontifex (Vigilius) non aliam ob causam in
exilium actus est, nisi quod 5. Synodum minime. probare voluiss^t Bar. an. 554.
nu. 4.
his not yielding to the fifth Synod, and refusing to condemn the Three
Chapters. So the Cardinals own witness: yea, his only witness is so far
from proving what he pretends, and affirms, that upon his narration is
demonstrated the quite contrary: For if Vigilius was banished in the life time
of Theodora, as Anastasius declares, and there remained till by Narses
entreaty he was released; then most certainly was he not cast into banishment
after the end of the fifth Synod, nor for refusing to consent thereunto, which is
the fiction of Baronius.

16. And for more evidence that the same which I said is the banishment by
Anastasius, I might allege Bellarmine Quo circa (quia noluit Anthimum
restituere) ab irata Imperatrice, in exilium missus fuit Vigilius, and misere
vexatus usque ad mortem. Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. Romans ca. 10 Contigit.
, and others, but omitting them, let us hear that worthy author, to whom
Binius De Vigilio et tota ejus causa vid. Sanderum. Bin. not. in vit. Vigil.
pa. 478. b.
referres us concerning this matter; Nicholas Sanders, He o thus writes, That
Vigilius was sent into banishment, because he would not restore Anthimus: the
Roman Pontifical (so he calls the book of Anastasius) does testify; and
besides it, Aimonius, Paulus Diaconus, Marianus Scotus, Platina, Blondus,
Petrus de Natalibus, Martinus Polonus, Sabellicus, and it may be gathered out
of Nicephorus. Thus Sanders: who might have added Sigebert Sig. an. 546.
, who places his banishment diverse years before the fifth Council; Albo Alb.
Flor. in vita Vig.
Floriacensis, who has the same words with Anastasius, Sand. lib. 7. de visib.
Monarch. ad an. 537.
Nauclerus Naucl. an. 540
, Rhegino Rheg. an. 559.
, Hermanus Herm. an. 547.
Co^tractus, Gotofridus Gotof. an. 527.
Viterbiensis, Otho Frisingensis Otho an. 528.
, Palmerius Palm. in Chr. an. 557.
, their own Genebrard Geneb. an. 537.
, Stapleton Stapl. Counterbl. ca. 15.
, and many others: These following Anastasius, relate the cause of his
banishment to have bin the not restoring of Anthimus; and the time, before the
death of the Empress Theodora. Nor I can find so much as one, either ancient
or later writer, who says, with Baronius, that he was banished after the fifth
Council, and for refusing to consent unto it; what a rare Poetical conceit
has the Cardinal, who can make such a noble discourse of that fictitious
banishment, and commend it as an historical narration, for the warrant of
which he had not so much as one writer, (and one is a small number) ancient or
late, upon whose credit and authority he might report it; and for that one
witness Anastasius, whom he names, he is so far from testifying it, that he
does clearly testify the quite contrary; yea, Baronius himself was not
ignorant hereof, but knew right well Anastasius to refer Hoc plane tempore
accidisse noscuntur, quae Anastasius jungit, imo confundit cum prioribus, quae
acciderunt vivente adhuc Theodora. Bar. an. 552. nu. 8.
the beating of Vigilius, his flight to Chalcedon, the other indigne usage set
down by him, and his exile, to the time while Theodora lived; and therefore
he taxes Anastasius, for confounding those things, and referring them to that
time, whereas himself places them after the death Caetera quae sequuntur (in
Anastasio) post obitum Theodorae contingerunt. Bar. an 547. nu. 27. Jnter illa
caetera est Vigilij exilium.
of Theodora: And yet for all this, though he knew Anastasius to teach the
quite contrary, yet was not the Cardinal afraid, nor ashamed to allege
Anastasius for a witness, that Vigilius was cast into banishment after the
fifth Council, and for refusing to consent unto it, and to say of this
banishment, Liquet ex Anastasio, it is clearly known out of Anastasius;
whereas not that, but the quite contrary, Liquet ex Anastasio.

17. From hence now there issues another consequent to be remembered. It is
agreed by all, who mention any banishment of Vigilius, and it is confessed also
by Baronius, that Vigilius was but once banished, and from that one freed by
the entreaty of Narses: Now that one cannot be the Baronian banishment, for of
it there is no proof at all to be found, no one author to witness it, but
the Cardinal and his own (...), which in matters of fact done some thousand
and more years before the Cardinal was borne, is of no worth at all, nor can
be esteemed ought but one of his own dreams and figments. Again, that one
cannot be the Anastasian banishment, which is said to happen before the death
of Theodora, more than four years before the fifth Council; for it is
certain by the Acts of the fifth Synod Conc. 5. Coll. 1, 2, 3, et 8.
, that Vigilius at that time was at Constantinople; yea, that until then he
lived and dwelt Contigit Vigilium in hac regia urbe degentem, omnibus
interesse, etc. Coll. ^. pa. 584. a.
at Constantinople. Seeing then Vigilius was neither banished before the
Council, as Anastasius says, nor banished after the Council, as Baronius
says, it follows, which indeed is very truth, that Vigilius was not at all
banished, but all which is reported of his banishment, and all that depends
thereon, is fictitious and Poetical, devised by two Bibliothecarij to his
Holiness; the former, and precedent to the Council, is an Anastasian; the
other, following the Council, is a Barbarian Poem; but both Poems both
fabulous and Aesopicall narrations.

18. And truly, might we be allowed to imitate the Cardinals Art in
disputing, this matter would easily be made plain. There is one Topicke place
of arguing a testimonio negative, which is very familiar to Baronius in his
Annals Vid. Bar. an. 774. nu. 10.11.
, and it is defended by Gretzer in his Apology Respondissemus hanc argumentandi
rationem (ab authoritate negative) in eis praesertim quae ad historiam
spectant, non esse prorsus infirmam et elum. bem. Gretz. Apol. pro Bar. ca. 1
Peritius.
for Baronius; let us take but one example, and that also in this our present
cause concerning Vigilius. There is in Anastasius Anast. in vit. Vigil.
a narration, how Vigilius was violently pulled away from Rome by Anthemius
Scribonius, sent thither for that purpose, by the Empress; how he was
apprehended in the Church, thrust into the ship; how the Romans followed
reviling Populus caepit jactare post cum lapides, fustes, et cacabos, et
dicere, Fames tua tecum, male invenias, ubi vadis, etc.
him, cursing him, and casting stones and dung at him, praying that a mischief
might go with him. Thus it is historified by Anastasius. The like is mentioned
by many others, who borrowed it out of Anastasius; by Aimonius Aim. lib. 2. de
gest. Franc. ca. 32
, by the Historia Miscella Hist. misc. lib. 16.
, going under the name of Paulus Diaconus, though it be not his; by Marianus
Mar. an. 553.
Scotus, by Hermanus Her. an. 547.
Contractus, by Sigebert Sig. an. 543.
, by Luitprandus Luitp. in vita Vigil.
de vitis Pontificum, as the book is called; by Albo Alb. in vita Vig.
Floriacensis, by Platina Plat. in vita Vig.
, by Conrade Conr. Ab. Vrsper. an. 527.
, by Nauclerus Nauc. an. 540.
, by Martinus Mart. in vita Vig.
Polonus, by Blondus Blond. Dec. 1. lib. 6.
, by Krantzius Krant. Met. lib. 2.
, by Sigonius Sigeb. lib. 19. de Occ. Imp. an. 545.
, and others. Hear now the Cardinals censure of this narration of Anastasius,
and the rest who followed him; Aperti mendacij Bar. an. 546. nu. 54.
redarguitur Anastasius; Anastasius is convicted of a manifest lie herein; and
how prove you that, my Baronius? res adeo ignominiosa, so ignominious a matter
as this is, could not have been unknown to the Authors, who writ most
accurately the Acts of their times, and those were Facundus and Procopius, the
Cardinal names no more: from the silence and omission of this matter in them
two, he concludes Anastasius to be a liar, and his narration, seconded by many
more, to be a lie.

19. Let now but the like liberty of disputing a Testimonio negative, be
allowed unto us, and the Baronian banishment (to begin with that) must be
rejected, banished, and set in the same rank with that lie of Anastasius; for
thus we may argue: This banishment of Vigilius after the end of the fifth
Council, and for refusing to consent unto it, is neither mentioned by Victor
Bishop of Tunen, nor by Liberatus, nor by Evagrius, nor by Procopius, who all
then lived, (and in relating the affairs of the Church, were full out as exact
as Facundus and Procopius) nor by Photius, nor by Zonaras, nor by Cedrenus, nor
by Nicephorus, nor by Glicas, nor by Constantinus Manasses, nor by Anastasius,
nor by Paulus Diaconus, nor by Aimonius, nor by Luitprandus, nor by Albo
Floriacensis, nor by Otho Frisingensis, nor by Conrade Abbat of Vrsberge, nor
by Hermanus Contractus, nor by Sigebert; nor by Lambertus Scaffuaburgensis, nor
by Martinus Polonus, nor by Gotofridus Viterbiensis, nor by Albertus Stade^sis,
nor by Vernerus, nor by Marianus Scotus, nor by Rhegino, nor by Bid, nor by
Platina, nor by Nauclerus, nor by Tritemius, nor by Krantzius, nor by the
magnum Chronicon Belgicum, nor by the Chronicon Reicherspergense, nor by
Chronico^ Germanicum per Monachu^ Herveldensem, nor by Chronica Compendiosa, or
Compilatio Chronologica, nor by Blondus, nor by Sabellicus, nor by Aventinus,
nor by Huldericus Mutius, nor by Sigonius, nor by Palmerius, nor by Karanza,
nor by Papirius Massonius, nor by Genebrard, nor by Sanders, nor by Stapleton;
and I challenge the welwillers of Baronius, by that love they bear unto him,
and his estimation, to name if they can but any one writer before Baronius, who
affirms Vigilius to have been banished after the Synod, for not consenting
unto it, that thereby it may be known, that their great Annalist plays the
Historian, and not the Poet, in relating the Ecclesiastical affairs of the
Church: Or if they can at any time do this, (which I am verily persuaded they
neither will, nor ever can perform) yet seeing none of all these do mention
that banishment; truly if Baronius, from the silence of two writers, might
conclude against Anastasius, that he was a liar in the former narration, I
think none will deny; but a fortiori, it will follow* that seeing more than
two score are silent in this matter, it may far more justly be said, aperti
mendacij redarguitur, which is the Cardinals own doom and words that he
bestows on Anastasius: and here much more fitly may the Cardinals reason take
place, res adeo ignominiosa, so ignominious a matter; nay, so glorious a piece
of martyrdom on the Popes part, as the banishment and cruel persecution of
the Pope, the chief Bishop in the world, for such a cause, as for not
assenting to the Synod, could not have bin unknown unto those writers, who
most diligently prosecute the affairs of their times, and such as concerned
the Church: Nay, from the most of these we may draw an affirmative argument
also, and reason, more strongly than the Cardinal does in his disputes.
Anastasius, Aimonius, Diaconus, Platina, and diverse more of the forenamed
authors, to the number at least of twenty, affirm, Vigilius was banished
before the Synod, and in the life time of Theodora; and withal teach but one
banishment of Vigilius, and therefore they not only are silent of that which
the Cardinal says, but they say the quite contrary unto him; and so, both by
their silence, and by their speech refute that, as an untruth, which the
Cardinal so positively and historically narrateth.

20. Now, as the negative kind of arguing disproves the Baronian, so does it
also the Anastasian banishment, and forcibly concludes, that Vigilius was not
at all banished, either before, or after the Council; for there is no
banishment at all of Vigilius mentioned, either by Victor, or by Liberatus, or
by Evagrius, or by Procopius, who all lived and writ at that time, or by
Photius, or by Zonaras, or by Cedrenus, or by Glicas, or by Constantinus
Manasses, or by Nicephorus, or by Aimonius (though Sanders falsely affirmed
them to teach this) or by Luitprandus, or by Bid, or by Krantzius, or by
Mutius, or by Papirius Massonius, or by Caranza, besides others. Add now here
again the Cardinals words, Res adeo ignominiosa, surely so ignominious and
shameful a fact, as the banishing of a Pope, could not have been unknown to
those who writ (as exactly as Facundus and Procopius) the Ecclesiastical
affairs, and occurrents in their times; and therefore seeing these so many, so
exact writers, mention not that Anastasian banishment of Vigilius, it may be
rightly concluded, that Anastasius therein aperti mendicij redarguitur; or if
none but the Cardinal may give the lie to Anastasius; yet, confessing his
narration to be untrue, let us leave that as a privilege of the Cardinals,
that he alone shall bestow lies, for liveries, upon Anastasius. Nay, seeing none
of these Writers mention any banishment at all of Vigilius, it must further be
concluded from their silence, that Vigilius neither first nor last, neither
before, nor after the Synod was banished, but that the whole narration,
touching his banishment, is a mere fiction and fable, devised, partly by
Anastasius, and partly by Baronius.

21. Which may much rather be affirmed, considering that Victor, who was
himself exiled, and brought to Constantinople, is not only careful, but even
curious; (that I say not proud) in recounting the most eminent persons,
specially Bishops, which were either deposed, or imprisoned, or banished about
this cause of the three Chapters, either before or after the Synod. In this
rank he Vict. in Chron. an. 8. post Coss. Bas.
names Benenatus Bishop of Iustinianea, Zoilus Patriarch of Alexandria,
Reparatus Bishop of Carthage, Verecundus Bishop of Nica, Macarius Bishop of
Jerusalem, Rusticus a Roman Deacon, Foelix a Monk of Guilla, Frontinus Bishop
of Salone, Theodosius Bishop of Sebarsuse, himself being Bishop of Tunen, and
Pelagius then a Deacon, but afterward Bishop of Rome, and successor to
Vigilius. Had Baronius this negative argument a testimonio in hand, how would
he insult, and even triumph in it? how easily would he persuade the world,
that certainly Bishop Victor, who by name, and so particularly, recounteth
meaner Bishops, yea, Deacons and Monks, who suffered banishment for this
cause, would never have omitted the Prince of Bishops, had he been exiled for
it, as they were. That one example had graced the defenders of the Three
Chapters, more than twenty, nay, than twenty hundred besides, seeing by this it
would have been evident, that the Oracle of the world, the infallible Judge
had sealed the truth of that cause with his glorious banishment, which is a
kind of Martyrdom. Anastasius, Diaconus, Otho, and all the rest, who say he
was banished, should have had the lie an hundred times at the Cardinals hands,
for saying that he was banished, either before or after the Council, rather
than Bishop Victor, who then lived at Constantinople, and was fellow-partner in
those troubles and banishments, should have been thought either ignorant or
forgetful to express that banishment of Vigilius, had there been truly any
at all.

22. Thus from the Cardinals own Topics it is concluded, that both the
Anastasian, and the Baronian banishments are both fictitious: Nor can I find
what they can except against our Negative Argument, which will not more forcibly
refute many of the Cardinals disputes, unless perhaps, as Gretzer Gretz. Apol.
pro Bar. ca. 1. Respondet.
answers in defense of Baronius, in another cause, that the old Logic rule, Ex
puris negativis nihil sequi, holds only in Syllogismes, but not in Enthymems
(for which subtilty I doubt not but the very Sophisters in our Universities
will soundly deride him) so in this they will say, which, with as good warrant
and reason, they may; that an agument a testimonio negative, holds only in the
Cardinals Annals, or when somewhat is to be proved for the Pope, or his cause;
but it never holds when ought makes against the Pope, and the Cardinal; or
makes for the Protestants, and their cause.

23. But if Anastasius, in this narration be fabulous, what shall we say of
Aimonius, and al those other Writers, who mention this banishment of Vigilius,
as well as does Anastasius? What else can be said, then that which Jerome
Hier. Apol. ^. adver. Ruff. pa. 223.
says of diverse of the ancient Writers? Before that Southern Devil Arius
arose at Alexandria, innocenter quaedam, and minus caute loquuti sunt; the
ancients spoke certain things in simplicity, and not so warily, which cannot
abide the touch, nor avoid the reprehension of perverse men: Or that which
Saint Austen Aug. lib. 3. de doct. Christ. ca. 33.
observes in himself, and Tyconius; Non erat expertus hanc haeresin; Tyconius
had not to deal with this heresy of the Pelagians, as I have said: It has
made us multo vigilantiores, diligentioresque; much more diligent, and
vigilant, in scanning of this point, than Tyconius was, who had no enemy to
stir up his diligence: Right so it falls out betwixt those Writers, and us of
this age. Aimonius, Otho, Platina, and the rest found the banishment of
Vigilius, and much like stuff, as it is historied in Anastasius: they, in
simplicity and harmless innocence, took it upon his credit. The question
about the Popes Cathedral Infallibility, about Vigilius heretical
Constitution, and such like controversies, were not moved in their days, and
therefore they spoke of these things, innocenter, and minus caute, as Jerome
says of the Fathers; and because they were not distrustful of Anastasius,
they writ not so warily of these matters, as others, whose industry, by the
manifold frauds of Baronius, as of another Arius, has been whetted, and they
compelled to fifth the truth more narrowly than they, wanting opposites and
oppugners, did: It fell out to them as it did to Jerome himself. Ruffinus had
set Vnus sub nomine Pamphili a te editus est, et; eadem, quae sub Pamphili
nomine a te ficta sunt. Hier. Apol. 2. Cont. Ruff. pa. 226.
out a book in defense of Origin, under the name of Pamphilus the Martyr: Vnus
sub nomine Pamphili a te editus est, et; eadem, quae sub Pamphili nomine a te
ficta sunt. Hier. Apol. 2. Cont. Ruff. pa. 226.
Jerome at the first, and for diverse years, believed Inter cae^eros
translatores posui et hunc librum a Pamphilo editum, ita putans esse, ut a te
et tuis discipulis fuerat, divulgatum. Ibid.
the book to have been indeed written by Pamphilus, as Ruffinus said it was:
Credidi Hier. Apol. 3. contra Ruff. pa. 238.
Christiano, Credidi Monacho: I never dreamed, that such an horrible
wickedness, as to forge writings, and call them by the name of Martyrs, could
come from a Christian, from a Monk, from Ruffinus: but when the question about
Origin was once set on foot, Jerome then sought Hier. locis citat.
out every corner, every Copy, every Library that he could come to, and so
discovered the whole forgery. The very like happened to Otho, Platina, and the
rest; they found this fabulous narration of the banishment of Vigilius, and the
consequents upon it, in the book of Anastasius, the Writer of the Popes lives,
of the Pontifical, the keeper of the Popes Library, a man of great name and
note for learning, one in high favor with the Popes of his time; they never
suspected or dreamed that such a man, a Christian, a Monk, that Anastasius
would deal so perfidiously, and record such horrible untruths: But now, the
question about Anastasius credit, and the cause of Vigilius, which was not
moved in their days, being sifted and come to the skanning, the whole forgery
and falsehood of Anastasius is made evident to the world, both in this, and in a
number the like narrations. Anastasius is not the man the world took him for;
his writings are full of lies and fictions: Not the Legendaur more fabulous
than Anastasius; he for a long time was the Master of the Popes Mint; by his
means the royal stamp of many golden Fathers, yea, of some Councels also,
and infinite historical narrations, was set upon Brass, Lead, and most base
metals; and then being brought, like so many Gibeonites in old Coats, and
moldy coverings, Anastasius gave them an high place, and honorable
entertainment in the Popes Library, and with them ever since has the Church
of God been pestered; they past for current among men delighted in darkness,
and errors, such as had no need to bring them to the touch; but the light has
now manifested them, and made both them and their author to be detested.

24. You see now the weakness, nay the nullity of the Cardinals reason, even
of his Achilles, drawn from the Emperors fact, in restoring or freeing him
from exile, which he would never have done, unless he had consented to the
Synod. For, seeing we have proved that Vigilius was not at all banished, it
clearly thence ensues, that neither Narses entreated to have him freed from
exile, neither did the Emperor upon that entreaty free him from exile, neither
did Vigilius consent to the Synod after his exile, and all the other
consequents, which upon this foundation of Vigilius his exile the Cardinal
builds like so many Castles in the air, they all of themselves do now fall to
the ground: and which I specially observe, it hence follows, that Vigilius
did never after the end of the fifth Council consent unto it, or to the
condemning of the Three Chapters, either by his Pontifical decree, or by his
personal profession: for the Cardinal assures us, and delivers it as a truth,
which of necessity Necesse est affirmare. Bar. an. 554. nu. 4.
must be granted, that his consent, (whether personal or pontifical) was at
no other time, but when he was loosed out of banishment.

25. Now at that time it neither was nor could be, for there was never any such
time, nor was he at all banished, and therefore upon the Cardinals own words
we are assured that Vigilius after the end of the Synod never revoked his
Constitution published in defense of the Three Chapters, never after that time
condemned the Three Chapters, or consented to the Synod, either by any
pontifical, or so much as by a personal profession, but that he still
persisted in his heretical defense of the same Chapters, and subject to that
censure of Anathema, which the fifth Council denounced against all the
defenders of those Chapters.

26. Some perhaps will marvel, or demand how it should come to pass, that the
Emperor, who as we have showed was so rigorous and severe in imprisoning,
banishing, and punishing the defenders of the Three Chapters, and such as
yielded not to the Synod, should wink at Vigilius at this time, who was the
chief and most eminent of them all: which doubt Baronius also Bar. an. 553.
nu. 222.
moves, saying, he who published his Edict against such as contradicted him,
Number Vigilio pepercit, may we think he would spare Vigilius, and not banish
him who set forth a Constitution against the Emperors Edict? Minime quidem:
Truly the Emperor would never spare him, says the Cardinal. Yes, the
Emperor both would and did spare him. Belike the Cardinal measures Justinian
by his own irefull and revengefull mind. Had the Cardinal been crossed and
contradicted, nothing but torture, exile, or fire from heaven to consume such
rebels, would have appeased his rage. Justinian was of a far more calm, and
therefore more prudent spirit. Vigilius deserved, and the Emperor might in
justice for his pertinacious resisting the truth, have inflicted upon him
either imprisonment, or banishment, or deposition, or death. It pleased him to
do none of all these, nor to deal with the Pope according to his demerits.
Justinian saw that Vigilius was but a weak and silly man, one of no constancy
and resolution, a very wethercocke in his judgment concerning causes of faith:
that he had said and gainsayd the same things, and then by his Apostolical
authority judicially defined both his sayings being contradictory, to be true,
and truths of the Catholic faith: the Emperor was more willing to pity this
imbecility of his judgment, than punish that fit of perverseness which then
was come upon him. Had Vigilius been so stiff and inflexible as Victor, as
Liberatus, as Facundus were, whom no reason, nor persuasion would induce to
yield to the truth, its not to be doubted but he had felt the Emperors
indignation as well as any of them. But Vigilius like a wise man took part
with both, he was an Ambodexter, both a defender, and a condemner of the three
Chapters, both on the Emperors side, and against him: and because he might
be reckoned on either side, having given a judicial sentence as well for
condemning the three Chapters, as for defending them: it pleased the Emperor
to take him at the best, and rank him among the condemners; at least to wink
at him as being one of them, and not punish him among the defenders of those
Chapters.

27. Nor could the Emperor have any way provided better for the peace and
quiet of the Church, than by such connivence at Vigilius, and letting him pass
as one of the condemners of those Chapters. The banishing of him would have
hardened others, and that far more than his consent after punishment would have
gained: the former, men would have ascribed it to judgment; the latter, to
passion, and weariness of his exile. But now accounting him as a condemner of
the Three Chapters, if any were led by his authority and judgment, the Emperor
could show them, Lo here you have the judicial sentence of the Pope for
condemning the three Chapters: if his authority were despised by others, then
his judicial sentence in defense of the Chapters could do no hurt: and why
should the Emperor banish him if he did no hurt to the cause? nay it was in a
manner necessary for the Emperor to wink at him, as at a condemner of the
three Chapters: for he had often testified to the Council, that Vigilius had
condemned both by words and writings those Chapters, he sent the Popes own
letters to the Synod, to declare and testify the same: those letters as well
of the Emperor as of the Pope testifying this, were inserted into the Synodall
Acts Conc. 5. Coll. 1. and 7.
. Had the Emperor banished Vigilius for not condemning those Chapters, his
own act in punishing Vigilius had seemed to cross and contradict his own
letters, and the Synodall Acts. If Vigilius be a condemner of the Chapters, as
you say, and the Synodall Acts record that he is, why do ye banish him for
not condemning those Chapters? If Vigilius be justly banished as a defender of
those Chapters, how can the Emperors letters and Synodall Acts be true, which
testify him to be one of the condemners of those Chapters? So much did it
concern the Emperors honor, and credit of the Synod, that Vigilius should not
be banished at that time. Vigilius had sufficient punishment that he stood now
a convicted, condemned, and anathematized heretic by the judgment of the
whole and holy general Council: but for any banishment, imprisonment, or
other corporal punishment, the Emperor in his wisdom, in his lenity thought
fit to inflict none upon him. Only he stayed him at Constantinople for one, or
as Victor says, for more years after the Synod, to the end that before he
returned, the Synodall sentence and Acts of the Council being every where
divulged, and with them, nay in them the judgment of Vigilius in condemning
those Chapters as the Synod did, might settle if it were possible, the minds
of men in the truth, or at least serve for an Antidote against that poison,
which either from the contrary constitution, or his personal presence when he
should return, could proceed.

28. And by this is easily answered all that the Cardinal and Binius collect
from those great offices, gifts, rewards, and privileges with which the
Emperor graced and decked Vigilius, and so sent him home: which the Cardinal
thinks the Emperor would never have done, unless Vigilius had consented to
the Synod, and condemned the three Chapters. Truly these men can make a
mountain of a molehill. There is no proof in the world that Vigilius was so
graced at his return: no nor that the Emperor bestowed any gifts or rewards
upon him at all. That which the Emperor did was the publishing of a
pragmaticall sanction, wherein are contained diverse very wholesome laws, and
good orders for the government of Italy, and the Provinces adjoining: The date
of the sanction is in August, in the eight and twenty year of Justinian, and
thirteen after the Cons. of Basilius, which was the next year after the
Council. But that Vigilius at that time returned, there is no solid proof;
and Victor Vict. in Chron. an. 16. (corrupt legitur 17.) post Coss. Basilij.
who then lived, and was present at Constantinople, puts the death of Vigilius
in the 31. year of Justinian, or 16. after Basilius, who yet by all men's
account (who write of his return) returned from Constantinople either in the
same, or in the next year before he dyed. So uncertain, and by Victors
account unlikely it is, that Vigilius at his return home was ornatus
muneribus, donis, officiis, and privilegiis, as they Bar. an. 554. nu. 6. and
Bin. Not. in Conc. 5.. Praestitit.
pompously set out the matter. Now it is true that the Emperor ordered and
decreed those matters upon the entreaty of Vigilius: for so the words pro
petitione Vigilij, do make evident: but that either Vigilius entreated, or the
Emperor granted this upon any entreaty which he made, either after his return
out of exile, (which certainly he did not) or after the end of the Synod, or at
the time of his return (al which are the Cardinals tales without any proof)
none of the Cardinals friends will be ever able to make clear. And for my
own part, till I see some reason to the contrary, I cannot otherwise think,
but that this petition was made by Vigilius some three or four years before
the Council, at which time Vigilius consented wholly with the Emperor, was in
great grace and favor with him. And I am hereunto induced by that which
Pracopius Proc. lib. 3. de Bell. Goth. pa. 393.
expresses: How in the 14. year of the Gothicke war, which is the 23. of
Justinian; when Totilas and the Goths began to win again diverse parts of
Italy, which Belisarius had before recovered, Vigilius and diverse Italians and
Romans, who were then at Constantinople, submissius and enixius postulabant ab
Imperatore, did in very submisse and earnest manner entreat the Emperor, that
he would reduce all Italy into his subjection. Now it is very likely that
together with this petition they signified diverse matters to the Emperor,
which were behoovefull for his government in the Western parts: and this the
Emperors answer then made unto them imports; who, as Procopius adds, answered
them, Italiam sibi curae fore, that he would have a care of Italy: but for
that time he was busy in composing the differences about Christian doctrines.
The fifth Synod then being ended, and all those Ecclesiastical affairs
concluded, nor that only, but Totilas and Teias being both vanquished, and so
the whole dominion of Italy being recovered by the victorious Narses, the
Emperor in his 28. year, which was next after the Synod, performed that
promise which he had made before to Vigilius and the other Italians, and
according to their request disposed and ordered diverse matters which in that
sanction are set down.

29. Now if the words of the Sanction have respect (as I verily think they
have) to that time, then all that Baronius collecteth from granting that
sanction, and those privileges upon the petition of Vigilius after his return
from exile, or after the Synod, are mere fancies and dreams. Or if it were
admitted (whereof I can find no proof at all) that Vigilius made, and the
Emperor granted unto him this petition after the end of the Council, yet will
it not hence follow that Vigilius then consented to the Synod; for as we have
before declared, the Emperor was not so eager, nor rigorous against Vigilius,
but that upon his entreaty he might grant to establish those Laws, which
being in themselves so commodious and behoovefull, he without any entreaty,
upon the consideration of those matters, would in all likelihood have enacted.
And so every joint of the Cardinals second reason (wherein consists the very
pith of his cause) drawn from the fact of Justinian, in restoring him from
exile, and dismissing him home with gifts and privileges, being now fully
dissolved by that which has been said, it remains clear, that
notwithstanding all which the Cardinal has yet brought, there appears no
proof nor token that Vigilius any time after the end of the Council, either
by his public decree, as the Cardinal boasts, or so much as by his
personal profession, consented to the Synod, and the condemning of the Three
Chapters.

30. His third Bar. an. 554. nu. 5.
and last reason is drawn from those dark words of Liberatus Liber. ca. 22.
, where he says, that Vigilius dyed, being afflicted by that heresy (of the
Eutycheans) but he was not crowned. Before we examine the Cardinals reason
grounded hereon, let us first in a word observe the Cardinals honest dealing
with Liberatus. In that very same chapter, and in the words next before that
sentence which the Cardinal alleges, Liberatus sets down the Epistle and
profession of Vigilius, wherein he defends the Eutychean heresy, and
anathematizeth all who hold two natures in Christ as the Council of Chalcedon
had defined. Of that Epistle Liberatus witnesses that it is the Epistle of
Vigilius, and was truly written by him. Baronius seeing that to tend to the
disgrace of Vigilius, that the Pope should be an heretic, an Eutychean, and
should accurse all that are not such, what says he for this matter? Truly he
contemnes and rejects the testimony of Liberatus; The Epistle Bar. an. 538.
^^. 15.
is not the writing of Vigilius, it is an Impostor, a forged writing, a
counterfeit: notwithstanding all that Liberatus says: So if Liberatus say
ought distasteful to the Cardinals palate, Liberatus is a witness of no worth,
he is utterly to be contemned, to be rejected. But if in the next words
Liberatus say ought that seems to favor the Cardinals fancy, Liberatus then
is a worthy witness, you may not take any exception against Liberatus, if he
say that Vigilius, when he dyed, had consented to the fifth Synod, you must
believe him. Some would think this to be scarce current dealing with his own
witness, to make him sometimes more then a thousand, sometimes less then a
Cipher, but such are almost all the Cardinals witnesses, they speak not so
much for him in one place, as they do against him in others, nor is he so
willing to accept them in one, as he is ready to reject the^ in another. If
Liberatus be to be credited, why does the Cardinal reject him? If he be not
to be credited, why does the Cardinal allege him?

31. Thus one might if he listed, elude his proof, and make a little sport
with the Cardinals Counters. But I will let the words of Liberatus stand in
their best value; and to see the Cardinals deduction the better, we must
consider the whole sentence of Liberatus, which is this; Vigilius writing these
things (to wit, that heretical Epistle, in defense of Eutycheanisme) and that
closely, to heretics, continued sitting, (in the Sea of Rome) In whom was
fulfilled that testimony of Solomon, they shall eat the fruit of their own
way, and they shall be filled with their own Counsels. Ab ipsa haeresi
afflictus Vigilius, nec coronatus, qualem vitae terminum suscepit, notum est
omnibus: Vigilius being afflicted by that heresy, but not crowned, how he
ended his life, every man can tell. Thus Liberatus. In which words as you see,
there is no mention at all either of Vigilius his going into banishment, or
returning out of banishment, or of his defending the three Chapters, or of his
condemning the same Chapters, or of the Emperors either casting him into, or
releasing him from exile, or of the fifth Council, or of the end thereof; and
yet out of these words will Baronius like a very skillful Chymick extract, both
that Vigilius after the end of the fifth Council was banished for defending the
Three Chapters, and after that banishment, consented to the Synod, and to
condemn the three Chapters. And see I pray you how the Chymick distills this.
If Liberatus, says he Bar. an. 554. nu. 5.
, being one of those who fought for the Three Chapters, had found Vigilius,
perstantem in sententia usque ad mortem, persisting until his death in that
sentence, which in his Constitution he had published for defense of the Three
Chapters, truly he would have praised Vigilius for a Martyr, had he dyed in
such sort. But when he says, Vigilius was afflicted, and not crowned, plane
alludit ad ejus exilium, he does plainly allude to the banishment of Vigilius,
and to his forsaking or revolt from that judgment after he came from
banishment. Thus does the Cardinal gloss upon the words of Liberatus.

32. See the force of truth; The Cardinals own words do most sully answer
his own doubt, and explane that truth which he wittingly oppugneth: Had
Liberatus found Vigilius, perstantem in sententia usque ad mortem, constant, or
persisting without any change or relenting in his defending the three Chapters,
until his dying day, then indeed Vigilius should have been with Liberatus (an
obstinate defender of that sentence) a glorious Martyr, at the least a worthy
Confessor, and for that cause he should have been condemned by Liberatus. But
seeing he found him a changeling in his sentence, wavering and unconstant
therein, turning his note as soon almost as he had looked the Emperor in the
face, Vigilius by reason of that change, unconstancie, and revolt from his
opinion, lost his Crown, and all his commendation with Liberatus, not for any
returning to condemn the Three Chapters after his exile, whereof in Liberatus
there is no sound nor syllable. By publishing his Apostolical Constitution in
the time of the Council for defense of those Chapters, and by his dying in
that opinion, Liberatus found Vigilius, stantem and morientem, but not
perstantem in ea sententia usque ad mortem, he found him standing and dying,
but he could not possibly find him persisting constantly, not persevering in
that sentence which first he had embraced; for whereas he saw and knew the
Synodall Acts, to testify that for five or six years together, he not only
was of a contrary judgment, but did judicially, and definitively decree the
contrary, and censure also such as continued and persevered in the defense of
those Chapters; this so long discontinuance, and so earnest oppugning of the
defenders of those Chapters, quite interrupted his persisting and persevering
in his first sentence, for this cause he lost his Crown, and dyed non
coronatus, in the Calendar, and account of Liberatus.

33. I add further, that the words of Liberatus being well pondered, do show
the quite contrary to that which the Cardinal thence collecteth. Liberatus as
all the defenders of those Chapters, held their opposites who condemned the
same Chapters, for no other then heretics, then oppugners of the Catholic
faith, and holy Council of Chalcedon. And for Vigilius, while he fought
Comptures Orthodoxi and ipse Vigilius contra eadem Capitula asserta ab
Imperatore insurrexere. Bar. an. 546. nu. 38.
on their side, and against the Emperor, they honored Vigilius arguit ut
prophanas vocum novitates. Facundi dictum apud Bar. an. 546. nu. 57. 58.
him as a Catholic, as a chief defender of the Catholic faith. As soon as
Vigilius had consented to the Emperor, and upon his coming to Constantinople
had condemned the Three Chapters, then they held him for no other then a
betraier Ne Traditor videretur. Facundi dictum de Vigilio apud Bar. an. 547.
nu. 37. Collusorem and Praevaricatorem conclamarunt. Bar. an. eod. nu. 49.
vulgarunt vbique eum impugnare Concilium Chalcedonense. Bar. an. 550. nu. 1.
of the faith, then an heretic, then a backslider, revolter, and lapser from
the faith, and for such they adjudged, and accursed him by name in their
Africane Vict. in Chron. an. 9. post Cons. Basil.
Synod, at which it is most like that Liberatus, being a man of such note for
dealing in that cause, was present; upon his returning at the time of the fifth
Council to defend again with them the Three Chapters, they esteemed him as
one of those poenitentes, which after their lapsing return again to the
profession of the faith. Had Vigilius after this revolted, and turned again to
condemn the same Chapters, and in that opinion dyed, as out of Liberatus, the
Cardinal would persuade, Liberatus and the rest of that sect would have held
him for a double heretic, for a lapser, and relapser from the faith, for one
dying in heresy, and dying a condemned heretic by the judgment of their
Africane* Synod. Now let any man judge whether Liberatus would have said of
such an one as he esteemed an heretic, a condemned heretic, and to dye in
heresy, that he dyed, non coronatus? would he have minced and extenuated the
crime of heresy, of one dying in heresy, would he not much rather have said,
he dyed Damnatus, condemned, and accursed by the judgment of their own Synod,
and therefore utterly separated from God? Who ever read or heard, that one
dying in heresy, was called by so friendly a title as Non coronatus?

43. This will most clearly appear, if we consider that the Church and
Ecclesiastical Writers do mention as two sorts, so also two rewards of
Catholic and Orthodoxall professors. The one is of those who are courageous
and constant in defending the faith, such as joyfully endure torments,
imprisonment, exile, and if need be, even death it self rather then they will
renounce and forsake the faith, and these are called coronati. The other is of
those who being timorous, and faint-hearted, yield to deny the truth, rather
then they will endure torments or death for confessing the same; and yet by
reason of that immortal seed which is in their hearts, they return again,
and openly profess that truth from which they had before lapsed: and these are
called, Non coronati, saved by repentance, and returning to the truth; but by
reason of their former faintness, and lapsing, Not crowned. Both of these are
Orthodoxall, and Catholics, both of them placed in the blessed house of God,
but not both in like blessed mansions and chambers of the house of God: For in
my Fathers John 14:2.
house are many mansions. Both of them stars, and glorious stars in heaven,
but even among those heavenly stars, one star 1 Cor. 15.41.
differs from another in glory. Both of them receive an infinity of glory,
but in that infinity, the weight is unequal, and the one receives but as the
penny, the other as the pound or talent of that glory. Both of them blessed in
the Kingdom of God, but the former not blessed only, but crowned with
blessedness, the later blessed, but not crowned; neither with the Aureall
Crown of Martyrs, nor with the Laurel garland of Confessors, yet still,
whether coronati, or non coronati, as they both dye in the profession of the
Catholic faith, so are they both rewarded with eternal glory for profession
of the Catholic faith. As for heretics such as die in heresy, and out of the
Catholic faith, they are to be sorted with neither of these, they have another
and a quite different rank, Classis or Predicament of their own. They may not
have that honor done unto them, as to be called non coronati, which implies
that they have a part in felicity, but not the Crown. As the Church does
justly anathematize and accurse such, so are they to be ranked in the order of
those to whom Christ shall say, Mat. 25.41.
Go ye cursed. The Apostle Gal. 5.19, 20.
reckoning heresies with Idolatry, witchcraft, adultery, and the like, of which
he says, that they which do them shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

35. Hence now it does clearly appear, that Liberatus in saying that Vigilius
dyed Non coronatus, cannot intend as the Cardinal most ignorantly collecteth,
that Vigilius returned from the defense of the three Chapters to condemn the
same; for that being in Liberatus judgment a revolt from the truth, he thereby
had by Liberatus been accounted an heretic, and to dye in heresy, and so had
been in the rank of those who are Damnati; but Liberatus, in saying he dyed
non coronatus, does directly teach, that he dyed in defense of those Three
Chapters, (which, with Liberatus, is the Catholic faith) from which he had
lapsed; and revolted before; but seeing at the time of the Council, he
returned again to that opinion, and therein dyed; he was saved, (in Liberatus
judgment) but not crowned: By his penitence, and returning to the defense of
those Chapters; he got glory, but because he had so grievously lapsed before,
he lost the crown of glory. And this also is the reason why Victor, Bishop of
Tunen mentions the death of Vigilius in such a naked Vigilius Romanus in
insula Sicilia moritur. Vict. in. Chron. an. 16. post Cons. Bas.
manner, neither disgracing him as a Prevaricator, as he does Firmus Firmus
donis Principis corruptus, assensum praebuit, sed in navi morte turpissima
perijt. Vict. ibid. an. 11. post Cons. Bas.
, Primasius Primasius a Catholicis, pro praevaricatore condemnatus ins^lici
morte extinguitur. Ib.
, and Pelagius A praevaricatoribus ordinatur. Ibid. an. 17. post Cons. Bas.
; nor honoring him as a Martyr or Confessor, as he does Foelix, Rusticus, and
Reparatus Reparatus exilio apud Euchaidam, gloriosa confessione transiit ad
dominum Vict. an. 22. post Cons. Bas.
; intimating thereby, that Vigilius dyed in the confession and defense of the
Three Chapters, and therefore he could not condemn him; but yet because he
was not constant in that profession, he would not commend him.

36. Yea, but Liberatus by saying he was afflicted by that heresy, Bar. an.
554. nu. 5.
plane alludit ad ejus exilium, he does plainly allude to the banishment of
Vigilius. Plainly? Phy on such a Plain-lie out of a Cardinals mouth; he does
not so much as obscurely, not under a cloud or mist, not any way allude unto
it, nor intimate or insinuate ought tending thereunto; nor could he indeed,
seeing, as we have before declared, that banishment of Vigilius is nothing else
but a fiction, partly of Anastasius, partly of Baronius; and Liberatus was no
Prophet, that he could allude to their idle dreams: But if he allude not to
his banishment, why then says he that Vigilius was afflicted by that heresy?
as if there were no afflictions in the world but banishment; what ere he
meant, he meant not that: And truly, whatsoever calamities or afflictions,
either of body or mind, befell Vigilius after he had once consented to the
Emperors Edict, and to the condemning of the Three Chapters; (which, in
Liberatus account, was heresy) and because it was (as he thought) contrary to
the Council of Chalcedon, even the heresy of the Eutycheans; all those did
Liberatus impute to that his revolt from the faith, and to that Eutychean
heresy which he then embraced, as Liberatus judged: Now there are two or three
evident matters, which were great afflictions to Vigilius, and may well be
intended by Liberatus.

37. The first was the general dislike which the Italian, Africane, and other
Western Bishops took against him, as soon as they knew that he had consented
to the Emperors Edict, they writ against him, as one who denied the faith, and
condemned the Council of Chalcedon, they censured, judged, and accursed him by
their Synodall sentence; they contemned him as a temporizer; as one, who, to
please the Emperor, betrayed the faith: This was, no doubt, no small
affliction to Vigilius, to be disgraced, contemned, and accursed by his own
friends, to whom, by so many bands of duty and love, he was so nearly
conjoined; and this lay upon his stomach for five or six years together,
even from his first coming almost, to Constantinople, to the time of the
Council.

38. His second affliction followed upon his change in the time of the
Council; for though he then, by defending the Three Chapters, and publishing
his Apostolical Constitution for defense of them, hoped to recover the love
and good opinion of the Western Churches; yet he exceedingly failed of that
hope. Now he was in far worse case than before; On one side he incurred the
Emperors just indignation, and made himself obnoxious to deprivation,
banishment, death, or whatsoever punishments may be inflicted on pertinacious,
and heretical oppugners of the faith; which, although the Emperor in his
lenity did not, nor would inflict upon him; yet what a grief is it to have all
those punishments hanging, like Damocles sword, over his head, and sure to fall
upon him, if the Emperor at any time listed to break or cut the hair? What
comfort could he have, who held not only his dignity, but his liberty; yea,
his very life at the will and pleasure of another? On another side he had
incurred the heavy and just censure of the holy general Council, and of all
Catholics, being by them adjudged and accursed for an heretic. On a third
side the Western Churches, and the defenders of the Three Chapters; were so
far from honoring him as he expected; that they also, for all that, held him
for no other than an unconstant and wavering person, one that turned his faith
with every wind and weather: So, whereas at the first he was beloved and
honored of the Western Churches, while he defended the Three Chapters, as
they did; and after that was beloved and honored of the Emperor, and Eastern
Churches, while he, with them, condemned the Three Chapters: when now again
he returned to defend them, he was contemned both of the one sort and the
other; they all now esteemed no better of him than a very Wethercocke. Now
whether this, to see himself forsaken and contemned by all, both friends and
foes, both Catholics and heretics; whether this might not be a corrasive to
his heart, let any man duly consider with himself. Add to these that
corporeal anguish which caused his death; he, if we may trust Anastasius,
Anast. in vit. Vig.
afflictus, calculi dolorem habens, mortuus est, being afflicted and vexed with
pain of the stone, or (as by Liberatus it may be thought) by some more
grievous disease of his body, dyed in great affliction: When there were so many
afflictions lying at the heart of Vigilius, all which Liberatus imputes to his
consenting to the Emperors Edict, and condemning of the Three Chapters, which
he, as the rest of the defenders of them, called heresy; was not the
Cardinal, think you, in some ecstasy of his wit, when he thought, that the
affliction of Vigilius must needs be his own fictitious banishment, and that
Liberatus does plainly allude thereunto.

39. Thus all the reasons of Baronius being many ways, and manifestly
declared to be ineffectuall, to prove that last and Baronian change in
Vigilius, after the end of the Synod, we may now safely conclude, that as
Vigilius, after his Apostolical Constitution in defense of the Three Chapters
once published, made at no time after that, any public, judicial or
Pontifical Decree to reverse and adnul the same; but that still stood in full
power and strength until the death of Vigilius; so neither did he ever after
that time declare so much as a private dislike thereof, or a personal consent
to the fifth Council, which had decreed the contrary; but pertinaciously
persisting in that sentence, he both lived and dyed an heretical defender of
those Three Chapters. At the first he was heretical in defending them against
the Emperors Edict: at the last he was not only heretical, but a condemned
heretic in defending them against the judicial sentence of the holy general
Council. In the middle time he had a fit of professing the truth, but that was
only in show, and in appearance, that so he might temporize with the Emperor,
in heart he was (as when the time of trial came he demonstrated himself) an
oppugner of the truth, both against the Imperial Edict, and Synodall
judgment: And therefore, as we found him at the first an heretic; so, for
all which Baronius has said, or could say to the contrary, we must leave him
for a condemned heretic; even such a one, as not only defended, but, by his
Cathedral and Apostolical sentence, defined heresy to be the Catholic
faith. And thus much be spoken of the Cardinals third principal Exception, or
troop of evasions, marching under that Act of Vigilius, which, by his manifold
changing in this cause of faith, you have fully seen.

CAP. XVIII. The fourth and last Exception of Baronius, in defense of Vigilius,
pretending, that the fifth Council (wherein the decree of Vigilius was
condemned,) was neither a general nor a lawful Council, till Vigilius
confirmed the same, refuted.
1. THere now remains only the fourth and last exception of Baronius; in
which, though being the weakest and worst of all, his whole hope now consists:
In this the Cardinal brings forth all his forces, all the Engines of his wit
and malice, to batter down the authority of the fifth general Council. Seeing
it contradicted the Pope, and judicially decreed his Apostolical sentence to
be heretical, it shall be of no authority at all; it shall be neither a
general, nor a lawful Council; it shall be nothing but a Conspiracy and
conventicle with Baronius and his friends, until Vigilius do approve the
same: But hear their own words to this purpose.

2. The fifth Council, says Baronius An. 593: nu. 224.
, aliquando expers fuit omnis authoritatis, was for a time void of all
authority; yea, so void thereof, ut nec legitima Synodus dici meruerit, that it
deserved not to be called so much as a lawful (much less a general and
lawful) Synod; because it was assembled, the Pope resisting it, and was ended,
the Pope contradicting it: But when afterward it was approved by the sentence
of Vigilius, and other succeeding Popes, then it got the title and authority of
an Oecumenicall Synod. Again An. eod. nu. 29.
, The fifth Council at that time, when it was held, could not have the name of
an Oecumenicall Synod, seeing it was not lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost,
because the Pope, neither by himself, nor by his Legates would be present in
it. And yet more spightfully; These things An. eod. nu. 219
considered, plane consenties, ipsam nec Oecumenicae, nec privatae, Synodi
mereri nomen; you will consent, that the fifth Council deserved not the name of
an Oecumenicall, no nor so much as of a private Synod; it was no Synod nor
Council at all, seeing, both it was assembled, resistente Pontifice, the Pope
resisting it, and also pronounced sentence, contra ipsius Decretum, against the
Popes Decree. Thus Baronius: in whole steps Binius treads, saying Not. in
Conc. 5. Praesedit.
, Pope Vigilius was not present in this Council, either by himself, or by his
deputies, Contradixit eidem, he contradicted the Synod; the members assembled
without the head, dum ageretur non consentit, the Pope consented not to it
while it was held, nor did approve it straight after it was ended; yet it got
the name, title, and authority of an Oecumenicall Council, quando ipsius
Vigilii sententia, when it was afterward approved by the sentence of Vigilius
himself, and his successors. So Binius.

3 How, or where shall I begin? or who, though more censorious than Cato, can
with sufficient gravity and severity castigate the insolency and most
shameless dealing of these men, who, rather than one of their Popes, even Pope
Proteus himself, shall be thought to err in his Cathedral Decree of faith,
ear not to disgrace, to vilify, yea, to nullify one of the ancient and
sacred general Councels, approved, as before Sup. ca. 4. nu. 26. et seq.
we have showed, by the whole Catholic Church? For if this Council was
neither general, nor lawful, (as they teach) till Vigilius approved it by his
Apostolical authority, after his return from exile; then was it never, nor as
yet is either a general or lawful Council, seeing Vigilius, after his exile,
never did, nor could approve it, as before Sup. ca. 17.
we have clearly proved: So this fifth Council must for ever be cashiered and
blotted out of the rank of Councels. And because, as their second Nicene Synod
rightly disputes Omne septim^ ordinatum in eadem numeratione qua res
praecesserunt, etc. Act. 6. pa. 357. a.
, the seventh must follow the sixth, in the same rank and order, and the sixth,
the fifth, if there was no fifth general and holy Council; neither can there
be any sixth, nor seventh, nor eighth, nor any other after it. So, by the
assertion of these men, there are at once dashed out fourteen of those, which
themselves Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5.
do honor by the name of holy general Councels.

4. I say more, the expunging of all those fourteen Councels, does certainly
follow upon the Cardinals assertion, though it were granted, that Vigilius had
confirmed this fifth, as it is true, that Pelagius and Gregory did: For if it
was (as he teaches) neither a general nor lawful Synod, while the Council
continued, and for that whole time while it was an assembly of Bishops; then
undoubtedly it never at any time was, nor yet is either a general or a lawful
Synod: For after the end, and dissolution thereof, it was never extant in rerum
natura again; it was ever after that time Non ens: and being neither Synod,
nor yet so much as Ens, it could not possibly be either general or lawful. It
is a Maxim, Non entis non sunt Accidentia; If while it was extant, and while
it was an assembly, it was but a conventicle; if then it was not gathered in
Gods name, I pray you, when was it ever after that, gathered in Gods name? Did
Vigilius, Pelagius, or Gregory, when they made it, by their approbation, a
general and lawful Council; did they, like some new Aeolus, blow all the
Bishops again to Constantinople, and assemble them the second time in the
Popes name, that so they might be said to be gathered in Gods name? Let their
Popes try, if by all their magical skill, or omnipotent power, they can make
any one of those Africane Councels under Cyprian, a General; or make the
Arimine, Syrmian; or second Ephesine, a lawful Council, and I will instantly
yield, that he may do the like to this fifth. If he cannot do any of the
former, what vanity was it in the Cardinal and Binius to say of this fifth,
that while it was extant, and Ens, it was neither a general nor lawful Council;
but some one, or some twenty years after, when it was non Ens, the Pope made
it, with a word, both a general and lawful Council? Dixit and factum est:
One word of his mouth makes, or unmakes what he list: Truth is, the Popes, or
any other Bishops approbation, or confirmation of a Council, or any decree
thereof, after the Council is once ended, may perhaps in the opinion of some
men, gain some more liking unto that Council, or decree, than before it had,
seeing now it has the express consent of those Bishops, whom the other do
much esteem: but the after consent, or approbation of all the Bishops in the
world, much less of the Pope, cannot make that to be a general, which
before, and while it was extant, was only Provincial; or that to be a
lawful, which before, and while it was extant, was an unlawful Synod: Even as
the Pope, and a thousand Bishops with him, cannot now make any of the four
first general and holy Councels, to be either unlawful or particular Synods;
and yet his power is every whit as great in annihilating that which now is, as
in creating that which never was a general or a lawful Council.

5. Say you that the fifth Council was of no authority till the Pope approved
it, and unless he should approve it? See how contrary the Cardinals assertion
is to the consenting judgment of the whole Church. Begin we with the Church of
that age: Baronius tells An. 547. nu. 41. and 43.
us, that both the Emperor, the Pope, Mennas, and other Eastern Bishops,
agreed to refer the deciding of this doubt about the Three Chapters, to a
general Council. Why did none of them reason, as the Cardinal now does,
against the Council? Why did the Pope delude them with that pretense of a
general Council? Why did he not deal plainly with the Emperor and the rest,
who made that agreement, and say to this effect unto them? Why will ye refer
this cause to the judgment of a Council, it cannot decide this question
otherwise than my self shall please? If they say as I say, it shall be a
Council, a lawful, a general, an holy Council: If they say the contrary to
that which I affirm, though they have ten thousand millions of voices, their
Decree shall be utterly void, their assembly unlawful, they shall neither be,
nor be called a general, nor a lawful Council, no nor a Council neither,
but only a Conventicle, without all authority in the world. Had the Emperor
and the Church believed this doctrine, there had been no fifth Council ever
called or assembled; nay, there never had been any other holy general
Council: The Pope had been in stead of all, and above them all. This very act
then of referring the judgment in this cause to a general Council,
witnesses them all (even the Pope himself at that time) to have esteemed the
sentence of the Synod to be of authority without the Popes consent, and to be
of more authority, in case they should differ (as in this question they did)
than the sentence of the Pope. This before the Council was assembled.

6. At the time of the Council, had the Church or holy Synod which represented
the whole Church, believed their assembly without the Pope to be no Synod, but
a Conventicle; why did they at all come together after their second Session?
for they were then assured by the Pope himself, that he would neither come,
nor send any deputies unto them. Or had they believed that his definitive
sentence would or ought to have overswayed others, so that without his assent
their judgment should be of no validity, why did they after the fifth Session,
once proceed to examine or determine that cause? For before the sixth day of
their assembling, they received from Pope Vigilius his Cathedral and
Apostolical Constitution in that cause, inhibiting them either to write or
speak (much more judicially to define) ought contrary to his sentence: or if
they did, that he by his authority had beforehand refuted and condemned the
same. Seeing notwithstanding all this well known unto them, they not only
continued their Synodall assemblies, but judicially defined that cause, and
that quite contrary to the Popes judgment made known unto them; it is an
evident demonstration, that the whole general Council judged their assemblies
both lawful and Synodall, and their sentence of full authority, even as ample
as of any general Council, though the Pope denied his presence to the one,
and expressly signified not only his dislike, but contradiction and
condemnation of the other.

7. What can pervicacie it self oppose to so clear an evidence? or what
think you will the Cardinal or his friends reply hereunto? Will he, or can he
say, that these men who thus judged, were heretics? They were not. The
doctrine which they maintained was wholly Catholic, consonant (as they Coll. 8.
profess, and as in truth it was) to Scriptures, to Fathers, to the four
former general Counsels. The doctrine which they oppugned, and Vigilius then
defended, was heretical, condemned by all the former, Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councels. Heretics then doubtless they could not be; that, like a leprosy did
cleave to Vigilius. Will he, or can he say that they were Schismatikes? Neither
is that true. For they all even then remained in the communion with the
Catholic Church: yea they were by representation the true Catholic Church: I
say further, they held communion even with Pope Vigilius himself, till his
own pertinacy, and wilful obstinacy against the true faith, severed him both
from them, and from the truth. In token of which communion with Vigilius, they
earnestly Sup. cap. 2. nu: 1. and seq.
entreated his presence in the Synod, they offered him the presidency therein,
yea they said in express words unto him, before they knew his mind to defend
the Three Chapters, Nos Coll. 2. p. 523.
vero and communicamus and uniti vobiscum sumus, We all do hold communion with
you, and are united unto you. Schismatic then they could not be. So the
judgment of these men being all Catholics, and holding the Catholic
communion, does evidently prove the whole Catholic Church at that time, to
have believed a Council to be both general and lawful, though the Pope
dissented from it, and by his Apostolical authority condemned the same, and
the decree thereof.

8. After the end of the Council did the Church then think otherwise? Did it
then judge the Council to want authority, while it wanted the Popes
approbation, or to receive authority by his approbation? Who were they, I pray
you, that thought thus? Certainly not Catholics, and the condemners of these
Chapters. For they approved the Council and Decree thereof during the time of
the Council, and while the Pope so far disliked it, that for his refusal to
consent unto it, he endured banishment. Neither did the Heretics who defended
those Chapters, judge thus. For they, as Baronius witnesses An. 553. nu. 221.
, persisted in the defense of them, and in a rent from the others, even after
Vigilius had consented to the Synod: yea among them Vigilius An. 555. nu. 2.
redditus est execrabilis, was even detested and accursed by them for approving
the Synod. Or because Vigilius approved it not, Pelagius who is known to have
approved it, was so generally disliked for that cause of the Western Bishops,
that there Adeo exhorruisse visi sunt Antistites occidentales aliam post
qua^tam admittere oecumenicam Synodum, ut non potuerit Pelagius reperire
Episcopos Romae a quibus consecraretur. Bar. an. 556. nu. 1.
could not be found three who would lay hands on him at his consecration; but
in stead of a Bishop, they were enforced against that Canon Can. 1. and Con.
Nic. can. 4.
of the Apostles, which they often oppose to us, to take a Presbyter of Ostia
at his ordination. So much did they dislike both the fifth Council, and all
(though it were the Pope) who did approve it. Now the whole Church being at
that time divided into these two parts, the defenders and condemners of those
Chapters, seeing neither the one nor the other judged the Synod to be general
or lawful, because the Pope approved it; who possibly could there be at that
time of the Cardinals fancy, that the fifth Council wanted all authority till
the Pope approved it, and gained authority of a general and lawful Council
by his approving of it? Catholics and condemners of those Chapters, embraced
the Council, though the Pope rejected it: Heretics and defenders of those
Chapters, rejected the Council, though the Pope approved it. Neither of them
both (and so none at all in the whole Church) judged either the Popes
approbation to give, or his reprobation to take away authority from a general
Council. Thus by the Antecedentia, Concomitantia, and Consequentia of the
Council, it is manifest by the judgment of the whole Church in that age, that
this fifth Council was of authority without the Popes approbation, and was not
held of authority by reason of his approbation.

9. What the judgment of the Church was, as well in the ages preceding, as
succeeding to this Council, is evident by that which we have already declared.
For we have at large showed Sup. ca. 4. nu. 25, 26. and seq.
, that the doctrine, faith, and judgment of this fifth Council, is consonant
to all former, and confirmed by all following general Counsels, till that at
Lateran under Leo the tenth. Whereupon it ensues, that this doctrine which we
maintain, and the Cardinal impugneth, (that neither the Popes approbation
does give, nor his reprobation take away authority from a Council,) was
embraced and believed as a Catholic truth, by the whole Catholic Church of
all ages, till that Lateran Synod, that is, for more than 1500. years together.

10. And if there were not so ample testimonies in this point, yet even reason
would enforce to acknowledge this truth. For if this fifth Council be of force
and Synodall authority, eo nomine, because the Pope, to wit Pelagius, approved
it; then by the same reason is it of no force or Synodall authority, eo nomine,
because the Pope, to wit Vigilius, rejected it. If the Popes definitive and
Apostolical reprobation cannot take away authority from it; neither can his
approbation, though Apostolical, give authority unto it. Or if they say that
both are true, (as indeed they are both alike true) then seeing this fifth
Council is both approved by Pope Pelagius, and rejected by Pope Vigilius, it
must now be held both to be wholly approved, and wholly rejected: both to be
lawful, and unlawful: both to be a general Council, and no general
Council. And the very same doom must be given of all the thirteen Counsels
which follow it: They all, because they are approved by some one Pope, are
approved and lawful Councels: and because they approve this fifth, which is
rejected by the Pope, they are all rejected, and unlawful Counsels. Such an
havocke of general Councels does this their assertion bring with it, and into
such inextricable labyrinths are they driven, by teaching the authority of
Councels to depend on the Popes will and pleasure.

11. Now though this be more than abundant to refute all that they can allege
against this fifth Council, yet for the more clearing of the truth, and
expressing my love to this holy Council, to which next after that at
Chalcedon, I bear special affection; I will more strictly examine those two
reasons which Baronius and Binius have used, of purpose to disgrace this holy
Synod. The former is taken from the assembling; the later, from the decree of
the Council. It was assembled, say Baronius Sup. hoc cap. nu. 2.
and Binius, Pontifice resistente and contradicente, the Pope resisting and
contradicting it. Whence they infer, that it was an unlawful assembly, not
gathered in Gods name. In this their reason, both the antecedent and
consequence are unsound and untrue. Did Pope Vigilius resist this Council, and
contradict the calling or assembling thereof? What testimony does Baronius or
Binius bring of this their so confident assertion? Truly none at all. What
probabilities yet, or conjectures? Even as many. Are not these men, think you,
wise and worthy disputers, who dare avouch so doubtful matters, and that also
to the disgrace of an holy, ancient, and approved Council; and yet bring no
testimony, no probability, no conjecture, no proof at all of their saying?
Ipse dixit, is in stead of all.

12. But what will you say if Ipse dixit will prove the quite contrary? If
both Baronius and Binius profess, that Vigilius did consent that this Council
should be held? Hear I pray you their own words, and then admire and detest
the most vile dealing of these men. Hanc Synodum, Vigilius authoritate
pontificia indixit, says Binius Not. in 5. Con.. Concilium.
; Vigilius called and appointed this Synod by his papal authority. Again Ibid.
, The Emperor called this fifth Synod, authoritate Vigilij, by the authority of
Pope Vigilius. Baronius sings the same note: It was very well provided, says
he An. 553. nu. 23
, that this Oecumenicall Synod should be held, ex Vigilii Papae sententia,
according to the mind and sentence of Pope Vigilius, who above all other men
desired to have a Council. Again Ibid. nu. 24.
, The Emperor decreed that the Synod should be called, ex ipsius Vigilii
sententia, according to the mind of Vigilius. And a little after; It was
commendable in the Emperor, that he did labor to assemble the Synod, ex
Vigilij Papae sententia, according to the mind and sentence of Pope Vigilius.
Neither only did the Pope consent to have a Council, but to have it in that
very city where it was held, and where himself then was. Indeed at the first,
the Pope was desirous Optavimus and frequentissime supplici voce poposcimus
eunde^ (coetum) ad que^libet Italia locu^, aut certe ad Siciliam, etc. Vigil.
in Constit. apud Bar. an. 553. nu. 56.
and earnest, to have it held in Sicily, or in some Western City: (even as
Pope Leo had labored Epist. Leon. 24
with Theodosius for the Council which was held at Chalcedon:) But when
Justinian the Emperor would not consent Quod quia fieri Serenitas vestra non
annuit. Vigil. loc. cit.
to that petition, (as neither Theodosius nor Martian would to the former of
Leo,) Vigilius then, voluntati Bin. Not. in Conc. 5.. Concilium.
Imperatoris libens accessit, very willingly consented to the Emperors
pleasure in this matter, that the Oecumenicall Council should be held at
Constantinople. Say now in sadness, what you think of Baronius and Binius?
Whither had they sent their wits, when they labored to persuade this Council
to be unlawful, because Pope Vigilius resisted and contradicted the assembling
thereof? whereas themselves so often, so evidently, so expressly testify, not
only that it was assembled by the consent, and according to the mind, will,
pleasure, desire, authority, and sentence of the Pope; but the very chief act
and royalty of the summons they challenge (though falsely) to the Pope; the
other, which is an act of labor and service, to be as it were the Popes Sumner
or Apparitor, in bringing the Bishops together by the Popes authority, that,
and none but that they allow to the Emperor.

13. Many other testimonies might be produced, to declare this truth: That of
Sigonius Lib. 20. an. 553.
: The Emperor called this Synod, Vigilio Pontifice permittente, Pope Vigilius
permitting him: that of Wernerus An. 544.
; Vigilius jussit Concilium Constantinopoli celebrari, Vigilius commanded that
this Council should be held at Constantinople: That of Zonaras An. to. 3. in.
Iustiniano.
and Glicas Cui Concilio praerant Eutychius, Domnus and Vigilius. Glic. annal.
part. 4. pa. 379.
, who both affirm, that Vigilius was Princeps Concilij, the chief Bishop of
the Council: not chief among them that sat in the Council, for there he was
not at all: nor chief^ in making the Synodall decree, for therein he
contradicted the Council: but chief of all who sued to the Emperor, and
procured the Council, as being desirous of the same. But omitting the rest,
the whole general Council, yea and the Popes own letters, put this out of
all doubt. This say Coll. 8. p. 584. a
the whole Council, even in their Synodall sentence, Consensit in scriptis in
Concilio convenire, Vigilius under his own handwriting consented to come
together, and be present with us in the Synod. Again, the Legates sent from
the Council to invite Vigilius, said Coll. 2. pa. 523.
thus unto him, Your Holiness knows, quod promisistis una cum Episcopis
convenire, that you have promised to come together with the other Bishops, into
the Council; and there to debate this question. Vigilius himself writ Coll.
1. p. 521. b
thus to the Bishops of the Council: We knowing your desire, praedictis
postulationibus annuimus, have consented to your petitions, that in an orderly
assembly being made, we may confer with our united brethren about the three
Chapters. I doubt not but upon such fair and undoubted records, every one will
now confess, First, that if to be gathered by the Popes consent and authority,
will make a Council lawful, (which with them is an authentike rule) then this
fifth Council is without question in this respect most lawful: Secondly, that
Baronius and Binius are shameless both in uttering untruths, and in reviling
this holy Synod, which they would persuade to be unlawful, because it was
assembled, the Pope resisting it; whereas this Council to have been
assembled, with the consent (yea as they boast with the authority also) of Pope
Vigilius, not only other Writers, but the Synodall Acts, the whole general
Council, the letters of Vigilius, and the express words of Baronius and
Binius themselves do evidently declare.

14. Come now to the Consequence. Say the Pope had resisted the assembling of
this Council; was it for this cause unlawful, was it no general Council?
What say you then to the second Council, of which Baronius thus writes An.
553. nu. 2
, It was held, repugnante Damaso, Pope Damasus resisting the holding thereof.
Will they blot that also out of the rank of general, and lawful Synods? If
not, why may not this fifth also be a general and lawful Synod, though
Vigilius had with tooth and nail resisted the same? Shall the peevishness or
perverseness of the Pope, or any Bishop hinder the assembling of a general
Council, and so the public peace and tranquillity of the whole Church? Open
but this gappe, and there never should have been, nor ever shall be any
general Council. The wilfulness of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, at Nice; of
John Patriarch of Antioch, at Ephesus; of Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, at
Chalcedon, will frustrate all those holy Counsels, and make them to be neither
general nor lawful. The saying of Cardinal Cusanus is worthy observing to
this purpose; I believe, says he Lib. 3. de Concor. ca. 15.
, that to be spoken not absurdly, that the Emperor himself, in regard of that
care and custody of preserving the faith, which is committed unto him, may
praeceptive indicere Synodum, by his Imperial authority and command assemble a
Synod, when the great danger of the Church requires the same; negligence aut
contradicente Romano Pontifice, the Pope either neglecting so to do, or
resisting and contradicting the doing thereof. So Cusanus. This was the very
state and condition of the Church at this time, when the fifth Council was
assembled. The Vid. sup. ca. 1. nu. 6.
whole Church had been a long time scandalized and troubled about those Three
Chapters, it was rent and divided from East to West. High time it was and
necessary for Justinian to see that flame quenched, although Pope Vigilius or
any other Patriarch had never so eagerly resisted the remedy thereof.

15. Had the Cardinal pleaded against this Synod, that Vigilius had not been
called unto it, he had spoken indeed to the purpose. For this is essential,
and such as without which a Synod cannot be general and lawful, that all
Bishops be summoned to the Synod, and coming thither, have free access unto
it, and freedom of speech and judgment therein. But the Cardinal durst not
take this exception against this Synod, or for Vigilius; for none of these to
have been wanting in this Council, is so clear, that pertinacie it self
cannot deny it. It was not the Pope (as they vainly boast) but the Emperor, who
by his own and Imperial authority called this Council, as the whole Synod
even in their Synodall sentence witness: We are assembled here in this City,
jussione pijssimi Imperatoris vocati, being called by the commandment of our
most religious Emperor. His calling to have been general, Nicephorus does
expressly declare, The Emperor says he Lib. 17. ca. 27.
, assembled the fifth general Council, Episcopis ecclesiarum omnium evocatis,
the Bishops of all Churches being called unto it: yea the Emperor was so equal
in this cause, that Binius Not. in Conc. 5.. Concilium.
testifies of him, Paris numeri Episcopos ex Orient and Occidente convocavit,
that he called (in particular, and besides his general summons, by which all
without exception had free access) as many out of the West, where the
defenders of those Chapters did abound; as he did out of the East, where the
same Chapters were generally condemned. And yet further, Vigilius himself was
by name, not only invited, entreated, and by many reasons persuaded, but even
commanded by the Emperor, and in his name, to come unto the Synod, as before
Sup. ca. 2. nu. 1. and. 3.
we showed. Now what freedom he might have had in the Council, both that
offer of the Presidencie, does show for him in particular, and the words of the
Council spoken concerning all in general does declare; for when Sabinianus
and others, who being then at Constantinople, were invited to the Synod, and
refused to come, the synod said Collat. 2. pa. 524. b.
, It was meet that they being called should have come to the Council, and have
been partakers of all things which are here done and debated, especially seeing
both the most holy Emperor and we, licentiam dedimus unicuique have granted
free liberty to every one to manifest his mind in the Synod concerning the
causes proposed. Seeing then he not only might, but in his duty both to God,
to the Emperor, and to the whole Church, he ought to have come, and freely
spoken his mind in this cause, his resisting the will of the Emperor, and
refusing to come, does evidently demonstrate his want of love to the truth, and
dutifulness to the Emperor, and the Church; but it can no way impair or
impeach the dignity and authority of the Council, neither for the generality,
nor for the lawfulness thereof.

16. Besides all which there is yet one thing above all the rest to be
remembered; for though Pope Vigilius was not present in the Synod either
personally, or by his Legates, but in that sort resisted to come unto it, yet
he was present there by his letters of instruction, by his Apostolical and
Cathedral Constitution which he published as a direction what was to be
judged and held in that cause of the Three Chapters, That Decree and
Constitution he promised to send ad Imperatorem and Synodum, both to the
Emperor and to the Synod, quod and ingenue praestitit, which also he
ingenuously performed as the Cardinal tells An. 553. nu. 47.
us. That elaborate Jdque elaborav^^. ibid.
decree, to which an whole Synod, together with the Pope subscribed, containing
the Popes sentence and instruction given in this cause, Vniverso An. eod. nu.
48.
orbi Catholico cunctisque fidelibus, not only to the Synod, teaching them
what they should define, but to all Christians, teaching them what they should
believe, was in consessu Episcoporum recitatum, read and recited before all the
Bishops in that Council, as Binius does Not. in Conc. 5.. Constitut^^.
assure us. This one kind of presence in the Synod, is suppletive of all the
rest, of more worth then 20. nay then 200. Legates, a latere sent from his
holiness. They all may deal besides, or contrary to the Popes mind, as
Zacharias and Rhodoaldus did in a Council held about the cause of Photius; but
this Cathedral instruction is an inflexible messenger, no bribes, no
persuasions, no fear, no favor can extort from it one syllable more then his
holiness by the infallible direction of his Chair has delivered; yea though
the Pope should have been personally present in the Synod, and face to face
spoken his mind in his cause, yet could not his sudden or less premeditated
speech have been for weight or authority comparable to this decree, being
elaborated after seven years ponderation of the cause, and all things in it
being disposed cum omni undique cautela atque diligentia, with all diligence
and circumspection, that could possibly be used, which the Pope though absent
in body, yet sent as an Oracle from heaven to be a direction to the Synod, and
to supply his own absence. So many ways is this former objection of Baronius
vain, and unsound, when he pretends this Council to have been unlawful
because the Pope resisted it, and the members assembled without their head: for
neither did Vigilius resist their assembling, but freely and willingly
consented unto it; neither was he excluded from the Synod, but most
undutifully absented himself from it: and though the members at that time
wanted the Popes head-peece, yet they had his heart, his mind, and his
Apostolical direction among them, to be a Cynosure unto them in that cause,
which alone is able to supply both his personal and Legantine absence in any
Council.

17. The other objection of Baronius is taken from the decree of this Synod.
The sentence, says he An. 553. nu. 219.
, given by it, was contra ipsius decretum, against the decree of Vigilius, and
therefore their assembly deserved not the name of a general, no nor so much as
of a private Synod, it was no Council at all. Cardinal Bellarmine explaines
this more fully, saying Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 11.. Ac de.
, Such Counsels as define matters against the Popes instruction; Reprobata
Concilia dici debent, are to be called or accounted, Rejected Counsels; for
it is all one, says he, whether the Pope do expressly reject and reprobate a
Council, or whether the Council deal, contra Pontificis sententiam, against
the Popes sentence, either of both such Counsels, are rejected, and so of no
authority at all. So Bellarmine. What shall we answer to the perverseness of
these men? If this rule be admitted, the Church has for ever and inevitably
lost this fifth Council, and (by their second Nicen collection) the sixth, the
seventh, and all that follow. And I verily am persuaded, that none can possibly
excuse either Baronius, or Bellarmine from this crime of expunging the fifth
Council, and all which follow it, from the rank and number of general, or
approved Councels. For it is as clear as the sunshine at noone day, that the
sentence pronounced by the fifth synod was contradictory to the definition and
Cathedral instruction sent by Pope Vigilius unto them. If then to define a
cause contrary to the Popes instruction be a sure note of a Reprobate Council,
as they teach it to be; farewell for ever this fifth, and all that follow it, or
approve it: they are all by the rule of these two worthy Cardinals, Reprobated
Councels, nay not so much as Councels, but mere Conspiracies or Conventicles.

18. Besides this, see I pray you the zeal and devotion of these men to the
Catholic faith. If this Council be for this cause a Rejected Council,
because it followed not the instructions of Pope Vigilius sent unto it, then it
should have been an holy, and approved Council, if it had followed those
instructions of Vigilius; that is, if it had condemned the Counsels of Nice,
Ephesus and Chalcedon, if it had decreed Nestorianisme to be the Catholic
faith, and Jesus Christ not to be God: for Vigilius by decreeing that the Three
Chapters ought to be defended, instructed them thus to define and judge. Had
they thus done, then, because they had followed the instructions of Vigilius,
the two Cardinals would have embraced this Council, with both arms, have
applauded, and advanced it to the skies: seeing it did not so, but contradicted
the Popes Apostolical instructions at this time; fie on it, it is an
unlawful, a Reprobated Council, nay it is no Council at all, nor of any
authority. Can any with reason judge these men to be ought else then
Nestorians, then condemned heretics, and obstinate oppugners of all ancient
holy Counsels, and of the Catholic faith? See the strange diversity of
judgment which is in us and them. They in their heretical dotage on the Popes
Cathedral infallibility, teach this fifth holy Council to be a reprobated
synod, eo nomine, because it followed not the instructions of Pope Vigilius; we
on the contrary do constantly affirm it to be an holy and most approved
synod, eo nomine, because it followed not, but rejected and condemned those
Cathedral instructions of Vigilius: with us consent the sixth, seventh, and all
succeeding general Counsels, till that at Laterane, all former holy Counsels
also, to all which this Council is consonant. From them dissent all these both
former and subsequent Counsels; that is, the whole Catholic Church for
fifteen hundredth years and more. Vtri creditis? whose doctrine think you now
is ancient, orthodoxall, and catholic? And whether had you rather with these
two Cardinals, account this fifth synod an unlawful assembly, and a reprobate
Council, because it contradicted the heretical constitution of Pope Vigilius,
or with such an army of witnesses, honor it for a sacred, Oecumenicall approved
Council, though it not only wanted the approbation, but had in plain words
the Cathedral Reprobation Si quid contra haec quae statuinius, a quolibet
factum dictum atque conscriptum est, vel fuerit; hoc modis omnibus ex
authoritate sedis Apostolicae refutamus. Constable. Vig. in sine.
of Pope Vigilius.

19. Having now fully refuted not only the Assertion of Baronius, That this
Council was of no authority, nor an approved Council till Pope Vigilius
confirmed and approved it, but also both those reasons whereby he would
persuade the same: there remains yet one doubt, which necessarily is to be
satisfied for the final clearing of this point. For it will, and justly may
be demanded, what it was which made this fifth an approved Council? Or if it
be not the Popes confirmation and approbation, what it is in any Council, or
any decree thereof, which makes it to be, and rightly to be esteemed an
approved Council or Decree? I constantly answer, that whatsoever it be, it is
no approbation, no confirmation, nor any act of the Pope; at least no more of
him, than of any other Patriarch or Patriarchall Primate in the Church: An
evident proof whereof is in the second General Council; for that, ever since
their Synodall sentence was made against the MACEDONIANS, and ratified by the
Emperor, was esteemed by the Catholic Church an Oecumenicall, and approved
Council, and that, before the Pope had consented unto it or approved the same:
For that Council being assembled in May Socr. l. 5. ca. 8.
, when Eucherius and Seagrius were Consuls, ( an: 381.) continued till Vsque ad
finem mensis Iulij producta est. Bar. an. 381. nu 80.
about the end of July in the same year. On the 30. of July Theodosius the
Emperor published his severe law against the Macedonians, being then condemned
heretics: He commanded that forth with all Churches should be give^ to those,
Lib. 3. de fide Cathol. Cod. Theod.
who held the one and equal Majesty of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
were of the same faith with Nestorius, Timotheus, and other Bishops in that
Synod; but whosoever dissented in faith from them, ut manifestos haereticos ab
Ecclesia expelli, they should all be expelled as manifest haeretikes, and never
be admitted again. In which law seeing the Macedonians are called manifest
heretics, that is, such as are convicted and condemned by a general Council,
it is doubtless, that at the promulgating of this law, both the Emperor and
the catholic Church, held that decree of the second Council, against the
Macedonians, to be the judgment of an holy, lawful, and approved Ecumenical
Synod, such as was the most ample convictio^ of an heretic, and manifestation
of a heresy. Now this Edict was published before Pope Damasus either approved
that Council, or so much as knew what was done therein: For the first news
what was done in the Council, came to Damasus, after the Council of Aquileia,
as after Sigonius L. 8. de Occid. Jmp. an. 381.
, Baronius declares, who after the Synod at Aquileia described, says An. 381.
nu: 97.
, Post haec autem, After these things done at Aquileia, when Damasus had
received a message concerning the Council at Constantinople, etc. that
Council at Aquileia was held Bar. an. eod. nu. 81.
on the fifth of September, when the other at Constantinople was ended a month
before: and how long after that time it was before Damasus approved that
Council at Constantinople, whether one, two, or three years, will be hard
for any of the Cardinals friends truly to explane: Howsoever, seeing it is
certain, that the general Council was ended, and the Decrees thereof not
only approved, but put in execution by the Church, before the Pope, I say not,
confirmed that Council; but before he knew what was done and decred therein,
it is a Demonstration, that a general Council, or a Decree thereof, may be,
and de facto, has been judged, by the Church, both of them to be of full and
Synodall authority, and approved by the Church, when the Pope had confirmed or
approved neither of both.

20. Nay, what if neither Damasus nor any of their Popes till Gregory's time,
approved that Council? Gregory himself is a witness hereof: The Lib. 6.
Epist. 3^
Canons of the Constantinopolitane Council condemn the Eudoxians; but who
that Eudoxius was, they do not declare. And the Roman Church, eosdem Canones
vel gesta Synodi illius, hactenus non habet, nec accipit; neither has, nor
approves those Canons or Acts; but herein it accepts that Synod in that
which was defined against the Macedonians, by it; and it rejects those
heresies, which being mentioned therein, were already condemned by other
Fathers. So Gregory: By whose words it is plain, that the Roman Church,
until Gregory's time, neither approved the Canons nor Acts of that second
general Council: Even the condemning of Macedonius and his heresy, was not
approved by the Roman Church, eo nomine, because it was decreed in that
Council, for then they should have approved the Canon against the Eudoxians,
and all the rest of their Canons, seeing there was the selfsame authority of
the holy Council, in decreeing them all; but the reason why they approved that
against the Macedonians, was, because Pope Anathema infligimus Macedonianis.
Epist. Damas. et Synod. Romans apud Theod. lib. 5. ca. 10.
Damasus had, in a Roman Synod, diverse years before Concilium illud Romanum
habitum est tempore Petri Episcopi Alexandrini, qui ei interfuit. Zozom. lib.
6. ca. 23. Timotheus vero qui Petro successit, sedit in Concilio
Constantinopolitano, ut ex subscriptione liquet.
the second Council condemned that heresy; and what heresies were by former
Fathers condemned, those, and nothing else; did the Roman Church approve in
that Council, as Gregory says. The inducement moving them was not the
authority of the second Council, but the judgment of other Fathers, for which
they accepted of the second Council therein: and this was until the days or
time of Gregory; for that is it which Gregory intends in the former words,
hactenus non habet n^^ accipit; not meaning, that till the year, wherein he
writ that Epistle, which was the fifteenth Indiction, the Roman Church
received not those Canons or Acts: (for in the ninth Indiction, that is, six
years before, himself professed Lib. 2. Epist. 24
to embrace that second Council, as one of the four Evangelists, which also
to have been the judgment of their Church, he Lib. 2. Epist. 10 Indict. 11.
witnesses in the eleventh Indiction) but until Gregory's time; hactenus,
until this age, wherein I live, was the second Council, the Canons or Acts
thereof, not had nor approved by the Roman Church: And yet all that time, even
from the end of that Council, was both that Council held for a general,
lawful, and approved Synod, and their Decree against Macedonius, by the whole
Church approved, as a Decree of a general and lawful Council, such as ought
to bind the whole Church.

21. What we have showed concerning the Decree against the Macedonians, and in
general, for the second Council, that will be much more evident in the third
Canon of that Synod, which concerns the Patriarchall dignity of the Sea of
Constantinople, his precedence to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, and
his authority over the Churches in Asia minor, Thrace, and Pontus, all which
was conferred on that See by that third Canon. That the Church of Rome, till
Gregory's time; approved not that Canon, is evident by Pope Leo, who in many
Epist. 54.51.61.
of his Epistles, specially in that to Anatolius Epist. 53.
, shows his dislike of it; yea, rejects it, as contrary to the Nicene Decrees,
which Leo there defines (but, without doubt, erroniously) to be immutable.
The Legates of Leo, having instructions from him, said openly in the Council
of Chalcedon Act. 16. pa. 136. ^.
, touching the Canons of this Council, in Synodicis Canonibus non habentur,
they are not accounted or held for Synodall Canons; and following the mind and
precept Seeds Apostolica quae nobis praecepit. Ib. d. pa. 137. b.
of the Pope, they most earnestly oppugned this third Canon. Long before Leo
did Damasus reject Vel. ementer refutarunt hunc tertium Canone^ Leo et Damasus.
Turrian. l b de 6, 7, et 8, Synodis. pa. 65. Romana Ecclesia hactenus respuit
hunc Canonem. Bin, not. in Conc. 2 Approbatum
this Canon, facto decreto in Synodo Romana, making a Decree against it, in a
Roman Synod, which is extant in their Vaticane, as Turrian, who belike saw the
Decree, does witness. Now seeing that Decree of Damasus was made, statim post
secundum Concilium, presently after the second Council, and was so strongly
corroborated by Pope Leo; this may persuade, that none of their Popes before
the days of Gregory would repeal the Decrees of those two Popes. Their own
Nicholas Sanders goes further, and says ^am primum (in Concilio Later.)
Constantinopolitana seeds Romanae Ecclesiae assensum, public obtinuit, etc.
Sand. lib. 7. de visib. Monar. ad an. 1215.
, That this Canon was not allowed by the Roman Church, till the Council at
Laterane, under Innocentius the third, which is more than six hundred years
after the death of Gregory: and though he prove this by the testimony of
Guilielmus Tyrius, yet I insist only upon the time of Gregory, whose words
are very pregnant for this, and the other Canons of that second Council; the
Roman Church, hactenus non habet nec accipit, did not till these days embrace
nor approve them.

22. Now that this same third Canon was all that time, held to be of full
authority, and approved by the Church, as a Canon of an holy general Council,
which binds all: notwithstanding the Popes did not approve it, nay, did even
by their Synodall Decrees reject it, there are very many and clear evidences:
By warrant of that Canon did Anatolius in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1. et
alijs ubi recensentur Episcopi.
, and Eutichius in the fifth Synod Coll. 1. et alijs.
, in the right of their See of Constantinople take place before, and above the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch; none in those Councels repining thereat:
nay, those Synods, and God himself (as is there Ecce nos Deo volente Anatolium
primum habemus. Ait Pascasinus in Conc. Chal. Act. 1. pa. 8. b.
said) approving that precedence: And whereas this order had hot been observed
in the Ephesine Latrocinie; Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople being set after
the Bishops of Antioch and Jerusalem, the Bishops of the Council of Chalcedon
stormed thereat, and said Ibid.
, Why did not Flavianus sit in his proper place? that is, next to the Roman
Bishop, or his Legates. By authority of the same Canon did Chrysostom, when he
was Bishop of Constantinople, depose S. memoriae Chrysostomus 15 Episcopos
deposuit in Asia, et pro eis alios ordinavit. Conc. Chalc. Act. 11. in sine.
Zezo lib. 1. ca. 6.
fifteen Bishops in Asia; ordain others in their rooms; celebrate Pallad. in
vit. Chrysostom.
a Council at Ephesus, and call the Asian Bishops unto it; none of which
either could he have done, or would the other have obeyed him therein, had it
not been known, that they were subject to him as their Patriarch, by that
Canon of the second general Council, to which they all must obey: And this
was done about some twenty years after that Canon was made. Conc. habitum an.
381. Chrysostom. creatus Episcopus Cesario et Attico Coss. Socr. lib. 6. ca. 2.
id est, circa an. 398 c^jus secundo anno, aut circiter, haec evenerunt.
So quickly was the same in force, and was acknowledged to be of a binding
authority. In the Council of Chalcedon, when the truth of this Canon was most
diligently examined, Elutherius Bishop of Chalcedon said, Act. 16. pa. 136. b.
Sciens quia per Canones and per consuetudinem; I subscribed hereunto, knowing
that the Sea of Constantinople has these rights (in Asia and Pontus, as a
Patriarch to govern there) both according to the Canons, and according to
custom: and the like was deposed by many Bishops of Asia and Pontus. They
acknowledge, nay, they knew there was such a Canon; they knew also, that the
custom and practice did concurrere cum lege, did concur with the Canon;
whereupon the glorious Judges, after full discussing of this cause, testified
b, and sentenced, that the Bish. of Constantinople had rightful authority to
ordain Metropolitan Bishops in the Diocesses of Thrace, Asia, and Pontus, and
the whole Synod consented to them; first proclaiming, Haec Ibid.
justa est sententia, this is a just sentence, this we say all: and then in the
very Synodal Epistle Relat. ad Leonem post act. 16.
to Leo testifying the same, to wit, that they had confirmed that custom to
the Bishop of Constantinople, that he should ordain Metropolitanes in Thrace,
Asia, and Pontus; and thereby had confirmed the third Canon of the second
Council. This was the judgment of the whole Council at Chalcedon, that is,
of the whole Catholic Church in that age, to which have consented all
Councels, and catholic Bishops ever since: All these do approve, and judge to
be approved that Canon of the second general Council, which the Popes and
Roman Church, not only not approved, but expressly and by Synodall decrees
rejected.

23. About some ninety years Conc. Chalced. habitum, an. 451
after this, and an hundred sixty years Conc. Constant. habit. an. 381.
after that second Synod, did Justinian the Emperor confirm the Nov. 131. ca.
1, et. 2.
Canons, both of that second, and of all the former general Councels, giving
unto them force of Imperial laws: Yea, he further commanded those Canons,
(this third among the rest) Dipticis inseri, and praedicari, to be written in
the Diptikes or Ecclesiastical books, and publicly to be read in the
Churches, in token of the public and universal approbation of the same. This
the fifth Council Coll. 2. pa. 524. a.
testifies, as also Victor In Chron. an. 1. Justin.
, and Evagrius Lib. 4. ca. 11.
, yea, the Emperor himself also, who both Cod. l. 7. de summa Trin.
professes that he will not suffer this custom to be taken away, and
signifies Nov. 115.
that all Patriarchs are known to keep in their Diptikes, and to recite those
Canons in their Churches. The Emperor doubted not but the Roman Church and
Patriarch, as well as the rest, had done this, and yielded obedience to so holy
an Edict; but the Roman Church deluded the Emperor herein: none of them, as
Bellarmine Lib. 1. de Pont. ca. 24. Hi^.
tells us, did after Justinians time, or as he accounts after the year 500,
reclamare, contradict or speak against that Canon, (which their silence the
Emperor and others, not acquainted with the Roman Arts, did interpret to be a
consent) but Binius Not. in Conc. 2. Constantinop.
bewrays their policy; they, for peace and quietness sake (being loath to
exasperate the Emperor) did permit or connive at that honor conferred by the
Canon upon the Sea of Constantinople; yet, nunquam a Romana Ecclesia approbatum
fuit; it was never, (the^ not til Gregory's time, which is as much as I
intended to prove) it was never, says he, approved by the Roman Church;
which he proves by a Decretall of Innocentius the third; whence it is evident,
seeing that Canon of the second general Council, was never, as Binius
avoucheth, but certainly not till Gregory's time, approved by the Pope, and yet
was all that time approved by the catholic Church, even by the great and
famous Council at Chalcedon, and al who approve it, who are no fewer than the
whole catholic Church; it is evident, I say, that it is neither the Popes
Approbation which makes, nor his Reprobation which hinders a Council, or
any Decree, or Canon thereof, to be an approved general Council, or a
Synodall Canon, such as does, and ought to bind all that are in the Church.

24. The Popes Approbation it is not: but what it is which makes a general
Council or Canon thereof, to be an approved Council, or an approved Canon;
and for such to be righly accounted, is not so easy to explane. This in an
other Treatise I have at large handled, to which, if it ever see the light, I
refer my self; yet suffer me to touch in this place so much as may serve to
clear this, and diverse other doubts, which are obvious in their writings
concerning this point.

25. That every Council and Synodall decree thereof is approved or confirmed
by those Bishops who are present in that Synod, who consent upon that decree,
is by the Acts of the Counsels most evident. For both their consenting
judgment pronounced by word of mouth, and after that, their subscription to
their decree, did ratify and confirm their sentence. In that which they call
the eighth general Synod, after the sentence pronounced, the Popes Legates
said Act. 10.
, Oportet ut haec manu nostra subscribendo confirmemus, it is needful that we
confirm these things which we have decreed, by our subscribing unto them. Of
the great Nicene Council Eusebius thus writes Lib. 3. de vita Constant ca. 13.
, Those things which with one consent they had decreed, (...), they were fully
authorized, ratified, confirmed or approved, (the Greek word is very
emphaticall) by their subscription. In the Council of Chalcedon, when the
agreement betwixt Iuvenalis and Maximus was decreed, they subscribed Act. 6.
in this form; That which is consented upon, confirmo, I by my sentence do
confirm; or, firma esse decerno, I decree that it shall be firm: and to the
like effect subscribed all the rest. Whereupon the glorious Judges, without
expecting any other confirmation either from Pope Leo, or any that was absent,
said; This which is consented upon shall abide firm, in omni tempore, for ever
by our decree, and by the sentence of the Synod. Of the second general
Council, a Synod at Hellespont said Extat inter Epist. post Council. Chal. pa.
168. a.
, Hanc Synodum Timotheus una cum eis praesens firmavit, Timotheus, with the
other Bishops, then present, confirmed this Synod. The consent and subscription
of the Bishops present in the Synod, they call a Confirmation of the Synod. In
the Synod Extat ibid. pa. 155.
at Maesia, after the sentence of the Synod was given, they all subscribed in
this form, I M.P.D. etc. confirmavi and subscripsi, have confirmed this
Synodall sentence, and subscribed unto it. In the second Council at Carthage,
held about the time of Pope Celestine, Gennadius said Tom. 1. Conc. pa. 541.
, Quae ab omnibus sunt dicta propria debemus subscriptione firmare, what has
been said and decreed by us all, we ought by our own subscriptions to
confirm: and all the Bishops answered, Fiat, fiat, let us so do; and then
they subscribed. So clear it is, that whatsoever decree is made by any
Council, the same is truly and rightly said to be confirmed by those very
Bishops who make the Decree; confirmed I say, both by their joint consent in
making that Decree, and by their subscribing unto it when it is made.

26. Upon this confirmation or approbation of any Decree by the Bishops present
in the Council, does the whole strength and authority of any Synodall decree
rely; and upon no other confirmation of any Bishop whatsoever, when the
Council is general and lawful. For in such a Council, lawfully called,
lawfully governed, and lawfully proceeding, as well in the free discussing, as
free sentencing of the cause; there is in true account the joint consent of all
Bishops and Ecclesiastical persons in the whole world. No Bishop can then
complain that either he is not called, or not admitted with freedom into such
a Council, unless that he be excommunicated, or suspended, or for some such
like reason justly debarred. If all do come, they may and do freely deliver
their own judgment; and that not only for themselves, but for all the
Presbyters in their whole Diocese. For seeing the pastoral care of every
Diocese, even from the Apostles time, and by them is committed to the Bishop
thereof, (all the rest being by him admitted but only into a part of his care,
and to assist him in some parts of his Episcopal function) he does, at least
(because he should) he is supposed to admit none, but such as he knows to
profess the same faith with himself: whence it is, that in his voice is
included the judgment of his whole Diocesan Church, and of all the Presbyters
therein: they all believing as he does, speak also in the Council by his
mouth, the same that he does. If some of the Bishops come not personally, but
either depute others in their rooms, or pass their suffrage (as often they
did) in the voice of their Metropolitan, then their consent is expressed in
theirs, whom they put in trust to be their agents at that time. If any
negligently absent themselves, neither personally, nor yet by delegates
signifying their mind, these are supposed to give a tacit consent unto the
judgment which is given by them who are present; whom the others are supposed
to think not only to be able and sufficient without themselves to define that
cause; but that they will define it in such sort as themselves do wish and
desire: for otherwise they would have afforded their presence, or at least sent
some deputies to assist them in so great and necessary a service. If any out of
stomach or hatred to the truth, do wilfully refuse to come, because they
dissent from the others in that doctrine, yet even these also are in the eye of
reason supposed to give an implicit consent unto that which is decreed, yea
though explicit they do dissent from it. For every one does, and in reason is
supposed to consent on this general point, that a Synodall judgment must be
given in that doubt and controversy, there being no better nor higher humane
Court than is that of a general Council, by which they may be directed. Now
because there never possibly could any Synodall judgment be given, if the
wilful absence of one or a few should be a just bar to their sentence;
therefore all in reason are thought to consent that the judgment must be given
by those who will come, or who do come to the Council, and that their decree
or sentence shall stand for the judgment of a general Council,
notwithstanding their absence who wilfully refuse to come.

27. If then all the Bishops present in the Council do consent upon any
decree, there is in it one of those ways which we have mentioned, either by
personal declaration, or by signification made by their delegates and agents,
or by a tacit, or by an implicit consent, the consenting judgment of all the
Bishops and Presbyters in the whole Church, that is, of al who either have
judicatory power or authority to preach publicly; and therefore such a decree
is as fully authorized, confirmed, and approved, as if all the Bishops and
Presbyters in the world had personally subscribed in this manner, I confirm
this Decree. Hereof there is a worthy example in the third general Council.
No Presbyters at all were therein, not in their own right. Very many Bishops
were personally absent, and present only by their Legates or Agents; as almost
all the Western Bishops, and by name Celestine Patriarch of Rome. Some, no
question, upon other occasions neglected that business; as, it may be, the
Bishops of Gangra, and of Heraclea in Macedonia, who were not at this Council.
Diverse others wilfully and obstinately refused to come to that holy Synod; as
by name Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, John Patriarch of Antioch, and
some forty Bishops, who at the same time while the holy Council was held in
the Church at Ephesus, held a Conventicle by themselves in an Inn, in the same
City; and yet notwithstanding the personal absence of the first, the
negligent of the second, and wilful absence of the last, the holy Epist. Conc.
Ephesians. ad Imper. tom. 2. Act. Con. Ephesians. epist. 17.
general Council says of their Synodall judgment, given by those who were
then present, that it was nihil aliud quam communis and concors terrarum orbis
sensus and consensus, nothing else but the common and consenting judgment of
the whole world. How could this be, when so many Bishops, besides three
Patriarchs, were either personally, or negligently, or wifully absent? How was
there in that decree the consent of these? Truly because they all (even all the
Bishops in the world) did either personally, or by their Agents, express; or
else in such a tacit and implicit manner (as we declared) wrap up their
judgment in the Synodall decree made by the Bishops present in the Council.

28. But what if many of those who are present, do dissent from that which the
rest being the greater part do decree? Truly, even these also do implicit,
and are in reason to be judged to consent to that same decree. For every one
is supposed to agree on that general Maxim of reason, that in such an
assembly of Judges, what the greater part decrees shall stand as the Act and
Judgment of the whole: seeing otherwise it would be impossible that such a
multitude of Bishops should ever give any judgment in a cause, for still some
in perverseness and pertinacie would dissent. Seeing then it is the ordinance
of God that the Church shall judge, and seeing there can no other means be
devised how they should judge, unless the sentence of the greater part may
stand for their judgment, reason enforces all to consent upon this Maxim.
Upon this is that Imperial Law grounded, Quod Dig. lib. 50. leg. 19.
major pars curiae effecit, pro rato habetur, acsi omnes id egerint, what the
greater part of the Court shall do, that is ratified, or to stand for the
judgment of the Court, as if all had done the same. And again, Refertur Dig.
lib. 5. tit. 17. de Reg. Iuris 160.
ad universos quod public fit per majorem partem: That is accounted the act of
all, which is publicly done by the greater part. Upon this ground is that
truly said by Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 11.. At.
, That whereon the greater part does consent, est verum decretum Concilij, is
the true decree of the Council, even of the whole Council. Upon the equity
of this rule was it said in the Council at Chalcedon Act. 4. p. 90. b.
, when ten Bishops dissented from the rest, Non est justum december audiri, It is
not just that the sentence of ten should prevail against a thousand and two
hundred Bishops. Upon the equity of the same rule did the fifth general
Council truly and constantly judge Coll. 6. p. 576. b
, that the Council of Chalcedon even in that definition of faith, which they
all with one consent agreed upon, condemned the Epistle of Ibas as heretical;
although they knew that Maximus, with Pascasinus, and the other Legates of Pope
Leo, in the Council of Chalcedon, adjudged that Epistle to be orthodoxall. How
was it the consenting judgment of the whole Council of Chalcedon, when yet
some did express their dissent therein? How, but by that implicit consent
which all give to that rule of reason, that the judgment of the greater part
shall stand for the judgment of the whole; which the fifth Council does plainly
signify, saying Ibid. pa. 563. b.
, In Councels we must not attend the interloquutions of one or two, but what is
defined in common, ab omnibus, aut amplioribus, either by all, or by the
greater part: to that we must attend as to the judgment of the whole Council.
But omitting all the rest, there is one example in the Council of Chalcedon
most pregnant to this purpose.

29. All Haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent. Act. 16. pa. 137. a.
the Council, save only the Popes Legates, consented upon that third Canon,
decreed in the second, and now confirmed in this fourth Council, that the Sea
of Constantinople should have Patriarchall dignity over Thrace, Asia, and
Pontus, and have precedence before other Patriarchs, as the next after the
Bishop of Rome. The Legates following the instructions of Leo, were so, averse
in this matter, that they said Ibid. pa. 137. b.
not without some choler, Contradictio nostra his gesti^ inhaereat, Let our
contradiction cleave to these Acts: and so it does, to the eternal disgrace
both of them and their master. The glorious Judges notwithstanding this
dissenting of the Legates and of Pope Leo himself in them, said Ibid.
concerning that Canon, That which we have spoken, (that the Sea of
Constantinople ought to be the second, etc.) Tota Synodus, the whole Council
has approved it. Why, but the Popes Legates approved it not; they contradicted
it. True, in this particular they dissented. But because they as all other
Bishops, even Pope Leo himself, consented unto that general Maxim, That the
judgment of the greater part shall stand for the judgment of the whole
Council, in that general both the Legates of Leo, and Leo himself, did
implicit and virtually consent to that very Canon, from which actually and
explicit they did then dissent. For which cause the most prudent Judges truly
said, Tota Synodus, the whole Council has approved this Canon: either
explicit or implicit, either expressly or virtually approved it. Neither did
only those secular Judges so esteem, the whole general Council it self
professed the same, and that even in the Synodall Relation of their Acts to
Pope Leo: The universal Sancta and universal. Synod. Leoni. Relat. Synod. post
Act. 16
Synod said thus, We have condemned Dioscorus, we have confirmed the faith, we
have confirmed the Canon of the second Council for the honor of the Sea of
Constantinople, we have condemned the heresy of Eutyches: Thus writ the whole
Council to Leo: declaring evidently that act of approving that Canon to be the
Act of the whole Synod, although they knew the contradiction of the Pope and
his Legates to cleave unto it.

30. You see now that in every sentence of a general and lawful Council
there is an assent of all Bishops and Presbyters, they all either explicit, or
tacit, or implicit, consenting to that decree, whether they be absent or
present, and whether in that particular they consent or dissent. Now because
there can be no greater humane judgment in any cause of faith or
ecclesiastical matter, than is the consenting judgment of all Bishops and
Presbyters, that is, of all who have power either to teach or judge in those
causes; it hence clearly ensues, that there neither is nor can be any
Episcopal or Ecclesiastical confirmation or approbation whatsoever of any
decree, greater, stronger, or of more authority, then is the judgment it self
of such a general Council, and their own confirmation or approbation of the
decrees which they make; for in every such decree there is the consent of all
the Bishops and Presbyters in the whole world.

31. Besides this confirmation of any synodall decree, which is by Bishops, and
therefore to be called Episcopal, there is also another confirmation added by
Kings and Emperors, which is called Royal or Imperial, by this later,
religious Kings not only give freedom and liberty, that those decrees of the
Council shall stand in force of Ecclesiastical Canons within their dominions,
so that the contemners of them may be with allowance of Kings, corrected by
Ecclesiastical censures, but further also, do so strengthen, and back the
same by their sword, and civil authority, that the contradicters of those
decrees, are made liable to those temporal punishments, which are set down in
EZra Ez. 7.16.
, to death, to banishment, to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment, as the
quality of the offense shall require, and the wisdom of that Imperial State
shall think fit. Betwixt these two confirmations, Episcopal and Imperial,
there is exceeding great odds and difference. By the former, judicial
sentence is given, and the synodall decree made or declared to be made, for
which cause it may rightly be called a judicial or definitive confirmation: by
the later, neither is the synodal decree made, nor any judgment given to define
that cause (for neither Princes nor any Lay men, are Judges to decide those
matters, as the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian excellently declare in
Nefas est eum qui Episcoporum catalogo adscriptus non est, Ecclesiasticis
negotijs se immiscere. (nempe ut Iudice^ qui definiat.) Epist. Imp. ad Synod.
Ephesians. to. 1. Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 32.
their directions to Candidianus, in the Council of Ephesus;) but the synodall
decree being already made by the Bishops, and their judgment given in that
cause, is strengthened by Imperial authority, for which cause, this may fitly
be called a superemine^t or corrobotative confirmation of the synodall
judgment. The former confirmation is Directive, teaching what all are to
believe or observe in the Church: the later is Coactive, compelling all, by
civil punishment to believe or observe the Synodall directions. The former is
Essential to the Decree, such as if it want, there is no Synodall decree made
at all: the later is Accidental, which though it want, yet is the Decree of
the Council, a true Synodall Decree and sentence. The former binds all men to
obedience to that Decree, but yet only under pain of Ecclesiastical
censures: the latter binds the subjects only of those Princes, who give the
Royal Confirmation to such Decrees, and binds them under the pain only of
temporal punishment. By virtue of the former, the contradicters or contemners
of those Decrees are rightly to be accounted either heretics in causes of
faith, or contumacious in other matters; and such are truly subject to the
censures of the Church, though, if the later be wanting, those censures cannot
be inflicted by any, or upon any, but with danger to incur the indignation
of Princes: By virtue of the later, not only the Church may safely, yea, with
great allowance and praise, inflict their Ecclesiastical censures, but
inferior Magistrates also may, nay ought to proceed against such contemners of
those Synodall decrees, as against notorious, convicted, and condemned
heretics; or in causes which are not of faith, but of external discipline and
orders, as against contumacious persons. The Episcopal confirmation is the
first in order, but yet because it proceeds from those who are all subject to
Imperial authority, it is in dignity inferior. The Imperial confirmation is
the last in order, but because it proceeds from those to whom every soul is
subject, it is in dignity Supreme.

32. This Imperial confirmation, as holy general Councels did with all
submission entreat of Emperors, so religious Emperors did with all
willingness grant unto them. Of the great Nicene Council Eusebius says Lib.
4. de vita Constant. ca 27.
, Constantine sealed, ratified, and confirmed the decrees which were made
therein. The second general Council writ Epist. Synod. 2. post Act. Council. pa.
518.
thus to the Emperor Theodosius, We beseech your clemency, that by your
letters, ratum esse jubeas confirmesque Concilij decretum, that you would
ratify and confirm the decree of this Council: and that the Emperor did so,
his Imperial Edict, before Hoc. cap. nu. 19.
mentioned, does make evident. To the third Council the Emperor writ thus Act
Ephesians. Conc tom. 3. ca. 17.
, Let matters concerning religion and piety be diligently examined, contention
being laid aside; ac tum demu^ a nostra pietate confirmationem expectate; and
then expect from us our imperial confirmation. The holy Council having done
so, writ Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 4. ca. 8.
thus to the Emperor, We earnestly entreat your piety, ut jubeat ea omnia,
that you would command, that all which is done by this holy and Ecumenical
Council against Nestorius, may stand in force, per vestrae pietatis nutum et
consensum confirmata; being confirmed by your roall assent: And that the
Emperor yielded to their request, his Edict Imperator sententia Synodi public
approbata, Nestorio exilium indicit. Act. Con. Ephesians. to. 5. ca. 11. et lege ult.
de haeret. Cod. Theod.
against Nestorius does declare. In the fourth Council the Emperor said Act.
6.
, We come to this Synod, not to show our power, sed ad confirmandam fidem, but
to confirm the faith. And when he had signified before all the Bishops his
royal assent Jn perpetuum quae a vobis terminata sunt serventur. Jbid.
to their decree, the whole Council cried out, Orthodoxam fidem tu
confirmasti, thou have confirmed the Catholic faith: often ingeminating those
joyful acclamations. That Justinian confirmed the fifth Council, his imperial
Edict for condemning those Three Chapters, which after the Synodall judgment
stood in more force than before; his severity Vict. in Chron. an. post Coss.
Bas. 13, 14.15, etc.
in punishing the contradicters of the Synodall sentence, partly by exile,
partly by imprisonment, are clear witnesses. The sixth Council said Act. 18.
thus to the Emperor, O our most gracious Lord grant this favor unto us,
signaculum tribue, seal and ratify all that we have done; vestram inscribito
imperialem ratihabitionem; add unto them your imperial confirmation, that by
your holy Edicts, and godly constitutions they may stand in firm force. And
the Emperor upon their humble request, set forth his Edict, wherein he says
Edict. Constat. Pogon. Act. 18. Conc. 6.
, We have published this our Edict, that we might, corroborare atque confirmare
ea quae definita sunt, corroborate and confirm those things which are defined
by the Council. To all which, that may be added which Basilius the Emperor
said in the eighth Synod, as they call it; I had Act. 10.
purposed to have subscribed after all the Bishops, as did my predecessors,
Constantine the great, Theodosius, Martian, and the rest: thereby evidently
testifying, not only the custom of imperial confirmation to have been
observed in all former Councels, but the difference also betwixt it and the
Episcopal subscription; the Bishops first subscribing, and thereby making or
declaring, that they had made a Synodall decree, the Emperors after them all
subscribing, as ratifying by their Imperial confirmation what the Bishops had
decreed.

33. By this now it fully appears, what it is which makes any Synod or any
Synodal decree, to be, and justly to be accounted an approved Synod, or an
approved Synodall and Oecumenicall decree. It is not the Popes assent,
approbation, or confirmation, (as they, without all ground of truth do fancy,)
which at any time did, or possibly can do this. It is only the Universal and
Oecumenicall consent of the whole Church, and of all the members thereof, upon
any decree ma^^ by a general Council, which truly makes that an approved
decree; which general and Oecumenicall consent or approbation, is showed
partly by the Episcopal confirmation of that decree, made by the Bishops
present therein, wherein there is ever either an ^^presse, or a vertuall and
implicit consent of all the Bishops and Presbyters, and so of all the Clergy
in the world; partly by the royal and imperial confirmation given to that
decree by Christian Kings and Emperors, in which there is an implicit consent
of all Laickes in the whole Church, Kings and Princes assenting not only for
themselves, but in the name of all their Lay subjects, for whom they undertake,
that either they shall willingly obey that decree, or else by severity of
punishments, be compelled thereunto. If these two confirmations, or either of
them be wanting, the Council and decree which is supposed to be made therein,
is neither an approved or confirmed Council, nor decree, though the Pope send
forth ten thousand Bulls to approve and confirm the same: But if these two
confirmations concur in any decree of a general and lawful Council, though
the Pope reprobate and reject that Council or decree never so often, yet is
both that Council an approved general Council, and the decree thereof an
approved or confirmed Synodall and Oecumenicall decree, approved I say, and
confirmed by the greatest humane authority and judgment that possibly can be,
either found, or desired, even by the whole catholic Church, and every member,
whether Ecclesiastical or Laicall, therein: And whosoever after such an ample
approbation or confirmation, shall at any time contradict or contemn such a
Council or decree, he does not, nor can he thereby impare the dignity and
authority of it, but he demonstrates himself to be an heretic, or, at least,
a contumacious person, insolently, and in the pride of his singularity
despising that judgment of the Council, which the whole Church, and every
member thereof, yea, even himself also among them, has approved.

34. You will yet demand of me, why general Councels have sought the Popes
approbation and confirmation of their decrees, (as did the Council of
Chalcedon Rogamus tuis decretis nostrum honora judicium. Epist. Synod. Chal. ad
Leonem post Act. 16.
of Pope Leo) after the end of the Synods; and what effect or fruit did arise
from such confirmations, if it added no greater authority to the Synodall
sentence, than before it had? I also ask of you another question; Why did the
Council of Constantinople confirm Statuerunt 318. Patrum fidem firmam ac
flabilem manner oportere. Conc. Constable. ca. 1.
the Nicene Synod, and the faith decreed therein? or why did the Council of
Chalcedon confirm In definit. fidei Act. 5. Confirmavimus Patrum 150. regulam
Epist. Conc. Chal. ad Leone^ post Act. 16. Conc. Chal. praedicta concilia
firmavit. Epist. Episc. Europae post Co^c. Chal pa. 152.
all the three former general Councels? or why did their second Nicene
confirm all the six Synods which were before it, saying c, Eorum
constitutionem integram and illabefactabilem confirmamus; we confirm the
divine Canons and constitutions, being inviolable? Was not the great Nicene
Council and decree of faith, of as great authority before it was confirmed by
the second or fourth Council, as afterward? or what greater strength and
authority had either it, or any of the six first general Councels, by the
confirmation of the second Nicene Synod, which, unto all the former, is as much
inferior, as is dross or clay to the gold of Ophir. If the confirmations of
one general Council by another, give no greater authority unto it than before
it had, (^^ it is certain by these examples, that it does not) what marvel if
the Popes confirmation do not work that effect? If notwitstanding all this,
the confirmations of former, by subsequent Councels, be not fruitless; truly,
neither the confirmation of the Pope, or any other Bishop that is absent, must
be thought fruitless, though it add no more authority to the Synod, or
Synodall decrees, than before they had.

35. Neither did only general, but even Provincial Councils, yea, particular
Bishops confirm general Synods, and the decrees thereof. The Synod at Millane
was assembled by the direction of Pope Leo, in which the Acts of the first
Ephesine Council, per subscriptionem Episcoporum absentium sunt confirmata;
were confirmed by the subscription of those Bishops, who were absent. So
writes Not. in Conc. Romans 3. tempore Silvestri.
Binius. The like was done after the Council of Chalcedon; for when some began
to quarrel at it, Leo the Emperor, that he might, confirmare Bin. not. in
Conc. Chalc. Incipiunt pa. 190.
ea, confirm the decrees of that Council, published an Edict to that end, at
the solicitation of Pope Leo Epist 73. hoc classico Pontificis Imperator
excitatus sanctionem edidit. Bin. not. in eam Epist.
; yea further, the Emperor commanded the several Bishops to show their
judgments in that doctrine of faith decreed at Chalcedon, which he did to this
end, ut omnium calculo and confessione Chalcedonense Concilium iterum
firmaretur, says Binius Locis citati^.
; that the Council of Chalcedon might be confirmed again by the consent and
confession of all those Bishops. They did what the Emperor commanded them:
some alone, as Anatolius, Sebastianus, Lucianus, Agapetus, and many more; some
in Synodal Epistles, as the Bishops of Alexandria, of Europe; all whose letters
are adjoined to the Council of Chalcedon Pa. 146. ad pa. 179.
: concerning all which, that is to be noted which Agapetus says Pa. 166.
, Pene omnes occidentalium partium Episcopi confirmaverunt, atque
consignaverunt; almost all the Bishops of the West, (and so also in the East)
did confirm by their letters and subscriptions, that faith which was explaned
at Chalcedon. What authority think you, could the confirmation of one single
Bishop, as of Agapetus and Sebastianus, or of a Synod consisting but of
nineteen Bishops, (as that at Millan Vt liquet ex eorum epist. Synod. quae
extat post Epist. 52. Leonis.
) or but of seven Vt Epis. Syriae post Conc. Chal. pa. 155. b.
, or six Vt Episc. Maesia ibid. a.
, or five Vt Episc. secundae Syria. Ibid. pa. 157. b.
, or four Vt Episc. Osr^eviae. Ibid. pa. 168. a.
, (as some of the other) give to the great and Oecumenicall Councels of Ephesus
and Chalcedon, approved not only by the Popes, but by the consenting judgment
of the whole (Christian) world, as out of the Ephesine Synod we before
declared: And yet was never one of those confirmations fruitless, as Pope Leo,
who was the author of them, rightly judged. Of the great Nicene Council,
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis Bishop of Nice, after they had
endured exile for not consenting to the Nicene faith, in token of their
repentance, writ Epistola eorum extat apud Socratem lib. 1. ca. 10.
thus unto the Synod, Those things which are decreed by your judgment,
consentientibus animis confirmare decrevimus, we are purposed to confirm with
consenting minds. Even the consent of two, and those exiled and heretical
Bishops, is called a confirmation of the great Nicene Council, to which no
authority was added thereby. I will but add one example more, and that is of
this our fifth Council; concerning which, in their second Nicene Synod, it is
thus said Act. 1. pa. 306
, Four Patriarchs being present, approved the same, and the most religious
Emperor sent the Synodall Acts thereof to Jerusalem; where a Synod being
assembled, all the Bishops of Palestina, manibus, and pedibus, and ore,
sententiam Synodi confirmarunt; they all confirmed the sentence of this
Council, with their hands, with their confessions, and full consent, except
only one Alexander Bishop of Abyles, who thought the contrary, and therefore
was put from his Bishopric; and coming to Constantinople was swallowed up by
an earthquake. So their Nicene Synod: By all which it is now clear, that
general and appoved Oecumenicall Councels, or the decrees thereof, may be,
and, de facto, have been usually approved and confirmed not only by the Pope,
but by other succeding general Councels, by Provincial Synods, yea, by
particular Bishops, who have been absent, none of all, which gave, or could
give more authority to the Council or Synodall decree thereof, than it had
before; and some of them are both in authority and dignity not once to be
compared to those Synods which they do approve or confirm; and yet not any
one of al these confirmations were needless, or fruitless.

36. The reason of all which may be perceived by the diverse ends of those two
co^firmations. These use and end of the first confirmation by the Bishops
present in the Council, was judicially to determine and define the
controversy then proposed, and to give unto it the full and perfect authority
of a Synodall Oecumenicall decree, that is in truth, the whole strength and
authority which all the Bishops and Churches in the whole world could give unto
it. The use and end of the second confirmation by those Bishops, who were
absent, was not judicially to define that cause, or give any judgment therein,
(for this was done already, and in as effectual a manner as possible it could
be) but to preserve the peace of the Church, and unity in faith, which could
by no other means be better effected, than if Bishops, who had been absent,
and therefore did but implicit, or by others, consent to those decrees at the
making thereof, did afterward declare their own explicit and express
consent to the same. Now because the more eminent that any Bishop was, either
for authority or learning, the more likely he was, either to make a rent and
schism in the Church, if he should dissent, or to procure the tranquillity and
peace of the Church, if he should consent; hence it was, that if any
Patriarch, Patriarchall Primate, or other eminent Bishop were absent at the
time of the Council, the Church and Council did the more earnestly labor to
have his express consent and confirmation to the Synodall decrees: This was
the cause why both the religious Emperor Theodosius Sacra Imper. ad Johan. to.
5. Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 3. Cyril. Epist. 38. ad Dynatum to. cod. ca. 16.
, and Cyrill, with other orthodoxall Bishops, were so earnest to have John
Patriarch of Antioch, to consent to the holy Ephesine Synod, which long before
was ended; that as he had been the ringleader to the factious conventicle, and
those who defended Nestorius with his heresy; so his yielding to the truth,
and embracing the Ephesine Council, which condemned Nestorius, might draw many
others to do the like, and so indeed it did. This was the principal reason
why some of the ancient Councels, as that by name of Chalcedon, (for all did it
not) sought the Popes confirmation to their Synodall decrees; not thinking
their sentence in any cause to be invalid, or their Council no approved
Council, if it wanted his approbation or confirmation, (a fancy not dreamed of
in the Church in those days) but whereas the Pope was never personally present
in any of those which they account the 8 general Councels, the Synod thought it
fit to procure, if they could, his express and explicit consent to their
decrees, that he being the chief Patriarch in the Church, might by his example
move all, and by his authority draw his own Patriarchall Diocese (as usually
he did) to consent to the same decrees; whereas, if he should happen to
dissent (as Vigilius did at the time of the fifth Council) he was likely to
cause (as Vigilius then did) a very grievous rent and schism in the Church of
God.

37. There was yet another use and end of those subsequent confirmations,
whether by succeeding Councels, or absent Bishops: and that was, that every one
should thereby either testify his orthodoxy in the faith, or else manifest
himself to be an heretic: For as the approving of the six general Councels,
and their decrees of faith did witness one to be a Catholic in those
doctrines; so the very refusing to approve or confirm any one of those
Councels, or their decrees of faith, was ipso facto, without any further
examination of the cause, an evident conviction that he was a condemned
heretic; such an one, as in the pride and pertinacie of his heart rejected
that holy synodall judgment, which all the whole catholic Church, and every
member thereof, even himself also had implicit before confirmed and approved.
In which respect an heretic may truly be called (...), being convicted and
condemned not only by the evidence of truth, and by synodall sentence, but
even by that judgment which his own self had given implicit, in the decree
of the Council. The sum is this; The former confirmation by the Bishops
present in the Synod, is Judicial; the later confirmation by the Bishops who
are absent, is Pacificall. The former is authoritative, such as gives the whole
authority to any decree: the later (whether by succeeding Councels, or absent
Bishops) is Testificative, such as witnesses them to be orthodoxall in that
decree. The former, joined to the Imperial confirmation, is Essential, which
essentially makes both the Council an approved Council, and all the decrees
thereof, approved, synodal, and Oecumenicall decrees: the later is accidental,
which being granted by a Bishop, does much grace himself, but little or
nothing the Synod; and being denied by any, does no whit at all either disgrace
the Synod, or impare the dignity and authority thereof, but does extremely
disgrace the party himself who denies it, and pulls down upon him, both the
just censures of the Church, and those civil punishments which are due to
heretics or contumacious persons.

38. My conclusion now is this: Seeing this fifth Council was both for the
calling general, and for the proceeding therein lawful, and orderly; and
seeing, although it wanted the Popes consent, yet it had the concurrence of
those two confirmations, before mentioned; Episcopal and Imperial, in which
is included the Oecumenicall approbation of the whole catholic Church: it
hence therefore ensues, that as from the first assembling of the Bishops it
was an holy, a lawful, and Oecumenicall Council; so from the first
pronouncing of their synodall sentence, and the Imperial assent added
thereunto, it was an approved general Council, approved by the whole
catholic Church; and so approved, that without any express consent of the
Pope added unto it, it was of as great worth, dignity, and authority, as if
all the Popes since S. Peter's time had, with their own hands subscribed unto
it. And this may suffice to satisfy the fourth and last exception which
Baronius devised to excuse Vigilius from heresy.

CAP. XIX. The true notes to know which are general and lawful, and which
either are not general, or being general, are no lawful Councels; with
diverse examples of both kinds.
1. THAT which has been said in the former Chapter is sufficient to refute
that cavil of Baronius, against the fifth Council, whereby he pretends it to
have neither been a general, nor a lawful Synod, because the Pope resisted the
assembling, and contradicted the decree and sentence thereof; but for as much
as it is not victory, but truth which I seek, and the full satisfaction of the
reader in this cause, and seeing this point about the lawfulness of general
Councels, is frequent, and very obvious, and such as being rightly conceived,
will give great light to this whole controversy about Councels; I will crave
liberty to lanch somewhat further into this deep, and explane, with what
convenient brevity I can, what it is which makes any Synod to be, or rightly
to be esteemed a general and lawful Council.

2. As the name of Synod does in his primary and large acception agree to every
assembly, so does the name of Council to every assembly of consultation: The
former being derived from (...), is all one with Coetus, and imports the
assembly of any multitude which meets and comes together: The later being
derived of Cilia Concilium dictu^ a communi intention, ^o quod in unum omnes
dirigant mentis obtutu^: Cilia enim oculorum sunt. Isiod. Mer. in suam Canon.
collect.
, (whence also supercilium) imports the common or joint intending, or bending
their eyes, both of body and mind, to the investigation of the truth in that
matter, which is proposed in their assembly: But both of those words being now
drawn from those their large and primitive significations, are by
Ecclesiastical writers, and use of speech, (penes quem jus est, and norma
loquendi) restrained and appropriated only to those assemblies of Bishops, and
Ecclesiastical persons; wherein they come together to consult of such matters
as concerns either the faith or discipline of the Church. Of these, because
some are lawful, others unlawful Synods, if we can find what it is which
makes a general and lawful Council, it will be easy thereby to discern
which are unlawful Synods, seeing it is vulgarly and truly said, that, Rectum
is index sui and obliqui.

3. That a Synod be general and lawful, there are three things necessarily,
and even essentially required, the want of any one of which is a just bar and
exception, why that Synod is either not general, or not lawful. The first,
which concerns the generality, is, that the calling and summons to the
Council be general and Oecumenicall; so that all Bishops be called, and when
they are come, have free access to the same Council, unless for some fault
of their own, or some just reason, they ought to be debarred: For if the
calling to any Synod be out of some parts only of the Church, and not out of
the whole, the judgment also of such a Council is but partial, not general,
and the Council is but particular, not Oecumenicall, seeing some of those who
have judicatory power are either omitted, or unjustly excluded from the Synod:
The want of this was a just exception taken by the Pope Julius, against that
Council of Antioch Extat tom. 1. Conc. pa. 420.
, (wherein Athanasius was deposed by the Arian faction, and Gregory of
Cappadocia intruded into his See) why it neither was, nor could be esteemed
general, or such as should bind the whole Church, by the decrees made by it;
for said Julius Apud Socr. l. 2 ca. 13. et Zozom. lib. 3. ca. 9.
, they did against the Canons of the Church, (...), because they did not so
much as call him to that Synod; whereas the Canons of the Church forbid that
any decree (which should have power to bind the whole Church) should be made
without the sentence, judgment, and consent of the Bishop of Rome, (either
attained, or at least sought for.) The Canon which Julius mentioned, might well
ordain, and if there were no such Canon, yet even reason and equity do teach,
that such decrees as concern the whole Church, and are to bind them all,
ought to be made by the help, judgment, and advise of them all; according to
the rule, Quod Reg. Iuris 29.
omnes tangit, ab omnibus approbari debet. The wilful omission of any one
Bishop, much more of the Bish. of Rome, who then was the chief Patriarch in
the world, declares the Council not to be general, seeing unto it there was
only a partial, and not a general summons or calling.

4. As this first condition is required to the generality, so are the other two
for the lawfulness and order of Synods: For if the Apostles rule, Let 1 Cor.
14.40.
all things be done decently, and in order, must be kept in every private and
particular Church, how much more in those venerable assemblies of Oecumenicall
Councels, which are the Armies of God, and of the Angels of all the Churches of
God, among whom does, and ought to shine gravity, prudence, and all sacred, and
fitting orders, no less than in the celestial Hierarchy, and in the very
presence of the Majesty of God. If they be gathered in Gods name, how can they
be other than lawful and orderly Assemblies, seeing God 1 Cor. 14.33.
is not the God of confusion (...). tumultuationis, inco^positi status.
, or disorder, but of peace in all Churches. Now the lawfulness and order of
Synods, consists partly in their orderly assembling, and partly in their
orderly government and proceedings, when they are assembled; whenever the
Bishops of any general Council first assemble together by lawful authority,
and then are so governed by lawful authority also; that orderly, lawful, and
due synodall proceedings be only used therein, as well in the free and
diligent discussion of the causes proposed, as in the free sentencing thereof,
the same is truly and properly to be called (...) Act. 19.39.
, a lawful Synod: But if either of these conditions be wanting, it becomes
unlawful and disorderly. If the Bishops assemble together, either not being
called, or if called, yet not by such as have right and authority to call them;
though this in a large acception may be called a Synod, that is, an assembly
of Bishops, yet because they do unlawfully and disorderly assemble together,
it is in propriety of speech to be termed a Co^venticle, a riotous, tumultuous,
and seditious assembly; even such as that was of Demetrius Ib. v. 24. et seq.
, and the other Ephesia^s, who, without calling and order, (...), rusht Ibid.
v. 29.
and run headlong together to uphold the honor of their great Diana; which
both the Spirit of God condemns, as a confused (...). v. 32.
or disorderly assembly, and the more wise among them taxed, as a riotous and
seditious Periclitamur argui seditionis. v. 40.
tumult. If being lawfully called, yet they either want a lawful President to
govern them; or having one, yet want freedom and liberty either in discussing
or giving judgment in the cause; such a Synod, though in respect of their
assembling it be lawful, yet in respect of their proceedings and judgment, it
is unlawful, and disorderly, and therefore in propriety of speech to be termed
a conspiracy, because those men conspire and band themselves, as did the
Council Mat. 26.59. and ca. 27.2. and Act. 4.27.
of the Priests with Pilate, by unjust and unlawful means to suppress the
truth, and oppress innocence.

5. But unto who^ belongs that right to call general Councels, and when they
are called, to see orderly and synodal proceedings observed therein? To whom?
to whom else but only to those who have Imperial and Regal authority, whether
they be one (as when the Empire was united, and the whole Christian world
subject to his authority;) or more, as it was when the Empire was divided, and
ever since that great dissolution of it in the time Circa an. 800.
of Charles the great: To them, and them only, this right to belong, I have in
two other books, the one concerning the calling, the other concerning the
Presidencie in Councels, at large and clearly demonstrated; and I hold them to
be so evident truths, both by the doctrine of Scripture, and by the constant
judgment and practice of the Catholic Church, for more than eight hundred
years after Christ, that if any would read the Tomes of the Councels, he had
need put out both his eyes, if he will not see this.

6. To them, and them only is the sword Romans 13.2, 3.
given by God, that by it they might maintain the faith, and use it to the
praise of them that do well, but take vengeance on them that do evil: They
are the nursing Isa. 49.23.
fathers of the Church, unto whom the ear is committed by God, that all his
Children, to whom they, next unto God, are fathers, be fed with the sincere
milk 1 Pet. 2.2.
of Gods word, all mixture and poison of heresy and impiety being taken away,
and severed from it: They are like Joshua Numb. 27.17. Psalm. 78.71, 72.
and David, appointed by God to be (...), the Pastors Tam Hebraice quam in 70.
Interpr. et apud Hier. legitur [ad pascendum Jacob populum suum] et [pavit eos]
quod alij vertunt, ad regendum.
, even supreme Pastors of the Israel of God, not indeed to teach and give the
food themselves, (which duty belongs to their inferior servants) yet to
perform those which are the principal and most Non proprie dicitur pascere
alium, qui cibum quacunque ratione ministrat, sed qui procurat et providet
alteri cibum, quod est certe Praepositi, et gubernatoris, and Actus Pastoralis
non est tantum praebere cibum, sed etiam ducere, etc. Bell. lib. 1. de Pont.
Romans ca. 15. Primu^. et Deinde.
proper Pastoral acts and offices, procurare ac providere alteri cibu^, ducere,
reducere, tueri, praeesse, regere, castigare; to provide that all the sheep of
Christ have wholesome and convenient food given unto them, to lead them, bring
them back, defend, govern, and chastise them when they will not obey their
Pastoral call and command. None of all which Pastoral duties were it possible
for Kings to perform, if for public tranquillity and instruction of Gods
people they might not by their authority assemble a general Council of
Bishops, and being assembled, if they might not defend and uphold all just and
equal, but castigate and keep away all violent, fraudulent, and unjust
proceedings in such Councels.

7. I purposely said supreme Pastors; for none is ignorant, that Peter John
21.15, 17.
and all the Apostles equally with him, as also all Cum ei (Petro) dicitur, ad
omnes dicitur, Amas me ^ pasce oves meas. Aug. lib. de agone Christ. ca. 30.
who either in their Presbyteriall or Episcopal authority succeed unto them
(for in their Apostolical none of them had or have any successor) that all
these are Pastors Ier. 23.1, 2. Ezech. 34. per totum, et Act. 20 28. et 1 Pet.
5.2.
also of Gods flock, but they are all subordinate to the Imperial Pastors of
the people of God, the sheep-hooke is subject to the Scepter, the Crosier to
the Imperial Crown. Concerning Kings Saint Peter gives a general precept,
Fear God 1 Pet. 2.17.
, and honor the King; which honor he expressly calls subjection Ibid v. 30.
and obedience in the same Chapter; first we owe obedience to God, and next
God, unto Kings and Emperors. Concerning all others excepting Kings, and such
as have Kingly authority, Saint Paul gives a like general precept, Let Romans
13.1.
every soul be subject to the higher powers, even to those, who by Gods
warrant, and as his Vicegerents, do bear Ibid. v. 4.
the sword: to them every soul ought to be subject; who can except thee from
this generality? This is commanded, says Chrysostom Chrysostom. in ca. 15. ad Romans
, Not only to secular men, but to all, to Monks, to Priests and Bishops, the
Apostle teaches them, ex debito obedire, even in duty to obey Kings and
Princes, sive Apostolus sis, sive Propheta, sive Euangelista, sive quisquis
tandem fueris; not the Prophets, not the Apostles, not the Evangelists, not any
soul is exempt from this subjection: and if not Peter himself, then certainly
not his Vicar, as the Pope Quem Primatem diocescos Synodus dixit, praeter
Apostol^^ primi Vicarium. Nich. 1. Epist. 8. Quem.
calls himself: And this very subjection of the Pope, and all Bishops to the
Emperors, to omit Silvester, Julius, Leo, and Gregory, Pope Agatho in most
submissive manner acknowledges almost seven hundred Conc. 6. habitum an. 680
Bar. et Bin.
years after Christ, Conc. 6. Act. 4. pa. 22. in Epist. Agathonis et Romans
Synodi.
Omnes nos praesules, vestri imperij famuli; All we Bishops are the servants of
your imperial highness, says Agatho, and a Synod of 125 Western Bishops
with him; to which purpose he calls Italy his servile Epist. Agath. Act. 4. pa.
12. b.
Province, and Rome his servile City; adding, that he did this at the Emperors
sacred command, pro obedientiae satisfactione, pro obedientia quam debuimus,
for that obedience which he did owe to the Emperor; nay, yet in more lowly
manner, he says not, that he, but, studiosa obedientia nostri famulatus
implevit; the willing obedience of his own servitude to the Emperor, did
perform this. Nor was this the profession only of Agatho; and the Western
Bishops, but the whole sixth Council approved the same, Petrus Sermo
acclamatorius Conc. generalis 6. Act. 18. pa. 89. b.
per Agathonem loquebatur, Saint Peter spoke by the mouth of Agatho. Now
because they all acknowledge the Pope to be the first and chief Bishop in the
Church, (for they all in that Council approve Defi^it. Council. 6. Act. 17. pa.
80. a.
the Councels of Chalcedon, and first Constantinopolitane, in both Conc. 2.
Can. 5 et Conc. Chal. Act. 16. post Can. 27.
which that is decreed) seeing by the confession of Agatho, by them approved, the
Pope is a servant, and owes subjection and obedience to the Emperor; much
more are all other Bishops in the whole world, servants, and subjects to the
Imperial command, and that by the consenting judgment of the whole catholic
Church, represented in that sixth general Council.

8. The same Sovereignty, and supreme Pastoral authority of Kings, is after
this again testified in that which they call the eighth general Council,
more than Conc. illud 8. habit. an. 869. Bar. et Bin.
eight hundred and sixty years after CHRIST. Basilius the Emperor said before
the Council, in his letters Conc. 8. Act. 1. pa. 880. b.
unto them, The government of the Ecclesiastical ship is by the Divine
Providence committed unto us: in that ship does sail all who are members of
the Church, Bishops or Laics, and the government of the whole ship is given to
the Emperor; He, like the Pilot, rules and directs all. Raderus the Jesuit,
and Binius following him, in stead of nobis have put vobis in the latin text;
as if Basilius had said, that the government of the Church belonged to Bishops,
not to Emperors: It is a Jesuitical and fraudulent trick, for which no
color of excuse can be made: The Greek set on the very opposite Page Apud
Rad. pa. 224.
, is (...), nobis: in the Surian Collectio^ Extat apud Bin. to. 3. Con. pa. 858.
of those Acts, it was rightly read nobis; their own Cardinal Cusanus Cusan.
lib. 3. de Concor. Cathi ca. 19.
out of the ancient Acts of that Synod, cites it, commisisset nobis: the very
sense inforceth it to be nobis, for the Emperor adds, Therefore do we with
all solicitude exhort and warn you, that you come to the holy Oecumenicall
Synod: which had been a most foolish collection, had he not said nobis, but
vobis, for then not to him, but to them should have belonged the care to call
the Bishops to the Synod; yet against all these evidences of truth Raderus and
Binius falsify the text, corrupt the words, and pervert the sense, by turning
nobis into vobis, that so they might deprive the Emperor of that supreme
authority which Basilius there professed to belong unto himself, and the
Legates of the Patriarchs, in the name of the whole Synod approved the
Emperors saying Conc. 8. Act. 1. pa. 880. b.
, Recte Imperatores nostri monuere, the Emperors have said well. To go no
further in this matter, that which was cited out of the Scripture concerning
Joshua and David, does clear this point; for seeing all who sit in Imperial
thrones, are like Joshua and David, to feed the Israel of God; and the Israel
of God contains the whole flock and all the sheep of Christ, ex Bell. lib.
1. de Pontif. Romans ca. 15. At nobis.
hac ipsa voce Pasce, difficile non est demonstrare summam potestatem ei
attribut; It is easy even by this very word Feed, to demonstrate, that supreme
power does belong to Kings, seeing unto them it is said, Feed my sheep, feed
my people: Wherefore seeing Kings are commanded by God to rule by their
Pastoral authority all others, and all others are commanded to obey, and be
subject unto them and their Imperial commands, as unto their supreme Pastor
hereupon earth; it hence unavoydably follows, that Bishops neither without
that Imperial command, may in a riotous manner assemble in general Councels,
nor being commanded by them, may deny to assemble, nor being assembled may
refuse to be ordered and governed by their Imperial Presidency.

9. After these precepts of GOD, look to the practice of the Church, and you
shall see that lawful Synods or Assemblies about Ecclesiastical affairs,
have been gathered by no other than Imperial authority, as well in the old as
new Testament. In the time of IOSIA when the Temple was purged from those
manifold Idolatries, wherewith it was polluted, who assembled Israel? the
Priests? no, but the King 2 Chr. 34.29.30.
sent and gathered all the Elders of Judah, and went into the house of the LORD
with the Priests and Levites: The like had ASA done in the oath of Association,
He 2 Chronicles. 15.9, 10.
gathered all Judah: SOLOMON in the Dedication of the Temple, He 2 Chronicles. 5.2.
assembled the Elders and the heads of the Tribes; DAVID in bringing the Arc,
and in ordering the offices of the Temple, DAVID 1 Chronicles. 13.5. and cap. 15.4.
gathered all Israel together; He 1 Chronicles. 23.2.
gathered together then all the Princes, with the Priests and Levites: HEZECHIA
in clensing the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.4.
He gathered the Priests and Levites, called Jbid. v. 11.
them his sons; and they were gathered together, juxta Jbid. v. 15.
mandatum Regis, according to the commandment of the King. Joshua at the
renewing of the Covenant, He Josh. 24.2.
assembled all the Tribes of Israel. And to mention no more, (for what King is
there, or Judge, or Captain, who had all kingly authority, though somewhat
qualified and tempered in them more than in Kings) who is not an example
hereof? Consider but Moses, who was the first that had sovereignty in their
commonwealth; how often and still with a warrant from God did he assemble the
people upon urge^t occasions? At the first making of the covenant with God,
Moses called Exodus 19.7.
the Elders; at the publishing of the law, Moses brought Exodus 19.17.
the people out of their tents unto God: after the bringing of the two Tables
from God, Moses assembled all Exodus 35.1.
the congregation of Israel: at the anointing and investing of Aaron, Moses
Levit. 8.3, 4.
assembled all the congregation: at the repeating of the Covenant, he Deuteronomy.
5.1. and ca. 31.28.
commanded all the Elders of the Tribes of Israel to come unto him. Yea at the
very first time, when God appointed him to be a Captain and Ruler over his
people, even then God gave unto him that authority (which afterward he renewed
in the tenth Number. 10.2. Make thee two Trumpets, that thou may use them for
the assembling of the congregation.
of Numbers) to congregate and assemble the people of God; Go, says God Exodus
3.16.
, and gather the Elders of Israel together: thereby teaching the power of
assembling Gods people to be inseparably annexed unto Imperial, regal, and
sovereign authority; that none has the one who has not the other by the very
warrant of God committed unto him, to the end the assemblies of Gods people
might not be tumultuous and seditious, as was that of Demetrius, and of Corah
Number. 16.2. etc.
, Dathan, and Abiram, which the Lord severely revenged, but lawful and
orderly, as God is the author not of confusion, but of order in all Churches,
and in all ages of the Church.

10. Come we to the times of the Gospel. The power and rightful authority to
call Synods was ever in the Emperors and Kings, even in those three hundred
years while the Church was in most grievous persecution under Heathen
Emperors: The right and power was in the Heathen as well as in Christian
Emperors; in Tiberius as well as Theodosius; in Dioclesian, as well as in
Constantine or Justinian. But that power which they rightly had, they did not
use aright: not to call Synods to maintain the faith, but to abolish Synods,
Bishops, Christians, and utterly extirpate the Christian faith. Now because
Christ had laid an absolute necessity 1 Cor. 9.16. Matthew. 28.19.
upon the Apostles, and their successors, to feed, to teach, and maintain the
doctrine of faith; and seeing they could not do this with the allowance, or so
much as connivence of the Emperors, who in duty should have protected them in
so doing, yea have caused them so to do; this very necessity enforced them,
and was a lawful warrant unto them, both to feed the flock, preach the
Gospel, and to hold Synods in the best and most convenient manner that they
then could, not only without, but against the will and command of the
Emperors, that higher command of Christ overruling theirs. Whereby are
warranted as lawful, to say nothing of that Acts 15. those Synods at Antioch
against Paulus Samosatenus at Rome, against the Novatians in Afric, many in
the time of Cyprian, and diverse the like. For even the law of God, to yield
unto necessity, the example of David Matthew. 12.1, 2. etc.
, the doctrine of our Savior, does demonstrate; besides those many Maxims,
which are all grounded on this truth, as, that necessity Necessitas non habet
legem, sed ipsa sibi facit legem. Cause. 1. q. 1 ca. 39. Remissionem.
has no law, nor is subject to any law, but is a law of it self: that many
things are lawful in case of necessity Gloss. in cap. Discipul^^. de consec.
distinct. 5. in marg.
, which otherwise are unlawful: that of Leo, Inculpabile judicandum quod
necessitas intulit; Citatur a Iohann^ 8. in Epist. 199.. N^^.
that is blameless which necessity does warrant: and many the like, which Pope
John Ibidem.
alleges. This, and nothing else, does declare those Synods to have been
lawful, though assembled without Imperial authority: as the times were
extraordinary, so their extraordinary assembling was by those times of
necessity made lawful. But as soon as Emperors began to profess the faith,
and to use their own, and Imperial authority, in assembling Bishops for
consulting about causes of faith; the Catholic Bishops knowing that from
thence that law of Necessity was now expired and out of date, attempted not
then to come to Synods uncalled, nor refused to come when they were called;
though sometimes they came with an assured expectance of the crown of
Martyrdom before they departed; as in the Councels of Millane, Arimine, and
Syrmium, called by the Arrian Emperor Constantius, is most clear.

11. Hence it is that all the ancient general Councels, yea all that were held
for the space of a thousand years after Christ, were all assembled by no other
than this Imperial authority. Take a short view of some, and of the chief of
them. Of the first Nicen, Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constant. c. 6
says, Constantine assembled this Oecumenicall Council, he called the
Bishops by his letters, and his call was mandatory, for Mandatum erat, (...) ad
hanc rem, Constantine commanded that they should come. The very Synod it self
writes thus in their Synodall letters, We are assembled Citantur verba, tum a
Socr. lib. 2. ca. 6. tum a Theodor. lib. 1. ca. 11.
by the grace of God, and mandato Imperatoris, and by the mandate of
Constantine the Emperor: so Christopher son translates (...), both in Socrates
and Theodoret. Of the second, their own Synodall Epistle to Theodosius
witnesses; We came Epist. Synod. Conc. Constable. 1. apud Bin. to. 1. Conc. pa.
518.
hither, ex mandato tua pietatis, by the command of your Imperial highness.
Of the third Council, the Synodall acts and Epistles are clear witnesses:
Your Highness has commanded (...). Iussit suo pio edict. Act. Conc. Ephesians. to.
4. ca. 11.
by your holy Edict, the Bishops out of the whole world to come to Ephesus.
Again, the synod Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. ca. 1.
being assembled (...), by the Edict, decree, authority and appointment of the
Emperor: and the like is repeated I think not so little as threescore times in
those Acts. And as they came at the Emperors command, so would they not depart
without his leave and license. We beseech Epist. Synodi ad Imper. to. 2. Act.
Conc. Ephesians. ca. 17.
your piety that you will at length free us from this exile: and the Emperor
granted their request: for, injungit (...). to. 5. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca 11.
eis, he commanded and enjoined them to return to their own Cities: and
again, Regio (...). ibid.
mandato imperatum est singulis Episcopis, there was a mandate to all the
Bishops by the Emperor to return to their own Provinces. Of the Council at
Chalcedon, the whole Synod says in their Epistle to Pope Leo, This Epist. Syn.
Chalc. post Act. 16.
holy and general Synod was assembled by the grace of God, and sanctione
Imperatorum, and by the sanction or decree of our most holy Emperors. Again,
this synod was gathered, ex decreto Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. pa. 1.
Imperatorum, by the decree of the Emperors: secundum jussionem, according to
his command. And the like is repeated almost in every action. Of the fifth we
showed before that it was called Iussione Conc. 5. Coll. 8. pa. 584. a.
piissimi Imperatoris, by the command of the most holy Emperor Justinian. Of
the sixth it is usually said, it was assembled, secundum Conc. 6. Act. 1.2.3.
and reliquis.
Imperialem sanctionem aut decretum, and the like, by the Imperial sanction or
decree. And the whole Council in their prosphoneticall oration to the
Emperor, says Conc. 6. Act. 18 pa. 89. a.
unto him; your mansuetude has congregated this holy and great assembly. Of
their second Nicene it is said, that it was assembled, per. Conc. Nic. 2. Act.
1. pa. 297. a and act. 2. pa. 308 b. and act. 5. pa. 338. b.
pium Decretum, Sanctionem, Mandatum, by the holy Decree, Sanction, and Mandate
of the Emperors: of that which they call the eighth, the synodall definition
expresses, Quod a Conc. 8. Act. 10. pa. 897. a.
Basilio Imperatore coactum, that it was assembled by Basilius the Emperor;
and the whole Synod cried out, We all think so; we all subscribe to these
things. And Pope Stephen in his letters to Basilius, speaking of this Synod,
says Epist. Stephan. post Conc. 8. pa. 900.
, Did not the Roman See send Legates to the Council, (...), te imperante,
Raderus and Binius translate it, but it is rather to be read, ad imperium, and
summam jussionem tuam, the Pope sent Legates, not when Basilius was Emperor,
(which was no great honor or token of duty to be done:) but at the most high
command of Basilius; which testified his subjection and duty to the Emperor,
whom the Pope in that same Epistle acknowledges to be the highest Quam vis
supremam Christi in terris personam formamque geris. Steph. Ep. eadem. p. 890.
b.
person who here upon earth sustaines the person of Christ: and in the sixth
Action of the same Conc. 8. act. 6. pa. 886. a.
Council, it is said, Imperator hanc Synodum coegit, the Emperor assembled
this Synod.

12. Thus all those Counsels which are usually reckoned for general and
approved, for the space of a thousand years, were all called by Imperial
jussion and command; the religious Emperors exercising that right in
commanding all Bishops, even the Popes to such Councels; all the Bishops, even
the Popes, by their willing obedience acknowledging that authority and power to
be in the Emperors, and therefore they gladly obeyed those imperial jussions
and commands. And as they were all assembled by Imperial calling, so were they
all governed by Imperial presidency. That Constantine was President in the
Nicene, Pope Stephen in the Epistle lately cited expressly witnesses: Do you
not remember, says he Steph. Papa in Epist. ad Basil. Imper. post 8. Conc.
, what Pope Silvester said in the Nicene Synod, praesidente ibi S. Constantino,
Saint Constantine being President therein. His own Acts in the Council, of
moderating Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constable. ca. 13.
, and repressing the jarres of the Bishops, of burning Ruff lib. 1. c. 2
their books of accusations and quarrels, of drawing them to unity, that with
one consent they should define the causes proposed, do manifest the same: for
all these are acts of the Imperial presidency. That Theodosius was President
in the second, may appear, not only for that he was present Ipsoque praesente
Theodosio Epist. Justin. post Conc. 5. pa. 605. a.
therein, and present no doubt as Constantine had been before, as a moderator
of their actions; but that small remainder of the Acts of that Council import
also the same: for he directed, and that by his Mandatum Insuperque ma^daret
Imperator, ut diligens inquisitio sieret. Sozom. lib. 7. c. 6
, what the Bishops should do: and when they out of their partial affections
would have preferred each his own friend to the Sea of Constantinople, the
Emperor perceiving that, corrected their partial judgment, Iussit Sozom.
lib. 7. ca. 7.
inscribere chartae, he commanded them to write a bill of such men as they
thought fit for the place; himself nominated Nectarius; and though many of the
Bishops at first contradicted that choice, yet he drew them all to his
sentence, and so the whole Synod consented upon the ordination of Nectarius.

13. For the holy Ephesine Synod, all the Acts are full of this Imperial
Presidency. The Emperors sent Candidianus Tom. 1. act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 32.
to keep away tumult, and disorderly Non licet illos qui necessarij non sunt,
dogmatum examen aliquo tumultu impedire. ibid.
persons from the Council: to see that no Vt diligenter prospiciat ne qua
gravior dissentio synodi consultationem obturbet. Ibid.
dissension and private quarrels might hinder their grave consultations, the
free and exact discussion of the causes proposed, and to provide that every one
might freely Vt omnibus and singulis recte perceptis, singuli quod vlsum
fuerit, in medio proponant, vel ab aliis proposita, si opus id fuerit,
refutare. ibid.
and with leisure propose what was needful, and have scope to refute all
doubts proposed by others. The Emperors when they heard of the dissentions and
disorders among the Bishops, writ unto them to take a better and more peaceable
and orderly examination of the cause, saying Sacr. Imper. ad Synodum, to. 3.
act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 17.
, Majestas nostra ea quae acta sunt pro ratis and legitimis habere non potest;
our Majesty cannot hold or esteem those acts, done so disorderly, for firm
and synodall; nay we decree that all things which hitherto have been done, pro
irritis, and nullis habenda esse, shall be accounted of no force, but utterly
void and frustrate: than which no greater tokens of Imperial Presidency can be
devised. The whole and holy Synod willingly submitted themselves to this
presidency. In their proceedings the Emperors letters were their direction
Primo omniu^ Actorum monumentis reverendas pietatis vestrae literas quasi Facem
quandam praemisimus. Ep. synod. ad Imp. to. 2. act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 22.
, and as themselves profess, the very Torch to guide all their actions. In the
manifold injuries and contumelies which they endured at the hands of John, with
his Conventicle, they fled to the Emperor, beseeching Etiam atque etiem
rogamus vestram Majestatem ut sanct. synod. studium erga Deum agnoscat, ut
Candidianum and quinque praeterea e sacra synodo Episcopos ad se accersat, qui
omnia and singula qua Ephesi gesta sunt pietati vestrae ordine and coram
exponant. Epist. synodi ad Imp. to. 4. act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 10. and idem ca. 11.
him to be Judge of their equal proceedings, and take an exact view and
examination of their doings, which upon Annuit tande^ illorum votis Jmperator.
Bin. in arg. cap. 19 to. 4. act. Conc. Ephesians.
their request the Emperor did, and called Vestra pielas nostra supplicatione
instexa mandavit, ut S. Synodus quos voluerit ama^d et qui universarum rerum
statum coram exponant. Relat. synodi ad Imper. to. 4. act. Conc. Ephesians. c. 22
Nostrae praeces sunt ut judicium a tua pietate accipiamus. Johan. and convent.
cum expetit. ad Jmper. Append. ad to. 2. Act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 2. pa. 787. b.
sive Bishops of either part to Constantinople to declare the whole cause unto
him; after which being performed, he gave judgment Decretum regium, to. 5 act.
Conc. Ephesians. ca. 11.
for the holy Council, and adnulled all the acts of the Conventicle, as the
holy Synod had earnestly and humbly entreated him. So fully and clearly does
that sacred and Oecumenicall Council, wherein was the judgment and consent of
the whole Catholic Church, both acknowledge this Imperial right of Presidency
in the Emperors, and submit themselves unto it.

14. For the Council of Chalcedon, the matter is so evident, that Bellarmine,
though struggling against the truth, could not deny it. There were present,
says he Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 19.. Quartam.
, in this Council secular Judges, deputed by the Emperor, who were not Judges
of controversies of faith, (to give a decisive suffrage therein, for that
belongs to no secular man whatsoever) sed tantum an omnia fierent legitime,
sive vi and fraud and tumultibus, but they were Judges only of Synodall
order, whether all things were done lawfully, without force, fraud and tumult.
And in this does the very Imperial Presidency consist. And truly how
religiously and worthily those glorious Judges performed that honorable office
in the synod, all the actions thereof do make manifest: for scarce any matter
was done in the synod, but the same was ordered, moderated, and guided by their
prudence and authority. The Popes Legates very insolently took upon them at the
beginning, willing that Dioscorus might be put out of the synod, and said Act.
1. Conc. Chal. pa. 4. b. Aut ille egrediatur, aut nos eximus.
, Either let Dioscorus go out, or we will depart. The Judges gravely reproved
this stomach in the Legates, telling them, If you will be Si Iudicis obtines
personam, non ut accusator debes prosequi. Ibid. pa. 5. b.
Judges, you must not prosequute as accusers: nor did they suffer Dioscorus to
go away, but commanded him, as was fit, to sit in the place of the Rei. The
cause of Iuvenalis and Thalassius was proposed to the synod; It could not be
examined by them, till they had leave from the Emperor; We, said Act. 4. Conc.
Chal. pa. 89. b.
the Judges, have acquainted the Emperor therewith, and we expect his Mandate
herein: and after they had received the Emperors mind, they then told the
synod, Imperator Ibid.
sententiae vestrae permisit de Iuvenale deliberare, the Emperor has upon
your entreaty permitted you to discuss and judge the cause of Iuvenalis,
Thalassius, and the rest. In the cause Act. 4. Conc. Chal. pa. 90. Omnes
clamaveriit, Isti haeretici sunt
of the ten Egyptian Bish. the Synod had almost pronounced a temerarious
sentence against them, as heretical, when indeed they were orthodoxall; the
Bishops cried out, Isti haeretici sunt, these ten are heretics. The glorious
Judges knowing which was manifest, that they forbore to subscribe, by reason of
a custom which they had, that they might do nothing without their Patriarch,
who was not then chosen; and not as thinking heretically in the faith,
moderated the Synod in that matter, saying, Act. eadem 5. pa. 90 b.
Rationabile nobis and clemens videtur; it seems to us to be reason, and an
act of clemency, not to have condemned them, but staid till their Patriarch
be chosen: the whole Synod consented to this grave sentence of the Judges, and
made a Canon Can. 30. Act. 15
for that purpose. In making the very definition of faith, there grew a great
dissension in the Synod; some Non recte habet Desinitio, etc. Act. 5. Co^c.
Chal. pa. 93. b.
would have it one, some another way set down; in so much that the Popes
Legates were ready to make a schism, and depart Iubete nobis rescriptum dari
ut revertamur, et ibid Synodus celebretur. Ibid.
from the Council, and hold another Council by themselves. The glorious Judges
proposed a most equal and fitting means to have the matter peaceably debated,
and the whole Synod brought to unity: But when outcries Suggerentur Imperatori
clamores isti, etc. Act. eadem. 5. pa. 94. a.
and tumult prevailed above reason, the Judges complained of those discords to
the Emperor, and, Imperator Ibid.
praecepit, the Emperor commanded them to follow the direction of the Judges,
which they did, and so with one accord consented on the Definition of faith.
The Emperor at the earnest entreaty of Bassianus, commanded Festinet vestra
reverentia causam discutere, etc. Literae Imper. Act. 11. Co^c. Chal. pa 116. b.
the Synod to examine the whole cause betwixt him and Stephanus, to which of
them in right the Sea of Ephesus belonged; The Synod would have given sentence
for Bassianus, Iustitia Act. eadem pa. 118. b.
Bassianum vocat, Equity and right does call for Bassianus to be the Bishop of
that place; The glorious Judges weighing the cause more circumspectly, thought
that neither of them both could in right be Bishop: The whole Synod being
directed by them, altered their opinion, and said Ibid.
, This is a just sentence, this is the very judgment of God. When there was a
difference in the Synod, about the dignity of Constantinople, the greater part
Haec omnes dicimus. Act. 16. pa. 137. a.
holding one way, and the Popes Legates the contrary Contradictio nostra his
gestis inhaereat. Ibid.
, the glorious Judges judicially Quod interloquuti sumus tota Synodus
approbavit, dixerunt Iudices. Jb.
sentenced, which was to stand for the Judgment of the Synod; and the whole
Council in their synodall letter consented Confirma vimus regulam 150. patrum,
etc. Relatio Synodi ad Leonem post Conc. Chal. pa. 140. a.
thereunto. So many, so manifest evidences there are of the Imperial Presidency
in that holy Council, not any of all those Catholics once repining at, or
contradicting the same.

15. For the fifth, that it was ordered by the Imperial authority, may
appear, in that both the Emperor was sometimes by Cu^ Iustinianus Synodo
interesset. Zonar. Ann. to 3. in Justin.
himself, sometimes by his glorious Coll. 1. Conc. 5. et Coll. 7.
Judges, present in the Synod, and specially in that he took order, that
liberty Maxim, cum pijssimus Imperator et nos ipsi licentiam dedimus unicuique
suam voluntatem facere manifesta^, sic dixit Synodus. Coll. 2. pa. 524. b.
and synodall freedom should be observed therein; yea, as the whole Synod
testifies, he did Coll. 7. p. 581.
omnia, all things which preserve the peace of the Church, and unity in the
Catholic faith: The sixth Council is abundant with proofs of this presidency:
Macarius said, O our most holy Lord, iubeto Conc. 6. Act. 1 pa. 8. b.
libro; proferri, command that the books be produced; and the Emperor
answered, Iubemus, we command them to be brought; we command them to be read;
and it was done. The Popes Legates say, Petimus Act. 3. Conc. 6. pa. 11. a.
serenitatem vestram, we entreat your highness that this book may be
examined; the Emperor answered, Quod postulatum est proveniat, let that be
done which you request: Again, O most holy Lord, we entreat Ibid. pa. 11. b.
, that the letters of Pope Agatho may be read; the Emperors answer was, what
you have desired, let it be done; and they were read: Macarius having collected
certain testimonies out of the Fathers, for his opinion, entreated the
Emperor, Iubeto Act. 5. pa. 25. b
relegi, that he would command them to be read; his answer was, let them be
read in order, and so they were: The Popes Legates said, petimus, we entreat
Act. 6. pa. 27. a
your highness, that the authentike Copies may be produced out of the
Registrie; his answer was, fiat, let it de done: The whole Synod entreated, If
it Act. 8. pa. 30. a
please your piety, let Theodorus and the rest, stand in the midst, and there
make answer for themselves; his answer was, What the Synod has moved, fiat,
let it be done: George Bish. of Constantinople said, O our Lord, crowned by
God, command Ibid.
that the name of Poper Vitalianus may be set in the Dipticks; his answer was,
quod postulatum est, fiat, let that be done which he has requested. The
Emperor commanded Act. eadem 8. pa. 30. b.
the books of Macarius to be read; the whole Synod answered, Quod jussum est,
what your highness has commanded shall be performed. After the authentical
letters of Sergius, and Pope Honorius had been read in the Synod, the glorious
Judges called Act. 13. pa 67. a.b.
for the like authentical writings of Pirrhus, Paulus, Peter, and Cyrus, to
be produced and read: the whole Council answered Sanctum Concilium dixit, Hoc
fieri superstuum judicavimus, etc. Ibid. pa. 67. b.
, that it was superfluous, seeing their heresy was manifest to all: the Judges
replied, omnino Ibid.
necessarium existit, this is necessary; that they be convicted out of their
own writings; and then their writings were produced. I omit the rest, whereof
every Action of that Synod is full; and by those Acts the Presidency in Councels
does so clearly belong to Emperors, and that also by the acknowledgment
Praesidente eodem pijssimo Imperatore Constantino. Act. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10 11.
of that whole general Council, that Albertus Pighius being unwilling to
yield to this truth, has purposely writ Act. Pigh. lib. de Actis. 6. et 7.
Synodiquae circumferuntur, quod parengrapha sint et minime germana.
a most railing and reviling Treatise against this holy general Synod,
condemning both this Council, and these Acts, as unlawful, for this among
other reasons, because the Emperor with his Judges, plena Lib. eodem At
Concilio illi
authoritate Praesidet, is President with full authority in the same; he does
all, he proposes, he questioneth, he commands, he examineth, he judges,
he decrees: And yet in all these he does nothing but what belongs essentially
to his Imperial authority; nothing but what Constantine, Theodosius, Martian,
and Justinian had done before him, and done it with the approbation and
applause of the whole Church, and of all the Catholic Bishops in those holy
general Councels; and he performed this with such uprightness and equality,
that he professed, necessitatem Sacra Imp. Constantini Pogon. ante 6. Conc.
pa. 6. b.
nullatenus infer volumus, we will enforce no man, but leave him at his own
freedom in sentencing the causes proposed, and, aequalitatam Ibid.
utriusque partis conservabimus; we will be equal and indifferent Judges
betwixt both parties.

16. In the second Nicene, though by the fraud of Anastasius there be not many,
yet are there some prints remaining of this Imperial Presidencie; We have
received, say the Emperors Conc. Nic. 2. a Act. 1. pa. 300.
, letters from Hadrian Bish. of Rome, sent by his Legates, qui et nobiscum in
Concilio sedent, who also sit with us in the Synod: Those letters, jubemus
public legi, we command to be publicly read according to the use in Councels,
and we command all you to mark them with decent silence: After that, you shall
read two quaternions also sent from the Bishops in the East; and the whole
Synod obeyed the Imperial commands. Pope Hadrian himself was not ignorant of
this right in the Emperors, when sending his Pontifical and Cathedral
judgment concerning the cause of Images, he said thus unto them, We Epist,
Hadr. Papae ad Imp. lecta in Con. Nic. 2. Act. 2. in sine Epist.
offer these things to your highness with all humility, that they may be
diligently examined, for we have but perfunctorie, that is, for fashion, and
not exactly gathered these testimonies, and we have delivered them to your
Imperial Highness to be read, entreating and beseeching your mansuetude; yea,
and as if I were lying Et veluti praesentes genibus ad voluti, et cora vestigia
pedum volutando. Ibid.
at your feet, I pray and adjure you that you will command holy Images to be
restored. Thus he. When the Pope calls the Emperors his Dominis pijssimis
Constantino et Irene Hadrianus servus servorum Dei. Inscript. Ep. Haar.
Lords, and submits both his own person to their feet, and his judicial
sentence to such trial, as they shall think fit, does not this import an
higher Presidency in the Emperor, than either himself or his Legates had in
the Synod? Nay, it is further to be remembered, which will remain as an eternal
blot of that Synod, that Irene the Empress, not contenting her self with the
Imperial, which was her own rightful authority, intruded her self into the
Episcopal also; she forsooth would be a Synodus illa (Nicena) mulierem
Institutrice^ sive Doctricem habuisse perhibetur; quod non solum divina legis
documentis, sed ipsius naturae lege inhibetur. Car. magni l ber dict.
Capitulare de non adorand. Jmag. lib. 3. ca. 13. Aliud est matremfamilias
domesticos erudire; aliud Antistitibus sine omni Ecclesiastico ordine, vel
publicae Synodo docentem interesse. Jbid.
Doctrix in the Council; she present among the Bishops to teach the whole
Council what they should define in causes of faith: Perversas Constitutiones
tradere; she took upon her to give Constitutions, and those impious also,
unto them: Those Constitutions backed with her sword and authority; the Bishops
of the Council had not the hearts and courage to withstand: All which is
testified in the Libri Carolini, which in part were written Quod o^us aggressi
sumus cum co^hibe^tia Sacerdotum, non arrogantiae supercilio, sed zelo Dei et
veritatis studio. Carol mag. praesatio, et Cap. ultimum illius libri fuisse
Caroli agnoscit Had. in sua Epist. 3. ca. 25. pa. 281. a.
, and wholly set forth by Charles the great, being for the most part composed
by the Council at Frankfourd Libri Carolini scripti videntur in Concilio
Fra^cofordiensi. Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 8. Primo quia.
, and approved by them all in that great synod. A truth so clear, that Pope
Adrian in his reply to those Caroline books, denies not Irene to have done
this, (which had easily and evidently refuted that objectio^, and discredited
those Caroline Books for ever) but he Hadr. Epist. 3.3. ca 53.
defends her fact by the examples of Helena and Pulcheria, to which this of
Irene is so unlike, that for this very cause she is by the whole Council of
Frankford Lib. Carol. lib. 3. ca. 13.
, consisting of three hundred Bishops, or thereabouts, resembled to the
tyrannizing and usurping Athalia. Lastly, when that whole Synod came to the
Kingly City for the Imperial confirmation of their Acts, seeing it is expressly
testified by Zonaras Commentaria in regia Praesidentibus Imperatoribus
recitarunt, quae statim obsignata sunt. Zonar. to 3. in vita Iren et Constable.
, and Paulus Diaconus Ingressi sunt omnes Episcopi in regiam, et praesidentibus
Imperatoribus una cum Episcopis, lectus est tomus, et subscripsit tam
Imperator, quam matter ejus. Paul. Diac. histor misc. lib. 23. in an. 8. Constable.
, that the Emperor was President in that assembly of the Bishops, why should
it not by like reason be thought, that both himself when he was present, and
in his absence the secular Judges, his Deputies, held the same Imperial
Presidency in the Nicene Synod?

17. For that which they call the eighth general Council, both the Emperors
Deputies are called Presidents Magnificentissimi praesides dixerunt Act. 9.
Lecta.
; and in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and tenth actions it is expressly said,
Presidentibus Imperatoribus, the Emperors being Presidents; yea, and both of
them by their very actions declared their Presidencie. The Popes Legate
Repugnantibus Apost. sedis legatis, utpote quod sententia Romans Pontisicum
condemnati audiri iterum non deberent. Bar. an. 869. nu. 27.
would not have permitted Photius and his Bishops to be heard; the Emperors
Deputies overruled Advocentur cum Photio Episcopi quoque Photiani, quod nisi
fiat, literam in hac Synodo scribemus nullam. Verba Iudic. saec. in Co^c. 8
Act. 4. pa. 883. b.
them, as was fit, in that matter; yea, they said to the Photian Bishops,
Imperator Verba Bahanis in Conc. 8. citata a Nich. Cusan. lib. 3. Concor. ca.
20.
jubet et vult, the Emperors will, pleasure, and command is, that you should
speak in your own cause. Of the Emperor they entreat liberty to defend
themselves, Rogamus domine Conc. 8. Act. 6. verba sunt Metropolitae
Caesariensis, pa. 886. b.
Imperator; we beseech you, our Lord and Emperor, that without interruption we
may defend our cause: When the books of Photius were brought into the Synod,
and burned in the midst thereof, this was done, (...) Act. 8. p. 893. a
, the Emperor commanding it, and many the like.

18. Now these eight are all which are accounted by them in the number of
general and approved Councels, for the space of more than a thousand years
after Christ: Of al which seeing it is now clear, that they were both called
by Imperial authority, and governed by Imperial Presidencie, it hence
appears, that as by the warrant of the Scriptures, and example of the ancient
Church before Christ, so also by the continued practice of the whole Catholic
Church, for a thousand years together; these rights of calling and ordering
general Councels do belong, and were acknowledged to belong only to Kings
and Emperors; they called and commanded the Bishops, the Bishops came at that
call and command: they governed the assemblies in those Councels, all the
Bishops (without murmuring or so much as once contradicting) willingly
submitted themselves to that Imperial government. And by this may now easily
be discerned wherein the lawfulness or unlawfulness of any Synod consists:
For wheresoever to Imperial calling, and Imperial Presidencie, there is added
the rightful use of that Imperial authority, in seeing liberty, freedom,
diligent discussion of the causes, and all due synodall order preserved in any
general Synod, the same is, and ought to be truly called a general lawful
Council: But what general Councels soever have been heretofore, or shall be
at any time hereafter, either assembled by any other than Imperial, and regal
authority, or governed for the observing of synodall order, by any other than
Imperial Presidencie, or misgoverned by the abuse thereof, they all are, and
are to be esteemed for no other than general unlawful Councels.

19. Suffer me here to propose some examples of each kind, partly in the
ancient, partly in the later times of the Church: In the order of lawful
general Councels, principally, and by a certain excellency above all the
rest, are the five first approved Councels to be reckned: The first at Nice,
the second at Constantinople, the third at Ephesus, the fourth at Chalcedon,
the fifth at Constantinople in the time of Justinian; unto these the Sardicane,
and that at Constantinople under Mennas, are to be added, like two Appendant
Synods; the former to that at Nice, the later to that at Chalcedon: For the
sixth, which was held at Constantinople in the time of Constantinus Pogonatus, I
am out of doubt, and do firmly hold it to have been both general and
lawful: But I mention it apart by reason of that scruple touching the Canons
thereof; concerning which I intend, if ever I have opportunity, to make a
several tract by it self. For their second Nicene, and the next unto it, to
wit, that at Constantinople, in the time of Basilius and Hadrian the second;
besides that there are just exceptions against their lawfulness, in regard of
the proceedings used therein, it may be justly doubted whether either of them
may be esteemed general: specially considering that the Council at Frankford
utterly condemned Synodus qua ante paucos annos sub Irene and Constantino
congregata, and ab ipsis non solum septima veru^ etia^ universalis erat
appellata ut nec septima nec universalis haberetur, dicereturve, quasi
supervacua in totum ab omnibus (in Conc. Francofordensi) abdicata est. Aim.
lib. 4. ca. 85. Similia habet Ado Vien. in Chron. Hincm. Rhem. in lib. contra
Hincm. Land. ca. 20. Rhegino, Hermann. Strabus Fuld. Egolis. Monac. and alii
quam multi.
that second Nicene, and decreed that it should not be called a general
Synod: and in very like manner did the Council at Constantinople, held in the
time of Pope John the eighth, (or as some call him the ninth,) the next
successor to Hadrian the second, condemn Quarius Canon (Concilii Constant. sub
Johan. 8.) superiores synodos adversus Photium habitas Nicholai and Hadriani
temporibus explodit, and rejicit imo ut de Synodorum numero tollantur jubet.
Fran. Turrian. lib. de 6, 7, and 8. synod. pa. 95.
that Council which they call the eighth, held in the time of Hadrian the
second. Now although by the judgments of these two Councels, those other which
they reckon for the seventh and eighth be wholly repealed, and that most justly;
yet if the authority of these Synods were omitted, there are so many and so
just exceptions against the two former, that I am out of doubt persuaded, that
neither of them ought to stand in the order of general lawful Councels: nor
will any, I suppose, judge otherwise, who shall unpartially examine the Acts of
them, and compare them with the histories of those times. If any at all after
the sixth be to be ranked in the number of general and lawful Counsels, I
would not doubt to make it evident, if ever I should proceed so far in this
argument about Councels, that the Council held at Constantinople in the time
of Constantinus Iconomachus (whom they incontempt have with no small token of
their immodesty nicknamed Copronimus) that this ought to be judged the
seventh; that at Frankford the eighth; and that at Constantinople, which even
now I mentioned, held in the time of Pope John the eighth, (or as some call
him, the ninth) the ninth of that order. For both the generality of all these
three is by the best Writers acknowledged, and all of them were called by
Imperial authority, governed by Imperial presidency, and that in a lawful,
free, and synodall manner; as, if ever I come to handle the Councels of those
times, I purpose to explain. This rather for this time I think needful to
observe: that as a Council may be general, and yet not lawful, so may one be
both general and lawful, and yet erroneous in the decrees thereof: which one
point rightly observed, shows an exceeding difference betwixt those five first
general Councels, with the Sardicane, and that under Mennas, and all the rest
which follow the fifth Synod. The former which were all held within the six
hundred years after Christ, in the golden ages of the Church, are wholly, and
in every decree and Canon, orthodoxall, and golden Counsels, no dross, nor
dram of corrupt doctrine could prevail in any one of them: and so they are,
and ever since they were held, were esteemed not only general and lawful,
but in every part and parcel of their decrees, holy and orthodoxall Councels,
approved by all Catholics, and by the whole Catholic Church. But in all
general Councels which follow that fifth, which were held after the 600. year,
and in those times wherein dross and corruption began to prevail above the
gold, in them all there is some one blot or other wherewith they are blemished,
and by reason whereof, although they be both general and lawful, yet are they
not in every decree holy and orthodoxall, nor approved by the succeeding ages
of the Church. Such in the sixth, is the 2. 52. and 53. Canons: in that under
Constantinus Iconomachus, the 15. and 17. definitions: in that at Frankford,
their condemning of the fact of the Iconoclasts, which (until the decree for
breaking them down was repealed by the Council at Frankford) was both pious,
and warranted by the example of Hezekias dealing with the brazen serpent: In
that under John the 8. their denying of the holy Ghost to proceed from the Son:
And these examples which I have now named, are all the examples of general and
lawful Councels, which as yet have been held in the Church.

20. We come now to unlawful Synods: wherein it is very memorable, that of
such as are unlawful by want of lawful calling, there is no example in the
ancient Church to be sound, nor more than a thousand years after Christ. All
that time not any general Council assembled without lawful warrant. The
Bishops, no not they of Rome, were as yet grown to be so insolent and
headstrong as to come together without the Emperors Mandatum. And the very
like might be said of such Synods as are unlawful by want of Imperial
presidency. During all that time no Bishop, no not he of Rome, durst intrude
himself into that Royalty and Imperial right. As the Emperor called them all
for a thousand years, so was he by himself or his deputies President in them
all. But of such as were unlawful by abuse of that Imperial presidency, those
ancient times do yield abundant examples. Such among many was that at Millane,
wherein Constantius, who should have preserved order in all others, most of all
in his own self used such violent and tyrannous dealing, that the only Canon
Athan. in Epist. ad solit. vit. agent. pa. 228. b.
whereby he ruled the Synod, was his own will: Quod ego volo pro Canone sit;
My will shall be your law: and the only reason whereby he persuaded, was a
most tyrannous Dilemma, Aut subscribite Jbid.
, aut exulate; either subscribe to Arianisme, or go into banishment. Such
again was that Ephesine Latrocinie; When Dioscorus could not otherwise
prevail, he brought Introduxerunt proconsulem cu^ multitudine magna, and
catenis. Act. Conc. Ephesians. in Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. pa. 39. a. Violenta facta
est vis, cum plagis. Minabatur nobis damnatio, minae exilij tendebantur,
milites cum fustibus and gladiis instabant. ibid. Act. 1. pa. 7. b.
the Proconsull guarded with clubs, with swords, with chains, and by such
means forced the Bishops to subscribe to blankes In pura charta subscripsimus.
ibid. pa. 7. b.
, and to the heresy of Eutiches; such fraud, violence, and unjust proceedings,
whereby all liberty was taken away, made that Synod, though lawfully called,
and having a rightful President, to be no other than a very Latrocinie Vbi
gladii and fustes, qualis synodus? ibid.
, as it is usually and Aliud Ephest Concilium latronum cogitur. Epist. Justin.
ad 5. synod. p. 605. b
justly called. Of this same sort was the Council at Arimine, at Syrmium, and
diverse more of the ancient Synods. But these are sufficient for examples in
those ancient times: the unlawfulness of them all arising only from the abuse
of the Imperial and lawful authority, not for want of lawful authority
either to assemble them, or govern them being assembled.

21. Let us come lower, and to later times, and then we shall have abundance of
examples of all kinds of unlawful Synods. Since the thousand year after
Christ, there have been ten which they honor with the specious titles of
general Bin. in (...) suis Council. and Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5. and al^ij.
and holy Councels. All of them held in the West, five at Rome in the Laterane;
three in France, (two of them at Lions, the third at Vienna;) two in Italy, the
one at Florence, the other, which is the last and worst of all, at Tridentum
no^ Germanicam esse, sed Italicans civitatem nemo est qui nesciat. Gravan.
op^os. Conc. Trident. pa. 36.
Trent. For their generality it is not unknown what just exceptions may be
taken against them. Seeing in four Omitto quinque alia Concilia generalia,
quia nec a Graecis recipiuntur, cum ipsi non intersnerint, -- nimicu^,
Lugdunense sub Innocent. 4. Viennense sub Clemente 5. Constantiense,
Lateranense sub Leone 10. and Tridentinum. Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 13..
Denique.
of them none, in the rest but very few of the Eastern Bishops were present,
they ought rather to be called partial, than general; Western, than
Oecumenicall Synods. That the Greeks held them not for general, both that
speech of theirs in the Council of Florence Conc. l. Flor. Sess. 5. p. 421. a.
Sunt autem verba Marci Ephesii, praeclari Theologi, qui pro Graecis causam
egit. ut liquet ex sess. 3. pa. 415 b.
, Venio ad septimum and ultimum generale Concilium: where they profess the
second Nicene to be the last which they acknowledge for a general Council:
and the words of Bellarmine do make evident; Graeci Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca.
5.. Ex his.
tantum recipient prima septem Concilia ut notum est; It is a thing vulgarly
known, that the Greek Church receives none but the seven first for general
Counsels. And yet if we should admit them (as we may not) for general, what
more honor were it for them that they were general, than for the Council at
Ariminum, at Syrmium, at Millane, and the Ephesine Latrocine: the worst of all
which is by many degrees, for sanctity and due synodall order, to be preferred
before the best of their ten. But besides this of their generality, there is
another exception which can never be removed, concerning their lawfulness.
They all and every one of them are unlawful Synods: and that by defect of all
those conditions which are essentially required in all lawful general
Councels.

22. Unlawful first they are by want of lawful calling and authority to
assemble them: not one of them assembled by Imperial, all by Papal and
usurped authority. The Popes, says Bellarmine Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 13.
Ad haec.
, have called more than twelve general Councels: Of those, these which we have
named were ten. Of the first Laterane, which is the first of the ten, Binius
Bin. Not. in Conc. Lateran 1. Concilium. to. 3. pa. 1317. a.
says, It was appointed, solius Pontificis authoritate, by the authority of
the Pope alone. Of the next, which was the second Laterane, wherein were
present about a thousand Bishops, It was Innocentius Quibus de causis Pontifex
hanc Synodum congregatam voluerit, intelliges. Bin. Not. in Conc. Later. 2. pa.
1325. a.
will to congregate it. Of the third at Laterane (which is also the third in
order) It was assembled, Papae authoritate Bin. Not. in id. Conc. pa. 1350. b.
, by the authority of Pope Alexander. Of the fourth Laterane, (the fourth also
in order) wherein among many other like matters, Transubstantiation was first
of all decreed, more than twelve hundred years after Christ, Authoritate Bin.
Not. in Conc. Lateran. 4. pa. 1465. b.
Innocentij indicta esse indicat apertissime Encyclica epistola, the
Encyclicall Epistle does most manifestly show that it was appointed by the
Popes authority. Of the fifth, which was the former at Lions, This Synod was
appointed and congregated, A Bin. Not. in Conc. Lugd. 1. to. 3. pa. 1490 d.
solo Pontifice, by the Pope alone, and by his authority. Of the sixth, which
was the second at Lions, Pope Gregory Indixit Bin. Not. in Conc. 2. Lugdun. (ex
Blond.) p. 1495. a.
hoc Concilium, appointed this Council. Of the seventh, which was at Vienna,
Pope Clement Bin. (ex Tritem.) Not. in Conc. Vien. to. 3. Conc. pa. 1510. a.
indixit Concilium, appointed this Council. Of the Florentine, which is the
eighth, This Synod was ab Bin. Not. in Conc. Florent. to. 4. pa. 495. b.
Eugenio indicta, appointed by Eugenius, at the entreaty of the Emperor. Of
the ninth, which was the fifth Laterane, This was appointed and assembled,
Authoritate Bin. Notis in Con. Later. 1. sub Leone 10. to. 4. Conc. pa. 651.
Iulij Papae, by the authority of Pope Julius: nor only was it self so
assembled, but it Conc. Later. sub Leone 10. Sess. 11. p. 639. b
decreed (which was never done before) that all general Councels ought to be
so assembled. For the last (which is their fair Helen Haec est Helena, qua
nuper Tridenti obtinuit. Espenceon. in Epist. ad Tit. pa. 42.
of Trent) the Popes Bull, whereby he appointed, summoned, and assembled it,
is set in the forefront of it; wherein the Pope says, Conventum Pauli 3. Bulla
indict. praesixa Act. Conc. Trid.
Mantuae indiximus, we have appointed that this Council should be held at
Mantua; but afterward he removed it to Trent.

23. Thus were all the ten assembled by Papal, not one of them by Imperial
authority. For though some Emperors and Kings consented indeed unto some of
them; as to the first Laterane, Henry 5. to that at Vienna, Philip of France,
and so in some others; yet the consent of Emperors and Kings is not sufficient
for holding a Council, the authority by which the Bishops are called and come
together, must be regal: which in all these, as Bellarmine Cur tunc non solus
Pontifex concilia indixerit, ut postea factum est, rations multae sunt. Bell.
lib. 1. de Council. ca. 13.. Habemus.
truly teaches, was only pontificial. Again, that very consent to hold those
Councels which Kings then gave, was a servile consent, not Imperial; nor was
it free and willing, but coacted and extorted. They knew certainly by the
dealing of Pope Hildebrand with Henry the fourth, what they might expect, if
they withstood the Popes will, or wrastled with such a Giant: no less than the
loss of their Crowns had been the censure for denying to consent to what the
Pope would have them: their consent was no other, but that by the Popes
authority the Synod should be called and held, a consent that the Synod should
be called by an unlawful and usurped authority; even such a consent, as if a
rightful King being overcome by a Rebel, should for fear of his life consent
that the Rebel should call and assemble a Parliament, and there enact what
laws himself listed. It is the authority by which those Councels were
gathered, not by whose consent they were gathered; of which we do now enquire.
The authority whereby they were assembled was only in the Pope, though to that
authority Emperors and Kings consented: and as they are not a little brag that
the Pope could do such worthy acts by his authority; so are we so far from
denying him to have done this, that we willingly profess the same: but
withal do affirm, which inevitably ensues thereof, that even for this very
cause all those Councels are unlawful, because they were called by Papal, and
not by Imperial authority. This demonstrates them to have assembled without
lawful authority, to have been nothing else than so many great Routs and
Riots in the Church, so many tumultuous and disorderly Conventicles, so much
more odious both in the sight of God and men, as those who tumultuously and
without authority convented, should have been patterns of piety, obedience,
and order unto others.

24. Yea and this very exception which may equally be opposed against them all,
was most justly taken (to omit the rest) against their Trent Riot, when it was
congregated by that Papal and usurped authority: The King Innoc. Gentil. in
Examine. Con. Trid. lib. 2. in initio.
of England gave this as a reason of his refusal to send to it, because the
right to call Councels belonged to Kings and Emperors, nullam vero esse
potestatem penes Pontificem, but the Pope had no authority to call or assemble
a Council. The French King writ a letter to them at Trent, and the
superscription Gent. in Exam. sess. 12. Co^c. Trid. pa. 96. and Ioh. Sleid.
Comment. lib. 22. pa. 332. b. et seq.
was, Conventui Tridentino: The Fathers stormed and snuffed a long while at
that, disdaining that the King should write Conventui, and not Concilio, and
hardly were they persuaded to read his letter: At last, when credence and
audience was obtained for James Aimiot his Legate, he signified before all the
Trent Fathers, that the King protested and published to al, (as also before he
had done at Rome) that he accounted not that assembly pro Oecumenico and
legitimo Concilio, sed pro privato Conventu; not for a general Council, but
for a private Convent, gathered together for the private benefit and good of
some few; adding, se suosque subditos nullo vinculo ad parendum his quae in eo
decreta fuerint obstrictos iri; that he and his subjects would not be tied by
the decrees thereof: exhorting further that this his protestation might be
recorded among the Acts of their Synod, and that all Christian Kings might have
notice thereof. The Electours Epit. rerum in orb gest. sub Ferd. 1. an. 1561.
apud Scard. tom. 3. pa. 2171. et seq.
and Princes of Germany being assembled at Nurimberge, when Zacharias
Delphinus, and Franciscus Commendonius the Popes Legates came to warn them in
the Popes name Summus Pontifex sacrum Concilium Tridenti celebrandii
authoritate divinitus sibi tradita decrevit; nosque ablegavit nuncios suos qui
pij Pontificis nomine singulos conveniremus, et rogaremus ut ad Concilium hoc
accederent. Ibid.
to come, or send to the Council of Trent, returned this answer unto them,
Mirantur illustrissimi Electores and Principes, the most illustrious Electours
and Princes do wonder, that the Pope would take upon him, Celsitudinibus suis
Concilij indictionem obtrudere, to obtrude to their Celsitude his appointment
of a Council, and that he durst call them to Trent; adding, we would have
both the Pope and you his Legates to know, that we acknowledge no such
authority in the Pope, and we are certainly persuaded by the undoubted
testimonies both of Gods law and man's, Concilij indicendi jus Pontificem
Romanum non habere; that the Pope has no authority and right to appoint, call,
or assemble a Council. Thus they; whose answer is at large explaned in their
Gravamina Gravam. opposita Conc. Trid. Causa 1. pa. 21.
, where the first reason of their rejecting the Trent assembly is this, quod ea
illegitime, and contra manifestum jus indicta sit; because it was appointed and
gathered unlawfully, and against manifest right, seeing the Pope who called it,
has no authority to summon or call a Council: Of the same judgment were
other Princes. When Hieronimus Martinengus Epit. rerum in orb. gest. sub Fer.
an. 1561. apud Scard. loc. cit.
was sent as Legate from the Pope, to call some out of England to that Trent
assembly in the time of the late Queen of renowned and blessed memory; e
Belgio in insulam traijcere prohibuit; she would not suffer him to set foot in
her dominion about such business: Nec Ibid.
diversum ad Reges Daciae and Suetiae missus, responsum retulit; and the Kings
of Denmark and Swetia gave the like answer, that the Pope had no right to
call a Council. So justly did they dislike and contemn the going to that
Synod, even for this cause, and that most justly, esteeming it for no other
than a Conventicle, or unlawful assembly.

25. Said I unlawful? that is too soft and mild a word: that, and all the
other nine with it, by reason of that Papal calling, were unlawful in the
highest degree, even Antichristian: For the authority whereby those Synods
were called, belonging in right to Emperors and Kings, and being tyrannically
usurped by the Pope, as he by intruding himself into the Imperial royalties,
and lifting up himself above all the Vicegerents of God here in earth, that
is, above 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
all that is called God, did thereby proclaim himself to be that man of
sin, and display his Antichristian Banner: So on the other side, those
Bishops and others, who came at his Papal call, and yielded obedience to him,
in such sort usurping, did, eo ipso, in that very act of theirs, receive the
mark of the beast, and not only consent, but submit themselves to his
Antichristian authority, and sight under the vety Ensigns and Banner of
Antichrist: But of this point I have before Sup. ca. 13.
entreated, where I showed, that all, even the best actions, (how much more
then such tumultuous and turbulent attempts) when they are performed in
obedience to the Pope, as Pope, that is, as a supreme Commander, are turned
into impious and Antichristian rebellions against God.

26. This rather is needful to be here observed, that not only general, but
even Provincial or National Synods are in all Christian Kingdoms to be
called only by Imperial, not at all by Papal or Episcopal authority; yea,
and they are so called in every well ordered Church: For although there go not
forth a particular and express Edict or mandatum from Kings, to assemble them,
yet so long as Kings or Emperors do not express their will to the contrary,
even that summons which is sent from Primates or other Bishops subject unto
them, has virtually and implicit the Imperial authority by which every such
Synod is assembled: The reason whereof is this: The holy Nicene Council
decreed Placuit annis singulis per unamquamque Provinciam his in anno Concilia
celebrari. Conc. Nic. Can. 5.
, that for the more peaceable government of each Church, there should be two
Provincial Synods yearly held by every Primate. Those holy Fathers meant not
(as the continual practice throughout the whole Church does explane) so
strictly to define that number of two, as that neither more, nor fewer might be
kept in one year: But they judging that, for those times a competent and
convenient number, they set it down, but yet as an accidental, ceremonial,
and therefore mutable order, if the necessity and occasions of any Church
should otherwise require. That which is substantial and immutable in their
Canon is, that Provincial Synods shall be held by each Primate so often, and
at such times as the necessity and occasions of their Church shall require: and
the chief Judge of that necessity and sitting occasions is no other than he
to whose sword and authority every Bishop is subject, and without whose consent
first obtained, they may in no place of his Kingdom assemble together without
the note of tumult and sedition. This Nicene Canon, as all the rest, when
Constantine Quae ab Episcopis erant editae regulae Constantinus sua consignabat
et confirmabat authoritate. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constable. ca. 27.
, and other suceeding Emperors and Kings approved, (as who has not approved
that holy Council?) they then gave unto it the force of an Imperial law,
according to the rule, omnia Lib. 1. Cod. de Veter. jure enuc. et lib. 2.
Decretal. tit. 23. ca. sicut noxius in Glossa.
nostra facimus, quibus nostram impartimur authoritatem; we make that our own
Act, and our law which we ratify by our authority: And Justinian more
plainly expressed this, when he said: Novel. 131. ca. 1.
Sancimus vicem legum obtinere sanctas regulas; we enact, that the holy Canons
of the Church set down in the former Councels, the Nicene, the
Constantino-politane, Ephesine, and Chalcedon, shall have the force, and stand
in the strength of Imperial laws: By this Imperial assent it is, that when
the wisdom of Christian Emperors and Kings does not otherwise dispose of
calling Synods in their dominions, Primates may call the same, two, or more, or
fewer in any year, as necessity shall persuade: but whenever they call any,
the same are called, assembled and celebrated by the force of that Imperial
authority, which Kings and Emperors have either given to that Nicene Canon,
or which they in more explicit manner shall impart unto the Primates or
Bishops in their Kingdoms.

27. Now if Provincial Councels may not, nor ever are lawfully held in
Christian Kingdoms without this authority, how much less may general and
Oecumenicall, the occasions of which being rare and extraordinary; the calling
also of them is extraordinary, and both for the time and place, merely
arbitrary, at the will of those who have Imperial or regal authority: To say
nothing, how inconvenient it is even in civil government, and how dangerous
unto Christian States, that all the Bish. of a Kingdom should leave their own
Churches naked of their guides, and Pastors, and go into far and foreign
Countries, without the command of their Sovereign Lords, especially go at the
command of an usurping Commander, and that also, if he require, though their
own Sovereigns shall forbid or withstand the same, of the mischief and
danger whereof the example of Becket, among many like, may be a warning to all
Kingdoms. But leaving that to the grave consideration of others, thus much now
out of that which has been said, is evident; that seeing all those ten
forenamed Synods were called and assembled by no other authority than
Pontifical, and seeing lawfully assemble they could not, but only by
Imperial, it hence clearly ensues, that for defect of lawful calling and
assembling, they are all of them no other than unlawful Councels: Again,
seeing no Synods are congregated in Christ's name Congregari in nomine Christi
nihil aliud est, quam ab eo congregari, qui habet a Christo authoritatem
congregandi. Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 17. At hoc.
, but such as are assembled by him who has from Christ authority to assemble
them, which in Christian Kingdoms none has, as we have showed, but only
Kings and Emperors: and seeing none of those ten were assembled by them, it
hence further and certainly ensues, that never one of those ten were gathered
in Christ's name, and if not in Christ's, then sure in no other but in the name
of Antichrist, and so all of them, in respect of their calling, not only
unlawful, but even Antichristian Councels.

28. After their calling consider their proceedings, for as those Councels were
unlawfully assembled, so were they also unlawful by defect of the other
essential condition, which is, due and synodall order: for they all not only
wanted synodall freedom and order, but, which is worse, they wanted that which
is the only means to have synodall freedom and order observed in any
general Council, and that is the Imperial Presidencie: in none of them was
the Emperor, in them all Addamus (his 8. primit) reliqua generalia Concilia,
in quibus omnibus sine controversia Pontifex Romans praesedit. Bell. lib. 1. de
Conc. ca. 20 Si ergo.
the Pope was President: In the first Laterane, Calistus Papa Calixtus 2. coram
innumera multitudine Cleri et populi, eidem Concilio (Viennensem nominat Vsper.
diceret Lateranensi, ut et Bin. agnoscit notis suis in illud Co^c.) praesedit.
Abb. Vrsper. ad an. 1119. et huic Concilio praesedit Pontifex. Bin. notis suis
ad id Conc. pa. 1317. b
; in the second, Innocentius Synodus maxima Romae, praesidente summo Pontifice
Junoce^tio celebratur. Otho Frising. lib. 7. ca. 23.
the second; in the third, Alexander Omnes scriptores fatentur eidem Concilio
Pontificem Romanum praesedisse. Bin. Not. in Conc. Later. 3. Oecumenicum to. 3.
pa. 1351.
the third; in the fourth, Innocentius Ei Pontifex Romans praesedit. Bin. not. in
Conc. Later. 4. to. 3. Con. pa. 1466 b
the third; and the like might be showed in the rest; but that Bellarmines
words may ease us of that labor, who speaking of all those ten Councels, says
Bell. lib. 1. de Con. ca. 20. Si ergo.
, In eis omnibus sine Controversia Pontifex Romans praesedit; the Pope without
doubt was President in them all.

29. Nor was this an Episcopal Presidencie a pre-eminence only, and precedence
before other Bishops in the Synod, such as any Bish. to who^ the Emp. pleased
to confer that dignity, might lawfully enjoy, and when he gave it to none by
name, it then by his tacit consent or permission fell, as it were by devolution
upon the chief Bishop that was present in the Council: Such a Presidencie,
though it be not due to the Pope, seeing in the ancient Councels he neither
had it, nor grudged that other should have it, yet are we not unwilling to
allow that unto him, if contenting himself therewith he would seek no more:
But the Presidencie which he now desires, and in all those ten Councels
usurped, is merely Imperial; the Presidencie of governing the Synod, and
ordering it by his authority and power, the very same which in all the general
Councels, for a thousand years after Christ, the Emperor held, and had it as
one of his Royalties and Imperial rights, none of all the Catholic Bishops in
those Councels ever so much as contradicting, much less resisting the same:
For any Bishops, most of all for the Pope, to take upon them such a Presidencie
utterly overthrows all liberty and order in Councels; for by it all the Bishops
are to be kept in awe and order; and the Pope, who of all other is most
exorbitant, and farthest out of square, ought by this to be curbed, and reduced
into order: Even as when Catiline took upon him to be the Ruler and guide to
his assembly, and a punisher of disorders among them, though all the rest
willingly submitted themselves, and that with a solemn oath Hos ut se nefando
jurejurando adstringerent, adegit, puerum enim mactavit, juramentoque inito
super ejus visceribus, eadem ipse cum alijs comedit. Dio Cass. lib. 37.
, to be ordered by him in their actions; yet for all this order they were no
free Roman Senate, but a Conjuration of Conspirators, striving to oppress
Catilinam luxuria primum, tu^ egestas in nefaria Concilia opprimendae patris
impulere, Senatum confodere, totam rempub. funditus tollere, et quicquid nec
Hannibal videretur optasse. L. Flor. lib. 4. ca. 1.
the Roman State, liberties, and ancient laws: Right so it is in these
Synods, when the Pope, who is the Lord of misrule, and Ringleader of the
Conspirators, takes upon him this Presidencie, to order Councels, though the
rest not only consent, but bind themselves by a sacred oath Ego Nic. ab hac
hora fidelis ero S. Petro et Ecclesiae Romanae dominoque meo Papae. Papatum
adjutor ero ad defendendum. Forma est juramenti secundum quam jurant Episcopi
et hodie omnes recipientes dignitatem a Papa. Extra. de jurejur. ca. Ego N.
lib. 2. tit. 24. ca. 4.
, to be subject to his authority; this very usurpation of such Presidencie
does, eo ipso, exclude and banish al liberty and synodall order, and makes
their assemblies mere Conjurations against the truth, and ancient faith of the
Church.

30. How could it now be chosen, but that whatsoever heresy the Pope with the
faction of his Catilinarie Conspiratours embraced, should in such Councels
prevail against the truth? The Imperial authority was the only hedge or pale
to keep the Pope within his bounds; that being once removed, he said, he did,
he decreed what he listed. The rule of his Regiment was now the old Canon of
Constantius, Quod ego volo pro Canone sit: the proof of all their decrees was
borrowed from their predecessors, the old Donatists: Quod Aug. lib. 2. cot. Ep.
Parm. ca. 13.
volumus sanctum est. Not Emperors, not Bishops, none might control him or
say unto him Quid excogitare verum vel verisimile possunt, quibus non vel Rex
vel Casar, non populus, non clerus, non generalis Synodus, non denique tota
Ecclesia dicere potest, cur ita facis? Cl. Espen. in cap. 1. ad Titum. pa. 76.
, Domine, cur ita facis? The Bishops were tied to him by an oath De quo supra
cap. Ego N. Extra. de jreujur.
, to defend the Papacy, (that is, his usurped authority) and defend it, contra
omnes homines, against all that should wag their tongues against it. The
Emperors and Kings saw how Hildebrand had used, and in most indigne manner
misused Henry the 4. how Alexander Alexander Imperatori jussit ut se humi
prosterneret, et Imperatoris collum pede comprimens ait, Scriptum est, Super
Aspidem et Basiliscum ambulabis. Naucl. an. 1177
the third had insolently trodden on the neck of Frederick: what could they,
nay what durst they do, but either willingly stoop and prostrate themselves,
or else be forced to lie down at the Popes feet, and say unto him, Tread on
us, O thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah; and according as it is written, Set thy
foot super Aspidem and Basiliscum. Could there possibly be any freedom or
order in such Synods, where the only means of preserving freedom and order
was banished? Might not the Pope in such Councels do and decree whatsoever
either himself, his will, or faction would suggest unto him? Say they had
neither swords, nor clubs, nor other like instruments of violence in those
Synods: they needed none of them: This Papal presidency was in stead of them
all. It was like the club of Hercules, the very shaking of it was able, and did
affright all, that none, no not Emperors durst deal against it. The removing
of the Imperial presidency made such a calm in their Synods, that without
resistance, without any need of other further violence, the Pope might oversway
whatsoever he desired.

31. And truly it may be easily observed by such as attentively read the
Ecclesiastical stories, that together with the standing or fall of the Empire,
either the ancient faith or heresies prevailed in the Church. So long as the
Emperor being Christian, retained his dignity and Imperial authority, no
heresy could long take place, but was by the Synodall judgment of
Oecumenicall Councels maturely suppressed: the faction of no Bishop, no not of
the Pope, being able to prevail against that sovereign remedy. But when once
Ab an. 730. ad an. 800.
Gregory the second, Zachary, and their succeeding Popes to Leo the third, had
by most admirable and unexplicable fraud and subtilty, clipped the wings and cut
the sinews of the Eastern Empire; themselves first seizing upon the greatest
part of Italy, by the means of Pipin, and then erecting a new Empire in the
West, the Imperial authority being thus infringed, the Eastern Emperor not
daring, the Western in regard of the late courtesy received from the Pope,
being not willing, and neither of them both being able now to match and justle
with the Pope; this which was the great let and impediment to the Popes
faction, and the discovering of the man of sin being now removed, there was
no means to keep out of the Church the heresies which the Pope affected: then
the Cataracts of heresies being set open, and the depths of the earth, nay of
the infernal pit being burst up, heresies rusht in, and came with a strong
hand into the Church, and those heretical doctrines which in six hundred
years and more could never get head, passing as doubtful and private opinions
among a few, and falling but as a few little drops of rain, grew now unto such
an height and outrage, that they became the public and decreed doctrines in
the Western Church. The Pope once having found his strength in the cause of
Images, (wherein the first trial was made thereof) no fancy nor dotage was so
absurd for which he could not after that command, when he listed, the judgment
of a general Council, Transubstantiation, Proper Sacrifice, the Idol of the
Mass, (to which not Moloch nor Baal is to be compared) their Purgatorian fire,
their five newfound proper Sacraments, condignity of works, yea
Supererogation, and an army of like heresies assailed and prevailed against
the truth. The Imperial authority being laid in the dust, and trampled under
the sole of the Popes foot, no means was left to restrain his enormous
designs, or hinder him in Councels, to do and define even what he listed. And
as the Imperial authority which he so long time had oppressed, is in any
kingdom more or less restored, and freed from his vassalage; the other
heresies which arose from the ruin and decay thereof, are more or less
expurged out of that Kingdom, and the ancient truth restored therein: Yea and
still, though but by insensible degrees, shall he and his authority wast 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and consume, till not only all the ten Apoc. 17.12.16.
horns of the Beast (that is, all the Kings whose authority he has usurped,
and used as his horns to push at Gods Saints) shall hate the Whore, that
Romish Babylon, and make her desolate and naked, and burn her with fire; but
till himself also being despised and contemned of his own lovers, shall
together with his adherents be utterly abolished, and cast into that Lake of
Gods wrath.

32. You see now how unlawful those Synods are by reason of the defect of
Imperial presidency: you will perhaps demand whether by the want thereof there
happened any particular disorder in them, or ought contrary to freedom and
synodall order: whereunto I might in a word answer, that there neither was, nor
could there be ought at all done in any of those ten Synods with freedom and
synodall order. For though otherwise their proceedings had been never so
mild, temperate and equal, yet even for that one defect of Imperial
presidency, and excluding the same, whatsoever they did was disorderly, and
they all nothing but synods of disorder. But yet for further satisfaction of
that question, let us (omitting all the rest) consider among very many, some
few particulars concerning their youngest and dearest baby of Trent; Was that
equal dealing in Paul the 3. at the beginning of his Trent assembly, to
conspire Cum Conciliu^ jam haberi inciperet, Imperator et Pontifex clanculum
una, de armis ad Protestants domandos suscipiendis concilium inter se
inierunt. Genesis Exam. Trident. Conc. sess. 3. nu. 5
and take secret counsel with the Emperor to make war against the
Protestants, and root them out of the world? The Italian Franciscan in his
Sermon before Ferdinand, stirring up both him and others to this butchery,
Exere vires tuas, pluck up your spirit and strength, and root out that
pestiferous kind of men, nefas enim est, for it is unlawful to suffer them
any longer to look upon the light: neither say that you will do it, it must
be done even now at this present, and without any delay. Ioh. Sleid. Comment.
lib. 16. an. 1545.
Thus did he give the watchword, and sound an alarm to their intended
Massacre: whereupon there ensued bellum Gent. loc. cit. nu. 6.
cruentum and calamitosum, a bloody and cruel war against the Protestants:
concerning which diverse of the Princes of Germany said in their Letters to the
Emperor, We Sleid. Comm. lib. 17. an. 1546
shall so answer that every man may understand, both that injury is done to us,
and that you do undertake this war Romani Antichristi and impij Concilij
Tridentini impulsu, at the instigation of the Roman Antichrist, and the
impious Council at Trent, that the doctrine of the Gospel, and the liberty of
Germany may be oppressed: Was this Concilium pacis, or rather Concilium
sanguinis, a conspiracy not only against the faith, but against the life of
Catholics? Was it fit his Holiness should play Judas part, pretend love and
emendation of the faith, when he intended murder, and an utter extirpation of
the servants of God? Could there be freedom for them at Trent in the Popes
dominion Tridentum libera aut Imperij civitas non est, sed membrum praecipuum
Pontificiae factionis. Grav. oppos. Trid Conc. pa. 37.
, when they might not be suffered to breathe or live at home in their own free
Cities and States? Was not this a stratagem unknown in the time of the
Council at Millane and Arimine, to invite Catholics to the Synod, and promise
liberty and free access, but provide that they shall have no leisure, not so
much as come to the Council?

33. What equity or freedom could there either be, or be expected in that
Council, wherein the Pope, who is the capital enemy of the Catholics, took
upon him to be their Judge, yea, when himself who was reus, guilty of heresy,
besides other crimes, and who should have been judged first of all, took upon
him to be supreme Judge in his own cause? Let Catiline be held for such a
Judge betwixt the Senate and himself; it is not to be doubted but Tully, and
all who stood for the liberty of their City and Country, shall be proscribed
and condemned as rebels; and Catiline with his faction decreed to be the only
true Citizens, the only men fit to rule the Empire. It was the just exception
Athanas. Apol. 2.. Non arbitramur. p. 216
which those 47. Catholic Bishops that stood for Athanasius, took against the
Council at Tire; wherein he was condemned, that Eusebius and Theogius, the
mortal enemies of Athanasius, were his Judges in that Synod; Lex autem Dei
inimicum neque testem, neque judicem esse vult; but the law of God prohibits a
man's enemy to be a witness, much more to be his Judge. The very same exception
took Chrysostom. Epist. ad Jnnocent. Papam to. 1. Conc. post Epi. Inn. 27.
Chrysostom against Theophilus and the Synod with him. Theophilus, says he,
has called us unto judgment, before he has purged himself of the crimes
objected against him, quod contra omnes Canones and Leges est, which is against
all laws and Canons: and again, it is not sit that Theophilus should judge
us, qui ipse reus est, inimicus and hostis, who is himself guilty or accused
of crimes, and is also our enemy. Thus Chrysostom. A matter of such equity,
that both Pope Nicholas Quia suspecti et inimici, judices esse non debeant, et
ipsa ratio dictat et plurimis probatur exemplis. Epist. 8. Nich. 1.. Igitur
quia.
the first, and Ipsa ratio dictat, quia suspecti et inimici judices esse non
debeant. Extr. de Appel. ca. Secundo requiris.
Celestine the third say, Ipsa ratio dictat, Common reason does teach, that
those who are ones enemies, ought not to be their Judges. The Pope then being a
professed enemy of Protestants can be no lawful or competent Judge of them:
and being himself reus, called into question for heresies, can be no lawful
Judge in his own cause, and in those very heresies whereof he is accused. And
truly the answer whereby Bellarmine thought to avoid this most just exception
against their Trent Council and the rest, does much more confirm the equity
thereof: He confesses that this holds Quod dicunt, non debere eundem esse
Iudice^, et parte^, dico habere locum in privatis hominibus, non in principe
supremo. Ille enim semper est summus Iudex etiamsi cum ipso litigetur. Bell.
lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 21.. Tertia.
in all, save only in the supreme Judge. He only may be Judge in his own
cause, and against his enemies also, all else must stand to the judgment of
others. The interpretation is true, but in the application of this to the Pope,
there he fails: for he intends the Pope to be that supreme Judge; than which
there cannot be devised a more base begging of the question, and most special
controversy. That he is not supreme, we unavoydably prove by the words of
Christ Matthew. 18.17 Hoc quod Christus dixit, Dic Ecclesiae, omnes homines
comprehendit, and quod Petrus and ejus successores illa authoritate
comprehenda^tur ostendit Paulus qui in faciem restitit Cephae: probat etiam hoc
authoritas universalis Ecclesiae, etc. Responsio Synodalis Council. Basil. pa.
105. a.
, Dic Ecclesiae: by the judgment of this fifth Council, which judged and
condemned both the Popes Cathedral Constitution for heretical, and Vigilius
himself for an heretic: and in saying the fifth Council, it is as much as if
I said, by the judgment of the whole Catholic Church, all the former Councels
consenting in faith with this fifth, and all that follow it approving the
judgment thereof, until their Laterane Synod. The same is further proved by
the sixth Conc. 6. act. 13 Epistolas Honoril omnimodo abijcimus and tanquam
animae noxias execramur, pa. 67. a. and, Exclamaverunt universi, Honorio
haeretico Anathema. Conc. 6. act. 26. pa. 79. a.
general Council, which judged and condemned Pope Honorius for an Heretic;
by that which they call the seventh, which Detestamur Sergium, Honorium, etc.
Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 7. p. 386. b.
also condemned Honorius; by the next, which they account the eighth, wherein
it is decreed, that in the case Quamvis Honorius post mortem anathemato sit
affectus, manifestum tamen est illum de haeresi fuisse accusatum, qua sola in
causa licet inferioribus de superioribus judicare. Conc. 8. Act. 7. pa. 891. b
of heresy the Pope may be judged; (and that is the very case whereof the Pope
is now accused;) by the Councels of Constance Potestati Ecclesiae quilibet
cajuscunque dignitatis, etiamsi papalis existat, obedire tenetur in his quae
pertinent ad fidem. Conc. Constant. sess. 4.
, and Basil Veritas haec quod Concilium est supra Papam est veritas fidei
Catholicae. Conc. Basil. sess. 33.
, in both which it is decreed to be a doctrine of the Catholic faith, that the
Pope has a superior Judge in the case both of heresy, schism, and
scandalous life: by the practice Peccata eorum (Paparum) saepe dicta fuerunt
Ecclesiae, et ab Ecclesia punita, et qui non audierlut Ecclesiam fuerunt habiti
ut Ethnici et Publicani, ut legitur de Anastasio et Liberio. Resp. Synodalis
Conc. Bas. pa. ^05. a. et pa. eadem b. enumerat Ioh. 12. et alios.
of the Church, in judging and deposing Liberius, and John the 12. by the very
words of Bellarmine himself, If the Bishops, says he Bell. lib. 1. de Conc.
ca. 21.. Denique.
, in a Synod can convince the Pope of heresy, possunt eum judicare and
deponere, they may judge and depose him. And if in any cause he have a
superior Judge, then is he not supreme. Seeing then by all these, besides
infinite more, it is not only proved, but demonstrated, that the Pope is not,
nor ought to be held as supreme Judge, but may in some causes be both judged,
condemned, and deposed: and seeing by Bellarmines own confession, none can be
judge in his own cause, or of his adversaries toward whom he professes open
enmity, but only the supreme Judge; it inevitably follows upon the
Cardinals own words, besides evident reason, that the Pope neither was in the
Council of Trent, nor can be in any Council a lawful Judge, either of
Protestants, or in those causes which he then undertook to judge, in which
himself was a party and Reus; seeing then, he should be Judge in his own
cause, which equity and reason, the law both divine and humane do constantly
prohibit.

34. Add hereunto the judgment of the ancient and Catholic Church. I do
never read, or almost remember the holy Council of Chalcedon, but with a
kind of amazement I admire the rare piety, prudence, integrity, moderation,
and gravity of those most glorious Judges, who supplying the Emperors place
when he was absent, were the Imperial Presidents in that Council: Had they,
or such like Presidents been wanting at that time, it may justly be feared,
considering the eagerness and temerity, that I say not the insolency of the
Popes Legates in that Synod, that the Council of Chalcedon had proved a worse
Latrociny than the second Ephesine was. In that Council both these causes now
mentioned fell out, the one in Dioscorus, the other in Athanasius Bishop of
Paros. Dioscorus came and sat down in his place among the other Patriarks and
Bishops, as one who would be a Judge in the causes proposed; for in ancient
Councels there was a different Eusebius et Theodoretus in ordine accusantium
sedent, sicut et vos in loco accusatorum sedetis. Conc. Chal. Act. 1. pa. 13. a.
place, and seats for the Bishops, who judged and gave sentence in the
Council, and for others who were actors, whether plaintiffs and accusers, or
Rei, and accused. Now because Dioscorus himself was the party who was called
into question, and to be judged; and equity forbids a man to be Judge in his
own cause: The Council, and by name the Popes Legates, (to whom the rest
therein assented) took this just exception thereat, and said, Act. 1. Conc.
Chal. pa. 5. a.
Non patimur, we cannot endure this wrong to be done, ut iste sedeat qui
judicandus advenit; that Dioscorus, who is to be judged, sit as a Judge in his
own cause; upon which most just and equal motion, the glorious Judges, who
were Presidents for order, commanded Dioscorus to remove Dioscoro secundum
jussionem gloriosiss. Judicum, reside^te in medio. Ibid.
from the Bench, as I may say; of Judges, and to sit in the middle of the
Church, which was the place both for the Accusers and Rei; and Dioscorus
accordingly sat there, as the glorious Judges had appointed: Upon the very
same ground of equity did the religious Emperor command in the second
Ephesine Synod, that if Epist. Theodos. et Valent. ad Diosc extat in Actis
Conc. Chal. Act. 1. pa. 5. b.
any question or cause fell out to be debated concerning Theodoret (whom he
commanded to be present) that then, absque illo Synodum convenire; the Synod
should assemble and judge that cause without Theodoret; he should have no
judicatory power in his own cause: And the like he further commanded concerning
that holy Bish. Flavianus: He and some others had before in the Synod at
Constantinople been Judges against Eutiches, and condemned him. An higher,
even that general Council at Ephesus (which proved a Latrociny in the end)
was called to examine Nunc vos convenistis ut eos qui judicaverant judicciis.
Elpidij dierum nomine Imper. in Concilia b. Ephesians. recitatur vero in Conc.
Chal. Act. 1. pa. 13. b.
that judgment of Flavianus and the rest, whether it was just or no. The
Emperor commanded Ibid.
those who had been Judges of late, in loco eorum esse qui judicandi sunt, now
to be in the place of Rei, such as were to be judged. A demonstration, that
if Theodosius or Martian, or such like worthy and equal Judges as they were at
Chalcedon, had been Presidents for order in their Trent assembly; the Pope,
though he had been as just and orthodoxall as Flavianus, much more being in
impiety and heresy far superior to Dioscorus, should not have been
permitted to sit among the Bishops of the Council, nor have so much as one
single decisive suffrage or any judicatory power in his own cause, much less
have had such a supremacy of judgment, that his only voice and sentence
should overruled, and over-sway the whole Council besides.

35. The other example is this: Athanasius Bishop of Paros being accused Conc.
Chal. Act. 14. per totu^
of sundry crimes, was called to trial before a Provincial Council at
Antioch, held by Domnus Bishop of that See, unto whose Patriarchall authority
Athanasius was subject; when he refused to come after three citations, he was
deposed by that Synod, and Sabinianus by the same authority, made Bishop of
Paros in his room. In the Council at Chalcedon Athanasius came, complained of
wrongful extrusion, and desired of the general Council, that his Bishopric
might be restored unto him, pleading for his refusal to come to trial at the
Synod at Antioch, nothing else but this Dicat Athanasius cur tert^o evocatus a
Conci io Antiocheno, non occurrit. Athanasius dixit, Quoniam inimicus meus erat
ipse qui judicabat, et rogo haec relegi, et veritate^ probari. Ib. pa. 127 b.
Solum quia sunt inimicus esset ipse qui judicabat, clamavit, a sancta Chal.
Synodo ad causas illatas sibi examinandas reservatur. Epist. 8 Nich. 1.
Veniamus.
, that Do^nus who was the chief Judge in that Synod, was his enemy; and
therefore he thought it not equal to be tried before him, though he was his
own Patriarch. The glorious Judges gave order that the accusations against
Athanasius should within eight months be examined by Maximus then Bishop of
Antioch, and a Synod with him; and if he were found guilty of those crimes, or
any other worthy deposition, he should for ever want the Bishopric. But if
either they did not within such time examine the cause, or examining it, find
the accusations untrue, that then the Sea of Paros should be restored unto
Athanasius, as unjustly deposed; and that Sabinianus should remain but a
substitute unto him, until Maximus could provide him of another Bishopric.
Thus ordered the secular Judges, and the whole Council of Chalcedon approved
this sentence, crying out, Nihil justius, nothing is more just, nothing is more
equal, this is a just sentence, you judge according to Gods mind. O that once
again the world might be so happy as to see one other such holy Council as
was this of Chalcedon, and such worthy Judges to be Presidents thereof. All the
Anathemaes and censures of their Council at Trent, where the Roman Domnus our
capital enemy was the chief, nay rather the only Judge, would even for this
very cause be adjudged of no validity, nor of force to bind I say not other
Churches, such as these of Britany, but not those very men who are otherwise
subject to the Popes Patriarchall authority, as Athanasius was to Domnus. Such
an holy Council would cause a melius inquirendum to be taken of all their
judgments and proceedings against the Saints of God: and unless they could
justify (which while the Sun and Moon endures they can never) their
slanderous crimes of heresy imputed unto us, and withal purge themselves of
that Antichristian apostasy whereof they are most justly accused and
convicted, not only in foro poli, but in their own consciences, and by the
consenting judgment of the Catholic Church for six hundred, nay in some
points for fifteen hundred years after Christ, they should and would by such
a Council be deposed from all those Episcopal dignities and functions which
they have so long time usurped and abused unto all tyranny, injustice, and
subversion of the Catholic Faith.

36. As the proceedings in that Council were all unlawful on the Popes part,
so were they also both unlawful and servile in respect of the other Bishops,
who were assessors in that Assembly. Could there possibly be any freedom or
safety for Protestants among them, being the children of that generation which
had most perfidiously violated their faith and promise to John Hus in the
Council of Constance, and murdered the Prophets? Among whom that Canon
authorizing treacherous and perfidious dealing, stood in force: Quod Constable.
Constable. sess. 19.
non obstantibus, that notwithstanding the safe conducts of Emperors, Kings,
or any other granted to such as come to their Councels, Quocunque vinculo se
astrinxerint, by what bond soever they have tied themselves, by promise, by
their honor, by their oath, yet non obstante any such band they may bring them
into inquisition, and proceed to censure, to punish them as they shall think
fit, and then vaunt and glory in their perfidiousnesse, saying, Caesar
obsignavit Campian. Rat. 4.
, Christianus orbis major Caesare resignavit; The Emperor has sealed this
with his promise and oath, but our Council which is above the Emperor, has
repealed it; it shall not stand in force.

37. Could there be any freedom or liberty among those who were by many
obligations most servilely addicted to the Pope? The Apulian Bishops Carol.
Molin. lib. de Council. Trident. nu. 21.
crying out, aliorum omnium nomine, in the name of all the rest in their
Council, Nihil aliud sumus praeterquam creaturae and mancipia sanctissimi
patris: O, we are all but the Popes creatures, his very slaves. The complaint
Cl. Espenc. cont. in Epist. ad Tit. ca. 1. pa. 42.
of the Bishop of Arles might here be renewed, which he made of such like
Councels, at Basil, that must be done, and of necessity be done and decreed in
Counsels, quod nationi placeat Italicae, which the Italian nation shall
affect; which country alone Vt quae sol ^ Episcoporum numero nationes alias
aequet aut superet. ibid.
for multitude of Bishops does equal or exceed other nations: and this very
Italian faction to have prevailed at Trent, their own Bishop Espencaeus, who
was at the Council, does testify: Haec Jbid.
illa Helena est, this is the Helena which of late prevailed at Trent; this
Italian faction overswayed all: whereof Molineus Car. Mol. loco citato.
gives a plain instance. For when an wholesome Canon, that the Pope might not
dispense in some matters, had like to have been decreed, many in the Council
liking well thereof, the Pope procured a respite Pont fex ad sesquimensem
decreti conclusionem ampliari fussit. ibid.
for that business for a month and an half, during which time some forty
poor Bishops of Italy and Sicily were shipped and sent to Trent, like so many
levis armaturae milites, and so the good Canon was by their valor discomsited
and rejected by that holy Synod. Some of the Council also were the Popes
pensioners, and stipendary Bishops, nay rather ought than Bishops: such as
among others were Olaus ^agnus Olaus: lagnus Suevus qui Archiepiscopi
Vpsalensis nomen et titulum vendicabat, quae quidem regio nec Pontificem
unqu^m, nec Ecclesiam Romanam agnovit. Gent. Exam. Conc. Trid. sess. 1. nu. 3
, the titular Archbishop of Vpsala in Gothia, and Robertus Venantius the
titular Jbid.
and blind Bishop of Armach, and yet not half so blind in body as in mind;
Archbishops Archiepiscopi, sine Archiepiscopatu, sine Ecclesia, sine Clero,
sine ullo censu and reditu. ibid.
without Archbishoprickes, without a Church, without a Clergy, without
Diocese, without any revenues, save a small Hos Archiepiscopos rerum tenues
and inopes Romae suis stipe^diis aluerat Pontifex. ibid. Olao in singulos
menses 15. aureos nummos suppeditabat. ibid.
pension which the Pope allowed them, that they might be ciphers in the
Council, and taking his pay might do him some service for it, and grace his
Synod with their subscriptions. But all the other bonds are as nothing to that
Extr. ad Iurejur. ca. Ego N.
oath wherewith every one of them was tied and fettered to the Pope, swearing
to uphold the Papal authority against all men, and to fight In nova juramenti
forma insuper hoc jurant Episcopi, se haereticos, omnesque rebels Pontifici
extreme infestaturos, and persequuturos. Grav. oppos. Conc. Trident. p. 2.
cause. 4 pa. 52.
against all that should rebel against him: an oath so exercrable, that Aeneas
Sylvius is Ibidem in Paral. ad Abbat. Vsper. pa. 41^.
mentioned to have said, Quod etiam verum dicere contra Papam sit contra
Episcoporum juramentum, that even to speak the truth, to speak for the truth,
if it be contrary to the Pope, is against the oath of Bishops. By this they
were so tied, ut Ibid. pa. ^1.
ne mutire quidem ipsis liceat adversus Idolum Romanum, that they might not so
much as whisper against him.

38. Verily none of those Iron chains which were used by Dioscorus in the
Ephesine Latrocinie are comparable to these: No subscription unto blankes like
the swearing to maintain whatsoever their Roman Dioscorus shall define. They
who were not chained might have no place in the Synod; they who were chained
with such bands, and specially with such an oath, could have no freedom in the
Synod; they must speak, think, and teach nothing but what the Pope breathes
into them. Had there been such wise and worthy Judges for Presidents of that
Council, as there was at Chalcedon, could they possibly have endured to see
all synodall freedom thus oppressed and banished? Nay they would in their
zeal to God and his truth, have broken and burst in sunder every link of that
chain: And as Conc. Chalc. act. 8. and 10.
Ibas and Theodoret were not admitted to the Council of Chalcedon as members
thereof, till they had openly renounced and anathematized the heresies which
they had before embraced: So would not those glorious Judges have permitted any
of those Tridentine Bishops to have sit in the Council, till they had openly
renounced, anathematized, and abjured that oath, and with it their vassallage
to the Pope, and all those heretical doctrines which by their adhering to the
Pope, and following his faction, they had embraced: and those are
Image Worship, Transubstantiation, proper Sacrifice, Adoration of the Host,
their Purgatorian fire, and the rest of those heresies, which, since the Roman
faction began to prevail, (and that was about seven hundred years after
Christ, in the days of Gregory the second, who as I suppose, first of all by
synodall judgment decreed the worship of Images,) they have maintained: For
seeing since that time not truth not equity, but faction prevailed in their
Synods, and swayed matters in their Church, there could be no equal trial of
the truth by any of their Synods held since that time. But when all the Bishops
were freed from those chains of their oath and slavish bondage to the Pope,
since the faction (whereof he has been the leader) got the upper hand, those
glorious Judges would have permitted nothing to pass for a free synodall
sentence, but that only which could have had warrant from the Scriptures,
those holy Counsels and consenting judgment of those Fathers who lived within
the six hundred years or somewhat more after Christ, at what time partiality
and faction had not corrupted and blinded their judgment, as in the second
Nicene, and ever since it has.

39. But because such glorious Judges and their most equal Presidency was
wanting, nay was banished from their Assembly at Trent, scarce any tokens or
shadow of freedom could take place therein. Not toward Protestants. Brentius
Gent. Exam. Conc. Trid. sess. 15. nu. 3.
, and diverse other learned Divines came to Trent, offered Obsecrant in
disputationis arenam desce^dere, and se certamine offerebant. ibid.
themselves and their faith to trial of disputations, Nulla ratione Ibidem.
impetrari potuit, this could not be obtained by any means, that they should
come to dispute Neque admissi fuerint ad suae fidei professione^ proponendam
and discutiendam, et haud unquam admitti potuerunt ut suam fidei confessionem
in synodi publico conventu exhiberent, ac multo minus ut dogmata quae in ea
continebantur disputatione assererent. ibid. Genesis in Exam. lib. 5. nu. 4. pa.
317.
for the faith. Jbid. pa. 320.
Nullus unquam liber aditus Protestantibus, the Protestants at no time had any
freedone to come to the Council at Trent. Not toward their own Bishops, if
they spoke or did ought tending to the defense of the truth. Cornelius Bishop
of Bitons said Melc. Can. lib. 12. loc. Theol. ca. 13.. Extat.
, that Christ offered not in his last supper his own body and blood: this
crossed their proper sacrifice of the mass, therefore Cornelius for that free
and true speech, a Patribus universis explosus est, was hissed out of their
Trent Council by all the Fathers and Divines there present. Iacobus Nachiantes
Cypr. Valor. in Marc. 2.
Bishop of Clodia Fossa, said, he could not approve that traditions should be
held in equal reverence as the Scripture, he was for this truth expulsed the
Council. Gulielmus Ibid.
Venetus a Dominican Friar, said in the Council, that the Council was above
the Pope, he was commanded to depart out of the Council. Another of the
Bishops Car. Molin. li. de Conc. Trid. nu. 22.
happening to touch, and that but lightly, the pride of the Pope in his titles,
wished, that seeing God is no where in the Scripture called sanctissimus, but
sanctus, the Pope also would be content with the same title of sanctus, and not
take a more ample name of honor than is given in Scripture unto God. The Pope
being certified hereof, sent for him to come from Trent to Rome, and gave him
to his Officers to use him hardly Satalitibus suis de gradu deijciendum and
duriter tractandum propinavit. Ibid.
, and to be degraded. Petrus Vergerius Ioh. Sleid. Com. lib. 21. pa. 304. and
seq.
Bishop of Iustinianople, (he who endeavoring Dum confuta^di causa libros
adversariorum diligenter excutit, and attente argumenta considerat, captum se
victumque sensit. Ibid.
to refute the Protestant writings, and began that book which he entitled,
Against the Apostates of Germany, was himself overcome by the evidence of that
truth, specially in the doctrine of Justification, which he oppugned) came to
the Council at Trent: The Pope having intelligence that he was inclined to
Lutheranisme, writ to his Legates at Trent, Ne locum ei tribuant in consessu,
That they should not admit him into their Council, but command him to depart.
Ad hunc Ibid. and plura de eo lege apud Cypr. Valor. in Marcel. 2.
modum eliminatus, by this means was the Bishop excluded from their free
Synod: and if Johannes Casus the Popes Legate to the Venetians, and Archbishop
of Beneventum, (who writ a Nec puduit eum scelus omnium long turpissimum
celebrare laudibus. Ioh. Sleid. loc. citat.
book in the praise of one of the most detestable and damnable sins) could
have prevailed to have entised n him to go to Rome, he had not thence escaped
so easily as he did from Trent. Could any of these or the like enormous
disorders, which utterly subvert all synodall freedom, have been endured, had
there been equal and prudent Presidents for Kings and Emperors in that
Council? But the Imperial presidency being abandoned, together with it, was
all freedom and synodall orders excluded. So that I may truly say both of
these Tridentine, and their other nine Synods, Eum, uti Romam peteret modis
omnibus hortatur Casus; Vergerius vero qui periculum suum intelligeret, recusat
ibid.
that as by reason of their want of this Imperial presidency, they had many
disorders, so by reason they excluded that Presidency, they had, nay they could
have nothing in them at all but disorder.

40. You see now the several kinds of unlawful Counsels, as well by want of
Imperial calling, or of Imperial Presidency, as when neither is wanting, by
the abuse of that Imperial authority in the Synod. And though the
unlawfulness of those ten later Synods does now appear to be far greater
than of those ancient Counsels before mentioned; seeing in all the ancient
there was not only a lawful calling, but a lawful presidency also, both
which were wanting in the other ten; besides the unlawful proceedings which
were equally in both, or rather far worse in the later: yet is there one
especial difference that is principally to be remembered, which issuing from
the former diversity of unlawfulness, makes a greater odds than at the first
one would imagine: and this it is: When the unlawfulness of any Synod arises
(as in their ten Synods it does) from the want of the first condition, that
is, of lawful calling and authority to assemble and judge, be the
consultations and proceedings of such Synods otherwise never so orderly, and
their resolutions never so just and true, yet for making of any Canon or
Decree, or giving any synodall judgment, there is an invalidity in all such
Synods, and a mere nullity in all their Decrees, Canons, and Judgments. They
had no authority to assemble in a Synod, much less Si legitima synodus non
fuit, planum est nulla authoritatem potuisse habere: and nullius roboris sunt
illius canones. Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. ca. 18.. Caeterum: and. Ac deinde. and
Sententia a non suo Iudice dicta nihil firmitatis obtinet. Greg lib. 11. Epist.
56.
have they any authority to make a Law, or give judgment in that Synod. That
which is invalid in the spring and original, must needs in all the subsequent
actions derived from thence, and depending thereon, retain the same invalidity.
And seeing it is neither multitude, nor learning, nor wisdom, but authority
which is the fountain and foundation of all Laws, Canons, and Judgments,
where this authority is wanting in any person or assembly, it is as impossible
for such a person or assembly to make a law, give any judgment, or pronounce
any judicial sentence, as to erect an house in the air, or build without any
foundation. And truly this touches at the quick all those ten Councels, which
wanting authority to assemble them, were no other but tumultuous, seditious,
and unauthorized assemblies. There was no more strength, validity, or vigor in
any of their Decrees to bind as laws, or synodall judgments, than there was
in such Edicts as Spartacus and Catiline in Rome, or Jack Cade in this
Kingdom should have published and set forth: specially in that which he like
another Pope intended to be his fundamental law, That all laws should proceed
out of his mouth. Those which they untruly call the Canons, Decrees, or
Judgments of those Synods, are only the opinions, resolutions, and
consultations of so many seditious men which co^vened and conspired together in
those conjurations: synodall Decrees, or Ecclesiastical Laws and Judgments
they were not, they could not be. In the head, they are nipt and tainted with a
nullity of authority, they bear this tainture and nullity throughout every
part and parcel of their determinations.

41. But when the unlawfulness of any Synod arises (as in the ancient
Councels at Arimine, Millane, and Ephesus it did) from the want of the other
condition, that is, of orderly proceedings only, the Bishops being both
lawfully called, and having a lawful President, the case is here far
different; their acts and sentences though they be unlawful, yet are they
truly judicial, and have the authority of synodall judgments, and therefore
do bind others, though not in conscience to accept them as true, yet with
patience to submit themselves to their censures, till by like authority they be
revoked, and repealed. Even as in civil Courts, though an unjust or partial
Judge, either for fear, favor, hatred, desire of lucre, or any other
perturbation of mind, shall wilfully pervert justice and due proceedings, and
pronounce an unjust sentence: yet is this act judicial, and stands in force of
a judgment, till by the like, or higher authority it be reversed; because such
an one had authority and rightful power to judge and give sentence in that
cause, though he abused his authority to injustice and wrong: Right so it is in
synodall and Ecclesiastical assemblies, when they are lawfully called and
authorized to hear and judge any matter, their want of due, orderly, and just
proceedings makes their judgment unjust, and shows them to be wicked and
malicious conspirators against the truth, but it does not make the decree to be
no judgment, or no judicial sentence of a Council. The corruption is now in
the branch, not in the root: the abuse of their authority makes not a nullity
in their act: It hinders not them to be truly and rightfully Judges, but it
demonstrates them not to be upright, good, and just Judges, it shows their
sentence to be wicked and impious, but it hinders it not to be a judicial
sentence. Whereof that one (among many) in the Ephesine Latrociny, is a clear
example. In it Flavianum et Eusebium ab omni Episcopali dignitate judicamus
esse alienos. Conc. Ephesians. in act. Con. Chal. act. 1. pa. 57. b.
Eusebius Bishop of Dorileum was most wickedly and unjustly deposed from his
See, yet this their unjust sentence stood in force, till by the like authority
of another general Council at Chalcedon, it was repealed: for in it Eusebius
sat not at the first as a Judge, but as an accuser Et Eusebius et Theodoretus
in ordine accusantium sedent. Con. Chalc. act. 1. pa. 13. a.
of Dioscorus, and in the place of accusers: He entreated the holy Council
that all the Acts Conc. Chalc. act. 3. pa. 66.
and Judgments at Ephesus, viribus carere, might be adnulled and declared to
be of no force, and that he might enjoy as before that sentence he did,
Sacerdotali dignitate, his Episcopal dignity and See. The holy Synod consented
to his just request, received him as a member Nam act. 6. pa. 101. b. Eusebius
Dorilei subscribit definitioni fidei inter alios.
of the Council, restored him to his See, and adnulled all the acts of the
Ephesine Latrociny, requesting Praesens omne Concilium deprecatur Imperatorem
quatenus pia lege sanciat, neque Synodum illam (Ephesinam 2.) nominati, neque
quidquam quod actum est in eteneri. Conc. Chalc. act. 10. p. 115.. Anatolius.
and pa. 116. Omnes eadem dicimus.
the Emperor to ratify and confirm that their Judgment.

42. Such an exceeding great and most remarkable difference there is betwixt
those ancient and these ten later unlawful Synods. Though both be unlawful,
yet in the former there was a binding force for a while, till they were
repealed; but in these later there never was any power to bind any, either to
accept their Decrees, or to undergo their censures, because ab initio there
was a mere nullity in all their Acts. Again, the inflicting of any punishment
upon the judgment of the former, had the warrant, though not of divine, yet of
humane authority, and was to be presumed as just, (the sentence of every
Judge, even eo nomine, because he is a Judge, being to be presumed just,
until upon evident proof it be declared to be unjust.) But what censures or
punishments soever are, or at any time have been denounced or inflicted on
any, upon the warrant or Judgment of these last ten Synods, they are all ab
initio merely tyrannous, and unjust, inflicted without any either divine or
humane authority, (seeing those Synods had none at all) there is not so much as
a presumption that they were or could be just, but for their want of authority
in decreeing them, they are (though otherwise equal) presumed to be unjust.

43. And thus much I have thought good to insert concerning all sorts of
Councels, as well lawful as unlawful: to manifest hereby not only the
injurious dealing of Baronius with this fifth Council, against which he
declameth as an impious and unlawful conspiracy; but their vanity also in
extolling and magnifying many, and specially those last ten, for holy, lawful,
and oecumenicall Synods; of which dignity they are so far short, that they
are all most deservedly to be ranked with the Ephesine Latrocinie, and put in
the Classis of those which of all other are the most base, impious, unlawful,
and disorderly Counsels.

CAP. XX. How Cardinal Baronius revileth the Emperor Justinian, and a
refutation of the same.
1. WE have hitherto seen and fully examined all the material exceptions
which Baronius could devise to excuse Pope Vigilius from heresy: and in them
consists the whole pith, and all the sinews of the cause; they being the only
arguments which are to be reckoned as the lawful warriers of the Cardinal.
Now follows that other Troop, whereof I told you Cap. 5. nu. 1.
before, of his piraticall and disorderly Straglers, which the Cardinal has
mustred together, not that they should dispute or reason in this cause, but to
rail and revile at every thing whereat their Leader is displeased: And the
Cardinal does this with so impotent affections, in so immodest, that I say not
so scurrill a manner, and with such virulency of all uncivil and most
undutiful speeches, that you shall see him now, having cast away all that
gravity and modesty which is sit not only for a Divine, a Cardinal, a
Disputer, but for a man of any temper, or sobriety, to act herein no other part
but Hercules Furens, or Ajax mastigophorus; without all respect either of
authority, or dignity, or innocence, lashing every body, and every thing that
comes in his way, be it friend or foe; sparing nothing that seems to cross
his fancy, not the Emperor Justinian, not the Empress Theodora, not Theodorus
Bishop of Cesarea, not the Imperial Edict, not the controversy and cause it
self of the Three Chapters, not the Acts of the holy General Council, not
Pope Vigilius himself; nothing can escape the whippe of his tongue and pen. Let
us begin with the Emperor, against whom Baronius declameth in this manner.

2. Princes Vides quanta jactura -- cum Principes indicere audent ipsis
sacerdotibus leges, a quibus sancitas servare ipsi debent. Bar. an. 553. nu.
237.
to dare to make laws for Priests? who should obey the laws made by them.
Such Si qui ejusmodi esset, leges sanciret de fide, an. 546. nu. 43.
an one as Justinian make laws of faith? an Fuit homo penitus illiteratus,
adeo ut nec Alphabetum aliquando didicisset, an. 528. nu. 2.
abcedary Emperor: an illiterate Illiteratus Theologus, an. 551. nu. 2.
Theologue: utterly Cum esset penitus illiteratus, an. 546. nu. 41.
unlearned: who Iustiniani legere nescientis, an. 538. nu. 32.
knew not how to read: who Qui nunquam legere sciverit vel ipsum foris
inscriptum titulum Bibliorum, an. 551. nu. 4.
could never read the title of the Bible: no not the very first Vt qui nec
prima clementa calleret, ut legere posset, an. 546 nu. 43.
elements: not his Alpha, Beta: He on a sudden to become a Fecit analphabetum
Imperatorem repent palliatum apparere Theologum, an. 551. nu. 4.
palliated Divine? He to prescribe laws Cui ut sibi subdita aggressus erat
prascribere leges, an. 551. nu. 2.
for the Church, as subject to his? He against Sacrarli legii co^ditorem agit:
de sacerdotibus leges far, in eosque poenas statuere, praeter jus fasque
praesumens, an. 528. nu. 2.
all right and equity to presume to make laws of sacred matters, of Priests?
He to set down punishments for them? He who was not only thus utterly
unlearned, but withal an enemy to the Church; a Ab Imperatoris sacrilegi
violentia, an. 552 nu. 8.
sacrilegious person: a Just. a persequutione cessavit, an. 553. nu. 14.
persecutor: a grievous, a Et quod monstrosius accessit, ab Imperatore
persequutio excitata suit, et haud quidem levis, an 553. nu. 221.
monstrous persecutor: one who was mad Ab Jmperatoris furore, an. 552. nu. 8.
ille furore percitus, mente dimotus, correptus maligno spiritu, agitatus a
Satana, an. 551. nu. 2.
, frantic, and out of his wits, who was possessed with an evil spirit, and
driven by the Devil himself? Such an one A quo accepturi essent leges
Episcopi, an. 551. nu. 4.
make laws for Bishops? what is this else, but to confound Confundi omnia
necesse est, an. 553. nu. 237.
all things, to tread Canones ipse conculcat, penitusque pessundat
Ecclesiasticam oeconomiam, an. 541. nu. 16.
under foot the sacred Canons, to abolish utterly the Church discipline, to
Sicque omnem in Eccesia dissolveret ordinem, faceretque ex regno coelorum
ergastulum inserorum, an. 551. nu. 4.
dissolve all divine order, and to make of the Kingdom of heaven (which the
Church is) the very prison of hell, where there is nothing but confusion? Thus
the Cardinal: And this is but the first pageant of his Ajax, and but some
gleanings neither of that harvest, which is abundant in his Annals.

3. Not to seek any exact, or methodicall refutation hereof: All that the
Cardinal has hitherto said may be reduced to three notorious slanders, by
which he labors to blemish the immortal fame and unspotted honor of that
most religious Emperor. The first concerns His knowledge and learning;
Justinian not able to read? not know so much as his Alphabet? Is there any in
the world, think you, so very stupid, as to believe the Cardinal in this so
shameless; so incredible an untruth? Tanti ingenii, tantaeque doctrinae fuisse
constat, says Platina In vita Bonifac. 2.
; it is manifest, that Justinian was of so great a wit, and so great learning,
that it is not to be marveiled if he reduced the laws, being confused
before, into order: Tritemius Lib. de script. Eccles.
says of him, He was a man of an excellent wit, and he is deservedly Lecum
inter Ecclesiasticos scriptores merito acquisivit. Jbid.
reckoned among Ecclesiastical Writers; and he expressly mentions three
books which he writ against Eutyches, one against the Africane Bishops:
adding, that none may doubt; but that besides these, he writ many and very
excellent Epist. Possevine Appar. Sac. in verbo Iustinianus.
the Jesuit acknowledges him, with Tritemius, for an Ecclesiastical Writer;
and besides the reciting of those same books which Tritemius mentioned, he
alleges these words of their Pontifical, most worthy to be observed for this
purpose: Justinian the Emperor a religious man, sent unto the Apostolic See
his profession of faith, Scriptam chirographo proprio, written with his own
hand, testifying his great love to the Christian Religion. In regard of which his
excellent writings, both Pope Agatho Conc. 6. Act. 4. in Epist. Agath.
, and the whole sixth general Council with him, who lived in the next age to
Justinian, reckons him in the same rank, not only of Ecclesiastical
Writers, but of venerable Fathers, with Saint Cyrill, Saint Chrysostom and
others, whose writings do give testimony to the truth. Liberatus who lived in
the days of Justinian; and who was no well-willer of the Emperor, yet could
not but record, That he In Brevia. ca. 24.
writ a Book against the Acephali or Eutichean heretics; in defense of the
Council of Chalcedon, and that Theodorus seeing him so toyled in writing
against heretics, told him, Scribendi laborem non eum debere pati; That he
should not trouble himself with writing books, but maintain the faith by
publishing Edicts. Procopius Lib. 3. de bell. Goth.
, who was familiarly conversant with Justinian, recites that traitorous
persuasion of Arsaces to Artabanus, when he excited him to murder the
Emperor; This (said he) you may do easily, and without danger, for the
Emperor is not mistrustfull, and he passes the time till very late of the
night in talking without any watch or guard, having none but some old and
feeble Bishops about him, Christianorum scriptis miro studio revolvendis
intentus, being marvellously addicted to read and peruse the writings of
Christians. Are these, think you, the actions of an illiterate, of an Abcedary
Emperor? And what speak I of these? The Pandects, the Code, the Authentikes,
the Institutions, the whole body of the law proclaim the incredible wisdom,
and rare knowledge of Justinian, All people says he, Instit. Proem.
are governed by the laws, Tam a nobis promulgatis quam compositis, as well
published as composed by us: and though he used the learning, help, and
industry of other worthy men, (whose names he has commended to all posterity,
and never-dying fame) yet when they offered the books unto him, Et legimus and
recognovimus, says he, Ibid.
we both read them and examined them; which the gloss explaineth, saying, Nos
ipsi legimus, We our selves have read and perused them. So that I cannot
sufficiently admire this most shameless untruth of Baronius, in reviling him
for an illiterate, and not so much as an Abcedarie scholar, whose wit,
learning, and prudence has been, and will for ever be a mirror to all ages.

4. But Suidas (says the Cardinal Bar. an. 528. nu. 2.
) does affirm Jn verbo Just.
the same; calling Justinian (...), and void of all learning. For answer
whereunto, first, I would gladly know of the Cardinal, how he can assure us
that this is indeed the saying of Suidas? specially seeing their own Jesuit
Possevine tells In appar. verbo Suidas.
us for a certainty, that Plaeraque, very many things are falsely inserted into
Suidas; and that, a Sciolis and Schismaticis, by some smatterers or
Schismatics; and further, that those Plaeraque, are such as are repugnant to
the Evangelical truth, and Historical sincerity. How may we be assured,
that this concerning Justinian, is not one of those Plaeraque, seeing this to
be contrary to Historical sincerity, does by those many and evident proofs
which we before produced, fully appear? Again, admitting Suidas for the
Author thereof: is Suidas think you of more, or equal authority and credit to
their Pontifical? which witnesses expressly, that Justinian writ the holy
confession of his faith, Chirorgrapho proprio, with his own hand? Equal to
Tritemius and Possevine, or (to wink at them) to Pope Agatho and the sixth
general Council? who all account Justinian among the Writers of the Church.
Who I pray you was this Suidas? truly an earnest defender of those impieties,
which in their second Nicene Synod began to prevail; who in reviling manner
does call Suid. in verbo Constantimus.
Constantine Iconomachus, a Serpent, an Antichrist, and the disciple of the
Devil: and all, for his not consenting to the adoration of Images, and
relics, and to the Invocation of Saints. Now how this sort of men were given
to lies and fables, the Acts of that Synod do fully demonstrate: Or if you
rather desire to have their Jesuits judgment of Suidas, he will tell you
first, that he was heretical, in teaching Poss. in verbo Suidas.
the Essence in the Godhead to be generative; which their Laterane Council
has condemned for an heresy. He will tell you further, that this book is
full of errors, fables, and lies, of which sort are these, among many. That
the world was made of the Poetical Chaos; that it shall continue 1200. thousand
years: that the Sun and Stars, are fiery substances, fed and perpetuated by
terrestrial humors as their nutriment: that Paradise is Hortus pensilis, a
garden hanging in the air far above the earth: that Caine was begotten of
the Devil, which is a lie; that the Jews adored an asses head, and every
seventh year sacrificed a stranger: His narration (in verbo Nero) touching
Annas and Caiphas, Pilate, Peter, and Simon Magus, wherein multa comminiscitur,
he forgeth many things: His narration (in verbo Iulianus) which he calls in
express words, mendacium flagiciosissimum, a most lewd lie: His slandering
Constantine the great, as base of birth; and his son Crispus as incestuous:
His commending of Acatius and Acesius two heretics: adding, that he writes
many things, contra Historiae venitatem, against the Historical truth. His
relation (in verbo Apolonius) where many things are praised, quae omnia
monstrosa sunt, and prorsus explodenda; all which are utterly to be hissed at:
where also he seems to allow the impious Art of Magic, and Divinations: His
approving of Appolonius and Danis, two wicked Magitians, who both are relegati
ad inferos; condemned to Hell. And to omit very many of this kind of impieties
and fables, which abound in Suidas: His narration (in verbo Jesus:) which not
only Baronius rejects, but Pope Paul the fourth, for that cause beside some
other Exploserit in Jndicem lib. prohib.
exploded the book of Suidas, and placed it in the rank librorum
prohibitorum: Such, even by the confession of their own Jesuit; is this
Suidas: a depraver of good, a commender of wicked men, a fabler, a liar, a
falsifier of Histories, a Magitian, an Heretic, whose book is by the Pope
forbidden to be read. Such a worthy witness has the Cardinal of his Suidas,
with whom he conspireth in reviling Justinian, as one utterly unlearned.
Concerning which untruth, I will say no more at this time than that which
Gotofrid does in his censure Art lib. Instit.
of those words of Suidas, where calling it in plain terms a slander, he
rejects it, as it justly deserves; in this manner, Valiant calumniae, nos
sinceriora sequamur; Away with this and such like opprobrious slanders of
Suidas and Baronius; but let us follow the truth.

5. His second reproof of the Emperor is, for presuming to make laws in
causes of faith; which for Kings and Emperors to do, brings (as he says) an
hellish confusion into the Church of God: The wit of a Cardinal! Justinian may
not do that which King Hezekiah, which Asa, which Josiah, and Constantine the
great, the two Theodosii, Martian, and other holy Emperors before had done,
and done it by the warrant of God, to the eternal good of the Church, and
their own immortal fame: Had he indeed, or any of those Emperors taken upon
them by their laws to establish some new, erroneous, or heretical doctrine,
the Cardinal might in this case have justly reproved them; but this they did
not: what doctrines the Prophets delivered, the word of God taught, and holy
Synods had before decreed and explaned; those, and none else did Justinian, by
his Edict, and other religious Emperors, ratify by their imperial authority:
Hear Justinians own words, We Edict. Justin, in causa trium, Capitul. in
princip.
have thought it needful by this our Edict to manifest that right confession
of faith, quae in sancta Dei Ecclesia praedicatur, which is preached in the
holy Church of God. Here is no new faith; no Edict for any new doctrine, but
for maintaining that only faith which the holy Catholic Church taught, and
the Council of Chalcedon had decreed; wherein that Justinian did nothing but
worthy of eternal praise, the whole fifth Council, and the whole Catholic
Church approving it, is a witness above exception, which entreating of that
which Justinian had done in this cause of the Three Chapters; (the chief of
all which was the publishing of his most religious Edict, to condemn the same)
says, Coll. 7. in fine.
Omnia semper fecit and facit, quae sanctam Ecclesiam. and recta dogmata
conservant; Justinian has ever done, and as yet does all things which preserve
the holy Church, and the true faith. So the Council. Is not Baronius mind
composed of venom and malice, who condemns and reviles the Emperor, as
bringing hellish confusion into the Church, by publishing that law, which to
have been an especial means to preserve the Church and Catholic faith, the
holy general Council, and all the whole Catholic Church with it proclameth.

6. See here again the love and respect which Baronius bears to the Imperial
laws, and to those holy and religious Emperors, which were the nursing fathers
of Gods Church, and pillars to uphold the faith in their days. There are
extant in the Theodosian Code many laws concerning the Catholic faith;
concerning Bish. Churches, and the Clergy; concerning Heretics, Apostates,
Monks, Jews, and Samaritanes; concerning Pagan sacrifices, and Temples;
concerning Religion, Episcopal judgment, those who flee unto Churches, and
many other of the same kind: laws wholesome and necessary for those times.
The like titles are extant also in the Code of Justinian. In the Authenticks
there are I know not how many laws in the like causes: Of the four Councels,
of the Order of Patriarchs, of the building of Churches; of goods belonging to
sacred places; Of the holy Communion, of Litanies, of the memorials for the
dead, of the Privileges of Churches, of Patriarchs, of the Pope of old Rome,
of Archbishops, of Abbots, of Presbyters, of Deacons, of Subdeacons, of Monks,
of Anchorites, of Synods, of deposing Bishops who fall into heresy, that
Patrons who builded Churches, and their heyers shall nominate the Clerks for
the same; and in case they name such as are unmeet, then the Bishop to appoint
who he thinks sit, that Heretics shall be incapable of any legacies: and
exceeding many the like. Now such a spite has the Cardinal to the Emperors,
and these their Imperial laws, made concerning the affairs of the Church,
that like some new Aristarchus, with one dash of his pen, he takes upon him to
casheire, and utterly abolish those laws, (five or six hundredth at the least,
with such care, piety, and prudence, set forth by Constantine, Theodosius,
Valentinian, Gratian, Martian, Justinian, and other holy and religious
Emperors: And when these are gone, whether the Cardinal meant not after them,
to wipe away (which with as good reason, and authority he may) all the other
laws, which are in the Digest, Code, and Authenticks, that so his master the
Pope may play even another Jack Cade, that all law might proceed out of his
mouth, let the judicious consider. This is clear, that the Cardinals malice is
not satisfied with reproof of the laws themselves: even these holy Emperors
Constantine, Theodosius and the rest, are, together with Justinian, for the
making of those laws touching Ecclesiastical affairs and persons, reproved,
nay reviled by Baronius, as having been presumptuous persons, authors of an
hellish confusion in the Church, and for turning heaven into hell. They, and
such as they, make laws of faith? laws for Bishops? laws for the Church? let
them hear, as they well deserve, and as the An. 550. nu. 14.
Cardinal shameth not to upbraid to Justinian, Ne ultra crepidam, Sir Cobbler
go not beyond you Last and Latchet. So indignly does the Cardinal use those
holy and religious Princes, and that even for their zeal to Gods truth and
love to his Church, for that which with exceeding piety and prudence they
performed to their own immortal honor, and to the peace and tranquillity of
the whole Church of God.

7. His third calumny is, that he revileth Justinian for his sacrilegious
fury and persecution which he used against Pope Vigilius, partly when Vigilius
Bar. an. 551. 2. et 552. nu. 8.
was buffeted and beaten at Constantinople, before the time of the Council,
and forced to slay to Chalcedon; partly when he was banished Bar. an. 553. nu.
221. et 222. etc.
after the end of the Council, for not consenting with the Synod in condemning
the Three Chapters. Alas, how has heresy and malice quite blinded the
Cardinal, and bereft him of his understanding? Justinian neither before the
Council, nor after it, persecuted Vigilius. Vigilius was neither beaten, nor
buffeted, nor fled he either to Saint Peter, or to Saint Euphemia, nor was he
banished at all; these all are nothing but the Poetical and Chimericall
fictions of the Cardinal, no truth, no realty at all in them, as we have
before Sup. ca. 16. et 17.
fully demonstrated. Judge now I pray you, whether any but some Ajax furiosus,
or who were deprived of his wits, would call the Emperor mad, frantic,
sacrilegious, possessed and guided by the Devil, for persecuting and banishing
him, who neither was persecuted nor banished, but enjoyed the latitude of
liberty, and all the benefits thereof, even the Emperors favor, and the
comforts accompanying it. But admit Vigilius had been banished, as indeed many
other Bishops were, for defending the Three Chapters against the Decree of the
holy general Council: was Justinian a persecutor, a monstrous sacrilegious
persecutor, for banishing or punishing condemned heretics, and Nestorians?
such as all the defenders of the Three Chapters to have been we have Ca. 4.5.
et seq.
before declared. what a monstrous persecutor then was holy Constantine for
banishing Theognis Socrat. lib. 1. c. 10.
Bishop of Nice, and Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, for refusing to consent to
the Nicene Synod? What a persecutor was Theodosius the the elder, who commanded
L. 3. de fide Cath. Cod. Theod.
all that held the Macedonian heresy to be banished and shut out of their
Churches without any hope to recover the same again? What a persecutor was
Theodosius the younger, who forbad all men Leg. ult. de haer. Cod. Theod.
to have or read the books of Nestorius, or to admit the Nestorians into any
City, Town, Village or house? What an horrible and monstrous persecutor was
Martian, who made a law Extat in Conc. Chal. Act. 3. pa 86.
that if any should teach the Eutichean heresy, ultimo supplicio coercebitur,
he shall be put to death. If Constantine, Theodosius the elder and younger,
and Martian be no persecutors, notwithstanding this severity in exiling,
punishing, and putting to death heretics: what a malicious slanderer is
Baronius for co^demning Justinian as a persecutor, for banishing, imprisoning,
or punishing with like severity the defe^ders of the three Chapters, who were
every way as detestable, as damnable, and as truly convicted and condemned
heretics, by the judgment of an holy general Council, as either the Arians,
Macedonians, Eutycheans, or old Nestorians? Thus to persecute, that is, justly
punish heretics, is laudable: thus to be persecuted is ignominious. Non est
pecoatum malos persequi, Lib. cont. Fulgent. Donat. art. 20.
says Saint Augustine, To persecute and justly punish wicked men is no
offense; neither are they just who are so persecuted, but he who is persecuted
for righteousness sake. Had Justinian done this to Vigilius, he had been no
persecutor: But Vigilius who oppugned the truth, and Baronius who with such a
virulent tongue reviles and railes at the defenders of Gods truth; they, and
none but they, are persecutors in this cause: They kill not the Prophets nor
Apostles, but they kill and murder, as cruelly as they can, that truth of God
which the Prophets and Apostles embraced, and for defense of which they were
ready to be killed; This spiritual persecution, as Saint Augustine teaches,
Lib. 1. cont. liter. Petil. ca. 27
exceeds the corporal: They Aug. lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil. ca. 14.
murder the Prophets who contradict the doctrines of the Prophets: Mitius
ageretis, It were less cruelty in you to thrust your swords into the bodies
of the Prophets, then with your tongues to murder the doctrine and words of
the Prophets. And a thousand like sayings has the same Augustine, by which it
were easy to demonstrate Baronius himself, and not Justinian, to be the
unjust, impious, sacrilegious, and frantic persecutor, if by that which has
been said this were not abundantly apparent.

8. Now follows the other Pageant of this Baronian Tragedy in declaming
against Justinian. That respects his last years, and his death, in which part,
as being the last, and therefore likeliest to leave deepest impression in the
hearts of the readers, because Baronius has couched together the most vile
accusations of all the rest, and the very venom of his poysonfull affections,
and spleen, against the Emperor, I am most unwilling to forsake the religious
Emperor in the last act of all, but am exceeding desirous to testify my love
unto him, both for other causes, and for this especially, that he, next unto
God, was the preserver of the Catholic faith, when in this cause of the Three
Chapters, the Nestorians, and especially Pope Vigilius, labored with might and
maine for ever to abolish and extinguish the same: in regard of which act
alone, if there were none else, he deserved to be eternized in the blessed
memory, and by the best endeavors of all that love the Catholic faith.
Baronius An. 563. nu. 1.
entreating of the 37. year of Justinian, which was about two years before
his death, tells us how at that time, Justinian, Unhappy Justinian ran
headlong into the heresy of the Aphthardokites, or incorrupticolae: who Evagr.
lib. 4. ca. 38. Leont. lib. de sect. Act. 10. et Prateoll. de Haeres. har. 55.
Dicebant carnem quam ex virgin Servator assumpsit, ante passionem,
incorruptibilem fuisse.
denied the body of CHRIST to be subject to passions, death, or corruption:
These, as Liberatus says Liberat. Brev. ca. 19.
, were also called Phantasticks, because upon their doctrine it followed, that
CHRIST had not a true and truly humane, but only an imaginary and
fantastical body. Into this fantastical heresy, says Baronius, did
Justinian fall, and run headlong in his last age: and for proof hereof he
alleges An. 563. nu. 8.
most ample witnesses: Authors omnes tam Graci quam Latini, All Authors both
Greek and Latin, they all testify that he fell into this heresy; and they
detest that impiety in him; Nor did he only fall himself into it, but he
sought to draw all others into the same error: Ita ebrius Bar. ibid. nu. 9.
factus est, ut mente motus, Justinian was so drunk, that being out of his
wits, he writ an Edict Illud constat, Jmperatorem haeresin comprobasse
eandemque scripto Edicto firmasse. An. 564. nu. 3.
to confirm that heresy, and bring all the Church to believe the same: When
he prevailed not that way, then he began An. 563. nu. 12
to use violence, Exilium omnibus Episcopis contradicentibus comminatur, he
threatened banishment to all the Bishops who contradicted that heresy, and Vbi
elaboratu^ a se edictu^ contemni ab orthodoxis percepit, ira exaestuans, magnam
persequntionem commovit. an. 564. nu. 1.
so boiling in rage, raised a persecution, yea, Persecutionem Ibid. nu. 3.
haud mediocrem, an heavy and great persecution against Catholic Bishops,
casting Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople into banishment for this cause. Thus
Baronius. Who proves this concerning the Edict and persecution, partly by the
Surian Eustathius Bar. ibid. extant vero apud Sur. die 6. Apr.
, who writ the life of Eutychius, partly out of Evagrius, Lib. 4. ca. 38.
who both mention indeed the banishment of Eutychius, and the Edict of
Justinian, written for that heresy.

9. This is the sum of that which is objected: but how Baronius does
amplify, deck, and paint out the same by his Rhetorication, is not unworthy
observing. He not only taxes this in Justinian as an act of curiosity, An.
563. nu. 1. and 6.
temerity, and arrogance, for His intermedling in sacred matters, and of
foolishness, for Partaking Praesinis eum stulte studuisse meminimus. an. 563.
nu. 2.
with the one side in the faction, as he had done with the Prasini, for which
he An. 558. nu. 13.
calls him, Maximum jurium proculcatorem, The greatest despiser and trampler
of laws under his feet; but he calls him also Mente motu^, an. 563. 9.
a man out of his wits, an hereteike, an. 565. nu. 1.
another Egyptian Pharaoh, an. 564. nu. 21.
who bent all his power to oppress the Catholic faith; yea a very Antichrist,
saying thus an. 563. nu. 6.
of him, Justinian no otherwise than Antichrist, setting up his Chair and
Throne in the Temple of God, and extolling himself above all that is
worshipped, makes sacrilegious laws for establishing Infidelity, and writes
Edicts for heresy: And again; not an. 564 nu. 1.
any reason, but only the Emperors authority, did erect that heresy; Tanquam
Idolum in Templo Dei, As an Idol in the Temple of God. Whereupon the Cardinal
an. 563. nu. 6.
in the anguish of his heart, takes up with sighs and tears the complaint of
Jeremy, O heavens be astonished at this, be afraid and utterly astonished, the
Emperor has forsaken the fountain of living waters, and he has dug to
himself pits that will hold no water. After this fit of his weeping overpast,
he then comes to the most base reviling and railing against the Emperor,
calling Ibid. nu. 7.
him Monstru^ triceps, that Monster with three heads (like another Cerberus, or
hell-hound) which Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 25.
speaks of, and declares to be so odious and execrable: A poor man proud, a
rich man a liar, and an old man a fool. Such a Monster, says he, did
Justinian now appear, (like three-bodied Gerion, in the Poets,) seeing he
joined these three detestable faults in himself at this time. He was poor,
yea most poor, Expers penitus literarum, Utterly void of learning, not able to
read his very A.b.c. and yet he would seem to be more learned than all
Bishops: so he was a poor man proud. He was also a rich man, a liar, in that
he commanded all to embrace heresy, and by his power hinders them to
contradict his Edict: like him of whom it is said, Eccl. 13.
The rich man spoke, and all held their peace. Lastly, when he refused the
counsel of the Elders, Plane senex cognitus est fatuus and insensatus, He was
therein plainly known to be an old doting fool, without wit or sense. Thus
Baronius: concluding that Emperor to be a monster, an heretic, a hell-hound,
a mad man, a liar, a blockhead, and a very plain fool: whom all the Christian
world has, and shall for ever, and that most justly, admire for his piety,
prudence, and wisdom.

10. Baronius, not content with this so uncivil demeanor, tells us further
what mischiefs ensued upon these detestable crimes of the Emperor. Those are
of two sorts: the former is public, concerning both the Ecclesiastical and
civil State. For the Church, An. 563. nu. 1
pacem prostigat, Justinian drove away peace and quiet from it: he endangered,
atque tandem penitus labefactat sidem, and at last utterly subverted and
overthrew the faith. For the Common wealth, it did An. 565. nu. 1.
titubare, reele and decline into a worse estate, under this heretical
Emperor, whom he An. 550. nu. 14
accuses, frigescere, to have been cold and careless in the government of
the Empire. The other mischief, which is private, concerns Justinian
himself. For the Cardinals hatred to Justinian is not satiate with the evils
of this life, he pursues him (...), and sitting in the chair of Radamanthus,
he approves Opinari si cui licet, facilius est invenire qui Evagrij de ejus
condemnatione velit sequi sente^tiam, quam aliorum, etc. an. 565. nu. 6.
and applauds that most rash and undiscreet judgment of Evagrius, Lib. 5. ca.
1.
ad supplicia apud inferos luenda profectus est, he is gone to be tormented in
hell. Yea the Cardinal proves An. 565. nu. 6.
that he went thither in this manner; Although it be not in man's power to be
present at Gods judgment, and it be utterly unlawful to judge of the dead;
yet according to that irrevocable sentence of God, which is pronounced of all
the dead, Apoc. 4.
Their works follow them, according to this sentence, eadem ipsa quae hinc
abeuntem sequuta sunt Iustinianu^, those same works which followed Justinian
when he dyed, do as yet cry against him in books: and those are juge
bellum, his perpetual war against the Church, which he continually
nourished, (having banished peace which he found therein) and when he dyed
left it in a flame: his unmeasurable Sacrilegiorum immensitas. Bar. Jbid.
Sacrilegies, laying oftentimes his violent hands upon holy Bishops, the
anointed of the Lord: his cruelty against innocent Citizens: his
covetousness, and the rest, which I omit. Thus Baronius: who plainly telling
us, that these so many, so heinous crimes, and crying sins, followed
Justinian out of this life, (and every man knows that these follow no whither
but unto hell) he most forcibly concludes, that Justinian out of all doubt,
was carried hence to be tormented in those hellish flames. Never could the
Cardinal be at quiet, till besides all those other reviling and disgraceful
ignominies which he has heaped upon Justinian, he had brought him into the
pit and torments of hell: And yet not there also will the Cardinal suffer him
to be at rest, but like a Fiend or Fury, he still exagitates the Emperor with
his virulent tongue and style, worse than any of all the infernal Ghosts;
neither alive nor dead will the Cardinal cease to torment him.

11. Verily I know not where either to begin or make an end in this matter, nor
how it is possible for any man with sufficient gravity and severity to
castigate the Cardinals insolent, inhumane, unchristian demenour against the
most renowned and religious Emperor. Did any of those worthy professors of
the civil laws, but half so much abound with leisure, as they do with
excellency of wit and learning, I doubt not but they would (as I do heartily
wish) undertake so honorable a service, not only to Justinian, but unto GOD
and his Church, as in a just volume to vindicate the Emperors honor from
these so many, so malicious, so base and immodest calu^nies of this Rhabsecha.
A work not very laborious, seeing as on the Emperors part there is such
abundant store and variety of all virtues and praiseworthy actions to set
forth his honor, as no man's style nor words can equal or come near the same:
so on Baronius part, with whom he is to contend, there are so many shameless
and detestable untruths, either devised, or applauded by him, that Voraginensis
himself may seem inferior to him in this kind; and I much doubt, whether so
many voluminous books, as might equal any two Tomes of his Annals, could be
able to comprehend them all: Mean while that I seem not to shuffle this
burden from mine own to other men's shoulders, I will, with their good leave, I
hope, add somewhat out of those books which concern my own profession, and
out of my shallow reading endeavor to free the Emperor from those most
dishonorable imputations of the Cardinal.

12. Let us then begin with that which is the substance and ground of this
whole accusation, and that is, The Emperors supposed falling into heresy, and
writing that heretical Edict: This if we can prove to be a slander and
untruth, all the rest, which the Cardinal builds upon this, and derives from
it, will of themselves fall to the ground. First then I do constantly avouch
that imputation of heresy to be untrue: Justinian neither held that
fantastical heresy of the Aphthardokites, nor made any Edict for the defense
or propagating thereof, nor did he banish or persecute any Orthodoxall Bishop
for contradicting that heresy: All these are slanderous untruths which the
Cardinal has collected out of others, and maliciously uttered in disgrace of
the Emperor: And truly, that very contradiction which is not only in other
writers, but in the Cardinal himself, in setting down this narration, is no
small presumption of the untruth thereof. Iustiniani indictum minime divulgatum
est. Lib 4. ca. 40.
Evagrius and Nicephorus Scriptum id. editum non est. Lib. 17. ca. 30.
expressly witness, that the Emperors Edict was not at all published.
Theophanes Hist miscel. lib. 16. an. 38. Justin.
, (as the Cardinal calls him, or Paulus Diaconus as others,) and after him
Sixtus Senensis Justin. praecepit hoc dogma a sacerdotibus public doceri, et
ab omni plebe recipi. Lib. 5. Bibl. annot. 186.
, expressly witness the contrary, that his Edict was divulged, and ubique
transmissum, and sent to every place. Baronius, not knowing whether was truer,
affirms them both; though they be expressly contradictory: First, that he did
publish the Edict, the Cardinal teaches, An. 564. nu. 1
saying, Justinian when he saw his Edict, contemni ab Orthodoxis, and pro
nihilo duci; to be contemned and set at naught by the Orthodoxall Bishops,
then he raised his persecution. How could that Edict be contemned, unless it
had been published and set forth for an Edict? or how could they be banished
for gainsaying that Edict, which if it was not published, had not the force of
an Edict? Again, that he did not publish it, the An. 565. nu. 4.
Cardinal likewise tells us, He writ indeed, Non tamen promulgavit de haeresi
Edictum, But he did not publish that Edict. He did publish it: he did not
publish it: what truth in those witnesses who thus contradict themselves? If he
did publish it, as the Cardinals Theophanes, and Sixtus Senensis affirm, then
Evagrius, and Nicephorus, are not herein to be credited: If he did not
publish it, how is the Cardinals Theophanes, or Senensis herein to be credited?
And whether he did publish it, or not publish it, the Cardinal who teaches
both, is certainly herein not to be credited. This disagreement of the
witnesses one with another, and of Baronius with his one self, is no good
sign of truth in their Narration.

13. But that Justinian neither published nor writ any such Edict, nor held any
such phantasticke heresy, a far more faithful witness than any of the
former, even Victor B. of Tunen, who lived in that same time at Constantinople,
and who would have triumphed to have had so just an occasion to reprove and
disgrace the Emperor, by whom he was imprisoned and banished, does make
evident. He Vict. Tun. in Chron.
plainly shows how Justinian continued constant in defense of his own Edict,
for condemning the Three Chapters, and of the synodall Judgment given therein,
even to his death. In his 38. year (the very next to that wherein Baronius
fancieth him to have fallen into heresy,) He sent for four Africane and two
Egyptian Bishops, and both personally by himself, as also by some others, he
labored to draw them to the orthodox faith, in condemning with him, and the
fifth Synod, the Three Chapters: and when he could not prevail, Custodiae
mittuntur, they were put into prison. In the next year, he says that An.
Just. 39.
Justinian placed John a condemner of the Three Chapters in the Sea of
Constantinople, Eutychius being banished: and to his very dying day, he kept
Theodorus Bishop of Cabarsussus in banishment, because he would not condemn
the Three Chapters. So orthodoxall was Justinian, and so earnest an oppugner of
heresies, of those especially which deny either the true humanity, or the true
Godhead of Christ, even till his very death, by the certain testimony of
Victor, an eager enemy of Justinian. Seeing then he continued constant till his
death, in condemning the Three Chapters, and maintaining his own Edict for the
condemning of them: and seeing the condemning of them, or the defense of that
Edict is the defense of the true faith, Necessarium putavimus, rectae fidei
confessionem quae in sancta Dei Ecclesia praedicatur praesenti edicto facere
manifestam. Edict. Just. pa. 492.
and an oppugnation of all heresies, which deny either the Divinity or Humanity
in Christ, specially of that of the Phantasticks, or Aphthardokites, as the
very words Jesus Christus est consubstantialis Patri secundum Deitatem,
consubstantialis nobis secundum Humanitatem, passibilis carne, impassibilis
deitate. ibid. and, Vtraque natura in proprietate and ratione naturae suae
monente, facta est unitas secundum substantiam. ibid.
of his Edict do declare; it clearly hence follows from the certain
testimony of Victor, that Justinian was so far from embracing, or making
Edicts for that heresy, that he constantly oppugned the same, and even
punished all who believed or taught as the Aphthardokites did; for in believing
that heresy, they contradicted the Emperors own Edict, and the holy
Councels, both at Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon: all Hac cum
universali Ecclesia confitentes: eandem confessionem conservamus, quam 318.
Patres in Nicea collecti, tradiderunt: and post illos, 150. sancti Patres,
Constantinopoli explanaverunt: and, qui in Epheso and qui Chalcedone convenere
docuerunt. ibid. pa. 495.
which the Emperor by this Edict, even until his death constantly maintained.

14. Why, but All Writers, says Baronius, an. 563. nu. 8.
both Greek and Latin, they all do testify that Justinian fell into that
heresy. What hear I? Do All, and All, both Greek and Latin? do they All
testify this of Justinian? A vast, a shameless, a Cardinal, a very Baronian
untruth! Of the Greeks, not Procopius, not Agathias, not Photius, not
Damascen, though he entreat Lib. de haeres.
of this very heresy; not the Cardinals own Suidas, who quite contrary to the
Cardinal calls Justinian (...), a most Catholic and Orthodoxall Emperor. Of
the Latins, not Victor, by whom as you have seen, the clean contrary is also
testified: not Liberatus; and both these lived at the same time with Justinian:
not Marcellinus: not Bid: not Anastasius, though such was his spleen against
Justinian, that he could not have concealed such a disgraceful crime: not
Aimonius, of whom I pray you see how well his testimony accords with the
Cardinal: Justinian, says De gest. Franc. lib. 3. ca. 8.
he, was a man side Catholicus, pietate insignis, aequitatis cultor egregius:
for his faith, Catholic; for his piety, renowned; a mavelous lover of
equity, and therefore all things did cooperate to his good: and he adds, for
the whole time of his Empire, (which was 39. years) Imperium faelici sort
rexit, He governed the Empire in an happy manner: Not the true Paulus Diaconus
Lib. 1. de Gest. Longob. ca. 25.
, who using the like words, says, that Justinian governed the Empire in an
happy Faelici sort.
sort, and was Prince for his faith Catholic, in his actions upright, in
judgments just: and therefore all things concurred to his good: not Sigebert,
not Marianus Scotus, not Lambertus Scafnaburgensis, not Ado Viennensis, not
Albo Floriacensis, not Luitprandus, not Conrad Abbas Vspergensis, not Albertus
Stadensis, not Otho Frisingensis, who calls Lib. 5. ca. 4.
him Christianissimum ac pijssimum Principem, a most Christian, and most pious
Prince, (unfit epethetes for an heretic, or one condemned to the torments of
hell) not Gotofrid Vtterbiensis Chron. in Just.
, who likewise calls him a most Christian Prince, one who established peace in
the Church, which rejoiced under him to enjoy tranquillity: not Wernerus,
whose testimony is worthy observing, to see the Cardinals faith and true
dealing in this cause: Justinian, says he An. 504.
, was in all things most excellent, for in him did concur three things which
make a Prince glorious, to wit, power, by which he overcame his enemies;
wisdom, by which he governed the world with just laws; and a religious
mind to Gods worship, by which he glorified God, and beautified the Churches:
So far is he from teaching him with the Cardinal, to have been a Tartarean
Cerberus, or Three-headed monster, consisting of three detestable vices, that
he opposes thereunto a Trinity of three most renowned virtues, Fortitude,
Justice, and Piety, of which the Emperor was composed: Not Nauclerus, not
Krantzius, not Tritemius, not Papirius Massonus, not Christianus Masseus, not
the Magnum Cronicum Belgicum: not the Chronicon Reicherspergense, which An. 564.
testifies, that he did perform many things profitable to the Commonwealth,
and so ended his life: Not Munster, who Cosmog. lib. 4. in Justin.
says of him, that he was a just and upright man in finding out matters
ingenious, Atque haeresum maximus hostis, and the greatest enemy of heresies:
not Platina, who In vita Ioh. 3.
says of Justinius, the next Emperor unto him, he was Nulla in re similis
Iustiniano, in nothing like unto Justinian, For he was covetous wicked,
ravenous, a contemner both of God and men: whence it follows, that Justinian
was quite contrary, bountiful, just, religious, an honourer both of God and
good men.

15. Now whereas all these (and I know not how many more, I think an hundred
at least, if one were curious in this search) do write of Justinian, and not
one of them, for ought that after earnest search I can find, do mention his
fall in that fantastic heresy; nay, many of them, as you have seen, do
testify on the contrary, that he was and continued a Catholic, a religious,
a most pious, a most Christian, a most orthodoxall Prince, and the greatest
oppugner of heresies: what an audacious and shameless untruth was it in the
Cardinal, to say, that, All Authors, all, both Greek and Latin, do witness
and detest his impiety, and his fall into that heresy. Besides these, I must
yet add some other, and those also far more eminent and ample witnesses, who
do more than demonstrate both the honor of Justinian, and those imputations
of heresy, and the other disgraces wherewith Baronius has loaded him, to be
most shameless calumnies and slanders.

16. The first of these is Pope Agatho, one of their Martyrol. Romans Ian. 10.
Canonized Saints: He in his Agath. Epist. extat Act. 4. Council. Genesis 6.
Epistle to the Emperor Constantine Pogonatus, to prove out of the venerable
Non desunt autem et alioru^ venerabilium patrum probatissima testimonia, etc.
Ibid.
Fathers two natures to be in Christ, tells us, that S. Cyril, Saint
Chrysostom, John Bishop of Scithopolis, Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria,
Ephremius and Anastasius the elder, two most worthy Bishops of Antioch, and
prae omnibus, amulator verae and Apostolicae fidei, piae memoriae Iustinianus
Augustus, and above all these Justinian the Emperor of holy memory, a zealous
defender of the true and Apostolical faith, teaches this, whose integrity of
faith did as much exalt the Christian Commonwealth, as by the sincerity thereof
it was pleasing unto God: and whose religious memory, ab omnibus gentibus
veneratione digna censetur, is esteemed by all nations worthy of veneration,
seeing the integrity of his faith, set out by his Imperial Edicts, in toto
orb diffusa laudatur, is spread abroad and praised in the whole world. Thus
Saint Agatho: Whose words may justly cause all the Cardinals friends to blush
and be ashamed of his Annals. Saint Agatho ranks Justinian among the
venerable and holy Fathers of the Church: Baronius thrusts him among heretics,
Saint Agatho preferres him before Saint Cyrill, Saint Chrysostom, Eulogius,
John and Ephremius, all learned and worthy Bishops: Baronius debaseth him below
the most rude and illiterate persons, even below any abcedary Scholar, and
calls him a very block and a fool: Saint Agatho preferres him to that very
Anastasius the elder, Nam Anastasius minor Episcopatum adeptus est post mortem
Iustiniani ut ex Niceph. Constant. in Chro. liquet.
surnamed Sinaita, because he came from the wilderness of Sinai, whom for
maintaining the faith against this very heresy of the Aphthardokites, Evagrius
Lib. 4. ca. 39.
, and Baronius An. 563.10.
himself, calls turrim munitissimam, a most strong tower; and yet (as Saint
Agatho witnesses) a more worthy and defended tower of faith was our Justinian:
Baronius Ibid. nu. 12.
makes him and this Anastasius to be contradictory in faith, and Justinian to
threaten banishment unto this Anastasius for not consenting to the heresy of
the Phantasticks: S. Agatho commends him for his integrity and sincerity in
maintaining the true and Apostolical faith: Baronius condemns him for an
Antichrist, an execrable and heretical oppugner, yea, persecutor of the
Apostolical faith: S. Agatho testifies that the sincerity of his faith did
both please God, and highly exalt the Church and Empire: Baronius revileth him,
as odious to God, detestable to men, and pernicious, yea, pestiferous both to
Church and Empire: S. Agatho witnesses his memory to be pious, blessed and
venerable, and that in all nations: Baronius declames against him as accursed,
and abominable to all: S. Agatho proclameth, that all nations, and the whole
world does consent in the praising of the faith, and veneration of the person
of Justinian: Baronius tells you, that all Authors, both Greek and Latin,
consent in condemning the faith, and detesting the heresy of Justinian. Vtri
creditis? whether do you believe Baronius maliciously applauding an untruth,
which he found in one or two writers, of none, or little credit, or Agatho a
Pope, a Saint, with whom consent all nations, and the whole world?

17. To Pope Agatho I adjoyne the whole Roman Synod consisting of 125.
Bishops, who all together with Agatho give the like honorable testimony of
Justinian. They with Agatho writ a Synodall Extat Epist. Act. 4. Conc. 6. pa.
21.
letter to the same Emperor Constantine, wherein they exhort him to imitate
the piety and virtue of Constantine, of Theodosius, of Martian, and of
Justinian the great, extremi quidem, praestantissimi tamen omnium, the last
indeed (of those who had before assembled general Counsels) but the most
excellent of them all, whose piety and virtue omnia in meliorem statum
restauravit, restored all things into a better order. Thus that whole Synod:
Could they more forcibly have demonstrated Baronius to be a slanderer? Baronius
says that Justinian was an heretic, a persecutor, an Antichrist, one who
dissipated the faith, ruinated the Empire, brought an hellish confusion into
the Church: for which crimes he places him among the damned in hell. Pope
Agatho with his whole Council, testify, that by his piety and virtue he
restored all; both the Church and Empire into a better order: they honor him
(as much, nay more than they do S. Constantine Sanctum Constantinum, vocat Papa
Steph. in Epist. ad Basil. Imperat. post 8. Synod.
, or Theodosius, or Martian,) for one of the most renowned upholders of the
faith of Christ, for one of them, who at their death did not leave nor lose,
but only exchange their imperial Crown, and in stead of their earthly and
corruptible, received the celestial and immarcessible Diadem of immortality
and eternal glory: among these, yea and above these Saints and glorified
Emperors, as being most excellent of them all, is Justinian placed and crowned
in heaven, by the judgment of Saint Agatho and his whole Council with him.

18. If yet you require more or more ample witnesses, behold, the sixth general
Council has approved both those Epistles of Agatho. Of them the whole Synod
In Sermon. prosphon. Act. 18. pa. 89.
said, Petrus per Agathonem loquutus est; Peter spoke by the mouth of Agatho:
and again, Ibid. and Act. 15 ^.6.
We all consent to the dogmaticall letters of Agatho, and to tho suggestion of
the holy Synod which was under him, of 125. Bishops. Of them Constantine Act.
18. pa. 93.
says in the name of the whole Council, Omnes consonanter mente and lingua;
we all with one heart and voice believe and profess, and admire the relation
of Agatho; as the divine voice of Saint Peter. Of them Act. 8. pa. 29.
Domitius B. of Prusias said, I receive and embrace the suggestions of the most
blessed Agatho, tanquam ex Spiritu Sancto dictatas, as being inspired by the
Holy Ghost, and uttered by the mouth of Saint Peter, and written with the
singers of Agatho. Thus does the whole general Council approve those Epistles
of Agatho: which their approbation not only Bellarmine Bell. lib. 4. de
Pontif. ca. 11. Vbi et, At si.
, but Baronius an. 681. nu. 2^
himself extends to every part and parcel of those Epistles, saying of
them, In omnibus tum ipse Constantinus, tam sancta Synodus suscepit, both
Constantine and the holy Council received these in all and every point. And
again, an. eod. nu. 45
Epistolae Roma missae in omnibus comprobatae dicuntur, The Epistles of Agatho,
which were sent from Rome are said to be approved in All things set down
therein. Now seeing the whole general Council, by Baronius own confession,
does in this sort approve the Epistles of Agatho, and therefore those very
testimonies concerning Justinians faith, piety, honor, and eternal
blessedness in Heaven: had not Baronius, think you, a face more hard than
brass or adamant, when he reviled in so immodest manner that Emperor, as an
heretic, a persequutor of the faith, an Antichrist, a drunken, frantic, and
sacrilegious fool, a ruinater of the Church, and careless governor of the
Empire, yea as one condemned and now tormented in hell, and who seals it with
this saying, That his heresy is testified by All authors? whereas those most
honorable testimonies of Pope Agatho, and the Roman Synod with him, (which
declare Justinian to have been for faith orthodoxall, for virtue and piety
renowned, and held in veneration by all nations, and praised of all the world,
and to have been equal, nay more excellent than Saint Constantine,
Theodosius, and Martian, and therefore to be both in his own person, and in
his memory blessed) are approved, and that in this very point, as Baronius
acknowledges, by the sixth general Council to be as certain and as true, as
if Saint Peter, or the Holy Ghost had uttered the same. Said I not truly, that
this cause of the Three Chapters had bereft the Cardinal, not only of truth,
but of judgment, of modesty, of civility, yea almost of common sense, so that
he cares not what he says, so he speak in defense of those who defend, and in
condemnation of those who condemn the Three Chapters, though he knows that,
which he says, to be testified to be a calumny and slander, not only by
historians and private writers, but by the Pope, by the Roman Synod, by the
holy general Council, that is, by the whole Catholic Church, by all Nations,
by the whole world, by Saint Peter, and by the Holy Ghost himself.

19. There might be added unto these, diverse other pregnant testimonies, of
Pope Gregory, who often calls Lib. 2. Ind. 11 Epist. 10. and lib. 3. Epist 4.
Justinian, a man Piae memoriae, of a pious memory; of the Legates of Agatho,
who call Con. 6. act. 3.
him, of divine memory; of Peter B. of Nicomedia and others, who call Act. 10.
him of blessed remembrance; of the Emperor Constantinus, who calls Act. 18.
him, divinae memoria; of the sixth general Council, which not so little as a
dozen times I think, Act. 14. and 18
calls him of pious, or divine memory, most holy Justinian, or the like; and
which, to express that great honor which they ascribe to the religious
Emperor then present before them, (whom they term the driver away of
heretics,) proclaim him to be a new Constantine, a new Theodosius, a new
Martian, a new Justinian, crying out in his honor in diverse Act. 8. and 16.
and 17. et 18.
actions, Novo Iustiniano aeterna memoria, eternal memory be to you our new
Justinian. A miserable praise and wish had this been, had Justinian been an
Heretic, a Persecutor, an Antichrist, a damned person in hell: for then the
whole general Council had not only dishonored Constantine there present,
but had wished honor and immortal glory to Heretics, to Persecutors, to
Antichrist, yea to the Devil himself: which kind of praising and praying, is
not very suitable to the piety and faith of that general Council. But the
former testimonies are so ample and illustrious, that they seem to me to
obscure all these and the like, and do so abundantly convince Baronius to
slander and calumniate the Emperor, that I will forbear to press him with
any more.

20. Perhaps some good friends of Baronius will say in his behalf, and for his
excuse, that he did not devise this of himself, nor is he the first that
accuses Justinian of this Heresy: he has his Books, and his Authors for him.
He has so indeed. And so he has Nestorius and Theodorus of Mopsvestia for his
defending Nestorianism. He devised not that neither of himself, he does but
second others therein. By this apology who^ may not the Cardinal revile when he
list? He may calumniate Athanasius for a Conc. Tyrium apud Athan. Apol. 2.
murderer; Celestine and Cyril for Conciliab. Iohannis, Ephesians. sup. ca. 11. nu,
42
Apolinarians; Constantine the great for a Quia ^oluerit esse Arianus, idcirco
Athanasium perosum habitum a Patre tuo, non te fugit. Lucif. lib. 1. pro Athan.
pa. 57. Primo, es haereticus, deinde, persecutor, etc. et, amici tui diaboli.
ait idem Constantino. ibid. pa. 12. et 13.
persecutor of the true faith; for which crime his son is called an Heretic,
a murderer, a friend of the Devil: Saint Paul for a Tertullus, Act. 24.5.
seditious and pestilent fellow, a Festus, Act. 26.24.
madman: Christ himself for a glutton Matthew. 11.19.
and drunkard, a man possessed Mark 3.22.
by the devil, a Matthew. 26.65.
blasphemer. Thus may he revile and accuse these, and all the best men that have
ever been in the world, yea even God himself, and then salve all with this
plaster, Why, Baronius devises not any one of these imputations, he can
produce his books and authors for the^ all: and those also far better than he
does for this concerning Justinian. In one he has the whole Council of Tire*
in another, John Patriarch of Antioch, Theodoret, and the Council which they
held at Ephesus; in a third, Lucifer Bishop of Calaris, a Confessor, one who
suffered whippings and tortures at the Council of Millan, and after that,
exile for the faith: in another, Tertullus and Festus: in the last, the Jews,
the Scribes, and the High Priest with his Council: would this excuse either
Baronius, or any that should upbraid these crimes unto Athanasius, Constantine,
Paul, or Christ, from being revilers and slanderers. He who applaudeth and
abetteth a slander, (as does Baronius this of Justinian) he is as guilty of
slander as if himself had devised it. The law of God does not only say, Thou
shall not lie or devise a false tale, but Exodus 23.1.
Thou shall not receive a false tale, neither shall thou put thine hand with the
wicked (not be a coadjutor, an accessory, or an abetter) to be a false
witness. Yea though many report an untruth, yet their multitude cannot excuse
thee: Thou Jbid v. 2.
shall not follow a multitude in doing evil; neither shall thou agree in a
controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. And the Apostles
rule Romans 1.32.
condemns not only those who do evil themselves, but those also (and that
much more) who consent unto, or who favor those that do evil: accordingly
whereunto S. Jerome Lib. 2. advers. Iovin.
says of wantonness, that which is true in all other sins, majori procacitate
defendunt libidinem quam exercent, it is a greater impudency to defend lust,
lying, slandering, or any sin, than to commit it.

21. But let us see who those are on whose report the Card. frames this his
slanderous invective against the Emperor. He says they are all authors. But
that, as you have seen, is a vast, and truly Baronian untruth. They are but
some: and the Card. names three, Evagrius, Eustathius, and Nicephorus
Callistus. I will yield more unto him if he please: let him have 10. or 20. to
say what his foreman does: yet the law of God is forcible against them, as if
they were but one: Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. And alas,
what are these, either for number, or (which is more) for gravity and
authority, to those which we have before produced? To say nothing of that cloud
of Historians: what are they to S. Agatho? to S. Gregory? to the Emperor
Constantinus Pogonatus? to the Roman Synod? to the sixth general Council? to
all nations? to the whole world? to S. Peter? yea to the Holy Ghost himself?
What an army of invincible, unresistable Captains, has Justinian to fight on
his side, against two or three poor, petite, and contemptible witnesses, which
the Card. has raked together, not to be named the same day with the former?

22. Will it please you further to take a view in particular of them? Truly of
those whom the Card. would not vouchsafe once to name, I will say nothing: if
they were not worthy to be named, nor to have a whistle from the Cardinal, I
think them unworthy to be refuted also. This only I say of them all, they
were misse-led and deceived by those whom the Card. mentions as his prime and
principal witnesses: and those are Evagrius, Eustathius, and Nicephorus. Now
for the last of these, Possevine shows him to be heretical, Nicephorus
Andronicum commendat quod S. Sanct^^^ a solo Patre procedere per Synodum a se
ceactam promulgari curaver^^. Poss. in verb. Nicephorus. Et, Habet tum in
dogmatibus, cum in historica veritate quae digna sunt ut praecaveantur. Ibid.
and in Historical narrations, erroneous: and the Card. an. 563. nu. 8.
himself says of him, Fatuus judicandus est, he is but a fool: and his
reason is far worse than his censure, because he is not so virulent and
spiteful in condemning the Emperor Justinian, as the Card. could wish him,
and as himself is: besides, what Nicephorus says, is but borrowed from
Evagrius, (Possevine In verbo Evagrius.
calls him Asseclam, a Page or Ape of Evagrius) and therefore the answer to
Evagrius will be sufficient for him also.

23. His middle witness is Eustathius, the writer of the life of Eutychius,
which is set forth by Surius. Heat large indeed describes this matter, both
how Justinian Hic (Justin.) cepit execrabilem opinionem probare, quae Christi
corpus incorruptum asserebat. Eust. apud Sur. 6. April.
fell into this heresy of the Aphthardokites, how he writ an Edict for the
same, and read it to Eutychius B. of Constantinople, urging him to approve it;
how when he refused so to do, the Emperor for this cause thrust him from
Persuaserunt Imperatori, ut cum a sede exturbaret, in eaque alium constitueret,
qui opinionibus suis consentiret: quod et factum est. Ibid.
his See, and sent him into banishment; where he lived working abundance of
miracles, for the space Perduravit exilium Eutychii (ut idem author affirmat)
spacio 12. annorum et amplius. Bar. an. 564. nu. 29.
of 12. years, till Tiberius the Emperor restored him with great honor. This
is the sum of that narration of Eustathius, in which the Card. much pleases
himself, as if all that Eustathius says in this matter were an undoubted
Oracle, seeing Eustathius (as he often boasts Haec Eustathius: Qui his
omnibus praesens aderat. Bar. an. 564. nu. 20. praesens aspexit. nu. 24. et
alibi.
) was present with Eutychius in all these occurrents, and an eyewitness of
them.

24. But why did the Card. mention this worthy record out of Surius? could he
find this writing of Eustathius in no better Author than Surius? Surius, a man
so prostitute in faith, so delighted in lies, and forgeries of this kind, with
which he has stuffed his Lives of the Saints, that at the very first naming of
Surius, I suspected this Eustathius to be but a forged Author, and a fabler:
the rather because neither Photius, nor Sixtus Senensis, nor Possevine, (who
all writ Bibliothecas,) nor Tritemius, mention any such Eustathius to have writ
the life of Eutychius. But after I had perused and considered the writing it
self, I did no longer suspect, but I found (which now I do constantly affirm)
that Surian Eustathius to be so vile and abject a fabler, and so full of lies,
that none but such as Surius and Baronius, men delighted in applauding
forgeries and untruths, can give any credit at all to that Surian Eustathius.
By one or two examples take a conjecture of all the rest.

25. That Eustathius describing the entrance of Eutychius to the Sea of
Constantinople, tells Loc. citat.
us that after the fifth general Council was summoned, Eutychius was sent
thither by the Bishop of Amasea, (who then was sick) to supply his room in
the Council. Mennas then Patriarch of Constantinople, exhorted Eutychius not
to depart from him, and showing Eutychius to the Clergy, said of him by way of
prophecy (for that Eustathius is full of miracles, prophesies, and visions,)
unto them, This Monk shall be my successor; and then sent him to the Emperor.
Some few days after this, Mennas dyed: and whereas many sued for the
Bishopric, the Emperor had a vision, wherein S. Peter appeared unto him,
showing him Eutychius, and saying, Fac ut hic sit Episcopus, see that this man
be the Bishop of Constantinople. The Emperor acquainted the Clergy with his
vision, and upon his oath testified it unto them; whereupon they all chose
Eutychius, and then he was consecrated. Thus the Surian Eustathius. A narration
so sottish and so absurd, that nothing can be more ridiculous: and so untrue,
that there are not so many words as lies therein. The fifth Council was not
summoned till the 26. year of Justinian: and that before then, it could not be
summoned, Baronius evidently shows: For the summons to the Council followed,
as he says, Sicque animis junctu restitutoque Romano Po^tifice in pristinam
dignitatem indicta est oecumenica Synodus. an. 553. nu. 14.
the restoring of Vigilius, and his reconcilement both to the Emperor, to
Mennas, and to Theodorus of Caesarea: all which he an. 552. nu. 19. and 20.
places in the 26. year of Justinian. Now it is certain by that testimony of
the Popes Legates, which Sup. ca. 16. nu. 18.
before was handled, and was uttered before the sixth general Council Act. 3.
, and is acknowledged for true by Baronius an. 860. nu. 46
, that Mennas died in the 21. year of Justinian, that is, four whole years
at the least before the summons of the Council, or before Eutychius came to
Constantinople, being sent from the Bishop of Amasea. What a dull and doltish
legend now is this of Eustathius? to make Eutychius come and converse with
Mennas, to be brought by him to the Clergy, to be designed and prophetically
foretold by Mennas to be his successor, when Mennas was dead four whole
years before he did any of these things? what a profane fiction is it, to
make the Emperor see a vision, and Saint Peter to command him to take care
that Eutychius should be chosen, and the Emperor to avouch all this upon his
oath to be true? whereas not one syllable thereof is true, or so much as
possible; seeing Eutychius was actually placed in that See full four years
before this vision, or before Saint Peter gave that strait charge unto
Justinian. They who can believe these fantastical dotages of that Surian
Eustathius, (and Baronius an. 553. and an. 564. and alibi
applauds this with the other narrations in that Eustathius) little marvel, if
upon his report they upbraid that which is every way as incredible, that
Justinian fell into that heresy of the Phantastickes, and banished Eutychius
for not consenting to the same.

26. Of no more truth is that which the same Eustathius sets down for the
continuance of the banishment of Eutychius, which was, the space of twelve Vt
ex Eustathio notat Baron. an. 564. 29. and an. 578. nu. 3. 5. 6.
whole years, until Tiberius was Ad Iustinum and Tiberium exclamant, ut fidei
custos (Eutychius) redderetur: qui id concesserunt. Verba Eustath. Suriani.
loc. cit.
associated into the Empire by Justinius, and in the same year when John Bar.
an. 578. nu. 5.
the successor to Eutychius dyed. For Theophanes, as the Card. calls him, as
other (though amiss) Paulus Diaconus, but the author of the Miscella.
Historia, expressly witnesses Justinius Jmperator coronatus ab Eutychio
Patriarch. lib. 1^ Hist. Miscel.
that Justinius (who began his reign two years after the banishment of
Eutychius) was crowned by Eutychius. And Zonaras Zonar. to. 3. in Justin.
for a certainty relates, how that (before Tiberius was associated) when
Justinius was sick, he called, besides others, Eutychius unto him, and in their
presence nominated Tiberius to be his partner in the Empire: for John, says
he, being dead, Eutychius was reduced from banishment, and restored then to his
See, and that Tiberius was crowned by the same Eutychius. Which evidently
demonstrates the vanity of that whole Eustathian Narration, wherein it is said,
that after the Empire of Tiberius begun, the people came to them to entreat the
restoring of Eutychius: that the Emperors upon their supplication, sent post
have to Amasea to bring him home out of banishment: that the Angel Vcre
cognovimus Deum misisse Angelum suum and eripuisse, etc. Eustat.
of God brought him miraculously thence: that the people flocked unto him in
every place: that they laid their sick in the way, that at least the shadow of
this second Peter might touch them, and according to their faith they were
cured: that he came like another Messiah, riding on the Colt of an Ass into
Constantinople, the people cutting down boughs, and spreading their garments
for him, and so was with admirable joy received by the Emperors, and the whole
City. Not one word of all which is true, seeing Eutychius was long before the
time of Tiberius restored from banishment, at the least 11. or 12. years, even
ever since the crowning of Justinius: who reigned 12. Justinius per se solum ad
annos 12. regnavit, and cum Tiberio annos 3. Evagr. Lib. 5. ca. 23.
years alone, before he assumed Tiberius into the society of the Empire. This
will be further evident by those words of Nicephorus Patriarch of
Constantinople, on which Baronius relieth. Eutychius was recalled from
banishment, as the Cardinal Hoc anno, defuncto Johanne, revocatus est
Eutychius exul. an. 578. nu. 5.
teaches, and that rightly, in the same year wherein Johannes Scholasticus
(who was placed in his room) died. Now John was Bishop, as Nicephorus (...).
Niceph. in chro.
witnesses, but two years and seven months. Whereupon it certainly
follows, that Eutychius was recalled within three years after his
banishment, that is, in the very first year of Justinius, upon whom he set the
Crown, at the solemnity of his first Coronation, as was showed out of the
Historia Miscella: and this was full twelve years Na^^ Justinius solus totidem
annos regu. vit s^p.
before Tiberius was made Emperor. Which demonstrates, not only the untruth
and manifold lies of that Surian Eustathius, but another handsome trick of
legerdemaine in Anastasius and Baronius. For Anastasius seeing belike that it
was needful (for saving the credit of some such like fabler as this Eustathius
is) that John should be Bishop twelve years, he translating Ab Anastasio
Bibliothecario hujus Chronologiae interpret. and, Chronologia Nicephori
conversa in Latinum per Anastasium. Titulo Nicephori in Biblioth. S. Pat. ^0. 7.
the Greek Nicephorus, in stead of two years seven months, puts in twelve
Johannes an. 12. men's. 7.
years and seven months, and gives so many unto John before Eutychius be
restored: and Baronius finding this account in the Anastasian translation,
follows it, Johannes sedit an 12. men's. 7. ut habet Nicephori Chronicon. Bar.
an. 564. nu. 29.
and says, Nicephorus ascribes twelve years to John: whereas, not Nicephorus,
nor his Greek edition (which has only two years and seven months) but the
Anastasian falsified and corrupted Latin translation has the other untrue and
false account of twelve years and seven months. This, if nothing else, might
be sufficient to refute the whole fiction of that Surian Eustathius, the
untruths whereof Baronius could not defend, but by applauding the untrue and
falsified writings of his fellow Bibliothecarius.

27. Perhaps you will demand, why then did Justinian banish Eutychius, if not
for refusing to consent to his opinion and heresy of the Aphthardokites, as
Eustathius says? which doubt seems the greater, because Nicephorus the
Patriarch in his Chronology mentions the same cause, saying thus, Eutychius
was cast out of his See by Justinian, eo quod non reciperet edictum ipsius de
corpore Christi expert omnis labefactionis, because Eutychius would not
consent to his Edict, that Christ's body was incorruptible. See here again I
pray you, and detest for ever the vile and shameless dealing of Anastasius.
Nicephorus says not so; all that he Niceph. in edit. Graeca.
says, is, that Eutychius was banished because he would not receive or
consent unto the Edict of Justinian; but that which follows his Edict de
corpore Christi incorruptibili, wherein is contained the heresy slanderously
objected to Justinian, of that Nicephorus has not one word in his Greek text;
that is wholly pacht to him in the Latin translation by the false hand of
Anastasius, the Arch-corrupter of all writings in his time, as I have Sup. cap.
17.
before more at large declared: And yet so are they delighted with lies, and
corrupted writings, this Latin translation, thus vilely falsified by
Anastasius, is set Tom. 7.
in their Bibliotheca Sanctorum Patrum; which much better deserves to be
called a Library of forged or corrupted Fathers, and Writers.

28. But for what other Edict, if not for this of the Aphthardokites, was
Eutychius banished? for that he was expelled from his See, there is no doubt,
that being testified not only by the Surian Eustathius, Zonaras, Glicas, and
others, but by Victor Jn Chron.
, who then lived, and was at Constantinople when these things fell out, to whom
alone more credit herein is to be given, than to five hundredth of the Surian
records. Truly, whatsoever was the cause why he was banished, certain it is,
that this heresy of Justinian, or any Edict made for it, was not the cause
thereof: But there are two other matters, the one, or both of which may very
well be thought to have incensed Justinian against him: The former was this;
Eutychius pretended a Prophetical skill whereby he could foreshew who should
succeed in the Empire; and he began to tamper and practice this Art about some
three years before Justinian dyed, as that Eustathius delareth. At that time
Tribus circiter annis ante Imperium Justini. Eust. apud Sur.
he privately called Justinius unto him, and told him that he should succeed in
the Empire after the death of Justinian, for so Significavit mihi Deus te post
avunculum tuum fore Imperatorem. Ibid.
(said he) God has revealed unto me. The like good fortune he foretold to
Tiberius, that Nunc in part reipublicae gubernacula commisit Deus; mox autem
et sinem concedet. Ibid.
ere long he should have the Empire alone. Again, two years before the death
of Tiberius, he prophesied of Mauritius, that Vere (inquit) non est alius (qui
succedet) quam Mauritius. Ibid.
he, and none but he should have the Empire after Tiberius, idque juramento
asseruit, and he confirmed this by an oath. Now this Art of Divination, and
Mathematical predictions, especially when they prognosticate of Kings their
deaths, and successors, was never allowable in any wise State, nor acceptable
to any prudent Emperor. It betokened no good to Caesar that they foretold
Suet. in Iul; Caes. cap. 81.
him of those dismal Ides of March. Domitian was foretold Suet. in Domit. cap.
13.
, not only of the year, but of the day, and the very hour when he should
dye; and when he had carefully looked to himself on that day, enquiring Ibid.
cap. 16.
the hour, his own men of purpose told him the sixth, in stead of the fifth:
he then thinking all danger to be past, was by the Conspiratours, (who kept a
better watch of the time than he did) securely murdered. What mischief ensued
upon that prediction to Valence, that one whose name did begin with Theod.
should succeed unto him, Socrates Lib. 4. cap. 1^.
declares; He thereupon murdered most unjustly all whom he could find to be
called either Theodori, or Theodoti, or Theodosij, or Theoduli, or Theodosioli,
or beginning with those letters. What hurt followed as well in this kingdom,
upon that prophecy G. should succeed unto Edward the fourth; as in the next,
when it was foretold the Earl of Athel, that he should be crowned before he
dyed, who thereupon never ceased to rebel against his Sovereign, till he was
crowned with an hot burning iron, our own Chronicles do declare. All
kingdoms, all Stories are full of like examples. It was not without cause,
that in the Code Tit. de Maleficis, Mathematicis, et his similibus.
both of Theodosius and Justinian, there are so many, and so severe laws
aginst this kind of Mathematical diviners, their Art Leg. 2. eod. tit. Cod.
Just.
being called damnabilis, and omnibus interdicta, a damnable Art, forbidden to
all; the punishment denounced against them, being Non solum urbe Roma, sed
etiam omnibus civitatibus pelli decernimus. l. ult. Tit. de malef. Cod. Theod.
banishment, yea, death; supplicio capitis Leg. 5. tit. de Malef. Cod. Just. et
leg. 4. Cod. Theod.
ferietur, he shall be put to death who practices the curiosity of
divining: Now Eutychius taking upon him this Art of divining, contrary to those
severe and Imperial Edicts ratified by Justinian, whether for this cause the
Emperor, who by the law might have deprived him of his life, did not choose
rather to deprive him only of his See, and liberty, I leave to the judgment
of others.

29. The other cause was a most impious heresy defended by Eutychius, whom
they so much honor; which alone being duly considered, overthrows that
whole fabulous Legend of Eustathius. Eutychius, when he had long continued in
the defense of the truth, did afterward fall both by words and writing to
maintain the Heresy of Origin and the Origenists, denying Christ's body after
the resurrection to have been palpable, that is in effect, to be no true
humane body; and the very like he taught of the bodies of all other men after
the resurrection: This the Surian Eustathius quite over-passeth in silence; for
it was not fit that such a Saint as Eutychius, so abunda^t in miracles,
prophesies, and visions, should be thought guilty of so foul and condemned an
heresy: But Pope Gregory does so fully and certainly testify Greg. lib. 14.
Moral. ca. 29. Eutythius scripsit quod corpus nostrum in illa resurrectionis
gloria erit impalpabile.
it, that no doubt can remain thereof; he tells us, how himself disputed
against Eutychius, defending this heresy; how he urged those words of our
Savior, palpate and videte; how Eutychius answered thereunto, that Christ's
body was then indeed palpable to confirm the minds of his Disciples; but
after they were once confirmed, all that was before palpable in Christ's body,
in subtilitatem est redactu^, was turned into an aerial and unpalpable
subtilty; How he further strived to prove this by those words of the Apostle,
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; how then (said he) may
this be believed, veraciter resurgere carnem, that true bodies did or shall
rise again? How he further insisted on those words, That which thou sowest is
not the same body which it shall be: proving thereby that which rises again
either not to be a body, or not a palpable, that is, no true humane body.
Gregory also tells, us, that Eutychius writ Libellum de Resurrectione scripsit,
ostendes quod caro vel impalpabilis, vel ipsa non erit.
a book in defense of this heresy, which both himself read, and Tiberius the
Emperor after diligent ponderation of the reasons of Gregory against it,
caused it publicly to be burned, as heretical: adding, that Eutychius
continued in this heresy almost till the very hour of his death. Now although
Gregory tells not when, or at what time Eutychius fell into this heresy, yet it
may well be supposed, that as Justinian honored him so long as he persisted in
the truth, so when once he gave himself to such dotages of the Origenists,
(which, as it seems, he did about the latter end of Justinians Empire, some
three years before his death) then the Emperor, who till his end was constant
in condemning the Three Chapters, as Victor shows, (the condemning of which
is, as before Hoc cap. nu. 1^
we declared, the condemning of all the heresies of Origin, and whatsoever
contradicts the verity of Christ's deity, or humanity) as it is most likely,
exiled him for this heretical opinion: And this is much more probable, seeing
Justinian had purposely set forth, long before this, a most religious and
orthodoxall Edict or Decree, particularly against Origin, and the Origenists,
as Liberatus Cap. 23.
shows, and as the Edict it self, which is extant Apud Nar. a^. 538. nu. 33.
and Bin. to^^. 2. ^a. 482.
, does manifest, condemning them in particular (Quamobre^^ hoc quoqu^ ris^
dignum est) (...) Anath. ^.
, for denying the verity of Christ's, and other humane bodies after the
resurrection. Seeing then Nicephorus the Patriarch says, that Eutychius was
banished for not consenting to the Emperors Edict, and Eutychius by his
defending of that heresy of the Origenists, directly oppugned that his Edict;
most like it is, that (besides his Mathematical Art, whereby he was liable
both to death and banishment, by the Emperors laws) this Edict of Justinian
against Origin, should be that which Nicephorus the Patriarch meant, and for
which Eutychius was, and that most justly, exiled. So not Justinian, but
Eutychius, was the heretic; nor was it any heretical Edict of Justinian, (as
the Surian Eustathius, and after him Baronius affirms) to which Eutychius a
Catholic opposed himself; but an orthodoxall and Catholic Edict of
Justinian, which Eutychius, then an heretic, and Origenist, oppugned, for not
consenting whereunto he was banished. Thus not only the Emperor is clearly
acquitted of that fantastical heresy, whereof the Surian Eustathius, and
Baronius do accuse him; but Eutychius himself, whom they honor for a Saint,
a Prophet, and a Demi-god, is found guilty of that selfsame crime, and of
that very heresy of denying the truth of Christ's body, which they unjustly and
slanderously impute to Justinian. And this I think is abundant to satisfy the
Cardinals second witness, namely that fabulous and legendary Surian Eustathius.

30. All the Cardinals hope, and the whole weight of his accusation relyes now
on Evagrius. He, I confess, says well near as much as Baronius, against
Justinian, accusing him of avarice, injustice, and heresy. But the credit of
Evagrius is not such, as to countenance such calumnies. Evagrius, in some
matters wherein he follows Authors of better note, is not be contemned, but
in very many he is too credulous, fabulous, and utterly to be rejected. What
credit can you give unto this Narration Evag. lib. 4. ca. 32.
of the Monk Barsanuphius, whom he reports to have lived in his Cell, wherein
he had mewed up himself; and for the space of fifty years and more, neither
to have been seen by any, neque quidquam aelimenti cepisse, nor to have
received any nourishment, or food? What a worthy S. does he Lib. eod. ca. 33
describe Simeon Moros, that is S. Fool, to have been? How does he commend
Lib. 1. ca. 15.
Synesius, whom they persuaded to be baptized, and undertake the function of a
Priest, though he did not consent to the doctrine of the resurrection, neque
^ta censere vellet, neither would believe that it was possible? The like might
be noted, touching the blood of Euphemia Lib. 2. ca. 3.
, and diverse other Narrations. Evagrius is full of such like fables; but
omitting the rest, I will propose only two, which will demonstrate him to have
been either extremely negligent in the search, or very malicious in perverting
the truth.

31. The former concerns Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, and his successor
Maximianus. Evagrius says Lib. 1. ca. 8.
, that Maximianus took the Bishopric after the death of Nestorius: An
untruth so palpable, that none can think Evagrius to have bin ignorant of
those manifold and undoubted records which testify the contrary: For it
appears by the writings of Nestorius, set down also in Evagrius Narrat ipse
Nestorius se in eo loco quadriennij spacio commoratum, and postea relegatum ad
Oasim. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
himself, that after his deposition, he stayed at Ephesus, and about Antioch,
for the space of four years, and then was exiled to Oasis. Now Maximianus was
placed in the Sea of Constantinople, that very same year, wherein the Ephesine
Council was held, and Nestorius deposed some three or four Soc. lib. 7. ca.
34. and Liber. Brev. ca. 7.
months after the same deposition, as Socrates and Liberatus declare. The next
year after the Council, the union was made between John and Cyrill; John and
the rest with him professing expressly in their letters Epist. Johannis, et
Orientalium Cyrillo, to. 5 Act. Ephesians. ca. 5 and ca. 17.
of union, that they acknowledge and receive Maximianus for Bishop of
Constantinople: A demonstration, that Maximianus was Bishop of Constantinople,
three whole years at least before the death of Nestorius: Nay, Lib. 7. ca. 39.
which argues Evagrius to have doated in historical relations, Maximianus was
dead, and Proclus placed in his See long before the banishment of Nestorius to
Oasis, much more, before his death; for Maximianus was Bishop but two years
and five months, and he dyed before the Ides of April, when Ariobindus and
Asper were Consuls; and before he was buried, was Proclus placed in the Sea the
same year, as Socrates witnesses. Now Nestorius lived four years at
Ephesus, and about Antioch, after his deposition, and some while also in
banishment at Oasis, as Evagrius himself affirms: So that by Evagrius
Narration Maximianus was made Bishop of Constantinople two years after his
death; and both Proclus and Maximianus were Bishops at once of that See. So
well does Evagrius relate matters of fact, and such credit is to be given unto
him.

32. The other concerns the fable touching the Epistle and Image of Christ
sent to Abgarus, which Evagrius Lib. 4. ca. 26.
paints out at large, and in most lively colors: He commends the Epistle as a
true writing of Christ, and celebrated by the Ancients; He calls the Image sent
to Abgarus, a most holy Image; He tells you, it was not made by the hand of man,
but framed immediately by God; that Christ himself sent it to Abgarus, when he
was desirous to see him; that by reason of this Image and writing kept at
Edessa, it was famously reported and believed by all the faithful, that the
City of Edessa should never be conquered: (that Image made it unconquerable)
He adds, the event did confirm that praediction to be true. He says, that
when Cosroes besieged the City, and had almost taken it, then the Edessanes
brought forth that divine Image, and laid it in a ditch, to keep away the
Engines wherewith Cosroes intended to destroy the City, and that by this means
Cosroes was feign to return home, not only without the victory, but with
great ignominy: and for confirmation of this, he says, Procopius has
related this concerning Edessa, and the Epistle of Christ, This is the
Narration of Evagrius, which for the worthiness thereof is approved and
applauded by their second Nicene Act. 5. pa. 35*
Synod: to which Synod you need not doubt but Baronius subscribeth.

33. By this now judge of the fidelity, and truth, not only of Evagrius, but of
their Nicene Council and Baronius; for in this whole narration there is not a
fillable of truth, it is nothing but a fardle, or dunghill of lies. First,
whereas Evagrius fathereth this on Procopius, that is utterly untrue: In
Procopius there is not any mention either of Abgarus or of Christ's Epistle, or
of that Image made without hands, or of any praediction touching the
unconquerable City of Edessa, or that the Edessanes brought forth any such
Image in the time of the Siege, or that they laid it in the ditch, or that by
the means of it Cosroes was vanquished; all these are the fictions of
Evagrius, and those also quite contrary to the true relation of Procopius; for
he Proc. lib. 2. de bell. Pers.
ascribes the repulsing of Cosroes from the City, to the noble military skill
and stratagem of the Roman Captains; by reason whereof when Cosroes perceived
his attempt to be in vain, he made peace with the Romans; but yet so, that
the Romans yielded to pay unto him, quinquaginta millia aureorum, those fifty
thousand pieces of Gold, which he at the beginning of the siege demanded, and
for which he offered to desist from war.

34. Again, whereas Evagrius, to justify that lying prediction, as divine and
prophetical, such as the faithful then believed as a prophecy of God, says,
that the Event did prove it to be true; in that, Evagrius proves himself to
be so extremely false, that almost nothing in him may be credited, but
certainly not for his authority: for in the first year of Heraclius, (at which
time it is not unlike but Evagrius lived, for he writ his history but some
sixteen years before) the event plainly demonstrated the contrary, and this
to be no divine prophecy, but a lying fiction; Then the Persians came against
Syria, says the Author Lib. 18. an. 1. Heracl.
of the miscella: historia, and ceperunt Edessam, and they won and took Capessa
and Edessa, and proceeded as far as Antioch; yea, Cosroes then so prevailed
against Christians, that Heraclius Jbid. an. 3. and an. 4. and an. 8.
was feign to send many Legacies to entreat peace, offering to pay what
Rogavit ut definiret tributa, et pacta acciperet. Ibid.
tribute he would impose; but the Persian disdainefully answered, Non parcam
vobis donec Crucifixum abnegetis and adoretis Solemn; I will not spare you, till
you renounce the profession of Christ, and with us adore the Sun. Ibid. an.
8. and Zonar. to. 3. i^ Heracl.
How did their Palladium, that divine Image* now defend them? or how could that
be a divine praediction, which for such Evagrius commends, and says, the
event proved it to be true, when the event within less than twenty years
after demonstrated it to be a lie?

35. But that which is the principal fault in this narration, is, that
Evagrius approves, as true and certain, that Epist. of Christ sent to Abgarus,
which is indeed the ground of the whole fable. Now that Epistle to be a
reprobated and rejected writing, and condemned by the Church, is so clear,
that their own Writers proclam^ the same. Bishop Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 11. c.
6. Reji^i^.
, among other books which the Church (as he says) rejects, recites
Epistolam Jesus ad Abgarum, and Historiam Eusebij; those two by name, the Church
(says he) rejects; and because some ignorant persons thought that touching
Eusebius History not to be the words of Gelasius, and the Council, Canus
refuting those, gives this, as the reason why Eusebius is rejected, because in
it is set down the Epistle of Jesus to Abgarus, quam Gelasius explodit, which
Epistle Gelasius does hiss out of the Church. This Epistle of Jesus to
Abgarus, says Sixtus Bibl. sanc. li. 2.
Senensis, Pope Gelasius inter scripturas Apochryphas rejicit, does reject
among other Apocryphal writings Coster their Jesuit says Enchir. Tit. de sac.
Scrip. Palam.
, Eusebius relates how Christ sent a letter to Abgarus, but that letter was
never, pro ejusmodi accepta ab Ecclesia, esteemed for such, (that is, not for
Christ's) by the Church. But the words of Gelasius, and the whole Roman Council
with him, are of all most remarkable: They Council. Romans 1 sub Gelas.
having expressed and named a long Catalogue of such fabulous writings, and
particularly this Epistle of Christ to Abgarus, (which Evagrius approves) set
down this censure of them all; These, and all like unto these, we confess to
be not only refused, but also eliminata, cast out of the Church by the whole
Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, atque cum fuis authoribus, authorumque
sequacibus, sub anathematis indissolubili vinculo in aeternum confitemur esse
damnata, and we confess as well these writings, as the Authors and the
followers also of them to be eternally condemned under the indissoluble bond
of an Anathema. So Gelasius and the whole Roman Council: whereby it is
evident, that not only this Epistle, and the Author of it, but that the
followers of the Author, the approvers of that Epistle, that is, Evagrius, and
the whole second Nicene Synod, and Baronius himself, that these also are
anathematized, condemned and accursed by the judgment of the whole Roman
Catholic Church, and that also by an indissoluble bond of an Anathema. Such an
untrue and fabulous, yea miserable and accursed witness has the Cardinal
chosen of Evagrius, by the warrant and authority of whom he might insult upon,
and revile the Emperor: but now the Cardinal has far more need to excuse
Evagrius from lies, than by his lying reports to accuse others; and now he may
clearly see that censure of condemnation, which he, with Evagrius, most rashly
and unjustly objecteth to the Emperor, to fall on Evagrius, their second
Nicene Fathers, and the Cardinals own pate; since they all, by approving that
Narration touching Abgarus; or being sequaces of the Author thereof, are
pronounced to be eternally condemned by the judgment of the whole Roman
Catholic Apostolical Church: It is fit such a censure should ever pass on
them, who open their mouths in reviling manner against religious and holy
Emperors, the anointed of the Lord.

36. You do now evidently see, not only Justinian to be cleared of those
odious and indigne imputations of heresy, tyranny, persecution, and other
crimes, which the Cardinal in such spiteful manner upbraideth unto him, but
all those witnesses whom he has nominated, and produced in this cause, to be
so light, and of so little account, that they are utterly unworthy to be put
in the skales or counter-poized with those honorable and innumerable
witnesses, which, (as we have showed) do with a loud and consenting voice
proclamo, that Faith, Piety, Prudence, Justice, Clemency, Bounty, and all
other Heroical and Princely virtues have shined in Justinian, which have
beautified any of the most renowned and religious Emperors that the Church has
had. Let us now proceed to those effects which Baronius observes to have
ensued upon the heresy of Justinian, and the persecution raised by his
maintaining of the same. Now indeed this whole passage might justly be omitted,
for, sublata causa tollitur effectus; seeing Justinian held no such heresy as
he is slandered withal, there neither was, nor could there be any effects or
consequents of a cause not existent: Yet will I not so slightly reject the
Cardinals calumny in this point, but fully examine, first the public, and
then the private mischiefs, which he, without all truth has fancied, and
objected against the Emperor.

37. The public was partly the subversion and overthrow of the faith, and
partly the decay of the Empire in the time, and under the government of
Justinian. Disertus esse posset; He that would in an elaborate speech refute
this calumny of Baronius, might have an ample scope to display all his Art and
skill in this so large an argument: My purpose is only to point at the
several heads, and not expatiate at this time. Truly, the Cardinal could
hardly have devised any calumny more easy to be refuted, or more evidently
witnessing his malicious and wilful oppugning of the truth. I will not insist
on those private testimonies: of Procopius, Lib. 3. de aedif. Justin. pa. 433.
Justinian seems to have been advanced by God to that Imperial dignity, ut
totum Imperium repararet, that he might repair and beautify the whole Empire:
Of Otho Lib. 5. ca. 4.
, Justinian being a most valiant and most Christian Prince, Imperiu^ quasi
mortuu^ resuscitavit, did raise the Empire as it were from death to life, and
exceedingly repaired the Commonwealth being decayed: Of Gotofrid In Chron.
part. 16. in Justinian.
, The whole glory of God was repaired by his virtue, and the Church rejoiced in
the stable peace which under him it enjoyed: Of Wernerus An. 504.
, He was in all things most excellent, and by his just laws, and wisdom he
governed the world; by his impiety he glorified God: Of Aimonius De gest. Fr.
lib, 2. ca. 8.
, He was a Catholic, a pious, a just Emperor, therefore all things prospered
under his hands. I oppose to that Baronian calumny, the judgment of Pope
Agatho, and of the Roman Council with him, wherein this is expressly witnessed,
In Epist. Aga^^ Act. 4. Conc. 6. pa. 18. a.
His integrity in faith did much please God, and exalt the Christian
Commonwealth: and again Ibid. in Epist. Synod. pa. 22.
, His virtue and piety, omnia in meliorem ordinem restauravit, restored all
things into a better state and condition: All, both Church and Commonwealth,
both the Civil and Ecclesiastical state: he restored all. I oppose the sixth
general Council, that is, the judgment of the whole Church, in which the
suggestions of Agatho, eve^ in that point, according to the Cardinals doctrine
Vid. sup. he^ cap. nu. 18.
, are approved as uttered by S. Peter, yea, by the holy Ghost himself. These
pregnant and irrefragable testimonies of so many, so holy, and divine
witnesses, are able, I say not to confute, but utterly to confound and
overwhelme Baronius with his deformed and decrepit calumny.

38. If any further please to descend to particulars, whether he cast his eyes
on the Church or Commonwealth, he shall see every Region, every Province,
almost every City and Town proclaming the honor of Justinian: Besides, his
happy appeasing of those manifold broils, and suppressing sundry heresies
which infested the Church in his days, among which this concerning the Three
Chapters was the chief: How infinite monuments did he leave of his piety and
zeal to Gods glory and the good of his Church, in building new, in repairing
decayed Churches, reducing both to a most magnifice^t beauty? The Church of
Christ called Sophia, built by him at Constantinople, was the mirror of all
Ages: Of it Procopius, an eyewitness, testifies, Proc. lib. 1. de aedif.
Justin. pa. 423.
that the magnificence thereof amazed those who saw it, but was incredible to
those that saw it not: the Assurgit in altitudinem caeli. Ibid.
height of it mounted up into the heaven, the splendour of it was such, as if it
received not Diceres locum illum non externo sole illuminari. Jbid.
light from the Sun, but had it in it self; the roof decked with Gold, the
pavement beset Pavimentum ex diversi coloris unionibus perfectum. Glic. Annal.
part. 4.
with Pearl; the silver of the Quire only contained four Myriadas 4. caelati
argenti habuisse fertur. Proc. loc. cit.
Myriads, that is, forty thousand pounds; in so much that it is said Hoc
aedificio Solomonem esse superatum. Glic. loc. cit.
, to have excelled the Temple of Solomon. Further, in the honor of the blessed
Virgin he builded every where so many houses, so stately and sumptuous
throughout the Roman Empire, that if you should comtemplate but only one of
them, you would think (says Procopius Lib. 1.
) his whole reign to have been employed in building that alone. At
Constantinople he builded three Ibid.
, one in Blacernis, another in Pege, a third in Hierio: besides others builded
in honor of Anna, of Zoa, of Michael, of Peter and Paul, of Sergius and
Baccus, utrumque fulgore lapillorum Solemn vincit, either of which, by the
brightness of precious stones, excelled the Sun; of Andrew, Luke and
Tymothy, of Acatius, of Mocius, of Thirsis, of Theodorus, of Tecla, of
Theodota: Haec omnia ex fundamentis erexit, All these he raised from the very
ground and foundation: and that at Constantinople; the beauty and dignity of
which cannot by words be expressed, by viewing be perlustrated. Nor did he
this to one only City; he builded like magnificent Churches, at Antioch Pro.
lib. 2.
, at Sebastia, at Nicopolis, at Theodosia, at TZani, at Iustinianea Lib. 4.
, where he was borne, at Ephesus Lib. 5.
, at Helena, at Nice, at Pythia, at Jerusalem, so magnificent, ut nullum aliud
aequipare possit, that none other may compare with it; at Jericho, at mount
Gerazim, at mount Sinai, at Theopolis, at Aegila Lib. 6. pa. 453.
, where they sacrificed to Jupiter Hammon and Alexander the great, even to that
time; at Boreion, at Tripolis, at Carthage, at the Gades, or Hercules pillars,
which was the uttermost border of the known world in those days: So that one
may truly say of him, Imperium Oceano, famam qui terminat astris; his piety and
zeal reaches as far as the earth, his honor as high as the heaven. And yet
have I said nothing at all of the Monasteries, Zenodochies, Nosodochies, and
other like Hospitals, which, out of his most pious affection to God and Gods
Church, he not only erected, but enriched with large patrimonies and
possessions, which for number are as I suppose equal, for expenses greater,
than the former: all the particulars whereof I refer to be read in Procopius,
who considering, beside other matters, al these magnificent and sumptuous
buildings, did truly say of Iustinia^ Lib. 1. pa. 424
, Nulla honorandi Dei satietas eum cepit, he was never wearied, never satiate
with honoring of God.

40. After the Church, will it please you to take a view of the civil state and
Empire. No man's tongue or pen can equal or come near his acts, and most
deserved praise. The whole Empire at the beginning of his reign was in a manner
spoiled and defaced. In the East, the Persia^s held a great part of Asia; in
the South, the Vandals possessed Africa; in the West, the Goths usurped Italy,
and Rome it self; in the North, the Franks, Almanes, and other people withdrew
Germany, France, and other Northern Countries. Justinian, finding the Empire
thus torn asunder on every side, freed it from all these enemies; and having
most happily subdued, and gloriously triumphed over them all, by his victorious
conquests, he purchased those manifold titles, which are so many Trophies,
Crests, and Ensigns of his immortal honor, to be surnamed Justinian the
Great Iustiniani magni. Epist. Agath. et Synod. Romans Act. 4. Conc. 6.
, happy Jn praef. ad Jnstitut. Justin.
, renowned, victorious, and Triumphant Augustus, Alamanicus, Gothicus,
Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus: So at once he
purchased both honor to himself, and peace and tranquillity to the Empire.
Neither did he this only by his conquests, and recovery of those great Nations,
which the Empire had lost; but further also by his prudence he so fortified
them, being recovered, by building and repairing their ruinated Cities, by
erecting Castles, Forts, and strong places of munition; by furnishing them all
with the commodities of waters, of walls, of promontories, of havens, of
bridges, of baths, of goodly buildings, and other matters, serving either for
the necessity or pleasure of habitation, that the whole Empire by his wisdom
and government was made, as it were, one great and strong City, both commodious
and delightful to his own subjects, and inexpugnable to his enemies: So in
Media he fortified Doras Inexpugnabile^ hostibus effecit. Proc. lib. 2. de a^
dis. Just.
; in Persia, Sisauranon; in Mesopotamia, Baros; in Syria, Edessa, and
Callinicum; in Commagine, Zenobia; in Armenia, Martyropolis Ibid. lib. 3.
; in the other Armenia, Theodosiopolis; in Tzani, Burgunocie; Totam Lib. 4.
Europa^ inaccessam reddidit; he made the whole Country of Europe
unconquerable: Tauresium, where he was borne, he exceedingly fortified, and
beautified, and called it Iustinianea; the like he did to Vlpiana, and called
it Iustinianea secunda: near to it he builded Iustinopolis; he repaired all
Epyrus, Aetolia, Acarnania; Vniversam Graeciam, he fortified al Greece: the
like he did in Thessalia, and Euboea, Quam penitus inexpugnabilem and invicta^
reddidit, which he made inexpugnable: The like he did in Thrace, in Misia,
and in Scythia also; in Libya Lib. 6.
, in Numidia, and at the very Gades. Time would fail me to recount the one
half of his famous buildings in this kind, they may be read in Procopius,
who thus concludes, Nulli Lib. 6. pa. 456.
dubium est, no man may doubt, but that Justinian fortified the Roman State
with munitions, and strong holds, from the East unto the West, and to the very
utmost borders of the Empire: Who further in admiration of these works of
Justinian not only calls Lib. 4. pa. 439.
him, Orbis reparatorem, the repairer of the whole world, but adds this
memorable saying of him, That there has Quapropter nemo contenderit, per omnem
aetatem fuisse quempiam ex omnibus hominibus Iustiniano magis providum, and
accuratiorem. Lib. 4. pa. 440.
not been any in all ages, nor among all men, more provident, more careful for
the public good, than Justinian, unto whom nothing was difficult, no not to
bridle and confine the Seas, to level the Mountains, and overcome those
things which seem impossible.

40. Even Evagrius himself, whose spite and spleen was (as I conjecture by
some welwiller of the Three Chapters, of which there were diverse in the time of
Gregory, when Evagrius writ) incensed against Justinian, could not choose but
testify this. Evagr. lib. 4. ca 18.
It is reported of him, that he restored anew, an hundredth and fifty Cities,
which were either wholly overthrown, or exceedingly decayed, and that he
beautified them with such and so great ornaments, with houses both private and
public, with goodly walls, with fair and sumptuous buildings, and Churches,
ut nihil possit esse magnificentius, that nothing can be more magnificent: So
he. And yet all these Buildings, Munitions, Castles and Forts, are not
comparable to those most wholesome Imperial Laws, whereby he most wisely
ordered and governed the whole Empire: that alone was a work of so great value
and excellency, that I may truly say, that all his victories and victorious
triumphs over the Persians, the Goths, the Vandals, and other nations, never
gained so much honor unto him, as did that his more than Herculean labor in
composing and digesting the laws, to the unspeakeable benefit of the whole
Christian world: for as by his victories and buildings, he restored but the
material Cities and walls thereof, so by this he repaired the men themselves,
and their minds, reducing them from rude and barbarous behavior to civility
and order, setting them in such a constant form of civil government, as all
Christian Kingdoms since have not only with admiration extolled, but with
most happy success embraced and followed.

41. Judge now, I pray you, uprightly of the Cardinals dealing, who declames
against this Emperor, and reviles him in most odious terms, as an unjust,
avaricious, sacrilegious, tyrannical person, calling him a dolt, a fool, a
madman, an heretic, an Antichrist, a persecutor of the faith, negligent of
the civil, disturber of the Ecclesiastical State, under whom the Empire and
Commonwealth decayed, and declined, the Church was oppressed, and the faith
overthrown: Whereas it does now appear by evidences of all sorts, that he
was a Prince, not only Catholic, pious, prudent, magnanimous, just,
munificent, and most vigilant for the good, both of the Church and
Commonwealth, but so adorned with the concurrence of all those heroical
virtues, which have been single in other men of great fame, as if in him we
should see the complete Idea of a worthy Emperor; he being for political
prudence, Solon; for valor and victorious conquests, Alexander; for
magnificence, Augustus; for his piety, constant love and zeal to the faith,
Constantine, Theodosius or Martian; for multiplicity of labors, undertaken for
the good of the whole Empire, more indefatigable than Hercules; and for
supporting the whole fabric of the Church and Christian faith, a very Atlas;
Caelum qui vertice fulcit.

42. There only remains now the other effect, which is private: which as it
is the last, so is it the heaviest punishment that Baronius could wish unto
Justinian, and that is, his adjudging him to the pit and torments of hell. Did
he not fear the Apostles reproof, either against rash and temerarious
judgers, Who Romans 14.4^
art thou that judge another man's servant? or against uncharitable censures,
Charity thinks not evil 1 Cor. 13.5.
, it rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. why did not the
Cardinal harken rather to the judgment of the Church of Constantinople?
Wherein the memory Jn ipso Dei Verbi Sapientiae templo quotannis magnifice
memoriam ejus celebrari, populi universi concione ad rem divinam coacta. Nicep.
lib. 17. ca. 31.
of Justinian was yearly celebrated, and that with great pomp and solemnity
in the Church of Sophia, in the time of divine service, all the people being
assembled. The like celebrity Ibid.
of his memory was observed at Ephesus in the Church of Saint John, which he
had builded: Or if the authority of these particular Churches could not sway
the Cardinal, seemed it a small matter unto him to contemn the consenting
judgment of Pope Agatho, and his Roman Council; which rank him among the
glorious and blessed Saints in heaven, with Saint Constantine, Theodosius, and
Martian? yea, of the whole sixth general Council, wherein his memory is so
often called, holy, blessed, divine, happy, and the like? and if his memory,
then much more himself is happy and blessed; for to the just only does that
honor belong; The Pro. 10.7.
memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.
To which purpose that is specially to be observed which Nicephorus adds in
plain terms of the sixth general Council, Iustinianum Loc. citat.
beata quiet dignatur, It places Justinian in blessed rest and peace: and
again, Semper eum qui in Sanctis est Iustinianum dicunt, That general Council
ever calls Justinian one who is a Saint, and among the Saints. Add to all
these, that seeing, by the Cardinals confession, the Epistles of Agatho, In
omnibus (and therefore even in that which he says of this holy Emperor, That
he is a blessed Saint, venerable in all Nations) are to be embraced as divine
Oracles; it may be truly concluded, that Justinian, not only by the
testimonies of mortal men, and of all nations, but even by the voice of God
himself is blessed, and has ever since his death, and does now rest, and
reign with God. When by the unpartiall judgment of S. Agatho, of the Roman
Synod, of the whole sixth general Council, of all Nations, yea, of God
himself, Justinian is proclaimed to be a venerable Saint, now resting and
reigning with God in heaven: who is Baronius, a man of yesterday, that after a
thousand years possession of that heavenly rest, he should unsaint him,
dethrone him, and thrust him down to the lowest pit and most hideous torments
of hell? Is It not enough for that Hildebrandicall generation to divest Kings
and Emperors of their earthly diadems, unless in the pride of their hearts
climbing up into heaven, they thrust them out thence also, and deprive them of
their crowns of immortality, and eternal glory?

43. And yet were there neither Historian nor Pope, nor Provincial, nor
General Council, to testify this felicity of Justinian unto us; that very
text, out of which, being maimed, the Cardinal sucked poison, and collected
His death and damnation, does so forcible prove the beatitude of Justinian,
that it alone may be sufficient in this cause. The Cardinal cites but one
part of the text, but the whole does manifest his fraud and malicious
collection. Apoc. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from hence
forth; even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and opera
illorum sequuntur illos, their works follow them: which last words the
Cardinal only alleges, and applies them to Justinian. Now who are Those,
that are meant by, Their works, and follow Them? who are those Them, that the
Spirit means in that text? Out of al doubt those selfsame of whom before he
spoke, Them, that dye in the Lord, Them, that are blessed, and rest from their
labors* Of Them, the Spirit there says, Opera illorum, Their works follow
Them. Seeing then the Cardinal confesses this text to belong to Justinian,
and himself applies it unto him, it certainly hence follows, that Justinian
is of their number, who dye in the Lord, and are blessed: for of Them, and Them
only does the holy Ghost speak in that text, saying, They rest from their
labors, and Their works follow Them. So hard it is for the Cardinal to cite
or say ought against Justinian, which does not redound to the Emperors honor,
and the Cardinals own ignominy.

44. But let us suppose the words to be general, as being uttered alone,
without any reference to that text, they may be truly affirmed both of the
good and bad: There cannot be found in all Scripture more fair evidence, nor a
more authentike Charter for the happy estate of any one in particular that
lived since the Apostles times, then is this for Justinian: For what were those
works which did accompany and follow Justinian? Truly the works of sincere
faith, of fervent zeal to GOD, of love to the Church and Children of God, the
works of piety, of prudence, of justice, of fortitude, of munificence, of many
other heroical virtues: with these, as with a garment and chain of pure Gold,
Justinian being decked, was brought unto the Bridegroom; every decree made, or
ratified by him for confirming the faith; every Anathema denounced against
heresies, and heretics, particularly those against Vigilius, and all that defend
him, that is, against Baronius, and all who defend the Popes infallibility in
defining causes of faith; every Temple or Church, every Monastery and
Hospital, every City and Town, every Bridge, Haven and Highway, every
Castle, Fort, and Munition, whether made or repaired by him, tending either
immediately to the advancement of Gods service, or to the maintaining or
relieving of Gods servants, or strengthening the Empire against his and Gods
enemies: every book in the Digest, Code, and Authentikes; every Title, yea,
every law in any title, whereby either the Christian faith and religion, or
peaceable order and tranquillity, have been either planted, or propagated, or
continued, either in the Church or Commonwealth: all these, and every one of
them, and many other the like, which I cannot either remember, or recount, are
like so many Rubies, Chrysolites, and Diamonds in the costly garment, or so
many linkes in that golden chain of his faith and virtues. Seeing they, who
offer but one mite into the treasury of the Lord, or give but one cup of cold
water to a Prophet, shall not want a reward; O! what a weight of eternity and
glory shall that troop of virtues and train of good works obtain at his
hands, who rewards indeed every man according to their works, but withal
rewards them infinitely above all the dignity or condignity of their works.

45. If Justinian and those who are beautified with so many virtues and
glorious works, be, as the Card. judges, tormented in hell, belike the
Cardinal himself hoped by works contrary unto these, by works of
infidelity, of impiety, of maligning the Church, of reviling the servants of
GOD, of oppugning the faith, of Patronizing heresy, yea, that fundamental
heresy which overthrows the whole Catholic faith, and brings in a total
Apostasy from the faith; by these he hoped to purchase, and in condignity to
merit the felicity of the Kingdom of Heaven: This being the track and beaten
path wherein they walk, and by which they aspire to immortality, what
Constantine Socr. lib. 1. ca. 7.
said once to Acesius the Novatian, the same may be said to Baronius and his
consorts, Erigito tibi scalam Baroni, and ad coelum solus ascendito, Keep that
Ladder unto your selves, and by it do you alone climb up into heaven. But
well were it with them, and thrice happy had the Cardinal been, if with a
faithful and upright heart toward God, he could have said of Justinian the
words of Balaam, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his. His life being led in piety, and abounding in good works, he now
enjoys the fruit thereof, felicity and eternal rest in Abraham's bosom: As
for the Cardinal who has so malignantly reviled him, himself can now best
tell whether he does not cry and pray, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and
send Justinian that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue: or sing that other note Wisd 5.4.6.
unto his fellows concerning this Emperor; We fools thought his life to be
madness, and his end to be without honor, but now is he numbered among the
children of God, and his lot is among the Saints: Therefore we have erred from
the way of truth, and wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness and
destruction; we have gone through deserts where there lay no way, but as for
the way of the Lord we have not known it.

CAP. XXI. How Baronius revileth Theodora the Empress, and a refutation of the
same.
1. NExt the Emperor, let us see how dutifully the Cardinal behaveth himself
toward the Empress Theodora. A small matter it is with him in several places
to call her an Impiae Theodorae Augustae. an. 535. nu. 59.
impious, an heretical Haereticae faeminae impiae Theodorae. ibid. nu. 60.
, a sacrilegious Sacrilega faemina molita est. an. 536. nu. 123
, a furious A furente haeretica faemina excitata. an. 538 nu. 9.
heretical woman, a patron Jpsa haeretic^rum, Acephalorum, Severianorum,
Eutychianorum patrona: an. 547. nu. 49.
of heretics, and the like. Hear and consider how he stormeth but in one
place An. 535. nu. 63
against her: These so great mischiefs did that most wicked woman begin; she
became to her husband another Eve obeying the serpent, a new Dalila to Samson,
striving by her subtlety to weaken his strength; another Herodias, thirsting
after the blood of most holy men; a wanton maid of the High Priest, persuading
Peter to deny Christ. But this is not enough, Sugillare ipsam, with these
terms to flout her, who exceeds all women in impiety, let her have a name
taken from Hell, let her be called Alecto, or Megera, or Tisiphone, a Citizen
of hell, a child of Devils, ravished with a satanicall spirit, driven up and
down with a devilish gad-bee, an enemy of concord and peace purchased with
the blood of Martyrs. Thus the Cardinal: who tells us afterward how when
Vigilius came to Constantinople, she contended long with him for to have
Anthimus restored, in so much that Vigilius was forced to smite her as from
heaven, with the thunderbolt of Excommunication Sententiam excommunicationis
inflixit. et, Excommunicationis sententia fulminis instar coelitus emisse
prostravit. an. 547. nu. 49. and 50.
, whereupon she Theodoram a Vigilio sauciatam diro jaculo anathematis, haud diu
post ulciscente numine, est insequutus interitus. an. 548. nu. 24*
shortly dyed. Here is the tragical end which the Cardinal has made of her.

2. Now I would not have any think that I intend wholly to excuse the Empress;
she had her passions and errors; as who has not? and as Liberatus Liber. ca.
21, 22.
and Evagrius Evagr. lib. 4. ca. 10.
show, she took part with the oppugners of the Council of Chalcedon: which
was for sometime true; she being, as it seems, seduced by Anthimus, whom for
a while she labored to have restored to the Sea of Constantinople: though
afterward, as Victor Tununensis testifies, she being better informed, joined
with the Emperor in condemning the Three Chapters, and so in truth, in
defending the Council of Chalcedon, though Victor thought the contrary. And
of this mind in condemning the three Chapters she was, as by Victor is
evident, some years before Vigilius came to Constantinople. Her former error,
seduction, and labor for Anthimus, I will not seek to lessen, or any way
excuse. But though she were worthy of blame, was it fit for the Cardinal so
basely to revile her, and in such an unseemly and undutifull manner, to
disgorge the venom of his stomach upon an Empress? Tanta ne animis
caelestibus irae, who would have thought such rancour and poison to have rested
in the breast of a Cardinal? But there was, you may be sure; some great cause
which drew from the Cardinal so many unseemly speeches against the Empress;
and though he would be thought to do all this only out of zeal to the
truth, which Anthimus the heretic oppugned, yet if the depth of the Cardinals
heart were sounded, it will appear, that his spite against her, was for
condemning the Three Chapters, which Pope Vigilius in his Constitution
defends; Anthimus and his cause is but a pretense and color; the
Apostolical Constitution, the heresies of the Nestorians, decreed and defined
therein, that is the true mark at which the Cardinal aymeth; neither Emperor
nor Empress, nor Bishop, nor Council, nor any may open their mouth against
that Constitution, which touches them in capite, but they shall be sure to
hear and bear away as harsh and hellish terms from Baronius, as if they had
condemned the Trent Council it self. Had Theodora defended the Three
Chapters, as Vigilius in his Constitution did, the Cardinal would have
honored her as a Melpomene, Clio, or Urania; because she did not that, she
must be nothing but Alecto, Megara, or Tisiphone, and they are too good names
for her.

3. If one desired to set forth her praise, there wants not testimonies of her
dignity, and honor. Constantinus Manasses Jn annal. suis. pa. 87.
says, that she was Iisdem addicta cum marito studiis, and iisdem praedita
moribus: that she so well consorted to her husband, that she was addicted to
the same studies, endued with the same manners as he was: That Justinian
himself calls her Participem consilij sumentes eam quae a Deo est data
nobis, reverendissimam conjugem. Novel. 8. ca. 1.
, reverendissimam conjugem, his most reverend wife, given unto him by God:
adding that he took her as a partner with him of his counsels in making his
laws, and after her death he In pragmatica sanctione Justin. ca. 1.
calls her Augustam piae memoriae, Empress of holy memory, as do also and
very often the sixth general Ad Iustinianu^ and Theodoram divae memoriae. Conc.
genesis 6. Act. 14. pa. 73. Bis ita ait Conciliu^. and, Ad Theodoram piae memoria
quondam Augustam. Act. 3 pa. 11.
Council: an unfit title to be given to an heretic, or a fury, either by a
holy general Council, or by a Christian orthodox Emperor, who was so earnest
with the fifth Council to condemn all that should obstinately persist in the
condemning of the true faith, and dye out of the communion of the holy Church.
Diverse the like testimonies might be alleged, if one would labor to extol
that Empress, as the Cardinal has strained his wit and pen to vilify and
disgrace her. But because that is not my purpose at this time, I would only
observe how unjustly the Cardinal has taxed her in respect of three several
times, and three special matters.

4. The first concerns the placing of Anthimus, an Eutychean heretic in the Sea of Constantinople, which Baronius Iustinianus Augustam conjugem audiens,
monstrum horrendum in sedem Pontificiam provehit. an. 535. nu. 60.
says was done by Justinian, occultis insidiis Theodorae, by the cunning and
treacherous means of Theodora; and thereupon he breaks Ibid. nu. 62. and 63.
into many uncivil terms. Wherein the Cardinals spite and indiscretion is
utterly unexcusable: for whatsoever Anthimus was secretly and in his heart, he
at that time when he was placed in the Sea, and afterward also, outwardly
showed and professed himself to be a Catholic; he was a wolf; as the
Archimandrites Libell. Arch. mand. et Monac ad Agapetum in Conc. Constantinop.
sub Menn. act. 1. pa. 426. a.
and Monks of Constantinople, Jerusalem, and other parts of the East do
witness, in their synodall Epistles to Agapetus; but he covered himself, and
his wolvish conditions, under sheep clothing. Again, he Pa. eadem. b.
and others, religionis pietatem dissimulantes, counterfeiting the piety of
religion, thrust themselves into the Church. Anthimus lived not an Evangelical
(that is, sincere,) sed fictam vitam, but a fained and hypocritical life,
manifesting forth to all men the counterfeit continency of his government, and
the show of piety which by it he made. The Emperor Justin. Constitutio contra
Severum, Anthimum. etc. quae extat post Conc. sub Menna. pa. 469. a.
testifies the same; Anthimus forsook and refused those true doctrines which
he often seemed to love, simulans sequi sanctas quatuor Synodos, faining
himself to follow the four holy Synods. The whole general Council under
Sent. Synodi contra Anthimu^. act. 4. pa. 438. a.
Mennas in their definitive sentence against Anthimus do expressly witness the
same, He counterfeited himself to embrace and receive the four Counsels, and
he kept them in dipticis. Again, he used deceptibilibus rationibus ad ejus
Serenitatem, deceitful and cozening means before the Emperor; promising to
do all things which the Apostolic See (then Catholic) did decree, and he
writ to the most holy Patriarchs, Se sequi per omnia Apostolicam sedem, that he
did in all things follow the Apostolic See: when Anthimus made so holy, and
orthodoxall a profession, better than which no Catholic could desire; what
marvel if by this fair show, and outward orthodoxy, he deceived both the
Emperor, and the Empress, and the whole Church? They were not, nor could they
look into his heart; it was their duty to judge him to be such in deed, as he
showed and professed himself to be, a Catholic Bishop: and taking him for
such; they placed him in that high Patriarchall See. Did not Constantine the
great the like, and without any just blame or reprehension, receiving into
great favor Eusebius of Nicomedia, and others, though inwardly and in heart
most pestilent Arians, yet in outward profession orthodoxall, and embracers of
the Nicene faith? Nay, what if Baronius himself acknowledge, that neither
Theodora nor Justinian, advanced Anthimus the heretic; but Anthimus then
seeming, and being in their judgment a Catholic? Hear I pray you his own
words an. 535. nu. 62.
, The Empress favored Anthimus, uti orthodoxo, as an orthodoxall Bishop: and
Justinian sent a Constitution to him, ut orthodoxu^ Antistitem, as to an
orthodoxal Bishop. He did an. eod* nu. 59.
outwardly profess the Catholic faith, but inwardly was an Eutychean. Again,
the an. eod. nu. 86
Fox had so ordered himself, that being a most abominable heretic, Studeret
tamen in omnibus apparere Catholicus, yet he endeavored every way to seem a
Catholic, approving the Council of Chalcedon, and all that true Catholics
did; yea and when there was a rumor spread of him to be an heretic, the
crafty companion thoroughly purged himself of that crime, when in plain terms
he professed before the Emperor, that he would in all things assent to what
the Apostolic See did prescribe: these things being dissembled by Anthimus,
his hypocrisy and heresy were not detected, until Jbid. nu. 88.
Agapetus the next year came to Constantinople; in the mean space he was held
for a professor of the Catholic faith, a communicator with the Apostolic See,
by reason of his public profession, wherein he openly before all men's eyes,
and before the Emperor himself, professed to receive all things which the
Apostolic See did prescribe. Thus Baronius. By whose words it is most clear
that Anthimus, when he was placed in that See of Constantinople by the means
of the Empress, was not known to her, nor discovered to the Church, as yet,
to be an heretic, nor a full year after: he was held and reputed by all for
a Catholic, and very orthodoxall Bishop. What fault was this now in Theodora
or Justinian, to place him in this See, whom they knew for no other than a
Catholic? who professed to hold the four former Councels, and promised to
yield to whatsoever Agapetus a known Catholic did prescribe. Nay, seeing by
Baronius own confession, the Empress did then favor him uti orthodoxo, no
otherwise than as being orthodoxall, she even therein testified her orthodoxy
in faith at that time, as favoring him eo nomine, because she thought him to
be orthodoxall. So far was she in this act either from being an heretic, or
deserving those epithetes and titles, which the Cardinal has fetched from hell
to bestow upon her, that in very deed by the Cardinals words she deserves
praise and honor.

5. The second point concerns the bienniall contention with Vigilius for
restoring of Anthimus, which out of Anastasius Anast. in vita Vigil.
Baronius an. 547. nu. 49
has borrowed: all which is nothing but a mere fiction and legend patched up
by Anastasius, as elsewhere I shall further explain. Vigilius was neither
called, nor came about that business to Constantinople, but about the three
Chapters; the cause of Anthimus was some ten years before ended: the Empress
knew the resolution of Vigilius therein, that he had absolutely refused to
restore him. And though for a while after the deposition of Anthimus, she,
being deceived by his fair words and show of piety, sought to restore him: yet
when she saw Anthimus to remain an obstinate heretic, and to oppugn the
faith of Chalcedon, she quite left off all striving for Anthimus, and became
with Justinian a condemner of the three Chapters, (as Victor Theodora elicuit a
Vigilio ut tria Capitula condemnaret. Vict. Tun. in Chron. an. 2. post Coss.
Basilij.
testifies) that is in truth, an earnest defender of the Council of
Chalcedon, and of the Catholic faith. So unjustly does the Cardinal take
occasion upon an untruth and legendary fable to revile the Empress as an
heretic.

6. The third and last point concerns the direful thunderblast of
Excommunication, which Vigilius the Roman Jupiter cast from heaven against
Theodora, wherewith belike she was smit to death. Wherein though the Cardinal
Ibid.
is exceeding brag, and thinks his saying to be warranted by no mean
witnesses, but by Pope Gregory himself; yet for all that, I must be bold to
tell him that it also is a fiction, and that Vigilius brought no such Ioviall
darts with him to Constantinople, or if he did, he spent them not upon the
Empress. It was Pope Agapetus, and not Vigilius, by whom (if by any) Theodora
was excommunicated, seeing Theodora did contend with Agapetus about Anthimus,
and that also before his deposition. It was he which called Theodora,
Eleutheria, a persecuting Empress. Vigilius had no occasion at his coming to
excommunicate her, the cause of Anthimus was before that ended. Theodora and
Vigilius consented together in one profession of faith: he condemning the three
Chapters, a little after he came to Constantinople, as well as the Empress,
could not condemn or excommunicate her for an heretic, but he must condemn
himself also. I, but Pope Gregory Greg. lib. 2. Epist. 36.
says expressly he did excommunicate her. Might I in stead of an answer say as
some Author. apol. Tumultuariae pro dispensatione de matrim. Hen. 8. and uxoris
fratris ejus. fol. 46.
of their own Writers do in another cause, Gregorius hic non est audiendus,
Gregory is here not to be regarded: or but say as their own Bishop Canus De
loc. Theol. lib. 11. ca. 6.. Lex vero 2.
does, that Gregory was too credulous in writing reports; the matter were soon
answered: But I am not willing to censure Gregory so hard as they do: my
answer is, that the name of Vigilius is by an error either of the writer or
Printer of Gregory, inserted there in stead of Agapetus: for of Agapetus,
Victor Agapetus Archiepiscop. Romans Theodoram Augustam Anthimi patronam
communione private: Anthimum deponit, and Mennam ejus loco Episcopum ponit.
Vict. Tunun. in Chron. in Coss. Justin. an. 14. Iustiniani.
is an express witness, that he indeed deprived Theodora of the communion:
All the circumstances accord thereunto. Theodora was then an enemy to the
Council of Chalcedon, she took part, and was a patron of Anthimus: Gregory
himself notes this fact to be done equally against the whole sect Papa, contra
Theodoram and Acephalos damnationis sententiam promulgavit. Greg. loco citato.
of the Acephalian heretics, as against Theodora: now Vigilius had nothing to
do with those heretics; it was the cause of the three Chapters wherewith he
was troubled; the heads of the Acephali, Anthimus, Severus, Petrus, Zoaras, and
their followers, were condemned both by Agapetus Acephalorum Principes,
Anthimum, Severu^, etc. condemnavit Agapetus. Bin. Not. in vitam Agapet. pa.
416. b.
, and by the great Council of Constantinople Act. 5.
under Mennas, where were present the Legates of the Roman See, Agapetus being
lately dead: and the same sentence was confirmed by the Emperor Justinian
Constable. Justin. post finem Synod. sub Menna.
at the end of the Synod, so that there was nothing left for Vigilius to do
against the Acephali, who both by the Pontifical, Synodall, and Imperial
sentence were condemned nine years before his coming to Constantinople.
Lastly, the very scope and coherence of Gregory's text does enforce this
correction. The defenders of the three Chapters alleged, that since the time
of the fifth Council, wherein the three Chapters were condemned, many
calamities had befalne Italy, whereupon they concluded that God afflicted the
Church for that decree of the fifth Council, and for condemning of those three
Chapters. Gregory to refute this their reason, alleged another example, and of
former times: to wit, of condemning the Acephali, whom they, to whom Gregory
writ, acknowledged for heretics; saying, Postquam, after Pope Agapetus when he
came into this kingly City denounced a sentence of condemnation, against
Theodora, and the Acephali, then was Rome besieged, and taken by the enemies
(that is the Goths;) was therefore God angry for that sentence against the
Acephali? Apply this reason to Vigilius, and his time, and it is not only
untrue, but unfit to the purpose of Gregory: for before Vigilius his coming to
Constantinople, not only Vitiges the Goth possessed Rome, (from whom
Bellisarius in the time of Silverius recovered it) and made great havocke in
Italy; but Totilas Totilas Romam contendit, quam statim obsedit. Proc. lib. 3.
de bell. Goth. pa. 360.
also (before Vitiges came) besieged it so hard, that by reason of the famine
they were driven not only to eat mice, and dogs, but even dung also, and last
of all one to eat up another: and that same year Totilas took Rome, sacked
it, and had purposed utterly to have abolished it, and burnt it to ashes, but
that Bellisarius by his most prudent and fortunate persuasions, staid him from
that barbarous immanity. Now seeing not only the siege, but captivity of Rome
was after the coming of that Pope to Constantinople, and sentence against
Theodora, of whom Gregory speaks, it must needs be he meant Pope Agapetus,
whose sentence all the foresaid calamities follow; and not Vigilius, Vigilius
venit Constantinopolin. an. 12. belli Gothic. Proc. lib. eodem. pa. 364. Romam
obsedit Totilas. an. 11. ejusdem belli. lib. eodem. pa. 359. and seq.
before whose coming to Constantinople Rome was besieged by Totilas, and taken
also before the sentence, if it was (as by Anastasius is to be gathered) not
denounced till the second year after Vigilius his coming thither. Neither
only had the reason of Gregory been untrue, but most unfit for his purpose,
had he meant Vigilius in this place: for he clearly intends such a calamity as
happened before the condemning of the three Chapters, but after the condemning of
the Acephali. Now it is certain by the Acts of the fifth Council, and by the
Emperors testimony, that as the Eastern Bishops, so also Vigilius presently
after he came to Constantinople consented to condemn the three Chapters, yea
condemned them by a Pontifical decree and judgment, and continued in that
mind till the time of the fifth Council; at which time by the general Synod
they were also condemned. Gregory then should have spoken against himself, had
he meant Vigilius, and his coming to Constantinople, in saying that after the
sentence of Vigilius against Theodora, the City was besieged and taken, (as it
was once again indeed taken by Totilas Proc. lib. eode^ 3. an. 15. belli Goth.
pa. 394.
in the 23. year of Justinius:) for his adversaries to whom he writ, being
defenders of the three Chapters, would have replied against him, that this
calamity befell them from the very same cause; seeing both the Eastern Bishops
and the Pope consented in that doctrine of condemning of the three Chapters.
Thus it appears not by surmises and conjectures, but by certain and evident
proof, that the text of Gregory is corrupted, or else that Gregory himself
was mistaken therein, (which in a matter so near his days we may not think)
and so that it was not Vigilius, but Agapetus whom Gregory intended to denounce
that sentence against the Acephali, or Theodora, of which Baronius makes such
boast, and commends with such great ostentation, that thereby he might make the
Empress who was a condemner of the three Chapters, more odious, and strengthen
that fiction and fabulous tale of Anastasius, that Vigilius contended with
Justinian and Theodora about Anthimus.

CAP. XXII. How Baronius declameth against the cause it self of the Three
Chapters, and a refutation thereof.
1. BAronius not content to wrecke his spite upon the Emperor and Empress in
such uncivil manner as you have seen, carpes in the next place at the very
cause it self of the three Chapters. What did Vigilius, says he Bar. an.
547. nu. 48.
, offend, in appointing that men should be silent and say nothing until the
future Synod, of this cause of the three Chapters? which if it could have
been, potius perpetuo erat silentio condemnanda, sopienda, sepelienda, atque
penitus extinguenda; was rather to be condemned to perpetual silence, to be
buried and utterly extinguished. Again an. 553. n. 237
, I do never fear to avouch that it had been much better that the Church had
remained without these controversies (about the three Chapters) nec unquam de
his aliquis habitus esset sermo, and that there had never been one word spoken
of them. Thus Baronius.

2. What think you moved the Cardinal to have such an immortal hatred to
this cause, as to wish the condemning, burial, and utter extinguishing of
those controversies? What more hurt did this to the Church, than the question
abut (...), about (...), or about the opinion of Eutiches? Very great calamity,
says Baronius Jbidem.
, insued upon this controversy, both in the East and West. True, it did so:
and so there did, and far greater and longer about the controversy of (...):
and more again than that, upon the question whether the Gospel or Paganism
should prevail: and yet by moving those controversies was the faith
propagated, the truth of Christ spread abroad, the blood of Martyrs was made the
seed of the Gospel. No affliction, calamity, or persecution, is a just cause
either to wish that there had never been any such controversy, or to forsake
the truth of God, when the controversy is moved. It was an excellent saying of
the Egyptian Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1. pa. 8.
, Christianus neminem timet, a Christian fears no mortal man; si homines
timerentur, martyrs non essent, if men should be feared, there would be no
Martyrs. But the truth is, it was not as Baronius fancieth; the controversy it
self, nor the disputing and debating thereof, that caused so great calamities
in the East and West; that is non causa pro causa; the peevishness and
perverseness of wicked men maintaining heresies, and oppugning the truth, that
was the true cause thereof. The controversy it self, if you well mark it,
was very beneficial to the Church. Oportet haereses 1 Cor. 11.19.
esse, there must be heresies among you, that they which are approved might be
known. Every heresy is a probation and trial of men's love to God, and his
truth, whether they esteem it more than their honors, pleasures, and their
own wilful conceits; and the greater the heresy is, and the further it
spreads, it is still a greater trial. Heretics, says S. Austen Lib. de ver^
relig. ca. 8.
, do much profit the Church, though they be out of the Church, not by teaching
the truth which they do not know, but by stirring up those who are more
carnal Catholics, to seek, and those who are more spiritual, to defend and
manifest the truth. This trial and probation of men (if I mistake not) was
never so great in any controversy or question, as in this of the three
Chapters. First, it sifted and tried Vigilius to the full, and tried him to be
a wether-cocke in faith, an heretic, and a defender of heresies even by his
Apostolical authority. Next, it sifted out diverse notable conclusions: as
first, that which I think was never before that tried; that not only the Pope,
but the Apostolic See also, to wit, the Roman Church, and with it the
Western Churches, all at once adhered to heresy, and forsook the truth, and
that even after it was decreed, and judged by the general approved Council;
and so it proved both Pope and Roman Church to be properly heretical, the
Eastern Churches constantly upholding the truth at that time; it showed that
the Catholic faith was tied neither to the Chair, nor Church of Rome. Another
conclusion then tried, was that either persons, or Churches, may not only
dissent from the Pope and the Roman Church, and that in a cause of faith
judicially defined by the Pope with a Synod, but may renounce communion with
them, and yet remain Catholics, and in the unity of the Catholic Church; the
Pope, the Western Church, and all that adheered unto them being then by
forsaking the Catholic faith, Heretics, and by forsaking the unity of the
Church, Schismatikes.

3. Neither only was this controversy a trial to them in that age, a trial
of their faith, love to God, charity to the Church, obedience to the Emperor,
but it is as great a trial even in these our days, and ever since that
doctrine of the Popes infallibility in causes of faith has been defined and
condemned. By this controversy, most happly decided by the general Council,
all that hold the Popes definitions of faith to be infallible, that is, all
that are Papists, or members of the present Church of Rome, they are all hereby
tried to defend this Apostolical Constitution of Vigilius, that is, to
maintain all the blasphemies of the Nestorians, to deny the Catholic faith,
the doctrine of the Apostles, of the primative Church, of the fifth general
Council; and so to be not only heretics, but convicted, anathematized, and
condemned heretics, by the judgment of a general approved Council, and so
by the consenting judgment of the Catholic Church. Further yet there is a
trial of them, whether upon that ground or foundation of the Popes
infallibility, they will build up and maintain any other doctrine, or position
of faith, or religion; if they do (as indeed every point of the Romish faith
and Religion relyeth upon that) they are again hereby tried to be heretical,
not only in the foundation, but in every position and doctrine of their faith
and religion, which relyes upon that foundation.

4. This was it which netled Baronius, and extorted from him those earnest and
affectionate wishes, that this controversy had never been heard of, nor
mentioned in the world: he saw what a trial was like to be made by it of men,
of doctrines, of Churches, of the Pope himself, and their whole Romish Church;
and seeing that trial, he never ceased to say, that it had been much better
that this controversy had never been moved, nor spoken of, for so they had
avoided this most notable trial. Blessed be God, for that it pleased him in
the infinite depth of his unspeakable wisdom to cause this controversy to be
ventilated, and discussed to the utmost; that among many other trials, this
might be one of the Antichristian Synagogue, to try them even until the very
destruction of Antichrist. It is for heretics whose errors and obstinacy is
tried, and discovered to the world; it is for them, I say, to wish that the
controversies about Arianisme, Nestorianisme, Eutycheanisme, and the like, had
never been moved; they had escaped the just censures and anathemaes by that
means. But Catholics have cause to rejoice and triumph in such controversies,
by which, both the truth which they maintain, is made more resplendent and
victorious, themselves, and their faith tried to be like refined gold, the
Church thereby is quieted, the truth propagated, heresies confounded, and the
glory of Almighty God, much more magnified, and praised.

CAP. XXIII. How Baronius revileth both the Imperial Edict of Justinian, and
Theodorus B. of Caesarea; and a refutation of the same.
1. SEeing now, notwithstanding the wishing of Baronius, this controversy
could not be buried, (it ought him and all ill-willers of it a greater shame
than that) in the next place let us see how he declameth both against the
Emperors Edict, whereby these three Chapters were condemned, and Theodorus
Bish. of Caesarea, who (as he says) was the author and penner of that Edict.
The Edict it self he calls first, Seminarium An. 534. n. 2^
dissentionu^, a seed-plot of sedition, which was never made upon a good
occasion, nor had any good end. And not content herewith, he tells An. 546. nu.
9.
us out of Facundus, that it is contrary to the faith, yea even to that faith
which Justinian himself professed as orthodoxall: to which effect also
Baronius himself says Ibid. nu. 8.
that the Emperors Edict was set forth contrary to the three Chapters of the
most holy Council of Chalcedon. But he specially seeks to disgrace it by the
author of it, for though it was published by Justinian, yet says he Edere
sanctiones sibi arrogat (Justin.) quas dolose conscripsissent haeretici. an.
546. nu. 41. Egerunt callide adversarii veritatis, etc. ibid. nu. 9.
, it was written, and that craftily by heretics and adversaries to the truth;
by the Ingenue professus est, Origenistarum studiis ea fuisse ab Jmperatore
promulgata. ibid. nu. 49.
Origenists, and in particular by Illud a Theodoro conscriptu^ edictum suo
nomine Justin. promulgavit. ibid. nu. 8.
Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea, one gracious an. 538. nu. 85
, potent, and familiar with the Emperor: and for proof of all this the
Cardinal cites Liberatus an. 546. nu. 9. and an. 534. nu. 21. and alibi.
, Facundus, and Vigilius.

2. Having thus declared Theodorus to be the author and writer of the Edict;
Baronius then rages against Theodorus, as if he were to act vetere^ comoediam,
or according to the Proverb, ex plaustro, to rail out of a cart against him,
calling him factious Justin. factiosorum studijs se inseruit. an. 550. nu. 14.
, fraudule^t Hominem vafrum. an. 551. nu. 4. and 564. nu. 7.
, impudent Ejus gratia factus impudens ibid. nu. 3.
, a most wicked Theodorum illum nequissimum quem mirum in modum favisse
ostendimus Origenis haeresibus. an. 564. nu. 6. and occullum haereticum,
manifestum schismaticum. an. 551. nu. 5. Praeceps Origenista. an. eod. nu. 4.
, heretical, schismatic, headstrong Origenist, the ringleader of the
Origenists, one marvellously addicted to the heresy of Origin: nor only a
servant to Origens errors, but also Non Origenis tantum errorum assecla, sed
and Eutychianae blasphemia vehementissimus propugnator. an. 564. nu. 7.
a most earnest defender of the Eutychean blasphemy; nor only so, but plunged
Ita miser (Iustinianus) caecus cacum (Theodorum) sectans, cu^ i^pso pariter
mergitur in profundum. an. 564. nu. 7. agit aute^ de haresi Aphthardochitarum.
in the heresy of the Aphthardokites, or Phantastickes, and like a blind
guide leading the blind Emperor into that ditch of heresy: a sacrilegious
Iuque sacrilegum (Theodorum) pseudoepiscopum, imotyrannum insurgit, in
perversorem legum, eversorem juriu^. an. 551. nu. 5.
person, a pseudobishop, a tyrant, a perverter of laws, an overthrower of
right, the Qui Imperatori omnium illi malorum causa fuit. an. 551. n. 3
author of all mischief to the Empire, the very Hic igitur nefandissimus,
totius Ecclesiae pestis. an. 564. nu. 7.
plague of the whole Church: Thus and much more does Baronius utter against
Theodorus, by whom being so unworthy an author, he would disgrace the Edict it
self, which he writ, though the Emperor published it.

3. Let us first begin with that most untrue and malicious calumny of Baronius,
that the Emperor published his Edict against the three Chapters of the Council
of Chalcedon. Truly the Cardinal should and might most truly have said the
quite contrary, that he published his Edict for defense not only of the three,
but of every Chapter, of every position, of every decree of the Council of
Chalcedon. The three Chapters which that Imperial Edict, and after it the fifth
Council, and the whole Catholic Church condemns, were not Chapters of the
Council of Chalcedon, but three impious positions, assertions, or (as they
were by an equivalent word called) Chapters, which heretics, specially the
Nestorians, collected, and falsely boasted to be taught by the Council of
Chalcedon; whereas in very truth the holding of any one of them (much more of
them all) is the overthrow of the whole Council at Chalcedon, yea of the whole
Catholic faith: that Council contradicts and condemns them all, no less
than the fifth Council, which as Gregory truly says, is in omnibus sequax, it
does in every point follow and consent unto the Council of Chalcedon. The like
may be said of that which out of Facundus, Baronius observes, and cites as a
proof of his saying, that the Emperors Edict is repugnant and contrary to the
orthodoxall faith. Baronius will still keep his old wont in applauding
Vigilius and the defenders of the Three Chapters. For if the Edict condemning
them be contrary, then is the defense of them consonant to the faith, and then
not the Imperial Edict of Justinian, but the Pontifical Constitution of
Vigilius must be approved as orthodoxall. And what is this else, but to
condemn the judgment of the fifth general Council, of Pope Pelagius,
Gregory, and all Popes after them, of all general Counsels following it; in a
word, to contradict, and utterly condemn the consenting judgment of the whole
Church, for the space of 11. hundred years? they all approve the determination
of the fifth Council, and it so fully consents with the Edict in condemning
the Three Chapters, that in their definitive sentence they differ very little
in words, but in substance and sense nothing at all from the Emperors Edict,
which caused Binius to say, the Edict of the Emperor was approved by the Pope
and the Council: So Catholic and orthodoxall is it, so advisedly and
orthodoxally penned. To seek no further proof, Baronius himself was so
infatuated in this cause, that he oftentimes confuteth his own sayings: for
himself gives a most ample and most observable testimony of this Edict, and of
the orthodoxy thereof, saying an. 534. nu. 21.
of it, Est veluti Catechismus, and fidei Catholicae exacta declaratio; this
Edict of Justinian is as it were a Catechism, or an exact declaration of the
Catholic faith, and an exact discussing of the Three Chapters, which were
afterward long controversed in the Church. So untrue is that his first
calumny against the Edict, whereby he would persuade, that it is contrary to
certain Chapters of the holy Council of Chalcedon, or as Facundus plainly,
but most untruely affirms, contrary to the Catholic faith.

4. For the second calumny, that his Edict was a seminary of sedition,
Baronius might as justly condemn the decree of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon,
yea, the very Scripture it self, and preaching of the Gospel; Christ himself
is set as signum Luke 2.34.
contradictionis, as a butt of contradiction, against which they will ever be
striving, and shooting their arrows of opposition, sedition, and contention:
himself Luke 12.49, 51
says, I am come to set fire on the earth, and what would I but that it should
be kindled: and again, Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on the earth,
I tell you nay, but rather division; and no sooner was the Gospel preached
abroad in the world, but that which our Savior foretold them Mat. 10.21.
, came to pass; Brother shall deliver up brother, the father the Child; the
Children shall rise against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death;
and ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: what a seminary of sedition
may the Cardinal call the Gospel, that caused all these troubles, wars,
seditions, murders; and burnings in the whole world? what another Seminary was
the Nicene decree against Arianisme, and Constantines Edict to ratify the
same? after that, how seditiously was Athanasius and the Catholics persecuted,
put to flight, to torments, by Constantius and the Arians? how seditiously did
the Councels of Ariminum, and Syrmium oppugn and fight against that Nicene
Decree, till they had so far prevailed, that well-neare there had needed no
longer contending, the whole world almost being turned Arians, and even
groaning under Arianisme? If the Cardinal, by reason of those manifold
troubles and oppositions, which ensued upon this Edict, will condemn it for
being a Seminary of sedition; let him first condemn the Nicene Decree, and
Imperial Edict for it, let him condemn the Gospel, and Christ himself,
which were all such Seminaries as that Edict was. If notwithstanding all the
oppositions, seditions, and co^tentions raised by heathen, heretical, and other
wicked men, against these, they were (as most certainly they were) Seminaries
of truth; let the Card. know and acknowledge his malicious slander against this
most religious and orthodoxall Edict of Justinian, which was, as all the
former, a sacred Sanctuary for the Catholic faith. Seditions, oppositions,
tumults, persecutions, and the like disturbances in the Church, spring not from
Christ, nor from his Word and Gospel, either preached by Bishops, or decreed by
Councels, or confirmed by Imperial Edicts, all these are of themselves causes
only of unity, concord, peace, and agreement in the Church; these only are
the proper, native, and natural fruits, and effects that proceed from them;
but contentions and seditions come from the perverse, froward, wicked, and
malicious minds of men, that hate the truth, and in hatred of it fight against
all that uphold the truth, be it by preaching, by decreeing, or by enacting
the truth, these are as Wolves, which by continual tumbling in the mire
disturb and trouble the stream: The fountains whence the truth springs are
most pure and most peaceable.

5. Now whereas in the third place Baronius seeks to disgrace the Edict, by
the Author of it, whom he describes to have been not only an heretic, but a
most detestable person, even the plague of the whole Church, let us suppose and
admit the Author to have been such a man indeed, nay, to have been Judas
himself, (and worse than Judas he could hardly be, seeing CHRIST himself
called John 6. v. 71.
Judas a Devil,) Is the Edict, or the truth of God thereby published, worse,
because Judas uttered or penned it? was the Arc to be refused or contemned,
because wicked men framed and built it? Did not Christ say Luke 10.16.
of Judas, (a Devil) as well as of Peter a Saint, He that hears you hears
me, he that despises you despises me? Has Baronius forgotten the lesson of
Saint James Iam. 2 v. 1.
, My brethren, have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect
of persons; love it for it self, but neither love it nor refuse it because of
him that speaks, penneth, or brings the same? Did the Cardinal never hear
of the Scribes and Pharisees, they sit Mat. 23. v. 2.3
in Moses chair, (that is, deliver Gods truth out of Moses and the Prophets
unto you) whatsoever therefore they bid you, that observe, do, but after their
works do not? Or if this reason of the Cardinal may take effect, themselves,
and their Roman Church will be far the greatest loosers; how easy will it
be to reject and contemn an whole Volume of their Pontifical Edicts? why,
this was made or written by John 12. that by Hildebrand, or Boniface 8. the
other by John 23. an heretic, an Atheist, a Devil incarnate, as a general
Council Johannes 23. inter Christi fideles ^itas ac mores ejus cognoscentes,
vulgariter dicitur Diabolus incarnatus. Conc. Constant. sess. 11. pa. 1579.
testifies; another by Formosus, Steven, or by one of those whom themselves
profess to have been thieves, robbers, Wolves, Tigers, and most savage
beasts, and Apostaticall Popes, as Genebrard Per annos fere 150. Pontifices
fere 50. a virtute majorum prorsus defecerunt, Apotactici, Apostaticive, potius
quam Apostolici, etc. Genesis lib. 4. Chronol. ad an. 904.
calls threescore of them, all worse than the Author of this Imperial Edict,
though we should admit him to have been such, or as bad every way as Baronius
describes him.

6. But the truth is, the Author of the Edict was no such man as the Cardinal
fancieth: as it bears the name, so it was indeed the work of Justinian, no
child can have more honor by his father, than it by such an Emperor: and
though Baronius having so often slandered Justinian, to be utterly rude,
unlearned, one that could not so much as read, nor knew his Alphabet or first
elements, could not but in good congruity confidently deny Justinian to be the
Writer, or Author of so learned and divine an Edict, or as himself calls it, of
so exact a Catechism; yet considering what before was declared, both out of
Procopius of the Emperors often tossing of books among the Bishops, out of
Liberatus of his great pains taken in writing against heretics, and for
defense of the Council of Chalcedon, and out of Platina calling Justinian a
very learned Emperor: I cannot think but that although Justinian might use
the advice, help, and industry of Mennas, Theodorus, or some other Bishops in
this as in other Edicts, concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, yet still the
ultima manus, the last correction and perfecting of all, was the Emperors own
doing, the rather because both in his other Edicts, that against Anthimus,
against Origin, as also in his letters to this Synod, and the rest, there is so
uniforme a style, so Imperial, and so divine a kind of writing, that the same
Genius of Justinian seems to breathe in them all.

7. But Baronius An. 546. nu. 8 9.
tells us, that both Liberatus, Facundus, and Vigilius do testify Theodorus
Bishop of Cesarea to be the Author of this Edict. Baronius is ever like
himself, that is, untrue, and fraudulent: Not one of these say it: first, not
Liberatus, he indeed affirms Jn suo Brevi. ar. ca. 24.
Theodorus and some others to have suggested this unto the Emperor, that he
would condemn those Three Chapters, by a public Edict or book; but he adds
withal, Rogaverunt eum ut dictaret Libellum; they prayed the Emperor that he
would dictate or indite the book against the Three Chapters; and the Emperor
consented, says Liberatus Annuit eis Princeps Jbid.
, unto them, and hoc se laetus implere promisit, and he gladly promised to do
so; that is, to indite or dictate such an Edict. So far is Liberatus from
affirming, as Baronius alleges him, Theodorus to be the Author of this book
or Edict, that he teaches the quite contrary. As for Facundus he Ea quae
scribi fecerunt, titulo nominis tui prae. notarunt, verum nos illa scripta
nolumus tua dici. Fac. apud Bar. an. 546. nu. 9.
says indeed, the Edict was not written by Justinian, but by the adversaries
of the truth: but that Theodorus writ it, that is the Cardinals addition,
Facundus says it not: and even in that which he says, that the Edict is
contrary to the Emperors faith, Facundus does so manifestly slander, both the
Emperor, (as if he thought the Three Chapters were not to be condemned,) and
the Edict also, as if the condemning of these Three Chapters were contrary to
the Catholic faith) that there is no credit at all to be given to him in his
report touching the Author, who is so untrue in his reports, both touching the
matter of the Edict, and touching the known profession, and faith of the
Emperor.

8. The Cardinals Vigilius now remains, whose words Inter Epist. Vigilij,
Epist. 17. tom. 2. Conc. pa. 503. b.
are these spoken to Theodorus; The book condemning the Three Chapters, by
their means was read in the Kings Palace, before certain Greek Bishops, a
quibus assentationum favorem tuis vocibus exigebas: What if one should here
oppose the Cardinal, and say, tuis vocibus, were the Ablative case, and that
Theodorus had by his words solicited, the other Bishops favorably to consent
to the Emperors Edict? How will Baronius assure us, that they must be taken in
the Dative case; as if Theodorus had solicited them to consent to his words,
that is, as the Cardinal supposes, to the Edict which was penned, and written
by him, or whereof he was the Author? Sure against this Baronian construction,
the words of Liberatus are very pregnant, seeing Theodorus, as he shows, was
one who entreated the Emperor to indite or dictate the book, and the Emperor
promised so to do. If then Theodorus solicited the Bishops to consent to the
words of the Edict, he certainly urged them (by this testimony of Liberatus)
to consent not to his own, but to the Emperors words, of whose inditing and
dictating the Edict was. Admit them to be the Dative, how knows the
Cardinal, that by [tuis vocibus] are meant the words of the Edict? might not
Theodorus signify to the Bishops his own great liking of the Emperors Edict,
and persuade them to the like, to say as he said, to consent to his words in
approving the Imperial Edict? The Card. was too secure and negligent in
relying on these words [tuis vocibus] which being so ambiguous, receive diverse,
and those also just exceptions: But yet there is a far worse fault in this
proof; that the Epistle, whence the Cardinal cites these words, though it
bear the name of Vigilius, yet is intruth not the Epistle of Vigilius, but a
very counterfeit and base forgery under his name, full of untruths, unworthy of
any credit at all; which, besides other proofs, (hereafter to be alleged)
faineth Mennas to be Bishop of Constantinople, and to be excommunicated,
together with Theodorus, by Vigilius four or five years after he was dead,
which censure was to stand in force till Mennas repented of his contumacie
against the Popes Decree, and should be reconciled to him. This lying and base
forgery does Baronius bring to prove Theodorus, and not Justinian to be the
author of this Imperial Edict. Might not one say here as was said of the Ass,
Like lips, like lettuce? Such a writing is a most fit witness for Baronius,
who delights in untruths, and not finding true records, to give testimony to
them, it was fit he should applaud the most vile and abject forgeries, if they
seem to speak ought pleasing to the Cardinals palate, or which may serve to
support his untruths.

9. You see that yet it appears not that Theodorus was the writer or penner of
this Decree, none of Baronius his witnesses affirming it, and Liberatus, who is
the best of them all, affirming the contrary. I might now with this answer put
off a great part of those reviling speeches which Baronius so prodigally
bestows on Theodorus: But I mind not so to leave the Cardinal, nor suffer
the proud Philistine so insolently to revile and insult over any one of the
Israelites; much less this worthy Bishop of Cesarea, to whom he could not
have done a greater honor, than in that which he intended as an exceeding
disgrace to him, to call and account him the Author and Writer of this Edict.
It is no small honor, that Justinian, so wise and religious an Emperor,
should commit the care of so weighty a matter to Theodorus; that he should
have him in so high esteem, as account his word an Oracle, to be guided and
directed by his judgment; so to adhere unto him, as Constantine did to that
renowned Hosius, as to think it a piaculum, or great offense not to follow his
advice in matters of so great weight, consequence, and importance. Nay, this
one Edict, (supposing with the Cardinal Theodorus to be the Author of it)
shall not only plead for Theodorus, but utterly wipe away all those vile
slanders of heresy, impiety, imprudency, and the like, so often, and so
odiously objected, and exaggerated by the Cardinal against him; this writing
and the words thereof being (as whosoever reads them will easily conceive,
and if he deal ingenuously, confess) the words of truth, of faith, of
sobriety, of profound knowledge, evidences of a mind full fraught with faith,
with piety, with the love of God, and Gods Church, and in a word full of the
holy Ghost. As Sophocles Cic. de Senect.
, being accused to doat, recited his Oedipus Coloneus, and demanding whether
that did seem the Poem of a doting man, was by the sentence of all the
Judges acquitted: So none can read this Edict, but forthwith acknowledge it a
mere calumny in Baronius to call the maker of it an heretic, whose profession
of faith is so pious, divine, and Catholic. Or rather Theodorus may answer
that Baronian slander with the like words, as did S. Paul Act. 24.12.13
, They neither found me making an uproare among the people, nor in the
Synagogues, nor in the City, neither can they prove these things whereof they
now accuse me; but this I confess, that after this way, (declared in this
Edict) which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers.

10. Now as this may serve for a general Antidote at once, as it were, to
expel all the whole poison of those Baronian calumnies; so, if we shall
descend to particulars, the innocence of Theodorus, as also the malice and
malignity of Baronius will much more clearly appear. The crimes objected to
Theodorus by Baronius are reduced to three heads; one, his threefold heresy;
another, his opposing himself to Pope Vigilius, or the Decree of Taciturnity,
in the cause of the Three Chapters; the third, his misleading of Justinian into
the heresy of the Aphthardokites, and so causing that great persecution of the
Church which thereupon ensued; all the other disgraceful terms are but the
superfluity of that malice which the Cardinal bears against all that were
opposite to Vigilius, and his Apostolical Constitution. To begin then with
that which is easiest, the two last crimes are not so easily uttered as
refuted, they both are nothing else but mere slanders and calumnies, without
any certain ground, or probability of truth, devised either by Baronius
himself, or by such as he is, enemies and haters of the truth; and truly for
the later, his misleading Justinian into the heresy of the Apthardokites, that
is not only a manifest untruth, (for Justinian, as we have before Ca. 20.
proved, did not only at all hold that heresy) but it is wholly forged and
devised by Baronius, he has not any one Author, no not so much as a forged
writing to testify this, no nor any probable collection out of any Author to
induce him to lay this imputation upon Theodorus; the world is wholly and soly
beholden to the Cardinal for this shameless calumny; and yet see the wisdom
of Baronius herein, he was not content barely and in a word to tax and
reprove Theodorus, (which had been more than sufficient, having no proof nor
evidence of the crime) but in this passage, as if he had demonstratively
proved Theodorus to be guilty hereof, he rages and foameth like a wild Bore
against him, calling him a most wicked man, and most vehement propugner of
blasphemy, the plague of the whole Church, who with a visor affrayed the
Emperor like a little Boy from the truth, and led him captive into heres^e.
Do you not think that the Cardinal needed to be sent to Anticyra, when he
writ this not only without truth, but without brain and ordinary sense?

11. The other crime, that Theodorus opposed himself to Vigilius, and to the
decree of silence, is like the former, save that this difference is to be
observed betwixt them, that the former was forged by Baronius, but this later
is grounded on a foolish and forged writing applauded by Baronius, fictions and
forgeries they are both, but the one was fained to the Cardinals hand, for the
other he was feign to beat it out of his own anvill. There was neither any
such decree for taciturnity, neither did Theodorus, nor needed he to oppose
himself to Vigilius, for Vigilius, as well as Theodorus, all the whole time
almost from his coming to Constantinople till the fifth Council was assembled,
wholly consented to condemn the Three Chapters, as, besides other evident
proofs before alleged, to which I remit the reader, that one testimony of the
Emperor does undeniably demonstrate; Quod Epist. Justin. ad Conc. 5. Act. 1
pa. 520. a.
vero ejusdem voluntatis semper fuit de condemnatione Trium Capitulorum per
plurima declaravit; Vigilius has by very many things declared, that he has
been always (since his coming to Constantinople) of the same mind in
condemning the Three Chapters; what think you here again of Baronius, who
upon this occasion of contradicting Vigilius, and his decree of silence,
reviles Theodorus, calling Locis supra citatis.
him sacrilegious, a Pseudo-Bishop, a tyrant, a schismatike, a perverter of
laws, the author of all evils; and yet when the Cardinal has said all this,
there is no truth nor reality in the cause and occasion for which he thus
rages and revileth; no opposition to Vigilius, no decree of silence either
oppugned, or such as might be oppugned, it was a non ens, a chymera floating
in the Cardinals idle fancy. Was there no Helleborus at Rome or in Italy to
purge the Cardinals brain of this extreme distemper?

12. The whole hope consists now in the Cardinals Triarij, the three heresies
objected to Theodorus, that of Origin, of Eutyches, and of the Aphthardokites.
And for the two last I must say the same almost as to the former calumnies,
they are mere fictions of Baronius: Theodorus was (says he Iustinianus
obligatus fuit in eo errore (Apthardochitarum) ab eis, qui ei assistebant,
haeresis ejus defensoribus. At quinam illi? Horum Antesignanus fuit Theodorus
ille nequis simus, etc. erat is Eu^ycheanae blasphemiae propugnator. Bar. an.
564. nu. 6. and 7.
) an Aphthardokite, and an Eutychean heretic: what Author, what witness or
testimony does the Cardinal produce to prove so heinous a crime against him?
truly not one, himself accusator simul and testis, is both the accuser and the
witness. But yet he proves it by some good consequence or reason? no nor that
neither, his proof is no less foolish than his position is false. Justinian,
says Ibid.
he, was misled into the heresy of the Aphthardokites by some Origenists, as
Eustathius declares; whereupon we may easily, and without calumny affirm,
that the ringleader of those who misled the Emperor was Theodorus Bish. of
Caesarea, an Origenist: The ground of which, (to omit that this Eustathius is of
no credit) being the heresy of Justinian, seeing that to be a calumny and
slander we have before Sup. ca. 20.
confirmed, this whole collection must needs be like the foundation on which it
relyeth, slanderous, and false, to say nothing how alogicall and incoherent a
consequent this is from particulars. Some Origenists misled Justinian,
therefore Theodorus; how much rather on the contrary may we certainly
conclude, that seeing Justinian, who was directed in causes of faith by
Theodorus, continued orthodoxall, and a most worthy defender of the true faith,
as before we proved, therefore doubtless Theodorus himself, the director of
the Emperor, was, and remained orthodoxall, and that of a certain he was no
Eutychean nor Aphthardokite, is evident by his subscribing Coll. 8.
to the decree of the fifth Council, wherein not only the Council, and decree
of Chalcedon condemning Eutyches, and in it the heresy of the Aphthardokites,
is strongly confirmed, but Eutyches also by name, and all that hold his
heresies, are anathematized, by all the Bishops of that fifth Council, and
particularly by this Theodorus, whom the Cardinal, without any testimony or
proof at all, slanders to have been an Eutychean and Apthardokite, unto both
which heresies he was most opposite: All which will be more manifest by
considering the first of those three heresies, wherein Baronius has the
greatest color for his saying. That Theodorus was an Origenist, and a most
earnest maintainer of that heresy, the Cardinal often, and most confidently
affirms; wherein he has Liberatus An. 538. nu. 29
the Deacon, and Bishop Facundus An. 546. 8, 9. and 49.
for his Authors.

13. First for Facundus, he does not expressly mention Theodorus as an
Origenist, but yet because Baronius cites him to say, that Theodorus writ the
Edict, and Facundus calls the writers of that Edict, Origenists, let him be
admitted for one of the Cardinals witnesses. Who I pray you, or of what credit
think you is this Bishop Facundus? Truly an enemy to Justinian, an enemy to
Theodorus of Caesarea, and to all that condemned the Three Chapters, a very
heretic, and enemy to the Catholic truth. Witness hereof that testimony
which their own Possevine Poss. Appar. in verbo Facundus, et verbo Secundus.
gives of him out of Isidorus. He writ twelve books in defense of the three
Chapters, whereby he proves the condemning of those three Chapters to be the
condemning or banishing of the Apostolic faith, and the Council of Chalcedon.
Now the defenders of the three Chapters, and writers in defense of them to be
condemned, anathematized, and accursed for heretics by the fifth Council, and
after it the 6. 7. and in a word, by all, both general Councels, and Popes
that follow Gregory, we have often before declared: So that by the consenting
judgment of all those general approved Councels, and Popes, Facundus being an
earnest defender of them, and writer in their defense, is anathematized, and
condemned for an heretic. And that he continued pertinaciously in this
heresy, after the sentence and judgment of the general Council, Baronius
does witness, who An. 553. nu. 221.
tells us, and that with a Constat, It is certain and manifest, that Facundus
was sought for to be punished, because he had written most eloquently in
defense of the three Chapters, but by lurking in some secret place he escaped.
Possevine In Facundo.
further adds, that Facundus writ a book against Mutianus in defense of
Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and that Theodorus of Mopsvestia, damnatus fuit ab
Ecclesia Catholica ob errores contra fidem, was condemned by the Catholic
Church, for his heresy or errors against the faith. Must not he needs be an
heretic, that defends a condemned heretic? yea defends those very writings
and errors of him and Ibas, which are condemned for heretical? I confess,
says Facundus Fac. apud Bar. an. 547. nu. 38.
, to your Holiness, that I withdraw my self from the communion of the
opposites, (those were the condemners of the three Chapters, that is, to say in
truth, Catholics) not because they condemn Theodorus of Mopsvestia, but for
that in the person of this Theodorus they condemn the Epistle of Ibas as
heretical, and by that Epistle condemn the Council of Chalcedon, a qua
suscepta est, by which that Epistle is approved. Thus Facundus, so very
heretically, that Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, nor any condemned heretic
could wish or say more than Facundus has done both for their heresies, and
against the Council of Chalcedon. For the impious Epistle of Ibas is wholly
heretical, the approving of it is the overthrow of the whole Catholic faith:
and yet Facundus not only himself defends that impious Epistle as
orthodoxall, and by it defends the person and writing of Theodorus of
Mopsvestia a condemned heretic; but avoucheth the Council of Chalcedon to
approve the same, which condemns it and every part of it even to the lowest
pit of hell.

14. Here by the way I must in a word put the reader in mind of one or two
points which concern Possevine and Baronius in this passage. If Facundus be a
condemned heretic for writing in defense of the three Chapters, what else can
Possevine be who praised those books of a condemned heretic? for thus he
writes Loco citato.
, Facundus writ opus grande atque elegans, a great and elegant work,
containing twelve books, fortified by the authorities of the Fathers in defense
of the three Chapters. Heretic! Is that a brave and elegant book that
defends heresy? can heresy be fortified by the testimonies of the holy
Fathers? What is this else but to make the holy Fathers heretics? So
heretical and spiteful is Possevine, that together with himself he would
draw the ancient and holy Fathers into one and the same crime of heresy. The
other point concerns Baronius: he says An. 547. nu. 30
that the controversy or contention about the three Chapters, was inter
Catholicos tantum, only among such as were Catholics: does not he plainly
thereby signify his opinion of Facundus, that he was a Catholic? for Facundus
was as hot, and earnest a contender in that controversy as Vigilius himself;
he writ in defense of the three Chapters twelve whole books, elegant and brave
books, as Possevine says: he bitterly inveighed against the Emperor, against
all the condemners of them, against Pope Vigilius himself, when he after his
coming to Constantinople consented to the Emperor. Seeing this Facundus (a
convicted and condemned hehetike) is one of the Cardinals Catholics, must not
heresy and Nestorianisme be with him Catholic doctrine? must not the impious
Epistle be orthodoxall, and the overthrow of the faith and decree of the
Council at Chalcedon be an Article of Baronius faith? even that which he
accounted the Catholic faith? But this by the way. We see now what manner of
Bishop Facundus was, an obstinate heretic, pertinaciously persisting in
heresy. What though Facundus call Theodorus of Caesarea an Origenist? Did not
the old Nestorians call Cyrill, and other Catholics, Apollinarians? of whom it
seems the defenders of the three Chapters learned to calumniate the Catholics
with the names of heretics and Origenists, when they were in truth wholly
opposite to those and other heresies. Can any expect a true testimony
concerning Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea, from Facundus, concerning Catholics,
from heretics, their immortal and malicious enemies, nor theirs only, but
enemies to the truth? Such, and of such small worth is the former witness of
Baronius in this cause, and against Theodorus.

15. His other witness is Liberatus the Deacon, who indeed says as In Brev.
ca. 24
plainly as Baronius that Theodorus was an Origenist; and refers the occasion
of that whole controversy touching the three Chapters to the malice of the
same Theodorus. For as Liberatus says, Pelagius the Popes Legate when he was
at Constantinople, entreated of the Emperor that Origin, and his heresies
wherewith the Eastern Churches, specially about Jerusalem, were exceedingly
troubled, might be condemned; whereunto the Emperor willingly assenting,
published an Imperial Edict both against him and his errors: when Theodorus
being an Origenist perceived that Origin who was long before dead was now
condemned, he to be quit with Pelagius for procuring the condemnation of
Origin, moved the Emperor also to condemn Theodorus Bishop of Mopsvestia, who
had written much against Origin, whose writings were detested of all the
Origenists: the Emperor at Theodorus his suggestion made another Edict,
wherein he condemned Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and the two other Chapters
touching the writings of Theodoret and Ibas, which bred so long trouble in the
Church. Thus Liberatus. Who as you see speaks as much, and as eagerly against
Theodorus, as Baronius could wish, and Liberatus lived and writ about that same
time.

16. Liberatus in many things is to be allowed, in those especially wherein by
partiality his judgment was not corrupt. But in this cause of the Three
Chapters, in the occasion and circumstances thereof, he is a most unfit
witness, himself was deeply interressed in this cause, partiality blinded
him, his style was sharp against the adverse part, but dull in taxing any,
though never so great a crime, in men of his own faction. Of him Binius Jn
notis suis in Brev. Liber. to 2. Conc. pa. 626.
gives this true censure, he was one of their rank who defended the Three
Chapters, who also writ an Apology for Theodorus of Mopsvestia: again,
Baronius and Bellarmine have noted Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5. Ca^sa Bell. et
Baronius in Liber^ti breviario, haec caute legenda admonueriit. Binius loco
citato.
, that diverse things are caute legenda in Liberatus; of him Possevine In Appar.
in verbo Liberatus.
writes, There are many things in Liberatus which are to be read with
circumspection, those especially which he borrowed of some Nestorians, and
those are his narrations touching Theodorus of Mopsvestia, that his writings
were praised both by the Emperor Theodosius his Edict, and by Cyrill, and
approved also in the Council of Chalcedon; all which to be lies Baronius does
convince. Again Ibid.
, what Liberatus says of the fifth Council is very warily to be read, for
either they were not his own, or he was deceived by the false relation of some
other, but certainly they do not agree with the writings of other Catholic
fathers. Thus Possevine out of Baronius; who might as well in plain terms
have called Liberatus a Nestorian heretic, for none but Nestorians, and such
as slander the Council of Chalcedon for heretical, can judge the writings of
Theodorus, which are full of all heresies, blasphemies, and impieties, to be
approved in that holy Council. Again, Possevine rejecting that which Liberatus
writes of the fifth Council, gives a most just exception against all that he
writes either touching Theodorus of Cesarea, as being an Origenist, or of the
occasion of this controversy about the 3. Chapters, as if it did arise from
the co^demning of Origin, in all this Liberatus by the Jesuits confession was
deceived by the false relation of others, they agree not to the truth, nor to
the narrations of Catholic fathers. Liberatus being an earnest favourer and
defender of Theodorus Mopsvestenus, could not choose but hate Theodorus of
Cesarea, for seeking to have him and his writings condemned: The saying of
Jerome Apol. 1. contra Ruffin. ad Pammach. et Marcel. pa. 204.
ought here to take place, Professae inimicitiae suspitionem habent mendacij;
the report of a professed enemy ought to be suspected as a lie. The true cause
why Liberatus is so violent against Theodorus of Cesarea, was not for that
Theodorus was an Origenist, (as Liberatus, and out of him Baronius slandereth
him) but because this Theodorus condemned the writings of Theodorus of
Mopsvestia whom Liberatus defended, and the two other Chapters. Neither was the
condemning of Origin the occasion of condemning the three Chapters, as
Liberatus untruly reports, but as both Justinian and the whole Council
witness; the true occasion thereof were the Nestorian heretics, who
pretending and boasting the three Chapters to be allowed in the Council of
Chalcedon, both the Catholics, in defense of the Council, justly denied the
same, and the Emperor first, then the Council to confirm the faith,
condemned the three Chapters, which were the overthrow of the faith, as before
Ca. 1 supra.
we have proved.

17. This were enough to oppose to all that Facundus and Liberatus say, two
defenders of the three Chapters, and so professed enemies both to the Catholic
truth defined in the fifth Council, and to Theodorus of Cesarea, who first of
all suggested the condemning of them to the Emperor Justinian: But now,
besides this just exception against the Cardinals witnesses I will add two
clear and authentike proofs to demonstrate both Liberatus, and after him
Baronius unjustly and falsely to slander Theodorus of Cesarea for an Origenist.
The former is his own subscription to the fifth Council. In that Council,
among other heretics, Origin is not only expressly and by name condemned, and
that in their definitive sentence; but an Anathema also denounced against all
who do not condemn and anathematize him: these are the words of the Council,
Coll. 8. pa. 587 a. b.
If any do not anathematize Arius, Emonius, Macedonius, Apollinarius,
Nestorius, Eutyches, Origin, with their impious writings, talis anathema sit,
such an one let him be accursed. To this Synodall decree did all the 165.
Bishops in the Council consent and subscribe; the eighth man was this
Theodorus of Cesarea, who subscribed Coll. eadem pa. 588. b.
in this manner, I Theodorus, decrevi quae proposita sunt, have decreed these
things which are proposed, and I confess that the truth is as all those
Chapters and doctrines above named (of which this against Origin is the
eleaventh) do contain: when Theodorus himself confesses Origin and his
writings to be condemned, accurseth them, yea, and all who do not accurse
them, is it not a vile and unexcusable calumny in Liberatus and in Baronius, to
revile him as a patron of Origin?

18. Perhaps you will say he was in former time an Origenist, but at the time
of the fifth Council he was become a new man. Though this were admitted, yet
cannot Baronius be excused, for calling him after that fifth Council an
heretic, an Origenist: But he was still the same man, both now and before
orthodoxall, as by the other evidence, taken from the Emperors Edict in
condemning Origin, will appear, when the defenders of Origin, both for their
number, and insolency, grew very troublesome in the East, specially about
Jerusalem. Pelagius and Mennas, as Liberatus Loco citato.
says; at the instigation of some religious Monks, entreated the Emperor that
Origin and his heresies might be condemned: the Emperor thereupon published a
very large and religious Edict against Origin, which he directed to Mennas, and
the copy thereof he sent also to Vigilius, and to other Patriarks; after many
other things the Emp. thus writes Edictum Justin. contra Origenem. extat to.
2. Con. pa. 482.
, We, desiring to put away all offense from the holy Church, and to leave it
without blemish, following the divine Scriptures, and holy fathers, who have
cast out and justly anathematized Origin and his impious doctrine, have sent
this our Epistle unto you, wherein we exhort you, that you call an assembly or
Synod of all the holy Bishops and Abbots who are now in Constantinople, and
that you see that all of them do in writing anathematize Origin, and his
wicked doctrines, and all the Chapters out of him underwritten; and further
that you send the Copy of what you have done in this cause (to all other
Bishops and Abbots within your Patriarkship) that they also may all do the
like. Besides this, the Emperor yet commands, that none be ordained Bishop or
chosen into any Monastery, unless forthwith in a book they accurse and
anathematize, as Arius, Sabellus, Nestorius, Eutyches, and the rest, so also
Origin and his impious doctrines. Thus writ the Emperor, and what in this
manner he commanded Mennas to do in his Patriarkship, the like was Vigilius
to do in the Roman, Zoilus in the Alexandrian, Euphrenius in the Antiochian.
That, according as the Emperor commanded, this was done, Liberatus Dictata est
in Originem damnatio, quam subscribentes, etc. Liber. ca. 23.
is witness; so that by all the Bishops in the world that then were, and by
such as were after this to be ordained, Origin with his impious doctrines was
to be condemned and accursed. Particularly of the Synod or Bishops at
Constantinople Baronius An. 538. nu. 83
confesses, The Emperor admonished Mennas to assemble a Synod, by which all
these things which he had written against Origin might be confirmed, quod and
factum fuit, which was accordingly done; and, as Cedrenus Ced. in compend.
Annal.
says, their sentence was this, We condemn all these errors of Origin, and
omnes qui ita sentiunt, and sentient, and all who do either now or her after
shall think as he does, condemning themselves with an anathema, if either then
they did think so, or ever hereafter should think the like. That Theodorus,
though he had remained at Cesarea subscribed to this sentence, I think none
can doubt, the Emperors command being so strict to all Patriarks: But indeed
it seems that Theodorus was not only at Constantinople at this time, and
there subscribed, but that he was one of the chief agents with the Emperor
to publish this Edict; for of him Evagrius Lib. 4. ca. 37.
witnesses, that, cum Iustiniano assidue versabatur, he was continually
conversant with the Emperor, he was faithful, and especially necessary unto
him, of him Liberatus Ca. 24.
says, that he was, dilectus and familiaris Principum, dear and familiar
both with the Emperor and Empress; of him An. 451. nu. ^
Baronius testifies that he was praepotens armiger Iustiniani, the Champion of
Justinian, for so says he, I may well call him that was used to sit at the
Emperors Elbow, yea, of whom An. 564. nu. 7.
the Emperor had conceived so great an opinion, that he thought it the chief
point of his duty or piety, ejus semper inhaerere Vestigijs, always to tread
in the footsteps of Theodorus. Thus Baronius. Seeing Theodorus was so near
unto, so potent with the Emperor, so highly esteemed by him, that he always
trod in his steps, how could Theodorus be a patron of Origin, when the
Emperor himself accursed, and commanded all others to accurse him? Did not
Theodorus tread out this path of an anathema unto the Emperor? or had he been
an Origenist, how could the Emperor, following him step by step, be an enemy
to Origin? Or to omit many other like consequences, seeing the Synod of
Constantinople, (as, besides Baronius, Liberatus witnesses) that is, all the
Bishops there present (among whom Theodorus being near and dear unto the
Emperor, and so continually conversant with him, was doubtless one, and one
of the chief) condemned Origin, it is not to be doubted but that he was one
of the first and chief Bishops that subscribed in that Synod to the
condemnation of him. Now this was done in the 12. Hoc tempore ( 12. is annus
Justin.) Constantinopoli magnum agitatum est de Origene judicium. Bar. an. 538.
nu. 31. et Conc. 5. habitum an. 27. Justin.
year of Justinian, that is, full fourteen years before the fifth Council,
so ancient, so constant was the detestation of Theodorus toward Origin.

19. Will any now judge otherwise of Baronius than a malicious slanderer? who
raileth against Theodorus as the most earnest Patron of Origin, whom his own
public and constant profession and subscription testifies to have accursed
Origin with all his heresies; yea, to have accursed all that do either defend
him, or think as Origin did, though outwardly and openly he do not defend him,
for that was one Article, Edict. Just. co^tra Originem in fine.
to which Theodorus, and the whole Synod under Mennas subscribed; a curse be to
Origin with all his execrable doctrine, a curse be to every one who thinks
the same which he did, or who at any time does presume to defend the same.

20. What are the partial, uncertain, and malicious reports of Facundus, of
Liberatus, or of the Surian Cyrill (to add him also among them) to these
undoubted and authentike records of Councels? when we read and see the
evident subscription of Theodorus proclaming him to condemn and accurse
Origin, what vanity, malice and hatred of truth is this in the Cardinal, to
allege two, or if you please, three partial testimonies against that evidence
which condemns them, and all that they can say? So unfortunate is the
Cardinal in all that he undertakes in this cause, that he does not only
speak praeter, but contra, directly contrary to the truth, whereof, as in
other passages, so in this touching Theodorus, we have seen so fair and
clear evidences.

CAP. XXIIII. How unjustly Baronius excepteth against the Acts of the fifth
Council, as being corrupted, and of no credit; and a refutation in general of
the same.
1. BAronius perceiving right well, that all which heretofore has been said
either against the Emperor, or the Empress, or the Edict, or Theodorus the
supposed author of it, is not sufficient in any measure either to defend, or
excuse Vigilius; in the next place he takes a very uncouth and unusual, but a
most sure course, whereby he may not only weaken, but utterly overthrow all
that has or can be said against the Pope in this cause; for the Acts of the
fifth general Council being the most authentike records that can be produced,
to prove Vigilius and all that defend him, to be heretics; the Cardinal, and
after him Binius will now no longer hacke at this or that person, which were
agents in the cause, and but petty branches, but now he will strike at the
very root, calling into question the Acts and evidences themselves, striving
to prove them to be of no credit; which if he can do, all the rest,
whatsoever can be said, will most easily be rejected. Now because Baronius
was willing in this passage to show not only the utmost subtilty of his wit,
but his exact diligence in picking out every quarrel, that art or malice could
suggest against the Acts of this holy Council, I must entreat the reader not
to think it tedious (though unto me this was a matter almost of greatest
trouble and difficulty) to hear patiently, and weigh with equity of judgment
the manifold exceptions against these Acts, which he has collected, or rather
scattered upon every occasion which offered it self here and there, that by
his inculcating, and ingeminating of the accusation he might breed some opinion
of the truth thereof.

2. And before I enter into examination of the particulars, let me put the
reader in mind of one or two considerations which may in general concern
them all. The first is, that though the Cardinal, and Binius following him,
have spared no labor to sift these Acts as diligently as Satan did Saint
Peter, and have objected ten or twelve special corruptions in them, yet not
any thing which they mention, or against which they except, does any way so
touch or concern the cause of the Three Chapters, whereof we have entreated*
as either to show that the Council condemns them not; or that Vigilius
defends them not by his definitive and Apostolical Constitution, or that the
Council by their Synodall sentence and consenting judgment did not for that
cause condemn, anathematize, and accurse for heretics all that defend them,
and so Pope Vigilius, among the rest, and all that defend him or his
Apostolical Constitution. All these are matters of so certain, evident, and
undoubted truth, by the Acts, that Baronius or Binius could find nothing at
all to blemish or darken them. So then, though the Acts were admitted in 100.
or 1000. other points to be corrupted, mutilated, and altered, yet the
Cardinal and Binius are never a whit the nearer; the maine point at which they
aim, is to excuse Vigilius, and those that defend him, but notwithstanding all
that they have said, (and they have said all that industry, having borrowed
serpentine eyes, could find out) both Vigilius himself, and all who defend
him, and those are all who defend the Popes infallibility in defining causes of
faith, that is, all Papists, remain still, as convicted, accursed, and
anathematized heretics, and that by the judgment of an holy general Council,
approved by all succeeding, both Popes and Councels, till the time of Luther
and Leo the tenth.

3. The second thing which I observe is, that corruptions which happily may be
crept into some Synodall Acts, or other writings, whether by mutilations,
additions, or alterations, are no just cause to reject, as unworthy of credit,
all the Acts of that Council, or writings of the author. Admit this once, what
credit can be given to the Nicene and Constantinopolitane Councels? whose Acts
to be miserably maimed, none is ignorant? yea, even the very Canons also to
be corrupted Bellarmine Probatur Canones illos (Nicenos) non esse integros.
Lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans ca. 25.. Omissa
and Baronius Quod Canon 6. Con. Nic. mutilatus sit, etc. Bar. an. 225. nu.
125. and Canon iste ( 5. Concilij Constantinopolitani) suspectus, imo plane
addititius esse atque suppositus habetur, etc. Bar. an. 381 nu. 35.
do profess and prove: The like corruption Baronius notes in the first
Ephesine Council, wherein is set Tom. 5. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 11.
down, among other acts, decretum Regum, for the banishment of the Nestorians,
of which Baronius An. 481. nu. 173.
says, plura simul mendacia insuta habent, there are many lies sowed up in
these Acts. In like sort in the Council of Chalcedon is inserted among the
Acts of the third Session Page 84. b.
, an Edict of the Emperor Valentinianus and Martianus, which was written a long
Concilium finitum est mense November. in Co^s. Martiani et Adelphij. Bar. an.
451. nu. 160. Edictum vero scriptum 7. Kalen. Febr. Coss. Sporatio.
year after the Council was ended, and therefore must of necessity be
acknowledged to be foisted, and unjustly inserted into the Acts. Of the sixth
Council Bellarmine Bell. lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans ca. 11. Ad secundum depravata
sunt. Bin. not. in Con. 6. Acta.
says, that it without doubt is corrupted, and whatsoever is found there of
Honorius, is falsely inserted. Of it Binius Acta Concilij multis in locis
after Baronius Bar. an. 681. nu. 13.
says, the Acts of it, are in many places depraved; and whatsoever is there
reported to be said or done by Honorius, all that is added by the Monothelites.
Of the seventh Binius Not. in Conc. Nicen. 2. et Acti. 4.
thus writes, This fourth Action is in diverse places faulty, and in the
History of the Image crucified at Beritus it contains diverse Apocryphal
narrations concerning the Image of Christ made by Nicodemus. Of the eighth
Council, that the Canons thereof are corrupted, and some inserted by
Anastasius, their own Raderus Viginti septem Canones ex Anastasii codice
sumptos nullus dubitet, et hi duo Canones non nisi ex Anastasio videntur
accipi. Rad. in Obser. ad Conc. 8. pa. 448.
will persuade them. Let the Baronian reason against the Acts of this fifth
Council be applied to these: He having found among these, one Epistle of
Theodorets which he supposes to be a counterfeit, concludes upon that one
example in this manner, quam fidem rogo merentur acta hujusmodi, quae sunt his
contexta commentis; what credit, I pray you, do such Acts as these of the fifth
Council deserve, which are entangled in such fictions? May not the self same
reason be much more justly alleged against the Nicene and Constantinopolitane
Canons; against the Acts of the Council at Ephesus, at Chalcedon; against the
sixth, seventh and eighth Synods, in every one of which, some, and in diverse,
more corruptions, not only mutilations, but alterations, and commentitious
writings are inserted by their own confession? Let Baronius answer here his
own question, Quam fidem rogo? I pray you then, what credit may be given to
such Canons or Acts as are those of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of
Chalcedon, of the sixth, seventh, or eighth Council? they all must by the
Cardinals reason be rejected, as Canons and Acts of no worth, of no credit at
all: Nor they only, but all the works of Augustine, of Athanasius, of Jerome,
and almost all the holy Fathers: none of them all by this Baronian reason,
deserve any credit, for among their writings are inserted many suppositious and
factitious tracts, as the book de variis Quaestionibus Scripturae, the Sermon
of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, and many more Poss. Appar. in Athan. p.
127.
in Athanasius, the Epistle of Augustine to Cyrill, and Cyrils to Austen, the
author Poss. in Aug. pa. 147.
of which was not only an Impostor, but an heretic; the book de Spiritu and
litera, the book of questions of the old and new Testament, which is
heretical, and an heap of the like in Austen; the Commentaries on Paul's
Epistles, which savor of Pelagianisme; the Epistle to Demetrias concerning
virginity, and 100. like in Poss. in Hier. pa. 751.
Jerome. Quae fides rogo? what credit can be given to these books or writings
of Austen, Athanasius, Jerome, or the rest, in which are found so many
fictitious, and heretical treatises, falsely ascribed unto them, mingled and
inserted among their writings? Truly, I cannot devise what might move the great
Card. to make such a collection, and reason, as from some corruptions crept
into the books of fathers, or Acts of Councels, to infer, that the whole
Acts or writings are unworthy of any credit, but only as Jack Cade had a
purpose to burn all authentic records and writings of law, that, as he
boasted, all the law might proceed from his own mouth; so the Cardinal intended
to play a right Jack Cade with all the ancient Councels and Fathers, that
having utterly, though not abolished, yet disgraced, and made them all by this
his reason and collection unworthy of any credit, his own mouth might be an
Oracle to report without controulment all histories of ancient matters; and
what his Cardinalship should please to say in any matter, or to set down in
his Annals, that all men should believe, as if the most authentic Records in
the world had testified the same: How much better and more advisedly might the
Cardinal have done, to have wished all corruptions to be removed? whatsoever
can be certainly proved in any Acts of Councels, or writings of Fathers to be
added unto them, that to be quite cut off; whatsoever might be found wanting,
that to be added; whatsoever to be altered or perverted, that to be amended,
and not in the blindness of his hatred, against this one fifth Council, to
fight like one of the Andabatae, against all the rest, and with one stroke to
cashire all the Acts and Canons of Councels, all the writings of Fathers or
Historians, because, forsooth, one or some few corruptions have either by
negligence or error of writing, or by fraud and malice of some malignant hand
crept into them.

4. The third thing which I observe, is, that whereas Baronius so often and so
spightfully declameth against the Acts of this Council, as imperfect and
corrupted; this his whole accusation proceeds of malice to the Council and
these Acts, rather than of judgment or of truth; for I do constantly affirm,
and who so ever pleases to peruse the Councels shall certainly find, (and, if
he deal ingenuously, will confess the same) that as of all the general
Councels which go before this fifth, for integrity of the Acts, none is better,
or any way comparable to this, save that of Chalcedon: so of all that follow it
none at all is to be preferred, nor any way to be counted equal with it,
unless that which they call the sixth Council, that is, so much of the Acts of
that Synod as concern the cause of the Monothelites, leaving out the Trullane
Canons: This, whosoever is exercised in the Volumes of Councels cannot choose
but observe. The Nicene and Constantinopolitane being so miserably maimed, that
scarce we have so much as a few shreds or chips of the most magnificent
buildings of those Councels, which, if they could be recovered, no treasures
are sufficient to redeem a work of that worth and value, a work non gemmis,
neque purpura vaenale, neque auro. That of Ephesus is a little helped indeed by
Peltanus, but yet it remains so imperfect, so confused, and disorderly, that
as Diogines sought men in the most thronged multitudes of men, so among those
very Acts and large Tomes of the Councils, the reader shall be forced to seek
the Acts of the Ephesine Council. The Acts of the second Nicene, and of the
next to it, which they call the eighth, are so doubtful, that not only this
or that part, but the whole fabric of them both is questionable, whether they
were the Synodall Acts, or but a relation framed by Anastasius, as he thought
best. Of all the eight Councels, the Acts of Chalcedon, this fifth, and the sixth
have been most safely preserved, and like the river Arethusa have strongly
passed through so many corrupt ages and hands, and yet without tainture of the
salt, deliver unto us the clear and sweet current of antiquity and truth: And
verily, when I seriously compare the wrack of other Councels with the
entirenesse of these three, I cannot but admire and magnify with all my might
the gracious providence, wisdom, and love of God to his Church, for in every
one of these there is an unresistable force of truth, against that
Antichristian authority and supremacy which is now made the foundation of the
Popish faith; the sixth in the cause of Honorius, the fifth in this cause of
Vigilius, and that of Chalcedon, in curbing the Popes Legates, in crossing the
decree, and known resolution of Pope Leo, and in being a most lively pattern
of that rightful and ancient authority which Emperors then held above all the
Bishops in the Council; but now the Pope usurpes both above all Bishops,
Emperors and Councels. God would by these monuments of antiquity pull down
the lofty Towers, and raze from the very bottom that foundation of Babylon,
which can never be firm and settled; he would have, besides other particular
witnesses, these unconquerable and irresistible forces of these ancient and
general Councels, against which no just exception can be taken: and although I
will not excuse the acts of these, nor any of them from all defects and
blemishes whatsoever, yet I dare boldly aver, that they are so few, so light,
and of so small importance, that the maine controversies handled in them, or
relying on them, cannot be prejudicated thereby, they being rather the errors
of the Collectors, or of the writers, and exscribers of these Councels, than of
the Councels themselves: And particularly for this fifth Council, against which
Baronius does so furiously declame: I doubt not to make it evident, that all
the faults, which, after much prying, he has objected unto the Acts thereof,
will prove so many evident testimonies of his own most fraudulent and corrupt
dealing, and not the defects or corruptions in the Acts of this Council. But
let us view the particulars.

CAP. XXV. The first alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, for
that the text of the Council at Chalcedon is changed therein, refuted.
1 THE corruptions which Baronius, and out of him Binius objecteth, are
according to the grammatical division reduced to three sorts of irregularity:
Some by variation or alteration, others by defect or mutilation, the rest by
redundance or addition. In the first rank he pretends three examples; the
first which seems to be of greatest moment, and carries the greatest color
of probability is the corrupting of a certain text of the Council at
Chalcedon cited by this fifth Synod. Hear the accusation in Baronius his own
words, We may not here omit, says he An. 553. nu. 214.
to note the craft of the Grecians, who, contrary to right and equity, have
corrupted the holy text of the Synodall Acts, by adding unto the Council of
Chalcedon those words, about which there was much contention in the time of
Pope Hormisda, when certain suspected of Eutycheanisme, specially some
Scythian Monks, did labor that unto the holy Council of Chalcedon these
words might be added, Dominum nostrum Iesum Chistum unum esse de sancta
Trinitate; which when they could not obtain, because the Synod was well enough
without that addition, here now (in this fifth Council) where the Epistle of
Ibas is compared with the profession of the Council at Chalcedon; they recite
these words of the Synod [Chalcedonensis sancta Synodus in definitione quam de
fide fecit, praedicat Deum verbum incarnatum esse hominem] the holy Synod of
Chalcedon in the definition which it made of faith, does profess God the Word
to have been incarnate and made man; and they add unto the words of the
Synod, [qui est Dominus noster Jesus Christus, unus de sancta Trinitate; who is
our Lord Jesus Christ, one of the holy Trinity;] as if the Synod of Chalcedon
had professed that, whereas they rather would call Christ, unam personam
sanctae Trinitatis, than unum de sancta Trinitate. Thus Baronius: In which few
words of his there are contained so many notable untruths, and heretical
frauds, that without a rare dexterity in that craft, he could not have easily
contrived and couched them in so small a room.

2. First, that they who contended to have Christ called unum de sancta
Trinitate, were heretics, or Eutycheans, or unjustly suspected thereof, is not
only untrue, but bewrayes the Cardinals obstinate and obdurate affection to
Nestorianisme; for as Dionysius Extat in Bib.. pat. tom. 3.
Exiguus in his Preface to the Epistle of Proclus, witnesses, and most truly,
the disciples of Theodorus Mopsvestenus began to teach an impious faith to the
people, with most crafty subtilty professing the Trinity to be in such sort of
one Essence, ut Christum Dominum nostrum unum ex Trnitate nullatenus
faterentur, that they would by no means confess Christ our Lord to be one of
the Trinity; and thereupon they taught a quaternity in the persons. If Baronius
esteem it heresy to profess Christ, unum de sancta Trinitate, then is he
certainly by this, besides all other evidences, convicted to be a Nestorian
heretic, for it is an Article of their Nestorian, and repugnant to the
Catholic faith, to deny or doubt to call Christ, unum de sancta Trinitate.

3. Secondly, that the Council of Chalcedon made ever any doubt to profess
Christ to be unum de sancta Trinitate, or that they would rather call him,
unam personam Trinitatis, is another vile Nestorian slander, and heretical
untruth of Baronius. The Council of Chalcedon, says Justinian Leg. 7. de
summa Trinit. ca. 4.
, approved the Epistle of Proclus, wherein it is taught, that we ought to
confess our Lord Jesus Christ to be one of the holy Trinity: Proclus, says
Loco citato.
Dionysius Exiguus, did marvellously resist that impiety, and he taught our
Lord Jesus Christ, unum de Trinitate esse, to be one of the Trinity. When the
Nestorians troubled the Church about this matter, Justinian set forth a most
religious Imperial Edict Edict. extat apud Bar. an. 533. nu. 7. 9.
wherein he commanded all to profess Christ to be unum de Trinitate; we
anathematize, says he, every heresy, especially Nestorius, and those who
think, or have thought as he did; we anathematize those who deny or will not
confess our Lord Jesus Christ, unum esse ex sancta and consubstantiali
Trinitate, to be one of the holy and consubstantiall Trinity. This Imperial
Edict the very next year after it was published was confirmed by Pope John,
who thus writes Epist. 1. Ioh. 2. ad Justin. to. 2. Conc. pa. 404. et Bar. an.
534. nu. 15. et seq.
to the Emperor, You for the love of the faith, and to remove heresy, have
published an Edict, which, because it agrees with the Apostolic doctrine, we
confirm by our authority: and again, You have writ and published those
things, which both the Apostolic doctrine, and the venerable authority of the
holy Fathers has decreed, and nos in omnibus confirmamus, and we confirm it
in all points: This your faith is the true and certain religion, this all the
Fathers and Bishops of Rome; and the Apostolic See has hitherto inviolably
kept; this confession whosoever does contradict, he is an alien from the holy
Communion, and from the Catholic Church. Thus Pope John. What can any man in
the world now think else of Baronius, but condemn him for an accursed
heretic? He denies the Council of Chalcedon to embrace that profession, unum
de Trinitate, which, as the Emperor and Pope witness, it earnestly embraces;
he not only suspecteth in this place, but in plain terms elsewhere Plane
comperitur eosdem ipsos (Scythiae Monachos) Eutycheanos fuisse haereticos. Bar.
an. 519. nu. 99.
, he calls the Scythian Monks Eutycheans, heretics, and oppugners of the
Council of Chalcedon, and that for this cause, for that both themselves
professed, and required others to profess Christ to be unum de sancta
Trinitate; nor content herewith he adds these words, the heresy whereof
with no niter can be washed away: he faineth, says Baronius An. eod. nu. 102.
, that these words, unus de Trinitate est crucifixus, are to be added for the
strengthening and explaning of the Council of Chalcedon; which sentence (unus
de Trinitate est crucifixus) the Legates of the Apostolic Sea, prorsus
reijciendam esse putarunt, thought to be such as ought utterly to be rejected,
as being never used by the Fathers in their Synodall sentences; latere enim
sciebant sub melle venenum, for they knew that poison did lie under this honey.
Now seeing by Justinians Edict, and the Popes confirmation thereof, all, who
either refuse, or who will not profess Christ to be unum de sancta Trinitate,
are accursed, and excluded from the Catholic Church and communion; Baronius
cannot possibly escape that just censure, who condemns that profession as
heretical, and as repugnant to the faith of Chalcedon. Thus while the
Cardinal labors to prove by this the Acts of the fifth Council to be
corrupt, he demonstrates himself to be both untrue, heretical, rejected out
of the Church, and a slanderer of the holy Council of Chalcedon, as favoring
the heresy of Nestorius.

4. Thirdly, whereas he says, that the Scythian Monks would infer verba
ista in Synodum Chalcedonensem, bring or thrust in those words into the
Council of Chalcedon, it is a slander without all color or ground of truth:
they saw diverse Nestorians obstinate in denying this truth, that Christ was
unus de sancta Trinitate, who pretended for them that these words were not
expressed in the Council of Chalcedon; the Monks and Catholics most justly
replied, that though the express words were not there, yet the sense of them
was decreed in that Council, that this confession was but an expression or
explication of that which was truly, implicitly, and more obscurely decreed at
Chalcedon. To falsify the Acts of that Council, or add one syllable unto it,
otherwise than by way of explanation or declaration, that, the Monks and
Catholics, whom Baronius calls Eutycheans, never sought to do, as at large
appears by that most learned and orthodoxall book written by Johannes
Maxentius about this very cause, against which book, and the Author thereof,
the more earnestly Baronius does oppose himself, and call them heretical, he
does not thereby one whit disgrace them (his tongue and pen is no slander, at
least not to weighed) but the more he still intangles himself in the heresy
of the Nestorians, out of which in that cause none can extricate him, as in
another Treatise I purpose God willing, to demonstrate.

5. Fourthly, whereas Baronius says, that the Scythian Monks prevailed not in
the days of Hormisda, quod absque additamento Synodus recte consisteret,
because the Synod of Chalcedon was well enough without that addition, he
shows a notable sleight of his heretical fraud. That the Synod is well enough
without adding those words, as an express part of the Synodall decree, or as
written totidem verbis by the Council of Chalcedon, is most true, but nothing
to the purpose; for neither the Scythian Monks nor any Catholics did affirm
them so to be, or wish them so to be added, for that had been to say in
express words, we will have the decree falsified, or written in other words
than it was by the Council: But that the Synod was well enough without this
additament, as an explication of it, and declaration of the sense of that
Council, is most untrue; for both Justinian by his Edict commanded, and Pope
John by his Apostolic authority confirmed, that to be the true meaning, both
of that Council, and of all the holy Fathers: And when a controversy is once
moved, and on foot, whether Christ ought to be called unus de sancta
Trinitate, for a man then to deny this, or deny it to be decreed in the
Council of Chalcedon, or to deny that it ought to be added as a true
explanation of that Council, is to deny the whole Catholic faith, and the
decrees of the four first Councels; and though one shall say and profess in
words, as did Hormisda and his Legates, that they hold the whole Council of
Chalcedon, yet in that they expressly deny this truth, which was certainly
decreed at Chalcedon, their general profession shall not excuse them, but
their express denial of this one particular shall demonstrate them, both to
be heretics, and expressly to believe and hold an heresy repugnant to that
Council, which in a generality they profess to hold, but indeed and truth do
not. Even as the express denying of the manhood, or Godhead of Christ, or
resurrection of the dead shall convince one to be an heretic, though he
profess himself in a generality to believe and hold all that the holy
Scriptures do teach, or the Nicene fathers decree. If Baronius his words, that
the Council is right without that additament, be taken in the former sense,
they are idle, vain, and spoken to no purpose, which, of the Cardinals deep
wisdom is not to be imagined: If they be taken (as I suppose they are) in
the later sense, they undeniably demonstrate him to be a Cardinal Nestorian.

6. But leaving all the rest of the Cardinals frauds in this passage, let us
come to that last clause which concerns the corrupting of the Council of
Chalcedon. This, says he, which in Hormisdaes days they could not, now in
this fifth Synod they obtained, now they added to the words of the Synod this
clause, qui est Dominus unus de sancta Trinitate: A very perilous corruption
sure, to express that clause which all the Bishops of Rome, (semper excipio
Hormisdam) with all Catholics, believed and taught, which, whosoever denies
or will not profess, is anathematized, and excluded from the Catholic Church.
Is not this think you a very sore corruption of the Council of Chalcedon? Is
not the Cardinal a rare man of judgment that could spy such a maine fault in
these Acts of the fifth Council, that they profess Christ to be unum de sancta
Trinitate; to which profession both they and all other were bound under the
censure of an anathema.

7. Yea, but in the Acts those words are cited as the words of the Council of
Chalcedon, whose they are not. A mere fancy and calumny of the Cardinal: they
are plainly set down as the words of the fifth Synod, whose indeed they are;
and it relates not precisely the words of the Council of Chalcedon, nor what
it there expressed, totidem verbis, but the true sum and substance of what is
there decreed. For thus they say Coll. 6. pa. 575. a.
, The holy Synod of Chalcedon in the definition which it made of faith, does
profess God the Word incarnate, to be made man; this is all they report of the
Council of Chalcedon, as by the opposition of Ibas his Epistle is apparent,
wherein they oppose not that he denied Christ to be one of the Trinity, but
that he called them heretics who taught the Word incarnate to be made man.
That clause which they add [That Christ is one of the Trinity] is an addition
of the fifth Council it self, explicating that of Christ, which the Emperors
Edict bound them to profess, as being the true sense and meaning of the
Council at Chalcedon, but not as being word for word set down in the decree
of Chalcedon. And even as he were more than ridiculous, who would accuse one to
corrupt the Council of Chalcedon for saying they professed Christ to be God
and man, who was borne in Bethleem, and fled from Herod into Egypt; so is the
Cardinal as ridiculous in objecting this as a corruption of the Synod, or
addition to the Council of Chalcedon, that they say the Council taught the
Word of God to be man, who is our Lord Jesus Christ, one of the holy Trinity.
Both additions are true, but neither of them affirmed to be expressly, and
totidem verbis, set down in the Council of Chalcedon. Why but look to the
Cardinals proof; for he would not for any good affirm such a matter without
proof. What? do ye ask for proof of the Cardinal? I tell you, it is
proof enough that he says it: and truly in this point he produces neither
any proof, nor any shadow of reason to prove either that those words are
falsely inserted into the Acts of the fifth Council, or that the fifth Council
cited them as the very express words of the Council of Chalcedon: all the
proof is grounded on his old Topicke place Ipse dixit, which is a sorry kind of
arguing, against any that love the truth: for although against the Pope or
their popish cause, any thing which he writes is a very strong evidence
against them, seeing the Cardinal is very circumspect and wary to let nothing,
no not a syllable fall from him which may in the least wise seem to prejudice
the Popes dignity, or the cause of their Church, unless the maine force and
undeniable evidence of truth do wrest and wring it from his pen: yet in any
matter of history, wherein he may advantage the Pope, or benefit their cause,
it is not by many degrees so good to say, the illustrissimus Cardinalis
affirms it, which is now grown a familiar kind of proof among them Vide
Gretz. tractatus varios, and alios ejus farinae.
, as to say, Ovid, Aesop, or Iacobus Voraginensis affirm it, therefore it is
certainly true. His Annals in the art of fraudulent, vile, and pernicious
untruths far excel the most base fictitious Poemes or Legends that ever as
yet have seen the Sun.

CAP. XXVI. The second alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius,
for that Ibas is said therein to have denied the Epistle written to Maris to be
his, refuted.
1. THe second thing which our Momus Dum falsa quaedam ibi (in Actis 5.
Concilij) asserta reperiuntur, de impostura non mediocrem suspicionem inducunt:
cum viz. ibi dictum habetur, Ibam negasse Epistola^ esse suam. Bar. an. 553.
nu. 211
carpeth at, is for that in these Acts it is said that Ibas denied the Epistle
written to Maris, to be his: which says Baronius is untrue; for Ibas
professed the Epistle to be his. And Binius not content to call it with the
Cardinal an untruth, in plain terms affirms Duo aut plura mendacia de Ibae
epistola leguntur. Bin. Notis in Conc. 5. pa. 606. b. Acta Conc. 5. no^ uno
loco indicant quod Ibas Epistolam non agnoverit, veru^ haec sententia, etc.
iid. p. 607. a
it to be a lie. Had not hatred to the truth corrupted or quite blinded the
judgment of Baronius and Binius, they would never have quarelled with the Acts
about this matter, nor for this accused them to have been corrupt. They may as
well collect the Edict of Justinian, or that famous Epistle of Pope Gregory,
wherein he writes of Ibas and the three Chapters, to be corrupted, and of no
credit, as well as the Acts of the fifth Council: for in both Ibas non est
ausus eam suam dicere Epistolam Justin. edictum pa. 496. b. Epistolam Jbas
denegat suam. Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 53.
them the same is said concerning the denial of Ibas which is in these Acts.
If notwithstanding the avouching of that denial, they may pass for sincere
and incorrupt, it was certainly malice and not reason that moved the Cardinal
and Binius to carpe at the Acts for this cause: which will much more appear,
if any please but to view the Acts themselves. For this is not spoken obiter,
nor once, but the Council insisteth upon it, repeateth it in several Abnegans
Epistolam. Coll. 6. pa. 563. b. Eo quod abnegabat Ibas illa. Coll. eadem. pa.
564. a. Vnde and Jbas eam abnegabat. ibid. and alibi.
places, and diverse times; and if those words were taken away, there would be
an apparent hiatus in the text of those Acts. The words then are truly the
words of the true Acts, the corruption is only in the brain of Baronius and
Binius.

2. Now whereas the Cardinal and Binius so confidently affirm this to be
untrue, or a lie, that Ibas denied his Epistle, and so accuse the whole
Council to lie in this matter, they do but keep their own tongues and pens
inure with calumnies: the untruth and lie belongs neither to the Council, nor
to the Acts, but must be returned to themselves to whom only it is due. For
the Councels truth herein, the Emperor is a most honorable witness, who
says Loco nuper citato.
, Demonstratur Ibas eam abnegasse, Ibas is demonstrated, or by evident proof
known, to have denied his Epistle. Pope Gregory is another witness above
exception, who says Loco citato.
, Epistolam Ibas denegat suam, Ibas denied the Epistle to be his: the fifth
Council also does not only affirm it, but prove Coll. 6. p. 564. a Johannes
Sebastiae, Seleucus Amasiae, Constantinus, Patritius, Petrus and Atharbius,
omnes Metropolitani pariter interloquuti sunt, eo quod Ibas abnegavit illa, etc.
it by the testimony of six Metropolitan Bishops, and their interloquution in
the Council of Chalcedon, they all said they received Ibas, eo quod negabat
illa, because he did deny those things which were objected by his adversaries:
a great part of which was that Epistle. All these are witnesses for the
Council: what witnesses now does the Cardinal or Binius bring to countervaile
these? truly not so much as one: and one were but a poor number to be opposed
to so many, and so worthy men, testifying the contrary. Now whether the
testimony of the Emperor, Pope Gregory, of six Metropolitanes, and an whole
general approved Council affirming this; or Baronius without any one witness
denying this, be more credible, let the very best friends of Baronius judge:
but Baronius loves to be Johannes ad oppositum, to Emperors, Popes, Bishops,
and Councels: if they say any thing that pleases not his palate, that is
indeed, if they say the truth.

3. But yet Baronius has a proof of his saying, which is this; because Ibas
Acta Germana habent Jbam confessum, eam esse suam: sed and acta Conc. Chalc.
eandem Epistolam ut Ibae cognitam esse docent. Bar. an. 448. nu. 77.
confessed it to be his, and he tells us this is in the Acts of Chalcedon. Say
he did confess it, as I will not deny that he did; (though I verily think the
Cardinal speaks an untruth, in saying that this is in the Acts, for I find
not in those Acts either any such express confession, or ought from whence it
can be collected: and Justinian plainly says Loco citat.
, that Ibas durst not acknowledge it to be his, for the blasphemies contained
therein,) but I admit that Ibas confessed it to be his. Does it thence follow,
that he denied it not to be his? might he not do both? might he not contradict
himself? does not the Cardinal, (who neither for wit nor wisdom will yield
one jote to Ibas,) does not he as much in this very cause of Ibas Epistle: In
one place he Bar an. 432. nu. 71.
says, the Epistle being produced, non esse Ibae compertam, it was found not
to be the Epistle of Ibas, as the Acts of Chalcedon do show: in another Bar.
448. nu. 77
place he says the quite contrary: The true Acts of Chalcedon have it, that
Ibas confessed it to be his Epistle. Is not this a piece of handsome work of
the Cardinal? The Epistle is his, the Epistle is not his: the Acts of
Chalcedon say it is his; the Acts of Chalcedon say it is not his. Could
Vertumnus himself play more cunningly fast and loose than he does? Might not
Ibas do the like? sometimes for his own credit deny the Epistle to be his,
though at other times he confessed it to be his? Is it not more likely in it
self, more charity in others to think that Ibas did thus, than that the
Emperor, Pope Gregory, and a general Council did all conspire to tell a lie.

4. And not to dispute that (which we have now admitted) whether he confessed
it to be his or not; that he did certainly deny it to be his Epistle, if
neither the fifth general Council, nor Justinian, nor Gregory had testified
this, yet the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon where Ibas himself was
personally present, have so clear a demonstration thereof, that I cannot
sufficiently admire either the stupidity, or the most shameless dealing of
Baronius and Binius, who with their foul mouths call it an untruth, and a
lie: for that Epistle was writ by Ibas not only after the union made betwixt
John and Cyrill, as Justinian Epistola factae ostenditur post unitatem ad
orientales facta^. Edict. Just. loco citato.
, and the fifth Impia epistola post unitatem scripta ostenditur. Conc. 5. Coll.
6. pa. 563.
Council truly teach; but as we have before clearly Sup. ca. 10.
proved, at least two years after the same. In that Epistle Cyrill is called
an heretic, an Apollinarian, as both the fifth Council testifies, saying
Coll. 6. pa. 575. a.
, Epistola Cyrillum sanctae memoriae haereticum vocat; and the very words of
the Epistle do make evident, wherein Ibas says In Conc. Chalc. act. 10. pa.
113. ^
, Cyrill is found to have fallen into the doctrine of Apollinaris: And again,
speaking of these twelve Chapters of Cyrill, which both the Ephesine and
Chalcedon Council confirm, he calls Jbid.
them plena omni impietate, full of all impiety, and contrary to the faith.
Thus writ Ibas of Cyrill two years at least after the union was fully made.
Now in the Acts before Photius and Eustathius, which are expressed in the
Council of Chalcedon, Ibas there professed before the Judges, that after the
union once made, we all, says he In Conc. Chalc. Act. 10. p. 113. a
, held communion with Cyrill, we accounted him an orthodoxall Bishop, and
nullus eum appellat haereticum, and none after that called Cyrill an heretic:
was not this a plain denial that he writ this Epistle? for whosoever writ it
calls Cyrill an heretic, and that diverse years after the union: now Ibas
denies that ever after the union he called Cyrill an heretic. Could he more
directly conclude that he writ not this Epistle? unless one will say that to
deny Baronius to have written or published one word after the beginning of Pope
Sixtus the fifth, be not a certain denial, that the Annalls which go under
his name, and were all published after the beginning of Sixtus Nam primum eorum
Tomum dedicavit Sixto 5. an. 1589.
, are the Annalls of Baronius. This denial by an evident and most certain
consequent, (not any express denial totidem verbis, as if Ibas had said, this
is not my Epistle) was it which both Justinian and the fifth Council meant, as
their own words do declare: The Epistle, says Justinian Loco citato.
, being full of blasphemies, and containing many injuries against S. Cyrill, is
showed to be written after the union, ex quo demonstratur Ibas eam abnegasse,
whereby it is demonstrated that Ibas denied it, (in that he said, that he never
called Cyrill an heretic after that union.) The impious Epistle, says the
Council Loco citato.
, is showed by the contents thereof to have been written after the union;
therefore it appears that Ibas denied it to be his Epistle by this, in that
he said that he spoke nothing against Cyrill after the union: again, Ibas in
this denied the Epistle, eo quod dicebat, because he said Coll. 6. p. 564. a
, after the union I am not found to have said ought against Saint Cyrill. Yea
this and no other, to have been that denial which the Council meant,
Baronius knew right well; for himself says an. 553. n. 211
, that it is said in the Council, that Ibas denied the Epistle, ex eo, for
this cause, for that after the union and peace made, he denied that he had said
ought against Cyrill: yet notwithstanding all this evidence of truth, the
Cardinal to disgrace the Acts of this Council, even against his own
knowledge and conscience affirms it to be an untruth, or as Binius calls it,
(in a most spiteful manner) a lie, that Ibas denied this Epistle to be his.

CAP. XXVII. The third alteration of the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius,
for that the Council of Chalcedon is said therein to condemn the Epistle of
Ibas, refuted.
1. THE third corruption is by a mis-report and untrue relation which Baronius
observes in these Acts, for that in them the Council of Chalcedon is said to
have condemned that Epistle of Ibas, which he not only says Quod ibidem
subditur, eandem Epistolam in Synodo Chalced. fuisse damnatam, ipsa acta secus
docent, neutrum enim horum verum esse superius demonstravimus. Bar. an. 553.
nu. 211.
is untrue, (Binius calls Duo aut plura mendacia. Bin. not. in Conc. 5. pa. 60^.
b.
it also in plain terms, a lie,) but adds both that the Acts of the
Council of Chalcedon do teach the contrary, and that out of those Acts he
has before demonstrated the same. Call you this a corruption of the Acts? why,
it is the maine purpose of the Council, it is their very judgment and
resolution touching the Three Chapters, often and with acclamations repeated.
The Epistle Anathematizavit Epist. contrariam per omnia, expositae definitioni
a Concilio Chalc. Sancta Synodus dixit, Scimus et nos haec ita subsequut^ esse.
Coll. 6 pa. 564. a.
is contrary to the definition, Epistolam Coll. eadem. pa. 576. b.
definitio sancti Chalcedonensis Concilij condemnat, definitio ejecit; in the
proof whereof they much insist. Neither only in the sixth collation do they
at large set down this, but in their eighth, even in their Synodall definition
Quo facto demonstratum est, contrariam per omnia Epistolam esse his quae
definitione (Chalc.) continentur. Coll. 8. pa. 584. a.
they expressly mention, that they have not only said, but even demonstrated
before, that this Epistle is in all things contrary to the definition of the
Council at Chalcedon; yea, they there add, which is more, that the Council of
Chalcedon would in no sort otherwise Jnvenimus quod non al^ter p^ssi sunt Ibam
suscipere, etc. Ib.
receive Ibas, unless he himself did condemn the impiety contained in that
Epistle. Would any in the world (save Baronius, a man merely infatuated in this
cause, and such as follow his idle fancies) account that to be a corruption or
depravation of the Acts, which is the maine scope, purpose, judgment, and
definition of the Synod? which they so often in their several Sessions
repeat, of which they expressly testify in their very definitive sentence,
that they before had said, proved, and demonstrated the same, without which
also if it were taken away, (as the Cardinal pretends it should,) not only
the Acts should be utterly perverted, but the quite contrary to the judgment
and determination of the Council, should be affirmed. Baronius might with as
great truth and probability have said, that the handling of the Three Chapters,
or judging of the Three Chapters had been a depravation and corrupting of the
Acts, for this assertion that Ibas his Epistle was condemned by the Council of
Chalcedon, is as necessary and essential to the Acts, as the cause it self
of the Three Chapters, or any sentence that is any where set down therein.

2. But yet if it be no depravation in the Acts, yet, says the Cardinal, Loc.
citat.
and Binius, it is untrue, It is a lie, that the Council of Chalcedon
condemned that Epistle: Let falsehood and impudency it self stand here amazed
and aghast at these men. This definitive sentence of this Council, wherein it
is proclaimed and decreed, that the Epistle of Ibas was condemned by the
Council of Chalcedon, is approved by all succeeding general Counsels, by
Pelagius, Gregory, and all other their successors, till Leo the tenth, (that
is, by the consenting judgment of the whole Catholic Church, and of all
Catholics ever since that decree was made) and now Baronius and Binius stand
up to give them all the lie; they all say untruths, only Baronius and Binius
are men that drop Oracles, out of whose mouths no lie nor untruth can at any
time proceed.

3. But says the Cardinal Loco cit.
, The Acts of the Council of Chalcedon do declare this, and out of them I
have before demonstrated this. Lo, the Cardinal will not only say it, but
prove it, yea, he has even demonstrated out of the Council of Chalcedon all
the former Popes, and Councels, that is, all the whole Catholic Church, to
lie. I fear me, such demonstrations will not turn to the Cardinals credit:
Do the Acts of the Council teach or demonstrate that? could none of the
Popes? none of the succeeding general Councels spy it in those Acts, till
Baronius took the^ all tardy in an untruth? What will you say to the Cardinal
and to his demonstration, if the Acts do not teach this? nay, if they teach
directly and demonstrate the quite contrary, who then, I pray you, must have
the whetstone? the Catholic Church or the illustrious Cardinal? And certainly
the Acts of Chalcedon do demonstrate what this fifth Council, and after it the
sixth, seventh, and eighth, and the rest testify, that this Epistle of Ibas was
condemned by the Council of Chalcedon. First, it is clear and certain by
those Acts that the Council of Chalcedon condemned Nestorius, and all the
impious doctrines and blasphemies of Nestorius, approving the Ephesine S. et
magna Synodus 5. Cyrilli Synodales Epistolas amplexa est, ad arguendu^
Nestorianam dementiam, etc. Conc Chalc. Act. 5. pa. 96. et Can. 1. pa. 15.
Council, and the Synodall Epistle of Cyrill, wherein they Omnes Episcopi
clamaverunt, Quicunque Nestoriano anathematizat, anathema sit. Omnes Nestorij
Epistolam, et dogmata anathematizamus. Con. Ephesians. to. 2. ca. 4. pa. 743.
are condemned and anathematized: was not this a condemning of the Epistle of
Ibas, which defends Nestorius and his heresies, which is full fraught with
all his blasphemous doctrines? Could the Council of Chalcedon condemn and
anathematize the doctrine of Nestorius, and yet not condemn that Epistle which
defends all those doctrines? By the Acts it is clear and certain, that the
Council of Chalcedon approve Huic omnes co^sentimus; omnes ita sapimus Act. 5.
pa. 98.
their own decree of faith: now this Epistle, as not only the fifth Council
often Epistolam definitio S. Chalcedonensis Concilij condemnavit. Collat. 6.
pa. 576 b. et alibi.
, but after it Pope Gregory says, procul dubio definitioni Synodi probatur
adversa, without doubt is contrary to the definition of the Council of
Chalcedon. Lib. 7. Ind. 2. Epist. 54.
Is not the approving of their definition a rejecting and condemning of
whatsoever writing is contrary to the same? By the Acts it is clear and
certain, that the Council even in their definition Chal. Conc. Act 5. pa. 38.
forbids, and pronounces it unlawful for any to teach, or produce, or write,
or deliver any other doctrine; which whosoever does, if he be a Bishop or
Clerk, he shall be deposed; if a Monk or Lay man, anathematized: Is not
this a plain forbidding of that Epistle to be read, or taught, the doctrine
whereof is directly contrary to their decree? when by the Councels decree it
may neither be taught, written, nor read, (otherwise then with a detestation)
is not this a condemning of it by the Council? by the Acts that is clear in
the fifth Council Hoc judicium Photij et Eustathij omnes Episcopi (Chal. Co^c.)
sequuti, perspexerunt ipsum (Jbam) anathematizare Nestorium et impia ejus
dogmata. Con. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 563. b.
, that the Council of Chalcedon approved the judgment of Photius and
Eustathius, for as Photius and Eustathius, so they all at Ibam anathematizantem
Nestorium et ejus impia dogmata, permanere in Sacerdotio volo. Eusebius. Epis.
Ancyrae in Conc. Chal. Act. 10. pa. 115. sic Stephanus, Romanus, Eunomius et
omnes Episcopi clamaverunt; omnes eade^ dicimus. Ibid. pa. 116. a.
Chalcedon required Ibas to anathematize Nestorius and his doctrines, before
they would receive him. Now as the fifth Council Coll. 6. p. 563. b
truly says, to approve the judgment of Photius and Eustathius, Nihil est
aliud quam condemnare impiam Epistolam; this is nothing else than to condemn
the impious Epistle, seeing in it Nestorius and his heresies are defended. To
be short (for there are very many other evidences to declare this,) Pope
Gregory Loco citato.
testifies, that the fifth Council was in omnibus sequax, did in all things
follow the Council of Chalcedon; if in all, then in condemning this impious
Epistle, and if they followed it therein, then most certainly the Council of
Chalcedon condemned it before them. So untrue it is which the Cardinal says,
that the Acts do show, and that out of them he has demonstrated, that the
Council of Chalcedon did not condemn this Epistle, whereas he has
demonstrated nothing so clear, as himself to be a malicious and shameless
downfacer of most certain and evident truths. Thus much of his first sort of
corruptions, namely, the three variations or depravations, wherewith, as you
see, he has slandered the Acts of this fifth Council, to his immortal
disgrace.

CAP. XXVIII. The three first defects in the Synodall Acts, pretended by
Baronius, for that the Acts against the Origenists, the Edict of Justinian, and
his Epistle touching that cause, are wanting therein, refuted.
1. THE second kind of the Cardinals Heteroclites, are his defectives
Intelligas qua^ plurima in eade^ 5. Synodo desiderari. Bar. an. 553 nu. 243.
: And here he and Binius labor to prove the lamenesse and defects of these
Acts by five instances: The first of them concerns the proceeding against
Origin, and the Origenists, which was done in the fifth Synod, but is now
wanting in the Acts thereof. Let us first hear what Binius Decurtatione^ et
mutilationem Actorum indicant illa fragmenta quae in sine hujus curavimus. Bin.
not. in Conc. 5. Constitutum.
says hereof; The curtaling and maime of these Acts do those fragments
declare which we have added to the end of the Synod, quodque nulla vel levis
tantum mentio reperiatur de condemnatis erroribus Origenis; and because there
is no mention, no not any small, or light mention, found in them, touching the
errors of Origin condemned. If one were disposed to quit Binius with his own
uncivil words, Binius should here be proclaimed both for a most impudent liar,
and a shameless belyar of these Synodal acts, of this holy Council. There is
express mention of condemning Origin in the fifth Collation, Origin Coll. 5.
pa. 552.
was anathematized after his death in the time of Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria, which also your sanctity, (he speaks to the Bishops of this
Synod) and Vigilius Pope of Rome have now done. Again, there is express
mention of him, and his errors in the eighth collation in the very Synodall
and definitive sentence of the Council, wherein Origin and his impious writings
are condemned; for thus it is written Coll. 8. Anath. 11. pa. 587. a.
, If any man do not accurse Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinarius,
Nestorius, Eutyches, Origin, cum impijs eorum conscriptis, with their impious
writings, and all other heretics condemned by the Catholic Church, let that
man be accursed. When the holy Council not only mentions the condemning of
Origin, but by their judicial sentence themselves also condemn, both him, his
errors, and his impious writings; what a face of Adamant had Binius, against
the truth, against his own text of the Council, against his conscience and
knowledge to say, there is no mention, no not any levis mentio, to be found in
the Acts of the errors of Origin condemned? or if Binius will not be persuaded
of his untruth, for us, let him acknowledge it for his Master Baronius his
credit, who says An. 553. nu. 248.
, In these Synodall Acts there is made only, brevis mentio de Origin ejusque
erroribus condemnatis, a short mention in the eleventh anathematisme of Origin,
and his errors condemned: if there be brevis mentio of him and his errors,
then Binius must cry the Acts forgiveness, for saying there is no mention at
all, no not levis mentio, of his errors.

2. Let us see now if Baronius deal any better. Constat, says An. 553. nu.
238.
he, It is manifest by the testification of many, that Origin, Didimus, and
Evagrius, together with their errors were condemned in this fifth Synod, and
that there was written, at least recited and repeated against them those ten
Anathematismes which Nicephorus sets down; but in the Acts there is only a
brief mention that Origin and his errors were condemned. Baronius adds one
special point further out of Cedrenus, that in this fifth Council, first An.
eod. nu. 242. porro de Origin, actum esse in Synodo ponitur, inde vero de
Theodoro. etc.
, they handled the cause against Origin, and then against the Three Chapters:
So by the Cardinals profession there wants the whole first action in these Acts
of this Synod, which, it may be, had many Sessions, as the other Action about
the three Chapters: Besides this, there wants also, says he Caeteru^ et illas
putamus esse his (actis de Origin) subjectas literas imperatoris ad Mennam
Origenis errores contin^ntes. Bar. an. eod. 553. nu. 242.
, the letters or Edict published by Justinian: Thirdly, there wants Fuisse
eandem Epistolam (quam Cedrenus recital) ad Synodum datam actis ejus intextam,
nemo jure dubitarit ut ex his intelligas quam plurima desiderari. Bar. an. eod.
nu. 243.
, the Epistle of Justinian, sent to the Synod about the condemning of Origin,
which is set down by Cedrenus, out of whom both Baronius recites it, and
Binius adjoyns it at the end of the Acts among the fragments which are wanting
in these Acts. These three defects touching the cause of Origin does the
Cardinal allege.

3. But in very deed none of these three, nor ought else, which Baronius
mentions, argue any defect at all in these Acts, but they evidently
demonstrate in the Card. a maine defect of judgment, and an overflowing
superabundance of malice against this holy Synod, and these true Acts thereof.
That the cause of Origin was not, as he supposes, the first Action, or the
first cause handled by the Synod; I might allege the most clear testimony of
his An. eod. nu. 238.
own witness Nicephorus, who after the narration of the three Chapters, and
the Synodall sentence touching them delivered, which he accounts for the first
Session of the Synod, adds Niceph. Col. ^st. lib 17. Eccl. Histor. ca. 27.
, In secunda autem Sessione, but in the second Sessio^, the Libels against the
impious doctrines of Origin were offered and read, and Justinian, rursum Synodu^
de eis sententia^ far jussit, commanded again the Synod to give sentence in
that cause. So Nicephorus: whereby it is evident that the Cardinal and his
Cedrenus are foully deceived in saying, that the cause of Origin was first
handled by the Synod, and after that the cause of the three Chapters: but I
oppose to these, far greater and even authentike records, the Epistle of the
Emperor Extat Conc. 5. Coll. 1.
to the Synod, who, at the beginning and first meeting of the Bishops in the
Council, proposed to their handling the cause of the Three Chapters, and no
other at all; commanding them without delay to discuss and give their
judgment in that: I oppose the definition and Synodall decree Collat. 8.
, wherein is set down their whole proceeding, and what they handled almost
every day of their meeting, from the beginning to the ending; so that it alone
is as a Thesean thread, which will not permit a man to err in this cause,
unless he maliciously shut his eyes against the truth, and wilfully depart out
of that plain path. They Pro Dei voluntate and jussione pijssimi Imperatoris
convenimus. Jbid.
came to the Synod to decide the controversy then moved about the Three
Chapters, at the command of the Emperor; before they entered to the handling
thereof, they often entreated by their messengers, Pope Vigilius to come
together with them, (which was all that they did in the first 1. Coll. 4. die
Maij.
and second 2. Coll. 8. die Maij.
day of their meeting or Collation) when Vigilius would not come, then by the
Apostles admonition, they prepared themselves to the handling of the cause
proposed, by setting down a confession of their faith, consonant to the four
former Councels, and exposition of the Fathers, and promising in their next
meeting to handle the cause of the Three Chapters, which was the sum of the
third 3. Coll. 9. die Maij.
days Collation: Cumque Loc. cit. Coll. 8. pa. 584.
ita confessi simus, initium fecimus examinationis trium Capitulorum; and when
we had made this confession, we began the examination of the Three Chapters;
lo, they did initium sumere, they began with this. Could they speak more
plainly, that the cause of Origin was not first handled? as if prophetically
they meant to refute this untruth of Baronius and Cedrenus; and we first
discussed the cause of Theodorus Mopsvestenus out of his own writing there
read before us: This was all they did the fourth Coll. 4. 12. die Maij.
, and a great part of the fifth Coll. 5. 14 die Maij. pridie Idus Maij. Bar. an.
553. nu. 41.
day of their Collatio^. His de Theodoro discussis, pauca de Theodoreto; next
after the discussing of the Chapter touching Theodorus, we caused a few things
to be repeated out of the impious writings of Theodoret; for the satisfying of
the reader; and this they did in the end of the fifth day or Collation. Tertio
loco Epistola quam Ibas, etc; In the third place we proposed, and examined the
Epistle of Ibas: and this they did at large, and it was all they did in the
sixth 6. Coll. 19. Maij.
day of their Collation. The whole cause being thus, and, as the Council
confesses, most diligently and sufficiently examined, the Council (as it
seems by their own words in the end of the sixth Collation) intended to
proceed to sentence in the next day of their meeting: but before ought was done
therein, the Emperor sent unto the Synod certain letters of Vigilius,
testifying his condemning of those Three Chapters, and some other writings, the
reading of the^ is all was done in the seventh 7. Coll. 26. die Maij.
day of their Collation. Now for that the cause was sufficiently examined
before, and these letters were read only for a further evidence, but not for
necessity of the cause, and for that the Synod did nothing themselves, but
only heard the letters, and applauded the Emperors zeal and care for the
truth, therefore it is that this seventh Collation, and what was done therein
is omitted in the Synodall sentence, and the Council which on that seventh day
had made ready and intended to have pronounced their sentence, by this occasion
deferred it to the next, which was the eighth 8. Coll. 2. die Iunij.
day of their Collation, using these for the last words of their seventh days
meeting, De tribus capitulis altero die adjuvante Deo Synodicam sententiam
proferemus; God willing we will pronounce our Synodall sentence touching this
cause of the three Chapters the next day. And so they did in that eighth, which
was their last day of Collation. Thus not only by Nicephorus and the Emperors
Epistle, but by the evident testimony of the whole Synod in the synodall
sentence, it is undoubtedly certain that the cause of Origin was not as he
fancieth the first action or cause handled in the Synod, and that he does but
play the Mome in carping at the Acts for want of the first Action.

4. It may be yet that the cause of Origin was the second action in the fifth
Synod, as Nicephorus Loco citato.
says, and after him Evagrius Evag. lib. 4. ca. 37.
, and that is enough to prove the defects of these Acts. No, it was not the
second neither; as it was not before, so neither was it handled after the other
of the Three Chapters, witness the Synodall sentence it self, wherein all the
matters which every day they examined and discussed are set down and repeated;
after repetition they testify Coll. 8. p. 586. a
also, Repetitis igitur omnibus, quae apud nos acta sunt, all things being
repeated which were done or handled by way of discussion among us, or in this
Synod. Seeing they repeated all that was debated among them, and make no
mention of this cause of Origin, it is undoubtedly certain that Origens cause
was not debated either first or last in the Synod; it was neither the first
action, as Cedrenus and Baronius, nor the second, as Evagrius and Nicephorus
suppose; besides the very determination of the Synod, evidently declares the
errors of Nicephorus and Evagrius: The books, say they Niceph. et Evag. loc.
citat.
, against the doctrine of Origin being offered to the Synod, the Emperor
demanded of the Council, Quid de his statueret, What it would decree
concerning those doctrines? A matter utterly incoherent and improbable; for in
the synodall decree concerning the three Chapters, which they suppose to be
made before this cause of Origin was either heard or proposed, the Council had
expressly delivered their judgment, and condemned both Origin and his impious
writings. When they had already condemned both him and his errors, what an
incongruity is it to make the Emperor demand, what they would decree of him
and his errors? Or may we think that the holy Synod would first condemn
Origin, and his impious writings as they did, in the synodall sentence against
the three Chapters, and then afterward examine the matter, and make an enquiry
whether Origin and his writings were to be condemned or not? which were to
follow that disorder which the Switzers are reported to have used in judgment,
(which was most justly called Iudicium vetitum) to execute a man, and then try
and examine whether he ought to be executed or not. Far be it from any to
imagine such injustice and rashness to have been in this holy general
Council. Seeing then they condemned and accursed Origin and all his errors,
in that which Nicephorus and Evagrius account the former Session, it is
ridiculous to think that either the Emperor urged, or that they themselves
would in the second Session go Switzer-like to examine the books and
doctrines of Origin, whether he and they ought to be condemned. Some doubt
perhaps may arise out of those words in the Council Coll. 5. p. 552. a
, which the Cardinal slily An. 553. nu. 42 haec acta inquit desiderantur in
Synod^, etc.
alleges, Origin was condemned in the time of Theophilus, Quod etiam nunc in
ipsa fecit vestra Sanctitas, which your Holiness has now done, and Pope
Vigilius also. But if the words be marked, they make nothing against that which
I have said: for neither has that [Nunc] a relation to this present Council,
(for it is certain that in it Vigilius did not condemn Origin, seeing he was
not at all present in the Synod,) but to this age; he was condemned in former
ages, as namely by Theophilus, and now also, that is, in this your age, and
even by your selves, and by Vigilius: and if ought else were imported thereby,
yet is it only said that Origin was now condemned: which was indeed done by
the Synod: but that his cause was then examined and debated there, neither is
it true, neither do the words any way imply.

5. Nay I add further, not only that this Council did not debate this cause
of Origin, but it had been both superfluous, and an open wrong to themselves,
and to the whole Church, to have entered into the examination thereof. For
beside many other former judgments, not many Anno nempe 12. Iustiniani, and
Vigilii 2. ut notat Bar. an. 538. nu. 29. et 31.
years before in the time of Mennas, both the Emperor in an Imperial Edict
Extat Edict. to. 2. Conc. pa. 482. et seq.
had condemned Origin and his errors; and by the Emperors command, Mennas with
a Synod of Bishops then present at Constantinople, had confirmed that
condemnation; the other Bishops who were absent did the like, the Emperor
requiring every Patriarch to cause all the Bishops subject to his jurisdiction,
to subscribe to the same. The doctrines and writings of Origin were no doubt at
that time fully debated; all the Bishops present in this fifth Council had then
subscribed and consented to the condemnation of him and his errors; so had
Vigilius and all Catholic Bishops in the West. Seeing the judgment of the
Church in condemning Origin was universal, would the Council, after
themselves, and all other Catholic Bishops; that is, after the judgment of
the whole Catholic Church, now debate and examine whether Origin and his
doctrines ought to be condemned? They might as well call into question whether
Arius, or Macedonius, or Nestorius, or Eutyches, and their doctrine should be
condemned: the judgment of the Catholic Church was alike passed on them all:
for this Council Coll. 8. pa. 587
condemned and accursed Origin and his errors, as it did Arius, Macedonius,
Nestorius, and Eutyches, but it condemned them all upon the known judgment of
the Catholic Church, not upon a new trial or examination then taken of any
one of them. And this verily seems to have deceived and led into error
Evagrius, Nicephorus, and Cedrenus, (for of Baronius I cannot for many reasons
imagine it to have been error or ignorance in him, but wilful and malicious
oppugning the truth,) they knew or heard by report, (for even Evagrius Evag.
loc. cit.
, who lived in that age, says of that which he writes touching the fifth
Synod, Of these things sic actum accepimus, we have heard they were thus done,)
I say, they might hear (that which indeed was true) that Origin and his
errors were condemned in a Council at Constantinople in the time of
Justinian; and they not being curious, nor careful to sift the diversities of
Councels, nor exact in computating times, confounded the former particular
Synod under Mennas, wherein many of the doctrines of Origin were recited, and
he with them condemned in eleven Anathematismes Extant post edictum Justin. pa.
488.
, with this fifth general Synod, held some fourteen years after, wherein
Origin and his errors were also condemned, but neither the Emperors Edict
read, nor the cause of Origin debated, nor the particulars recited as they were
in the former. Further, it is most likely that together with diverse copies of
the fifth Council were annexed the Acts of that former under Mennas, that so
men might see what were the particular heresies condemned in Origin, wherein
some according to the order of time might set them before these, and others
according to the order of dignity might set them after the acts of this fifth
Council; which might occasion some with Cedrenus to think them a former, some
with Nicephorus to think them a second action of this fifth Council, whereas
in truth they were the acts of a several and provincial Council by
themselves, and neither the first nor last, nor any acts at all of this
general Council.

6. By this now I suppose every one does see the weakness of the Baronian
frame, touching the anathematismes and proceeding against Origin. They are not
extant among the acts of the fifth Synod. True: nor were they ever, nor ought
they to be inserted or set among the true Acts thereof: these anathematismes
neither were made nor repeated in the Council. The Edict of Justinian for the
condemning of Origin is not there neither. True, neither ought it to be; it
was never sent to, never published in this fifth Council: but if in any, in
that provincial Synod under Mennas, unto which it was sent; and the Cardinal
to prove that Edict to have been a part of these Acts, brings no other, nor
better proof than his own [ putamus an. 553. n. 242.
,] a proof so exceeding weak, that it is not worthy a refutation. The Epistle
of Justinian sent to the Synod commanding them to condemn Origin, which is one
of the fragments that Binius Post Conc. 5. pa. 604. et pa. 606. b. indicant
illa fragmenta, etc.
has added, is not among the Acts. True, nor ought it to be; for neither is it
Justinians, but an extract and brief collection of Cedrenus, who out of the
large Edict or Epistle, (as the Emperor calls it) collected this; neither
does it any way belong to this, but to the former Synod. The condemnation of
Didymus and Evagrius, says Binius Ib. pa. 606. b.
, together with Origin, was made in this fifth Synod, as the second Nicene
Council Act. 1. pa. 306. a.
witnesses, and that is not here among the Acts. That Didymus and Evagrius
were nominatim condemned in the fifth Synod, the second Nicene Council says it
not; no, if one would straightly stand upon it, they do not say so much as that
Communi et generali anathemate vi ejecti sunt Origenes, et Theodorus
Mopsvestenus, et quaecunque ab Evagrio et Didymo dicta sunt de praeexistentia.
Conc. Nic. 2. loco citat.
they were at all, but that their doctrines touching preexistence were
condemned. But say they said it; Didymus and Evagrius were two earnest
Origenists Didymus et Evagrius sectarii Origenis. Bin. loc. citat:
, and defenders of Origens error. Now the fifth Council not only condemns
Origin and his errors, sed eos qui similia praedictis haereticis sapuerunt, vel
sapiunt; but all who teach or think the like that Origin did: in which
generality Didymus and Evagrius, and all Origenists are condemned; which
general condemnation is all that can be enforced one of the second Nicene
Synod. Thus all the three defects which Baronius and Binius labor to prove in
these Acts about this cause of Origin, declare a foul maime in their own wits
and judgments, but none in the Acts, and do evidently show, that themselves
under color of correcting these acts, do indeed corrupt and falsify the same.

7. And yet (which one can scarce with patience endure, or read without scorn
of their folly) they are not content to tell what is stolen or taken away
touching this cause of Origin out of these acts, but like skillful
figure-flingers, they will name you the very thief, and tell particularly who
maimed the Acts in this part. And who think you is it? Even Theodorus Quis
dubitet id factu^ ab Origenistis qui Synodo praefueru^t, quorum patronus fuit
Theodorus malorum omniu^ concinnator. Bar. an. 553. nu. 244. and intelligere
potes quorum art quae in Synodo acta sunt contra Origenem and ejus errores ex
ea fuerint decurtata. ibid. Quis neget Theodorum Caesareensem abstulisse ^b
actis hujus Concilij quae suae causae ^erat aute^ Origenistarum patronus)
adversabantur. Bin. Notis in Conc. 5. pa. 606. b.
Bishop of Caesarea; they have an implacable hatred to him; he is an Origenist,
he the chief of the Origenists; and for love of Origin he corrupted the acts
of this fifth Synod, and stole away the proceedings against Origin, the
Anathematismes, the Edict, and Epistle of Justinian. O how blind and besotted
is a malicious mind? that is it which put this rare skill of divination into
the heart of Baronius and Binius. There is nothing stolen; as these Acts do
demonstrate, and yet they will tell you who took away the goods. They do with
Theodorus as the malicious Arians dealt Ruff. lib. 1. Eccl. hist. ca. 17. and
alij.
with Athanasius, proclaimed him for a murderer, and conjurer, and little less
than condemned him for killing Arsenius, and cutting off his right hand, which
they brought into the open Court; whereas Arsenius was both alive, and a sound
man with both his hands: So this viperous Arian brood proclaim Theodorus for
cutting off one arm of these Acts, which yet has no maime nor defect at all
in that part. Theodorus was a Catholic Bishop, a condemner and anathematizer
of Origin and all his errors, and yet they will enforce you to believe that he
is an heretic, an Origenist, the chief patron of the Origenists. Yet these
men have not very well summed up their accounts. For how did Theodorus take
away that which was against the Origenists, whereas he suffered to stay in the
Acts an anathema to Origin, and to the impious writings of Origin, and to all
that think as did Origin, yea to all that do not anathematize Origin? What
silliness was it in the Cardinal, to think that Theodorus or any Origenist
would spoil the Acts, and take away some discourses, and disputations against
Origin, and leave that which is the maine matter of all, the sentence of
condemnation against him, and his errors, yea against themselves, (supposing
them to be such as the Cardinal slandereth them) and that also subscribed by
their own hands, as an eternal witness against them? So maliciously blinded
were the Cardinal and Binius in this cause, that so they spoke against the
Council and the Catholic Bishops thereof, they regard not how untruly, how
unadvisedly they slander them. But neither is it a disgrace to Theodorus to
suffer like slander as did Athanasius, nor is it any honor to the Cardinal
and Binius to slander, and do the like as their forefathers the old Arians
have done before them. And thus much of the three first defects in these Acts,
which all concern the cause of Origin.

CAP. XXIX. The fourth defect in the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, for
that the Emperors Epistle to the fifth Council is wanting therein, refuted.
1. THE fourth defect which they find in these Acts, is the want of that other
Epistle of Justinian directed to the Synod, set down by Cedrenus, and out of
him annexed by Binius Epistola 2. Justin. ad Conc. Oecumenicum. 5. Bin. pa.
604. b
to the end of the Synod, as one of the fragments which were taken away from
the Acts. Of it Baronius An. 553. nu. 243.
thus writes: Cedrenus adjoyneth after this another Epistle of the Emperor
sent to the Synod, containing an history of the four general Counsels, in the
end whereof diverse things are written against Theodorus of Mopsvestia; the
beginning of it is this, Majores nostri fidei cultores, etc. That this same
Epistle sent to the Synod was inserted among the Acts thereof, nemo jure
dubitarit, none may justly doubt: so that by this you may perceive, Quamplurima
in eadem quinta Synodo desiderari, that very many things are wanting in the
Acts of this fifth Council. Thus Baronius. No sure: that cannot be hence
perceived: but another thing is most evident, that the Cardinal is more
malicious in carping at these Acts, and correcting Magnificat, than Momus
himself. May no man doubt but that this Epistle of Justinian (as it is set
down by Cedrenus) was inserted in the Acts of this fifth Council? what proof
has the Cardinal for this his confident saying? Truly none at all: nor could
he find any sound proof, if he had studied for one thirty years: for none
but a carping Momus can, and none at all ought to doubt of the contrary, that
this Epistle which is in Cedrenus, neither was Justinians Epistle, neither was
sent unto the Synod. Justinian indeed sent a very large and learned Epistle to
the Bishops of the Synod at their first assembling, containing altogether the
like effect, (to wit, a history or narration of the four former Counsels, and
a declaration of the impieties both of Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and of the
writing of Theodoret, and of the impious Epistle of Ibas:) by which he
commanded and authorized the Synod to examine and decide that controversy
touching the three Chapters; and that being the true and authentical Epistle
of Justinian, is extant in the Acts Collat. 1. pa. 518. and sequ.
, and is the warrant for all that the Synod did. That which out of Cedrenus the
Cardinal and Binius mention, is nothing else (as any man may easily see) but
an epitome or extract which Cedrenus himself, or some other undiscreet
abridger, collected out of the true Epistle of Justinian. It is not the use of
Emperors to send with their letters abridgements and briefes of the same,
especially such (of which sort this is) as come far short of the maine scope
of the same. Besides, if there were nothing else, yet the untruths which the
abbreviator sets down, and that quite contrary to the mind of Justinian, may
testify, it was neither writ, nor sent by him to the Synod. In that Baronian
Epistle Eutyches is said Eutyches Nestorii opiniones probat. in Frag. ex Cedr.
apud Bin. pa. 605. b.
to approve the opinions of Nestorius; whereas the heresy of Eutyches was
quite contrary to that of Nestorius, as Justinian Nestorio alium dicente Deum
verbum, et alium Christum, etc. Just. epist. Coll. 1. pa. 519.
truly observes in his Epistle; for Nestorius taught two Jn e^ te laudo quod
distinctionem naturarum secundum divin^tatis et humanitatis rationem praedicas.
Haec enim vera et orthodox^ sunt, etc. Sic Nestorius scribit Cyrillo, in ea
Epist. Nest. quae habetur. tom. 1. Ephesians. Con. ca. 14
natures to be in Christ, and to make two persons; Eutyches taught as but one
person, so but one Eutyches negat consubstantialem nobis esse carnem Domini.
Just. in Epist ad Synod. sup. citat. et anathem. qui dixit duas naturas post
adunationem, dicunt Eutychiani in conciliab. Ephesians. apud Conc. Chal. Act. 1.
nature. Yea the Eutycheans utterly condemned the Nestorians, and with them all
Catholics, as Nestorians, because Exclamaverunt, de vicina Nestoriana haeresi
infamantes nos, In duo separate, interficite eos qui dicunt duas naturas, de
Eutychianis loquitur, Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. pa. 8. a.
they taught 2. natures after the adunation to remain in Christ, Eum qui dicit
duas naturas in duo incidite, Qui dicit duas naturas, Nestorianus est. ibid.
pa. 12. a.
Qui dicit duas naturas, Nestorianus est. In that Baronian Epistle Eutyches is
affirmed to follow Nestorius, in that Eutyches Nestorii opiniones pr^bans;
dicensque carnem Christi non ejusdem cum nostra esse naturae. Epist. ex Cedr.
pa. 605. b.
he said that the flesh of Christ and ours are not of one nature; but Nestorius
taught no such thing, but the clean contrary Vt liquet ex verbis Nestorii, ante
citatis.
, the flesh which Christ took of the blessed Virgin to be truly humane, and
therefore the son of Mary to be truly, but yet only a man; as Justinian also
in his Epistle teaches. In that Baronian Epistle, Nestorius is said Opera
Theodori Mopsvesteni, qui magistrum suum Nestorium impie de rebus sacris
loquendo superabat. Epist. ex Cedr. loc. cit.
to have been the master or teacher of Theodorus; but the quite contrary is
truth, as both the whole fifth Et docerent non solum discipulum impietat^s
Nestorium, sed etiam doctorem ejus Theodorum. Coll. 8. pa. 585. b.
Council often, and even in their definitive sentence, and Justinian Per
Theodorum Mopsvestenum, doctorem Nestorij. Epist. Just. Coll. 1. p. 519.
in his Epistle do expressly witness. Are not Baronius and Binius rare men to
cure the lamenesse of Councels, who when the Acts are sound and perfect, would
patch unto them such false and unworthy writings, containing so manifest
untruths, repugnant to the authenticke records of the Acts? But woe come to all
Councels, Fathers, and ancient writings, when they must be amended and cured by
such Surgeons as Baronius and Binius. Give me the most lame and impotent
Councels that can be had, I had rather have them all to be creeples, than to
come under their deadly, unfortunate, and Harpyan hands, which defile every
history or writing that they touch.

CAP. XXX. The fifth defect in the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, for that
the Constitution of Pope Vigilius concerning the three Chapters is wanting
therein, refuted.
1. THe fifth defect which the Cardinal has spyed in these Acts, is, that the
Constitution of Pope Vigilius is not now extant therein. Of it the Cardinal
says An. 553. nu. 48
, That it belongs to the Acts of the fifth Synod, is evidently declared by
that which we have spoken: and again, this Ibid. nu. 47.
Constitution as also many other things, Noscitur esse sublatum, is known to
be taken out of the Acts of the fifth Synod. How prove you Sir, that either it
belongs to it, or is taken out of these Synodall acts? What? again so rude and
unmannerly as ask a reason of the Cardinal? Is it not proved sufficiently
when Baronius has said it? Truly then it is disproved sufficiently when an
opposer of Baronius has denied it. For any man for truth and credit may easily
oversway Baronius. I pray, why should the Popes Constitution be part of the
Acts, rather than the Emperors Edict? or why does the Cardinal find a defect
in wanting the Papal, which is heretical, and not of the Imperial which is
an orthodoxall decree?

2. Baronius will further tell you, out of which part of the Acts this is
stolen. It Libellus Synodo oblatus pridie Idus Maij. an. 553. nu. 41. et Papae
libellus oblatus Synodo: nos hic (in 5. Collatione) suo loco restituendu^ esse
putamus. ibid nu. 47.
was offered to the Synod in their fifth Collation, Ad Jbid. nu. 48.
hunc ipsum diem quintae Collationis pertinere cognoscitur; It is known that
the Popes Constitution belongs to this year, and to this very day of the fifth
Collation. And how I pray you is that known? Because Ibid.
the Constitution has in the end of it the date of the day and year wherein
Vigilius published it. A reason fit for none but a Cardinal. As if all
Constitutions, Letters, and Edicts which bear date of a year and a day,
belonged to that fifth Collation, and were certainly stolen out of it. Was ever
any infatuated, if not Baronius in this cause? But the Constitution bears date
Pridie Idus Maij. Bar. an. 553. nu. 210. eo autem die habita 5. Collatio. an.
eodem nu. 41.
on the 14. day of May, in the reign of Justinian, and the fifth Collation of
the Synod was on the same day. A like reason to the former: as if all Letters
or Constitutions written on that day must needs be published in the Council,
or on that very day in their Collation. Admitting it was read, yet the contrary
seems much rather to follow, that it was not read on that day, but on some
other after; for the Constitution is directed Gloriosissimo et clementissimo
filio Iustiniano, Vigilius Episcopus; ita incipit Constit. Vigil. apud Bar. an.
553 nu. 50.
, and was sent Vigilius pollicitus fuit se missurum (decretu^ suum seu
Constitutum) ad ipsum Imperatorem atque ad Syodum, quod et ingenue praestitit.
Bar. an. eodem. nu. 47.
to the Emperor: that could not be before the fourteenth day, on which it is
dated, and in likelihood the Emperor both read and examined it with leisure
before he sent it from him to the Council: the length of the Constitution may
easily persuade any, that one day was little enough for that business,
supposing no other affairs to have distracted the Emperor. Binius considering
this, and being better advised hereof, dissenting from the Cardinal herein,
tells us that the Constitution was read in their sixth Collation, which was on
the nineteenth 14. Kalendas Iunias. Coll. 6. in initio.
of May, Oblatum fuisse Concilio, Vigilij constitutum, etc. quibus non obscure
significatur idem Constitutum in sexto illo Patrum confessu recitatum fuisse.
Bin. Not. ad Conc. 5. pa. 610. a. et Ex Actis Concilii non obscure colligitur
ipsum (Constitutum) insexto Confessu Episcoporum recitatum fuisse. idem pa 606.
b.
four or five days after the date and publishing of it. So uncertain and
unlikely is that, of which the Cardinal says Cognoscitur, it is known to
belong to the fifth Collation.

3. But indeed, as the Imperial Edict was not, so neither was this Papal
Constitution publicly read, either in the fifth or sixth, or any other Collation
of this Synod, much less was it ever any part of the Synodall Acts thereof.
The Emperor, and so all the Bishops of the Synod labored, as much as they
could, to draw the whole Church to unity of faith with themselves, especially
Pope Vigilius, whose consent might happily draw after it, if not the whole; yet
a great part of the Western Church, which were most earnest in defense of the
Three Chapters. They knew that in particular, and by name to condemn Vigilius,
or his Constitution, might not only have exasperated, but even utterly
alienated the mind of Vigilius, and made him (and with him his adherents) more
obstinate in their heresy. They sought by silence to conceal and by charity
to suppress, as much as they could, that heretical and disgraceful
Constitution of his, and by their lenity and fair means, to gain him, and
his consent to them, yea, even to the truth it self: for this cause, though
they knew full well, that Vigilius had set out that decree, yea, though they
confuted all the substance thereof, and condemned both it, and him in
generalities, yet they forbear at all to name Vigilius, or in particular to
mention this his decree; that had been to proclaim hostility, and have made an
absolute breach betwixt them and Vigilius for ever.

4. Besides this, which was a very just reason, not so much as to publish (as
they did not) that Constitution in their Synod, the Emperor had always a
purpose to have (as in the seventh Collation was done) the Epistles of Vigilius
to Rusticus and Sebastianus to Valentinianus and others, openly read and
published in the Council: In them Vigilius by his Apostolical authority
decrees the condemning of the three Chapters: what a disgrace had this been
to Vigilius to publish first his Apostolical Constitution in defense, and
shortly after, his Apostolical Constitution for condemning the same Three
Chapters? How justly might this have incensed Vigilius, and for ever withheld
him from consenting to them, who had proclaimed him in their Council, and
recorded him in their Synodall Acts to be such a Proteus? Nay, this had
extenuated and vilified for ever the authority of Pope Vigilius, and the holy
Apostolic See, to record two constitutions, both proceeding ex Tripode,
fighting ex Diametro, and by an unreconciliable contradiction opposed the one
to the other. Seeing then both the Emperor, and the Council meant by their so
often expressing the consent of Vigilius to them, and by their reciting his
Apostolical Constitution for condemning the Three Chapters in the seventh
Collation, seeing they meant hereby to draw others to the like consent to the
truth, by the authority and credit of the Pope and his Apostolical decree: it
is not to be imagined that the Emperor of Council would at all, either
publish in their Synod, or insert among their Acts the contrary Constitution of
Vigilius in defense of the Three Chapters; in doing whereof they should not
only have for ever disgraced Vigilius, but have much impaired the reputation
of their own wisdom, and quite crossed their principal design: Nay, what
will you say if Baronius himself profess the same? See, and wonder to see him
infatuated in this point also. The Bishops, says he Bar. an. 553. nu. 218.
, of this fifth Council, that they might pretend to have the consent of
Vigilius to those things which they defined, expressed in their sentence, that
Vigilius had before both in writing and by word condemned these three Chapters,
tacentes omnino quid ab ipso per editum constitutum pendente Synodo pro
defensione trium Capitulorum decretum esset; wholly conc^aling, or saying
nothing at all of that decree, which in the time of the Synod he made for
defense of those three Chapters: Sicque nullam penitus de Vigilij Constitutione
mentionem habendam esse duxerunt, so they thought fit to make no mention at all
of the Constitution of Vigilius, wherein he defended the three Chapters. So
Baronius: whom, speaking the truth, I gladly embrace, and oppose him to
himself speaking an untruth in malice to these Synodall Acts.

5. Now if none of these reasons, nor yet Baronius his own express testimony
can persuade, but still the Cardinal or his friends will reply with his
cognoscitur. It is certainly known, that this Papal Constitution did belong
to this Synod, yea, to the fifth Collation thereof; I would gladly entreat some
of them to tell us in this, as in the former concerning Origin, who was the
thief, or robber, that cut out, or picked away his holiness Constitution; a
more capital crime than the expiling of the Delphian Temple, or the house of
Jupiter Ammon. Touch the Popes own writings, even his Apostolical decree
delivered out of the holy Chair? what Clement? what Ravailack might be so
impious, so audacious, so sacrilegious? was it some Origenist? no certainly,
the Constitution defending, that none after their death might be condemned, was
a shield and safe charter for Origin to bring him to heaven. Was it some
Monothelite? nothing less; they knew that this Constitution was the overthrow
of the Council of Chalcedon, and all the former holy Councils, Hoc Ithacus
velit, they would have wished the Constitution to have stood for ever: whom may
we deem then to have stolen away that Papal decree? Truly by the old Cassian
rule, Cui bono, none else but either some of the Popes themselves, or some of
their favorites, who being ashamed to see such an heretical Constitution of
Pope Vigilius stand among the Acts, judged theft and sacrilege a lesser crime,
than to have the Popes Chair thought fallible and heretical. Now because I
can imagine none to have been so presumptuous, and such is my charity and
favorable opinion of those holy fathers, and their children also, that they
would never commit such an heinous crime, as with sacrilege to maime the Acts
of the holy Councels; I do therefore here absolve and acquit them all of this
crime, promising against any adversary, be it Baronius himself, to defend
their innocence in this matter, until some of Baronius his friends can either
bring some further evidence against them, or else prove, which I think they
will hardly be able, that a decree, which was never extant among the Synodall
Acts, can be stolen or cut away out of the Synodall Acts.

CAP. XXXI. The sixth defect in the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius, for
that the decree which advanced Jerusalem to patriarchall dignity is wanting
therein, refuted.
1. THE sixth and last defect is of all the rest most memorable, concerning the
advancing of Jerusalem to a Patriarchall See, and annexing some Churches unto
it. That this was done in the fifth Council Baronius An. 553. nu. 245. Acta
illa desiderari noscuntur, quibus agebatur de adjectis Patriarchatui
Hierosolymitano Ecclesiis, etc.
proves by Guil. Tyrius De Bello sacro, lib. 24. ca. 12.
, who writes, that in the fifth Synod in the time of Justinian, Vigilius,
Eutychius, and the rest decreed, that this Bishopric of Jerusalem should have
the place of a Patriarch, with the rest: And because it was situate in a manner
in the limits of the Bishop of Alexandria and Antioch, and so there Non habens
unde illi urbi ordinaret suffraganeos, nisi utrique Patriarchae aliquid
detraheret.
was no means for it to have subordinate Bishops, unless somewhat were taken
from either of those Patriarkships, therefore it seemed good to the Synod to
take part from either; so they took from the Bishop of Antioch two Provinces,
Caesarea and Scythopolis; and two other from the Bishop of Alexandria, Ruba and
Beritus; besides which Metropolitan Sees, they took also from the same
Patriarks diverse Bishoprics, and erected some other; all which (being in
number twenty five) they subjected to their new founded Patriarch of Jerusalem.
This is the sum of that which Guil. Tyrius, and out of him Baronius
delivers, and Binius Bin. inter fragmenta addit post Co^c. 5 pa. 606. a.
adds this as a fragment or scrap of the fifth Council, which is now not found
among the Acts thereof. Baronius An. 553. nu. 246.
further glossing on this text, tells us, that though Iuvenalis had attempted
and obtained this before in the Council of Chalcedon, when the Post absentiam
Legatorum. Ibid.
Pope Legates were absent, yet Pope Leo resisting it, he prevailed not, nor was
the matter put in execution; but at this Sic igitur inverso antiquo ordi^e a
Nicaeno Constituto instituto, Caesariensis Ecclesia, totius Palestinae
Metropolis nunc primum subjecta est Hierosolimorum Ecclesiae. Bar. Ibid.
time the ancient order instituted by the Nicene Council, being inverted,
Caesarea was now first of all made subject to the Church of Jerusalem, which
now was become a Patriarchall See.

2. This whole passage of Baronius (approving that testimony of Guil. Tyrius
which is justly refuted by Berterius Diatr. 2. ca. 2.
) I cannot tell what to call, but sure I am, it consists of diverse untruths,
not so much upon ignorance (then his sin had been less) as maliciously
objected against the Acts of this holy Synod; some of them I will explane,
beginning with that which is the ^^ine point of all. First then it is untrue,
that this fifth Synod advanced the Sea of Jerusalem to a Patriarkship. Not to
the name and title of a Patriarch, for that it had long before, as Bellar.
Hierosolimitan^ per annos fere quingentos habita est quarta Pa^ria chalis, sed
nomine non re, seu honor non potestate. Bell. lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans ca. 24.
^orro.
and Binius Binius verba Bellar. repetit, et ait id patere ex Conc. Nic. Can.
7. notis in Epist. 3. Anaclet. to. 1. Conc. pa. 105. and not. in Conc. Nicen.
ca. 7. pa. 31^. a.
profess; and though it was but a single Bishorick, subject, as both Jerome,
Hoc ibi (in Conc. Nic.) decernitur ut Palestinae Metropolis Cesarea sit, et
totius Orientis Antiochia. Hier. Epist. ad Pammach. contra Johan. Epis. Hieros.
and the Nicene Habeat Aelia honoris consequentiam (post Antiochiam) Metropoli
propria dignitate servata. Conc. Nic. Can. 7.
Council declare, to the Bishop of Antioch, as his Patriarch, and to the
Bishop of Cesarea Palestina, (for there is another in Cappadocia,) as his
Metropolitan, yet for honor of our Saviors resurrection in that place, it had
the name of Hieros. limita^ ^^^scopus sc^^bat. loco, sed null^ Archi-Episcopo
vel Episcopo praeerat. Bell. loc. cit.
Patriark, and preeminency in Councels Nam sedit 4. loco in Concilio Niceno, et
subscribit ante Episcopum Caesariensem in Conc. Nicene, et Constant. ut ex
subscriptione liquet, et in Conc. Chalc. Act 5.
to the Bishop of Caesarea. Not to the authority and power of a Patriarch, for
that it had, and had it justly, long before this fifth Council, even by the
decree and judgment of the Council of Chalcedon. Iuvenalis Epist. 62. Leonis.
had sued for it in the Ephesine Council, but the Bish. of Antioch, as it
seems, then being unwilling to manumit him, and as it were, free him from his
subjection, Cyrill resisted it and writ to Pope Leo, praying him to do the
like. But after long contention both parties being thoroughly agreed, the matter
was brought to the Council of Chalcedon, where Maximus and Iuvenalis, the
Bishops of both Sees, first of all, and before the whole Council, professed
that they were both willing, that Placuit mihi (ait Maximus) et Iuvenali
propter multam contentionem ut seeds Antiochena habeat duas Phaenicias et
Arabiam, seeds autem Hierosolymorum habeat tres Palestinas, et rogamus ex
decreto vestr^ haec firmari. Conc. Chalc. Act. 7. pa. 105.
the Bishop of Antioch should hold the two Pheniciaes and Arabia, and the
Bishop of Jerusalem should hold the three Palestinaes, and they both requested
the whole Synod to decree, confirm, and ratify the same. The whole Council
thereupon by their decree confirmed the same, all the most revere^d Bishops
cried Ibid.
, We all say the same, and we consent thereunto. After them the most glorious
Judges in the name of the Emperor, added Imperial authority and the royal
assent to the Synods decree, saying, Firmum etiam per nostrum decretu^ and
sententiam Concilij in omni tempore permanebit hoc; this shall abide firm for
ever by our decree, and by the judgment of the Council, that the Church of
Antioch have under it the two Pheniciaes, and Arabia; and the Church of
Jerusalem have under it the three Palestines. Thus the Judges. The same Decree
of this Council at Chalcedon is expressly testified both by Evagrius Evag. l.
2. ca. 18
and Nicephorus Nic. Callist. lib. 15. ca. 30.
. So untrue it is which Guil. Tyrius, and out of him Baronius avoucheth, that
the Church of Jerusalem was first made a Patriarchall See, or had the Provinces
and Metropolitanes of Casarea and Scithopolis annexed unto it by the fifth
Council, that it is undoubtedly certain, that it had with the title and
dignity, true Patriarchal authority and power over diverse Provinces, together
with their inferior Bishops conferred upon it, with a plenary consent of the
whole Church in the Council of Chalcedon. And that you may see the most
shameful dealing both of Bar. and Binius in another place (where their choler
against this fifth Council was not moved) they acknowledge that truth; for
entreating of the Council at Chalcedon: In this seventh Session of it, says
Baronius An. 451. nu. 124.
, (and the like does Binius Not. in Conc. Chalc. pa. 184. b.
) was the controversy composed betwixt the Bishops of Antioch and Jerusalem,
and the cause being judged, the two Pheniciae and Arabia, were given to the
Bishop of Antioch, and the three Palestines were adjudged to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, ex quibus jam perspicue ^^paret jus Metropolis in Hierosolymitanam
Ecclesiam esse translatum; whence it does evidently appear, that the right of
the Metropolis which before belonged to the Bishop of Caesarea was translated
to the Bishop of Jerusalem. So they: who yet in hatred against the Acts of the
fifth Council with faces of Adamant deny that truth which here they confess to
be clear and conspicuous.

3. But (says the Cardinal An. 553. nu. 246.
) the decree of Chalcedon was made, post absentiam Legatorum, when the Popes
Legates were now gone, and so they being absent, is to be held invalid. O the
forehead of the Cardinal! Were the Popes Legates absent? were they gone? Truly
they were not only present at this decree, and consenting unto it, but after
it was proposed by Maximus and Iuvenalis, they were the very first men that
gave sentence therein, whose sentence the whole Council followed. For thus it
is said Conc. Chalc. Act. 7. pa. 105. a
, Pascasinus and Lucentius the most reverend Bishops, and Boniface a Presbyter,
these holding the place of the Apostolic See, said by Pascasinus; These things
betwixt Maximus and Iuvenalis are known to be done for their good and peace;
and nostrae humilitatis interloquutione firmantur, and they are confirmed by
the interloquution of our humility; ut nulla imposterum de hac causa sit
contentio, that never hereafter there should be any contention about this
matter between these Churches. Is it credible that the Cardinal could be so
audacious and impudent, as to utter such palpable untruths? Unless he had
quite put off, I say not modesty, but reason, sense, and almost humane nature.
Let this stand for the second capital untruth in this passage.

4. Yet Pope Leo himself, says Baronius Loco citato.
, withstood that Decree of the Council at Chalcedon, because it was
prejudicial to the rights of other Churches; and by reason he consented not,
it was not put in execution, as it was after this Decree of the fifth Synod. Had
the Cardinal and his friends been well advised, they would fear, and be
much ashamed once to mention the resistance of Pope Leo to the Council at
Chalcedon, either in those Patriarks, or in the other of Constantinople: for
first the resistance of Leo, which was merely ineffectuall, demonstrates, that
the Popes contradiction, with all his might and power, can neither disanull nor
infringe the judgment of a general Council; which is no small prejudice to
his Princehood, or Princely supremacy. Again, it convinces Leo of a very
foul and unexcusable error, seeing Leo judged the Nicene Canons concerning
matters of order, policy, and government of the Church (such as these are
about the extent of Sees, or superiority of one Patriarch or Bishop above
another) to be unalterable and eternal, no less than the decrees of faith:
The condition (says he Leo Epist. 53.
) of the Nicene Canons (in the margent he points at the sixth and seventh, both
which concern the limits of Sees) being ordained by the Spirit of God, is in no
part soluble; and whatsoever is diverse from their Constitution, omni penitus
authoritate vacuum est; is utterly void of all authority, by whomsoever it be
decreed, fewer or more. Again Epist. eadem.
, the Nicene fathers, after they had condemned Arius, made laws of
Ecclesiastical Canons, mansuras usque in finem mundi, which are to stand in
force until the end of the world; and if ought be any where presumed to be
done otherwise than they have decreed, sine cunctatione cassatur, it is
presently made void. Again Epist. 54.
, the privileges of Churches being instituted by the Canons of the holy
Fathers, and confirmed by the Nicene decrees, nulla possunt improbitate
convelli, nulla novitate mutari; they can be infringed by no improbity, they
can by no novelty be altered. Again Epist. 61.
, concerning Iuvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, who was now truly made a Patriarch,
for keeping the Statutes of the holy fathers, which in the Nicene Synod are
confirmed, inviolabilibus decretis, by inviolable decrees; I admonish your
sanctity, that the laws of the Churches remain; let no man's ambition covet
that which is another man's, let no man seek by impairing another to advance
himself, for though they think to strengthen their desires by Councels,
infirmum atque irritum erit quicquid a praedicatorum patrum Canonibus
discreparit; whatsoever is diverse from these Nicene Canons shall be void.
Lastly Epist. 62.
, to Maximus Bishop of Antioch, let it suffice that I pronounce this in
general, ad omnia, for all matters, concerning limits of Sees, and the like,
that if any thing be attempted by any man, in any Synod, against the Statutes
of the Nicene Canons, nihil praejudicij potest inviolabilibus infer decretis,
it can bring no prejudice to these unalterable and inviolable decrees. Thus
Pope Leo erroniously judging the order set down in the Nicene Canons, for the
bounds and pre-eminence of Bishops to be for ever, or by any Council
whatsoever immutable.

5. See now the wisdom of the Cardinal in alleging Pope Leo. If the decree
at Chalcedon was not of force because Leo contradicted it, then neither can
that other decree, supposed to be made in the fifth Council, be of force,
because Leo contradicts it also, for by Leo his judgment, at no time, by no
person, by no Council, by no authority can the order set down at Nice be
changed. If that at Chalcedon was not in force, to which the Popes Legates
consented, how can the Cardinal think think this of the fifth Council to be
of force, to which neither Pope nor Legate consented, nor was so much as
present in the Council? If the judgment of Leo stand for good, then neither
is, nor ever was either Constantinople or Jerusalem Patriarchall Sees; and then
the decree of the eighth Council Haec sancta and magna Synodus, tam in seniori
and nova Roma, quam in sede Alexandriae, Antiochiae et Hierosolymorum priscam
consuetudine^ decernit in omnibus conserva^i, ita ut eorum praesules
universerum Metropolitanorum qui ab ipsis promoventur, habeant potestatem, ad
convoca^dum eos, ad co^rcendum et corrigendum. Can. 17 Conc. 8. apud Bin. pa.
850.
, and the Conc. Later. 4. habitum sub Jnnoc. 3. ca. 5.
Laterane, and I know not how many Councels must be rejected as unlawful and
impious, if the judgment of Leo be (as by the eighth Council and their
Laterane it is adjudged) erroneous, then was Jerusalem a Patriarchall See,
notwithstanding the contradiction of Leo to that decree. In a word, if Leo his
judgment be of force, it repeales the decreee of the fifth, eighth, and all
other general Councels decreeing this; if it be not of force, it neither did
nor could infringe the decree of Chalcedon. So unadvised was the Cardinal in
alleging th the resistance of Leo to that decree.

6. And to satisfy the Cardinal yet a little more fully, it is an untruth
which he says Quo minus ea (quae Chalcedone obtinuit Juvenalis) executioni
mandata essent. Leo Romans Pont. intercessit. Nunc ergo primum (in Concilio 5.)
Hierosolymorum Ecclesia Patriarchatu vere aucta cognoscitur. Bar. an. 553. nu.
246.
, that the Decree of Chalcedon was not put in execution before the time of this
fifth Synod, and this supposed decree thereof, for the Council of Chalcedon Act.
7.
decreed that their sentence in advancing Jerusalem to a Patriarchall See,
should stand in force, in omni tempore, and therefore doubtless even then, and
from that very time it was truly a Patriarchall See, the contradiction of Leo
no more hindering it the very next or second year, than it did two hundred or
two thousand years after that decree made. Again, as it is certain for the Sea of Constantinople, that it both before and after the Decree of Chalcedon
(which was not inotrductory but confirmative in that point) exercised
Patriarchall authority, Justinian also by his Imperial law Novel. 131. ca. 1,
et 2.
made some twelve Data est Novel. Basilio Coss. ut in sine ejus liquet, is vero
est annus Regni Justiniani 15. et Conc. 4. habitum an. Just. 27.
years before the fifth Council, confirming the same; and so it is not to be
doubted but the Church of Jerusalem did the very like in it own Patriarchall
Diocese, especially considering, that the Imperial law of Justinian is as
forcible Saucimus vicem legum obtinere sanctas Ecclesiasticas regulas quae a
sanctis 4. Concilijs expositae sunt, aut firmatae. Nov. eadem ca. 1.
for the one as for the other: So that for any one to have denied or sought
then to have infringed the Patriarchall authority confirmed to Constantinople,
conferred to Jerusalem by the Council of Chalcedon, had brought him into
danger not only of Ecclesiastical censure, but of civil punishments, and of
the Emperors high indignation: Act. 5. pa. 455. et seq.
Or if the Cardinal will not be satisfied unless he see the practice of
that Patriarchall authority, let him look in the general Council under
Mennas, and there he shall see John Bishop of Jerusalem hold a Provincial
Council of the Bishops of the three Palestines, qui sub eo sunt, who were
under him, two of which, as by their subscriptions appear, were the
Metropolitan Bishops of Caesarea and Scythopolis, with thirty more; so many
were then subject to the Patriarch of Jerusalem. Again, in another Provincial
Council Conc. Hieros. contra Severum et alios extat, to. 2 Conc. pa 472.
held at Jerusalem the tenth year of Justinian, Peter, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
is President Praesidente sanctissimo Patriarcha Petro, assistentibus Episcopis
trium Palestinarum. Ibid.
over all the Bishops of the three Palestines there assembled with him, two of
which were the foresaid Metropolitanes. So untrue it is which Baronius to
maintain the false testimony of Guil. Tyrius avoucheth, that the Decree of
Chalcedon was not put in execution before this fifth Council. Let this be
scored for his third capital untruth in this short passage.

7. A fourth untruth is that which is said in the fragments, that the Council
had no other means to erect this Patriarchship of Jerusalem, but by taking
part from both the other of Antioch and Alexandria, for there was another
means, as both the Decree of Chalcedon, and the event did show, and nothing at
al was taken from the Sea of Alexandria.

8. A fifth untruth is, that they took from Alexandria the Metropolitan Sees
and Provinces of Ruba and Berithus, for neither of these Sees belonged to the
Patriarch of Alexandria, but of Antioch; of them both Berterius Diatr. 2. ca. 2.
(refuting this very fragment, which the Cardinal and Binius so gladly snatch
at) says At certe Ruba a Ptolomeo in Syria ponitur, et Berithum Phaenices
Libani Metropolim esse constat, Syria autem et Phaenice Orientis Provinciae
omnibus notae sunt* Nihil igitur ab Aegyptiaca Alexandrini Patriarchae diocaesi
accepit Hierosolymitanus. Quod si ita est, non temere Tyrio et veteri huic
scripto (fragmento scilicet Baroniano and Biniano) fides adhi^enda. Bert. Ibid.
, certainly Ruba is placed by Ptolome in Syria; and it is manifest, that
Berithus is the Metropolis of Phenice, near Libanus: Syria autem and Phenicia
Orientis Provinciae omnibus notae sunt; but Syria and Phenicia to be Provinces
of the East (and so belonging formerly to the Sea of Antioch) all men do know.
Thus he; and for Berithus the matter is certain, that it is not near the
bounds or limits of Alexandria, for that it is in the Province of Phenicia, not
only Ptolome Ptol. Geog. lib. 5. ca. 15. ubi Berithum ponit situm in Syria.
shows, but the subscriptions of the Bishops, both in the Nicene Provinciae
Phaenices Gregorius Berithi, pa. 310. b.
, in the first Constantinopolitane Provinciae Phaenices Timotheus Beritius, pa.
513. a.
, and Chalcedon Eust. Berithi civitatis Phaenices maritimae. Act. 1. pa. 2. a.
Councels, in all which the Bishop of Berithus is set in the Province of
Phenicia; whence again a sixth untruth is to be observed in that fragment of
Tyrius, for it says Subtraxerunt Alexandrino Ecclesiam Berithensem; et quoniam
iterum eundem Patriarcham (Hierosolymitanum) oportebat habere prater
supradictos Metropolitanos, etc. Frag. sup. citato.
, that Berithus was granted to the new Patriarch of Jerusalem; whereas it is
clear, that it was in Phenicia, and that the two Pheniciae Council Chalc. Act.
7. pa. 105. ut seeds Antiochena habeat duas Phaenicias, etc.
, both by the agreement of Max. and Iuvenalis, and by the decree of the
Council of Chalcedon did belong to the Sea and Bishop of Antioch, and not of
Jerusalem.

9. Is not this now think you a worthy fragment which Baronius and Binius have
found to be wanting, and will you, nill you, will needs fasten to the fifth
Council? Are not they excellent Surgeons to cure lame Councels? who to the
fair and authenticke Acts and Records of this Synod would patch such a
rablement of untruths, quite repugnant to the mind of this fifth Synod? For
seeing as Gregory Lib. 7. Ind. 2. Epist. 54.
truly says, it was in omnibus sequax, in all things a follower of the
Council at Chalcedon, most certainly it never either decreed or approved this
of taking ought from the Sea of Alexandria, or of adding Berithus and Ruba to
the Sea of Jerusalem; both which are directly contrary to the Decree of
Chalcedon, which this fifth Council follows. Let the Cardinal and Binius
themselves feed upon these and such like scraps and husks, they are fit and
dainty meat for the Cardinals tooth and palate, which relisheth little, unless
it have a touch of falsehood. But as I said before, so I here again proclaim,
let all Councels be a thousand times lame, rather than receive any crutches of
the Cardinals and of Binius devising and framing. And now you have all their
defectives, wherein I doubt not but every one sees both the defects to rest in
their corrupted judgment, and the truth of these Acts to be much more
confirmed hereby; seeing neither the craft, nor malice, nor extreme labor of
Baronius and Binius was able to find so much as any one thing which is wanting
or defective in them.

CAP. XXXII. The two first additions to the Synodall Acts pretended by
Baronius, for that the Epistle of Mennas to Vigilius, and the two laws of
Theodosius are falsely inserted therein; refuted.
1. LEt us in the last place, says Baronius Iam ad postremum videa nuquae ab
im^osteribus fuerunt 5. Synodi nomine pervulgata. Bar. an. 553. nu. 247.
, see what things Impostours have published under the name of the fifth Synod;
Quaeve An. cod. nu. 238.
spuria eidem accesserunt, and what counterfeit additions are inserted in these
Acts. Of these in general the Cardinal An. ^^d. nu. 29.
tells us, Pudenda plane in istis intextae habentur, there are inserted very
shameful matters into these Acts, such as are altogether unworthy of an
ecumenical Synod. An heinous crime indeed, if the Cardinal can justify this.
For though we might deplore the defects if ought were wanting, yet that is no
prejudice to the truth of that which remains, no more than the extreme want
and shipwreck of the Nicene Acts, does or can discredit the truth of the
Canons which are come safe to land. But if in these Acts which now are extant,
and pass for the true and faithful Acts of the fifth Synod, Impostors have
inserted false and counterfeit writings, that may cause one justly to misdoubt
the truth of these acts which we have: for why (will some say) may not that
part, or any one be forged or foisted in, as well as this or that? Let us then
see how well the Cardinal does prove this redundant corruption in these Acts
which now are extant of this fifth Council: his proofs thereof are five.

2. The first Monoth^litarum fuit inventum ut sub tit^lo 5. Synodi, epistolam
Mennae ediderint. Bar. an. 553. nu. 247.
is taken out of the sixth general Council, in which when the Monothelites
alleged an Epistle of Mennas to Vigilius as out of the Acts of the fifth Synod,
It was proved that those Acts were corrupted, and that the heretics had
inserted three quaternions, that is, four and twenty leaves into the same
Acts. Again Duae in ea ( 7. Action^ Council. 5.) Epistolae inventae sunt quas
commentias esse and suppositias manifest probarunt ibid.
, in the 7. Action or Collation it was found further, that they added two
Epistles of Vigilius, one to Justinian, and the other to Theodora; by which you
see, says the Cardinal Vides igitur quam fuerit 5. Synodus tum ab Origenistis,
tum a Monothelitis diversis temporibus lanciata. ibid.
, that the Acts of the fifth Synod have been foully corrupted by the
Monothelites. We see it indeed. And we see withal another thing no less
remarkable and clear, that the Cardinal is an insignious slanderer, and
plays the trifling Sophister in the highest degree. Who ever doubted or
denied, but that some copies of the Acts of this Synod have been corrupted? of
this, none that read the sixth Act. 3. and Act. 14.
Council can make the least question in the world. For three corrupted copies
were produced Act. 14.
and examined, and some other were mentioned, and the authors, both who
falsified them, and who writ the inserted additions are all there recorded. Nay
the three corrupted copies were not only discovered, but accursed Anathema
libro qui dicitur Mennae ad Vigilium, and qui cu^ sinxerunt sive scripserunt.
Anathema lib^llis qui dicuntur facti fuisse a Vigilio ad Iustinianum et
Theodorum. Anathema simul eis qui falsaverunt acta sancti and universalis
quinti Concilij. ibid. pa. 74 b.
, defaced Chartaceum volumen quod falsatum est decernimus cassari in locis, in
quibus adjectiones sunt facta: veru^ libros etiam eos, obelis obduci, in locis
in quibus depravaeti sunt, and cassari, etc. ibid. pa. 73.
, and raced before the whole Synod, so far as any corruption could be found.
Does the Cardinal know any man to defend as sincere, or justify one of those
corrupted Monothelite copies? If he do, the sixth Council is an unresistable
record against such; and we will join with him in confuting such
audaciousnesse. Or will the Cardinal say, that the Acts of the fifth Synod
which are now extant, either have those additions, or were written and taken
out of those corrupted and falsified copies? It is as clear as the Sun they
are not, for not one of those Monothelite additions are in these Acts now
extant. These Acts, and no other are they which we defend, and which the
Cardinal undertook to disgrace, and prove to be corrupted, and to have
forgeries patched unto them. Against these Acts, the Cardinals proof out of
the sixth Synod is so idle, and so ridiculously sophistical, as not disputing
ad idem, that he had need to pray that the Sophisters in our Schools hear
not of, and applaud his rare skill in Logic. If because some copies were
corrupted by the Monothelites, those which most certainly escaped their hands
must be condemned, then no deed, nor testament, though never so truly
authentical, may be trusted, for a forgerer may exscribe it, and add what he
pleases in his extracted copy; or because the Roman copies of the Nicene
Canons were corrupted by l Zozimus, Bonifacius, or some of their friends,
therefore the authenticke records thereof (the true copies of which the
Africane Bishops with much labor purchased from Constantinople and
Alexandria,) must be distrusted: which yet the Africane Synod (Saint Austen
among the rest) so much honored, that they gave a just check to the Pope, and
manifested that blot in him, which all the water in Tiber will never wash away.

3. The Cardinal An. 554. nu. 8 Exemplaria genuina misisse noscitur Gregorius.
, and after him Binius Germana exemplaria S. Synodi vidit and cognovit S.
Gregorius. lib. 12. Epist. 7. Bin. pa. 607. a.
, tells us a great matter and rare news, that in Pope Gregory's time, the Acts
of this Synod were entire, and that he sent the genuine copy thereof to Queen
Theodalinda: (An evidence by the way that the Cardinal S. Greg. lib 7 Epist
54. in depravata Synodi (quintae) exemplaria incidisse liquet, dum ait Ibam
negasse dictam epistolam esse suam. Bar. an. 448. nu. 76.
wittingly and wilfully slandereth the acts which Gregory followed to have
been corrupted; wherein Ibas is truly said (as the true genuine acts do also
witness) to have denied the Epistle to be his.) But let that pass: why do
they mention the Copies of the Acts to have been sincere in Gregory's time, as
if after that time no true copies thereof could be found? In the sixth Council
more than 70. Obijt Greg. an. 604. Con. 6. habitum. an. 681.
years after the death of Gregory, diverse true, ancient, and incorrupt copies
Praefatos duos libros falsatos esse, eo quod neque in unum e prolatis antiquis
and immutilatis lib^is, ejusdem sancti Concilijs, neque in chartaceo libro qui
in recenti inventus est apud bibliothecam venerabilis Pat^iorobij. Act. 14. pa.
73. b
were produced of the same: one of them were found in the very Registry at
Constantinople, which the Monothelites of that See had not corrupted and
falsified; by it and the other true and entire copies, were discovered and
convinced the corruption of those three books which they cancelled and
defaced; how will or can either the Cardinal or Binius, or any other, prove
that these Acts now extant, are not consonant to those, or taken out, or
published according to them? Truly I do verily persuade my self, considering
both that the sixth Council was so careful and vigilant to preserve the true
Acts; and also that these which now we have, are so exact, as before I have
declared, that these are no other than the copies of those self same ancient
and incorrupted acts (save some few and light faults, which by the writers
thereof have happened) which Pope Gregory had, and in that sixth Council were
read, and commended to all posterity. And I doubt not but the fraud of
heretics being then so fully and openly discovered, the Church ever since has
most diligently and curiously, not only carefully, preserved the same. Which
may well be thought to be the true cause, why of all the eight Councels the
Acts of these three last, that at Chalcedon, this fifth, and the other of the
sixth, are come most safe and entire unto our hands. Howsoever, certain it is
that the Cardinal and Binius do most childishly sophisticate, in accusing the
copies of the Acts now extant, (which only we defend) to be corrupted, because
those three or more copies of the Acts which were produced in the sixth Synod,
(which we detest and condemn much more than the Cardinal) were falsified by
the Monothelites, none of those false additions being found in these.

4. The second imposture or fictitious writing which Baronius observes to be
inserted in these acts, are the two laws of Theodosius against Nestorius,
recited in the fifth Collation. We may not omit this, says he an. 553. nu. 46.
, that those laws of Theodosius against Nestorius, aliter se habere in Codice
Theodosiano, are otherwise set down both in the Code of Theodosius, and in the
Ephesine Council, in which there is no mention at all of Theodoret, as in one
of these there is: and then he concludes, haec de commentitiis scriptis, this
may be spoken of the counterfeit writings inserted in these Acts. Thus Baronius
I am somewhat ashamed that such a reason should slip from a Cardinal,
specially from Baronius, for it bewrayes an exceeding imbecility of judgment.
There is but one law extant in the Theodosian Code Tit. de haeret. ^ig. 66.
Damnato
against Nestorius, and the followers of his sect. Now because the laws which
are recited in the Synodall Acts Coll. 5. pa. 544. and seq.
of this fifth Council, are different from it, hereupon the Cardinal presently
concludes it to be a forgery, an imposture: he might as well conclude the
Gospel of S. Luke, or S. John to be forged, because they differ from the
Gospels of Matthew and Mark: or the Book of Deuteronomy to be forged, because
some laws in Exodus are different from some in Deuteronomy. Is it possible, or
credible, that Baronius could be so simple, and so infatuated, as to think one
Emperor might not make diverse laws concerning one heresy? specially against
diverse persons, or diverse writings, though all of them supporting one heresy?
The law in the Code and these in the Acts are different laws: True, they are
so: but can the Cardinal prove, or does he once offer to prove that they are
one law? and that they ought not to differ? No: the Cardinal was wise enough
not to undertake so hard a task. For it is as evident as the Sun, that the law
against Nestorius which is in the Code was one, and first published; and long
after that these which are recited in the Acts. In the one of these it is said
Pa. 544. b.
, Iterum, igitur doctrina Diodori, and Theodori, and Nestorij visa est nobis
abominanda, It seems good to us again to detest the doctrine of Diodorus,
Theodorus, and Nestorius. This Iterum, imports it was once done before in a
former law, and now in this the Emperor would do the same again. As the
laws, so the occasion of them, was quite different. That in the Code was made
indeed against the heresies of the Nestorians, but in it none of them were
personally and by name condemned, but only Nestorius, all the rest who favored
that heresy, were in a generality, not by name condemned; because when that
law was made, the Nestorians honored, and held Nestorius for their chiefest
patron, and urged his writings: In these two recited in the Acts, Diodorus of
Tarsis, Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and their writings, are particularly, and by
name condemned, as well as Nestorius: and in the later the writings also of
Theodoret against Cyrill: for when after that first law set down in the Code,
the Nestorians durst not, nor could without danger of punishment either praise
Nestorius, or read, write, or urge his books, which were all by that law
condemned: then they began to magnify Theodorus of Mopsvestia, and Diodorus,
and the writing of Theodoret, all which were as plain and plentiful for their
heresy, as Nestorius himself: but because these were not as yet by name
condemned, nor by name prohibited, they presumed more boldly to rely on them.
The Catholics, and specially they of Armenia, as is witnessed Coll. 5. pa. 542
in a letter from them to Proclus, seeing this their new device, entreated the
Emperor Theodosius to stop that wicked course, and to condemn by name
Theodorus, as well as he had done Nestorius. Which though at the first the
Emperor did not, yet seeing how insolent the Nestorians grew upon those
writings, long after the former, he published these two, condemning now
explicit by name, and in particular, Diodorus, Theodorus, and the writing of
Theodoret, which before were only implicit, and in a generality condemned.
When the laws, the occasion, the time of promulgation, were all different, was
not the Cardinal, think you, bereft of judgment, who would prove these later
to be forged and counterfeit, because they differ from the former, with which
they should not agree.

5. It may be the Cardinal thought that all laws were expressed in the Code,
and therefore if there had been any such laws as they, they would have been
there set down. A conceit I believe which will never enter into any man's mind,
while he has use of his five wits, but into the Cardinals, who has conceits
by himself, and knows notes above Ela. To say nothing of the twelve Tables,
and of all the ancient Roman laws, (no part of which are extant in the
Theodosian Code,) the most ancient law mentioned in the Gregorian, surpasses
not the time of the Emperor Antoninus Nam 1. lex ibi posita, est imperante
Antonino and Severo.
; and in the Theodosian, not the time of Constantine. Can the Cardinal assure
us that all the Laws of Constantine, Constantius, and the other Emperors till
the time of Theodosius the younger, Vt liquet ex tit. 1. l. 1.
are expressed in this Code? Eusebius Lib. 2. de vitae Constant. ca. 30. 31.
and seq.
, and Zozomen Lib. 1. ca. 8.
mention diverse of Constantines laws, Pro liberatione exulum, Pro reducendis
relegatis, Pro ijs qui ad metalla damnati erant, Pro confessoribus, Pro
ingenuis, Quod Ecclesia sit haeres ijs quibus nemo de sanguine superfuerit; De
sacellis, and coemiteriis, and many the like; none of which are in the
Theodosian Code; they were all published, if the Cardinal say an. 318. nu. 37.
true, in the Consulship of Licinius, the fifth time, and Crispus; for which
year the Code has no laws, but two Vide Chronol. omnium Constit. Imperat.
servata Consulum ratione. extat post finem Codicis Theod.
, one De veteranis, and another De parricidio.

6. To come yet nearer to the very times of Theodosius: besides all these, he
made another Edict and law against Nestorius Extat illa lex tom. 5. Conc.
Ephesians. ca. 19.
, commanding if any Bishop or Clerk mention that heresy, that he should
forthwith be deposed; if a Laicke, be anathematized; in which law he
particularly commands Irenaeus Bishop of Tyrus to be deposed from his See.
This law, though it is both recorded in the Acts of the Ephesine Council, and
confessed by the Cardinal An. 448. nu. 2. and seq.
to be truly the Emperors Law; yet is not extant in the Code, nor is it all
one with that which is there set down. The Cardinal by the same reason might
prove it a forgery, as well as those other two, and conclude the Acts of the
Ephesine Council to be falsified by Impostors, and so to be of no credit, as
well as the Acts of this fifth Synod. Further yet, there was another law against
Nestorius published by the same Theodosius after the Ephesine latrociny, and
recorded in the Acts of the Council Act. 3. pa. 85.
at Chalcedon; wherein the Emperor shows again his detestation of that
heresy, approving the condemning and deposing of Domnus, of Theodoret and
Irenie, Nestorian Bishops, as also of Flavianus, and Eusebius of Dorilen, whom
he thought to be Nestorians: but therein the Emperor was misinformed, as he
had been before, in the time of the holy Ephesine Synod, when upon like
misinformation he condemned Cyrill and Memnon, as well as Nestorius. That
law, though acknowledged also by Baronius an. 449. n. 130
to be true, is not extant in the Theodosian Code, nor does it accord with that
which is there expressed: would not any man think it ridiculous hence to
conclude as the Cardinal does, that certainly it is therefore a forgery, and
the Acts of Chalcedon containing such forgeries, are to be held of no credit?
Thus while the Cardinal labors to discredit these Acts, he so foully
disgraceth himself, that men may justly doubt whether he were his own man
when he writ these things, which are so void both of truth and reason.

CAP. XXXIII. The third addition to the Synodall Acts pretended by Baronius,
for that the Epistle of Theodoret written to Nestorius after the union, is
falsely inserted, refuted.
1. THe third proof which Baronius Nestoriani co^mentitias quasdam Theodoreti
vulgavere Epistolas, extat ex illis ad Nestorium inscripta ad finem 5. actionis
5. Synodi. an. 436, nu. 10.
brings to show that these Acts are corrupted by the additions of some forged
writings inserted among them, is an Epistle of Theodoret written to Nestorius
after the union set down in the fifth Collation Pa. 558. b.
, wherein Theodoret professes to Nestorius, that he did not receive the
letters of Cyrill as orthodoxall; nay, he shows himself so averse from
consenting to them, and so addicted to Nestorius after the union made, that he
thus writes, I say the truth unto you, I have often read them, and earnestly
examined them, and I have found them to be free, (that is, full) in uttering
heretical bitterness; nor will I ever consent to those things which are
unjustly done against you, nec si ambas manus, no though both my hands should
be cut off from me. Thus writes Theodoret in that Epistle which the holy
Council first, and after them we affirm and profess to have been the true
writing of Theodoret; and the same to be a counterfeit, a forgery, and none of
Theodorets, but framed by heretics, Baronius confidently avoucheth.

2. Now in this cause having the Synodall Acts, and with them the judgment of
the whole general approved Council, on our side, we might justly reject this
as a calumny of Baronius, but for as much as he not only says it, but
undertakes to prove the same, we will examine his reasons, that so the
integrity and credit of these Acts may be more conspicuous. His reasons are
two. The first Bar. loco cit.
is grounded on a testimony of Leontius Scolasticus, who writes Leont. lib. de
sect. Act. 4 extat com 4. Bibl. S. Patrum Edit. 3.
thus, It is to be known, that certain letters of Theodoret and Nestorius
are carried about, in which either of them do lovingly embrace the other, sed
fictitiae sunt, but they are counterfeit, and devised by heretics, thereby to
oppugn the Council at Chalcedon; but Theodoret hated Nestorius, etc. Thus
Leontius: and the Card. adds Bar loco citat.
this, extat ex illis Epistolis una, one of those counterfeit Epistles written
to Nestorius is extant in the fifth Council, near the end of the fifth action
thereof.

3. What if we should except against Leontius, (though he Nam Leontius
meminit Eulogij Episcopi Alexandrini, lib. de sect. Act. 5. Gregorius vero et
Eulogius aequales, et extat Epist. Greg ad ipsum lib. 6. Epist. 37.
be as ancient as Pope Gregory) as a man not of sufficient credit? Or will the
Card. think you, defend him, and take his testimony for sound and good
payment? then farewell for ever the books of Toby, Judith, Wisdom, Maccabees,
and Ecclesiasticus; for Leontius Leont. Act. 2.
reckoning the books of the old Testament to be twenty two, and expressly
mentioning them all without these, says, Hi sunt libri, these are the books,
as well of the old, as of the new Testament, which in the Church are held for
Canonical. I doubt the Card. will here say, that the case is altered; In this
he speaks against them and their Trent faith, not against us: Here the note of
their Index expurgatorius Magister Sac. Palate. pa. 134. primi tom. Indicis
Romae ^liti, an. 1607.
must be embraced; write, says the Index, in the margent, diminute Catalogum
texuit Leontius, Leontius recites not fully the Catalogue of the sacred books:
And yet note one memorable thing by the way; God who suffered not Laban to
speak an ill word against Jacob, and who turned the curses of Balaam into a
blessing to Israel, the same God overruled their pen or hands, as he did
once the tongue of Caiphas, and in stead of diminute texuit, they have uttered
a Prophecy against themselves, printing even in that edition Edit. 3. Bibl. S.
Patr. per Marg. la ^igne. Paris. an. 1610.
which past through their Purgatorian fire of correction, Divinitus Catalogum
librorum divinorum texuit; Leontius has recited this Catalogue by an heavenly
inspiration: and yet for all that divinitus texuit, the Cardinal will not
believe Leontius, whom against us he persuades all men to believe. But
howsoever in other matters (as by name in that Catalogue texto divinitus)
Leontius is to be believed, of a certainty he is no fit witness in this
cause of the Three Chapters; He was too partial, that I say not heretical,
in this point, too much addicted to the writings of Theodorus of Mopsvestia,
and Theodoret; let Baronius himself say, whether his commending of Theodorus
Extiterunt ijs temporibus duo viri, Diodorus et Theodorus Mopsvestiae, qui
universas literas sacras commentariis illustrabant. Leont. Act. 4.
Bishop of Mopsvestia, and Diodorus Bishop of Tarsis, for illustrating the
whole Scripture by their Commentaries, for being such worthy men, as that no
man Nec ipsis vivis quisquam dictu^ aliquod eorum reprehendebat. Jbid.
while they lived, did reprove any one saying of theirs, be not untrue, and
after, both the person of the one, and writing of both condemned by the
general Council, impious also and heretical. To come yet nearer to his
saying concerning Theodoret, in the very next sentence save one before those
words which Baronius alleges Leontius says, Verum ne Theodoretum quidem
constat unquam admisisse Nestorium, it does not appear that Theodoret did ever
admit of Nestorius, or hold communion with him. Had not the Cardinal skipt
over (as is the wont of all heretics) these former words of Leontius, he
would have been ashamed to allege this testimony: For not only the Synodall
acts of the Ephesine Scripsi haec praesentibus multis Episcopis, Archelao,
Apringio, Theodoreto, etc. qui omnes tui studiosissimi, una mecum te rogant,
etc. sic Johan. Antio. Nestorio. tom. 1. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 31
Council, but the Cardinal himself often teaches and proves it by clear
evidence, that Theodoret Ex schola Theodori Mopsvesteni erant Nestorius,
Theodoretus et alij, foetus viperini dicendi. Bar. an. 427. nu. 26. et
Theodoretus ejusdem plane communionis cum Theodoro Mopsvesteno, cujus adeo
studiosus extitit ut crederetur eum nome^ Theodoreti a Theodoro derivasse.
Ibid. nu. 29.
admitted Nestorius, and that into a near band of friendship, love, and
communion. In that Epistle which Theodoret writ from Chalcedon to Alexander,
he calls Nestorius their friend De amico autem sciat tua sanctitas. (vult
autem Nestorium) Epist. Theodoret. tom. 3. Ephesians. Conc. Append. 2. ca. ^.
(...), and says of him, while we are here in this legacy to the Emperor,
non cessabimus omni virtute, ejus patris curam gerere, we will not cease with
all our power to take care for Father Nestorius, knowing that wrong is done to
him by wicked men. There is recorded Tom. 1. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 31.
a very loving Epist. to Nestorius written by John and other Eastern Bish.
particularly by Theodoret, who all writ of themselves tui studiosissimi, we are
all most affectionate to Nestorius; of whom Baronius An. 431. nu. 44.
says, they who writ this to Nestorius, eidem intima conjuncti necessitudine,
being joined in a most near band of familiarity, stood afterward for him in
the Council, Maxim vero eidem addictus Theodoretus, but of them all Theodoret
was most addicted unto him. And again An. eod. nu. 169
, having cited some words of Theodoret, he adds, Seeing Theodoret says thus,
Iam non solum cum Nestorio unanimem fuisse vides, sed dixerim etiam
concorporeum; you see that he was not only a loving friend, and of one mind,
but, if I may so say, one incorporated, and concorporated to Nestorius. Thus
Baronius, when himself so expressly contradicts his own witness Leontius, and
in this very cause touching Theodoret and Nestorius, yea, in that which is the
ground of Leontius error touching this Epistle; should he require us to
believe that which is but a collection from the former, which is his
fundamental error? may Baronius reject him in the former clause, must we
embrace him in the next, which is but a dependant on the other? Leontius
because he thought, and thought erroniously, that Theodoret never embraced the
friendship and communion with Nestorius, thought also erroniously this Epistle
(which testifies Theodorets love and communion with Nestorius) to be a
counterfeit; the Cardinal, who knows and professes against Leontius, that
Theodoret was most inward, and even almost incorporated to Nestorius, ought
likewise to hold against Leontius, that this Epistle which testifies such
ardent affection to Nestorius, is the genuine and true Epistle of Theodoret.

4. And that every man may see the force of truth, and with what a seared
conscience the Cardinal dealt in this cause, behold himself within few years
after, against this testimony of Leontius, acknowledges, professes, and sets
down this very Epistle as the true and certain Epistle of Theodoret to
Nestorius, which here no doubt, against his own judgment and conscience he
denies, and proves out of Leontius not to be the Epistle of Theodoret, but a
counterfeit, and a forgery, for thus he writes An. 432. nu. 80 81. et seq.
, Theodoret indeed received the form of faith sent from Cyrill, (at the time
of the union) and subscribed unto it, but he could not so quickly forsake the
friendship of Nestorius, whom he had so long affected, for at this time (to
wit after the union was made) he writ an Epistle to Nestorius, which was read
in the fifth general Synod; and then repeating every word of the Inscription
and Epistle, he adds at the end, hactenus ad Nestorium Theodoretus, thus writ
Theodoret to Nestorius: and again, Theodoret obstinately professed in his
letters lately recited, that he would never assent to the sentence against
Nestorius. Thus Baronius; who hereby demonstrates himself to be a mere
calumniator, who to disgrace the Synodal Acts of the fifth Council, affirms,
and would seem by Leontius to prove that Epistle of Theodorets to be none of
his, but a forgery, which to be no forgery but the true writing of Theodoret,
himself knew, testifies and professes. Thus much of his former proof out of
Leontius.

5. His other proof is taken Bar. an. 436. nu. 11.
out of diverse Epistles of Theodoret, specially out of that to Dioscorus Bishop
of Alexandria, to Pope Leo, and diverse others; and because it might be
replied, that these were written long after the time of the union, whereas,
only at that time, and somewhat after, Theodoret might be said to have been
heretical, and a favourer of Nestorius, as by this Epistle is signified: to
wipe away this suspicion, he adds these words, post initam quidem pacem, truly
after the peace and union once made with Cyrill, that ever after that time
Theodoret was addicted to Nestorius, Nulla prorsus est mentio, there is no
mention at all; but there are many monuments, that (since then) strenue atque
impigre laboravit, that he labored stoutly and diligently for the Catholic
faith. To which purpose he again says an. 449. n. 140.
, Post restitutam Ecclesiae pacem, after the peace and unity of the Church,
Theodoret by all Catholics was known to be orthodoxall, and to communicate
with those that were orthodoxall. Which orthodoxy of faith, says he an. 436.
nu. 12
, those Epistles of his do so abundantly testify, that by them plus satis
abstersit, he has too much wiped away, purged and abolished all the blots and
blemishes which he had contracted by his acquaintance with Nestorius. Thus
Baronius, denying Theodoret at any time after the union made, to have been
heretical, or a favourer of Nestorius; and then undoubtedly this Epistle,
which both is heretical, and wherein such entire love and affection is
expressed to Nestorius, and which is recorded to have been written after the
time of the union, can be none of Theodorets, but must be rejected for an
imposture, a forgery.

6. Do you not verily believe the Cardinal had sent his wit out of the
Country, when he writ that whole part of his Annals, which concerns these
three Chapters? A little before he professes an. 432. nu. 80. 81.
this to be truly the Epistle of Theodoret, and now he will prove that it was
not, that it could not possible be the Epistle of Theodoret. Yea which is no
less worthy of observing, he before not only allowed this Epistle, (with the
inscription, wherein it was said that it was writ to Nestorius after the union)
to be Theodorets; but he further says an. eod. nu. 82*
, that Theodoret seems to have been of this mind, (which is noted in this
Epistle) etiam post concordiam, even after the agreement, union, and concord
made with Cyrill, seeing Theodoret so obstinately professes in his letters,
that he would never assent to the sentence against Nestorius, Sicque certum
est aliquandiu perseverasse, and so it is certain that Theodoret continued
some while (after the union) with an angry mind against Cyrill. But now he
will prove the quite contrary, that Theodoret for a certainty writ no such
things, nor had any fellowship with Nestorius after the union. So both it is
certain that Theodoret writ this, and yet it is certain he writ it not;
certain that he writ it after the union, and yet certain that he writ it not
after the union. That is, to speak plainly, it is certain the Cardinal
demonstrates himself and his Annals to be false, untrue, and ridiculous,
repugnant both to the truth, and to his own writings.

7. This might suffice to oppose against whatsoever Baronius can produce. If he
prove by any testimony this Epistle not to be Theodorets, I on the contrary
will prove it to be Theodorets, by the Cardinals own testimony: If he prove
by any reason Theodoret after the union not to have favored Nestorius and his
heresy; I on the contrary will prove that after the union he favored
Nestorius, by a stronger reason, even by the Cardinals own confession. If he
bring Theodoret, I bring Baronius, and so I might Par pari refer, quod male
mordeat hominem. But besides this confession of Baronius, (which disproves
whatsoever he can prove against us in this matter) I will add somewhat
concerning those Epistles of Theodoret, on which he much relyeth. Those
Epistles coming out of the Epistolas Theodoreti ( 157. numero) Graece scriptas
continet codex Vaticanus, etc. Bar. an. 430. nu. 48.
Vaticane (the very Mint-house of forgery) are in truth nothing else but
counterfeits, as hereafter I purpose more fully to demonstrate; for this time I
will only mention that which most concerns this present cause, out of those
Epistles which the Cardinal most urges, and those are his Epistles to
Dioscorus, and to Pope Leo, specially seeing that to Dioscorus (as the
Cardinal An. 444. nu. 20.
tells us) declares the faith of Theodoret to be such and so orthodoxal, that
it is enough, ad abstergendum suspitionem, to wipe away all suspicion of
heresy, wherewith, by reason of some counterfeit writings in the Synod, (I
think he means the fifth Council) he was blamed: And indeed in those
Epistles there is a plain condemning of the heresies of Nestorius; but first
those Epist. were writ long after Epistola ad Leonem scripta erat post
Ephesinum Latrocinium illud habitum an. 449. altera ad Dioscorum scripta est
an. 444. ut ait Bar. illo an. nu. 18. at unio facta est an. 432. Bar. illo an.
nu. 72.
the union, and so cannot help the Cardinal at all in this point: and if they
had been writ presently upon that union, yet those not to be truly
Theodorets, diverse circumstances do make evident. In the Epistle to Dioscorus
Extat apud Bar. an. 444. nu. 21.
Theodoret is made to relate how long before that time he had been a Bishop,
and where he had preached. The years of his Bishopric he reckons Sex annos
ibi ego docens tempore Theodos^ alios tradecim annos tempore Johannis, praeter
haec jam septimus agitur annus quo Domnus sedet. Epist. Theod. apud Bar. an.
444. nu. 23.
to be twenty six, all which time he continued a Preacher at Antioch. Whence
Baronius Ibidem.
observes, Theodoretum Episcopum publicum semper egisse Catechistam
Antiochiae, that Theodoret being a Bishop, was continually the public
Catechist at Antioch, during that time of three Patriarchs, Theodatus, John,
and Domnus: And at least it might be supposed that he was a Preacher, or (as
the Cardinal calls him) a Catechiser in that City, before he was Bishop;
another of those Epistles (that ad Nonium Extat apud Bar. an. 448. nu. 12. et
seq.
) will assure us the contrary, for there Theodoret says of himself, I stayed
in a Monastery, quousque Episcopus factus, till I was made a Bishop; And
Baronius An. 423. nu. 10.
further explanes this, saying, creatus Episcopus, after Theodoret was made and
ordained Bishop, he was held at Antioch to be the preacher there, first by
Theodatus, then by John his successor: Theodoret goes on to set forth his own
orthodoxy and praise, saying Epist. ad Dioscorum apud Bar. an. 444. nu.
, that though he so long continued a preacher at Antioch, yet in all those
years, neither Et usque hodi^ cum tantum tempus praeterierit nullus neque Deo,
dilectorum Episcoporum, neque pijssimoru^ Cle^icorum, ea quae a me dicta sunt,
reprehendit aliquando. Ibid.
any of the Bishops, nor any of the Clergy did reprove his doctrine or sayings;
which he explanes in that other Epistle Epist. Theod. 113. extat apud Bar. an.
449. nu. 115.
to Pope Leo, saying thus, Whereas I have been a Bishop these six and twenty
years, yet in all this time, non subij quantumvis levem reprehensionem, I have
not been so much as lightly reproved for my doctrine, but by the favor of God
I have delivered more than 1000 (or as Baronius An. 424. nu. 19.
corrects it, more than ten thousand) souls from Marcionisme, Arianisme,
Eunomianisme, so that in eight hundred Parishes (so many are in my Diocese of
Cyrus) there has not remained no not one weed, but my flock is free from all
heretical error. Thus he in that Epistle. Which his orthodoxy he yet more
fully declares in another Epistle Epist. Theodoreti 81. ad Eusebium Ancyrae
Episcopum apud Bar an. 443. nu. 1^.
; Look on my writings both before and since the holy Ephesine Council, in
singulis quae edidimus operibus, Ecclesiae sanus sensus and men's mihi
conspicitur; in all and every one of my writings, the doctrine of the Church,
and my sound opinion is conspicuous: And again in that to Nomus Theodor.
Epist. 81. apud Bar. an. 448. nu. 14.
speaking of the same his integrity of faith, in all these five and twenty
years, says he, Nec a quoquam accusatus, nec quenquam accusavi, Neither have
I been accused of any man, neither have I accused any. Thus is Theodoret made
to write in those Epistles.

8. Let us omit the vanity and folly of the forgerer, who reports this as an
honor to Theodoret, that he even when he was a Bishop, was a Catechiser for
six and twenty years together, and that out of his own Diocese: that withal
he makes Theodoret boast of a most unlikely matter, that by his care and
diligence (even during that his absence) he had so rooted all weeds of heresy
out of his own Diocese, that ne unum zizanium, not so much as one weed
remained, in all those eight hundred Parishes whereof he was Pastor. Do but
observe here two most palpable and ridiculous untruths of the forgerer. The
former, that he makes Theodoret to write in the first year of Dioscorus, that
is, as Baronius An. 444. nu. 18. Defuncto Cyrillo, suffectus est hoc anno in
locti ipsius Dioscorus.
assures us, an. 444. that he had then been a Bishop six and twenty years.
Now he was created Bishop, as the Cardinal Hoc eodem anno Theodoretus Cyri
creatus est Episcopus; id plane colliges ex etc. Bar. an. 423. nu. 10.
demonstrates, and sets down for a certainty, An. 423. to which if you add
26. I doubt not but any Arithmetician will easily show it to be impossible that
at the year 444. he shall be 26. years a Bishop. Nay see and deride the folly
of this impostor. In the Epistle to Leo written after Nam in ea Epist. (quae
est Theod. 113.) narrat se injuste in eo Concilio Ephesino depositum. apud Bar.
an. 444. nu. 118.
the Ephesine Latrociny, which the Cardinal Non hoc an. (448.) sed sequenti.
Ephesi famosam habitam esse Synodu, certum est. Bar. an. 448 nu. 58.
, Binius In Notis suis ad ^onciliab. Ephesians. pa. 1017. b.
, and all confess to have been An. 449. he makes Theodoret, account the whole
time of his Bishopric, to be but twenty Viginti sex annis Ecclest^m rexi.
Epist. Theod. ad Leo^em apud Bar. an. 449. nu. 119. quos ab an 423. inchoandos
esse necessario statuit pro certo. Bar. an 423. nu. 10.
six years, which was so much when he writ to Dioscorus, five years before
that.

9. And here withal note by the way the rare wisdom of Cardinal Baronius.
He upon that Epistle an. 444. nu. 23
to Dioscorus sets down this Memorandum, Observa lector, Note here gentle
reader, that all these twenty six years Bishop Theodoret was a Catechist; and
withal note how long each of those three Patriarchs sat (to wit, six and
twenty years) from the time that Theodoret was made Bishop, till this year
444. Observa lector, Note again good reader, the dotage of the Cardinal.
Theodoret was made Bishop An. 423. and by adding 26. the Cardinal cannot find
above 444. Truly it was fit he should be besotted, who undertakes to defend
Impostours, and most sottish untruths. But in the mean space do you not
think Baronius a very fit man to write Annals of 1200. years, that is so
exact in calculating so small a sum, as to account 23. and 26. to make just
44. though at another time, when by such a false account he had no purpose to
disgrace or refute the Acts of this Synod, he Cum Theodoretus testatur se anno
449. habere in sede Episcopali annos 26. utique in hunc annum (423.) necesse
est revoces sedis ejus primordia. Bar. an. 423. nu. 10.
could then sum those particulars to make 49.

10. The other untruth which I mentioned is common to both these Epistles, and
demonstrates them both to be counterfeits, or Theodoret if he writ them to be a
most shameless liar, and in these his writings of no credit at all. In all
those 25. or 26. years, says he, I was not accused, nor reproved: no not
lightly reproved for my doctrine by any man. Not accused? not reproved? no not
lightly reproved? Fie, both he and his doctrines were condemned and accursed
for heretical, and before he writ this to Leo, himself was deposed also from
his Bishopric in a general Council. Of all which there are undoubted
evidences as clear as the Sun. His impious and heretical writings against
Cyrill, and his twelve Chapters, so often recorded both in the fifth Council,
in the Imperial Edict of Justinian, in Pope Gregory and Pelagius, acknowledged
by Baronius for impious and heretical, these being writ in the time of the holy
Ephesine Council directly in defense of Nestorianisme, and against the
Catholic faith, did the doctrine of the Church shine in them? were not they
reproved? not so much as lightly reproved? when the holy Ephesine Council
Sancta Synodus, parisententia condemnavit aliorum vaniloquentiam, quolquot vel
post Nestorium, vel certe illum fuere q^i eadem saperent. Append. 1. ad tom. 2.
Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 6 pa. 679.
expressly condemned and accursed all the doctrines of Nestorius, and all who
defend them: was this think you no reproof of Theodoret his writings? There
is extant among the acts of the Ephesine Council, the decree which John Tom.
3. Act. Ephesians. ^onc. ca. 2. pa. 775.
Bishop of Antioch made with the rest that took part with Nestorius, and which
falsely called themselves the holy Synod of Ephesus, whereas they were nothing
else but a mere conspiracy of detestable heretics. In that decree they depose
Cyrill and Memnon as being Apollinarians, heretics, contemners of the holy
Fathers and their doctrine, turbulent, seditions, and the like: they accurse
all the rest of the Bishops who consented to Cyrill, that is, all who were of
the holy Ephesine Council; and they bind them with an Anathema so long, till
they did accurse the twelve chapters of Cyrill, (that is, till they did
renounce and accuse the Catholic faith, and maintain Nestorianisme.) To this
heretical, false, slanderous, and diabolical decree of the Nestorians,
Theodoret subscribed by name among the rest. What think you now? Did Theodoret
all this time accuse none? or was this decree to which he subscribed not
accused? was it not reproved, not lightly reproved of any? Read but the
seventh Chapter of the fourth Tome of those acts Pa. 797.
, and there you shall see that this their whole conventicle, and among the rest
Theodoret is particularly condemned, and anathematized by the holy Oecumenicall
Synod of Ephesus, for this their heretical dealing: and I suppose this was
some reproof of Theodoret, to be, and that most justly, condemned and
excommunicated for an heretic by the consenting judgment of an holy
Oecumenicall Synod; that is in truth by the whole Catholic Church. Those Acts
of the Ephesine Council contain 1000. like demonstrations of that untruth,
uttered in those Epistles. Among them all consider but that Sermon Append. 5.
ca. 3. ad tom 6. Act. Conc. Ephesians. p. 907
which Theodoret made to the Nestorians at Chalcedon, during the time of that
Ephesine Council, of which Peltanus says, Theodoret is carried, insano impitu,
with a furious rage against Cyrill, and the other Orthodoxall Bishops of the
holy Council, comparing them to Serpents, Basiliskes, murderers, and the like.
Neither does he only vomit out his choler against them, but he plainly girded
at the Emperor also. (Did he accuse none when he uttered all this?) Nay he
Theod. loc. cit.
affirms Catholics which hold Christ God and man to be one person, and so to
be passible, to be worse than Heathens. The Heathens, says he, taught, the
Heaven, the Sun, and the Stars to be impassible, and shall we believe the
only begotten Son of God to be passible, and such as may dye? Absit Salvator,
ne sic simus Apostatae; far be this from us, O Savior, let us not be such
Apostates, as to teach this, let us not suspect that our Savior could suffer.
Let any man now judge whether it be not a shameless untruth which those
Epistles avouch that Theodoret was not reproved for this doctrine, no not
lightly reproved in all those 26. years; whereas both then and ever since, the
whole Catholic Church has accursed his impiety and heresy, which he so
insolently then preached? And omitting infinite like proofs of the falsehood of
that Epistle, the next year after the Ephesine Council, there was a Synod
Tom. 5. Act. Ephesians. Conc. ca. 5. pa. 831. and pa. 927.
held at Antioch, where John and diverse other Bishops concluded the full union
with Cyrill, wherein they all condemn and anathematize the heresies of
Nestorius, which their profession of faith, and this condemning of the
Nestorian heresy, John sent, both to Cyrill, to Pope Sixtus, and to Maximianus
Bishop of Constantinople. Now seeing Theodoret not only in former time had
been so violent and furious in defense of that doctrine, but then and long
after continued in the same mind, was not his doctrine reproved, nay was it
not accursed and anathematized by John Patriarch of Antioch, and many other
Bishops subject to his Patriarchship? What a most vile and shameless untruth
then is it, which the Impostor makes Theodoret to utter, that in the whole
space of 25. or 26. years he neither accused any, nor was accused nor
reproved, no not lightly reproved either by John or any other, but that all and
every one of his writings, contained the true doctrine of the Church? But
enough of those Epistles, which to be forged and false this which is already
said may for this time suffice.

11. Having now declared how untrue that is which Baronius affirms, that
Theodoret after the union did never embrace the heresies of Nestorius, and
withal seen how weak and unsound his proof is in this point, I will yet
add one consideration which will further manifest, and even demonstrate the
same. That is taken from the history of Theodoret. Certain it is, that when
Theodoret writ that history, he was earnestly addicted to Nestorianisme,
whereof in the very last Chapter Lib. 5. ca. 40.
he gives an eminent proof, commending Theodorus Bishop of Mopsvestia for a
worthy teacher of the whole Church, and for an oppugner of all heresies:
adding, that whereas he was a Bishop thirty six years, he never ceased,
optimam herbam sanctis Christi ovibus suppeditare, to feed the flock of Christ
with the best herbs. None can doubt but he who so much extolleth so
detestable an heretic, and approves those most damnable heresies which from
him Nestorius sucked, for the best herbs or doctrines, but he must needs be
confessed to be as deep in Nestorianisme as Nestorius himself. If now it may
appear that this history was writ by him after the union, there can no doubt
remain but that after the union Theodoret favored Nestorius and all his
heresies.

12. Baronius knowing this inevitably to follow, to decline the whole force of
this, tells an. 427. nu. 28
us that Theodoret writ his history not only before the union, but before the
jarre also; yea before the time of the holy Council at Ephesus; whereof having
given some slight conjectures, in the end he concludes, Dicendum est, It must
be said that Theodoret writ this history in the space of those three years
which were next precedent to the holy Ephesine Council. So he. Shall I say the
Cardinal was deceived and overseene herein? No, I will not suspect that such
an evident error could creep into the mind of so exact an Annalist. I rather
think his intent was, wilfully and wittingly to deceive others, and that
therefore he said this to smother that truth touching Theodorets continuance
in Nestorianisme, which he elsewhere so often denies. Theodoret Lib. 5. hist.
Eccl. ca. 36.
mentions in that his history the translation of the body or relics of
Chrysostom, and bringing them to Constantinople. The Cardinal was so far from
being ignorant hereof, that himself cites Bar. an. 438. nu. 6.
Theodoret with a memorandum, He, ante omnes, above them all mentions this
translation, but in few words. That translation, as Socrates Lib. 7. ca. 44.
and Marcellinus In suo Chron.
witness, was when Theodosius was the sixteenth time Consul, that is, as the
Cardinal also accounts, in the year 438. Now seeing the union between John
and Cyrill was made in the year 432. it unavoydably follows, that either
Theodoret writ not his History till seven years at least after the union, and
how much more I know not, whether 8. 10. or 16. after it, (for it is
uncertain:) or if he writ it, as the Cardinal divineth, before the Ephesine
Synod, that he writ it prophetically, writing those Acts which happened not
till eight or nine years after his history was written. The truth is, an
orderly and historical continuation of things done, he does not write, but
only to the death of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsvestia, where his history (for
any such continuation of succeeding matters) does end: but to show and testify
that he writ his history after the year 438. he purposely mentions some of
those acts which fell out in that year: and hereof further there may be a
presumption, because Theodoret, as Baronius tells Ecquid mirum, si quod dixerat
Sozomenus, a Theodoreto repetitum inveniatur. Bar. in Martyr. Romans December. 23.
us, followed Sozomen in his commending of Theodorus of Mopsvestia; now
Sozomens history was continued unto the 17. Consulship of Theodosius, as
himself witnesses: So that if Theodoret, as the Cardinal tells us, took it
out of Sozomen, and his book was not published till the year 439. sure the
Cardinal of all men had reason to think that Theodoret could not before that
time (otherwise than prophetically in this point) write his history. It
remains now, seeing Theodoret was an earnest defender of Nestorius at the
time when he writ this history, and it was written after the year 438. that
out of all doubt till then he remained heretical, and devoted to all the
blasphemies and heresies of Nestorius and Theodorus, which in that history he
commends for most wholesome food, and Catholic doctrine.

11. But not to stay longer in a matter very clear, my conclusion of this
former point is this; Seeing the Cardinal tells us that from the time of the
union Theodoret was not only a Catholic and orthodoxall Bishop, but that he
did manfully fight for the Catholic faith, it evidently follows, that in the
Cardinals judgment, Nestorianism and those herbs, nay most poysonfull weeds of
Theodorus are Catholic doctrines, seeing as now we have proved for many (but
of a certainty for seven years at least) after the union, that doctrine which
Theodoret embraced, and so earnestly defended, was no other than the
blasphemous heresies of Nestorius and Theodorus. And let this suffice for the
third addition, which he unjustly objecteth to the Acts of this fifth Council.

CAP. XXXIV. The fourth addition to the Synodall Acts, pretended by Baronius,
for that the Epistle of Theodoret, entitled to John Bishop of Antioch, is
falsely inserted therein; refuted.
1. HIs fourth instance concerns an Epistle of Theodoret, inscribed to John
Bishop of Antioch, set down near the last end of the fifth Collation; wherein
Theodoret exceedingly rejoices for the death of Cyrill. In handling whereof,
Baronius and Binius do more than triumph, as if the field were certainly
won. That Epistle, says Binius Annot. in 5. Council. Constitutum.
, nequissimi and scelestissimi alicujus nebulonis Eutychiani commentum est, is
the forgery of some most naughty and nefarious Eutychian varlet, and by fraud
and surreption is thrust into the Acts of this Synod. We have before
discovered, says Baronius an. 553. nu. 43
, the imposture of that Epistle, but we are not grieved to repeat the same
things here again, that it may be showed that they are not the true Acts of
the Synod, sed nebulonis cujusdam ex cogitatione commentum, but a forgery
devised by some knave: and therefore we say, that Epistle which is recited under
the name of Theodoret to John of Antioch, Omni ex part convinci, is every way
convinced not to be Theodorets. Again Bar. an. 444. nu. 12.
, There is an Epistle set down in the fifth Synod, under the name of Theodoret,
written unto John, rejoicing in the death of Cyrill, and babbling very many
things against him, which you may more truly call a Satyr, or infamous libell,
than an Epistle. And we take it very indignely that it should go under the
name of Theodoret, which is rather the figment of some Nestorian: and again
an. 553. n. 44.
, it is sigmentum impudentissimi cujusdam nebulonis, a fiction of some most
shameless varlet. Thus and much more Baronius. The like does Binius with no
less confidence and virulency against these Acts affirm. The maine ground on
which they both rely, is, for that John Bishop of Antioch to whom this Epistle
is inscribed, was dead before Cyrill. How could Theodoret, says Baronius an.
444. nu. 16 and an. 553. n. 44.
, write to John touching the death of Cyrill, seeing John was dead seven years
before Cyrill? which, says he, exploratum habetur, is sure and certain, both
by Nicephorus and others who writ the succession of Bishops, as also by an
Epistle which Cyrill writ to Domnus the successor of John, both which proofs
Binius Loco citato.
also alleges.

2. My first answer hereunto is, that if this be a demonstration of forgery,
because an Epistle is written to one that is dead, themselves, and not we,
shall be the greatest losers hereby. There is a decretall Epistle Epist. 1.
Clem. extat. to. 1. Conc. pa. 25. and seq.
written by Pope Clement to James Bishop of Jerusalem, and brother of our Lord:
in that Epistle the Pope tells James, how Peter being now ready to be martyred,
took Clement, ordained him Bishop, gave him the keys, set him in his own
chair, and when he was set therein, said unto him, Deprecor te O Clemens, O
Clement I beseech thee before all that are here present, that thou write unto
James the brother of our Lord, how thou have been a companion with me of my
journyes, and of my actions, ab initio usque ad sinem, from the beginning to
the end; and write also what thou have heard me preach in every City, what
order of words, of actions, I have used in my preaching, and also what an end I
make of my life in this City. Neither fear that he will be sorry for my death,
seeing he will not doubt but I dye for pieties sake; yea it will be a great
comfort unto him, to hear that I do not leave my charge to one that is
ignorant or unlearned. According to this request and command of Peter, Clement
writ an Epistle to James, exhorting him, that he command all that which Peter
taught, to be diligently observed. This and much more writ Clement to James
after the death, and of the life and death of Peter. Now James unto whom he
writ was dead six or seven years before Peter. For James was slain in the
seventh, and Peter in the thirteenth year of Nero, as out of S. Jerome Hic
Iacobus 30. annis rexit Ecclesiam, usque ad septimum Neronis annum Hier. in
Catal. scrip. in Iac^bo, Petrus ad ult^mum annum Neronis, id est, 14. Ecclesiam
rexit. idem in Petro.
, Eusebius Eusebius. an. 7. Neronis ait Iacobum occ^sum. an. Christ. 63. Petrus
an. 14. Neronis idem an. 70.
, Josephus Joseph. Iacobu^ lapidatu^ ait an. post Christum natum 63. Antiqu.
lib. 20. c. 8.
, and others, is evident; and as Baronius Anno 7. Neronis, Iacobi necem
accidisse omnes consentiunt. Bar. an. 63. nu. 2. Petrum autem anno 13. Neronis
occisum probat. Bar. an. 69. nu. 2.
, and after him Binius Annot. in Epist. 1. Clem.
, not only profess but clearly and rightly prove: and because this is a
decretall Inter Decretales epistolas Pontificum numerat eam Tu^rian. lib. 2 ca.
13. and hoc probat. p. 209
Epistle, an Apostolical Apostolicorum Pontificum. Tur. lib. 2. in praef. pa.
150. et suis authoribus, id est Apostolicis, dignissimas. ibid. pa. 152.
writing, sent from Clement being Pope, which was not till the tenth Clementem
ingressum in Papatum an. Chr. 93. is est Domitiani an. 10. probat Baron. an.
93. nu. 2.
year of Domitian, and that is thirty years after the Nam is obij^ (ut
probatum est) an. Chr. 63.
death of James, it hence ensues that it was writ to James thirty years after
he was dead. What shall now become of this decretall and Apostolical Epistle?
Will they be content that by the Cardinals demonstration it be rejected as the
forgery of some lewd varlet? Fie! By no means. Binius Epistola 1. Clement.
Papae.
calls it the Epistle of Pope Clement; Baronius An. 102. nu. 6.
tells us that it is not only Pope Clements, but that this and the other written
to the same James the dead Bishop of Jerusalem, are integrae and illibatae,
entire and incorrupted writings of Clement. In their Canon law Clemens Papa, ad
Iacobum Epist. 1. Distinct. 80. ca. 2. sic iterum Cause. 6. q. 1. ca. 5.
, and that corrected by the Pope, it is styled the epistle of Pope Clement to
James: and that which is there related must stand for the words and doctrine of
S. Peter Petrus in ordinatione Clementis. cause. 11. q. 3. ca. 11. attendite
sermoni illius, qui nobis per B. Clemente^ recitatur. Nich. 1. Epist. 49. et
beatus Petrus prohibebat. Cause. 6. q. 1. ca. 5.
; yea the authority of it, as other decretall Epistles, Concilioru^ Did. 20.
ca. Decretases.
Canonibus pari jure exaequatur, is every way equal to the Canons of Nice, of
Chalcedon, of other holy Councels. If that be too little, what Saint Austen
Lib. 2. de doct. Christ. ca. 8.
says of the very sacred Canonical Scriptures, indicted by the Spirit of God
himself, that does Gratian (wretchedly abusing Saint Austens words) apply to
this and the rest of the Popes decretall Epistles, saying of them Did. 19. ca.
6.
, Inter Canonicas Scripturas, decretales Epistolae connumerantur; the decretall
Epistles are to be reckoned among the Canonical Scriptures. Bellarmine Lib. 2.
Conc. ca. 12.
not only in general defends this saying of Gratian, telling us that the
decretals may well be called Canonical, that is, either such as are a rule,
and have force to bind; or Canonical in that sense as the seventh Synod
calls the Decrees of Councels, Constitutions inspired from God; but
particularly also he defends Ruffinus meminit epistolae Clementis ad Iacobum,
et eam se vertisse dicit ex Graeco. Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. Romans ca. 14.. Ad
haec.
by the authority of Ruffinus this to be the true Epistle of Pope Clement unto
James: and to omit others, their Jesuit Turrian, to whom Baronius Tu consule
Turrianum. Bar. an. 102. nu. 6.
, Binius Cujus fidei sint hae Clementis epistolae, Vide Turrianum. Bin. notis
in Epist. 1. Clem. pa. 31.
, Gretzer Defens. ca. 14 lib. 2. de Pont. Rom.. Altera.
, and others, refer us for the credit of these Epistles, has writ a whole
book in defense of them; wherein he calls them (and particularly he mentions
and defends this of Clement to James) sanctissimas Turr. pro epist.
Pontificum. lib. 2. praef. pa. 152.
, verissimas, etc. most holy, most true Epistles, most worthy of their authors;
that is, men Apostolic, consecrated by the reverence of the whole world, full
Omni gravitate, doctrina et sanctitate refertas. ibid.
of all gravity, learning and sanctity, confirmed by the testimony and use of
all ages: and which is most worthy remembering for our present purpose, the
Jesuit writes in defense of them thus Praef. cadem. pa. 150. 151.
, What if in these Epistles sometimes there meet us some such matters as are
not easy to all? must we therefore doubt of their authority? by no means.
Therefore if any man do not understand how the Epistle of Clement could be
written to James the brother of our Lord, who was dead more than eight years
before, such an one, if he be a learned, modest, and temperate man, he will ask
of others, and in the mean space contain himself within his own bounds;
that is, as himself explaineth, handling this Epistle Lib. eodem. 2. ca. 13.
pa. 215.
, he must so firmly hold it to be written by Pope Clement, ut dubitare nefas
existimet, that he esteem it a great sin to doubt thereof. Besides all this,
the Jesuit has a large Chapter Ca. 13. lib. 2.
purposely to defend and show this Epistle to be truly Clements, though it was
written to James long after he was dead. Some there were (whom Baronius Si
Clementis germanam epistolam hanc esse dixerimus (ut Bar. ipse ^it. an. 102.
nu. 6.) falso inscripta est, and ad Simeonem potius tunc Hierosolymorum
Episcopum, quam ad Iacobum long antea defunctu^, scripta fuit. Bar. an. 69 nu.
43.
, Possevine and Binius follow) who thought it was written indeed by Clement,
but not unto James, who was then dead, but unto his successor Simeon. Against
these their own Turrian holds resolutely Ne si ad Simeonem Iacobi successorem,
aut Marcum Alexandriae Episcopum, aut alium ullum scribere fussisset, etc.
Turr. ca. illo 13. pa 211.
that it was writ not to Simeon, nor to any but to James; and whereas some
would think it a folly Quid coegit eum e^ imprudentiae delabi, ut ad
cumscribere Clementem mandaret Petrus, quem ipse sciebat jam mortuum. ibid. pa.
208.
and madness to write to such an one as was dead, and which was known to be
dead to the author who writ it, (for who should be the carier of this letter
unto him?) especially to write unto him as a governor in the Church militant,
and to instruct and exhort Haec tibi frater Iacobe ab ore sancti Petri accepi,
tibique insinuare studui, ut servari omnia immaculate praecipias. Epist. Clem.
in fine.
him what he should carefully observe, Turrian tells Causa gravissima scribendi
ad Jacobum jam mortuum jussu Petri, de doctrina ad omnes Episcopos pertinente.
Turr. loc. cit. pa. 211.
you that there were diverse great and weighty reasons why Saint Peter commanded
Clement, and why Clement did write this to a dead man, whom they both knew to
be dead: and having given diverse very wise and worthy reasons hereof, one taken
from transfiguration Causa gravissima scribendi per transfigurationem. pa. 211.
, Poss. in Clemente, in suo apparatu.
another Simile exemplum in alijs ejusdem Clementis libris cernitur. Jn utroque
est quaedam fictio seu inductio personae quod genus totum ad imitationem
personarum pertinet. ibid. pa. 212. Vtrobique est imitatio personarum. pa. 213.
from imitation, a third from avoiding Si ad ullum aliquem vivorum scripsisset,
videretur magis eum diligere aut honorare, and aemulationis, vel invidiae
materiam praehuisse: Anne parvi motenti haec cautio? Quis tam obtusus fit, ut
sic sentiat? ibid. pa. 211.
hatred, if he had writ to any that had been alive; a fourth Cum Petrus mandat
Clementi ut ad Iacobum mortuum scribat clarissimum testimonium resurrectionis
prabet. ibid. pa. 212.
, for to be a testimony of the Resurrection, (belike because that Saint James
shall then read this holy Apostolical Epistle, Hac epistola potius ad
Simeonem qui etiam frater Domini dicitur, scripta est: and in titulum epistolae
mendose, vox (Iacobum) irrepsit. Bin. notis in epist. 1. Clem.
and see what Ita certe est ut isti dicunt, non potuisse ignorare Petrum fuisse
jam ante annos 8. Iacobum mortuum. ibid. pa. 208.
godly exhortation and advice for government of the Church Clement gives unto
him:) and such like; in the end he concludes Catholici vero si qui sint, etc.
pa. 215.
, that such as are Catholics must not doubt Etiamsi unde, aut quomodo ad nos
profecta sint nesciamus, tame^ propter antiquorum authoritatem ita tenemus, ut
de eis dubitare nefas esse existimemus. Ibid.
of the truth of this Epistle, though they know not the reason why it was
written to a dead man: and withal, that with men who have reason and
judgment, certum esse debet; such must assure themselves that both S. Peter
and Clement had and knew reasons why the one commanded to write, and the other
did write unto a dead man. Whereas now the Cardinals worthy demonstration? Had
he and Binius been men of reason and judgment, and considered (as no doubt
but they read) that tract of Turrian, (seeing unto it they refer us) they
might have seen therein diverse reasons why Theodoret might write to John,
though he were dead; for every one of Turrians reasons is as forcible to defend
this Epistle of Theodoret, as they are to excuse Clement, for writing to James,
who was dead long before: But the case is now altered, the Cardinals
demonstration holds only in those writings that distaste him, or make for us,
and against their cause. But si in rem sint, if any such writing bring (as all
the decretals do) either honor to the Roman See, or gain to the Roman
Court, though they were writ to one that was dead, I say not seven, but seven
times seven years before, they shall be honored as the true and undoubted
writings of the authors.

3. Let me add but one other example, but that is such an one as does cut all
the sinews; yea, the very heart strings of the Cardinals demonstration. The
translation of Chrysostomes body or relics by Theodosius the younger, more
than thirty years after his death, from Comana, where he dyed in banishment,
to Constantinople, is a matter so testified by Socrates Lib. 7. ca. 44.
, Theodoret Lib. 5. ca. 36.
, Marcellimus in suo Chron. an. 438.
, the great Menology Die 27. Ianu.
, their Roman Martyrology Die 27. Ian.
, and others, that we do not doubt of the truth thereof; But since it is Inde
postea Romam translatum est Martyr. Romans Ibid.
retranslated, as they say, from Constantinople to Rome, the only shop indeed
to utter all such ware, and make the people go a whoring after them: That
those his supposed relics may be have in reverence, it is worthy the
considering, how miraculously they had made the manner of his Translation.
Nicephorus Lib. 14. ca. 43.
relates the sum of it, but, as by Baronius Recitat idem Cosmas literas, a
quibus puto Nicephorum exscripsisse. Bar. an 438. nu. 8.
it seems, he borrowed it out of the luculent Oration of one Cosmas
Vestiarius, whether one of the Vaticane Habimus eum (Cosma sermonem) in nostra
Bibliotheca discriptu^. Bar. an. not. in Martyr. Ro^. Jan. 27. et an. 438. nu.
7.
, or a Baronian author I know not, but so ignoble, and so unworthy an author,
that Possevine judged him not worthy to be named in his Bibliotheca, or
reckoned among his testes veritatis. Out of this Tailors Oration has the
Cardinal An. 438.
stitcht a very pretty Anile, the sum whereof is this: Proclus on a time
making a panegyricall Oration in the praise of Chrysostom, the people were so
flamed with the love and longing desire after him, that they interrupted the
Bishop, and would not suffer him to make an end of his Sermon, crying out with
many loud vociferations, they would have Chrysostom, Chrysostom and his
relics they would have: Proclus moved herewith, intreates the Emperor; the
Emperor, at this their earnest suit sent diverse Senators (some Misit exercitum
militum una cum clericis. Georg. Patriar. Alex. in vita Chrysostomi, fol. 77.
say an army together, with Clerks and Monks) to bring with all pomp the body
of Chrysostom from Comana; thither they go, and come to the place where
Chrysostomes body was kept in a silver Coffin: Once, again Jn theca argentea,
sacra Iohannis pignora asservabantur, inde ea auferre et defer conantibus,
nemine, resistente minime concessum fuit, ressaepe frustra tentata. Bar. an.
438. nu. 8
, and very often they assay, yea, labor and strive with all their strength, with
all their skill, to lift up the Coffin, all was in vain, the sacred body Sacro
corpore instar silicis, loco inhaerescente et immobili permanente. Jbid.
was more immoveabl than a rock; they certify this news to the Emperor, who
called Proclus, and other holy men to advise further about that matter; in the
end the resolution of them all Imperatoris sententia ab omnibus aequae pro bata
atque laudata fuit. Jbid.
was, that the Emperor Theodosius should write a Letter to Chrysostom,
Supplicis instar libelli, in form of a supplication, asking him forgiveness
for the sins which Arcadius his father had committed against him, and
humilibus praecibus, to beseech him with most lowly prayers that he would
return to Constantinople, and take his old See again, praying him that he
would no longer by his absence afflict them, being so desirous of his body,
yea, of his ashes, yea, of his shadow. The Emperor did so, the form of whose
letter of supplication out of the Tailor Cosmas, first Nicephorus, and then
Baronius express, though the Cardinal for good cause was loath to give
Chrysostom the title of a Patriarch, and Pater Patrum, which Nicephorus
Johanni, aurei oris Patriarchiae. Nic. lo. cit. et, At tu pater patrum, etc. Ib.
sets down; those either the Tailor or the Cardinal concealeth or alters.
The Emperors letters were sent and brought to the dead corpse, and with great
reverence laid upon the breast and heart of Chrysostom, and the next day the
Priests with great ease took up the body, and brought it to Constantinople into
the Church of the holy Apostles. There first (as out of Nicephorus the Cardinal
relates) the Emperor with the people, supplex communem precationem pro
Parentibus fecit, made an humble prayer for his Parents, and more specially
entreated for his Mother, that her grave Precatus est, ut tumuli ejus motus
atque strepitus, consisteret, 35. enim annis jam is quatiebatur. Bar. ibid. nu.
12.
, which had shaked and been sick of a palsy, and made a noise and rattling for
thirty five years together might now at length cease; and the holy man heard
the request, granted it; the graves palsy was cured, so that it shaked no
more. Then Proclsu the Bishop placed dead Chrysostom in eundem Thronum, in the
very same See and Episcopal seat with himself, all the people applauding and
crying, O Father Chrysostom receive thy See; and then by a miracle beyond the
degree of admiration, the lips Ipse Chrysostomus labijs rursum apertis, ad
populum dixisse fertur, Pax vobis. Cosmas apud Bar. loco citat. et Niceph.
of Chrysostom (five and thirty years after he was laid in his grave) opened
and blessed all the people, saying, Peace be to you; and this both the
Patriarch Proclus, and the people standing by, testified Jd circumstantes
homines et Patriarcha Proclus, se audisse, testati sunt. Cos. et Niceph. loc.
cit.
that they heard. Thus far the Cardinals narration out of his Tailor Cosmas
and Nicephorus.

4. Say now in earnest, is not this a story able to put down Heliodore,
Orlando, and all the fictions of all the Poets? their wits are barren, their
conceits dull, they are all but very botchers to the Cardinals Tailor. It is
not my purpose to stand now to refute such a lying legend: The Cardinals
friends may see the censure which their Carthusian Monk Ad optimum quemque
lectorum (...) Carthusiam post vitam Chrysostom. apud Geor. pat. Alex.
Tilmannus gives of it and of Nicephorus, the only author that he knew, till
Baronius pulled this blind Tailor out of a corner; Though I believe (says
he) God to be omnipotent, yet I believe not all which is here written of
Chrysostom, sed fides penes lectore^ esto, let the reader choose whether he
will believe it or not, for the writers of men's lives, who lived before
Nicephorus, (and he writ about the year 1328.) would not have concealed or
smothered in silence, rem tanti momenti, a matter of so great moment. Thus the
Carthusian, whose judgment may justly be thought to be the more weighty,
because of all the ancient Fathers there is none (I speak it confidently) who
happened to have more fabulous writers than are Palladius (as he is called) Leo
and George the writers, or rather the devisers of Chrysostomes acts, his life
and death. Any one of them doting after such miraculous reports, would have
painted out this miracle of miracles, with all the wit and words which they
had: That which I only observe is the strange, and if you please, miraculous
lewd dealing of Baronius. This Epistle of Theodosius, though it was written to
Chrysostom more than thirty years after his death, the Cardinal approves,
applaudes, and for a rare monument he commends Concionem illam rati, tibi fore
chariorem. Bar. an 438. nu. 2. Cosmas vestiarius luculenta oratione de cade
translatione habita qu^^ gesta fuerunt exact recenset. Jbid. nu. 7. et alia
similiahabet.
it, and all that appendant fable to all posterity. Why? it is an excellent
story indeed to persuade the adoration of relics, invocation of Saints,
prayers for the dead, and such like. Had this Epistle of Theodorets contained
such stuff, it should have had every way the like applause from his
Cardinalship; because it wants such matters, and crosses in very many things
the Cardinals Annals, Oh it is nothing but a fiction, and a very forgery of
some lewd naughty varlet. It is demonstrated to be such, because it was written
to John Bishop of Antioch, who was dead but 7. years before, whereas more than
four times seven years, cannot hinder the Epistle of Theodosius written to
the Bishop of Constantinople after he was dead, to be an authentike and
undoubted record. This may serve the Cardinal for the first answer, who is
now bound in all equity, either to confess his own demonstration to be
fallacious, or to proclaim the Epistle of Pope Clement, and the other of
Theodosius with that whole narration, to be fictitious, and his own Annals a
fabulous legend.

5. My second answer is, that though John, to whom this Epistle is directed,
was dead, yet that proves only the title or inscription to be amiss, or that
Theodoret writ not this Epistle to John; it cannot prove (which the Cardinal
undertook to do) that the Epistle is forged, and not written by Theodoret:
For the Epistle it self to be truly Theodorets, his own Sermon publicly
preached at Antioch before Domnus after the death of Cyrill, and mentioned in
the Synodall Acts Conc. Coll. 5. 5. pa. 559. b.
next after this Epistle, does clearly manifest; for the scope and purpose of
that sermon is the same which is expressed in the Epistle. In the Epistle
Theodoret declares his eagerness in defending the doctrine of Nestorius, and
withal rejoices and insulteth (...) Cyrill being dead, who was then the
chief oppugner of the heresies of Nestorius. The very same eagerness for
Nestorianisme, and love to his heresies, as also the like joy for Cyrils death
does his sermon express more fully, saying, Nemo neminem jam cogit
blasphemi^e, none does now (seeing Cyrill is dead) compel any man to
blaspheme, (so he calls the Catholic faith.) Where are those (to wit Cyrill)
who teach that God was crucified? It was the man Christ, and not God who was
crucified! It was the man JESUS that dyed, and it was GOD the Word who raised
him from the dead. Non jam est contentio, Now (seeing Cyrill is dead) there is
no contention; Oriens and Egyptus sub une jugo est, the East and Egypt (that
is, as well those who are under the Patriarch of Alexandria, as they who are
under the Patriarch of Antioch) are all under one yoke; that is, all submit
themselves to one faith, that is, to Nestorianisme. Mortua est invidia, and cum
eo mortua est contentio; Envy (he means Cyrill, who so much hated and
oppugned the doctrine of Nestorius) is now dead, and all contention is dead and
buried with him. Let now the Theopaschites, (he means Catholics, who taught
God to have suffered and dyed) let them now be at quiet. Thus preached
Theodoret after the death of Cyrill, insulting over him being dead, triumphing
that now (seeing Cyrill was dead) Nestorianisme did and would prevail. Who can
imagine, but that the Epistle, maintaining the same heresy insulting in the
same triumphing manner at the death of Cyrill, was written by Theodoret, when
he publicly in his sermon before a Patriarch, uttered the same matter. Would
Theodoret fear or forbear to write that in a letter, which he neither did
fear, nor could forbear to profess openly in a sermon, and that in so
solemn a place and assembly? or was Theodoret orthodoxall, and a lover of
Cyrill in his writings before the death of Cyrill, who was heretical, and so
full with the dregs of Nestorianisme after the death of Cyrill, that he must
vent them, and with them disgorge his malice and spite against Cyrill in an
open Pulpit, and in the hearing of a Patriarch, and all the people of Antioch?
It is not the inscription on title of the Epistle, but the Epistle it self
which the fifth Council and we after it do stand upon. Had not they known
the Epistle to be Theodorets they needed not by it to have proved that
Theodoret, after the union, yea, after the death of Cyrill was eager, violent,
yea, virulent also in defense of the heresies of Nestorius; that his public
sermon by them cited and preached after Cyrils death, and against Cyrill, had
been a sufficient proof and demonstration of that; but because they were sure
this was the true Epistle of Theodoret, they thought good to testify that he
was in writing the self fame man as he was in preaching, that is in both a
spiteful maligner of Cyrill, in both a malicious and malignant Nestorian, and
that long after the union made betwixt John and Cyrill, yea, that even after
the death of Cyrill he continued both to write and to speak the same.

6. Observe now by the way the fraudulent dealing of Baronius and Binius in
this cause. This passage taken out of a sermon publicly preached at Antioch
against Cyrill, and in an insulting manner for his death, this they do not,
nor durst they carpe at it. It is testified by all the Bishops of the fifth
Council to have been a part of Theodorets sermon: the Epistle which likewise
is testified by them all to be Theodorets, containing the same matter with his
sermon, that they rail at, and revile both it and the writer of it, because in
the inscription thereof they have espied an error. It had been honest dealing
in the Cardinal and Binius, seeing these are feathers of one wing, either to
have acknowledged both, or denied both to be the brood of Theodoret.

7. Again, the Cardinal undertook to prove, that still after the union
betwixt John and Cyrill, Theodoret was a Catholic, and defender of the
Catholic faith, and because the Epistle demonstrates the contrary, he will not
allow it to be Theodorets, but a forgery written in his name. Admit it were,
yet that part of Theodorets sermon is truly his, nor does either Baronius or
Binius deny it to be his. Now by this sermon is Theodoret as effectually
proved and demonstrated, as by the Epistle to have been an eager oppugner of
the Catholic faith, and an obstinate defender of all the heresies of Nestorius
after the death of Cyrill, which was twelve Vnio facta an. 432. Bar. illo an.
nu. 77. Cyrillus autem obijt an. 444. Bar. illo an. nu. 9.
years after the union: So that although the Epistle were not Theodorets, or
had never been extant, yet the Cardinals position for Theodorets Orthodoxy is
clearly and certainly refuted by the sermon of Theodoret made twelve years
after the union.

8. Further yet the Cardinal to defend the Orthodoxy of Theodoret urges
strongly, and relyeth upon the Epistles, which in their Vaticane or Mint-house
are stamped with the name of Theodoret; whereas if there were no other proofs,
this one sermon of Theodorets is an undoubted evidence that they can be none
of Theodorets, but are forged in his name; for the whole scope, at which those
Epistles Vt clarum est ex Epist. Theod. ad Dioscorum, ad Leonem, ad Nomum, de
quibus diximus supra, ca. 33.
aim, is to magnify Theodoret both for his integrity of life, uprightness in
judgment, laboriousnesse in preaching, and specially for his soundness in the
Catholic faith, that he was never reproved nor accused by any, no not in six
and twenty years, for his doctrine; that he never accused any, and specially
for Cyrill, that Theodoret loved and honored him for a learned and pious man,
and mirifice coluit ejus memoriam, when Cyrill was dead, he wonderfully
honored his memory, calling him a man of blessed memory; all which and a
hundred such like matters contained in those Epistles are undeniably convicted
to be untrue by this sermon of his, wherein he vomiteth out in a most solemn
assembly, together with the blasphemies of Nestorius, most slanderous revilings
not only against Cyrill, at whose death he insulteth, but against all
Catholics, whom he, according to the Nestorian language, calls Theopaschites
and heretics: with such false, fained, and lying writings does the Cardinal
fight against the fifth Synod and the Acts thereof.

9. Yea, but still the Cardinal will reply, the Inscription unto John, who
before was dead, shows the Epistle to John to be forged, and to be none of
Theodorets: It does not; for the inscription or title of an Epistle or other
writing may be erroneous, and the Epistle truly his whose name it bears,
which the Cardinal may see, if need were, in a hundred examples.

10. In the Epistle of Pope Clement unto James, whereof before we spoke, the
Cardinal An. 69. nu. 43
and Binius Notis in 1. Epistolam Clementis.
both confess the inscription to be false, and yet they both hold the Epistle
to be Pope Clements, yea, they can excuse that, and say it was but an error
in writing James In titulum Epistolae, mendose v^x [Iacobum] irrepsit. Bin.
loc. cit.
in stead of Simeon in the title, were they not too too partial and malicious
against this holy Synod, they would as easily have used the same excuse for
Theodorets Epistle, and have said, the Epistle is truly his, but in the
inscription in the Acts, the name of John is, by the writers mistaking, set in
stead of Domnus.

11. Theodoret in his history Lib. 5 ca. 10. et secundum Christ. ca. 11.
sets down an Epistle of Pope Damasus, against Eunomius and other heretics,
the title in him is thus, The confession of faith which Pope Damasus sent to
Paulinus Bishop of Thessalonica; and with this inscription it is also published
in the Venice edition of the Councels by Nicholinus. Did Damasus write or send
this to Paulinus Bishop of Thessalonica? No, he did not; there was no Paulinus
then, nor long after that Bishop of Thessalonica, as Vides Lector, ne fingi
quidem posse ut Paulinus, quem jactat Theodoretus, fuerit Episcopus
Thessalonicensis. Bar. an 378. nu. 43.
Baronius and Bin. not. in Conc. Romans 3. sub Damaso post professionem sidei
Apollinaris, etc. pa. 508.
Binius at large prove and profess. What then? may we here conclude by the
Cardinals demonstration; certainly this Epistle was none of Pope Damasus
writings, it is a forgery and a counterfeit, seeing it is written to Paulinus,
whereas there was no such man at all? No, the demonstration holds not in Pope
Damasus, nor in his writings; for notwithstanding this error in the title,
Baronius and Binius Scripta fuit Synodalis Epistola a D^maso ex Con^ilio Romano
ad Paulinum Antiochenum. Bar. an. 378. nu. 41. itidem Binius loco citat.
hold it both to be the true, undoubted, and Synodall Epistle of Pope Damasus,
and truly sent from him, but sent to Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, not to any
Paulinus Bishop of Thessalonica. Apply now this to the Epistle of Theodoret,
may not it likewise be true, and truly written by Theodoret, though the title
be either false or unpossible? If any demand how that error in Theodoret,
touching the title of the Epistle, might happen, Baronius and Binius impute
Locis citatis.
it to the malice and wilful fraud of Theodoret; but I much rather ascribe it
to the writer, who finding in Theodoret the name of Paulinus, without any
addition, either ignorantly or wickedly, inserted the false addition of
Thessalonica. Would the Cardinal have dealt favorably with the other
inscription of John, and in stead of it have put Domnus, who was then Bishop of
Antioch, he might have spared his labor in this point.

12. In the sixteenth Novell of Justinian the inscription is to Anthimus Bishop
of Constantinople, now the date of that Edict is on the thirteenth day of
August in the year after the Consulship of Bellisarius, at which time it is
certain that not Anthimus, but Mennas was Bishop, for Mennas sat in the
general Council held that year at Constantinople, which began on the second
of May; yea, the Emperor himself on the sixth of August in the same year and
Consulship, dates another Edict unto Mennas. So that undoubtedly there is an
error in the inscription, and yet notwithstanding this error, the Edict it
self is without all doubt Justinians, nor will the Cardinals demonstration
hold in this.

13. The Epistle of Foelix the fourth Extat tom. 2. Conc. pa. 390.
to Sabina, was written and dated on the twefth of the Kalends of November, at
which time Hac Chronologia mendosa est, nam hoc mense Bonifacius jam Pontifex
creatus erat, ut patet supra. Bin. not. in eam Epist. et Bar. an. 530. nu. 1.
Foelix was dead. What, may it by the Cardinals demonstration be rejected for a
counterfeit? No, the Cardinal Facile accidisse potuit, ut loco Bonifacij,
Foeli^is nomen fuerit appositum. Bar. loco citat.
will tell you, it was indeed the Popes Epistle but of Boniface the successor
of Foelix, and not as the inscription tells, of Pope Foelix, and facile
accidisse potuit, it might easily happen, that the name of Foelix might be put
in stead of Boniface his next successor. Might not the very same and as easily
happen in this Epistle of Theodoret, that the name of John might be put in the
inscription in stead of Domnus his next successor?

14. There is an Epistle of Pope Silverius Epist. 1. Sylv. extat. tom. 2. Conc.
pa. 476.
, wherein he writ an excommunication against Vigilius usurping his See, it is
dated in some Copies in the year of Basilius, in others of Bellisarius, being
Consuls. Now in all the time Temporibus Sylverii nullus convenit Bellis rii
consulatus, neque Basilii. Bar. an. 539. 3. and idem ait Bin. Not. margin. ad
eam epistola^.
Silverius was Pope, neither was Basilius nor Bellisarius Consuls. What then?
shall the Popes Epistle be rejected as a a forgery, a counterfeit? No, by no
means. The Cardinal An. 539. nu. 1. and 4.
often mentions it, honors it for a rare monument; and to help that error,
he tells us the date is added more than should be. Might not the like happen to
the inscription of Theodorets letter in the Synodall acts? Might it not happen
that the inscription was only to the Archbishop of Antioch, and that the name
of John was added more than should be? Epiphanius in his Book of heresies says
Epiph. haer 46.
that Iustine Martyr dyed when Adrian was Emperor; a manifest untruth, for
Iustine Martyr writ an Apology for the Christian faith unto Antoninus Just.
Mart. ad Antoninum piu^^ defensio.
the successor of Adrian, and he was put to death under Mar. Aurelius, and
Verus, 24. years Nam Hadrianus obiit an. 140. Bar. illo an. nu. 1. Justinius
vero an. 165. Bar. illo an. nu. 1
after the death of Adrian. Will the Cardinal have his demonstration to hold
here in Epiphanius? so that his book against heresies must be condemned for a
counterfeit, and none of Epiphanius writing? No, error irrepsit, there slipped an
error into Epiphanius; for Adrian is written in stead of Antoninus, as the
Cardinal ^^cc. citat. and Notis in Martyr. Romans Apr. 13
tells you: but it rather seems in stead of Aurelius, (under whom Iustine
dyed.) Had the Cardinal been any way as indifferent to Theodorets letters,
he would likewise have said, error irrepsit, an error is slipped into the
inscription, by writing John in stead of his successor Domnus, rather than have
condemned the writing for a forgery.

14. In the twenty third Cause, Question 4. Cap. 30. in the ancient title it
was cited as a text of Sylvester, a manifest error of Sylvester instead of
Sylverius. Did the Gregorian Correctors, for this false title or name of
Sylvester inserted, condemn that Canon or Epistle as a counterfeit? no; but
approving the text as true they amended the title, and restored it to
Sylverius. In the very same Chapter it is said, that Guillisarius caused
Sylverius to be deposed, there was no Guillisarius that ever did that, but it
was Bellisarius; yet for that error of the name, which yet remains
Guillisarius, quia est initium capitis non est mutatum. Not. Greg. in illud cap.
uncorrected, is not the Canon or Epistle rejected.

15. In that fragment of this Synod which Binius Post 5. Council. pa. 606. a.
out of Tyrius commends, it is said that the fifth Synod which decreed the
Patriarchall dignity to the Bishop of Jerusalem, was held in the time of
Vigilius of Rome, Eutychius of Constantinople, and Paul of Antioch. Now that
by the Cardinals demonstration was never; for it is certain that there was no
Paul Bishop of Antioch in Pope Vigilius his days. Before this Synod, was
Ephreem Ephreem sedere capit. an. 526. Bar. eo an. nu. 55 sedet aute ^ an. 18.
Niceph. in Chron.
, who sat eighteen years, in whose fourteenth, or fifteenth year began
Vigilius Vigilius caepit an. 440. Bar. eo an. nu. 9 is est Ephaimi an. 15.
to be Pope, to him succeeded Domnus Niceph. in Chron. and Bar. an 446. nu. 68.
, he sat 18. years, in whose Nam 8. Domni est an. 553. quo habitum est
concilium hoc 5.
seventh or eighth year this fifth Council was held, and himself personally
subscribed unto Collat. 8. pa. 588. a.
it, and about his tenth year dyed Vigilius Domnus caepit an. 446. quare ejus
an. 10. erit 55^. quo anno obijsse Vigilium, ait Bar. an. 555. nu. 1.
. So this decree, by the Cardinals own reason, is but a forgery (as in very
truth it is.) Now if he to save the credit of that worthless fragment, will
admit an error of the writing, Paulus being put for Domnus, why should he be so
hard hearted against the other writing of Theodoret, as not to think a like
error of the pen in it, and Johannes to be put for Domnus?

16. That Edict of Justinian which we have so often mentioned in the ancient
editio^s of Councels before Binius had this title; The Edict of Justinian sent
unto Pope John the second. Contius In append. ad Cod. Justin.
the learned Lawyer, defends that inscription. Baronius himself somewhat
forgetful of what elsewhere he writes, calls this Bar. an. 451. nu. 129.
Edict, Constitutio data ad Johan a Constitution sent to Pope John, and again
An 530. nu. 4.
, Justinian expressly witnesses this in his Edict to P. John; a false title and
inscriptio^ without al doubt, John being dead ten Johannes 2. obijt an. 9.
Iustiniani. Bar. an. 535. nu. 26. at Edictum editum an. 20. Iustiniani Bar. an.
546. nu. 8.
years before this Edict was either published, or writ, as Baronius Iohannis
Papae tempore editum, mendaci inscriptione notatur Bar. an. 546. nu. 10.
liquido constat, non ante praesens tempus (an. vid. 20. Justin.) potuisse esse
conscriptum libellum illum. Bar. ibid. and constat Edictum Vigilij tempore
conscriptum, an. 534. nu. 21.
himself both declares and proves, professing that Inscription to be false.
Had the Cardinal remembered his demonstration drawn from the title and
Inscription, oh how happily, how easily had he avoided all his trouble of
defending Vigilius for writing against, and contradicting that Edict: He might
have said, Why, that Edict was none of Justinians, nor ever published by him;
for the Inscription is to Pope John who was dead long before. And because the
fifth Council was assembled for discussing that truth which the Emperor in his
Edict had delivered, and Vigilius with the other Nestorians did oppugn, the
Cardinal again might have denied that ever there had been any such fifth
Council, or any Synodall Acts at all of it; for if there was no Edict there
could be no Council, which was assembled and gathered for that only cause, to
define the truth delivered by the Edict. This had been a short cut indeed, and
the Cardinal, like another Alexander, by this one stroke had dispatched all
the doubts and difficultes which neither he nor all his friends can ever
untwine or loose in this Gordian knot. But the Cardinals demonstrations were
not in force as then, nor ever, I think, till the acts of this fifth Synod, and
in them the Epistle of Theodoret came to his trial: for notwithstanding the
falsehood of that inscription and title, the Card. very honestly acknowledges
that to be no counterfeit, but a true imperial Edict, truly published by
Justinian Imperator promulgavit Edictum. Bar. an. 546. nu. 8. Hactenus
Iustiniani Edictum. Ibid. nu. 37. et saepissime similia.
, contradicted by Vigilius, confirmed as touching the doctrine of the Three
Chapters, by the fifth Council. Here he can say Scias perperam additum, ipsum
missum ad Iohannem. Bar. an. 534. nu. 21. et an. 546. nu 10.
that addition to John is added, and put amiss in the title by some later
hand, by some who knew not accurately to distinguish the times: may not the
same as truly excuse this writing of Theodoret? the name of John is added in
the title by some who knew not accurately to distinguish the times, but yet the
Epistle it self it is truly Theodorets. It had been honest and fair dealing
in the Cardinal, any one of these ways to have excused this error in the
title of Theodorets Epistle, rather than by reason of such an error, as
happens in many Epistles and writings, to declame, not only against the
Epistle as a base forgery, and none of Theodorets, but even against all the
Acts At quam fidem rogo, merentur Acta hujusmodi, qua sunt hi^ contexta
commentis? Bar. an. 553. nu. 46.
of this holy general Council, as unworrhy of credit, because among them an
Epistle with an erroneous Inscription is found extant.

17. None, I think, do nor ever will defend the Acts of this or any other
Council, or any humane writings to be so absolutely entire, and without all
corruption, as that no fault of the writer or exscriber has crept into them;
such faults are frequent in the Acts almost of all Councels. To omit the rest;
in those of Chalcedon Act. 1. pa. 8. a.
, the Ephesine Latrociny is said to have been held when Zeno and Posthumianus
were Consuls, in the third Indiction. An undoubted error; For that Ephesine
Conventicle was held when Marcell. in Chron. and hinc certo liquet, qu^a
Conciliabulum Ephesinum sequutum est illud Constantinopoli habitum, in quo
condemnatus est Eutyches a Flaviano, at hoc Constantinopoli habitum est,
Protogene et Asterio. Coss. ut patet in Council. Chalc. Act. 1. pa. 30.
Protogenes and Asterius were Consuls, not when Zeno and Posthumianus; neither
were Zeno and Posthumianus Consuls in the third, but in the first Vt liquet ex
Marcell. in Chron.
Indiction: neither was the Council held either in the first or in the third,
but in the Vt liquet ex eodem Marc.
second Indiction; and therefore both Baronius Ba. an. 448. n. 58
, and Binius Haec verba [te^pore Zenonis et Posthumiani Jnd ctione 3.] mendosa
sunt and surreptitia. Bin. Not. in Conciliab. Ephesians. to. 1. Conc. pa. 1017. b
say, these words [tempore Zenonis and Post humiani venerabilium Consulum
indictione tertia] are false, and by surreption crept into the Acts. Again,
the sixteenth Action or Session is said to have been on the twenty eight
Quinto Kalenda^ Novembris. Act. 16. Conc. Chalc.
of October. A manifest error; seeing their thirteenth Action 3. Kalend.
November. Conc. Chal. Act. 13.
or Session was on the nine and twentieth, and their fourteenth Pridie Kalend
Nov. Conc. Chal. Act. 14.
Session on the thirtieth of October. Yea there are in those Acts far greater
faults than these. For in the third Action Pa. 84. b.
is set down the Imperial Edict of Valentinian and Martian, for condemning of
Eutyches: and yet that Edict was not published until the 26. of January, when
Datum 7. Kalend. Febr. Sporario Coss. in fine Edicti.
Sporarius was Consul: whereas the Council of Chalcedon and all the Acts
thereof was ended on the first day of November Nam ultima Sessio habita est
Kalendis November. dicitur enim ibi, hesterna die, postquam potestas vestra
surrexit, etc. quare ultima Sessio fuit proxima die post Sessionem in qua Actio
14. and 15. continentur, at actio 14. habita est pridi^ Kalend. Nov^b*
the year before: that is, more than two months before that Edict was made.
In the seventh Session also there is inserted by Binius Act. 7. pa. 105 b.
and Baronius Bar. an. 551. nu. 128.
an whole Action concerning Domnus, who was deposed in the Ephesine Latrociny,
where the Council decreed that Maximus should allow Domnus some charges to
serve him pro victu and vestitu. A forged Action, and that in the highest
degree, as not only the time when it was held, to wit, on the twenty seventh
Actio de Domno habita est 6. Kalend. Nov Bar. an. 451. nu. 129. e^ Bin. Not. ad
Conc. Chalc. pa. 18.
of October; whereas the Session Nam actio sequens quae etiam alia Sessio est,
in qua Theodoreti causa tractatur, habita est sub octav. Kalend. Nov.
which followed it was held on the five and twentieth, or six and twentieth day
of the same month, does declare; but because this Domnus was dead before the
Council of Chalcedon, as both the Imperial Edict of Justinian Chalcedonensis
Synodus Domnum post mortem condem navit. Edict. Just. t^. 2. Council. pa. 498. ^
idem repetis Conc. 5. Coll. 6. pa. 575 b.
, and the fifth Council, do certainly witness. Could the Cardinal have found
such additions or forgeries inserted into the Acts of this fifth Council, quos
ludos daret, how would he have triumphed in the disgrace of these Acts, to
have writings in them, and as parts of them and their Synodall Acts, which were
not made long after the end of the Council? to have an whole Action or
consultation, what allowance should be made to a dead man for provision of his
food and raiment? Here had been a field indeed for the Cardinal to have
insulted over these Acts. And yet, notwithstanding these errors in the two
first, and undoubted additions of the Emperors Edict in the third, and that
whole ridiculous action, nay fiction, in the fourth, patched unto the Acts of
Chalcedon, the Cardinal will not so disgrace those Acts; as to use his
demonstration against the credit of them, or that Council: And yet see his
unequal and unhonest dealing in these matters, because but one name is
inserted into the inscription, or by an error put in stead of another: the
Cardinals choler breaks out in this manner against the Acts of this fifth
Synod, Quam fidem An. 553. nu. 46.
, rogo, I pray you what credit is to be given to such Acts?

18. Some three or four errors of the pen, besides this of the inscription, I
confess are also in the Acts of this fifth Synod. The fifth Collation is said to
have been on the eight Octavo Idus Maias. Coll. 5. pa. 537. b.
, (it should be on the thirteenth or fourteenth) of May, seeing the fourth
Collation was held on the twelfth Collatio 4. die 4. Idus Maias.
of that month. In the same fifth Collation Pa. 548. a.
Cyrill is alleged to say, Non jam quidem sancta Synodus, the holy Synod did
not now pronounce a sentence against Nestorius: the negation (non) is by
negligence either of Binius, or the Printer, crept in, and is certainly to be
blotted out, which otherwise not only makes Saint Cyrill to speak untruly,
but even to contradict himself. In the same Action Pa. 558. b.
, there is recited an Epistle to Andreas Bishop of Samosat, in the inscription
whereof Theodorus is written in stead of Theodoretus, seeing of the next
Epistle being Theodorets, it is said, ejusdem ad Nestorium. It may be some few
more such errors may be found in these Acts of the fifth Council; but for the
honor of them, I profess, they are so incorrupt and entire, that more than
these I do not remember my self to have for a certainty observed in them.
Neither do such errors creep only into humane writings, their own learned
Iansenius Cap. 140. Concord. Euang.
(after Beza Bez in cap. 27 Matthew. v. 9.
) will tell them, that the very sacred Scriptures are subject to the same: for
whereas Matthew. 27.9. the Evangelist says it is written in the Prophet Jeremy;
seeing the text there cited is not found in Jeremy, but in Zachary; although
some think it to be a slip Videtur huc inclinare Aug. lib. 3. de cons. Euan.
ca. 7.
in memory in Saint Matthew; others, that it is in some apochryphall Sic Orig.
sensit Homil. 35. in Matthew.
writing of Jeremy; others, that Zachary had two names (as many other Jews)
and so might be called either Jeremy or Zachary; yet Iansenius not liking any
of these conjectures, rests on this answer as most near the truth, that either
the name of Zachary is Scribae culpa commutatum in Ieremiam, by the error and
fault of the writer turned into Jeremy; or else, that whereas the Evangelist
said no more, but that this is written in the Prophet (in which sort without
any addition or mention of name, some copies to have read that place, Saint
Austen Loco citato.
is witness, and not only Rupertus, but the Syriack translator read it in the
same manner) some more audacious hand expressed the name of Jeremy. Do you
think the Cardinal would or durst use his demonstration in this text? that
seeing a wrong name is inserted (not in the title or inscription (as in this
Epistle it is) but in the very text,) he would account the Gospel a forgery,
and unworthy of credit? It is true, they are too too bold even with the
Scriptures also: whereof they gave a notable proof; first when (as it was
credibly reported A Relation of the state of Religion in the West parts. fol.
l. 4.
to the relator) some of the Jesuits, even in their solemn Sermons in Italy,
censured Saint Paul for an hotheaded person, who was transported with his
pangs of zeal and eagerness, beyond all compass in his disputes, and that
there was no great reckoning to be made of his assertions; yea that he was
dangerous to read, as savouring of heresy in some places, and better perhaps
he had never written: and again, when (as some Catholics Ibid.
told it in the hearing of the relator) they held a consultation among them, to
have censured by some means, and reformed the Epistle of Saint Paul. Though
such be their audaciousnesse, yet I hope the Cardinal will not be so
censorious with the holy Gospel. what hard hap then has Theodoret, that he
alone among all writers, divine and humane, may not have the benefit of his
book at the Cardinals hand; but for one such fault, not only his writing must
be rejected as a forgery, but the Synodall Acts, among which it stands; must be
condemned as worthy of no credit?

19. If none of these can mollify the Cardinals heart, let it yet further be
considered, that in his own Annals an. 547. nu. 40
it is said of the consent of Vigilius to the Edict, the fifth Synod does often
give witness, quinetiam sexta Synodus Action septima continet monumenta,
Further also the sixth Synod in the seventh Action contains the writings of
Pope Vigilius against the three Chapters. A saying so void of truth, that those
monuments of Vigilius, yea almost any one of them, is able to eat up all that
whole seventh Action, it is such a pittance to those large writings of
Vigilius. Besides, in that seventh action of the sixth Council, there is
neither monuments of Vigilius, nor so much as any mention of Vigilius at all,
nor of the three Chapters. Let him again consider how he says Bar. an. 536.
nu. 32.
, that Caelestine called the Ephesme Council by the Emperor Theodorus; that
is to say, never, if the Cardinal be not relieved with an error or escape of
the writer. That elsewhere in the same Annalls he Bar. an. 534.
says, that by the Catholic Church the Roman Church is signified, as
appears ex Epistola Hormisdae Papae ad Iustinum Imperatorem, by the Epistle
(he quoteth the 22.) of Pope Hormisda to Justinius. An evident error. For
neither is that 22. Epistle written to Justinius, but to Dorotheus a Bishop;
neither is that which the Cardinal alleges, either in that 22. or in any
other of all the epistles (they are five) which Hormisda writ to Justinius. But
the Card. by a pretty mistaking, first turns Justinian into Justinius, and then
pretends that to be written Epist. 22. and by Hormisda, and to Justinius; which
is written by Justinian, and to Hormisda, and which follows the 56. Epistle.
Further yet let him remember, how in the same Annals Bar. an. 546. nu. 10.
it is said, that before the Edict of Justinian was written, those
controversies happened betwixt Theodorus (Bishop of Caesarea) and Pascalis the
Deacon. The Card. might as well have said, that the Edict was never written nor
published; for there was never any contention nor controversy betwixt Pascalis
the Deacon, and Theodorus; and I doubt, or rather am out of doubt, that there
was never any such contention as the Cardinal dreameth of (the best author for
it being Liberatus, one heretically affected in this cause, and maliciously
bent against Theodorus) but if there was any such controversy, it was not
betwixt Theodorus and Pascalis, but betwixt Theodorus and Pelagius. Pelagius
and not Pascalis was the Popes Agent at Constantinople at that time, as not
only Liberatus Pelagius aemulus existens Theodoro, volens einocere. Liber.
Brev. ca. 23. 24. and Pelagius Apocrisiarius Agapeti, Siloerij and Vigilij.
Bar. an. 536. nu 116.
, but Procopius Lib. 3. de Bell. Goth. pa. 365. Pelagius diu Constantinopoli
commoratus.
, a man of better note testifies. Now these foul errors (whereupon is
consequent that almost all which the Cardinal has historified for some 10. or
11. years is utterly untrue) being extant and recorded in his Annals, though
there be violent presumption, to think that the Cardinal judged some of them
to be indeed no errors, neither of his own memory, nor of the writers pen,
seeing when he reviewed or retracted his Tomes, and corrected therein small
slips, and very motes to such beams as these, as the mistaking of a few months
or days, or miswriting a word or syllable, and the like; yet he not once
mentions any correction in these places, yet am I content to allow these to
be but slips of the writer or Printer, as writing Theodorus in stead of
Theodosius, Pascalis for Pelagius, from Hormisda, for, to Hormisda; to Iustine,
for, from Justinian; and sexta for quinta, or eadem quinta; upon condition that
the Cardinal and his friends will in like sort consent, that by an error of
some writer of these Synodall acts, the name of John is either inserted when
there was no name, or written in stead of Domnus in that inscription. But if
they be obstinate and refuse such a reasonable profer, the Card. and all his
friends must be patient to hear, how justly and forcibly his own demonstation
may in his own words be retorted upon himself, and these errors of his.
Certainly these are patent and manifest lies and frauds, devised by some
heretical knave or varlet, they are such as every man may perceive to be
written by him who was not in any measure a lover of Christian piety: Sed
impudentissimi cujuspiam Nestorij sigmentum, but they are the fiction of a most
impudent Nestorian forgerer. Et quam fidem rogo, merentur? and what credit in
the world can be given to those writings or Annals, which have such untruths
and fictions inserted in them, and are contexta, composed and woven together
with such untruths? This being abundantly sufficient to satisfy any
indifferent man in this matter, yet would I a little further let the Reader
see, how childishly and corruptly Baronius deals in this cause. It is true, I
confess, that John dyed before Cyrill: for this is clear and certain, by
many undoubted testimonies in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 14. Vbi extat
germana Cyrilli Episcopi Alexandrini Epistola ad Domnum Antiochenum. pa. 122.
and sapius fit mentio Cyrilli mortui cum Domnus ille sedebat Antiochiae.
, not one of all which the Cardinal had the grace to allege. But all the
Cardinals reasons are so weak and withal so full of fraud and untruth, that
it is worthy your considering to see his blindness and perverseness even in
proving that which is true.

20. His first reason is this; I have showed Bar. an. 444. nu. 16.
this apertissime, that John dyed seven years before Cyrill by the Epistle
which Theodoret writ to Domnus four years since, (that is, four before the
year 444.) in the behalf of one Felicianus, whose estate Theodoret recommends
to Domnus. Truly the Cardinal has showed himself an egregious trifler
hereby: For neither in the 440. nor in any four years either before or after
that, does he set down any Epistle of Theodorets to Domnus, in the behalf of
Felicianus. The Epistle which the Cardinal dreameth of, is in behalf of
Celestianus, and that is indeed expressed An. 440 To. 6. an. 440. nu. 9.
. where note I pray you, that the Cardinal by a slip either of his own pen
or memory, (as I verily suppose) or of his Scribe, names Felicianus in stead of
Celestianus: God even by this, demonstrating how unjustly he carpes at the
Synodall Acts, for that very error or slip of a pen, which the Cardinal
himself falls into, even while he, for the like slip, declameth against
those holy Synodall Acts. And yet there is a worse fault in this reason. For it
is no more showed that John dyed before Cyrill by that Epistle, than by Tullies
ad Atticum. That Epistle having neither date, nor any circumstance to induce
that, may as well be written Anno 448. as Anno 440.

21. His second reason is this: There are letters, says heei, extant of
Theodoret to Domnus the year following, (to wit, an. 437.) and that Epistle of
Theodoret I will set down in his due place, anno sequenti, the next year. Now
in that next year, viz. an. 437. there is no Epistle of Theodoret set down by
the Cardinal, nor is either Domnus or Theodoret so much as named in all his
discourse of that year. Is not this now showed apertissime? you may be sure
the Cardinal would not have feared to perform his promise, but that there was
somewhat in that Epist. which would have bewrayed his lewd dealing in this cause.

22. His third reason is drawn from the testimony of Nicephorus Bishop of
Constantinople. This, says he Bar. an. 553. nu. 44.
, exploratum habetur, is sure and certain by Nicephorus. No, it is sure and
certain by Nicephorus that Baronius is erroneous in this matter; for
Nicephorus (...). Niceph. in Chro^.
accounts John to have been Bishop of Antioch eighteen years, and the
Cardinal Johannes obiit cum sedisset annos 13. licet Nicephorus in Chronico
tribuat ei 18. Bar. an. 436. nu. 12.
will allow him no more but thirteen, now the first year of John cannot
possibly be before the year 427. for in that year Theodotus, the next
predecessor of John, dyed, as Baronius Post haec Theodotus ex hac vita
migravit, qui ad hunc usque annum pervenisse proditur, etc. Bar. an. 427. nu.
25.
himself proves. Add now unto these seventeene more, and then the death of
John by Nicephorus will be an. 444. which is the self same year wherein
Cyrill dyed. Is not this a worthy proof to show John to have dyed seven years
before Cyrill, as the Cardinal avoucheth that he did? Or do not you think the
Cardinal was in some ecstasy, to produce Nicephorus as a witness for him,
whereas Nicephorus (as the Cardinal himself also confesses) gives to John
18. years, and the Cardinal allows him but thirteen; and whereas the
Cardinal of set purpose refuteth the account of Nicephorus?

23. But will you be pleased to see how the Cardinal refuteth him? Domnus,
says he Bar. an. 436. nu. 12.
, was Bishop of Antioch an. 437. as is proved by an Epistle of Theodorets
written to Domnus in that year, which Epistle I will set down in his due
place, to wit; an. 437. Lo, all his proof is from that Epistle, which the
Cardinal, contrary to his own promise, does not, and, as I think, durst not
set down.

24. But see further how the Cardinal is infatuated in this cause: John, says
he Bar. Ibid.
, dyed an. 436. having been Bishop 13. years. John succeeded to Bar. an. 427.
nu. 26. Defuncto Theodoto, subrogatus est in ejus locum Johannes.
Theodotus, who dyed an. 427. Say now in truth, is not the Cardinal a worthy
Arithmetitian, that of 427. and 13. can make no more than 436? And is not this
a worthy reason to refute Nicephorus? But this is not all, for Baronius Bar,
an. 444. nu. 23.
glossing upon Theodorets letter to Dioscorus, which, as he Theodoreti ad
Dioscorum data hoc anno Epistola sic se habet. An. illo nu. 18.
says, was written, an. 444. there observes with a memorandum, that by this
passage of Theodoret you may see how long Theodotus Hinc discas annos cujusque
ipsorum Episcopatus. Bar. an. 444 nu. 23.
, John, and Domnus had sitten in the Sea of Antioch, to wit, 26. years in all,
from the time that Theodoret was made Bishop unto that 444. year, viz.
Theodotus 6. John 13. and Domnus 7. until that year Theodoret, as Baronius
Bar. an. 423. nu. 10. Hoc anno Theodoretus creatus est Episcopus.
will assure you, was made Bishop, an. 423. Add now unto these six of
Theodotus, thirteen of John, and 7. of Domnus, and tell me whither you think
the Cardinal had sent his wits, when he could sum these to be just 444?

25. Or will you see the very quintessence of the Cardinals wisdom? I will,
says he Bar. an. 437. nu. 12.
, set down the next year (that is, an. 437.) the very Epistle of Theodoret to
Domnus, which was then written unto him; and eam qua monstratur, and I will also
set down in his due place (to wit, an. 444.) that Epistle of Theodoret to
Dioscorus, whereby is showed, that John was Bishop of Antioch just thirteen
year. Thus Baronius; who by these two Epistles of Theodoret will prove both
these. As much in effect as if he had said, I have already An. 427. nu. 26
proved, that John began to be Bishop of Antioch an. 427. and this being set
down for a certainty: I will now prove by Theodorets Epistle to Domnus, that
John dyed an 436. that is, in his ninth year; and then I will prove again by
Theodorets Epistle to Dioscorus, that he dyed in his thirteenth year, and so
dyed not till the year 440. Or, as if he had thus said, I will first prove,
that mine own Annals are untrue, wherein it is said An. 436. nu. 12. Hoc anno
Johannes diem obijt extremum.
, that John dyed in the year 436. which is but the ninth year of John;
because he dyed not, as Theodoret in one Epistle Theodor. Epist. ad Diosc. apud
Bar. an. 444. nu. 23. Alios 13. te^pore Iohannis.
witnesses, until his thirteenth year, which is an 440. And then I will
prove unto you, that mine own Annals are again untrue, wherein it is said Bar.
an. 436. nu. 12. Johannes sedit annot 13.
, that John was Bishop thirteen year, and so dyed not till an. 440.
(beginning the first, an. 427) because Theodoret, in another Epistle Anno
sequenti (vid. an. 437.) extant literae Theodoreti ad ejus successorem Domnum.
Bar. on. 436. nu. 12.
, witnesses, that John dyed an. 436. Or thus, I will first prove, that John
was dead an. 436. though he was alive an. 440. and the^ I will prove unto you,
that John was alive an. 440. though he was dead an. 436.

26. Is not this brave dealing in the Cardinal? is he not worthy of a cap and
a fether too, that can prove all these? and prove them by Theodorets Epistles?
or do you not think those to be worthy Epistles of Theodoret, by which such
absurdities, such impossibilities may be proved? Nay, does not this alone, if
there were no other evidence, demonstrate those Epistles of Theodorets to be
counterfeits? If that to Domnus be truly his, as Baronius assures Extant litera
Theodoreti ad Domnum Bar. an. 436. nu 12.
you, whereby John is showed to have dyed an. 436. then certainly the other to
Dioscorus must needs be a forgery, whereby John is showed to live an. 440.
Again, if that to Dioscous be truly his, as Baronius Hactenus Theodoreti ad
Diosc. Epistola. Bar. an. 440. nu. 29.
assures you, wherein John is said to live an. 440. then certainly the other to
Domnus must of necessity be a forgery, wherein John is said to be dead an.
436. And as either of these two Epistles demonstrates the untruth and forgery
of the other, so they both demonstrate the great vanity of Baronius, who
applauds them both, and who will make good what they both do affirm; that is,
the same man to be both dead and alive, a Bishop and no Bishop; at the self
same time, and by these worthy reasons does the Cardinal refute his own
witness Nicephorus, who by giving eighteen years to John, shows plainly
that John and Cyrill dyed within one year, which account perhaps gave occasion
to the exscriber of the Synodall Acts to thrust in the name of John, whom, upon
Nicephorus account he thought to live after Cyrill, whereas in very deed he
dyed somewhile before Cyrill.

27. His fourth and last reason is drawn from a Canonical Epist. of Cyrils to
Domnus, which is set done in the adjections to Theodorus Balsamon, whence it is
out of all doubt, says the Cardinal Bar. an. 553. nu. 44.
; that John dyed before Cyrill, seeing Cyrill writ unto his successor Domnus.
But howsoever the Cardinal vanteth, that this reason will leave no doubt, yet,
if you observe it, there are two great doubts therein: The former is, whether
that Epistle be truly Cyrils: And besides other reasons, that one point which
the Cardinal himself mentions, may justly cause any to think it none of
his; for as the Cardinal Nullus alius nomine Domnus inscriptus legitur, qui
tanta polleret authoritate ut ad libitum (quod dictu^ est) deponere atque
restituere Episcopos posset. Bar. an. 553. nu. 44.
says, the Author of that Epistle ascribes such authority to Domnus, that he
might ad libitum, at his pleasure put out Bishops, and at his pleasure restore
them. Now there is none that knows the learning, moderation, and wisdom of
Cyrill, that can think Cyrill ever to have written in such manner either to
any Metropolitan, or to any Patriarch, specially seeing Cyrill was not
ignorant of that Canon of the Council at Antioch Conc. Antioch. sub Iulio 1.
can. 9.
, let not a Metropolitan do any thing in such causes, without the advice and
consent of the other Bishops in the Province.

28. The other doubt is, whether that Domnus, to whom this Epistle is written,
be the same Domnus that was Bishop of Antioch, and successor to John. The
Cardinal is much troubled in removing this doubt, and he winds himself
diverse ways. Sure it is, says Baronius Vnde apparet. non inferioris sedis
aliquem esse potuisse ejus nominis Episcopum. an. 553. nu. 44.
, that he who had such authority must needs be some eminent Bishop, and not
one of an inferior See. True, but he might be a Metropolitan and so have
inferior Bishops under him, and yet be no Patriarch. Again, says he Certe
quidem in scrie Episcoporum Orientalium, qui Concilio Ephesmo, et Chalcedoneusi
interfuerunt, nullus alius ejus nominis Dominus inscriptus reperitur. etc. Jbid.
, There is no Domnus else but this Domnus Bishop of Antioch, mentioned either
in the Council of Ephesus or Chalcedon, who had such authority, as to depose
and restore Bishops, ad libitum. As if Domnus of Antioch might do it ad
libitum: But in such lawful manner as Domnus of Antioch might do it, there
were others called by the name of Domnus, and those mentioned in those very
Councels, who might upon just cause, and by due and Canonical proceeding depose
and restore their inferior Bishops: look but into those Councels, and you
will admire both the supine negligence of the Cardinal in this point, and his
most audacious down-facing of the truth; for, to omit others, both in the
Conventicle of Ephesus, and the Council of Chalcedon, there is often mention
of Domnus Bishop of Apamea, a Metropolitan Bishop, as the words of Miletius
Act. 3. Conc. Chal pa. 75. b.
do witness, I Miletius Bishop of Larissa, speaking for Domnus the
Metropolitan Bishop of Apamea; and for this Domnus he subscribed Act. ea^dem
pa. 81. et Act. 6. pa. 101. a.
. And that you may see how fraudulently the Cardinal dealt in this very point,
he neither would set down that Epistle, nor acquaint you with that which in
Balsamon Sic enim in margin illius Epistolae notatur, videtur tempore Cyrilli,
emissa esse Romam, hujus Alexandrini Sacerdotis Appellatio.
is expressly noted; that Peter the Bish. whom that Domnus, unto whom Cyrill
writes, had deposed, was Alexandrinus Sacerdos, a Bishop of the patriarchall
diocese of Alexandria, what had Domnus of Antioch to do with the Alexandrian
Bishops. So clear it is by Balsamon, that this Domnus, unto whom Cyrill writ,
was not Domnus of Antioch, as the Card. I fear against his knowledge,
avoucheth,

29. Thus you see all and every reason which the Cardinal brings John to be
dead seven years before Cyrill, not only to be weak and unable to enforce
that Conclusion, but withal to be full fraught with frauds and untruths: So
that if I had not found more sound and certain reasons to persuade this, I
could never by the Cardinals proofs have been induced to think that an
error in the Inscription of Theodorets Epistle. But seeing upon the undoubted
testimonies in the Council of Chalcedon it is certain, that John dyed before
Cyrill, I willingly acknowledge a slip of some writer in that Inscription, but
yet the Epistle it self must be acknowledged truly to be Theodorets, which
is all that the Synod avoucheth, and which is that which the Cardinal
undertook to disprove, but by no one reason does offer to prove the same. And
even for that error also in the Inscription I doubt not, but those who can
have the sight of the Greek and Original, yea, perhaps of some ancient Latin
copies of the Acts of this fifth Council, shall find either no name at all,
or, which I rather suppose, the name of Domnus expressed therein; in stead of
which, whereas some ignorant audacious exscriber, has thrust in the name of
John; it is not, nor ought it to be any impeachment at all to the Synodall
Acts, unless the Cardinal will acknowledge his own Annals to be of no
credit, because in them Pascalis is written by some such error, for Pelagius,
John for Vigilius, Justinius for Iustinianus, Theodorus for Theodosius, Sexta
for Quinta, Foelicianus for Celestianus, and a number the like in other causes,
most of these slips pertaining to this very cause of the Three Chapters, of
which we do entreat.

CAP. XXXV. That Baronius himself follows many forged writings, and fabulous
narrations in handling this cause of the fifth Council, as particularly the
excommunication ascribed to Mennas, Theodorus and others, and the narration of
Anastasius.
1. YOU have seen all the exceptions which their great Momus could devise
against these Acts, to prove them corrupted, either by alteration or
mutilation, or, which is the worst of all, by additions of forged writings. But
alas, who can endure to hear Baronius declame against corrupted, false,
forged, or counterfeit writings? Quis tulerit Gracchos? better might Gracchus
invey against sedition, or Verres against bribery, than Baronius against the
using of false and fained writings. Aethiopem albus derideat, he should first
have washed away those foul blemishes out of his own Annals, more black
herewith than any Ethiopian, and then have censured such spots in others. Were
his Annals well purged of such writings, their vast Tomes would become a pretty
Manual: They who have occasion to examine other passages in Baronius will
find the truth hereof in them; for this one concerning the fifth Council, Pope
Vigilius, and the cause of the Three Chapters, from which I am loath to
digress, I doubt not, but whosoever will compare the Cardinals Annals with
this Treatise, will easily perceive, that all which he has said in defense of
the Pope relyeth on no other nor better grounds, but either forged writings,
or, if truly written by the authors, yet on some fabulous narration and
untruths, which from them the Cardinal has culd out, as only sit for his
purpose. Suffer me to give a taste hereof in some of them.

2. The first in this kind is a supplication to Vigilius, or a brief
confession made unto him by Mennas Bishop of Constantinople, Theodorus Bishop
of Caesarea, and diverse other Eastern Bishops, inserted in the beginning of
the Constitution of Vigilius, and much applauded by the Cardinal Bar. an. 572.
nu. 19.
in this cause; and this to be a mere fiction is by many evident proofs,
before mentioned, easily discerned. The occasion of it, as the Cardinal tells
us Ibid. et nu. 20.
, was to humble themselves to Pope Vigilius, and acknowledge the injuries they
had done in writing and declaming against Vigilio non acquu vit, sed e^^ plane
despexi^, eique insultavit, etc. Ba. an. 551 nu 3.
him, and his Synodall Constitution for Taciturnity concerning the Three
Chapters. Now seeing that whole matter is fictitious, for neither was there any
such Synod ever held, nor any such decree ever made; the confession which is
grounded on them, must be like them, fabulous and forged.

3. The contents bewray the dullness of the forgerer; the Eastern Bishops
profess there, to embrace the four former Councels, and all the Acts thereof,
in all causes, judgments and Constitutions, made with consent Vniversa ab
eis^em Synodi^ Communi co^sensu cum Vicarijs sedis Apostolicae judicia
conservamus, etc. in Exemplo confess. quod extat in initio Constituti Vigilij.
of the Popes Legates. Why? the Eastern Bishops knew right well, that some
Canons were concluded both in the Counsels of Constantinople and Chalcedon,
not only without, but quite contrary to the mind of the Pope and his Legates,
as namely, that about the dignity of Constantinople, which they,
notwithstanding the resistance of the Legates, both approved and knew it to
have been ever held in force by the judgment of the Catholic Church, but
specially by the Bishops of Constantinople, whose Patriarchall dignity, which
they ever after the second Council enjoyed, was both decreed and confirmed by
those Canons. Never did the Eastern Bishops in those days, nor long after,
esteem the Popes own, much less his Legates consent, so necessary to any
Synodall Decree, but that without them the same might be made and stand in
force as the judgment of the general Council and whole Church. And to go no
further, what an unlikely and uncredible thing is it, that Theodorus and the
rest in one year should make this confession to accept no more of those
Synodall decrees, then the Pope or his Legates were pleased to allow; and the
very next year after, contrary to that their confession, themselves hold a
Synod, and make a Synodall decree in this cause of the Three Chapters, not
only without the Popes consent, or presence either of himself or his Legate,
but even contrary to his definitive sentence made known unto them? the deviser
of that confession shows himself plainly to have been some of the Vaticane
favorites, who living perhaps in the time of Gregory, by this intended to
infringe the dignity of the Sea of Constantinople, and those Canons which were
concluded both in the 2. and 4. Council, whereas the Eastern Bishops
notwithstanding the contradiction and resistance of the Pope held them ever in
as great authority and reverence, as any Canons in all the four former
Councels.

4. Again what a silly devise was it to make Mennas, Theodorus, and a great
number of Bishops to ask pardon of the Pope for that wherein they profess
themselves no way to be guilty? I have De injurijs be^titudini vestrae factis,
ego quide^ nullam feci, etc. Ibid.
done no injuries to your Holiness, yet for the peace of the Church, veluti si
eas fecissem veniam postulo, I pray you forgive me that which I never did, as
if I had done it. Can any man think this the submission of wise men, of such
stout and constant minds as Mennas and Theodorus, besides the rest, had? or
what could be devised more repugnant to that which Vigilius is made to say in
his excommunication Extat inter Epist. Vigilij post Epistolam 16.
of Theodorus, Thou scandalizing the whole Church, and being warned, entreated,
threatened by me, have refused to amend: and nunquam a prava intention
cessasti, and never have thou ceased from thy wicked design, nor to write and
preach novelties, (so he calls the condemning of the Three Chapters) yea, after
the Constitution for silence, to which thou had sworn, thou have openly red
in the Palace a book against the Three Chapters; thou have been the
firebrand and the beginner of the whole scandal, thou have despised the
authority of the Apostolic See. Thus says the Excommunication. Was Vigilius
well advised, think you, to accept, as a satisfaction and submission for so
many and so heinous crimes of insolency, contempt, perjury, sacrilege, and the
like, this confession at the hands of Theodorus, wherein he does in effect give
the Pope the lie, saying and avouching, I have written no books at all
contrary to that Decree of Silence made by your Holiness, and for the
injuries which have been done to your holiness, and to your See, eas quidem
non feci, truly I have done none at all. Is not this a worthy submission? the
Pope says, he has done innumerable and very heinous injuries to him, such as
deserved the censure of excommunication: No, says Theodorus, I have done none
at all unto him: and this the Pope, like a wise man, takes for a good
satisfaction Tali praemissd satisfactione Vigilius eosdem in communionem
accepit. Bar. an. 552. nu. 20.
, or an humble submission upon which he is presently reconciled, and shakes
hands with that capital offender. Or where was the Cardinals judgment when he
says An. eodem nu. 19.
of this confession, that in it Theodorus did suppliciter, humbly entreat
pardon of Vigilius, de irrogatis in ipsum probris and contumelijs, for the
scoffs and contumelies which he had used against the Pope. If this confession
was true and real, then certainly the Excommunication of Vigilius is not only
most unjust, but a very foolish fiction: If the Excommunication was true and
real, then must needs this submission be fained and fictitious. True they
cannot be both, but that both should be false and counterfaits, is not only
possible, but certain.

5. If nothing else, the time when this Confession was made by Theodorus and
Mennas demonstrates this. It was made after the Decree Bar. an. 551. nu. ^. e^
552. nu. 19.
of Taciturnity, and the Synod wherein that was concluded, and that was indeed
never: that decree and Synod are merely Chymericall, this Confession then made
after them, and mentioning that decree, cannot possibly be real: It was made,
as the Cardinal Bar. an. 552. an. 8 e^ seq.
assures us, after that Vigilius, fleeing the persecution of Justinian, had
fled, first, to Saint Peter's in Constantinople, then to the Church of Enthennia
at Chalcedon; yea, after that the Emperor had revoked and abrogated his Edict
against the Three Chapters, and Vigilius, at the earnest entreaty of the
Emperor, was now returned from Chalcedon to Constantinople: and this was at
Nevermasse: neither did Justinian persecute Vigilius, neither did Vigilius for
fear of his persecution flee either to S. Peter's, or to Chalcedon, neither did
Justinian entreat him to return from thence, whither he fled not at all, nor
ever did the Emperor adnull or revoke his Edict against the three Chapters:
then certainly the confession which by the Cardinals own profession and
acknowledgement followed all these, must needs be like them, a fiction and
mere forgery, never really and truly made by Mennas, Theodorus, and the rest
of those Bishops. Lastly, it was made the next year before the fifth Council
was held, that is, anno 552. which is the twenty sixth of Justinian, as the
Cardinal witnesses Anno illo 552. nu. 19.
; before which time it cannot be imagined to have been made; for the
excommunication of Theodorus was published but in that year in which Vigilius
came to Chalcedon, as Baronius Haec de sententia in Theodorum ac Mennam lata
Vigilius, quae ipse scripsic anno sequenti in Basilica S. Euphemia Chalcedone.
Bar. an. 551. nu. 18.
confesses. Now it is a riddle which Oedipus cannot dissolve, how Mennas, who,
as we have certainly proved by the Acts of the sixth Council, dyed in the 21.
year of Justinian, should come now in his 26. year, that is, four or five
years after his death, to offer up a supplication to Vigilius, and ask pardon
of him for doing no offense against him. Me thinks either the Pope should be
afrighted with such a ghastly sight, or Baronius ashamed to applaud such sottish
fictions, as is that excommunication of Mennas made by Vigilius: and the
Encyclycall Epistle of Vigilius, which mentions and approves that
excommunication, and this forged confession; none of which will suffer the
ghost of Mennas to rest, but bring a dead man out of his grave, to hear the
Popes sentence thundered out against him, and then come with a bill of
supplication to beg forgiveness of his Holiness, who had more reason to have
prayed pardon of Mennas for disquieting and waking him out of that long and
sound sleep.

6. So both the occasion, the contents, and the time, besides other
circumstances, do evidently convince that submission to be a counterfeit. But
how comes it then into the Popes Constitution? You must enquire this of
Baronius, or of those who have access to the Vaticane whence this Constitution
was taken: might one have the sight of the Vaticane copy, I doubt not but
either there are some evident prints of error, in inserting this confession
into it; or which I exceedingly mistrust, Baronius has used a little of the
Vaticane art in this matter. Howsoever, certain it is that this confession
has neither fit coherence, nor any dependence at all of ought in the
Constitution, but it is both complete and much more orderly, this being wholly
expunged, than if so idle a fiction be annexed unto it. But let the Cardinal
and his friends look to this matter by what means or whose fraud this was
inserted, I thought needful to admonish the^ of the fault, nor for the love
and affection I bear to that Constitution of Vigilius, could I with silence
see and suffer it to be blemished therewith.

7. The second is Eustathius, of whom I would have spoken more in this place,
but that his fained and fabulous narrations are so clearly discovered before,
that I think it needless to add ought concerning him, or them.

8. The third writing is a book in very great request with Baronius, and that
is, those Epistles which bear the name of Theodoret, of which though much has
been said before; yet will I here add somewhat to manifest them further to
be counterfeit and most false. Among them, two are most eminent; that to
Dioscorus, and the other to Pope Leo. That the former is forged, the other does
demonstrate. For by that to Dioscorus which was writ anno 444. Theodoret is
made to say, that he had then been Bishop 26. years Apud Bar. an. 444. nu. 23.
, whereas by the later written anno 449. it is clear that in that year he had
been Bishop, no more Cum 26. annis Ecclesiam rexerim. Theod. apud Bar. an.
449. nu. 119.
than 26. years: So vice versa, that the later is forged is demonstrated by
the former; for by that to Leo written an. 449. Theodoret is made to say that
he had then been Bishop just 26. whereas by the other to Dioscorus written
anno 444. it is witnessed that he had been Bishop 26. Apud Bar. an. 444. nu.
23.
years, five years before he writ to Leo. And they are both demonstrated to
be mere fictitious, in that Theodoret is made in them both to testify that
for that whole time of 26. years he had been orthodoxall in faith, and for
proof thereof he appeals In Epist. ad Leonem. apud Bar. an. 449. nu. 120. A
(...) enim scripta sunt alia quidem ante annos viginti, etc.
to his own writings, written 12. 15. and 20. years before that; whereas it
is as clear as the Sun that he was a most earnest defender and writer in
defense of Nestorius and his heresies, and for this cause was justly condemned
by the holy Council of Ephesus, yea and his writings yet extant Extant tom. 5.
act. Conc. Ephesians. pa. 859. et sequ. sub hoc titulo. Reprehensio 12. Capitulorum
Cyrilli, a Theodoreto Episcopo Cyri.
do undenyably convince the same. Besides in that to Dioscorus, he professes
Hominem sumus admirati, et scripsimus ad Cyrillum beatae memoriae, etc. Theod.
apud Bar. an. 444. nu. 28.
his ardent affection and love to Cyrill, whereas after Cyrils death, in an
open assembly at Antioch he most bitterly Theodoreti alloquutio, apud Conc. 5.
Coll. 5. p. 559. b.
, unjustly, and spitefully declamed against him. Further, in that to Dioscorus,
it is said that he was orthodoxall Ego multas habeo myriadas hominum qui
doctrinae veritatem et rectitudinem mihi testantur. Theod. apud Bar. an. 444.
nu. 22.
anno 444. when that Epistle was written; whereas in his Epistle written anno
448. Literae quae a Theodoreto ad Irenaeum tunc (id est, ut ipse explicat, hoc
anano 448.) reddita sunt. Bar. an. 440. nu. 7. 8.
or after, unto Irene a Nestorian Bishop of Tire, justly deposed Statuimus ut
Irenaeus a sancta Tyriorum Ecclesia statim expellatur. Edict. Theodos. quod
extat to. 5. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 19.
by the Emperor, he bemones both the public cause and the case of Irene,
comparing his to the cause Beatissimae Susannae sum recordatus, etc. Theod.
epist. ad Iren. apud. Bar. an. 448. nu. ^.
of Susanna, and lamenting that either Et nunc Domine duo nobis proponuntur,
vel Deum offendere et conscientiam ladere, velincidere in injusta hominum
decreta, etc. Theod ibid.
they must offend God, and hurt their own conscience, (if they forsake
Nestorianisme,) or else fall into unjust decrees and punishments of men, (if
they continued in that doctrine;) and who further calls this deposed and
heretical Bishop, Dilectissimum Epistola eadem.
, and piissimum Irenaeum, The most beloved, and most holy Irene. The like
forgery might be showed in his Epistle to Nomus, written also anno 448. Illa
Theodoreti Epistola scripta ad Nomum hoc ipso anno Bar. an. 448. nu. 11.
wherein he exclameth against the Emperor Theodosius, as if he had given
toleration Alijs quidem omnibus aperta est civitas, non solium Arij et Eunomij
sectatoribus, sed et Manichtis, et Marclonistis, etc. Theod epist. ad Nomum.
apud Bar. an. 448. nu. 12.
and free liberty of Religion to Arians, Eunomians, Manichees, Marcionites,
Valentinians, and Mo^tanists, and yet restrained yea excluded him ab omni
civitate, from every City in his Empire; which to be a most vile and unjust
slander, the piety and zeal of Theodosius, highly renowned both by Sozomen
Nullum non virtutis genus sedulo excoluisti, etc. sic Theodosium ju^^i^re^
alloquitur Sozom. in praefat, ad suam histor.
, and Pope Leo Piissimam sollicitudinem Christianae religionis habetis, ne in
populo Dei (...) schismata, aut haereset, aut ulla scandala convalescant. Leo.
epist. 7. qua est ad Theodosium.
does demonstrate; and whose Leg. 66. de har. cod. Theod. et id quod extat in
Conc. Chal. act. 3. pa. 84.
Edicts against heretics do also manifest the same, seeing therein out of his
hatred to heresy, and specially to Nestorianisme, he forbids any Definivimus
eos cateris debere ultionibus subjacere, etc. Edict. Theod. in Conc. Chal^.
loc. cit.
such to enjoy their Sees, or to escape unpunished; and being misinformed that
Flavianus and Eusebius of Dorileum were Nestorians, he upon that
misinformation, unjustly and rashly subjected Excludi ab Episcopatu (volumus)
Flavianum and Eusebium, Domnum quoque and Theodoretum. ibid.
them to that censure; but being truly informed of Domnus and Theodoret, that
they embraced Nestorianisme, he justly confirmed their deposition, forbidding
any either to read or have the books or Theodoret Sed nec habeat quis, vel
legate, proferatve, Neflorij Theodoreti scripta. ibid.
, or of Nestorius, Theodorets being every whit as bad as the books of
Nestorius. It were easy to show the like prints of forgery in all those
Epistles going under the name of Theodoret, which the Cardinal so much
magnifieth: but I am loath to stay too long in them, the falsehood of which has
been so often before demonstrated.

9. A fourth is that Action concerning Domnus, inserted by Baronius and Binius
into the Acts of the Council Conc. Chalc. Act. 7.
at Chalcedon. This to be undoubtedly a forgery and fiction, was before proved,
because Domnus was dead before the Council at Chalcedon; for so both the
Emperor Justinian Just. Edict. to. 2. Conc. pa. 498.
in his Edict, and the fifth Council Co^^. 6 p. 575. b.
expressly witness, saying, the holy Council at Chalcedon condemned Domnus,
post mortem, after he was dead, for that he durst write that the twelve
chapters of Cyrill should not be spoken of. Now that whole Action containing
nothing else but a consultation and decree for the maintenance of Domnus, by
some annual allowance out of the revenewes of the Sea of Antioch, none I
think will once imagine that so grave, so wise and worthy an assembly of 603.
Bishops, would either consult or make a decree for the allowance of a stipend
or maintenance to be given to a dead man: specially not to Domnus, whose
deposition in the Ephesine latrociny the whole Council of Chalcedon approved:
and it is very unlikely they would judge him worthy to have maintenance out of
that Bishopric, of which by reason of his heresy they judged him most justly
to be deprived. But if there were no other reasons to manifest this, the place
whence it comes might justly cause one to distrust the same: for is it think
you in the Greek and original copies of that Council? No certainly, it is
not: as both the Cardinal Haec actio defideratur in Craco codice. Bar. an.
451. nu. 129. and Bin. not. in Conc. Chal. p. 185
and Binius will assure you; Desideratur in Graeco, it is wanting in the Greek
or original: nor only is it now wanting there, but certum est eadem caruisse
Graeca exemplaria tempore Iustiniani; It is certain the Greek copies had not
this Action in the time of Justinian the Emperor. Is it mentioned in
Liberatus? Or in Evagrius? or in Nicephorus? all which set down the sum of
the Actions in that Council? No, it is not in any of them. Whence then comes
this worthy action that so carefully provides victuals for a dead man? Truly
out of their old Minthouse the Vaticane: Haec Actio scripta in Latino veteri
codice Vaticano: There is in the Vaticane an old manuscript Latin copy, which
is said to have been the copy of Albinus and Proculus, and in that old written
book, this Action is found, says Baronius ^n. 451. n. 130
. A very Gibeonite you may be sure. It came with old molded bread, (such as
was fittest to feed a dead man) with old moldy shoes and torn clothes, and
so deceived the Cardinal: No, it deceived him not, but by it he would deceive
others, and not only most shamefully deprave and corrupt the Acts of the holy
Council of Chalcedon, as he and Binius have done herein, but make a way, and
show an occasion to carpe at the Synodall Acts of the fifth Council: and had
not the Cardinal been conscious of this fault in this Action, you may be well
assured that he would not have omitted so foul an error in the fifth Synod,
and the Acts thereof, as to avouch Domnus to have been dead before the
Council of Chalcedon, when he scraped and raked together all that he could
find (and they are all but motes to this beam) whereby he might disgrace
those Acts.

10. But the Cardinal will not for all this yield in this matter, nay he will
defend this Action also: For objecting an. 451. n. 130
to himself how any such Action could be held concerning Domnus, seeing
Justinian testifies he was dead before the Council of Chalcedon, he
answers, Justinian was ignorant of this Action, and he had some other Action
of the Council of Chalcedon touching Domnus, Quam nusquam legimus, Which we no
where find. So Baronius: Who hereby would have it thought, that Justinian and
the fifth Council had not the true Copies of the Council at Chalcedon, but
that these which the Cardinal frames, they are the only perfect and entire
Acts thereof. Certainly Justinian was ignorant of this Action, and so was the
fifth Council. And no marvel, when the Council of Chalcedon it self was
ignorant thereof. And whether the Emperor and the whole fifth general
Council, wherein were present four Patriarchs, and the Bishop of Chalcedon
also, whether these living about an hundred years after that Council, be not
like to have had more true Copies of the Council at Chalcedon, than Baronius,
living eleven hundred years after it, it is not hard to judge.

11. Now for that which the Cardinal would persuade, that whereas Justinian
and the fifth Synod said, that the Council of Chalcedon condemned Domnus after
he was dead, they said this, as he supposes, out of some other Action Ex
quibus apparet Justinianum alicujus alterius actionis, quam nusquam legimus,
cognitionem habuisse. Bar. loc. cit.
of Chalcedon, which is not now extant, and thereby would blemish the Acts of
the Council of Chalcedon as being defective, and wanting that Action: Truly
his Cardinalship is foully mistaken herein. Neither Justinian, nor the fifth
Council, had any such Action, as he vainly and idly dreameth of. It was
these very Acts which now we have, out of which they affirm that. For they
say not that the Council did that in any action particularly concerning
Domnus, nor yet that in express terms they condemned Domnus: But they say,
the Council condemned him, and so they did, in that they approved both his
condemnation and deposition decreed in the Ephesine Latrociny. That this they
did the acts now extant do declare; whereas Act. 10. pa. 115.
the most holy Bishops of Rome accounted all that was done in the second
Ephesine Synod to be void, it is manifest that the judgment concerning the
Bishop of Antioch is excepted; so said the Popes Legates, and Stephen Ibid.
, I also judge those things to be void which were done at Ephesus, absque his
quae gesta sunt adversus Domnum, excepting those things which were done against
Domnus: and to the like effect said they all. Domnus then being dead, at the
time of the Council at Chalcedon, and having been in the Ephesine Latrociny,
both condemned and deposed, seeing the Council of Chalcedon approved both his
condemnation and deposition, and the substitution of Maximus, (which were all
done in that Ephesine Latrociny,) as just and lawful: hence it is that the
fifth Council says, and that out of these very Acts and no other, as
themselves explain, that Chalcedonensis Synodus Domnum condemnavit, cum
confirmasset condemnationem ejus, and suscepisset Maximi ordinationem. Conc. 5.
Cell. 6. pa. 575.
the Fathers at Chalcedon condemned Domnus being dead, whose condemnation they
approved, when at that time of their approving it he was dead. So neither are
the Acts of the fourth Council imperfect, nor these of the fifth untrue, in
affirming this of Domnus; but that Vaticane and Gibeonitish Action, inserted
into the Acts of Chalcedon, and approved by Baronius and Binius, is both false,
ridiculous, and impossible.

12. The last whom I will now mention, is Anastasius, the writer of the lives
of their Popes. An author whom Baronius much follows, and relyeth upon,
almost in all parts of his Annals: whom I do not mention in this place, as
doubting whether those lives are truly his, but as doubting, nay rather without
doubt assuring both my self and others, that such credit is not to be given
to him and to his reports, as the Cardinal and Binius do give. This I doubt
not to demonstrate, if ever I come to handle the second Nicene Synod, and that
which they call the eighth, wherein Anastasius was a stickler, yea and the
penner of the one, and correcter of the other: For this present, I will only
examine the life of Vigilius written by him; wherein I do constantly affirm,
that there are not so many lines as lies set down by Anastasius. Which that it
may appear that I do not speak in any spleen against Anastasius, but out of
the evidence of truth, give me leave to take a view of some particulars
therein, those especially which most concern this our present cause.

13. First, Anastasius Anast. in vita Vigil. Nam Anastasius continuavit
historiam Damasi, ab obitu Damasi usque ad Adrianum secundum. Possev. in App.
describing the entrance of Vigilius to have been eodem tempore, at that time
when Bellisarius made war against Vitiges the King of the Goths, says that
Vitiges fled away by night, but John surnamed the bloody, pursued after him,
and brought him to Bellisarius and Vigilius at Rome, and there Bellisarius
took the Sacrament to bring him safe to Justinian. All untrue. First, it is
untrue that Vitiges fled away by night; or secondly, that he fled at all; or
thirdly, that John did pursue him in flight; or fourthly, that John took him;
or fifthly, that John brought him to Bellisarius; or sixthly, that he brought
him to Vigilius; or seventhly, that he brought him to Rome; or eighthly, that
Bellisarius took any such oath; or ninthly, any Sacrament; or tenthly, took
it in the Church of Julius; or eleventhly, took it to assure them that he
would bring Vitiges to Justinian: all these are the fictions of Anastasius: For
as Procopius who was Counselor Bellisario Consiliarus adfuit Procopius, and
rebus omnibus dum agerentur interfuit. Procop. lib. 1. de bello Persico.
to Bellisarius, and present with him in all his wars, testifies, Vitiges
and the Goths willingly yielded Gothorum Optimates Bellisarium Hesperiae Regem
appellare constituunt, ad eumque mittunt qui obsecrarent ut imperium
susciperet. Vitiges quoque formidine percitus Bellisarium et ipse ad
suscipiendum imperium hortatur. Proc. lib. 2. Bell. Goth. pa. 340. qui paul^
post quomodo se turpiter dediderunt Vitiges et Gothi declarat: idem docet Leon.
Aret. lib. 1. de bello Jtal. pa. 669.
themselves and Ravenna unto Bellisarius; yea Vitiges persuaded and even
entreated him to accept the kingdom: and Bellisarius took Vitiges Bellisarius
Ravenna potitus Vitigem imprimis honorifice custoditum servabat. ibid. pa 341.
himself, and kept him in custody: yea he sent away John Bellisarius Johannem
and Narsetem diversim abire cum fuis copijs jussit. His abeuntibus Ravennam
contendit. ib. p. 340. idem et Leon. Aret. loco citato.
and Narses before either he entered in Ravenna, or took Vitiges, and being
taken, he carried him not to Rome, but the straight way by Sea to Bellis. iter
aggreditur, Bizantiumque recta contendit. ibid. pa. 343. et cum Vitige
Gothorumque optimatibus Bizantium venit. Idem lib. 3. pa. 343. Bellisarius cum
Vitige Bizantium navigavit. Leo. Arct. loc. cit.
Constantinople, whither himself was then Bellisario ad se celerius vocato.
Proc. lib. 2. pa. 341. et Leonar. Aret. pa. 670. Iustinianus Bellisarium ex
Italia confestim revocavit.
called by the Emperor, and commanded to come without any delay. So in the
very entrance of his narration, Anastasius has in few words couched together
at the least ten or eleven evident untruths.

14. Next, Anastasius relates, how the Emperor and his wife demanded of
Bellisarius when be came to Constantinople, how he had placed Vigilius in stead
of Silverius, and thanked him for it. Truly Anastasius had small wit to think
that the Emperor had leisure to confer with Bellisarius concerning a matter
done about three Nam Silveriu^ a Bellisario ejectum nar^at. Proc. lib. 1. pa.
287. e^que tum suffectus Vigilius. ibid. Jd sactum an. 3. belli Goth. vel ante,
liquet ex lib. 2. pa. 313. ubi sic ait, Iam tertius bello huic annus exibat.
years before: and specially which with the death of Silverius Nam Silverius
obijt an. 14. Iustiniani. Bar. an. 540. n. 2. at Vitigem caepit et
Constantinopol. adduxit Bellisarius an. 15. Iustiniani. Bar. an. 541. nu. 3.
was now dead and buried. Yet say he did. Again, what an idle discourse was
this about the placing of Vigilius in the room of Silverius, seeing the
Emperor knew the whole matter long before, how Silverius was banished, upon an
accusation of a Letter written to the Gothish King, to come and take possession
of Rome, and himself had taken order that the cause of Silverius should be
again examined, and if that letter was truly writ by Silverius, that he should
be banished; if it were found a calumny, that he should be restored, as
Liberatus Liber. in Brev. ca. 22.
shows. He knew Hoc anno ( 14. Iustiniani) simulas de legitima Vigilii
electione nuncium Constantinopol. perlatum est, Imperator protinus Epistolam ad
eu^ dat. Bar. an. 540. nu. 11.
also that Silverius was dead, and that Vigilius was peaceably and with his
consent placed in the Roman See before Bellisarius came, for he had written p
unto him as the only lawful Pope, and both the Emperor and Mennas had
received Letters Epist. Vigilij extat apud. Bar. an. 540. nu. 20. and sequ.
from him the year Nam literae ad Mennam data sunt 15. Kalend. Oct. Justino
Consule, id est, an. 14. Iustiniani. Bar. an. 450. nu. 25. Bellisarius autem
Constantinopol. redit Consul. Basilio, id est. an. 15. Justin. Bar. an. 541. n.
3.
before. But Anastasius thought the Emperors discourses to be as idle as his
own. Besides, whereas he adds that the Emperor thanked him for placing of
Vigilius in the room of Silverius; Binius is bold therein to tell Anastasius
of his untruth, seeing all that, as he says b, was done without the knowledge
of Justinian, by the plotting of Theodora. I will account these for no more
than two untruths.

15. After this, Anastasius tells us that Justinian then sent Bellisarius again
into Afric, who coming thither killed by treachery Gontharis King of the
Vandalls, and then coming to Rome offered some of the spoils of the Vandalls
to Saint Peter by the hands of Pope Vigilius, to wit, a Cross of gold beset
with precious stones, being a hundred pound in weight, wherein were writ his
victories, two great silver tables gilded, which unto this day stand, says
he, before the body of Saint Peter: also he gave many other gifts, and many
alms to the poor, and built an hospital in the broad way, and a Monastery of
Saint Iuvenalis at the City of Orta, where he gave possessions, and many
gifts. Thus Anastasius; whose narration as it must needs testify in what great
honor the Roman Church was in those ancient times, and how bountiful they
were then unto it, so may it serve for an incentive to inflame the zeal of
Emperors, and great persons to do the like after their victories and
conquests; and no doubt but by such lies and fables as this is their Church had
gained the best part of her treasures and possessions; for all this not one
syllable is true or probable. Bellisarius when he came to Constantinople Patet
quod ipse Imperator Bellisario hac de causa gratias non egit. Bin. Not. in
vitam Vigil.. Gratias.
with Vitiges was not then sent into the West, but into Persia Bellisarius
Vitigem captivum eo tempore Biz^ntium duxit quando Iustinianus Cosroem audivit
bellum movisse. Proc. lib. 2. Bell. Pers. pa. 156. Jmperator res Orientis in
duos diduxit d^ces. circa fluvium Euphratem omnia Bellisario tradidit regenda.
Ibid. pa. 158.
against Cosroes, as Procopius, who was present with him, testifies, and in
those wars he continued full three Totilus cum exercitus part ad loca Romae
vicina co^tendit, cujus profectione cognita, Imperator, etsi adhuc fortissime
sibi insistetibus Persi^, mittere r^rsum in Italiam Bellisarium cogitur. Iamque
novus hujus belli annus exibat. Proc. lib. 3. de bell. Goth. pa. 356. redierat
autem ex Italia Constantino^olim anno 6. belli Gothici, ut liquet ex Proc. lib.
2. in sine, et lib. 3. in initio.
years: When he was sent Westward he was not sent into Africa, for thither
Ariobindus Imperater Ariobindum duce^ in Africam misit, and Artabanum, sed
inutile putans duorum ducum Im^erio res administrari, Ariobind. ^otius Africae
curam delegavit. Proc. de bell. Vand. lib. 2. pa. 239.
was sent, with whom was sent Artabanus: Neither did Bellisarius either by
villainy or victory kill Gontharis, but Artabanus killed Convivium erat in
conclavi, ubi tres mensae paratae, ipse in prima accubuit, cui Athanasium and
Artobanum adhibuit. Artabanus Gontharidem adcessit, quasi clam ei aliquid
dicturus, Gontharidi saucio exilire conanti Art^banus ensem educens latus
dextrum capulo tenus confodit, ex quo ille statim moribundus cecidit. Proc.
lib. 4. de bello Vandal. pa. 243.
him treacherously when they sat together at a feast in Gontharis Chamber: nor
came Bellisarius from Africa to Rome, (for after his second coming (which was
from Constantinople) into Italy, he stayed there till his return to Bizantium
five Bellisarius Bizantium venit, quum per quinquenuium ex Italia nusquam
abcessisset. Pro. lib. 3. de bell. Goth. pa. 392. sicque 14. annus hujus belli
exibat. Ibid. pa. 394.
years after, and returned back no more Bizantium cum pervenisset, ibi
diutius commoratus, ex otio vivere, et in delitijs affluentibus opibus agere,
rebus ante hac foeliciter gestis, contentus. Proc. ibid pa. 393.
) nor brought he thence with him any of the spoils of the Vandales; nor
offered he them to Saint Peter; nor offered he, by the hand of Vigilius either
that golden Cross of an hundred pound weight (which is a golden lie,
consisting of an hundred latchets) nor the silver table, nor those many other
gifts, nor built he an Hospital; nor gave he either possessions or donations.
All these, if they be well summed, will make at least twelve grand capital
mother lies, which have many more in their wombs; such an art of devising
untruths has Anastasius. Or if this oblation be referred, as Binius Bin. not.
in vitam Vigilij. De spolijs.
says perhaps it ought, to the time when Bellisarius wanne Rome from Vitiges,
which was, as Procopius Vrb^ Roma recuperata a Gothis per Bellisarium post
annum sexagesimum quo eam tenuerunt Gothi, et post Iustiniani annum undecimum.
Proc. lib. 1. de bell. Goth. pa. 271. et post haec ait, Jan que tertius huic
bello annus exibat. Lib. 2. pa. 313.
shows in the third year of the wars against the Goths, and 12. of
Justinian, yet this can excuse no one of all the untruths of Anastasius; for
neither then was Vigilius but Sylverius Duodecimus annus Iustiniani respondet
anno 2. Sylverij. Bar. an. 538. nu. 1. Sylverius autem sedit annos 3. Bar. an.
540. nu. 2.
the Pope, neither did Bellisarius then come out of Africa, or bring the
spoils of the Vandals with him, of which this oblation was made by the hands
of Pope Vigilius.

16. Next to this, Anastasius says, eodem tempore Theodora scripsit, at that
same time Theodora the Empress writ to Vigilius to come to Constantinople, and
restore Anthimus to his See; but Vigilius refused, saying, I spoke foolishly
before when I promised that, but now I can no way consent to restore an
heretic: Whence Baronius An. 540. nu. 13.
observes a rare miracle, that Vigilius was now turned to a new man, and now
Saul was one of the Prophets, of a blasphemer changed to a true Preacher, of a
Saul into a Paul; all which change proceeded from his very sitting in the Popes
Chair, momento temporis novam formam accepit, at that very moment when he
became the true Pope, he had a new form, a new speech, and then prophesied
consonantly to the fathers: and the like miracle does Binius Bin. not. in vit.
Vig. pa. 478.
note, statim ut sanctam sedem ascendit, as soon as ever Vigilius had stepped
into the holy Chair, he was wholly changed into a new man, and then condemned
the heresies, which before he approved. A right Neanthes indeed, of whom it is
written, that before being (...), having now got the harp of Orpheus, he
thought he was also able to work wonders therewith, as well as Orpheus had
done; he would needs then, Saxa movere sono testudinis, but all in vain: Even
so Peter's Chair made Vigilius as infallible as Peter himself, being once set
there he could do nothing else but drop Oracles, and his fidling on Orpheus
harp made an heavenly harmony, but how he failed in his skill, and proved no
better than Neanthes, his Constitution touching the Three Chapters is an
eternal record, and yet all that time he sat in the Chair and prophesied,
for as the common saying is, Vbi Papa, ibi Roma; so it is as true, Vbi Papa,
ibi Cathedra, it is more easy for the Pope to take the Chair with him, than,
like an Elephant, to carry the whole City of Rome upon his back to
Constantinople, and go up and down the world with it.

17. But is this narration, think you, of Anastasius true? verily not one word
therein; neither did the Empress write, nor Vigilius answer any such thing,
for both these were done, as Anastasius says, eodem tempore, at, or after that
same time, when Bellisarius, having killed Gontharis, came out of Africa, and
offered those spoils of the Vandales, and seeing, that, as we have proved,
was never; this writing of Theodora and answer of Vigilius was at the same tide
of Nevermas. Again, this answer of Vigilius was given, statim ac sanctam sedem
ascendit, at his very first placing in the Sea, as Binius shows, and that was
in the fourteenth Bar. an. 54. nu. 2.
year of Justinian, for then Sylverius dyed: now seeing Theodora writ not this
till Gontharis was overcome, and that was, as Procopius Hoc modo (caede nimirum
Go^tharidis et aliorum) Artabanes Carthaginem Justiniano restituit anno ipsius
decimo nono. Procl. lib. 2. de Bell. Vandal. pa. 244.
shows, in the nineteenth year of Justinian; it was a fine devise of
Anastasius, to tell how this new Saint answered a letter (by way of prophecy)
three or four years before the letter was written. Further, Vigilius, as
Liberatus says Liberat. ca. 22.
, implens promissum suum, quod Augustae secerat, performing his promise to the
Empress, writ a letter in this manner, he performed it as much as he could,
he labored a while to do it, and this was both before and a little after the
death of Sylverius; but when he could not effect it, and after that the
Emperor had writ unto him to confirm the deposition of Anthimus: Vigilius
seeing his labor to be lost therein, left off that care until he could have
a better opportunity to overthrow the Council of Chalcedon, which, so long as
it stood in force, was a bar unto Anthimus. If Vigilius could have prevailed
to have had the fifth Council and the Church approve his Constitution published
in defense of the Three Chapters, by which the Council of Chalcedon had been
quite overthrown, then in likelihood he would have set up Anthimus, and all
who with Anthimus had oppugned the Council of Chalcedon, but till that were
done, till the Council were repealed, Vigilius saw it was in vain to strive
for Anthimus; and therefore waiting for another opportunity for that, he in two
several Epistles, the one to Justinian, the other to Mennas, confirmed, as the
Emperor required him to do, the deposition of Anthimus; and this he did the
year before Bellisarius returned to Constantinople with Vitiges, namely in the
fourteenth year of Vt ante probatum est hoc cap.
Justinian, and five years before the death of Gontharis. Would the Empress
then write to him to come and do that which he knew not only the Emperor
most constantly withstood, but Vigilius also, to have five years before
publicly testified to the Emperor, that he would not do? specially seeing,
as Baronius Bar. an. 540. nu. 22.
says, Vigilius by that his letter to the Emperor, Omnem prorsus, sive
Theodorae, sive alijs spem ademisset, would put both Theodora, and all else out
of all hope, that he should ever perform his promise in restoring Anthimus. So
although those words, eodem tempore, were not (as they ought to be) referred to
the time after the killing of Gontharis, but to the time when Bellisarius came
with Vitiges to Constantinople, which was the year Nam literae Vigilij missae
Iustimano sunt an. 14. Iustiniani. Bar. an. 540. nu. 14. Bellisarius autem
redit Constantinopolim cum Vitige an. Iustiniani 15. Bar. an. 541. nu. 3.
after Vigilius his letter sent to the Emperor; yet the Anastasian narration
is not only untrue, but wholly improbable, that Theodora should then send to
him to come and restore Anthimus, who had the year before confirmed the
deposing of Anthimus, and professed both to the Emperor and Mennas, that he
would not restore him, and that he ought not to be restored. Lastly, at this
time when Anastasius faineth Theodora to write to Vigilius to come and restore
Anthimus, (which following the death of Gontharis, must needs be in the
nineteenth or twentieth year of Justinian) the cause of Anthimus was quite
forgotten and laid aside, and the Three Chapters were then in every man's mouth,
and every where debated: The Emperor having in that nineteenth year, as by
Victor Iustinianus Vigilium compelit ut ad urba^ regiam properaret. an. 4. post
Consulatum Basilij. Vict. in Chr. in eum an. is autem est an. 19. Justiniani
secundum Bar. an. 545. nu. 1.
, who then lived, is evident, if not before, published his Edict, and called
Vigilius about that matter to Constantinople. Anastasius dreamed of somewhat,
and hearing of some writing, or sending to Vigilius about that time, he not
knowing, or, which I rather think, willing to corrupt and falsify the true
narration, for his great love to the Pope, conceales the true and only cause
about which the message was sent to Vigilius, and devises a false and fained
matter about Anthimus, and endeavors to draw al men by the noise of that from
harkning after the cause of the Three Chapters, which he saw would prove no
small blemish to the Roman See. Just as Alcibiades Plut. in Alcih.
to avoid a greater infamy, cut off the tail of his beautiful dog, which cost
him 70. minas Atticas, (that is of our coin Nam mina At^tica valet nostri nun.
mi 3. l. 2. s. 6. d. ut testatur Edovardus Breirwooddus in lib. suo de Pond.
ca. 4. quem libru^ accurate admodum haec tractare, non est cur docti dubitent.
218. pound and 15. shillings) and filled the mouths of the people with that
trifle, that there might be no noise of his other disgrace. The true cause of
sending to Vigilius, as Victor shows Imperator Vigilium ad regiam urbem
compellit venire, ut t^ia Capitula conde^naret. Vict. in Chron. an. 4. post
Coss. Basilij.
, was about the Three Chapters, this of Anthimus, which Anastasius harpes upon,
is in truth no other but the dogs tail, and the din of it has a long time
possessed the ears of men; but now the true cause being come to the open view,
fills the world with that shameful heresy of Vigilius, which Anastasius would
have concealed and covered with his dogs tail. But enough of this passage,
wherein there are not so few as twenty lies.

18. The next passage in Anastasius contains the sending for Vigilius, and the
manner how he was taken from Rome and brought to Constantinople: He tells us
that the people of Rome taking that opportunity of the displeasure of Theodora
against him for his former consenting to restore Anthimus, suggested diverse
accusations against him, as that by his Counsel Sylverius was deposed, and
that he was a murderer, and had killed his Nephew Asterius, whereupon the
Empress sent Anthimus Scribo to take him wheresoever he were, except only in
the Church of Saint Peter. Scribo came and took him in the end of November,
and after many indignities both in words and actions, as that the people cast
stones, and clubs, and dung after him, wishing all evil to go with him; he
in this violent manner was brought to Sicilie, in December, and on Christmas
eve to Constantinople, whom the Emperor then meeting, they kissed and wept one
over the other for joy, and then they led him to the Church of Saint Sophie,
the people singing an hymn, behold the Lord comes. Thus Anastasius. Which
whole narration to be a very lying and dunghill legend, were easy to
demonstrate, if Baronius and Binius had not much eased us in this part, for
they not only condemn this as untrue, but prove it by diverse arguments to be
such. The first, for that Vigilius was called to Constantinople only Trium
Capitulotum causa tantum vocatus est. Bin. not. in vita Vigilij. Tunc Romani.
Non alia causa profectionis Vigilij Constantinopolim cognoscitur. Bar. an. 546.
nu. 55.
for the cause of the Three Chapters, and therefore Anastasius putting down
other causes thereof, aperti mendacij Bar. an. eodem 546. nu. 54.
arguitur, is convinced of an evident untruth. The second, because seeing, as
they say, Mennas and the chief Eastern Bishops would not subscribe to the
Edict of the Emperor until the Pope had consented, Justinian would conciliate
Putavit Vigilium, quibus posset fieri, blanditijs conciliandum. Bin. loc. cit.
Eum sibi quibus valuit, studuit conciliare blanditijs. Bar. an. 546. nu. 55.
the Pope unto him by all fair means, and entreat him no otherwise but
favorably, least if the Pope were displeased, he should not yield his consent,
and then the whole purpose of the Emperor should be made frustrate. Their
third reason is an argument a testimonio negative, because neither Ba. an eo.
n. 54
Procopius nor Facundus mention any such violence or abuse offered to the Pope,
of which reason I have spoken before. A fourth is taken from the time; whereas
he says, that Vigilius came to Constant. on Christmas eve, mendacij Bar. an
eod. 546. nu. 60.
redarguitur, he is proved to lie, by that which Procopius says. Many other
reasons might be added, but these of Baronius and Binius are sufficient to
convince Anastasius of lying, and open lying in this passage, which is, as now
you see, nothing but a fardell of lies; for neither did the people take that
opportunity to accuse Vigilius, nor did they accuse him of those crimes, nor did
the Empress for that cause send for Vigilius, neither did she, but Justinian
call him to Constantinople, neither did she send Anthimus Scribo to pull him
away by violence, neither commanded she him not to forbear Vigilius in any
place, but only in Saint Peter's Church (this was but the kind affection of
Anastasius to the honor of Peter's See) neither did she swear to
excommunicate Scribo if he brought not Vigilius, neither did Scribo apprehend
him in the Temple of Saint Cicile, neither did Vigilius distribute a largess
at that time when he was apprehended, neither did they violently carry him to
Tiber and there ship him, neither did the people follow him, and desire him to
pray for them; neither when the ship was gone, did they revile him, nor cast
stones, nor clubs, nor dung after him, nor imprecate and curse him, neither was
he at that time brought, but as by Procopius Interea Vigilius ab Imperatore ex
Sicilia evocatus, Bizantium venit. Nam ut eo contenderent, diutinam in ea
insul^ traxerunt mora^. Proc. lib. 3. de bell. Goth. p. 364 Evocatus autem fuit
circa finem an. 11. bell. Goth. ut liquet, ex praecede^tibus verbis; unde^imus
hujus bellise verterat annus. Jnterea Vigilius, etc. Iam 11. illius belli est
Iustiniani 20. nam bellu^ capit anno ejus nono prope sinito, ut testatur. Proc.
lib. 1. Bell. Goth. pa. 253. Imperator se ad bellum parat, annos novenos
potitus Imperio.
appears, long before he voluntarily went to Sicilie, and made so long stay
there, that the Emperor having called him the year before, as by Victor
Victor loc. cit. etiam et Marcellinus anno priori evocatum ab Imperatore, sed
sequenti Constan. venisse express docet. In Chron. an. 546. et 547.
is clear, by reason of his long abode in Sicilie, he called him the year
after again out of Sicily, as Procopius shows. Neither came he to
Constantinople on Christmas Eeve, but either on the five and twentieth of
January, as Marcellinus Vigilius Constantinopolim ingressus est 8. Calend. Febr.
says, or as by Procopius, who is far more worthy of credit, may be
gathered Nam adventus Vigilij Constantinopolim ponitur a Procopio, in initio
12. anni belli Gothici, lib. 3. pa. 364. Jam 12. an. illius belli i^choatur in
sine anni 20. Iustiniani; is autem imperare coepit 1. die Aprilis, ut docet
Marcell. in Chr. an. 527.
, about the middle of April next ensuing; neither did the Emperor when they
met, kiss him, nor did they weep for joy, the one of the other, nor did they
sing the hymn of Ecce advenit Dominus Dominator, behold the Lord the Ruler is
come. It was a very pretty allusion of Anastasius, and very apt for the season,
in honor of the Pope to take part of the text expressing the joy for Christ's
Advent in the flesh, and turn it to an Anthem to congratulate the Popes Advent
on Christmas eve to Constantinople; but I fear it will hardly be believed,
that men in those days did use such base, nay, blasphemous flattery to the
Pope; this hymn would have better befitted the time of Leo the tenth, when in
the open Council they durst say Conc. Later. sub Leone 10. sess. 6. in Orat.
Simonis Begnij.
, to Pope Leo, Weep not O daughter Syon, Ecce venit Leo de Tribu Judah, behold
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah comes, the root of Iesse; behold GOD has
raised up to thee a Savior, who shall save thee from the hands of the
destroying Turks, and deliver thee from the hand of the Persecutors; O most
blessed Leo, we have looked for thee, we have hoped that thou should come
and be our deliverer. The former Anthem had been suitable to such a time; the
art of their blasphemous Gnatonisme to the Popes, was not half learned in
Justinians days, and most incredible it is, that Justinian would use, or could
endure in his presence, such entertainment of Vigilius, knowing that he was an
earnest and violent oppugner of his Imperial Edict, in which he had expressly
anathematized and accursed all that did defend the Three Chapters. This
proclaming of an Anathema against Vigilius, and the hymn of Ecce advenit
Dominus Dominator, with kissing and weeping for joy, make no good concord nor
harmony together. Let this be accounted for no more than twenty Anastasian lies,
and those are the fewest which are bound up in this fardle.

19. After that Anastasius has, as you have seen, safely landed the Pope at
Constantinople, then he tells you, That for two years space there was
continual strife about Anthimus, the Emperor and Empress labored to have
Vigilius restore him, urged him with his promise and handwriting, but Vigilius
would no way consent; and when he found them so heavy toward him, he said, I
perceive now it was not Justinian and Theodora, but Dioclesian and Eleutheria
that called me hither, do with me what you will: thereupon they buffeted him,
and called him homicide, and killer of Sylverius; then he fled to the Church
of Euphemia, and held himself by a Pillar of the Altar, but they pulled him
thence, cast him out of the Church, put a rope about his neck, dragged him
through all the City till evening, and then put him in prison, feeding him with
a little bread and water, and after this they banished him also with the rest
of the Roman Clergy. And these, like the rest, are merely the fond and
sottish dreams of Anastasius, or, as Baronius uses to call them, lies.
Baronius will assure you, that it was not Anthimus or his restoring, but the
Three Chapters about which Vigilius was sent for. The cause of Anthimus, who
was deposed ten Anthimus depositus in Conc. Constant. sub Menna, Act. 4. an
post. Cons. Basilij, qui est primus belli Gothici, Vigilius autem venit
Bizantium an. 12. ejusdem belli.
years before, was quite forgotten: and to see the sottishness of Anastasius,
Justinian had long before Anno nimiru^ 540. Bar. in illum an. nu. 12.
written to Vigilius, requiring him to confirm the deposition of Anthimus,
Vigilius Bar an. eod. nu. 18.
had done this upon the Emperors letter, the Popes letters are recorded both
in Baronius and Binius, dated when Justinius was Consul, which was six whole
years before the Popes coming to Constantinople, all that time the Emperor
still liked the deposing of Anthimus, and many ways had approved Mennas for
the Bishop. Now after all this, when the whole Church, and every man was
troubled with a more weighty cause of the Three Chapters, Anastasius brings in
this, that the Emperor, and the Pope quarrelled for two years, about an old
forgotten matter of Anthimus, wherein there was a perfect concord betwixt them
both: nay, that is nothing to quarrel, but that the Emperor, like Dioclesian
should cause him to be beaten, to be reviled, to be pulled from the Altar and
Sanctuary, and haled about the town by a rope about his neck, imprison and
banish him, and all for his refusing to do that which the Emperor had decreed
to be done, and commanded him to do the same, that for this cause their kisses
should be turned into curses, and they both now weep a contrary weeping to
their former, the Emperor wept because Vigilius would not do that which the
Emperor himself commanded him not to do; the Pope wept for that he was
trailed in a rope about the town, and all for not doing that which the
Emperor would not have him to do: Truly this surpasses the degree of a
fable or untruth. Voraginensis himself could not devise a more simple and
sottish Legend.

20. If this do not sufficiently persuade you of the untruth of this passage,
see how Baronius and Binius do contradict the same, for in this short
narration are contained those complura mendacia, as Baronius calls Bar. an. 552.
nu. 16.
them, which writers, and first of all Anastasius, delivers. The Church of
Euphemia, whither the Pope fled, was, as Anastasius says, one of the Churches
in Constantinople: Baronius In Basilica S. Euphaemiae, quae est Chalcedone
habitare disposuit Vigilius. Bar. an. 552. nu. 8.
and Binius Confugit Chalcedonem in Basilicam S. Euphaemiae. Bin. Not. in vitam
Vigilij Tunc dedit.
tells you, it was the Church in Chalcedon; Anastasius says, the Pope was pulled
thence from the Altar. Baronius Jmperator dignam tanto Pontifice legatione^
ornavit, etc. At Vigilius egredi nunquam consentit, nisi prius etc. Bar. an.
552 nu. 11, 12.
tells you the Emperor sent a most honorable message to entreat him to come
from thence, but the Pope refused, till the Emperor yielded to his demands in
recalling his Edict. Lastly, Baronius Hoc tempore (vid. an. 552.) accidisse
nosclitur quae Anastasius confundit cum prioribus quae acciderunt, vivente
Theodora. Bar. an. 552. nu. 8 Theodora autem obijt an. 548. ut ait Bar. illo
anno nu. 2^.
and Binius Haec quae sequuntur contigerunt post obitum Theodorae. Bin. not. in
vitam Vigilij Tunc dedit.
will assure you, that the buffeting of Vigilius, his fleeing to the Church of
Euphemia, and their haling him from thence did all happen diverse years, three
at least after the death of Theodora the Empress; but Anastasius referres all
that to the time of Theodora, and makes her another Eleutheria, as great an
agent in all this as Dioclesian himself: belike as Eleutheria by a
metempseuchosis, was changed into Theodora, so Theodora by a like
Necromanticall trick of Anastasius was raised out of her grave to buffet, to
beat, and banish Pope Vigilius for not restoring Anthimus.

21. That which, as it seems, gave occasion of this whole error to
Anastasius, was a matter done by Agapetus: He when he came to Constantinople,
had much contention with the Acephali, who were oppugners of the Council at
Chalcedon, among which Anthimus the Bishop of Constantinople was one, and a
most earnest defender of that sect. It is not unlike but Justinian at the first
favored Anthimus, until he perceived him to be heretical. Anastasius
Agapetus altercationem caepit habere cum Imperatore de religione, etc. Anast.
in vita Agapeti.
further says, that Justinian favored not only the person, but the very
heresy of Anthimus, and relates certain threatening words used by Justinian
against Agapetus for that cause, as if Justinian had said, either consent to
us, or I will banish thee; which the Pope answered in the same manner almost as
Vigilius is said to have done, I thought I had come to Justinian, but now I
perceive I have found Dioclesian: upon which narration of Anastasius, Baronius
Imperator ipse in suspitionem haeresis est adductus. Bar. an. 536. nu. 18. et
idem ait Binius Not. in vitam Agapeti.. Hic missus. Et, apud eum v^luit jussio
pontificia. Bar. an. cit. nu. 19.
and Binius, (having an implacable hatred to Justinian,) say, that he was
suspected of heresy, and to clear himself, he upon the Popes command Non
obtemp^rare Romano Pontifici, nefas ratus, editam confessionem iterat. Bar. an.
536. nu. 18.
, published again his profession of the true faith. But that neither
Anastasius nor Baronius are herein to be credited, may clearly appear, partly
because Justinian had before published an orthodoxall profession in the
beginning Simulac Agapetus est creatus Papa, Iustinianus rectae fidei
professionem Romam misit. Bar. an. eod. nu. 18.
of the Popedom of Agapetus, and specially by that ample testimony, which is
given him by the Eastern and orthodoxall Bishops in the Council under Mennas,
after the death of Agapetus, who Act. 1. pa. 429. a.
say of him, that a primordits regni sui usque nunc, from the very beginning of
his Empire till then; he studied to keep the whole body of the Church sound,
and entire, and free from all infection of heresies. So far was he from
supporting that heresy, or Anthimus in it, when he once knew him to defend the
same. Theodora the Empress, by whose means Anthimus (who secretly oppugned
the Council of Chalcedon) was translated from Trapezuntum to Constantinople;
she I say was indeed for a time more earnest for Anthimus, both to prevent his
deposition, and after it was past, to have him restored by the means of
Vigilius. Liberatus who then lived, saying nothing of the Emperors threats
(which had Justinian used, for the ill will Liberatus bare to Justinian, he
would not have omitted) expressly mentions Liber. ca. 21. Augusta clam
promittente munera, et rursus Papae (Agapeto) minas intentante.
both how Theodora by rewards sought to corrupt Agapetus, and when that
prevailed not, added threats thereunto; and how the Pope would not at all
consent to her motion. Victor Vict. Tim. in. Chron. sub Coss. Justin.
, who also lived at that time, says that Agapetus communione privavit, did
excommunicate Theodora, the patron of Anthimus, an oppugner of the Council of
Chalcedon: whence it may appear, that Anastasius ascribes to the Emperor that
which was done by the Empress, against Agapetus, and if any such words were
used by Agapetus, as comparing their tyranny to Dioclesians persecution, it was
spoken no way of Justinian, (who was even then a most earnest defender of the
true faith,) but of Theodora: who for a while labored for Anthimus, and
against the Council of Chalcedon, till seeing that she could not prevail
therein, neither by the means of Agapetus, nor Silverius, nor Vigilius, after
he had once writ to the Emperor, his confirmation of the deposition of
Anthimus, she then changed her mind, the cause of the three Chapters being then
moved, she became as the Emperor himself was, an earnest condemner of the
three Chapters, as by Nam Victor asserit Theodoram laborasse ut tria Capitula
condemnentur. in suo Chron. sub an. 2. ^ost Cons. Basilij.
Victor is evident, that is in truth an earnest defender of the Council of
Chalcedon. Now upon this truth (error always having some truth for his
ground) Anastasius Jn vita Agapeti.
builds many fabulous and poetical fictions of his own devising: as that
Justinian and Agapetus quarrelled about the faith, Agapetus defending against
him the two natures in Christ; that the Emperor threatened banishment to
Agapetus, unless he would consent with him, and deny the two natures; that
Agapetus called him Dioclesian; that Agapetus disputed with Anthimus, and
overcame him before the Emperor; that the Emperor thereupon humbled himself
to the Pope, and adored Augustus adoravit beatissimu Agapetum Papam. Anast.
ibid.
the most blessed Agapetus; that then he banished Anthimus, and entreated
Agapetus to consecrate Mennas in his room. Now Anastasius perceiving these his
fictions concerning Justinian and Agapetus, wherein he had some ground of
truth, to be plausible, and his end being this, Papae ut placere^t, quas
fecisset fabulas, he brings in Justinian and Vigilius to act the very same
pageant again, and that without any ground of truth, they for sooth, ten
years after Anthimus was deposed; and for ought appears was dead at that
time, must come in quarrelling again about Anthimus, as fresh as ever the
Emperor and Agapetus had done before: nay they must contend two other whole
years after the former ten: about this Helena, Justinian and his Empress
must for want of variety of phrases be termed Dioclesian and Eleutheria,
Vigilius must be buffeted and beaten, haled, dragged, imprisoned, and banished.
Truly Anastasius had some ground for the act under Agapetus, for this of
Vigilius he is beholding to none but his own poetical pate; and lest any
little scene or shadow of resemblance might be wanting, Baronius Bar. an. 547.
nu. 49.
supplying one defect in Anastasius, tells us how Vigilius for the same cause of
Anthimus, excommunicated Theodora at his coming to Constantinople, even as
Agapetus had done before. Who sees not all this to be nothing else but a
mimesis of the acts of Agapetus, and a mere fiction of Anastasius? in which
there are not so few as thirty lies.

22. You have seen the tragical part of this Anastasian fable, now follows
the Catastrophe or sudden change of all this hard fortune: Tunc Gothi secerunt,
then (says he) the Goths made Totilas their King, who coming to Rome
besieged it so sore, that the City was pressed with a great famine, so that
they did eat their own children. Totilas entered the City at the gate of
Saint Paul, in the 13. Indiction, and for a whole night caused a Trumpet to be
sounded, till all the Roman people were fled away, or hid in Churches. And
Totilas dwelled with the Romans, quasi pater cum filijs, even as a father with
his children. Thus Anastasius. Who would not think by this narration that
Totilas were made King after the beating, dragging, and imprisonment of
Vigilius, and banishment of him and his fellows, upon which Anastasius
presently adjoyneth, Tunc Gothi fecerunt, then the Goths made Totilas King;
and yet Totilas was King Totilas creatur Rex Gothorum anno 7. belli Gothici.
Proc. lib. 3. pa. 346. Is est annus Just. 16. ut ait Bar. an. 542. nu. 1.
Vigilius Bizantium venit anno 12. belli Gothici. Proc. lib. 3. pa. 364. i^ est
Iustiniani 21. and isto anno Constantinopolim venisse Vigilium, ait Bar. an.
547. nu. 26.
not only before all that tragical act, but four or five years also before
Vigilius came to Constantinople, or before the Emperor sent for him, and in
like sort Totilas his besieging of Rome by Anastasius narration follows all the
former: whereas by Procopius Totilas Romam contendit quam statim obsedit.
Procop. lib. 3. pa. 360. Per id tempus (obsidionis) cum Vigilius in Sicilia
esset, etc. lib. eod. pa. 364.
it is evident that Totilas besieged Rome while Vigilius stayed in Sicilie,
before he set forward to Constantinople. The like error is in the note of the
Indiction; for Totilas took the City, not as Anastasius says in the 13. but
as Indictione 10. and 6. post Cons. Basilij anno, Totilas Romam ingreditur.
Marc. in Chron. Is est juxta eundem Marc. an. 547. cui consentit Bar. an. 547.
nu. 12.
Marcellinus witnesses, and that aright, in the 10. Indiction: neither did he
enter at the gate of Saint Paul, but as Procopius Vniverso exercitu instructo
ad p^rtam Asinariam duxit, etc. Proc. lib. 3. p. 372
expressly declares, at that which was called Asinaria: neither did Totilas
sound any such Trumpet, to give them warning or space to flee, but entering the
City in the night, and that by treachery of the watch, he stayed Vnum in locum
copias omnes coegit hostium insidias veritu^. Proc. ibid.
his army together till morning, for fear that some danger might befall
himself or his army in the dark, by the lying in wait of the enemies. And
when after this, Bellisarius having recovered the City, Totilas again wan it
from the Romans, which was three years after this, to wit, in the 15. year
of the Gothicke war, as Procopius Annus 14. exibat hujus belli, Totilas
deinde copias Romam ductavit, etc. Proc. l. 3. pa. 394.
shows, which was the 24. of Justinian, whereas his first taking it was in
the 21. of Justinian; then indeed Totilas, as Procopius Praecepit ut quanta vi
posse^t buccina clangorem eliderent, etc. Proc. ibid. pa. 394.
declares, caused diverse Trumpets to sound an alarm on the river of Tyber in
the night time, as if he would on that side assault the City, while he had
his army in readiness on the contrary side, and entered there by treachery also
of the Watch; the Romans giving little regard to that part. These Trumpets
gave the occasion to Anastasius his fiction, which is so blockish, that what
Totilas used as a warlike stratagem to deceive, and more easily to overthrow
and kill the Romans, that Anastasius in his simplicity takes and relates as
done in favor of the Romans, that they might escape and not be killed. And
yet the taking of the City, whereof Anastasius speaks, cannot be this second,
wherein the Trumpets were sounded, but the former, (at which time Totilas used
no such policy) as appears by the famine which Anastasius Et facta est fam^s
in civitate talis, etc. Anast. in vita Vigilij.
mentions, which happened in this former Vt testatur Proc. l. 3. p. 367.
, and not at this second taking of Rome by Totilas. So very incoherent and
false is all that Anastasius writes of this matter. But whereas Anastasius
adds of King Totilas that he dwelt among the Romans as a father among his
children, I know not how to check so great a folly. The barbarous Goths,
after that long and miserable siege of the Romans, having by treachery in the
night entered the City, the very next Vbi primum illuxit Gothi, etc Proc. pa.
373.
morning when they saw there was no danger of the enemy, Quos obvios habent,
obtruncant; killed all that they met; and had made no end of slaughter, if
Pelagius Pelagius Totilae supplex factus, non prius precari hunc des^it, qu^m
ille cleme^tiorem fore in Romanos pollicitus esset. Proc. lib. 3. pa. 374.
coming in most submissive manner had not stayed their Gothish fury. The
Roman people Pars maxima fugam capessunt, pauci in templo perfugium habuere,
constat e plebe ad quingentos in urbe resides. Proc. ibid. pa. 372.
, so many as could by flight, sought their safety: there remained of their
innumerable Roman troops, but to the number of five hundred, the Noblemen
Inter hos erat Rusticiana filia Symmachi, et uxor Boethij Senatoris. Proc. ib.
and better sort who remained among them, led a life more ignominious and
miserable than death, being spoiled of all, domos circumeundo, foresque
appulsando cibum dari sibi suppliciter precabantur; from door to door in most
abject and beggarly manner praying for some relief of the proud and insolent
victor: nor was Totilas content herewith, but he was resolved Totilas Roman ad
solum prosternere decernit. Proc. pa. 375.
to ruinate and utterly deface the whole city of Rome, which also he had then
done, had not the most prudent persuasions E duobus (sic ad eum scripsit
Bellisarius) alterum necesse est ut aut bello victus succumba^, aut ut nos
vincas. Si viceris, et Romam demoliaris, non alterius urbem sed tuam delebis,
qua servata, long opulentior fies. Si victus sis, Roma incolumi reservata,
gratia tibi nec mediocris apud victorem conciliabitur, qua deleta nullus tibi
ad clementiam locus relinquetur. His (inter similes alias) persuasionibus usus
est Bellisarius apud Totilam, ut refert Proc. lib. 3. pa. 375.
of Bellisarius never sufficiently even for this only cause to be commended,
hindered so barbarous a design. And which is noted as one of the most miserable
spectacles of all other, in Rome which was the most frequent, populous, and
eminent City in the whole world, Totilas when he went away left not so much as
one man Nullo hominum in urbe relicto, quam penitus destitutam demiserat. Proc.
lib. eod. p. 376. Roma fuit ita desolata ut nemo ibi hominum, nisi bestiae
morarentur. Marcell. in Chron. an. 547.
, woman, or child to remain or inhabit therein; would any but Anastasius call
or account this fatherly usage? what is then, or can be called hostile, savage,
and barbarous? But let us leave this passage, wherein we will account no more
than ten of Anastasius grand lies, and proceed to the rest of his narration.

23. At the same time, says he, the Emperor sent Narses into Italy, to whom
God gave the victory over the Goths, the King and a great multitude of them
were slain. I should have thought this eodem tempore to have had relation (as
in an orderly narration it ought) to that taking of Rome by Totilas, which is
before expressed; which if Anastasius meant, then is this circumstance most
suitable to all the rest, that is, wholly untrue: for Totilas the first time
took Rome in the 12. and the second time in the 15. year of the Gothicke
war, whereas Narses overcame him not, nor came as chief General into Italy
till the eighteenth year of the same war. All which by Procopius De Roma
capta, supra ostendimus. De Narsete liquet, ex Proc. lib. 3. pa. 408. ubi ait
Iam 17. hujus belli exibat annus. Et paulo post, Narses ex Salonis (in Sicilia)
profectus adversus Totilam progreditur. Ibid.
is clearly testified. But Binius does here set to his helping hand, and making
a gloss upon the text, by two notes of time he declares unto what this
Anastasian eodem tempore is to be referred: the former is this: It was, says
he Bin. Not. in vitam Vigilij.. Eodem.
, Illo anno quo Imperator revocavit Edictum; in that year wherein the Emperor
at the instance of Pope Vigilius recalled the Edict, which he had published
concerning the three Chapters, showing himself therein obedient to the Pope;
in that year Narses the Captain of the Roman army, trusting to the help of
God, by the intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary, put to flight and killed
Totilas, with his whole army. So Binius: upon whose gloss it will inevitably
follow that Narses never overcame Totilas, nor was sent General into Italy.
For it is certain, (as before we have by many reasons proved) and by the
testimony of the whole general Council Iustinianus omnia semper fecit, and
facit, quae sanctam Ecclesiam and recta dogmata conservant. Conc. 5. Coll. 7.
in fine.
, that Justinian did not at all recall that Edict: he was both before and after
the Council, yea after the death of Vigilius, earnest in the defense thereof.
But let us admit that he had indeed recalled that Edict; when think you was
this done? No man can tell you better than Baronius, who referres all that to
the 26. year of Justinian, which is the 17. of the Gothicke war; for by his
narration Bar. an. 55. nu. 15. 22, 23.
, not only the Emperor in that year revoked his Edict against the Three
Chapters, but he with Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea, and Mennas, were all in
that year reconciled to the Pope, and a perfect peace concluded on all hands
before the month of July; peace being concluded Mennas shortly after dyed. If
then as Binius glosseth, Totilas was slain eo anno, in that year wherein
Justinian is supposed to have recalled his Edict, then was he certainly
vanquished and slain, not by Narses, for he as Procopius Proc. lib. 3. pa. 408.
shows, came not as chief General into Italy, until the 18. year of the
Gothicke war, which is the 27. of Justinian. Again, seeing it follows in
Anastasius, Tunc adunatus, then when Totilas was vanquished and killed, did the
Roman Clergy entreat to have Vigilius with the rest restored from exile. It
hence clearly follows, that Anastasius can mean no other exile, than such as
was inflicted upon him some three or four years before, for the cause of
Anthimus, and not that which followed the Council: for the Council was not
held in the seventeenth year of the Gothicke war, or six and twentieth of
Justinian, but in the eighteenth of the one, and seven and twentieth of the
other, as the Acts do witness: or if Baronius will needs have the exile
following the Council, to be that from which Narses entreated that he might be
delivered; then it certainly follows upon this account of Binius, reckoning
Totilas death to be in the six and twentieth of Justinian, that Narses and the
Roman Clergy entreated the Emperor to restore Vigilius out of exile, before
he was cast into exile; nay before the Council was assembled, or before
Vigilius had given any cause why he should be banished; which does not well
accord with the wisdom of Narses and the Roman Clergy to entreat, nor was it
possible for the Emperor to grant. The same is further manifest by the other
note of time which Binius Bin not. cit.
sets down, that Totilas was killed decimo anno regni sui, in the 10 year of
his reign, as the holy Monk Bennet had foretold unto him: for Totilas was made
King of the Goths in the 7. year of the Gothic war, as Procopius Hujus belli
annus sextus exierat. Proc. lib. 3 pa. 346. and Totilas ex conventu suscepit
imperium. idem pa. 347.
testifies, which was in the 16. year of Justinian, and as it seems by his
Acts, in the beginning of the year. But to help the Benedictine prophecy, we
will suppose him to be made in the last end of all, and account the next year
for his first: yet even so must Totilas be vanquished and slain before the
beginning of the 18. year of the Gothicke war, or 27. of Justinian, for with
the end of the 17. year of the Gothicke war is fully completed the tenth
year of Totilas. Wherefore if Benedict was not a lying Prophet, and if Totilas
was slain decimo anno, in his tenth year, then all the former inconveniences
do upon this account also ensue, that he was not vanquished by Narses; that
then, when he was slain, Narses and the Roman Clergy did not entreat for the
delivery of Vigilius out of banishment, and the like; seeing it is certain
that Narses came not into Italy, and that Vigilius was not banished (by that
Baronian exile which follows the Council) till the 18. year of the Gothicke
war, and 27. of Justinian. Or if any to excuse Binius will expound as Baronius
Necatur Totilas, anno undecimo regnisui inchoato, decimo expleto. Bar. an. 553.
nu. 16.
does, the prophecy to be meant that Totilas was slain anno decimo, that is,
in the tenth year being complete, that plainly contradicts the prophecy:
for if the tenth year was wholly ended, then was he not slain in the tenth,
but only in the eleventh year, nor in the tenth otherwise than in the first,
second, or sixth year; nay slain in the year before he was borne, that is,
slain after all those years ended and fully completed.

24. Now that which Binius Se Romans Pontifici obsequentem praebet. Bin. loc.
citat. et itidem Bar. an. 553. nu. 16.
interlaceth of the Emperors being so obsequent and obedient to the Pope, or
as Baronius Dum sibi imperari a Romans Pontifice passus est. Bar. ibid. nu. 17.
expresses it, for being ruled by the Popes command, these as being but
flourishes of their vanity and arrogance, I will pass over. The Acts both of
Justinian, and of the fifth Council do demonstrate that Justinian was (as he
ought to be) the commander of the Pope, the Popes Empire was not as yet in the
cradle. But that which is added, that Narses overcame the Goths by the
intercession of the blessed Virgin, I am desirous a little more at large to
examine, the rather, because Bar. an. 553. nu. 15.
Baronius little less than triumphs therein. Narses, says he, indevored all
these things, Mariae virginis open, by the help of the virgin Mary. And again,
having cited certain words out of Evagrius to prove it, By this, says Ibid.
nu. 18.
he, you do understand, cujus niti praesidio duces debeant, on whose help
Generals and Captains must rely, that they may perform every difficultest
enterprise, truly even on the help of Mary the Mother of God, who being
invocated by our prayers may rise against the enemy, for of her the Church
sings, Terribilis ut Castrorum acies, thou art terrible as an army well
ordered. Thus the Cardinal, wresting and abusing the Scripture, to draw men's
confidence from the Lord of Hosts to the blessed Virgin, making her, contrary
to her sex, to be another Mars, and a chief warrier in all the greatest
battles of the Christians. But for the truth of the matter, what Narses did,
Procopius does declare, who thus writes Proc. lib. 3. pa. 416.
of him; When Totilas was overcome, Narses being exceeding joyful, id omne Deo
acceptu^ ut erat in vero indesinenter refer, did continually attribute all
that victory to God, to whom in truth it was to be ascribed. Evagrius the
Cardinals own witness, testifies the same, even in that place which the
Cardinal alleges, his words are these Evag. lib. 4. ca. 23.
, (...), they who were with Narses report, that, dum precibus divinum numen
placeret, while he appeased or pleased God by his prayer, and other offices of
piety, and gave due honor unto him, the Virgin, Mother of God, appeared unto
him, and plainly set down the time when he should sight with the enemies, nor
sight with the^ til he received a sign from above. Thus Evag. in whose words
three things are to be observed: First, that Narses used no invocatio^ or
prayers to the blessed Virgin, or any other, but only to God, it was Divinu^
numen, the very Godhead, which he did in his prayers, and offices of piety
adore. Secondly, that Evag. mentions not either invocation, or adoration,
used by Narses to the Virgin, or any confidence that he reposed in her, or
that she at al helped him in the battle, but only that she appeared unto him as
a messenger, to signify what time he should sight. Now as the Angel Gabriel
was no helper to the Virgin Mary, either in the co^ception of Christ, or in his
birth, though, as a messenger from God, he signifies them both unto Joseph,
(Joseph neither invocating him nor relying on him, but on God, whose messenger
he was) even so, admitting the truth of this apparition, the Vigin Mary did
signify from God the time when Narses should fight, but neither did Narses
invocate or adore her, nor did she her self more help in the battle than the
Angel in the birth of Christ; nor did the confidence of Narses rely on her,
but on God, whose messenger he then believed her to be. Let the Cardinal, or
Binius, or any of them prove forcibly (which they can never do) out of
Evagrius any other invocation or adoration used by Narses to the blessed
Virgin, and I will consent unto them in that whole point. Thirdly, all that
Evagrius says of that apparition of the blessed Virgin, is but a rumor and
report of some who were with Narses: (...), some say, Evagrius himself does
not say it was so, or that Narses either said or believed it to be so, but
reported it was by some of the soldiers of Narses, whether true or false, that
must rely on the credit of the reporters. Now for the Cardinal to avouch a
doctrine of faith out of a rumor or report of how credible men themselves knew
not, from such an uncertainty to collect, that Generals ought to rely on the
aid of the blessed Virgin in their battles, and that she, interpellata
precibus, being invocated by their prayers, rises up, and becomes a warrier on
their side; this, by none that are indifferent can be judged less than
exceeding temerity, and by those that are religious will be condemned as
plain superstition and impiety. But let us return now to Anastasius, whose
narration, as it is untrue in it self, if the coming of Narses into Italy,
and victory over the Goths, be referred to that time, when Totilas had before
won Rome, so it is much more untrue, if it be referred, as by Binius gloss
it is, either to the year wherein the Emperor recalled his Edict, (which was
never) or to the tenth year of Totilas, which was wholly ended before the
coming of Narses into Italy, and before the fifth Council, and the Baronian
banishment of Vigilius.

25. After the victory of Narses it follows in Anastasius, tunc adunatus
Clerus, then the Roman Clergy joined together, besought Narses that he would
entreat the Emperor, that if as yet Pope Vigilius, with the Presbiters and
Deacons that were carried into banishment with him, were alive, they might
return home. In that they speak of this exile, as long before begun, even so
long that they doubted whether Vigilius were then alive or no, it seems
evidently; that Anastasius still has an eye to that banishment for the cause
of Anthimus, after he had been two years in Constantinople; that falling five
Nam Vigilius venit Constantinopolim anno 12 belli Gothici. Proc. lib. 3. pa.
364. Narses autem Totilam vicit, et Romam recapit an. 18. ejusdem belli. Proc.
lib 3. pa. 408. et seq.
whole years before the victory of Narses, they had reason to add, si adhuc,
if Vigilius do live as yet, that is, after so long time of banishment, remain
alive. Now seeing it is certain, that Vigilius was not at that time (to wit,
not within two years after his coming to Constantinople) banished, as by the
fifth general Council is Nam ex eo liquet, Vigilium a primo ejus adventu
Constantinopolim, illic mansisse ad fine^ Concilij, dicitur enim illic a
Iustiniano, quod Vigilius semper ejusdem voluntatis fuit de condemnatione Trium
Capitulorum. Conc. 5. Coll. 1. pa. 520. a Semper, viz. a primo ejus adve^tu et
consensu ad tempus 5. Concilij.
evident, it hence follows, that as this Anastasian exile, so all the
consequents depending thereon are nothing else but a mere fiction of
Anastasius, without all truth or probability: for seeing Vigilius was not then
banished, neither did the Romans entreat Narses, nor Narses the Emperor for
his delivery, nor the Emperor upon that send to recall him or them from exile,
nor use any such words about Pelagius, nor thank them if they would accept
Vigilius, nor did they promise after the death of Vigilius to choose Pelagius,
nor did the Emperor dismiss them all (for of Pelagius that he three years
after the end of the Council remained in banishment, is certainly testified by
Victor Nam Victor ait Pelagium redijsse ab exilio anno 18. post Coss. Basilij.
Vict. Tun. in Chron. et Concilium habitum ait ille an. 13. post ejusdem
Consulatum.
) nor did they return from exile into Sicilie; all this is a mere fiction. So
in this Catastrophe, beginning at the time when Anastasius says Totilas was
King of the Goths, there are contained at least sorty capital untruths, to
let pass the rest, as being of lesser note and moment. Let any now cast up the
whole sum, I doubt not but he shall find, not only, as I have said, so
many untruths as there are lines, but (if one would strictly examine the
matter) as there are words in the Anastasian description of the life of
Vigilius; and I am verily persuaded, that few Popes lives escape better at his
hands than this: But I have stayed long enough in declaring the falsehood of
Anastasius, on whom Baronius so much relyeth, and who is a very fit author for
such an Annalist as Baronius.

CAP. XXXVI. That Baronius reproves Pope Vigilius for his coming to
Constantinople, and a refutation thereof; with a description of the life of the
same Vigilius.
1. AFter all which the Cardinal could devise to disgrace either the Emperor
or the Empress, or Theodorus Bishop of Cesarea, or the cause it self of the
Three Chapters, or the Synodall Acts; in the last place let us consider what he
says against Pope Vigilius; for, this cause so netled him, that whatsoever or
whosoever came in his way, though it were his Holiness himself, he would not
spare them, if he thought thereby to gain never so little for the support of
their infallible Chair: And what think you is it that he carps at, and for
which he so unmannerly quarrels Pope Vigilius? was it for oppugning the truth
published by the Emp. Edict, or was it for making his heretical Constitution,
and defining it ex Cathedra, in defense of the Three Chapters? or was it for
his pevishnesse in refusing to come to the general Council, even then when he
was present in the City where it was held, and had promised under his own hand
that he would come unto it? or was it his pertinacious obstinacy in heresy,
that he would rather undergo both the just sentence of an anathema denounced
by the general Council, and also the calamity and weariness of exile
inflicted by the Emperor (as Baronius says) upon him, then yielding to the
truth and true judgment of the Synod in condemning the Three Chapters? Are
these (which are all of them heinous crimes, and notorious in Vigilius) the
matters that offend the Cardinal? No, none of these, he is not used to find
such faults in their Popes, these all he commends as rare virtues, as
demonstrations of constancy, of prudence, of fortitude in Vigilius? what then
is it that his Cardinalship dislikes? Truly, among many great and eminent
vices in Vigilius, which are obvious, and run into every man's sight, it
happened that once in his life he did one thing worthy of commendations, and that
was his obedience in going to Constantinople, when the Emperor Vigilius ab
Imperatore evocatus, Bizantium venit Proc. lib. 3 pa. 364.
called and requested Jpsum summa celeritate venire rogans. Bar. an. 546. nu.
54.
him to come thither, and the Cardinal winking at all the other, reproves his
Holiness for this one thing, which both in equity and duty he ought to have
done: This forsooth is it which he notes as a very Caeterum Vigilij
profectionem Constantinopolim, magnum intulisse Catholicae Ecclesiae damnu^
eventa declararunt, quae et sigficarunt quam prudentissime egerunt illius
praedecessores, S. Leo, et alij, qui vocatisaepe ab orthodoxis licet
Imperatoribus nunquanm passi sunt se ab ipsa fixa Romae sede divelli, etc. Bar.
an. 546. nu. 55.
dangerous and hurtful matter, and a special point of great indiscretion in
Pope Vigilius, that leaving Rome, that holy City, he would go to
Constantinople, and to the Emperors Court, which his predecessors, Leo and
others, in very great wisdom would never do, not go into the East, nor suffer
themselves to be pulled away from their See fixed at Rome.

2. Truly, I never knew before that there was such virtue in the Roman, or
such venom in the Constantinopolitane soil, or in the Eastern air,
specially seeing the holy Land and the holy City, and the holy Temple were all
in the East: All the Western nations are beholding to the Cardinal for this
conceit; 2 King. 5.17.
Shall there not be given to thy servant two Mules load of this Romish earth?
But let us a little more fully see why the Pope, and particularly Vigilius
might not go to Constantinople. Oh; says the Cardinal Bar. los. cit.
, it is found by experience, that the Popes going from Rome to the Court,
obfuisse haud modicum, has done great hurt to the Church; for then partly by
the threats, and partly by the favors and fair entreaties of Emperors, as it
were with two contrary winds, the ship of Peter is exposed to great hazard.
Modicae fidei, phy, a Cardinal to fear or distrust any wrack of Saint Peter's
ship, though never so dangerous a tempest happen, though, Vna Eurusque,
Notusque ruant, creberque procellis Africus. S. Peter has left such a Pilot in
his Rome, that a thousand times sooner might he himself, than his ship sink,
Pasce oves, tu es Petra, and oravi pro te Petre, will uphold it against all
wind and weather: And truly I would gladly know of his Cardinalship for my
learning, how any of their Popes can forsake their See or Rome. They have
heretofore held it for a maxim, Sententia illa omnium ore versata, Vbi Papa,
ibi Roma. Bar. an. 552. nu. 10.
ubi Papa, ibi Roma, let the Pope go to Peru, yea, ultra Garamantas and Indos,
he has a privilege above all creatures but the Snaile; he carries not only
their infallible Chair, but the whole City of Rome on his back, whithersoever
he goes. If not so, or if the Chair be fixed to Rome, where sat all their
Popes for those seventy years Clemens 5. propter seditiones Jtalicas sede^
Pontificiam ab urbe Roma, Avionem Galliae urbem, ubi successores mansere annos
70. transtulit. Geneb. in Chron. in an. 1305.
, when they were at Avinion? or how shall they sit in the Chair, when their
Babylonish Rome for her Idolatries shall be burnt with unquencheable fire, and
sink like a Millstone into the bottom of the Sea? which being foretold by
Saint John, of the Roman City, which yet remains, as their own Jesuit
Ribera Johannes in omnibus quae de Babylone loquitur, adversus urbem Romanam
vaticinatur, etc. Rib. Com. in ca. 14. Apoc. nu. 57. et Vicarius Christi
ubicunque sit, erit Episcopus Roma, etiamsi illa penitut excisa sit. Ibid. nu.
48.
does truly and undeniably demonstrate, is a most certain Article of the
Catholic faith, though they seldom think of it, and will hardly put it into
their Creed. When their Pope (go whither he will) carries still with him his
infallible Chair, was it not infidelity in the Cardinal to dream or doubt
lest that ship should any where miscarry, more at the Court or Kings Palace
than in a Country Cottage, more in the Trullane than in the Laterane Temple?

3. Yea, but, usu rerum reperitur Obshisse haud modicum usu rerum reperitur,
Pontificum ab urbe profectio ad Comitatum. Bar. an. 546. nu. 55.
, experience teaches, that their going to the Emperor has done exceeding
hurt, and particularly for Vigilius, that his going to Constantinople has
brought Ibid.
, magnum damnum, great harm to the Catholic Church, declararunt eventa, the
events have showed. Events and experience are the most woeful arguments in
Divinity, that can possibly be devised. Measure the Gospel by temporal
calamities which ensued upon it, the bloody murdering of the Apostles, of the
Saints of God, almost for three hundred years together, and he may as well
conclude, that the Gospel and truth of Christ is found by woeful experience
to have brought exceeding great hurt to the Church. The Cardinal was driven to
a narrow strait, and an exceeding penury of reasons, when he was forced to put,
Argumentum ab eventu, for one of his Topicall places.

4. But say, what hurt can he tell us that ever any Emperors presence with the
Pope, brought unto the Church? If both were Catholic, or both heretical, they
agreed well enough together. As not Satan's, so much less is Gods Kingdom
divided against it self; if the Emperor Catholic, and the Pope heretical,
the worst the Emperor ever did, was but to inflict just punishment on an
heretic, the worst the Pope sustained was but a just recompense of his heresy
and hatred of truth: The execution of Justice never did, nor ever can hurt the
Catholic Church. If the Emperor were heretical and the Pope orthodoxal, there
was trial of the Popes art and skill in converting such a man to the truth;
trial of his constancy and love unto Gods truth, whether by fear or favor he
would forsake it: trial of his patience and fortitude in enduring all
torments, even death it self, for his love to Christ. All the hurt which such
an Emperor did, or could do, was to crown him a glorious Martyr, and in
stead of the white garment of innocence, to send him in scarlet robes unto
heaven; and woe be to that Church which shall think Martyrdom an hurt unto
it, which was, and ever will be the glory of the Catholic Church. Non decet
sub spinoso capite membrum esse delicatum, when Christ, his Apostles, and
glorious Saints, and Martyrs, have gone before upon thorns and briars, we
must not look to have a silken way, strewed with Roses and Lillies, unto the
Kingdom of God. This, which is yet the very worst that can befall any
Catholic, Reu. 14.13.
is no harm to him who has learned that lesson, Blessed are they which die in
the Lord; so whether Pope and Emperor be both of one, or of a different
religion, his presence with the Emperor may happen to do good, but it is
certain it can never possibly do hurt unto the Church. The greatest hurt that
was ever done to the Church by this means, was when Constantine after his
baptism by Pope Silvester, in liew of his pains, and in token of a thankful
mind, sealed unto him that donation Donationis exemplar extat Did. 96. ca.
Constantinus.
of the Roman and Western Provinces: That one fable I must particularly
except, for by it has been lift up the man of sin, Christian Empires have
been robbed, the ignorant seduced, the whole Church abused: Nero did not the
thousand part so much hurt by martyring Peter and Paul when they were present
with him, as the most falsely supposed donation has done to the Catholic
Church.

5. Will you yet see the great vanity of the Cardinal in this reason drawn
from the event, and the Emperors presence. Some Agapetus Barbarico coactus
Imperio, etc. Bar. an. 536. nu. 10. qui Agapeti profectionem eo anno contigisse
probat.
ten years before this, Pope Agapetus, being sent by Theodotus King of the
Goths, came to Constantinople, and to the same Emperor: It so fell out, that
at that time Anthimus an heretic and an intruder, held the Sea of
Constantinople: Agapetus deposed him, that is, he declared and denounced
(which was true indeed) that he was never lawfully Bishop of that See, and
that himself did not, nor ought others to hold him for the lawful Bishop
thereof; whereupon Mennas was chosen and consecrated Bishop by Agapetus in
Anthimus his room. Vigilius was called by the Emperor, Agapetus sent by a
Gothish usurper; Vigilius called by a religious and most orthodoxall Professor,
Agapetus sent by an heretic and Arian King; Vigilius called purposely about
causes of faith, Agapetus sent only about civil, and but casually intermedling
with Ecclesiastical causes. You would now even bless your self to see how the
Card. here turns this argument ab eventu, and by it proves the Popes presence
at the same Court with the same Emperor, to have brought such an infinite and
unspeakeable good unto the Church, as could scarce be wished. Agapetus
Agapetus licet a Rege visus sit missus ad Imperatorem, a Deo tamen proficisci
missus apparuit, ut imperaret imperantibus, etc. Bar. an. 536. nu. 12.
no longer sent from Theodotus a barbarous Goth, but even from God himself,
and by him commanded to go thither with an errant from heaven; he seemed to
be sent to entreat of peace, but he was commanded by God to go, ut imperaret
imperantibus, that he should show himself to be an Emperor above the
Emperor: He, like Saint Peter Illud ipsum ferme contigit Agapeto, quod olim
Petro, etc. Jbid. nu. 13.
, had not gold nor silver being feign to pawn the holy Vessels for to furnish
him with money in the journey, but he was rich in the power and heavenly
treasures of working miracles. Now was demonstrated In his omnibus peragendis
summa potestas Apostolicae sedit Antistitis demonstrata est, etc. Ibid. nu. 22.
the highest power of the Pope, that without any Council called about the
matter, as the custom is, he could depose a Patriarch, (at other times he
may not have that title) and a Patriark of so high a See as Constantinople, and
so highly favored by the Emp. and Empress. Now was demonstrated Ibid. nu. 23.
, that, Pontifex supra omnes Canones eminet, that the Popes power is above all
Canons, for herby was showed, that he by his omnipote^t authority may do
matters with the Canons, without the Canons, against all Canons; and seeing his
judgment was without a Synod, (which in a Patriarks cause is required) fuit
secundum supremam Apostolicae sedis authoritatem, it was according to his
supreme authority, which is transce^dent above all Canons; or to use
Bellarmines Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 18. Pontifex et Princeps Ecclesiae
su^mus, potest retractare judicium Concilij, et non sequi majorem partem.
phrase, he did show himself to be, Princeps Ecclesiae, one that may do
against the whole Church. Nay, if you well consider Bar. an. 536. nu. 31.
, admirari non desines, you will never cease to wonder, to see that Agapetus a
poor man, as soon as he came to Constantinople should imperare
Imperatoribus, eoru^ facta rescindere, jura dare, omnibusque jubere, to command
Emperors, to adnull their Acts, to depose a Patriarch and thrust him from his
throne, to set another there, to set down laws, and command all men, and to
do all this without any Synod: and such a Pope Jbid. nu. 70.
was Agapetus, that I know not, an similis alius inveniri possit, whether such
another can be found among them all. Thus declameth Baronius. Where think
you, all time was the Cardinals argument ab adventu? Experience teaches, that
when Popes leave their See, and go to the Court or Emperors presence, the
ship of S. Peter is then in great hazard: If Agapetus his coming to
Constantinople or to the Emperor did not hazard or endanger the Church, how
came it to be perilous a few years after in Vigilius? and where were now the
most wise examples of Pope Leo and the other, who in great wisdom could never
be drawn to the East, and from their own See? how was the holy Church now
fixed to Rome, when Agapetus had it in the greatest majesty and honor at
Constantinople? perceive you not how these arguments lie asleep in the cause
of Agapetus, which the Cardinal rouseth up when Vigilius goes to
Constantinople? This, ab adventu, as all the Cardinals Topicke places, is
drawn from the art and authority of Esops Satyr: If they make for the Pope, as
the event did in Agapetus, then the Cardinal with his Satyrs blast will puff
them up and make them swell to demonstrations: But if they make against the
Pope, as did the event in Vigilius, all arguments in the world drawn from the
cause, effect, or any other Topicall or demonstrative place, the Cardinal with
a contrary breath can turn them al to Sophistications. He is another Iannes or
Iambres of this age, when any argument or Topic place is for the Romish
Pharao, it shall sting like a Serpent, when it is used against King Pharao it
shall be as dull and dead as a stick.

6. And yet what are those ill events and dangers whereunto the Church was
brought by the coming of Vigilius to Constantinople? what hurt received it by
the presence of the Pope with Justinian? Sure the Cardinal in good discretion
should have expressed them, at least some one of them, but he was too politic
to open such secrets of their State; for mine own part I cannot but first
condemn his foul ingratitude in this point. Vigilius before he came to
Constantinople, was earnest in oppugning the truth, and Catholic faith, by
defending of the Three Chapters, he defended them by words, by writings, by
censures, by the utmost of his power: All the hurt the Emperor did him was
this, that he converted him to the truth, that he brought him to define, by an
Apostolical Constitution, that truth which before he oppugned, and in this
tune the Emperor kept him for five or six years together, but then when his
old fit of heresy came upon him again, when at the time of the general
Council he forsook the Emperors holy faith, his communion, and, as may be
thought, even his company and presence also, by this absence from the Emperor,
he relapsed quite from the Catholic faith, even from that which before he had
defended and defined, so long as he kept society with the Emperor. When the
Emperors presence made heretical Pope Vigilius for the space of five or six
years a Catholic Pope, (at least in show and profession) do you not think
Baronius to deal unkindly with the Emperor in blaming the time that ever
Vigilius came to the Emperor, that is in effect to blame, and little less
than curse the day wherein Vigilius renounced heresy, and embraced or made
profession of the Catholic faith.

7. Now as this good redownded to Vigilius in particular by his coming to
Constantinople, so there is another and public benefit which ensued thence to
the whole Church, and that so great and so happy, that if we should (as the
Cardinal does) measure things by the event, the coming of Agapetus to
Constantinople, though they glory therein more than in any other example of
antiquity, is no way comparable to this of Vigilius, for by this coming of
Vigilius it was demonstrated by evident experience, that the Pope may say and
gainsay his own sayings in matters of faith, and then define ex Cathedra, both
his sayings, that is, two direct contradictories to be both true, seeing Pope
Vigilius, first, while he temporized with the Emperor defined ex Cathedra,
that the Three Chapters ought to be condemned, and after that, when it pleased
him to open the depth of his own heart, defined the quite contrary ex
Cathedra, that the Three Chapters ought to be defended. By it was further
demonstrated, that the Pope may not only be an heretic, but teach also and
define, and that ex cathedra, an heresy to be truth, and so be a convicted,
condemned, and anathematized heretic, by the judgment of an holy general
Council, and of the whole Catholic Church. These and some other like
conclusions of great moment for the instruction of the whole Church of God, are
so fully, so clearly, so undenyably demonstrated in the cause of Pope Vigilius,
when he came to Constantinople, that had the Cardinal or his favorers (I
mean the maintainers of the Popes infallibility,) grace to make use thereof
for the opening of their eyes in that maine and fundamental point, wherein
they are now so miserably blinded, they might have greater cause to thank God
for his coming thither, than for the voyage of Agapetus, or of any other of
his predecessors undertaken in many years before.

8. Where are now the great hurts and inconveniences which the Cardinal
fancieth by Vigilius his coming to the Emperor? Truly I cannot devise, what
one they can find, but the disgrace only of Vigilius, in that upon his
coming he showed himself to be a temporizer, a very weather-cocke in faith, a
dissembler with God and his Church, pretending for five or six years that he
favored the truth, when all that time he harbored in his breast the deadly
poison of that heresy, which as before his coming he defended, so at the time
of the Council he defined. This blot or blemish of their holy Father, neither
I, nor themselves, with all the water in Tiber, can wash or ever wipe away. The
best use that can be made of it, is, that as Thomas distrusted, to make others
faithful and void of distrust; so God, in the infiniteness of his wisdom,
permitted Pope Vigilius to be not only unconstant, but heretical in defining
causes of faith, that others by relying on the Popes judgment as infallible,
might not be heretical: and yet even for this very fact, thus much I must
needs say, that if the Cardinal think it was the place, or the City of
Constantinople, that wrought this disgraceful effect in Vigilius, it may be
truly replied unto him much like as Themistocles Cic. lib. de Senect.
did to the foolish Seriphian, ascribing his own ignobility to the baseness
of the town of Seriphus, certainly though Silvester, Julius, and Caelestine
had been never so often at Constantinople, they had been orthodoxall and
heroical Bishops; but Vigilius heretical and ignoble, though he had been
nailed to the posts of the Vaticane, or chained to the pillars of it as fast as
Prometheus to Caucasus. The soil and air is as Catholic at Constantinople,
as in the very Laterane; it is as heretical in Rome, as in any City in all the
world. The only difference is in the men themselves, the former, where ever
they had come, carried with them constant, heroical, and truly pontifical
minds; Vigilius in every place was of an ambitious, unstable, dissembling,
hypocritical, and heretical spirit: which that every one may perceive, I will
now in the last place, and in stead of an Epilogue to this whole Treatise, set
down a true description of the life of Vigilius: partly because it may be
thought a great wrong to reject the narration of Anastasius, and not some way
to supply that defect, touching the life of so memorable a Pope as was
Vigilius; partly with a true report of this heretical Popes life, to requite
the labor of Baronius, in his malicious slanders of the religious Emperor
Justinian; and specially because Vigilius being the subject, (in a manner) of
this whole Treatise, it seems to me needful to express the most material
circumstances, touching the entrance, the actions, the end of him, who has
occasioned us to undertake this so long, and as I truly profess, both
laborious and irksome labor.

9. I confess I have no good faculty in writing their Popes lives, Nec font
labra prolui Caballino, nec in bicipiti somniasse Parnasso memini; I have not
tasted of their streams of Tiber, more holy than Helicon, nor ever had I
dream or vision in their sacred Parnassus; yet with their leave will I
adventure to set down some parts of the life of Vigilius, which do afford as
much variety of matter, and are as needful to be known and remembered, as any
other of that whole rank from S. Peter to Paul the fifth.

10. That many of their Popes have unjustly climbed up to S. Peter's Chair, I
think none so unskilful as not to know, none so malicious as to deny: But
whether any of them all, I except none, not the boy. Pope De quo Otho Jmperator
dixit postquam sedisset 8. annos, Puer est: erat enim cum invasit sedem non
nisi annorum 18. Bar. an. 956. nu. 1. and 2. Cujus electioni lex nulla
suffragata est, sed vis and metus omnia impleverunt. ibid. n. 3.
John the 12. not the Fox De quo dicitur, Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut leo,
mortuus est ut Canis. Geneb. in suo Chron. ad an. 1303.
Boniface, not Silvester the second, who had it Pontificatum adjuvante diabolo
consequutus est, hac tamen lege, ut post mortem totus illius esset. Plat. in
Silv. 2.
by a compact with the Devil, of whom he purchased it with the gift of his
soul; not John the 23. called a Devil incarnate Johannes inter Christi
fideles, vitam and mores ejus cognoscentes, vulgariter dicitur Diabolus
incarnatus. Conc. Constan. Sess. 11. pa. 1579.
, not any else; whether any of them all, I say, obtained the Sea with more
impiety, or greater villainy than Vigilius, may be justly doubted. He, intending
to be a good cammock, began (according to the Proverb,) to hook and crook
betimes, and gape after that eminent Throne. His first attempt Contra jura
canonica, temporibus Bonifacij Papae, ipso vivente, successor ejus designari
conabaris. Epist. 1. Silverij quae est ad Vigilium.
was in the time of Boniface the second, with whom he prevailed so far, that
when Boniface Bonifacius 2. congregavit Synodum, and fecit Constitutum ut sibi
successorem nominaret, quo Constituto, cum chirographis Sacerdotum, et
jurejurando, Diaconum Vigilium constituit. Anast. in vita Bonif. 2.
in a Roman Synod had made a Constitution that he should nominate his
successor, before them all he named and constituted Vigilius to succeed to
himself: for the performance of which, both he and all the rest of the Synod
did bind themselves, both by subscription, and by a solemn oath. Vigilius
seemed for a while to be cocke-sure of the Sea: but it fell out contrary to his
expectation at this time: the Senate of Rome justly withstood (as Pope
Silverius Amplissimi Senatus tibi obviavit justitia. Silv. Epist. 1.
witnesses) that nomination. It may be they knew the crooked disposition of
Vigilius, how unfit he was to make a Bishop: nor the Senate only, but the
Ecclesiastical Canons resisted it: Thou endeavouredst this contra jura
canonica, says Pope Silverius Ibid.
, against the Canonical right. The Italian laws also resisted it at that
time; Theodorick Electionem Romans Pontificit ad Regem spectare Theodoricus
statuerat. Bar. an 531. nu. 2.
, and after him Odoacer Basilius vices agens Odoacrit dixit, Admonitione
beatissimi Papae Simplicij, hoc nobis sub obtestatione meministis fuisse
mandatum, ut non sine nostra consultatione, hujusmodi (Pontificis) celebretur
electio. Conc. 4. sub Symmacho. Et, lex una Odoacris erat, ne absque
consultatione and consensu Regis Jtaliae, electio summi Pontificis fieret. Bin.
Notis in illud Conc. 4.
, having enacted, and that as they affirm by the advice of Pope Simplicius,
electionem Romani Pontificis ad Regem spectare, that the election of the Pope
should belong to the King; and that no election should be made without the
consent of the King of Italy, as by the fourth Roman Council under Symmachus
does appear: For which cause Boniface called a second Synod to Rome, wherein
he recalled Bonifacius facta iterum Synodo reum se Majestatis confessus est
quod Diaconum Vigilium constituisset, ac ipsum constitutum incendio consumpsit.
Anast. in vit. Bonif. 2.
his nomination of Vigilius, and burned his former Constitution; acknowledging
himself (and by consequence all the rest of the former Synod) to be reus
Majestatis, guilty of high treason, for presuming to name Vigilius. This was
the first onset of Vigilius, seeking the Papacy both by violation of the
Canons, and treason against the King, and perjury of the Pope, and of the whole
Synod, whom he had cunningly drawn to that snare, either by making him Pope to
incur treason, or by defeating him of it to incur perjury.

11. Hac non successit, he could not by such petty offenses, as treason,
perjury, and contempt of the Canons prevail: about he will again, and try
another course, and that is by treason against Christ himself, and abnegation
of the Catholic faith. For after the death, first of his old friend Boniface,
then of John the second, then of Agapetus, who died at Constantinople;
Vigilius, that he might effect his purpose, tampered and consulted with the
Empress Theodora, who though of her self at that time she was too earnestly
affected to Anthimus, and being by him seduced, sought for his cause to
overthrow the Council of Chalcedon; yet Instigabat Blo^d. Decad. 1. lib. 5. in
initio.
ardentem Vigilius; Vigilius incited her by his ambitious desires. She and
Vigilius the Deacon having advised about the matter, and covenanted, it was
concluded betwixt them, as Liberatus Lib. in Brev. ca. 22.
shows, that the Empress for her part should procure Vigilius to be Pope,
and give him 700. pieces Promittens dare centenaria septem, (puta auri, number duo
ex his centenaria auri Vigilius Bellisario promisit.) Lib. los. cit. Videntur
autem fuisse aurei illi qui a Valentiniano cusi Sextala dicebantur, quod essent
sexta pars unciae. Aureus autem quisque talis valebat de nostro nummo 10. 1. ut
observat doctissim. vir Edw. Breirwood. lib. suo de antiquis nummis. ca. 15.
Ita summa Vigilio promissa fuit 350. li.
of gold; and that Vigilius for his part, and in recompense of so ample wages,
and so great a reward, should when he were Pope, abolish Augusta vocant
Vigilium profiteri sibi secreto ab eo flagitavit, ut si Papa fieret, tolleret
Synodu^, and fidem firmaret Anthimo, etc Liber. loc. cit.
and adnull for ever the Council of Chalcedon, and restore Anthimus,
Theodosius, and Severus, three Eutychean Bishops to their Sees. The words of
Liberatus are very worthy observing: Libenter suscepit Vigilius promissum ejus,
amore episcopatus, and auri; Vigilius gladly took the offer, for his desire
both of the Popedom, and of the pounds of gold. O ambition, and auri sacra
fames, what will not it effect in such a Balaam, such a Judas as Vigilius was?
It was a very bitter scoff, and some touch also to the credit of Pope Damasus,
that Praetextatus Hier. Epist. ad Pammach. adversus err. Iohannis Hieros.
an heathen man said in derision of him, Facite me Romanae urbis Episcopum, and
ero protinus Christianus, make me Pope, and I will be a Christian: But see the
difference betwixt this heathen man and Vigilius; Praetextatus would renounce
paganism, and become a Christian, so he might gain the Popedom thereby;
Vigilius will renounce Christ and Christianity, and turn quite Pagan, to
obtain the same honor. What think you would Vigilius have said to him that
made the offer, Matthew 4.9.
All these will I give thee and fall down and worship me, when he was so glad
for the offer of 700. pieces of gold, and the triple Crown, that for them
only he undertakes, and binds himself in an obligation under his own hand
to renounce Christ, and abandon out of the world the whole Catholic faith?
Which is every whit as bad, if not all one with falling down to adore the
Devil. Vigilius having now the Empress warrant, seemed sure and secure of the
Papacy, and in this confidence he Vigilius facta professione (Theodorae) Romam
profectus est. Liber. loc. cit.
posts from Constantinople to Rome: but it fell out so unhappily, that when he
came, he found Invenit Silverium, Papam ordinatum. Lib.
Silverius placed by Theodotus, and holding quiet and peaceable possession of
the Sea. This had been enough to have discouraged a faint heart: but Vigilius
was of a better courage: though he found it not, he will make the Sea vacant.
He comes to Bellisarius; Sinite me praeterire, how gladly would I pass by this
fact and fault of Bellisarius, one for warlike prowes, wisdom, and success,
inferior to no General that Rome ever had, by whom the Persians were subdued,
the Vandals expelled Afric, the Goths out of Italy, the Empire restored with
an overplus also to his pristine beauty and dignity! But it so falls out that
all men, even the most praiseworthy, yea the most holy, Abraham, Lot, Sampson,
Peter, and the rest, they all have some blemish or other, like a moale or wart
in a fair body, they must all be commended as God himself praised 1 Reg. 15.5.
David, with an exception of that one matter of Vriah: Peter a most holy
Apostle, save only in the matter of denying Christ. Bellisarius, a most worthy
and renowned man, save this one matter of Silverius. To this renowned
Bellisarius comes Vigilius, and delivered unto him Liber loc. cit. and misit
Augusta iussionet suas ad Bellisarium per Vigilium Anast in vita Silver.
praeceptum Augustae, the Empress mandatory letters to make him Pope; and to
persuade him more easily, knowing what strong operation gold had in himself,
Duo Liber. loc. cit.
ei auri centenaria promisit; he promised to part stakes with him, and give him
two hundred pieces of gold. I wish any but Bellisarius had been the instrument
of so vile an action. But so it was, either the command of the Empress, or the
importunity of Vigilius, or both, caused him to condemn Intentabat Silverio
calumnia^ quasi Gothis scripsisset ut Romam introlrent. Liber. loc. cit. and,
Exierunt quidam falsi testas qui dixerunt, Invenimus Silverium, etc. Anast. in
vita Silv.
Pope Silverius as guilty of treason, for practicing to betray the Imperial
City of Rome to the Goths, under pretense of which false accusation, (for I
cannot assent to Marcellinus Marc. in Chron. an. 547. Silverium faventam
Vitigi, Bellisarius submovit.
, who thinks Silverius guilty thereof) Silverius was expelled Oborta suspicione
Silverium defecturum ad Gothos transmisit in Graciam Bellisarius, and Vigilium
suffecit. Proc. lib. 1. de bell. Goth pa. 286 Bellisarius mandavit eis ut alium
Papam eligerent, and savore Bellisarij ordinatus est Vigilius. Liber loc. cit.
and thrust away, and then Vigilius by the same means of Bellisarius intruded
himself, and stepped into the Apostolical See, usurping it about two years Hoc
anno (548) expulsus est Vigilius. Bar an. 547. nu. 21. obijt autem Silverius a.
540. Bar. an. 540. nu. 2.
during the life time of Silverius: all which time he carried himself Vigilius
quae Pontificij muneris erant, exequi minime praetermisit. Bar. an. 538. nu. 21
for the only lawful Pope; as Pope he received Haec eadem scripsimus ad
beatiss. Papam sentoris Roma Vigilium. sic ait Justin. in suii literis ad Menn.
qua extant apud Bar. an. 538. nu. 34 and 77. Illam autem epistolam missam tam
Mennam qua^ ad Vigilium, isto anno 547. ex hoc liquet, quod hae litera
Concilium illud Constantinopolitanum praeced. in quo Origines damnatus est, nam
Mennam admonet Imp. ut Synodum de hac re habeat. Epist apud Bar. n. 77.
Concilium aute^ illud habitum est isto anno testatur Bar. an 538. nu. 31 and
nu. 83.
Letters from Justinian, as Pope he gave answer Bar. an. 538. nu. 21. and 25.
Legitimorum Pontificu^ vestigijs insistit.
and judgment to Etherius, to Caesarius Epist. 2. Vigilij, apud Bin. pa. 482.
, as true and Catholic, you may be sure, as if S. Peter had given them: the
Chair would not permit him to speak amiss.

12. Now though it was too bad for any Pope, to enter into the holy throne of
S. Peter, by open injustice, by slander, and false accusations, by a
sacrilegious extrusion of the lawful Bishop, by Symonie, by undertaking to
restore condemned heretics, and to abolish the holy Council of Chalcedon,
which is in effect utterly to abandon the whole Catholic faith; yet the
sequel of his actions bewrayes further the most devilish mind of Vigilius.
Who would have thought but that Vigilius would have kept touch, and performed
his sacrilegious and symoniacall contract with the Empress and Bellisarius?
Liberatus Vigilius post ordinationem suam compellabatur a Bellisario ut
impleret promissionem suam Augustae, and sibi redderet duo auri centenaria
promissa. Vigilius autem timere Romanorum, and avaritia patrecina^te nolebat
sponsiones suas implere. Liber. loc. cit.
notes of him that he would do neither, not restore Anthimus, timore
Romanorum, it was not out of conscience, he feared the people, he feared his
own life: Not pay the 200. Centenaria to Bellisarius, avaritia patrocinante,
better lose all his credit, faith, and honesty, than two hundred pieces of
gold; better break his promise, than hurt his purse: But all this is nothing to
his usage of Pope Silverius: Was it not enough to usurp and violently thrust
himself into his See, to set up altar contra altar, Pope against Pope, S.
Peter's Chair against S. Peter's Chair, but he must add indignities also to
the holy Bishop? Had he permitted him to live in his own Country, in some
quiet, though mean estate, it had been some contentment to innocent
Silverius: But Vigilius could not endure that, away with him, out of Rome, out
of Italy, out of Europe. So by Vigilius means is Silverius sent to Patara, a
City in Licia Pomp. Mel. in Lib. 1. in Licia.
, once famous for the Temple and Oracle of Apollo Vnde Patareus Apollo dictus.
Vad. in Pom. Mel. loc. cit.
: there he is fed with the bread of tribulation, and with the water of
affliction. But the rage of Vigilius was further incensed by two occasions, the
former on Silverius part. He, though in exile, yet as then being the only true
and lawful Pope, in a Council held Silverius habito illic Concilio
Episcoporum in Vigilium sententiam damnationis intorquet. Bar. an. 538. nu. 18.
and Vigilio veniente Pataram venerabilis Episcopus, etc. Liber. loco cit.
at Patara, by the authority of S. Peter, and the fullness of his Apostolical
power, thundered out from Patara a sentence of excommunication, of deposition,
of damnation against the usurper and invader of his See, Vigilius. Which being
an authenticke and undeniable record of the good conditions of Vigilius, and
how fit a man he was to make a Pope, I will relate here some parts thereof.
Pope Silverij Epist. 1 quae est ad Vigilium pseudopapam.
Silverius having told Vigilius how he sought against law to obtain the Papal
dignity in the time of Boniface the second, adds this, At that Viz. tempore
Bonifacij.
time the pastoral and pontifical authority should have cut away, execranda
tua auspicia, thy execrable beginnings, but by neglect a little wound
insanabile accrevit apostema, is become an incurable impostume, which being
senseless of other medicines, is to be cut off with a sword. For thou art led
Nequissimi spiritus audacia, ambitionis phrenesin concipiens. Silv. ibid.
with the audaciousnesse of the most wicked fiend, thou art frantic with
ambition, thou labourest to bring the crime of error or heresy into the
Apostolic See; thou followest the steps of Simon Magus, whose disciple thou
show thy self to be, by thy works, by giving money, by thrusting out me,
and invading my See: Receive thou therefore this sentence of damnation,
sublatumque tibi nomen, and ministerium sacerdotalis dignitatis agnosce; and
know that thou art deprived of the name, and all function of priestly
ministry, being damned by the judgment of the holy Ghost, and by the
Apostolic authority in us: for it is fit, ut quod habuit amittat, that he
should lose that which he has received, who usurpes that which he has not
received. Thus Silverius: who being then the only true Pope, pronounced this
sentence of deprivation, of degradation, and damnation out of the highest
authority of their Apostolic Chair: which alone is so authentical a
testimony, of the most execrable conditions of Vigilius, that if I said no
more, few Logicians I think would complain that the description of Vigilius
were imperfect, being so fully, so plainly, and so infallibly expressed, both
by his Genus, a damnable and damned intruder, and by his four differences, or
at least properties, heretical, schismatic, symoniacall, Satanicall.

13. This no doubt moved the choler of Vigilius not a little, to hear such a
thundering from Patara, as if Apollo were there set again on his sacred trevet.
But the other accident was far worse than this. For perhaps Vigilius had
learned that maxim which Lewis Contin. of the History of France, collect. by
Thomas Daunet, in Jews 11 in fine.
the French King sometime uttered, That he who feared the Popes curse should
never sleep a quiet night. Many other Catholics, and among them the Bishop of
Patara grieved much to see the injury and ignominy of the innocent and
miserably afflicted Bishop Silverius, went Venerabilis Patarae Episcopus venit
ad Imperatorem, and judicium Dei contestatus est, de tantae sedis expulsione,
etc. Liber. loc. cit.
to the Emperor to plead on his behalf; declaring both his innocence and
extreme oppression. The Emperor whose delight it was to do justice to all,
and relieve the innocent, especially sacred persons, and most of all the Pope,
was so affected therewith, that he commanded that Jmperator revocari Romam
Silverium jussit, and de literis illis (a Silverio ut aiebant ad Gothos
scriptis) judicium fieri, ut si probaretur etc. Liber. loc. cit
Silverius should be brought again from exile to Rome, and that there should
be taken a melius inquirendum of the whole cause, and if he were found guilty
of the treason objected, then he should be for ever exiled; if innocent, he
should be restored to his See, which Vigilius then usurped. Silverius
Praevalente Jmperatoris jussione Silverius ad Jtaliam reductus est. Liber. ibid.
was hereupon brought back with speed, and being come as near as Italy,
Vigilius was then netled indeed, and fearing Cujus adventu territus Vigilius ne
sede pelleretur, Bellisario mandavit, Trade mihi Vigilium, alioquin non possum
facere, quod a me exigis. Liber. ibid.
to be dethroned, he bestirres himself, and stirs every stone. Then he comes
again in very earnest manner to Bellisarius, and tells him he will now perform
all his covenants, if he would deliver Silverius to his custody. By which
solicitation Silverius the lamb was committed to the wolf, who (intending
now to make as sure work with him, as he who said Dictum Theodoti de Pompeio,
apud Plut. in vita Pomp.
, mortui non mordent,) by two of Ita Silverius traditus est duebus Vigilij
servis, qui in Palmariam insulam adductus, sab eorum custodia desecit inedia.
Liber. loc. cit.
his servants convayed him out of Italy to the Island Palmaria, where after all
other injuries, indignities, and calamities, he spared not the innocent life
and soul of that holy Bishop, but murdered him by a kind of languishing
death, namely by famine, which Ferro saevior est fames. Veget.
Vegetius and the Prophet Lament. 4.9. Melius est mori gladio, quam fame.
also judged worse than the sword.

14. And now that which only hindered Vigilius, being by a strong writ de
ejectione mundi quite removed, there was none to make opposition against him,
or hinder his exaltation to the Zenith of Pontifical dignity, but only God,
and the sting of his own most guilty conscience, both which (though you may be
sure he lightly regarded, yet) for abundant caution he by a fine slight and
policy will pacify and appease: for as hitherto he had played the Wolf and
Tiger, so now you shall see him act the Fox: and that in so lively and native
manner, that he means to cozen not only all men, but his own conscience,
and Almighty GOD himself. As he had murdered the true and lawful Pope
Silverius, so in token of remorse he will needs die and kill himself also,
being the usurping Pope: but his death is no other than they fancy of
Antichrist the beast in the Apocalypse; he dies, but within few days he
revives again. He considered he had entered violently and injuriously into the Sea; that he was as yet nothing but a mere intruder and usurper of it; the holy
and conscionable man will not hold his dignity by so bad a title: and therefore
Bin. Not. in vitam Vigilij.
abdicat se pontificatu, he puts off his Popedom; and considering Bar. an.
540. nu. 4.
how he was blemished with Symony, heresy, murder, and other crimes, that he
was also excommunicated and accursed, a sede male occupata descendit, he
forsakes and comes down from the papal chair, and resignes the keys into
the hands of S. Peter or Christ, and makes the Sea void, that there might be a
new election of a lawful Pope. They shall choose freely whom they will, as for
himself, either they shall bring him by a lawful election in at the door, or
he (so co^scionable is the Fox now become) will for ever stand without: climb
in at the window he will no more; either Christ himself shall reach the keys
unto him, that he may be his lawful Vicar, or open and shut who will for
Vigilius. Thus by the death of Silverius, the true and lawful Pope, and by the
abdication or resignation (which is a death in law) of the usurping Pope
Vigilius, the Sea is wholly vacant, and that was, as Anastasius Cessavit
Episcopatus dies sex. Anast. in vit. Silv. Ex quibus intelligas Vigilium qui
sedem usurpasset ad hoc tempus, minime diutius sedere perseverasse. Ba. an.
540. nu. 4
witnesses, for the space of six days.

15. In this vacancy of the Sea Baronius not only tells you, that there was
(which is not unlike) very great deliberatio^ about the election of a new Pope,
but, as if he had been present in the very conclave at that time, or as if by
some Pythagoricall metempseuchosis the souls of some of those Electors,
coming from one beast to another, had at last entered into the Cardinals
breast, declares their whole debatement of the matter, pro and con, what was
said for Vigilius, what against Vigilius; which kind of poetry, if any be
pleased with, they may have abundance of it in his Annals; for my self, I told
you before I never dreamed as yet in their Roman Parnassus, that I dare
presume to vent such fictions and fancies: In that one he sounded the depth
indeed both of Vigilius counsels, and of the consultations of the Electors; Of
Vigilius he says Bar. an. 540. nu. 5. quod Vigilius id fecerit tanquam
representans in scena comoediam, non ex animo, facile mihi persuadeo.
, that he gave over the Popedom, not with any purpose to leave it, but, as it
were, to act a part in a comedy, and seem to do that which he never meant,
and that he did it, Bar. ibid. nu. 4 Et, vafer homo, hujusmodi sibi viam
aperienda curavit, ut ob perpetrata delicta eijci inde nu^quam posset, securus
de Bellisarij voluntate, etc. Bar. an. eod. 540. nu. 5.
fretus potentia Bellisarij, quod esset eum mox iterum conscensurus; because he
knew, that by the means of Bellisarius he should shortly after be elected
and placed in it again; or, to use the Cardinals own comparison, he did not
play Haud dubiam jecit aleam, cum sciret eandem quam vellet, facie^ redituram.
Bar. ib. nu. 5.
at mum chance, but knowing how the election would go after he had given
over, haud dubiam jecit aleam, he knew what his cast would be, and what side
of the Die would fall upward, he knew his cast would be better than jactus
venereus, it would be the cast of the triple Crown; As for the Electors Clerus
long abhorret, ut hominem tot criminibus implicatum in sedem eveheret
Pontificiam, id praesertim sacris Ecclesiae legibus prohibentibus, et omnes, ut
ab execrando facinore, ab ejus electione, long longius abhorrent. Bar. an.
540. nu. 7.
he tells us, that they chose him not for any worth, piety, virtue, or such like
Pontifical qualifications, (of which they saw none in him) but to avoid
Contra, accuratius rem expendentes manifest cernebant si aliquem alium
eligerent, scindendam mox sore Ecclesiam diro schismate, ideo divinitus
inspirato consilio evehunt ipsum in Pont. thronu^, etc Bar. an. 540. nu. 7. and
8.
a schism in the Church, because they knew if they should choose another, the
Empress and Bellisarius would maintain the right of Vigilius, and as they had
thrust him in, so they would uphold and maintain him in the Sea, and for this
cause, at the instance of Bellisarius, they all with one consent chose their
old friend Vigilius, and now make him the true and lawful Pope, the undoubted
Vicar of Christ, which was a fine cast indeed at the Dies.

16. Now though this may seem unto others, to demonstrate great baseness and
pusilanimitie in the Electors at that time, who fearing a little storm of
anger or persecution, would place so unworthy a man in the Papal throne, and
though it testify the present Roman policy to be such, that if Simon Magus,
nay, the devil himself can once but be intruded into their Chair, and put in
possession thereof, he shall be sure to hold it, with the Electors consent, if
he can but storm and threaten in a Pilates voice to incense the Emperor, or
some potent King to revenge his wrong, if they ever choose any other; yet the
Cardinal who was privy to the mysteries of their Conclave, commends Bar. ibid.
nu. 8.
this for salubre consilium, a very wholesome advice; and wisely was it done to
choose Vigilius, nay, as if that were too little, he adds, it was, Divinitus
inspiratum consilium, God himself inspired this divine counsel from heaven
into their hearts, rather to choose an ambitious, an hypocritical, a
Symoniacall, a schismatic, an heretical, a perfidious, a perjured, a
murderous, a degraded, an accursed, a diabolical person to be their Pope,
rather than hazard to sustain a snuff of Bellisarius, or a frown of
Theodoraes countenance. Howsoever, chosen now Vigilius was by common consent,
and solennibus Bar. ibid.
ritibus, made the true and lawful Pope from thence forward, and with all
solemnity of their rites placed in the Papal throne, and put, not only in the
lawful, but quiet and peaceable possession thereof, the whole Roman Church
approving and applauding the same. Thus Vigilius at last got what in his
ambitious desires he so long gaped and thirsted after: At the first onset he
sought the Papacy, but got it not; at the second turn he got it, but by
usurpation and intrusion only; but now at this third and last boute he hit
the mark indeed, he got the rightful possession of it, and is now become
what he would be, the true Bishop of Rome, and Vicar of S. Peter.

16. I have stayed somewhat long in the entrance of Vigilius, and yet because I
have set down no more but a very (...), a naked and undecked narration, or as
it were, only rough hewed; I must pray the reader that he will permit me to
set down some few exornations and polishments of it out of Cardinal Baronius,
for though all men knew him to be one, whose words concerning their Popes are
as smooth as oil, and who will be sure to say no more ill of any of them,
than mere necessity and evidence of truth inforceth him, yet so unfit am I to
write their Popes lives, that for want of fit terms I am enforced to borrow
from him the whole garnish and varnish of this Description of Vigilius; hear
then no longer me, but the great Cardinal, the dear friend of Vigilius,
telling you what a worthy man the Electors at this time chose for their Pope:
hear him defining Vigilius in this manner; He was an ambitious Ab ambitioso
Diacono procurata Bar. an. 538 nu. 9.
Deacon, who by a mad Insana cupiditate flagrans ambitione Vigilius. Jbid.
nu. 5.
desire, burned with pride, whom thirst Enin quod burathrum infalice^ hominem
conjecit ambitio, in quantum insaniam, and infamiam adegit eu^ vana gloriae
cupido, cujus causa cogatur in ipso portu pati naufragium, and in Petra Petrae
scandalum esse, et in fide infid^lem haberi. Jbid. nu. 17.
of vain glory drove into madness, and into the hellish gulf, by means
whereof he makes shipwreck in the very haven, becomes a Rock of offense, and
seems an infidel in faith; a bondslave Se Theodorae Augustae instar mancipij
turpissime vendidit. Bar. an. 540. nu. 8.
to impious and heretical Theodora, that is, to Megera Accipiat (Theodora)
nomen potius ab inferis, Alecto, vel Megera, vel Tisiphone nu^cupanda. Bar. an.
535. nu. 63.
, to Alecto and the hellish furies, who, with Lucifer, desired to ascend Dum
sursum ascendere meditatur, deorsum demergitur. An. 538. nu. 18.
into heaven, and exalt his throne above the Stars, but being laden with the
weight of his heinous crimes, falls down into the depth, which crimes with Cain
Vagetur necesse est cum Caine qui intus clausum habet, quod eum agit in
adversa, peccatum. Ibid.
he having so enclosed in his breast, must needs wander up and down like a
Vagabond: Unsavory salt Quid reliquu^ esse potuit salis infatuati, nisi ut
conculcetur et proijciatur in sterquiliniu^ haeresum. An. 538. nu. 17.
, worthy by all to be trodden under foot, and cast into the dunghill of
heresies, who had got unto him the stench Putorem contraxit haeretica
pravitatis. Ibid.
of heretical pravity, who bound himself Pactis conventis conscripta jurataque
haereticorum defensio. An. 540. nu. 4.
by an obligation under his own hand, yea by his oath also, to patronize
heretics, who promised Augusta Vigilium sibi profiteri flagitavit, ut tolleret
Synodum, lubenter suscepit Vigilius promissum ejus. Haec cum ipso sacrilega
foemina molita est. An. 536. nu. 123.
to abolish the faith and Council of Chalcedon. It was the just judgment Ita
plane sententia Domini judicatur a fide excidere qui gloriae mancipium se
constituit. An. 538. nu. 17.
of God that he should fall from the faith, who became a Vassal to vain
glory, a schismatike Vigilij schismatici, an. 538. nu. 20.
, a Symoniacke Alienae sedis emptor. Jbid. et Symoniaca labes eum deturpavit.
an. 540. nu. 4.
, a murderer Silverij necis cooperatio eum redarguit. Ibid.
, whose sacriledges Clamantibus undique sacrilegijs, an. 538. nu. 19.
cried unto heaven, an usurper Silverij viventis sedem usurpasse, and malis
artibus nactum esse, imo and inv^sisse eum intelligit, an. 540. nu. 4.
violentus intrusor, an. 538. nu. 11.
, a violent invader, an intruder of the Apostolic See, a bastard Agit Romans
Po^tificem, quamvis spurius, et penitus illegitimus, an. 538. nu. 2^.
and unlawful Pope, whom the true and lawful Pope has bound Sciens cunctos
sibi subjectos, quos vel absolvat, vel aeternis vinculis obliget, authoritate,
etc. an. 539. nu. 4.
with eternal chains; against whom he has shot the dart Adversus Romanae
Ecclesiae invasorem, spurilique intrusum Pontificem, valide telum damnationis
intorquet, an. 539. nu. 4.
of damnation, and showed to the whole world that he ascended into the throne,
ut lapsu graviore ruat, that he might have a greater and more shameful fall,
that he did not represent Silverius oste^dit universo orbi, Vigilium non
refer Simonem Petrum, sed Ma^um, neque Vic^rium Christi, sed Antichristum.
Ibid.
, nor was the successor of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus, and that he is the
Vicar not of Christ, but of Antichrist, an Idol Cernebanc quod rursus Idolum
collocandu^ esset in Templo. conspiciendamque abominationem desolationis
slanse^ in loco sancto, an. 540. nu. 7.
, even the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, and set up in
the temple of God; one rightly Quonam alio nomine quam lupus, sur et latro,
Pseudoepiscopus, ac denique Antichristus jure potuit appellari? an 538. nu. 20.
to be called by no other name than a Wolf, a Thief, a Robber, a
Pseudobishop, and even Antichrist: and, which after all the rest is especially
to be remembered as the cloze of the Cardinals Description, all this time
Vigilius Cum Vigilij personam satis perspectam haberent, eum nempe esse hominem
revera Catholicum, an. 540. nu. 8.
both was, and was known to the Electors, to be a very sound and true
Catholic. A true Catholic? Such Catholics indeed does the Cardinal describe
and commend unto the world; a Catholic Schismatike, a Catholic heretic, a
Catholic Antichrist, a Catholic Devil: If such were their Roman Catholics
and Catholic Popes in those ancient times, O gracious God, what manner of
Catholic Popes are they in these ages? Then, and until the year 600, was the
golden age of the Church, their Roman Bishops were then like the head of
Nebuchadnezzers Image to the late and modern Popes, Vigilius a golden Bishop
indeed to the brazen, iron, and clayish Popes of these later ages, the
baseness of which no tongue or pen can express; when the gold is so full of
dross, when the heads, which give life, motion, and being to all the rest,
are so full of abomination, what manner of Catholics think you are the arms,
the legs, the feet and tails of that their Babylonish Image, which all must
be proportionable? But let us return to Vigilius, whom, I hope, you will now
confess to be exactly and graphically described by the pensill of their own
Apelles.

17. After his instalment, we are to come to his Acts and gests; those, I
confess, are very few in number, they are but two: Anastasius a man slavishly
addicted to the Papal See, was the chief compiler of his life, which had a
man of integrity and indifferency writ, it is not unlike but many other matters
had bin recorded of Vigilius, yet those two are very memorable, and such as
most nearely touch the Po^tifical office. The former concerns the performance
of that promise which Vigilius made to Theodora, that when he were Pope he
would abolish the Council of Chalcedon, and restore Anthimus, Severus, and
other Eutychean deposed Bishops: of it Liberatus Lib. ca. 22.
writes, that Vigilius, implens promissionem suam quam Augustae fecerat, talem
scripsit Epist. fufilling his promise which he had made to the Empress, writ
this Epistle. Victor B. of Tune^, shows Vict. in Chron.
also, that Vigilius by the means of Antonia the wife of Bellisarius, writ unto
Theodosius of Alexandria, Anthimus of Constantinople, and Severus of Antioch, a
good while since condemned by the Apostolic See, tanquam Catholicis, as unto
Catholics, and signified, that himself was of the same opinion concerning the
faith with them. The sum then of the Epistle of Pope Vigilius was to signify
to these heretical and deposed Bishops, that himself was an Eutychean, as
they were, the Epistle it self, set down both in Liberatus and in Victor,
clearly testifies the same, for therein Vigilius writes thus, eam fidem quam
tenetis, Deo adjuvante, and tenuisse me, and tenere significo, I signify unto
you, that, by Gods help, I have held, and do now hold the same faith which
you do: but the Pope adds one clause further for secrecy, well worthy
observing; Oportet ut haec quae scribo nullus agnoscat, it is needful, that
none know of these things which I write unto you, but rather your wisdom must
have me in suspicion, more than any other, that so I may more easily effect,
and bring to pass those things which I have begun. See you not here, as in a
glass, the deep hypocrisy and heresy of Vigilius? with what subtilty and
closeness he labors to undermine the Council of Chalcedon, and the whole
Catholic faith, even then when he would seem to favor it, and therefore
wishes the Eutycheans to speak of him as one who they suspected most of all
to be against them. Liberatus adds, that Vigilius under his Epistle writ a
confession of his faith also, in qua duas in Christo damnavit naturas, wherein
he condemned the teaching of two natures in Christ: and dissolving the Tome of
Pope Leo, he said, non duas Christi naturas confitemur, we do not acknowledge
two natures in Christ, but one Son, one Christ, one Lord composed of two
natures, (to wit, two before the adunation) and again, qui dicit in Christo
duas formas, whosoever says that there are two forms or natures in Christ,
either working according to his own property, and does not confess one
person, one essence, anathema sit, let such a man be accursed. Could Arius,
Eutyches, or any heretic in the world more plainly condemn and accurse the
Council of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, yea, the whole Catholic Church,
and Catholic faith? It is here a fine sport to see how the two Cardinals,
Baronius and Bellarmine, how other pettifoggers, such as Gretzer and Binius,
do here bestirre themselves to quit Vigilius of this blemish, and of the
heresy and impiety taught in this Epistle. First, Vigilius writ not this
Epistle, it is but a counterfeit and forgery: Next, if he did write it, yet he
did it while he was an usurper, not when he was the true and lawful Pope.
Lastly, he did not hereby embrace heresy ex animo, nor define it as Pope, but
only by an exterior act he condemned the faith. Thus they toil themselves
to wash the Ethiopian, and turn a Blackamore into a mike white Swanne.

18. Truly, I am exceeding loath now at the shutting up of this Treatise, and
after sounding of the retreat, to enter into a new and fresh conflict, and
prove Vigilius to have taught Eutycheanisme, as before I have showed, that he
taught the quite contrary heresy of Nestorianisme, might I not say, Spectatum
satis and donatum jam rude, tandem, Quaeritis hoc iterum antiquo me includere
ludo? I have not now the like vigor of mind at the putting off of the armor,
as at the first coming into the field; and, to say truth, what courage can I
or any have to fight against a foiled enemy, which is but to cut off a dead
man's head, by proving him to be an heretic, who is not only proved, but by
most ample judgment and sentence of the whole Catholic Church, already
condemned for an heretic? yet because I have a desire to handle this whole
argument concerning Vigilius, if the reader be not as much tired as my self,
after conquest of the general, I will, as Abner did, play a little with these
straggling Asaels in this point also; or if you please to suffer me to give aim
a while, I will only (...), commit the two Cardinals into the pit to fight it
out, and day the matter betwixt themselves.

19. Commentitium est, it is a forged Epistle, says Cardinal Bar. an. 538.
nu. 15.
Baronius, it is none of Vigilius writing. I here one say so, says Cardinal
Bellarmine Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10.
, but I say, Vigilium scripsisse illam Epistolam, and damnasse Catholicam
fidem, that Vigilius did write that Epistle, and condemn the Catholic faith,
Epistolam quidem scripsit nefariam, truly he writ Bell. ca. eod.
that nefarious Epistle, unworthy of any Christian. Here is work indeed,
saying against saying, Cardinal against Cardinal, and whether Cardinal is
the stronger let the spectators consider: But the best sport is, that whereas
Cardinal Baronius Nomine Vigilij ab aliquo Eutychiano esse suppositam, eoque
imperito, ex pluribus colligi potest. Bar. an. 538 nu. 19.
tells us, that this Epistle was written by some unskilful Eutychean heretic,
and Cardinal Bell. loc. cit.
Bellarmine tells us, that it was writ by Vigilius, it follows upon the two
Cardinals sayings joined together, that Vigilius was both an heretic, and an
unskilful Eutychean heretic.

20. From their words let us come to their strokes and sad blows, Causa cum
causa, ratio cum ratione pugnet. Cardinal Bellarmine has but one reason, but
that is indeed a very sound one, like the Cat in the fable, which has but one
shift against the hounds; his reason Bell. loc. cit.
is the testimony of Saint Breviarium collectum a sancto Liberato, sic
inscribitur apud Binium, to. 2. pa. 610.
Liberatus who then lived, who not only testifies Vigilius to have writ this,
but sets down the very Epistle it self of Vigilius; and whereas some
pretended both that Liberatus was corrupted by heretics, and that his
narration was contrary to their Pontifical; the Card. tells us for a certainty,
that there Vestigium nullum apparet corruptionis in libro. Liberati. Bell.
is neither any footstep nor print of corruption in Liberatus, neither does he
Revera non pugnat narratio Liberati, cum narratione Pontificalis. Jbid.
herein dissent from the Pontifical. Cardinal Baronius boasts Plura sunt
quae persuadent. Bar. an. 538. nu. 15. et ex pluribus colligi potest. An. eod.
nu. 19.
of his reason, as the Fox did in the same fable, that he had a number of
sleights and shifts to deceive the dogs; but the hounds coming suddenly upon
them both, the Cat skipt into a tree, which was her only policy, and there
she saw the Fox with all his hundredth wiles torn in pieces: even such are
Cardinal Baronius his sleights in this cause, he has many, but never a one
that is worth a Rush, none that would save from tearing if the hounds should
happen to come upon him. His first is, because the Bar. an. 538. nu. 19.
Acts of the sixth general Council do show, that heretics had counterfaited
some Epistles in the name of Vigilius, and particularly those books, which are
said to be writ from Vigilius to Justinian and Theodora of blessed memory. Thus
say the Acts; To which the Card. assumes, sane quidem inscriptio recitatae
Epistolae; Truly the inscription of the Epist. recited in the name of Vigilius,
ad Dominos, to my Lords, does demonstrate that it was written to Just. and
Theodora. Alas that this must be one of the Cardinals shifts, and that it must
be for the worth of it styled Inscriptio ad Dominos, demo^strat hanc Epistolam
scriptam esse ad Just. et Theodoram. Bar. ibid.
a demonstration: Why, there needs here, neither mastive nor hound, any beagle
or brache will rent this reason into 20. pieces. First, what meant the Cardinal
to express the words of the sixth Council, where Theodora is called an
Empress of blessed memory? had he forgot what in another place Bar. an. 548.
nu. 24.
he said, that she died miserably, being blasted by the Popes thunderclap?
Again what a demonstration is this; some Epistles were forged in the name of
Vigilius, ergo, this is forged. A pari, some books are forged, the Cardinals
Annals are some books, ergo, they are all forged; or some man is as wise as
Chorebus, ergo, so is the Cardinal. Take heed, I pray you, the hounds sent not
these consequences of the Cardinal, grounded on that old maxim, A particulari
non est Syllogisari. Further yet, what a reason call you this; some books sent
in Vigilius name to Justinian and Theodora, were forged, ergo, this Epist. is
forged. It is a demonstration, a baculo ad Angulum, for this Epistle was writ
neither to Justinian, nor to Theodora, but to Anthimus, Theodosius and Severus;
The Cardinal may know this clearly by Victor, who testifies the same in
express words; he might have perceived it by Liberatus, who says, that
Vigilius writ this Epistle to heretics; whereas not Pope Leo himself was more
orthodoxall in this point than Justinian, as besides infinite other proofs, is
evident both by his Epistle Constitutio Iustiniani vocatur. Extat autem post
finem Conc. Constantinopolitani sub Menna. to. 2. pa. 469.
to Mennas, confirming the deposition of Anthimus, and by that his Epistle
Epistola illa ad Epiphanium extat. Leg. 7. Cod. de summa Trin.
written to Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, four Data est ea Epist. Just.
3. Consul. Is est an. 533.
years before Silverius was expelled, wherein he professes to embrace all the
four Councels, and he anathematizeth all that are anathematized by any of
them, declaring that he will not permit within his Empire any that oppugned
those Councels. But for all this the Card. will prove by the Inscription Sanc
quidem Inscriptio demonstrat. Bar. an. 538. nu. 19.
of this Epistle, that it written to Justinian and Theodora. What if it were?
can he prove withal that no other Epistle or book was writ to them in the
name of Vigilius? No, he never offers to prove that, and till that be proved
his reason at the best is but a particulari, some Epistle writ in the name of
Vigilius to Justinian and Theodora was forged, ergo, this; some man deserves a
whetstone, ergo, so does the Cardinal. Besides this inconsequence, the
Antecedent is so false that I am ashamed to take the renowned Cardinal so
tripping in his demonstration: The Inscription, says he, demonstrates that it
was writ to Justinian and Theodora. Truly the Inscription demonstrates the
Cardinal to be of no truth or credit at al. The Inscription in Liberatus (and
him the Bar. an. 538. nu. 13.
Cardinal follows) is Dominis and Christis Sic habetur in Lib. ca. 22. apud
Bin. pa. 624. b.
Vigilius, Vigilius to my Lords and Christ's. An Inscription indeed with a
witness, and a lesson for the Cardinal; Justinian Christ, Theodora Christ,
and yet the Cardinal ranks the one Christ among the Furies of hell, the other
Christ he condemns to the pit and torments of hell; what a Cardinal to be
so malicious and spightfull against Christ, and Christ's?

21 The Inscription, says the Cardinal, points Demonstrat.
at Justinian and Theodora: I rejoice to see the Cardinal once so charitably
affected, as to think Justinian to be Christ, Theodora Christ, let all applaud
the Cardinal in this saying; seldom shall you take him, nor will he long
persist in so good a mood or mind. The Inscription of the Epistle is to
Christ's, the Inscription demonstrates and points at them, as the Cardinal tells
us; Christ's then they were, Christ's they are against the spite of all
slandering tongues, Christ's let them be, and with Christ let them rest for
ever. But will you now see a fine slight indeed of the Cardinal, such as put
down the Fox, and Cat, and all. Truly, says he, the Inscription; ad
Dominos, demonstrates, that this Epistle was writ to Justinian and Theodora:
why, what means this Inscription, ad Dominos? why does the Cardinal clip away
the one half of the Inscription? The Inscription in Liberatus is, Dominis and
Christis; the Cardinal belike misdoubted by Christis could not be
demonstrated Justinian and Theodora, Christus is the Popes prerogative, it
demonstrates him, and therefore lest the Pope should frown upon the Cardinal
for saying this Inscription, Dominis ac Christis, do demonstrate Justinian and
Theodora, he corrupts the Text, and maimes the Inscription, and makes it to
be but ad Dominos, and so the Inscription, ad Dominos, may well point at the
Emperor and Empress.

22. Yet take the Cardinals maimed Inscription as it is, does this title, ad
Dominos, demonstrate the Emperor? may not one write Domino, or ad Dominum, but
only to the Emperor? how many thousand millions of Emperors will the
Cardinal coin unto us? every servant, every prentise may write, Domino, or
Dominis, unto their Master, and then by the Cardinals demonstration you shall
have Cobblers, and Tailors, and Weavers, and all Artificers in the world turned
into Emp. and their wifes into Empresses, for, sane quidem, verily this
Inscriptio^, ad Dominos, demonstrates that the Epist. is writ to the Emperor
and Empress. Do you think, I say not, that Philosophers and Logicians, but
any elementary boy that has learned to decline Dominus can hold himself at
the hearing of such demonstrations? But to put the matter out of all doubt, and
demonstrate the other demonstration to be as idle a fancy as can devised, the
Inscription which is but in brief set down by Liberatus, is fully and at
large expressed by Victor, who lived and writ also at that time: The tenor
(says he Vict. Tun. in Chron. sub an. 2. post Cons. Basilij.
) of Vigilius Epistle is proved to be thus, Bishop Vigilius, Dominis ac
fratribus, to Theodosius, Anthimus and Severus Bishops, my Lords and brethren,
joined to us in the love of Christ our Savior: What is now become of the
Demonstration, ad Dominos? how does the Inscription, ad Dominos, sane quidem,
truly and verily demonstrate Justinian and Theodora, when, together with
Dominus, is expressly set down and named who those Domini were, to whom
Vigilius writ, even three deposed heretical Bishops?

23. The Cardinal, and Binius Bin. in not. ad Liberatum. In historia.
following him, will not yet let go this demonstration, but much please
themselves in a new device; The Epistle, says he Bar. an. 538. nu. 19.
Abhorret a consueto scribendi more, etc. et, quodnam unquam extitit
praedecessorum exemplum, ut Imperatores Romanus Pontifex Patres nominaret.
, is inscribed also ad Patres, now it is unusual for Popes to call Emperors
their Fathers, and therefore sure it is but a counterfeit Epistle in Vigilius
name: Why, but if Popes do not use that term, it is their own fault, thy
might justly so call Emperors, Emperors are the fathers of their whole
Empire, and that in a more eminent manner than any other father, Imperial
Fathers, commanding and compelling fathers, fathers superior to all other
fathers, even to all Pontifical fathers; but where, I pray you, is that
Inscription Dominis ac Patribus? Not in Victor, not in Liberatus, at least not
in the best Edition of him, not in that which Binius has set forth, there the
Inscription is fair, and clear, Dominis ac Christis; and yet so ridiculous
was Binius, and so foolishly addicted to Baronius, that he proves this Epistle
to be forged, because the Inscription is, Dominis ac Patribus; whereas
himself in the leaf before had set down the Inscription to be Dominis ac
Christis, let it be Patribus: the Cardinal and Binius surely doated when they
concluded, that the Epistle was writ to the Emperor, for as out of Liberatus,
but most clearly out of Victors words is demonstrated, it was writ to father
Anthimus, father Theodosius, and father Severus: Vigilius might well call them
Patres, when in the Inscription he called them Bishops Dominis Theodosio,
Anthimo et Severo Episcopis. Apud Victorem loc. cit.
.

24. And certainly Baronius was conscious to himself, that this Epistle was
writ to Bishops, not to the Emperor and Empress; for as misdoubting that this
would, and justly might be replied to his demonstration, he adds Bar. loc.
cit.
, Si dicas scriptum ad Episcopos, if you say the Epistle was written to
Bishops, and not to the Emperor, yet even so it is a forgery also, and why?
for, Qui novus iste mos est, what a novelty is it, and utterly unusual, that
the Pope should call his fellow Bishops, Patres and Dominos? or if you say that
it should be read fratribus, and not Patribus, yet certainly that procul
abhorret, is very abhorrent, that he should call the same both brethren and
Lords. What is the demonstration come now to rely upon this? It is new, It is
unusual; as if nothing that is new or unusual were done or writ: It was new
and unusual to thrust out and murder the true Pope, yet Vigilius did it for
all the novelty thereof. Could Vigilius act a matter so horrible being new and
unusual, and might not he write a phrase, or give a title being new and
unusual? It is unusual, I trow, for Popes to call heretical Bishops, deposed
by general Councels, their brethren beloved in Christ, he that would honor
deposed heretics with such loving terms, would he doubt to call them by an
unusual title, Dominos ac Patres, or, Dominos ac Fratres? and yet neither of
both is so unusual as the Cardinal would have it thought. In the Council at
Bar Guil. Malshur. lib. 1. de gest. Pontif. Angl. pa. 127.
, when the Greeks disputed against Pope Vrbane so eagerly against the
procession of the holy Ghost, that the Pope was at a non plus, and unable to
answer, being driven to that exigent, and remembering that Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury was in the Council, exclamat he cried aloud before the whole
Council, Pater et Magister Anselme ubi es? Oh my father and Master Anselme
where are you? come now and defend your mother the Church. And when after much
crying and shouting, they brought him in presence among them, Pope Vrbane said,
includamus hunc in orb nostro quasi alterius orbis Papam; let us enclose him
in our circle, as the Pope of the other world. Might not Vigilius do that to
three Patriarks, which Vrbane did to an Archbishop? might not Vigilius call
them fathers, as well as Vrbane called Anselme father and Master? Might not
that be done secretly, and in a private letter which the Pope did openly in
the audience of the whole Council? Is it more incongruity for the Pope to call
the Patriarcke of Alexandria, or of Antioch, his father or Lord, than to call
the Patriarch of England, father, master, yea, Pope in his own Patriarchal
Diocese in England?

25. But the Cardinal still harps on a wrong string; Vigilius neither in the
Inscription, subscription, nor body of the Epistle, called them fathers, but
brethren: That title is given them indeed three or four times, both in
Liberatus and in Victor, fraternitati vestrae, fraternitatem vestram, and orate
pro nobis mihi fratres in Christo conjuncti; pray for us my brethren in the
Lord. Which evidently shows, that Baronius and Binius either themselves
corrupted, and followed some corrupt Edition of that Epistle, when they so
craftily persist on the Inscription, Dominis ac Patribus; for had he styled
them in the title fathers, he would not in the Epistle have so often called
them brethren, and never once fathers. Now to say as the Cardinal Vel si
fratres legas, certe procul abhorret, ut eosdem dicat and Dominos. Bar. an.
538. nu. 19.
does, that it is abhorrent either from reason or practice to call the same
parties both Dominos and fratres, argues, either extreme and supine negligence,
or obstinate perverseness in the Cardinal and Binius, scarce any thing in
antiquity being more frequent. Pope Damasus Epist. S. Damasi apud. Bin. to. 1.
Conc. pa. 501.
writ a Synodall letter to Prosper Bishop of Numidia, and others, he inscribes
it thus, Dominis venerabilibus and fratribus Prospero, Leoni, Reparato, Damasus
Episcopus; Bishop Damasus to my reverend Lords and Brethren Prosper, etc. So
the Council of Carthage Habentur in Council. Africano sub Caelest. et Bonif.
ca. 101. et 105. to. 1. Conc. pa. 644. and 645.
in two letters, written the one to Pope Boniface, the other to Pope
Caelestine, writes in both in this manner, To our Lord and honorable brother:
So Cyrill In eodem Co^c. Afric. ca. 102.
Patriarch of Alexandria writ to Aurelius Valentinus, and the other African
Bishops, Dominis honorabilibus, to the honorable Lords, and holy brethren. In
like sort Atticus In eodem Conc. ca. 103.
Patriarch of Constantinople to the same Africane Bishops, Dominis sanctis, to
the holy Lords, and our most blessed brethren, fellow Bish. Why might not
Vigilius call other Patriarks Lords and brethren, when Atticus, Cyrill, the
Council of Carthage, yea, Pope Damasus himself called other Bishops, Dominos
ac fratres. Nay, seeing the Pope is used to inscribe his letters to the Emp.
Dominis ac Sic Adrianus 1 scribit ad. Constantinum et Irenem. Tom. 3. Conc. pa.
254.
filijs, or, Domino ac filio, as does P. Hadria^ to Constant. and Irene, and to
Charles Adrianus Papa to. eod. pa. 263.
, why may not he as well call his brother as his son, Lord? is the title of son
more compatible with Dominis, than the title of brother? or whether title,
think you, Lord or brother, may not the Pope give to his fellow Bishops? the
name of brother is almost every where seen in his letters, the Cardinal
envies not that unto them; it is the name of Dominus that seems somewhat
harsh. The Cardinal would not have the Pope call or account other Bishops his
Lords; and yet how can they, even the meanest of them, but be his Lord, when
he gladly styles himself their servant, yea, servant Servus servorum Dei, sic
se scribit Gregor. 7. qui prius Hildebrandus dictus. est. Epist. 13, 14. et
reliquis plus centies.
to every servant of the Lord? So that if the Popes Secretary were well
catechized, and knew good manners, his Holiness should write thus to his own
servants, To my Lord Groom of my stable, to my Lord the Scull of my Kitchen, I
am indeed your servant, I am servus servorum Dei: But let the title of the
Epistle be howsoever ye will, whether, Dominis ac Christis, as it is in
Liberatus; or, Dominis and fratribus, as it is in Victor; or, Dominis and
Patribus, as the Cardinal (without any authority that I can find) would have
it, certain it is, that the parties to whom Vigilius writ it, were the three
deposed Bishops to whom Vigilius was like to give any of all those titles, and
not to the Emperor and Empress, as the Cardinal without all shadow of truth,
affirms, and says that he has demonstrated the same, but it is with such a
demonstration as was never found in any but in Chorebus his Analyticks.

26. Another of the Cardinals reasons to prove this Epistle to be a forgery, is
taken from a repugnance and contrariety of the words in the Subscription,
wherein Vigilius Quo pacto, rogo, potuit Vigilius anathematizare Dioscorum, si
cum Dioscoro Eutychianam haeresin praedicat? Haec enim sibi invicem
adversantur, ut utraque vera esse non possint. Bar. an. 538. nu. 16. et idem
habet Bin. not. in Lib. pa. 626. a.
first professes to hold but one nature in Christ, and then anathematizeth
Dioscorus, who held the same. The Cardinal should have proved, that Vigilius
could not, or did not write contrarieties. As the Cardinal, though he has
been so often taken tardy in contradictions, yet will not deny the Annals for
that cause to be his own fair birth; so he might think of this writing,
though it be repugnant to it self, yet it might proceed from such an unstayed
and unstable mind, as Vigilius had: But I do acquit Vigilius from this
contradiction, it is not his, he condemned not Dioscorus in his Subscription.
In his Epistle he professes to hold the same doctrine of one only nature in
Christ with Eutyches and Dioscorus; there is little reason then to think, that
he did in his Subscription adjoined, condemn the professors of that doctrine,
of which Dioscorus was one of the chief, as deep in that heresy as Eutyches
himself: What shall we say then to Liberatus, in whom Dioscorus is named?
Truly had not malice and spite shut the eyes of Baronius and Binius, they
could not but have seen, that the name of Dioscorus is by the oversight or
negligence of the writer, inserted in stead of Nestorius: It was Nestorius and
not Dioscorus whom Vigilius there accursed, the very conclusion and coherence,
not only with the Epistle, but with the next precedent words in the
Subscription, do evidently demonstrate thus much; for having professed in his
Epistle Eam fidem quam tenetis, and tenere me, et tenuisse significo. Epist.
Vigilij cu^ apud Liber. ca. 22. et Vict. Tan. in Chron. an. post Cons. Basilij
2.
to hold, as did Dioscorus, but one nature in Christ, having again in his
Subscription and next words before, anathematized Qui dicit in Christo duas
formas, et non co^sitetur unam personam, unam essentiam, Anathema sit. Ibid.
apud Liber.
all who admit two, or deny but one nature in Christ, he in particular
declares who those are, that he therein anathematized, saying, Anathematizamus
ergo, therefore we accurse (by this our condemnation of those who deny but one
nature) Paulus Samosatenus, Nestorius, Theodorus, and Theodoret, and all who
have or do embrace their doctrine. Now it was Nestorius, not Dioscorus, who
embraced the same doctrine with Paulus Samosatenus, with Theodorus of
Mopsvestia, and Theodoret, all these concurred in that one and selfsame
heresy of denying one nature in Christ, they all consented in teaching two
natures, making two persons in Christ, which Dioscorus and Eutyches condemned.
Of Theodorus and Theodoret it is clear by the Councels, both of Ephesus and
Chalcedon, and the fifth Synod. Of Paulus Samosatenus, the writing or
contestation of the Catholic Clergy of Constantinople, set down in the Acts
of Ephesus To. 1. act. Conc. Ephesians. ca. 11.
, do certainly witness and declare the same; the title of which is to show,
partly, Nestoriu^ ejusdem esse sententiae cum Paulo Samosateno, that Nestorius
is of the same opinion with Paulus Samosatenus; and in the contestation it
self it is said thus, I adjure all to publish this our writing for the evident
reproof of Nestorius the heretic, as one who is convinced to teach and openly
maintain, eadem prorsus quae Paulus Samosatenus, the same doctrines altogether
which Paulus Samosatenus did; and then they express seven heretical assertions
taught alike by them both. Seeing then Vigilius accursed him who taught the
same with Paulus, Theodorus, and Theodoret, and that was Nestorius, not
Dioscorus: it is undoubtedly certain, that not Dioscorus, but Nestorius was
the party written and named by Vigilius in his subscription: and that Dioscorus
was not by Vigilius, but by the oversight and negligence of the exscriber of
Liberatus, wrongfully inserted in stead of Nestorius. And truly the like
mistakings are not unusual in Liberatus. In this very Chapter it is said that
Vigilius a little after the death of Agapetus, and election of Silverius, when
he came from Constantinople to Rome with the Empress her letters for placing
him in the Roman See, he found Quin and Ravennae reperi^ Bellisarium. Liber.
ca. 22.
Bellisarius at Ravenna; a manifest mistaking of Ravenna for Naples; for there,
and not at Ravenna was Bellisarius at that time, as by Procopius Nam Silveriu^
ait ejectum a Bellisario. p. 287 id fuit anno 3. belli Gothici, ut liquet ex
pa. 313 ubi ait, Tertius belli hujus annus exibat, at Bellisarius non caepit
Ravennam ante finem anni 5. ejus belli, ut ait Proc. 340. and 343. ubi ait, Iam
annus 5. exibat.
is evident: and because this is no way prejudicial to their cause, Baronius
and Binius can there willingly admit Hic puto Liberatum memoria lapsum,
Ravennam pro Neapoli posuisse. Bar. an. 538. nu. 7. and idem Bin. Not. in Liber.
an error or slip of memory in Liberatus, and not so hastily conclude as here
they do, that because Bellisarius was not then at Ravenna, as in Liberatus is
falsely affirmed, therefore that Chapter of Liberatus is forged, and not truly
written by him. Would his Cardinalship have been as favorable to Liberatus in
naming Dioscorus for Nestorius, which the like evidence of truth and all the
circumstances do necessarily enforce, the Epistle might as well pass for the
true writing of Vigilius, as that Chapter for the writing of Liberatus. In this
very Epistle of Vigilius, it is said in Liberatus Apud Bin. to. 2. pa. 614.
, I know, quia ad Sanctitate^ vestra^ fidei meae crudelitas pervenit, that the
cruelty of my faith is before this come to your ears; and the very same word
of crudelitas fidei is in Victor also, which argues the fault to be very ancient.
It is true that the faith of Vigilius was indeed cruel, for he by it cruelly
condemned, abolished, and as it were murdered the Council of Chalcedon, that
is in truth, the whole Catholic faith: and so this happened to be not only a
true, but a fit and significant error. Yet the Cardinal was so friendly and
charitable here, as to think that it was but a slip of the pen, or
negligence of the writer, in saying crudelitas, for credulitas, as the
Cardinal reads Bar. an 538. nu. 14.
it; might not by the like negligence, and with less disgrace to Vigilius,
Dioscorus slip into the text in stead of Nestorius? In the inscription of the
Epistle Liberatus reads it, Dominis ac Christis; Victor, Dominis ac fratribus;
the Cardinal corrects both, and makes it worst of all, Dominis ac patribus.
May he play the Critic, and turn Christis, or fratribus, into patribus, and
that without, nay against reason, and may not others in the subscription
restore Nestorius for Dioscorus, when the truth and necessary circumstances
enforce that correction? It was Nestorius then not Dioscorus whom Vigilius
accursed; it is but the error or corrupt writing of Vigilius Epistle in
Liberatus, (which we also condemn) and not the Epistle of Vigilius at which
the Cardinal unjustly quarrelleth.

27. His third and last shift is worst of all. If Vigilius had indeed writ this
Epistle, why then (says he Bar. an. 538. nu. 15.
) was it not upbraided unto him at Constantinople, neither by the Empress
Theodora, when she contended with him, about the restoring of Anthimus, nor by
Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea, and Mennas, when Vigilius excommunicated them
both, and they vexed him so long; nor by the Emperor Justinian, when he was
furiously enraged against him; nor by the fifth Synod, which was offended with
him for refusing to come to the Council; nor yet by Facundus, when he writ
angerly against him? these were publicly debated, nec tamen de dicta epistola,
vel usquam mentio; yet is there not any mention, or light signification of any
such Epistle. Thus the Cardinal. Of whom I again demand where he learned to
dispute ab authoritate humana negative; the old and good rule was, Neque ex
negativis recte concludere si vis; but the Cardinal has new Analytickes, and
newfound rules of Art, Ex negativis poteris concludere si vis. Himself
witnesses Bar. locis supr. citat.
and proclameth Vigilius to have been a Symoniack, and to have compacted with
Bellisarius for 200. pieces of gold, to have been excommunicated, deposed,
degraded, by Pope Silverius pronouncing that sentence out of his Apostolic
authority, and from the mouth of God: why was not this Symony, why was not this
censure of Silverius upbraided, neither by Theodora, nor Theodorus, nor
Justinian, nor the fifth Council, nor Facundus? that being a public and known
censure, had been a matter of far greater disgrace to Vigilius, far more
justifiable than the epistle writ privately and secretly to Anthimus, and
commanded by Vigilius to be kept close that none might know it. See you not
how vain this shift of the Cardinal is? How it crosses him in his Annals, to
slander Vigilius as symoniacall, as censured by Silverius, both which seeing
they are not upbrayded to him by the forenamed persons, but set down in the
Cardinals Analytickes, sure they are impostures, and forgeries. What though
none of them upbrayded this Epistle unto him? Is it not enough that it is
assuredly testified and recorded by S. Liberatus, by Bishop Victor, two who
lived and writ at that same time? what if most of them knew not of this
Epistle, which was sent secretly by Vigilius, and by his advice kept closely by
Anthimus and Severus? what if they all knew it, and yet having other crimes
enough to object, thought it needless to mention that, as it seems they did
the Symony of Vigilius, and censure of Silverius? what if they were not so
spiteful as the Cardinal is, and therefore would not say the worst they could
against his Holiness?

28. But see the strange dealing of the Cardinal! How or why should Theodora
upbrayd this to Vigilius for the not restoring of Anthimus? that quarrel for
the restoring of Anthimus (as I have often said, and clearly proved) was a
mere devise and fiction of Anastasius, it was nothing but Alcibiades dogs
tail. Or how should Justinian upbraid it, when he was so enraged against
Vigilius, and persecuted him for not restoring Anthimus? Seeing neither
Justinian persecuted Vigilius, nor was enraged against him, but for the space
of five of six years they both sang one note, they fully consorted together?
or how should Mennas and Theodorus upbraid it, when they were excommunicated by
Vigilius? Seeing that excommunication, and all the circumstances of it are
merely fictitious, as by the death of Mennas, (which was long before that
forged excommunication of him) was demonstrated? Are not these worthy reasons
to disprove this Epistle to be writ by Vigilius, which all rely on fictions,
and on most untrue and idle fancies? And whether Facundus upbraided it or no,
may be questioned, nor will it be clearly known, until they will suffer
Facundus to come out of their Vaticane, where he lies yet imprisoned. But as
for the fifth Council, it was great silliness in the Cardinal, once to think
that they should or would upbraid this Epistle to him, they used the Pope in
the most honorable and respectfull manner that could be wished, they uttered
no one harsh or hard word against him, but what was rightly said or done by
him; as his condemning of Origin, his condemning the Three Chapters before the
time of the Council, that they often mention and approve it also. They sought
by lenity to win the Popes heart to consent unto the truth, which they
defended: seeing they could not prevail with him; yet they would have the
whole world to testify, together with the Popes peevishness, their own
lenity, equity and moderation used toward him, and that it was not hatred or
contempt of his person, nor any precedent occasion, but only the truth and
equity of that present cause, which enforced them to involve him (remaining
obdurate in his heresy) in that Anathema which they in general denounced
against all the pertinacious defenders of the Three Chapters, of which Vigilius
was the chief, and standard bearer to the rest. Did the Cardinal think with
such poor sleights to quit Vigilius of this Epistle? If nothing else, truly
the very imbecility and dullness of the Cardinals reasons and demonstrations
in this point may persuade, that Vigilius and none but he was the author of it.
Baronius was too unadvised without better weapons to enter into the sand, with
old Cardinal Bellarmine in this cause, who is known to be, plurimarum
palmarum vetus ac nobilis gladiator, and in this combat with Baronius he has
played the right Eutellus indeed. Come, let us give to him in token of his
conquest, corollam and palmam, and let Baronius in remembrance of his foil,
leave this Epistle to Vigilius, with this Impresse; Vigilio scriptum hoc,
Eutello palma feratur.

29. Vigilius now, by just Duel, is proved to be the true author of this
Epistle: Be it so, say they Etiamsi ista vere scripsisset Vigilius, nullum
tamen ob id infertur praejudicium Apostolicae sedi, cujus tunc ipse erat
invasor, Silverius autem germanus Pontifex. Bar. an. 538. nu. 15. Fecit id cum
adhuc viveret Silverius, quo tempore Vigilius non erat Papa, sed Pseudopapa.
Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10. Non mirum si Pseudoepiscopus et quasi
Antichristus ad schisma, haeresin addidisset. Bin. not. in. Lib. pa 626. a. ita
etiam Gretz. in Defens. ca. 10. lib. 4. Bell.
, yet that is no prejudice at all to the Apostolic See, because he writ it in
the time of Sylverius, while as yet Vigilius was not the lawful Pope, but an
intruder and usurper, and Pseudopope, and herein they all join hand in hand,
Bellarmine with Baronius, Gretzer and Binius with them both. But fear not the
tails of these smoking firebrands, nor the wrath of Rhesin, Aram, and
Remalias son, because they have taken wicked counsel against the truth. Nor
needed there here any long contention about this matter, for how do they prove
this saying of theirs, that Vigilius writ it when Sylverius lived, and not
afterward. Truly by no other but the Colliers argument, It is so, because it
is so, proof they have none at all, they were so destitute of reasons in this
point, that laying this for their foundation to excuse the Pope for teaching
heresy, they beg this, or rather take it without begging or asking, by
virtue of that place called, Petitio Principij. Let us pardon Binius and
Gretzer, who gathered up only the scraps under the Cardinals tables, but for a
Cardinal so basely and beggarly to behave himself, as to dispute from such
sophistical topics, is too foul a shame and blemish to his wit and learning.
And why may not we take upon us the like Magisteriall authority, and to their,
I say it is so, oppose, I say it is not so? Do they think by their big
looks, and sesquipedalia verba, to downface the truth?

30. But because I have no fancy to this Pythagoricall kind of learning, there
are one or two reasons which declare, that Vigilius writ this Epistle after the
death of Silverius, when he was the only and true lawful Pope; for the former
is the narration of Liberatus, who in a continued story of these matters, after
the death of Silverius relates how Vigilius writ this; Silverius, says he
Liber. ca. 22.
, dyed with famine; Vigilius autem implens promissum, And Vigilius to fulfill
his promise, writ this Epistle. Oh, says Gretzer Great. loc. cit.
, Liberatus uses here an anticipation, and sets down that before which fell
out after. Prove that Gretzer; Prove it? why, his proof is like his Masters,
It is so, because it is so: Other proof you shall have none of Gretzer: He
thought, belike, his words should pass for current pay, as well as a
Cardinals, but it was too foolish presumption in him to take upon him to
dispute so Cardinaliter; that is, without reason; why should it not be thought,
seeing we find nothing to the contrary, that Liber. in his narration followed
the order and sequel of things and times, as the law of an historian requires,
rather than believe Gretzers bare saying, that it is disorderly and contrary to
the order of the times and event of things?

31. This will further appear by the other reason drawn from the time when
this Epistle was written: Baronius referres it to the year 538. wherein
Silverius was expelled, and faith Bar. an 538. nu. 14, 15.
, that though Vigilius had truly writ it, yet it is no prejudice to the
Apostolic See, cujus tunc ipse invasor, of which he was an invader and
intruder at that time when it was written. But the Cardinal is mistaken in this
point, for it is clear and certain by the testimony of Liberatus Lib. loc.
cit.
, that Vigilius had not writ this Epistle when Silverius returned out of exile
from Patara into Italy; for Vigilius hearing of the return of Silverius, and
being in great fear of losing the Popedom, he hastened then to Bellisarius,
and entreated him to deliver Silverius into his custody, otherwise, said he,
non possum facere quod a me exigis, I cannot do that which you require me.
Bellisarius required of him two things, as the same Liberat. witnesses, the
one to perform his promise to the Empress, and that was Augusta Vigilium
profiteri flagitavit ut si Papa fieret tolleret Synodum, etc. Lubenter suscepit
Vigilius promissum. Liber. loc. cit.
the overthrowing of the Council at Chalcedon: the other, to pay him the two
hundred pieces of Gold, which he promised to himself; whereby it is most
evident, that at Silverius returning into Italy, Vigilius had done neither of
these, and so not writ this Epistle. Now it is most likely, that Silverius
returned into Italy, an. 540. for seeing he dyed Silverius hoc anno obijt, 12.
Kalend. Iulij. Ba. an. 540. nu. 2
in the month of June that year, and being presently upon Ita Silverius
traditus duobus Vigilij servis, qui in Palmariam abductus sub eorum custodia
defecit inedia. Lib. loc. cit.
his return sent away into the Island of Palmaria by Vigilius, a little time,
you may be sure, would serve to famish an old and disheartened man. But Gretzer
eases us in this point, and plainly professes Mors Silverij fuit an. 540. et
hoc ipso itidem anno Vigilius ad Theodoram scripsit, promissa exolvere volens:
Gretz. def. ca. 10 lib. 4. de Pont.
, that this Epistle was writ in that same year 440. wherein Silverius dyed. If
now you do consider how little time there was betwixt the death of Silverius,
and his delivery to Vigilius, and how in that short time also Vigilius had a
greater work, and of more importance to look unto, than the writing of
letters to deposed Bishops, to wit, to provide that Silverius should not live,
that himself should not be expelled his own See, and how upon Silverius
death himself might be again lawfully chosen Pope; none I think will suppose
that Vig. writ this before Silverius death in that year, but after it, and
after all his troubles ended, when he having quiet possession of the Sea, had
leisure to think on such matters. But why stay I in the proof hereof, this
being clearly testified by Nauclerus, who thus writes Naucl. Gener. 18.
, Silverius being dead, Vigilius was created Pope, quod postquam comperit
Theodora, which when Theodora understood, she writ unto him to perform his
promise about Anthimus, but Vigilius answered, far be this from me, I spoke
unadvisedly before, and I am sorry for it. So Nauclerus; who therein no doubt
followed Anastasius, for he Anast. in vit. Vigilij.
having set down both the same motion made by Theodora, and the answer given
by Vigilius, Binius Ecce ut Vigil. statim ac sanctam sedem ascendit, etc. Bin.
not. in vit. Vig.
observes, that this was done when Vigilius was now the rightful and true
Pope: wherefore seeing Theodora writ to Pope Vigilius, and that after the death
of Silverius, to perform his promise, it is certain, that before then he had
not done it, and so that until he was the only true and lawful Pope he did
not write this Epistle, which would have given full content to Theodora; and
seeing again we have clearly proved that he did write it, it remains that
he writ it after the death of Silverius, when himself was the only lawful
and true Bishop of Rome. One doubt in this matter remains, which Binius Bin.
not. in vit. Vig. Ex Actis
slightly mentions, for that Vigilius after he was true Pope, did not only
anathematize Anthimus, and confirm his deposition, but profess himself also
to defend the Council of Chalcedon, as appears both by his Epistle to
Justinian and Mennas, dated four months Epist. Vigilij ad Mennam 15 Calend.
October. data est. Ea extat apud Bar. an. 540. nu. 25. et eodem tempore missa est
etiam illa ad Iustinianum, apud Bar. an. 540. nu. 15. et 22.
after he was the true Pope; and by that answer, which, as Anastasius and
Nauclerus say, he sent (in Ad haec rescripsit Vigilius. Anast. in vit. Vig.
writing) to Theodora, that he would not now restore Anthimus, being an
heretic: Whence it may be collected, that after he was once the true and
lawful Pope, nihil horum dixerit, scripserit vel egerit, that he neither
said, writ, nor did any such thing, as it is expressed in this Epistle, for
confirming the heresy of Eutyches; for how is it credible, that he should
write both these, being directly contrary the one to the other?

32. I answer, that had Vigilius bin an honest man, or a man of credit, of
constancy, and resolution, he would never have thought or dreamed to write both
those. But Vigilius was perpaucorum hominum, you may go through the whole
Catalogue of the Roman Popes, (and there is the best choice of wicked men in
all forms and fashions of impiety to be found) and not pick out such a
Polipus, a turncoate, a weathercocke as Pope Vigilius. Baronius compares him to
King Saul, and says Bar. an. 540. nu: 13.
, that as soon as he was made the true Pope, he was then Saul inter
Prophetas. It is true in many things, he was like King Saul, but in that act
of prophesying, wherein the Cardinal compares them, there is a mavelous
dissimilitude betwixt them; Saul was moved by Gods Spirit, Vigilius by his own
will; Saul was acted and driven to utter those prophesies, which God put into
his mouth, Vigilius himself did guide and move his tongue, and turned it with
the rudder of his unconstant mind, when, and whithersoever he would; Saul
prophesied of necessity, not being able to resist Gods motion, Vigilius in
hypocrisy being desirous to please and humor other men: in a word, Saul had
the gift, Vigilius the art or juggling trick of prophesying. When he would
seem to be that which indeed and in heart he was not, a Catholic Bishop, and
gain the favor of Justinian a Catholic Emperor; not Saul, nor scarce Paul
more orthodoxall than Vigilius; when he would open his heart and declare what
he was intus and in cute; not Eutyches or Nestorius more damnably heretical
than Vigilius. In his Epistle written secretly to Theodosius, Anthimus, and
Severus, he opens to them his true intent and mind, that he was of one faith
with them, an Eutychean as they were, and so assures them that he would do
what he could for them, when opportunity Scribit ut sint omnia occulta usque ad
tempus. Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10.
should be offered. In his Epistles to the Emperor, Empress, and Mennas,
which were to be public and seen of all, he makes a show of love to the
truth, and to the Council of Chalcedon, which even then he meant, if
opportunity were once offered, to adnull and a bolish for ever. I here remember a
narration, not unworthy observing, which long since a man of great gravity and
judgment in law, and now one of the chief Judges in this Realm, related unto
me, how one of the most notorious Traitors in the time of our late Queen of
happy memory, having by solemn vow, by oath, by receiving the holy Sacrament,
bound himself to murder his Sovereign, returned home from Italy, but with
such a show of zeal toward our religion, our State, and his Sovereign, that
in open Parliament (being chosen a Burgess) he made a very spightfull and
violent invective against Recusants, and specially against Jesuits: His
Paymasters and friends of Rome, expostulating with him then about the matter,
Oh, quoth he, it was needful I should thus do, now all fear, nay suspicion
of me is quite removed, I have by this my open speech gained trust and credit
with the Prince, with the Council, and the whole State, I have now made an
easy and free access to perform that holy work. And if God had not watched
over Israel, and his Anointed, many times without suspicion and danger he
might have done, and had done it indeed. Seldom are great villainies attempted
but with great hypocrisy: such deep dissembling is no novelty at Rome; Pope
Vigilius was not to be taught this lesson; no treason more horrible than his
was at this time. He undertakes Vigilius facta promissione Romam profectus
est. Liber. ca. 22. redarguit ipsum, haereticorum pactis conventis conscripta,
juraque defensio. Bar. an. 540. nu. 4.
and binds himself by his own handwriting, by his oath also, (the Sacrament
was not as yet grown to be an obligation of such detestable designs) to
overthrow and abolish for ever the Council of Chalcedon, and with it the whole
Christian faith; his purpose and resolution of heart he signifies in his
heretical Epistle, which, as it seems, he writ very shortly after he was
the true and lawful Pope, to Anthimus, Severus, and Theodosius, and sent it
privately to Theodora. While he is meditating and seeking how to effect this,
the Emperor writes unto him, requiring him to approve that faith which Leo,
Caelestine, Agapetus, and others his predecessors had embraced; and
particularly to confirm the deposition of Anthimus, Severus, and Theodosius.
What should Vigilius here do? had he refused to yield to the Emperors just
motion, he had bewrayed himself, and his mind, and then not only the
Emperor and Graecians, but even his own Roman Church (then orthodoxall and
Catholic) would have expelled him for an heretic, and so he had deprived
himself of all possibillity ever to effect his heretical intendment: He saw
it was most needful for him to put on the visor of a Catholic profession, and
therefore after his sacrifice and prayer to Laverna, Pulcra Laverna da mihi
fallere, da justum sanctumque videri; then in that counterfeit habit of
holiness he writ those open letters to Justinian, to Mennas, and to Theodora,
so orthodoxall and Catholic, that none by them in the world could otherwise
judge of him, but that he was another S. Silvester, S. Caelestine, or S. Leo;
When by this he had gained, first, the reputation of sanctity in the Church,
then the good will of the Emperor and the love of all Catholics, when every
man now held Vigilius his Apostolical letters or decrees for so many Oracles,
and himself for an Apostle and Prophet sent from heaven to instruct them,
then, and not before, was it time to work his intended feat; then, and never
before, he was to publish his Apostolical decree (his mind was as yet but
private) for overthrow of the Catholic faith, and the Council of Chalcedon:
But it so happened, that the heresy of the Eutychians was so generally odious,
and so lately condemned, that there was no likelihood for him to bring his
purpose about by establishing it, as at the first he meant, but after some few
years expectance there fell out another and far fitter opportunity, and that
was the defense of the Three Chapters, there he had the Africane, the Illirian,
the Italian, and, in a manner, all the Western Churches to partake with him in
that heresy; that opportunity Vigilius gladly embraces, nor would he let it
pass: Then he labors tooth and nail, and in the end, when either then or
never he must do the deed, by his Apostolical Constable. he decrees that those 3.
Chapters should by all be defended. Certainly, had that his decree prevailed,
(as his purpose and earnest desire was that it should) not only Anthimus,
Theodosius, and Severus, being Eutychians, but all Arians, Macedonians, all
heresies and heretics, had at once, like so many wild Bores, rushed into the
inheritance of Christ; the Catholic faith, which is the only bar and fence
against them all, being by that Constitution of Vigilius utterly broken down,
and by the defending of those Three Chapters, for ever subverted. This was the
most Diabolical plot and project of Pope Vigilius, to seem a Catholic, and
openly to profess before Justinian and others the Catholic faith, and while
they are secure of him, closely in the mean space to undermine and blow up at
once all Catholics, and with them the Catholic faith. So there is no
repugnance, no incoherence at all in these, though contradictory letters of
Vigilius, both of them, the orthodoxall to Justinian, Theodora, and Mennas, the
heretical to Anthimus, Theodosius, and Severus, both were writ by Vigilius,
both by Pope Vigilius, both by Vigilius, when he was the only true and lawful
Pope; but the former were writ by the personated and visored, the later by the
naked and unmasked Pope Vigilius.

33. We have now proved, first, that Vigilius writ this heretical Epistle
against their first evasion, next that he writ it when he was the only true
and lawful Pope, against their second evasion; there remains as yet two other
Pretenses of Bellarmine, but such, as Baronius was ashamed to use so poor and
petty excuses for their Pope. The third evasion then is this, that Vigilius in
heart embraced the true faith, and only fained himself in this Epistle to be
a favourer of the Eutychean heresy. Vigilius, says the Cardinal Bell. lib.
4. de Pontif. ca. 10. Sciendum.
, was here in a great strait, for if he openly professed heresy, he feared
the Romans, who would never endure an heretic to sit in Peter's Chair; if he
should on the other side profess himself a Catholic, he feared Theodora the
heretical Empress, that she would not endure him; Itaque rationem illam
excogitavit, therefore he devised this policy, (and I pray you note it well)
that Vt Romae Catholicum ageret, et interim per literas apud Jmperatricem,
haereticum simularet. Bell. ibid.
at Rome (or openly) he would play the Catholic, but (secretly) in his
private letters to the Empress, and to Anthimus, he would feign himself an
heretic. Thus Bellarmine, who fully expresses the nature and disposition of
Pope Vigilius, as if he had not only felt his pulse, but been in his bosom:
He was indeed another Catiline, Simulare, ac dissimulare, he could semble and
dissemble, conceal what indeed he was, seem to be what he was not: At
Rome, and in show of the world a Catholic; at Constantinople, and in his
secret and close actions an heretic. Thus far the Cardinal says well; but
he is extremely mistaken in one circumstance, in that he says, that his open
or Catholic profession was mental, and ex animo, and his private and secret
detestation of the Catholic faith, was verbal and fained. It was quite
contrary, his heart and Intrals were all heretical, nothing but his face and
outward show was Catholic: for proof whereof I will not urge, that the Pope
in this Epistle accurseth and Qui dicit in Christo duas formas ( i. naturas) et
non confitetur unam persona unam essentiam anathema sit. Vigil. in Epist. apud
Liber. loc. cit.
anathematizeth all who hold the Catholic faith, or who believe otherwise than
Eutyches did, for so he does also in his other Epistle to the Emperor and
Mennas, condemn Eutycheanisme; and yet it is no commendation for his
Holiness, either to curse the Catholic faith, or to curse that faith which in
his heart he believes. But this I would have considered, that Vigilius
promised Adimple nobis quae prona voluntate promisisti. Anast. in vita Vigil.
under his handwriting, yea, he swore Conscriptaque jurataque haereticorum
defensio. Bar. an. 540. nu. 4.
also that he would abolish the Council of Chalcedon, and restore Anthimus;
for performance whereof he writ Vigilius implens promissione^ suam quam
Augustae fecerat, tale^ scripsit Epistolam. Liber. ca. 22
that private Epistle, which was all that as yet he could do. Let Bellarmine
now say, if their Popes do use to promise, and that under their hands, yea, to
swear also to do that, which they mean not to do. Who may be believed upon
their words, upon their oaths, if not the Popes Holiness? if he, not only
in words and writing, but in his solemn oaths equivocate, whose oath, among
all that generation, can be thought simple and without fraud?

34. Again, to what end should Pope Vigilius dissemble secretly and among his
entire friends, such as were Anthimus, Theodosius, and Severus? where or to
whom should he truly open himself and his inward heart, if not to such? The
first lesson that men of Vigilius metal learn, is that of Lucilius Ex quo
citat Lactant. lib. 6. divin. Jnst. ca. 18.
, Homini amico ac familiari non est mentiri meum. The Priscilians, who as S.
Austen Exhortantur suos ad mendacium, tanquam? exemplis Prophetarum,
Apostolorum, Angelorum, et ipsius Christi. Aug. lib. contr. Mend. ca. 2.
shows, were the very teachers of lying and dissembling, and who persuaded
their fellow heretics unto that base art and trade; yet even they taught that
Lucilian lesson, (and most impiously pretended Aug. ibid.
to collect it out of the words of the Apostle) Speak the truth every man to
his neighbor, for we are members one of another. To his neighbor and fellow
member, said they, we must speak the truth: but to such as are not joined Cum
eis qui nobis in societate veritatis proximi non sunt, neque ut ita dicam
commembres nostri sunt. Ibid.
to us in the neighborhood or fellowship of the same Religion, and who are not
of the same body with us, to them loqui licet oportetque mendacium, to them you
may lie, nay you must not speak the truth to such. Anthimus, Severus, and
Theodosius, they were the next neighbors to Vigilius, all conjoined Grati^,
qua nos Deo nostro conjungimur, eam fidem quam tenetis, et tenuisse me, and
tenere significo, ut et anima una sit, et cor unum. Vig. Epist. ad Anth. apud
Lib. loc. cit.
and concorporated into Eutycheanisme. Had he dissembled with them, he had
been worse than the Priscilianists, nay worse than the devils themselves, for
they though they lie to all others, yet speak truth among themselves, and to
Beelzebub, otherwise his kingdom could not endure. It was Justinian and the
Catholics, who were of a contrary religion to Vigilius, there was little or no
neighborhood at all betwixt them: they were not concorporall, not members of
one body with him, to them not being his neighbors, and commembres with him by
the rules of that black Art, he might, he ought to lie: but to Anthimus and
Severus, being of one body with him, he must speak the truth.

35. Further yet, look to that old Cassian rule, Cui bono? where, and with
whom was Pope Vigilius to gain more by his cogging and counterfeiting? He had
now rightful possession of the Sea of Rome, which was the only mark he aimed
at. What hurt could three deposed Bishops, or the Empress her self do now
unto him, being backed by the Emperor, by all Catholics, and which is best, by
a good cause? what needed he for pleasing them to feign himself an heretic?
Could they thrust Vigilius from his See, who could not hold their own? or
could the Empress deprive Vigilius, who could not restore Anthimus? There was
nothing that could move Vigilius to feign himself an heretic, or to write
that heretical Epistle, if he had been in heart a Catholic. But being in
heart heretical, there was many most urgent and necessary inducements, why he
should feign himself a Catholic. Had he showed his inside unto the Emperor,
and the Church, had he opened to them the heresy lurking in his breast, had he
made it known that he would abolish the Council of Chalcedon, and the
Catholic faith, he had instantly incensed all against him; both the Emperor
and the Romans, as Bellarmine Metuebat Romanos qui haereticum sedere, nunquam
passuri videbantur. Bell. loc. cit.
says, yea the whole Catholic Church would have joined in the expulsing and
deposing of such a wolf and wretched heretic out of the Sea. S. Peter's Chair
had been too hot for him. Vigilius wisely considered that it was no less art
to keep, than to get the Sea; he knowing that without deep dissimulation, and
without faining himself a Catholic, he could not possibly hold it, much less
could he effect that which he purposed, and had both promised and sworn to
perform, and therefore by his private letter assuring Anthimus, Severus,
Theodosius, and Theodora, of his hearty and serious intent to join with them,
and when time served to work his feat, by his other public and orthodoxall
letters to Justinian, Theodora and Mennas, he did but cast a mist before their
eyes, that they should not spy his heresy; and under that visor of a
Catholic, he did labor to undermine the whole Catholic faith. And thus much
in his private letter he signifies to Anthimus and the rest, warning them
first Oportet ut haec quae scribo nullus agnescat. Epist. Vig. apud Lib.
of secrecy, lest if his powder plot should be discovered (as indeed most
happily it was) the sudden blow should not hit the Council of Chalcedon: and
next, that besides their secrecy they should dissemble also no less than he
did, they should still seem Sed magis suspectum me ante alios, habeat
sapientia vestra ut facilius possim quae caepi, operari et perficere. Ib.
to suspect and be jealous of him as of their only enemy, that their fear
might make Catholics secure of him, and of that sudden blow which in a moment
by the publishing of his Apostolic Edict for the adnulling of the Council of
Chalcedon he meant to give.

36. But Bellarmine Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10. Sciendum.
for all this will prove by two reasons that Vigilius was not in heart Non fuit
animo haereticus. Ibid.
an heretic, nor did ex animo write this Epistle. The former is, because, non
palam in ea condemnavit Catholicam fidem, sed occulte; he did not openly and
publicly, but only in secret and closely condemn the Catholic faith: for
he writes therein, Vt sint omnia occulta usque ad tempus; that they should
keep all private until a fitter time. Condemn then he did the Catholic
faith, but not ex animo, because he did secretly condemn it. Ex studio
occultandi, says Gretzer Great. loc. cit.
, by his desire of concealing it. Bellarmine collecteth this, that Vigilius did
not seriously and from his heart, but dissemblingly write that impious Epistle.
As if one may not do the same thing ex animo, and seriously, and yet do it
secretly. What thinks he of Judas? his plotting to betray Christ was close and
secret, his own fellow Apostles knew not of it, but said, Master, is it I? his
friendly conversing with Christ, sitting at table, and kissing, was open and
public, yet his outward courtesy, even his kiss was dissembled, and
treacherous; his malice, treason, and murderous affection which were secret and
covered under those outward shows of love, were true and serious. The
Powder-plotters dealt closely and secretly, all underboord: their pretended
subjection was open, and yet the treason was serious, their obedience but
fained. Bellarmine was but a mere novice in the Roman Court when he writ
this, and imagined that Popes do not seriously that which they do secretly.

37. His other reason Bell. ubi supra.
to prove that Vigilius was not in heart heretical, when he writ this Epistle,
is, because he writ it not with an heretical mind, sed propter cupiditatem
praesidendi, but in an ambitious desire of presidency. What I pray you, Is an
heretical and ambitious mind incompatible? does ambition exclude heresy? or
in ambition for one to teach heresy, does that hinder him from being in heart
an heretic? Scarce was there any Heresiarch, whom ambition has not inflamed,
and who in ambition laid not the foundation of his heresy. Valentinus, says
Tertullian Tert. cont. Valent. ca. 4.
, hoped for but missed a Bishopric, in revenge thereof he kindled his
heresy, and set fire in that Church, wherein himself could not be governor.
When Marcion, (says Epiphanius Epiph. har. 42
) got not the presidency, he invented his heresy, and puffed up with pride,
said, Ego findam Ecclesiam, I Will rend usunder your Church. When Aerius Epiph.
haer. 75.
missed the Bishopric which Eustathius obtained, in his ambitious pride he
devised his heresy, that a Presbyter was all one with a Bishop. Hear
Cardinal Bellarmines Bell. lib. de not. Eccl. ca. 13.
own words: All Arch-heretickes have one common vice, and that is pride, they
spring up in diverse places, but pride is the mother of them all. If Vigilius
was no heretic in heart, because he was ambitious, neither was Nestorius, nor
Arius, nor Aerius, nor Montanus, nor Valentinus, by Bellarmines divinity
heretics, because they were all ambitious. If they notwithstanding their
ambition were (as certainly they were) Arch-heretikes, and taught their
heresies with heretical minds, then not only the Cardinals reason is
inconsequent and ridiculous, but Vigilius for all his ambition may not only
write that Epistle with an heretical mind, but be even an Heresiarch, or
rather a Pope heretic.

38. Again, did he not write this with an heretical mind? why did not the
Cardinal express what that heretical mind is, which was now wanting in
Vigilius? An heretical mind is no other but a mind pertinaciously and
obstinately addicted to heresy. It was heresy doubtless which he writ, in
teaching with Eutyches but one nature to be in Christ. That he writ this
obstinately, is clear, seeing he writ it against the known judgment of the
holy Council of Chalcedon, that is, of the Catholic Church; which none can
do but even thereby he shows an obstinate and pertinacious mind, rebellious
against the Church. If this be not, no heretic in the world ever had an
heretical mind. If Arius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, when they writ or taught
their doctrines with this mind, were heretical and heretics, then most
certainly Vigilius who writ this Epistle with the like obstinate and
pertinacious mind, must needs be judged to be rebellious against the Church,
and as heretically affected in mind, as Arius or Eutyches himself. Pride and
insolency is so far from excluding an heretical mind, as Bellarmine would
here persuade, that it is even an individual companion, yea essential unto
it. None can possibly have an heretical, but eo nomine he has an ambitious
heart, the pride whereof causes him to condemn the just sentence of the
Catholic Church, and prefer before it his own fancy and opinion.

39. You see now how inconsequent both these reasons of the Cardinals are,
seeing Vigilius might be heretical in heart, though both his writings were
secret, and his mind ambitious. Let us yet a little further debate this matter
with the Cardinal. Say you that Vigilius did not write this heretical Epistle
ex animo, or from his heart? I pray you when looked your Cardinalship into the
heart of Vigilius? how know you that he was not an heretic in heart, when he
was so heretical in profession? or how know you of S. Hildebrand, of Boniface
8. or of any of all the Popes that lived since their times, that they were not
heretics and plain Infidels in heart, when their words were Catholic? I
would gladly for my learning be informed how Bellarmine, or the most acute
Lynceus of them all do or can know, otherwise than by their outward
professions, what any of all the Popes believed and thought in their heart.
What Innocent the third, when he decreed the doctrine of Transubstantiation:
what Leo the tenth, when he condemned Luther: or what Paul, Julius, and Pius
the fourth, when they confirmed their Trent Council? How know you that in
their hearts they believed those doctrines? or that they did not dissemble and
feign, as you say Vigilius did? What can you say for Pius the fourth, which may
not be said for Vigilius also? Does Pius say, he did before, and now does
think as the Trent masters do? Pope Vigilius says the like, and most
plainly, Eam fidem quam tenetis, that faith which you ( Anthimus, Severus, and
Theodosius) do hold, I signify unto you, that I have held, and that I do now
hold the same. Does Pius call the Trent Fathers his beloved brethren in Christ?
so does Vigilius call those heretical Bishops his beloved brethren in Christ:
nay in Liberatus he calls them even Christ's. Does Pope Pius profess an unity
betwixt himself and them, all making one body of the Church? Pope Vigilius
does the like, and he does it more significantly: We, says he, preach this
same doctrine that you do, Vt and anima una sit and cor unum in Deo; so that
there is in you and me but one soul, and one heart in God. How can any speech
be cordial, if this testifying himself to be one soul and one heart with
them, do not come a fibris, but only a labris? Does Pope Pius approve the
doctrine of the Trent conspirators? So does Pope Vigilius the doctrine of those
Eutychean heretics? Does Pius condemn and anathematize Lutherans, Calvinists,
and all who think or teach otherwise than himself and his Trent Conventicle
taught or believed? so does Pope Vigilius condemn and anathematize all who
deny two natures in Christ, all who believe otherwise than himself and his
Eutychean fellow heretics did. In all these there is as much to be said for
Pope Vigilius, as for Pope Pius: and if you please to add that one other
agreement also, as of Vigilius it is said, that they knew crudelitatem fidei;
so may it in like manner be truly said of Pope Pius, that this did manifest
unto all men, crudelitatem fidei, the cruelty of his and his Trent Councels
faith. If by these outward acts the Cardinal can know Pius the fourth to have
ex animo condemned their Trent heresies, why can he not by the like outward
acts know Vigilius to have ex animo condemned the Catholic faith? If Vigilius
for all these outward acts, and so many testimonies and evidences of a willing
mind did dissemble, and think in his heart otherwise than he writ, how will
or can the Cardinal prove unto us that Pius the 4. and the whole Council of
Trent did not dissemble, and both write and speak otherwise than they thought
in heart? Has the Cardinal some windows to pry into the secrets of the heart
of Pius the fourth and the Trent Council, which are dammed up that he cannot
see into the breast of Vigilius? If Pope Pius upon his word and writing be to be
credited, much more is Pope Vigilius, seeing he did not only by words and
writing teach this heretical doctrine, but (which Pius did not) he bound
himself by a sacred oath that he would teach the same. And which is yet a
far greater evidence, Vigilius after this did teach the like heretical
doctrine, to overthrow the same Council of Chalcedon, in the cause of the
Three Chapters, which he did so unfainedly and so cordially, that for teaching
the same he incurred the just indignation of the Emperor, the curse of the
holy general Council, the public hatred of all Catholics, and, if we may
believe Baronius, even exile and persecution also. Why might not the same
Vigilius from his heart teach Eutycheanisme, as well as Nestorianisme? The
faces of those two heresies look contrary ways indeed, but their tails, like
Sampsons Foxes, are joined together to undermine the Catholic faith, and the
holy Council of Chalcedon: He who once is proved to be treacherous in this
sort, and to do this once from his heart, semper praesumitur, is always to
be presumed treacherous in the same kind: He who did this in the Three
Chapters, would have done it in Eutycheanisme, his heart, his desire, his
purpose at both times was the same; the odds was accidental in the opportunity
which served better in the one, than in the other; what need they excuse his
teaching Eutycheanisme to have been only labiall, when it is clear his
teaching of Nestorianisme was cordial? If they cannot excuse Pope Vigilius for
teaching Nestorianisme from his heart, which cannot possibly be done, what need
they be so nice in denying his teaching of Eutycheanisme to have come from the
same heart? his fault in them both being alike, one answer will alike serve for
them both.

44. But what, think you, meant the Cardinal so to busy himself, and be so
curious about the heart and secret mind of Vigilius? what though he did not
in heart, yet, exteriori professione, by his heretical writing, by his outward
confession, by that Vigilius condemned the Catholic faith, as the Cardinal
Dico Vigilium scripsisse illam Epistolam, et damnasse Catholicam fidem, saltem
exteriori professione. Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10.. Respondeo, multi.
acknowledges, and it is the Popes outward profession, not his inward
cogitation, by which we prove his Chair to be fallible; what have we, nay
what has the Cardinal or any of them all to do with Vigilius intent or
inward thoughts? leave those to his Tribunal, who only Reg. 8.39.
knows and sees the hearts of all the sons of men; let men, who cannot see
the heart, look to his words, to his writings, to that profession, by which
he teaches others. If that be heretical, what boots it them though his heart
be orthodoxall? Confirma fratres, and pasce oves, are outward acts, they look
abroad and outwardly, not to the inward and hidden man in the Popes breast. If
he think as Simon Peter, and teach as Simo^ Magus, as Arius, Nestorius, or
Eutyches did, is he not an heretical teacher, an heretical Pope, a confirmer
of his brethren in heresy, a feeder, nay, a very prisoner of the sheep, with
worse weeds than the Socraticall Cicuta? If the Pope only think and believe
heresy, why, thought is free, (to wit, from man's eye, much more from his
censure) his thought is for himself, that error is personal, it hurts none
but the Pope himself. If either by word or writing he teach heresy, that is
Pontifical, it is the fault of his office, of his Chair, which should have
been infallible, this hurts his sheep and his brethren: Nor skilleth it at
all in what manner, whether by word or writing, by what occasion or motive he
teaches heresy, but whether at all, or upon any occasion he wittingly and
willingly teach it, that is the only point which is questioned. Vigilius
condemned the Catholic faith, says Cardinal Bellarmine Bell. loco cit.
, but he did it for ambition, and desire of presidency. Be it so: If the Pope
for ambition may condemn the Catholic faith; why may he not do so, for
fear of exile, of disgrace, of losing the Emperors, or the King of Spain, or
the French Kings favor? If for fear, why not for favor to purchase the good
will of those, or any of them? If for favor, why not for hatred, hatred of
Henry the fourth, the Emperor; of Henry the eighth, for pulling away the best
feather out of the Popes Plume; of Luther for being so busy in meddling with
his Indulgences, and the triple Crown? If for hatred or favor, why not for
desire of lucre, and to keep the gain of their crafts-men and Image workers,
who continually sing that note in the Popes ear, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, great is the Church and S. Peter's Chair? Why not for any like
passion of the mind may the Pope condemn the Catholic faith? On what a
ticklish and slippery ground does their whole faith stand, when either the
Popes ambition, or fear, or favor, or love, or hatred, or anger, or desire,
or a fit of any other perturbation, which disturbeth his mind, may procure, as
at this time it did in Vigilius, an anathema to the Catholic faith? Best it
were for them to renew the Stoicall sect and doctrine, and receive it in the
Church; that out of those sober and unmoved minds, as out of an happy Nursery
of Popes, the Cardinals might in the Conclave still elect a Pope void of all
passions and perturbations, and transplant him out of the Stoicall to their
Apostolical Chair. But sure, so long as they go no further than the
Conclave, they shall never find any but of the same metal with Vigilius, one
that may be tossed every way with ambition, with envy, with love, with hatred,
with fear, and every passion of his mind, as a powder plot to blow up the
whole Catholic faith; and when he has done that by his words, by his writing,
by his preaching and teaching, by any of his outward acts whatsoever, Cardinal
Bellarmine can excuse it, and wipe away all the disgrace of it, as here he
does in Vigilius; he did it not with an heretical mind, for he did it for
ambition, he did it for fear, he did it for hatred; he did it for some
other passion, he did it only by an exterior act, and not ex animo: But in
the mean time whether he did it ex animo, or otherwise by his exterior act,
the Catholic faith is blown up from the foundation thereof, as much by the
Popes act, as by the act of Arius, of Nestorius, of Eutyches, or any other
heretic; and the Church has a goodly amends indeed, that the Pope forsooth
did not (which is impossible for him or all heretics in the world to do) blow
it up with an imagination or inward thought, but with an exterior act of his
teaching by word or writing.

41. Oh but, says Bellarmine Bell. loc. cit.
, non damnavit fidem palam, sed occulte, Vigilius did not openly but closely
condemn the Catholic faith: Closely, so he did indeed; it was his purpose and
intent so to do. He came not now as Nero, or Dioclesian, with open force to
batter, but as Simon Magus, Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and other heretics,
with Synomian arts, to undermine the Church; all his work was under the vault.
The Anathema denounced in this Epistle against all who hold two natures in
Christ, was the powder that should have blown up the holy Synod, and Senate,
the House of God, and whole City of God: the powder, the person and all was
ready, only, which the Cardinal observes Vt sint omnia occulta, usque ad
tempus. Bell. loc. cit.
, the time for the open publishing of that Anathema, and setting fire to the
train was not yet come. The gracious Providence of God, which watches over
Israel, the admirable zeal, piety, prudence, and vigilance, which God put
into the heart of Justinian, the constancy of faith in the Greek Church, which
at that time most happily fell out to be greater than at any time before or
since; by these was the fatal blow intended by Vigilius, most happily
prevented. This close and secret working proves Pope Vigilius to have been
both subtle and malicious in condemning the faith; it does excuse him neither
a toto, nor tanto, from his condemning the faith or from being an heretical
Pope, laboring by his heretical doctrine to subvert the faith.

42. The fourth and last Evasion or excuse for Vigilius fact in writing this
Epistle, is Bellarmines also; Vigilius, says he Bell. 4. de Po^t. ca. 10.
Sciendu^
, did not at that time define any thing against the faith, tanquam Pontifex, as
he was Pope. What shuffling and shifting is this in the Cardinal? he did not
define any thing against the faith, as Pope: He did then define that which was
against the faith, but he defined it not as Pope, for otherwise it had been
foolish to say, he defined it not as Pope, when he defined it, neither as
Pope, nor as no Pope, when he defined it not at all. Again, what a worthy
saying is this of a Cardinal? Vigilius did not at that time define it as he
was Pope; at that time, to wit, while Silverius lived and was the only Pope,
at which time, as himself in express words says, Vigilius Papa non erat,
Vigilius was not then the Pope. What needed the Cardinal say he defined it
not at that time as he was Pope, when at that time he was not Pope? This
reduplication, quatenus Papa, implies he was Pope, and that being Pope he
defined it, but he defined it not as he was Pope, but as he was a private
man, or some other way: Would not the Cardinal laugh, if Gretzer or any such
good friend of his should say, Bellarmine at that time while he was at
Ingolstad writ not his Controversies as he was Pope, or, he writ them not as
he was a Turk, a Jew, or Mahumetane? But leaving these shifts, which
demonstrate plainly, that Bellarmine had a desire to say somewhat in excuse of
Vigilius, but knew not what, and therefore snatched at this or that, or any
thing, though it were never so cross unto himself, and such also as he could
not hold. Let us consider the Exception it self; Vigilius writ this Epistle,
that is confessed; he writ it when he was the only true and lawful Pope,
that we have proved; he defined heresy in it, and that which is against the
faith, that Bellarmine implies; he condemned in it the Catholic faith, that
Bellarmine in plain words expresses. Thus far the cause is clear. Now
whether Pope Vigilius in it defined heresy, and condemned the Catholic faith,
as he was Pope, or no, that is the point here to be debated.

43. Some may think, that Bellarmine by those two reasons drawn from secrecy
and an ambitious mind, by which he labored before, to prove, that Vigilius
did not condemn the faith ex animo, meant also that he condemned it not as
Pope, for it follows in the next sentence, siquidem Epistolam scripsit, as
giving a reason of his saying. If any like to take Bellar. words in that sort,
then his reasons are before hand refuted; for as Vigilius might, ex animo,
write heretically, both privately and out of ambition, so also might he,
tanquam Pontifex, condemn the faith, notwithstanding both his secrecy and
ambitious mind; secrecy and an ambitious mind are no more repugnant to the one,
than to the other, they are compatible with them both; the Pope may use his
Apostolical authority in teaching, as well privately as publicly, as well with
Judas in ambition, as with John or Peter in sincerity of heart. But the
Cardinals Apologist, who it may be consulted with the Cardinal about his
intent herein, does ease us of those reasons, for he Gretz. loc. cit.
tells us plainly, that from Vigilius his desire of secrecy, nil aliud
colligit, Bellarmine collects or proves nothing else, but this, that Vigilius
did not write his letter from his heart or serio, that he did it not in
earnest. It is but a sport with Gretzer, or with the Pope, to condemn the
Catholic faith; they do it, but they do it not in earnest, they do it
joculariter not serio. Have ye indeed such May-games and sports at Rome, as to
condemn the faith, and then say, I was in jest, and in sport? Are not these
men new Philistines, Call in Sampson, Condemn the Catholic faith, to make us
pastime? But let us leave them to their sports, till the fall of their
Babylonish house make a catastrophe and doleful end both of their actors and
spectators: That which I now note, is, that Bellarmine does not in those words,
Siquidem Epistolam scripsit, etc. from the privatenesse or secrecy prove any
thing else, but that Vigilius writ it not serio, in earnest and from his heart;
that he writ it not, tanquam Pontifex, this those words prove not, Bellarmine
in those words collects not: So we have now nothing but the bare saying of
Bellarmine, without any proof, without any reasons, and I must needs confess,
I hold it a most sufficient encounter for any man to Bellarmines ipse dixit, to
oppose, ipse dico, yet because I desire rather to satisfy such as seek the
truth, then contend with those who seek to smother and betray the truth, I
will a little further enlarge this point, and see if it may be cleared by
evidence of reason, that Pope Vigilius did not only condemn the Catholic
faith at that time, but that he did it even as he was Pope, and, tanquam
Pontifex, condemn the Catholic faith.

44. What it is for a Pope to teach an error as Pope, may be perceived by
other Arts and Sciences, in the practice or exercise whereof, together with
knowledge, judgment, and skill, fidelity also is required; were Baronius or
some Roman Facundus to examine this point, they would quickly suit the Pope to
some Cobbler, Peddler, or such like companion: I love not to deal so rudely with
his Holiness, yet if I should happen at any time to let slip a word that way,
you know how the Cardinal quitted the religious Emperor with, Ne ultra
crepidam. If a Physician, or Lawyer, or Judge in any discourse should speak
barbarously or incongruously, they err therein but as Grammarians, not as
Judges, Lawyers or Physicians; But if a Judge for any sinister respect should
pronounce that sentence as just, which is against the law; or if a Lawyer
should after his diligent sifting of the cause, affirm that title to be
sound, which were clearly void in law; or if a Physician should prescribe to
his patient Coloquintida for an wholesome diet, each of them now erred and
offended in his own profession, and in that proper duty which belongs to them;
the Judge as a Judge, the Counselor as a Counselor, the Physician as a
Physician, because they failed either in skill or in fidelity in those
faculties wherein they profess both to know themselves, and to make known unto
others what is right and good: If in other matters they transgress, it is not,
quatenus tales; if any of them be profane, covetous, or intemperate, they
offend now, quatenus homines, as they are mortal men in those duties of
morality, which are common to them with all men: If they be seditious,
rebellious, and conspire in treasonable practice, they offend, quatenus Cives,
as they are parts of the Commonwealth, in those duties which are common to
them with all subjects; but when they offend in Physic, law, or judgment,
those are their own peculiar Arts and Sciences, they then offend, neither
quatenus homines, nor quatenus Cives, nor in any other respect, but quatenus
tales, as they are such professors: for now they transgress against those
proper duties, which, as they are Judges, Counselors, or Physicians, are
required of them. The like of all Artificers, of Gra^marians, Logicians, Poets,
Philosophers, of Presbyters, of Bishops, of the Professors of Theology, which
is scientia scientiarum, is to be said. If a Divine shall speak rudely,
incongruously, ad populum Antiochenum, he offends as a Grammarian, not as a
Divine, unless perhaps it be no fault when it does so happen for edification,
that he ought so to speak, as Saint Austen Aust. lib. 4. de doct. Christ. ca.
16. et Tract. 7. in Johan.
did use diverse barbarismes, and say, ossum for os, floriet for florebit, dolus
for dolor; Malo me populus, I had rather edify with rudeness of words than
speak nothing but pure Ciceronian without edifying them, without honoring
God; But if a Bishop or any Divine, in stead of truth teach heresy, either
because he knows not the truth, or knowing it, oppugnes the truth, he is now
in his own element, he offends no longer as a Rhetorician, or Grammarian, but,
quatenus talis, as he is a Bishop, as he is a Divine, as he is one who both
should know, and bring others to the knowledge of the truth. And this, beside
that by reason it is evident, is grounded on that saying of Austen Aug. Epist.
50.
, Aliter servit Rex qua homo, aliter qua Rex, for as a King serves God, qua
Rex, in doing that which none but a King can do; so a King, or a Bishop, or
any other offends God, as a King, or Bishop, in doing against that duty which
none but they are to do.

45. Now, what is said of all Sciences, Arts and mysteries, that is in due
proportion to be applied to that greatest mystery of mysteries, and Craft
above all Crafts, to their Pope-craft, or mystery of Iniquity: He is the
shepherd to feed all, the Physician to cure all, the Counselor to advise
all, the Judge to decide al, the Monarke to command all, he is all in all,
nay, above all; hard it is to define him or his duties, he is indefinite,
infinite, transcendent above all limits, above all definitions, above all rule,
yea, above all reason also: But as the Nymphs not able to measure the vastnes
of the Giants whole body, measured only the compass of his thumb with a
thread, and by it knew and admired the bigness of his Gygantean body; so let us
consider but the thumb, or little toe of his Holiness fault, and by it
conjecture the immensity of this eldest son of Anak. Pasce oves and confirma
fratres, must be to us as the Nymphs thread or line, for these two are the
Popes peculiars, in which are contained all the rest, and they reach as far
as heaven and hell, they are the Popes duty, quatenus he is Pope. If at any
time, or upon any occasion he swarve from this line, if by his doctrine he
cast down his brethren, instead of confirming them, or give them poison in
stead of good food, he offends not now as Swines-snout Sunt qui Sergium 2.
prius dicant os porci vocatum, et ob turpitudinem cognomenti, Sergij nomen
sumpsisse, eamque consuetudinem ad posteros manasse, etc. Plat. in vita Serg. 2.
, nor as Peter Dicimus quidem quod Innocentius hoc dixit, non ut Papa, sed ut
Petrus de Tarantasia. In Extrav. Johan. 22. Tit. 14. de verbor. signif. ca. 5.
Greg. 13. antea Hugo dictus a Boncompagnoru^ familia oriundus. Anto. Cicar. in
ejus vita.
of Tarantasia, nor as Hugh Bone companion, but quatenus Papa, even as Pope; in
that very Pastoral and Papal duty, which properly and peculiarly belongs to
him as Pope. Lay now this line and thread to Pope Vigilius, and his Epistle; did
he confirm Anthimus, Theodosius, and Severus in the faith, when he told them,
that, by Gods Vigil. in epist. apud Liber. loc. cit.
help both before and then also he held the same faith with them, and that was
Eutycheanisme, and that they were joined to him in the charity which is in
Christ? or was this wholesome food, which he, the great Pastor of their souls,
set before them: Accursed be all that deny one and affirm two natures to have
been in Christ? If this be heretical doctrine, seeing Pope Vigilius fed
them, and confirmed them in this faith, then certainly he taught heresy as
Pope; that is, he exercised his Papal office, even that of feeding and
confirming his brethren, which is peculiar to the Pope, as Pope, to the
teaching and approving of heresy at this time.

46. If yet we shall go somewhat more precisely and exactly to work,
according to line and measure; those acts of feeding and confirming do but in
a very equivocall sense (for their doctrine is full of Equivocation) agree to
other Bishops, but still a maine difference or odds is to be observed, betwixt
the Popes feeding and confirming, as he is Pope, and all others; when any
other Bishop teaches heresy, because his teaching is subordinate and
fallible, one may, nay, he must doubt or fear to feed on such food, he must
still receive it with this caution or tacit appeal of his heart, if his
holiness commend it for an wholesome diet of the soul. But if the Pope teach
any heresy; if he say that the Sun is dark; the left, the write hand;
poison an wholesome food; Eutycheanisme or Nestorianisme, the orthodoxall
faith; here, because there is no higher judge to whom you may appeal, you are
bound upon salvation, without any doubt or scruple at all, to eat and devour
this meat; you may not judge, nay, you may not dispute or ask any man whether
it be true or no, the Popes teaching is supreme, and therefore infallible,
indubitable; this is to teach, to feed, to confirm as Pope, for none can thus
teach or feed, but only the Pope as Pope. So the same heretical doctrine,
when it is taught by the Pope, as he is a private man, is a private instruction
without any public authority to teach; when by him, as a Presbiter, it is an
instruction with public authority to teach, but without judicatory power to
censure the gainsayers; when by him, as a Bishop, it is both with pulike
authority and judicatory power to censure, suspend, or excommunicate the
gainsayers, but yet subordinate and fallible, including a virtuall appeal to
the highest tribunal of the Pope, when by him, as Pope, it has all the former
conditions, both public authority to teach, and judicial power to censure,
and, which is the Popes peculiar prerogative, as Pope, to do those with
infallibility of judgment, and supremacy of authority, such as none may
refuse, or doubt to believe and embrace.

47. If any will here reply with the Sophister Thrasimachus his subtilty in
Plato p, that the Pope, as Pope, teaches not amiss, Plat. lib. 1. de Repub.
but as he fails in the Popes duty, as he wants skill or will to perform
that office: This must be acknowledged as true indeed, for in the strictest
sense of all, what the Pope is as Pope, that must inseparably agree to every
Pope, and the manner of his teaching as Pope, must inseparably agree to the
teaching of every Pope, even as Logicians Per hanc conditionem quatenus ipsam,
notatur quod praedicatum inest subjecto secundum propriam subjecti naturam.
Iac. Zab. com. in ca. 4. lib. demon. text. 36.
say, that what agrees to a man, a bird, or a tree, quatenus talia, as they
are such, must agree to every man, bird and tree. But this quirke and subtilty
will not help their cause, nor excuse the Pope from erring as Pope; for as in
this sense no Pope, as Pope, does err, because then every Pope should err in
all doctrines which he teaches, so neither in the same sense does any Pope,
as Pope, teach the truth, for then every doctrine of every Pope should be
true. Again, as according to this sense, no Pope as Pope, so no Bishop as
Bishop, no Presbyteras Presbyter does err or teach heresy, for did he in his
teaching err as Bishop or Presbyter, then every Presbyter and every Bishop,
and so even the Apostles themselves should err in their teaching. But as
Vigilius or Liberius when they taught Arianisme, Eutycheanisme, or
Nestorianisme, did this not simply as Popes, but as persons not knowing as in
duty they should, what to teach; or knowing it, but willingly teaching the
contrary to their knowledge, which in duty they should not: even so Nestorius,
Macedonius, Arius, and Eutyches, every Bishop, and Presbyter, when they erred,
they erred not simply as Bishops, or as Presbyters, but as persons failing in
their Episcopal, or Presbyteriall duties, either not knowing the truth, as by
their office they should, or wilfully oppugning and contradicting the truth, as
by their office they should not: So by his subtilty, if any applaud themselves
in it, not only the Bishops of Rome, but of Constantinople, of Antioch, of
Alexandria, yea, all Bishops and Presbyters in the world shall be as free from
error, as his holiness himself, yea, all professors of any Art, Science, or
faculty, shall plead the like Papal exemption from error; every man shall be
a Pope in his own faculty; no Grammarian speaking incongruously as a
Grammarian, but as wanting the skill required in a Grammarian; no Judge giving a
wrongful sentence as a Judge, no Galenist ministering unwholesome physic as a
Physician, no Artificer working any thing amiss in his trade, as an Artificer,
but as being defective in the duties either of that knowledge, or of that
fidelity which is required in a Judge, a Physician, and in every Artificer. If
they will exempt all Bishops and Presbyters, all Judges and Physicians from
erring, as they are such Officers or Artificers, we also will in the same sort
and sense allow the like immunity to the Pope: If they notwithstanding this
subtilty, will admit another Bishop to err as Bishop, they must not think
much if we exempt not the Pope as Pope: For, to speak that which is the very
truth of them all, and exactly to measure every thing by his own line, a Judge
simply as Judge does pronounce a judicial sentence, as a skillful and
faithful judge, an upright judicial sentence; as an unskilful or unfaithful
Judge, an erroneous or unjust sentence. A Bishop or Presbyter simply as Bishop
or Presbyter, does teach with public authority in the Church; as a skillful
and faithful Bishop or Presbyter he teaches the truth of God; as an ignorant
and unfaithful Bishop he teaches errors and heresies in the Church, the one
without, the other with judicall power to censure the gainsayers. The like in
all Arts, Sciences, and faculties is to be said, even in the Pope himself. A
Pope simply as he is Pope and defined by them, teaches both with authority to
teach, with power to censure the gainsayers, and with a supremacy of judgment
binding all to embrace his doctrine without appeal, without doubt, as an
infallible Oracle: as a skillful or faithful Pope he teaches the truth in
that sort, as an unskilful or unfaithful Pope he teaches error or heresy
with the like authority, power, and supremacy, binding others to receive and
swallow up his heresies for Catholic truth, and that with a most blind
obedience, without once doubting of the same.

48. Apply this to Vigilius and his heretical Epistle: In a vulgar sense; Vig.
erred as Pope, because he erred in those very Po^tifical duties of feeding and
confirming, which are proper to his office. In a strickt sense; though he did
not therein err simply as Pope, but quatenus talis taught only with a supreme
binding authority, yet he erred as an unfaithful Pope, binding others by that
his Pontifical and supreme authority to receive Eutycheanisme as Catholic
truth, without once moving any doubt or making scruple of the same. What may
we think will they oppose to this; If they say Vigilius does not express in
this Epistle, that he writ it by his Apostolical authority. He does not
indeed. Nor does Pope Leo in that Epistle to Flavianus, against the heresy of
Eutyches, which to have been writ by his Apostolical authority, and as he was
Pope none of them do or will deny, that Epistle being approved by the whole
Council Conc. Chalc. Act. 2. et 3.
of Chalcedon. Pope Leo by his Papal authority condemns Eutycheanisme, Pope
Vigilius by his Papal authority confirm Eutycheanisme: both of them confirmed
their doctrine by their Papal authority; both writ as Popes, the one as
orthodoxall, the other as a perfidious and heretical Pope; neither of both
express that their Apostolical authority by which they both writ. The like in
many other Epistles of Leo, and of other Popes might easily be observed. Not
the tenth part of their decretal Epistles, such as they writ as Popes, have
this clause of doing it by their Apostolical authority expressed in them. It
is sufficient that this is vertually in them all, and vertually it is in this
of Pope Vigilius: Yea, but he taught this only in a private letter to a few,
to Anthimus, Severus and Theodosius, not in a public, general, and
encyclicall Epistle, written for instruction of the whole Church. What, is the
Pope fallible in teaching of a few, in confirming three of his brethren? why
not in four, in eight, in twenty? and if in twenty, why not in an hundred? if
so, why not in a thousand? if in one, why not in two, four, or ten thousand?
Caudaeque pilos ut equinae paulatim vellam; where, or at what number shall we
stay, as being the least which with infallibility he can teach? Certainly,
confirma fratres, and in cathedra sede, and pasce oves, respects two as well as
two millions. If in confirming or feeding three, the Chair may be erroneous,
how can we know to what number God has tied the infallibility of it? But the
sixth general Council may teach them a better lesson. Pope Honorius writ an
heretical Epistle Quae recitatur Conc. 6. Act. 12. pa. 64.
but only to Sergius Bishop of Constantinople, Vigilius writ this to three,
all of patriarchall dignity as Sergius was. Honorius writ it privately, as
Vigilius did, which was the cause, as it seems, that the Roman Church took
so little notice thereof: yet though it was private, and but to one, it is
condemned by the sixth Council, for Vocantur istae et aliae Epistolae,
dogmatica scripta. In eodem Conc. Act. 12. p. 65. a. et retractantes dogmaticas
Epistolas, a Sergio, et ab Honorio ad Sergium. Act. 13. pa. 67. a. et, Honorius
impia dogmata confirmavit. Jbid.
a domaticall writing of Pope Honorius, for a writing wherein he confirms
others in heresy: and Pope Leo Anathematizamus quoque Honorium, qui hanc
Apostolicam Ecclesiam, et immaculatam fidem prophana proditione subvertere
conatus est. Leo 2. Epist. 1
the second judged it to be such as was a blemish to the Apostolic See, such
as by which Honorius did labor to subvert the Catholic faith. The like and
more danger was in this, to these three deposed patriarchs. It confirmed them
in heresy; it confirmed the Empress; it confirmed all that took part with
them; it was the means whereby the faith was in hazard to have been utterly
subverted. For plurality or paucity it is not material, be they few, be they
more: if the Pope as Pope, or as an heretical pope may confirm three, or but
one, that one is abundant to prove his Chair and judicial sentence not to be
infallible.

49. But he taught this alone, not in a Council, not with advice of his
Cardinals, and Consistory: why, he did it not as a member of a Council, but
as Pontifex non ut praeses Concilij, sed ut Princeps Ecclesiae summus potest
iudicium Concilij retractare, etc. Bell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 18. Dico secundo.
Princeps Ecclesiae. He did this as did Agapetus Agapeti Papae contra Anthimu^
iudicium absque Synodo fuit, secundum supremam Apostolicae sedis authoritatem,
qua supra omnes Canones Pontifex eminet. Bar. an. 536. nu. 23.
in deposing Anthimus, above and besides the Canons. The whole power of his
Apostolic authority much shined in this decision, more than in any other,
where either his Cardinals or a Council has ought to do: much more was this
done by him as Pope, than any of them. And yet had he listed to follow the
judgment of others, or of a Synod herein, what better direction, advice, or
counsel, could his Cardinals, or any Synod in the world give unto him, than
the decree of the whole Council of Chalcedon? That Vigilius had before his
eyes at this time, that was in stead of a thousand Cardinals unto him, seeing
he as Ecclesiae Princeps, defined Eutycheanisme, notwithstanding that most holy
and general Synod; yea against that Synod, what could the advice of another,
or of a few Cardinals have avayled at this time?

50. Thus all the evasions which they use, being refuted, it may now be clearly
concluded, not only that Vigilius writ this impious and heretical Epistle,
and writ it when he was the true and lawful Pope; but that he writ it also ex
animo, even out of an heretical heart, and writ it as he was Pope, that is, in
such sort as that by his Pontifical and supreme authority he confirmed that
heresy which he taught therein. And this is the former of his Acts, which as
I told you is very remarkable, his purpose and intent therein being the
overthrow of the Council at Chalcedon, and of the whole Catholic faith.

51. The other act of Vigilius concerns the cause of the three Chapters,
wherein by the heresy of Nestorius, he publicly decreed and performed that
(as much as in him lay, and as by his Apostolical decree could be effected,)
which he had purposed and intended to do by the heresy of Eutycheanisme. In
which whole cause, how Vigilius from the first to the last, behaved himself;
how at the first he oppugned the Emperors most religious Edict, and the
Catholic faith, how afterward he played the dissembling Proteus with the
Emperor and the whole Church, for the space of five or six years together,
how at the last he returned to his natural and habitual love of heresy, and
how in decreeing it by the fullness of his Apostolical authority, he sought
utterly and for ever to abolish the Council of Chalcedon, and with it the
whole Catholic faith; the former Treatise does abundantly declare; which
withal demonstrates the vanity of that saying of Bellarmine: For the time,
says he Bell. lib. 4. de Pont. ca. 10. Contigit. Ab hoc tempore nullus
inventus est in Vigilio, aut error, aut erroris simulatio, etc.
, that he was true Pope, neither any error, nor simulation of error was
found in him: sed summa constantia in fide, but the greatest constancy of faith
that could be. For as by our former treatise is evident, he was not only most
wavering, but heretical in faith. And this was in a manner the whole course of
Vigilius life, or the most eminent acts thereof while he was Pope; pretending
orthodoxy, but embracing heresy, and as opportunity offered it self,
laboring by words, by private Epistles, by resisting the imperial, just, and
godly Edict, by public constitutions to overthrow the faith and the whole
Church of God.

52. You see now his ingresse into the Papacy, and his progress in the same:
touching his egresse both out of it and this life, hear what S. Liberatus
Liber. Brev ca. 22.
says: How Vigilius being by heresy afflicted, died, it is known unto all.
Hear what Cardinal Bellarmine Bell. loc. cit.
says out of Liberatus, Ab illa ipsa haeresi afflictus, Vigilius was miserably
afflicted by that selfsame heresy, which at the first he nourished: and
again, Misere vexatus usque ad mortem, he was miserably vexed even until he
dyed. Hear Baronius, who first promised Bar. an. 538. nu. 20.
to declare how invigilavit in Vigilio vindicta Dei; how the vengeance of God
watched Vigilius, and at last revenged the innocent blood which he shed: and
then performing that promise, says Bar. an. 556. nu. 2.
, He died in an Island in Sicily by the just judgment of God; confectus ipse
aerumnis ex morbo, himself being wasted with misery, by reason of his disease,
who had caused Silverius in an Island in Palmaria to be pined away, and put to
death. As he got the papacy by wicked means, so was he immensis agitatus
fluctibus, tossed with exceeding great tempests therein, hated by the Emperor,
not grateful to the Eastern, and execrable to the Western Bishops: and when
he seemed to have come out of the stream into the haven, and almost one foot
into the City, being pined away, immensis doloribus, with unmeasurable pains,
he dyed. Thus Baronius. Now if we should deal with him as Baronius Opinari si
cui licet, facilius est invenire, qui Evagrij de ejus condemnatione (ad
supplicia apud inferos luenda) velit sequi sententiam, quam aliorum. Bar. an.
565. nu. 2. etc.
does with Justinian, and by his precedent acts judge of his reward, according
to the Text, Opera eorum sequuntur eos, I fear the censure would seem very
harsh to those who are so ready to examine Justinian by that rule. For what
works I pray you followed Pope Vigilius? Ambition, usurpation, sacrilege,
murder, symony, hypocrisy, schism, heresy, and Antichristianisme, concerning
which the Apostle says, They which do them shall not inherit the kingdom of
God. I will not, I list not be rigorous in this point, neither toward him or
any other. I content my self with that lesson of the Apostle Romans 14.4.
, Domino suo stat aut cadit. Yet thus much by occasion of this Treatise, and
the approved judgment of the Church declared therein concerning Theodorus of
Mopsvestia long before dead, must needs be said of him, of Baronius, and of
all other who have already, or shall at any time hereafter write as they have
done, in defense of heresy, and oppugnation of Gods truth; As repentance for
such sins and impious writings opens unto them, so impenitency and
persevering therein, eternally shuts against them the gates of Gods mercy, and
the kingdom of heaven. Both which because they are hid from man's eyes, the
Church leaving the judgment of certainty and verity only to God, passes her
sentence which is the judgment of charity, by the outward and apparent acts
which are open unto them: whomsoever she sees not, nor finds by certain and
evident proof to have manifested the detestation and revocation of their
heretical and impious writings, which before they published and maintained,
all those though dead ten, an hundred, or a thousand years before, she by her
censure does, and does most justly condemn, accurse, and anathematize, as by
her sentence against Theodorus of Mopsvestia, dead an hundred years before, is
most evident, whose condemnation and anathema pronounced by the fifth Council,
is approved by all succeeding general Councels, by all Catholics, and even by
the whole Catholic Church. Nor will I here dispute whether such a sentence
does not sometimes pass, errante clave, the party having repented, whom they
not having proof of his repentance, thought to dye impenitent; but howsoever
that fall out, none may justly complain of the Churches judgment as unjust or
unequal herein; for besides that it is presumed, that those who so notoriously
and publicly by their heretical writings do scandalize the Church and people
of God, if they had seriously repented would have expressed some public and
outward testimony of the same; the Church would by this severity of her
censure, teach all men a lesson which is very hard to learn; first, that they
should not have such an itch and ambitious desire to write or utter those
detestable heresies which lurk within their breasts; or if they cannot observe
that, yet at least to learn to be so lowly and humble in heart, as to revoke
their impieties and blasphemies, although to some blemish and disgrace of
themselves, yet to the great honor of Gods truth, and the satisfaction and
edification of the holy Church, which they had scandalized. If in ambition they
will first oppugn the truth, and then in a worse pride of heart, not be
reclamed to the truth, nor show their love unto it, why should not the Church
by her most charitable judgment show her open detestation of their persons,
who in the insolency of their hearts will not show any open detestation of
their heresies? That Vigilius writ a papal Constitution in defense of heresy,
it is apparent and undeniable: that he at any time revoked that writing, I wish
it were, but it is not yet evident. The like may be said of Baronius, of
Pighius, of Eccius, of the Laterane, Florentine, and Trent conspirators, of all
who have whet their tongues against other truth, and specially to uphold that
fundamental heresy of the Popes infallibility. Their writings for heresy are
evident, that they ever reclamed those writings, it is inevident: and if ever
they and their cause come to be tried, in such a free, lawful, and
oecumenicall Council as was this fifth under Justinian, they may justly fear,
and certainly expect from the Church, (unless the disclaming of their writings
may by certain proof be made known) the very like sentence, though a hundred
years after theirs, as passed upon Theodorus of Mopsvestia an hundred years
after his death. And because the houre-glasse for repentance is run out to
the former, all that we can do, is (which I seriously now do from my heart)
to cry amain unto others, to admonish, exhort, yea even pray and entreat them
by the mercies of God, and by the love of their own souls, first that they
keep their tongues and pens from once uttering any heresy; or (if they have
not done that) with the same hands to give the medicine, wherewith they gave
the wound, and as openly, nay much more openly to disclame than they have ever
proclaimed their impious and heretical doctrines.

53. You have now some view both of the life and death of Vigilius. The exact
pourtraiture of the Popes lives, Baronius had been able to set forth if he had
listed; but he adds such fucos, and so many sophistical colors, that indeed
scarce you shall see any one of them in his Annals set out in his native and
natural habit. If ought be amiss in this our description, and not set forth
according to the lively lineaments of Vigilius and his impieties, the equal
reader will not too rigorously censure the same. I acknowledge that I can but
dolare in this kind; to polish and set forth the lively image of their Popes,
I have not learned: That is an Art which may not be too vulgar, lest their
Roman policies be too far divulged. But by this it is easy to perceive what
a silly excuse it is which Baronius uses in this cause, blaming Vigilius for
coming to Constantinople, as if not the Popes own heretical mind, but the
air of Constantinople had wrought such effects, as to produce that heretical,
and yet as they count it, Apostolical Constitution in defense of the Three
Chapters.

FINIS.
Laus Deo sine fine.
Errata haec corrigat benevolus Lector.
In Textu.
Page 48. lin. 2. read Theodorus. ibid. lin. 9. diptisis. p. 509. l. 14. eos.
p. 99. l. 3. John B. p. 125. l. 38. Catholics. p. 141 l. 35. Binius, he was.
p. 145. l. 39. Son of God. p. 163. prope finem, substances. p. 164. l. 5.
explanation. p. 172. l. 20. of the Pope. p. 182. l. 45. their present. p. 199.
prope finem, Catholicae. p. 216. l. 17. it. p. 224. l. 25. Popes. p. 227. l. 5.
yield. p. 289. l. 33. the. p. 350. l. 30. aequiparare. p. 425. l. 8. where is.
ibid. l. 27. Commana. ibid. Marcellinus. l. 42. inflamed. p. 442. in fine,
Euphemia. p. 462. l. 11. quarrels with Pope. p. 465. l. 35. all this time. p.
478. l. 23. it was written. p. 495. l. 37. poysoner of. p. 500. l. 35. right
hand.

In Margin.
Pa. 9. lit. (c). lege, Marsorum. p. 67. lit. (e). Antio^henum. p. 233. lit.
(s). emissam. ibid. lit. (c). corrupt. p. 409. lit. (c). commentitias and
supposititias. p. 410. lit. (q). Consilij 5. p. 437. lit. (l). Council. 5. Coll.
5.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE CHIEF THINGS CONTAINED IN THIS TREATISE.
A.
ACts in Councels not so entire, but there may be faults from the exscriber,
page 433. Sect. 17, 18. Acts of the fifth Council unjustly excepted against by
Baronius, pa. 379. sect. 3, 4. Agnoites and other sectaries called Acephali p.
3. sect. 6. Agapetus lost nothing by the Emperors presence, p. 464. sect. 5.
Antichrist: the Pope first Antichrist nascent; secondly, crescent; thirdly,
regnant; fourthly, in their Laterane Council he was Antichrist triumphant, pa.
186. sect. 24. Anthimus a Catholic in show and outward profession, p. 157.
sect. 4. Anastasius narration not helped by Binius, p. 458. sect. 23.
Anastasius a fabler, p. 256. sect. 23. and pa. 447. sect. 12. etc. The Author
of that Apologicall Epistle published Anno 1601. a vaunting Braggadochio, p.
205. sect. 10. To Assent to the Popes or to their Cathedral definitions in a
cause of faith, makes one an heretic, pa. 172. sect. 6. Author of the Edict
was Justinian himself, p. 366. sect. 6, 7.
B.
BAronius nice in approving the Epistle of Ibas, and why, p. 128. sect. 22.
Baronius wittingly obstinate in maintaining the heresy of Nestorius, by
approving the later part of that epistle, p. 129 sect. 24, 25. and p. 31. sect.
28. Baronius sports himself with contradictions, p. 131. sect. 27. Baronius
revileth the cause of the Three Chapt. p. 361. sect. 1. Baronius Annals not
altogether entire, page 435. sect. 19. Baronius by his own reasons proves his
Annals to be untrue, p. 436. sect. 19. in fine, and sect. 20. etc. Baronius
holds it dangerous for Vigilius to leave Rome to come to Constantinople, p. 462
sect. 1, 2. Bellisarius most renowned, save in the matter of Silverius, p 470.
sect. 11. Bellarmine and Baronius at variance about the Epistle of Vigilius to
Anthimus, Severus, and others, p. 477. sect. 19, 20. Baronius first reason to
disprove it, is taken from the inscription p 477. in fine, and p. 478. sect.
21, 22, 23. etc. his second reason, from the subscription, pa. 482. sect. 26.
his last reason is, because he was not upbraided for it by the Emperor and
others, p. 483. sect. 27. Bellarmines (...) to know when a Council decrees
any doctrine tanquam de fide, pa. 40. sect. 9. etc. Baronius vilifieth the fifth
general Council, p. 266. sect. 2. The Banishment of Vigilius after the fifth
Council a fiction, p. 250. sect. 16. and p. 253. sect. 19. When and for what
Vigilius was banished, p. 252. sect. 18. Baronius his three reasons for
Vigilius his consenting to the Synod after his exile, p. 245. sect. 8. First,
from the testimony of Evagrius, sect. ibid. the second from the fact of
Justinian in restoring Vigilius, p. 247. sect. 11. the third of Vigilius
consenting to the Synod, taken from the words of Liberatus, He was afflicted,
not crowned: p. 160. sect. 30.
C.
COnstitution of Vigilius sent unto the Synod, page 8. sect. 4. in fine. the
sum of the Constitution was the defense of the Three Chapters, p. 10. sect.
8. etc. The Council refuteth the Popes decree and ground of it, p. 14. sect.
1, 2. etc. The Council condemns and accurseth the Popes decree, p. 17. sect.
6. and p. 22. sect. 15, 16 The Councels decree consonant to Scripture, p. 26.
sect. 24. The fifth Council approved by succeeding Councels and Popes, p. 27.
sect. 26. and how long, p. 29. sect. 29. etc. Counsels above the Pope, p. 29.
sect. 30, 31. The Cause of the Three Chapters; a cause of faith, p. 37. sect.
3, 4. etc. professed by Baronius, p. 42. sect. 14. a trial of men's faith, p.
362. sect. 4. The Council proposes their decree about them tanquam de fide,
p. 41. sect. 13. The Churches in the East divided from the West about the three
Chapters, p. 39. sect. 7. The fifth Council explaineth a former definition of
faith, made no decree to condemn any new heresy, p. 46. sect. 20, 21. Fifth
Council of authority without the Popes approbation, p. 268. sect. 5, 6, etc.
it was neither heretical, nor schismatic, p. 269. sect 7. it was assembled
with the Popes consent, p. 272. sect. 12, 13. Corruptions crept into some
synodall acts, are not just causes of rejecting others of that Council, p.
378. sect. 3. The Council of Chalcedon held Christ to be unum de sancta
Trinitate, p. 382. sect. 8. 3. the Council of Chalcedon not corrupted, pa.
384. sect. 6, 7. The Constitution of Vigilius no part of the synodall acts, p.
399. sect. 1, 2, 3. not published in the Synod, p 401. sect. 4. Chrysostomes
bones not translated from Commana to Constantinople, p. 426. sect. 3. Council
against Council at Ephesus, p. 113. sect. 2. The Church may bind or loose a
man after death, p. 53. sect. 15, 16. The Church cannot loose those who dye
impenitent, p. 55. sect. 20, 21. Coronati and non coronati, as two sorts, so
two rewards of professors, p. 263. sect. 43. A Council is approved, though the
Pope approve it not, p. 275. sect. 17, 18. General Councels have sought the
Popes approbation, p. 287. sect. 34. Cyrill cleares himself of Nestorianisme,
p. 123. sect. 16.
D.
Whether a dead man may noviter be condemned, is a question of faith, p. 48.
sect. 3. That a dead man may be condemned, is the judgment of Fathers, p. 49.
sect. 6. the judgment of provincial Synods, p. 50. sect. 7. the judgment of
general Councels, p. ibid. sect. 7. the judgment of Baronius, p. 51. sect.
10. Defenders of the Popes infallibility accursed by the Council, p. 24 sect.
20, 21, 22. Dioscorus being heretical judged Ibas his profession heretical,
therefore the profession of Ibas must be orthodoxall. Vigilius his reason, p.
151. sect. 29. Defenders of the three Chapters heretics, p. 171. sect. 4.
Divination or Mathematical predictions, nor allowable, p. 343. sect. 28.
Domnus his action not inserted at Chalcedon, p. 44. sect. 9. To dissent from
the Pope in a cause of faith makes not one an heretic, p. 171. sect. 5. Many
Doctrines of their Romish Church may be held, except that of the Popes
infallibility, and yet the party that holds them no papist, p. 182. sect. 21.
in fine.
E.
EPistle of Ibas wholly heretical, p. 19. sect. 8, 9. and p. 24. sect. 19.
Eunomius approved not any part of this Epistle, p. 20. sect. 11. Eunomius
approved the confession of Ibas, p. 21. sect. 14. The Epistle of Ibas not
approved at Chalcedon, p. 107. sect. 2, 3, 4, etc. The Epistle was truly the
writing of Ibas, p. 109. sect. 5, 6. At Ephesus a great rent and division
between John and Cyrill, ibid. At Ephesus Cyrill was deposed by the
Conventicle, ibid. sect. 3. The Emperor ignorant for a time of the division
between John and Cyrill, p. 15. sect. 4. The Emperor had knowledge of the
division by a letter brought into the Court by a beggar, ibid. Eustathius full
of forgeries, p. 340. sect. 24, 25, etc. Eutychius not banished for not
consenting to the heresy of the Phantastickes, p. 341. sect. 25. Eutychius
given to divination, heretical, and what it was, p. 343. sect. 28, 29. for
these supposed to be banished, ibid. Evagrius full of fables, p. 345. sect. 30.
etc. The Emperors Edict reviled by Baronius, p. 363. sect. 1. it was not
repugnant to the orthodoxall faith, it was no seminary of sedition, ibid. sect.
3, 4. The Epistle of Ibas condemned by the Council at Chalcedon, p. 381. sect.
1. the Epistle in Cedrenus not Justinians, p. 398. sect. 1. Epistles writ to
Dioscorus and Leo were forged, and not Theodorets, p. 417. sect. 7, 8. and p.
444. sect. 8. Epistles by their erroneous inscription are not proved to be
forged, p. 429. sect. 9, 10. etc. Epiphanius his writing against images read in
the second Nicene Synod, and by them rejected. p. 109. sect. 7. the book was
the book of Epiphanius, p. 112. sect. 12. The explanation meant by Ibas was a
condemning of the twelve chapters of Cyrill, pa. 159. sect. 42, 43. a
condemning of the faith, p. 160. sect. 44. the like explanation meant by
Vigilius, p. 166. sect. 52.
F.
FAcundus set on by the Pope writ against the Emperors Edict, p. 214. sect. 4.
Facundus and Baronius revile the Emperor, p. 215. sect. 4. Facundus an enemy to
the Catholic faith, p. 371. sect. 13. The Foundation being heretical, poisons
all which is built thereon, p. 190. sect. 29, 30. Faith: unto certainty of
faith two things required, p. 182. sect. 20.
G.
GOntharis not trecherously slain by Bellisarius, p. 448. sect. 15. Gregory
his words and meaning pretended by Basil about the three Chapt. explained, p.
43. sect. 16, 17. etc.
H.
Heretics dying, dye not in the peace of the Church, page 59. and page 61.. 6.
Heresy with pertinacy differs much from an error, p. 61. in fine. First, in
regard of matter, p. 62. sec. 8. secondly, for the manner, ibid. sec. 9.
thirdly, in regard of the persons who err, p. 64. sec. 11. fourthly, in regard
of the Churches judgment, ibid. sec. 12. Heresy in its own habit does less
harm, p. 103. sec. 27. Heretics in words orthodoxall, in sense and meaning
heretical, p. 147. sec. 20. proved in Vitalis, ibid. An heretical profession
may be in terms orthodoxall, ibid. sec. 21. Heretics pretend to hold with
ancient Councels, p. 201. sec. 4, 5. Worst Heretics are the modern Romanists,
p. 204. sec. 10. Heretics liars in their profession, pa. 207. sec. 15.
Heretics profession contradictory to it self p. 208. sec. 16. An heretical
profession gives denomination to a man rather than an orthodoxall, pa. 208.
sec. 17, 18. Heresy is a trial of men's love to God, pa. 361. sec. 2.
I.
IBas his epistle unto Marie an heretic of Persia, p. 125. sec. 19. full of
Nestorianisme. Ibas denies God to be incarnate, and Mary the mother of God, p.
122. sec. 13. Ibas professes two natures and one person in Christ, p. 139.
sec. 1. and p. 143. sec. 9. Ibas his consenting to the Ephesme Counsel proves
not his epistle Catholic, p. 154. sec. Ibas consented not to Cyrill upon his
explanation, p. 155. sec. 35. etc. Vigilius his first reason: explained in five
several things: first, the Popes Rhetoric, sec. 35. second, his Chronology of
time, sec. 36. third, his Logic, sec. 40. the fourth and fifth, his Ethicall
and Theological knowledge, sec 41. vide p. 168. sec. 55. Ibas embraced the
union in Nestorianisme, p. 125. sec. 19. Ibas professed not the epistle to be
his, as the Acts declare, p. 386. sec. 2. The Image of Christ sent to Abgarus,
a fable, p. 346. sec. 32. Infallibility of the Popes judgment the foundation
of a papists faith, p. 34. sec. 34. and a doctrine of the Romish Church, p.
172. sec. 7. 8, etc. and p. 177. sec. 13, 14. Infallibility of the Popes
judgment in causes of faith defended by any, makes the defender heretical, p.
61. sec. 6. and p. 63. sec. 10. and to dye out of the peace of the Church,
ibid. Infallibility of the Popes judgment taught by commending the Churches
judgment to be infallible, and general Councels, pa. 173. sec. 8. and by the
Church they understand the Pope, sec. 8, 9. and p. 178. sec. 15. Infallibility
only peculiar to the Pope, p. 174 sec. 11. Infallibility of the Popes judgment
is heretical, p. 180. sec. 18. Justinian his Edict for defense of the three
Chapters, p. 3. sec. 7. Justinian the Emperor spared Vigilius from banishment,
and why, p. 257. sec. 26, 27. Justinian reviled by Baronius, p. 324. slandered
to be illiterate, p. 325. sec. 3. 4. for making laws in causes of faith, sec.
5, 6. for persecuting Vigilius, sec. 7. Justinian in his last age no
Aphthardokite, p. 330. sec. 8. and p. 333. sec. 12. etc. no disturber of the
peace of the Church, p. 331. in fine. Justinian a defender of the faith,
witness Pope Agatho, p. 356. sec. 16 witness the Romans Synod, sec. 17.
witness the sixth Council, sec. 18. witness Pope Gregory, sec. 19. Justinian
no subverter of the faith, pa. 349. sec. 37, 38. Justinian founded many stately
Churches and Monasteries, p. 350. sec. 39. Justinian no subverter of the
Empire, ibid. sec. 40. Justinian severely censured by Baronius, p. 354. sec.
45. Jerusalem not advanced by the fifth Synod to a Patriarchship, p. 430. sec.
1, 2, etc. Justinian Dioclesian-like caused not Vigilius to be beaten, p. 453.
sec. 19. Justinian favored not the heresy of Anthimus, p. 454. sec. 21.
K.
THe King of England refused to send to their Trent Council, p. 308. sec. 24.
Kings and Emperors have only right to call Councels, p. 239. sec. 5.
L.
THe Laterane Council under Leo the 10. reprobated the Council at Constance
and Basil touching the authority of Gen: Councels p. 33. sec. 33. The Laterane
decree condemned by the University of Paris, p. 34. sec. 35. The more learned
the man is, the more dangerous are his heresies, p. 123. sec. 27. Luther, his
zeal that he would not communicate in both kinds, if the Pope as Pope should
command him, p. 195. sec. 33. Liberatus an unfit witness in the cause of the
three Chapt. p. 373. sec. 15, 16. Leo judged the Nicene Canons for the limits
of Sees unalterable, p. 405. sec. 4. Leo, his judgment erroneous for
preheminency of Bishops, p. 400. sec. 4, 5. Leontius no sufficient witness for
the Epistle of Theodoret, p. 415. sec. 3. Laws besides those in the Theodosian
Code, p. 412. sec. 5, 6. Lawful Synods, and what makes them so, p. 282. sec.
24, 25, 26. etc. To Lawful Synods, besides an Episcopal confirmation, p. 281.
sec. 25. etc. there is required a Regal or Imperial, p. 285. sec. 31, 32.
Lawful Councels require, first that the summons be general, p. 292. sec. 3.
secondly, that it be lawful; thirdly, that it be orderly, ibid. sec. 4.
M.
MEnnas died in the 21. year of Justinian, and the Pope excommunicated him in
the 25, p. 237. sec. 18. The Matrones of Rome entreated Constantius to restore
Liberius, 248. sec. 12. Monks of Sythia slandred by Baronius for falsifying
the Acts of the Council at Chalcedon, p. 383. sec. 4, 5. Monothelite additions
not extant in the fifth Synod, p. 409. sec. 2, 3. Mennas his confession to
Vigilius a forgery, p. 441. sec. 2. Mennas not excommunicated by Vigilius, p.
442. sec. 4 5.
N.
NEpos died in an error only, not in any formal heresy, p. 65. sec. 13. The
2. Nicene assembly a conspiracy, p. 111. sec. 11. in fine. Nestorius his books
being restrained, the books of Theodorus and Diodorus were in more esteem, p.
121. sec. 12. The Nestorians forged a false union between John and Cyrill, p.
123. sec. 15. and p. 134. se. 34. The Nestorians confessed two natures and one
person in Christ, and how, p. 144. how Catholics confess it, ibid. sec. 11,
12, 13. Nestorius affirms the two natures to be two persons, pa. 145. sect.
16. so Theodorus the Master of Nestorius, sect. 17. to affirm this, is plain
Nestorianisme, proved by Justinian, pa. 146. sect. 18. by Pope John the second.
The Nestorians in words orthodoxall, in sense and meaning heretical, pa. 147.
sect. 20. and p. 448. sect. 22, 23. witnessed by Justinian, p. 449. sect. 24.
by the fifth Council, sect. 25. by the epistle it self, sect. 26, 27. The
Nestorians by Nature understand Person, p. 162. sect. 46, 47. The Nestorians
slander Cyrill to teach two persons, p. 163. sect. 47. Narses for his piety and
prudence beloved of Justinian, p. 248. sect. 12. Narses entreated not for
Vigilius, pa. 249. sect. 14. Narses overcame not Totilas, if Binius his gloss
be true, p. 458. sect. 23. Narses overcame not the Goths by the intercession
of Mary, p. 459. sect. 24.
O.
THe occasion of the fifth Council was those tria capitula, p. 2. sect. 3.
Origin commended for his gifts and learning, p. 103. sect. 28. Origin condemned
by the Acts of the fifth Synod, p. 392. sect. 1, 2. Origens cause not the cause
of the first action in the fifth Synod, p. 393. sect. 3. nor the cause of the
second action in the Synod, sect. 4. The order of lawful general Councels,
pa. 304. sect. 19.
P.
PApists are truly such as ground upon the Popes infallibility, p. 187. sect.
26. Pope Vigilius excommunicated in an African Synod, p. 236. sect. 16. The
Pope refuses to come to the Synod, p. 4. sect. 2, 3, 4. and the true reason
why, page 6. sect. 5. The Popes presence not needful in a general Council,
p. 273. sect. 14, 15. The Pope present in the fifth Council by his letters of
instruction, p. 274. sect. 16. The Popes consent makes not a Council to be
approved, p. 275. sect. 27. vid. lit. C. In the Pope intensive there is as much
authority, as in the Pope with a general Council, Bellarmines assertion, p.
174. sect. 10. The Pope vertually both Church and Council, p. 178. sect. 15.
p. 180. sect. 17. The name Papist not heard of till Leo the 10. p. 188. sect.
25. to be a Pope an happy thing, for all is held for truth that they define,
page 223. sect. 16. Papist had need of a strong faith, relying on the Popes
judgment, p. 224. sect. 18. Paulus Bishop of Emisa subscribed to the
anathematizing of Nestorius, to persuade an union between John and Cyrill, p.
133. sect. 31 his Sermon at Alexandria, containing an orthodoxall profession of
the faith, p. 134. sec. 33. Pelagius Pope after Vigilius, consecrated by two
Bishops only an a Presbyter of Ostia, pa. 242. sect. 4. A Pope may err
personally, they say, but doctrinally he cannot, p. 244. sect. 7. The Pope no
competent Judge of Protestants, being an enemy unto them, page 315. sect. 33.
Pope Clements epistle to James a forgery, pa. 422. sect. 2. Paul censured by
some for an hotheaded person, 434. sect. 18. in fine.
R.
THe Church of Rome holds no doctrine by certainty of faith, p. 181. in fine.
and pa. 282. sect. 20. and p. 189. sect. 27, 28. The Romish doctrines may be
held three ways, p. 183. sect. 21. in fine. First, of them who hold the
Scriptures for the foundation, p. 183. sect. 22. such were our forefathers.
Second way, by grounding upon Scripture, but with pertinacy, p. 184. sect. 23.
A third way of holding them, is on the Popes word, p. 185. sec. 24 They of the
Roman Church are heretics, p. 192. sect. 31. In their Roman Church no true
holiness, p. 193. sect. 32. They of the Romish Church are schismatikes p. 196.
sect. 34. Rome miserably besieged by Totilas, p. 456. sect. 22. Ruba not taken
from Alexandria, page 407. sect. 8.
S.
THe Synod resolves to judge the controversy about the three Chapt. the Pope
being absent, p. 7. sect. 1. Sergius Bishop of Cyrus deposed from his
Bishopric, p. 706. sect. 18. Scripture being the ground of a man's faith is a
comfort unto him, though in some things he err, pa. 191. sect. 29. and p. 194.
sect. 33. Supremacy and infallibility are inseparably joined, p. 176. sect. 12.
Schismatikes are not of the Church, pa. 199. sect. 39. Profession of Scriptures
excuse not from heresy, p. 226. sect. sect. 13. Suidas a fabler, 326. sect. 4.
Sophia built by Constantine, the mirror of ages, p. 350. sect. 39. Switzers
order in judgment, p. 394. in fine. Shameful matters not added to the Acts of
the fifth Synod, p. 408. sect. 1. 4. Silverius died of famine in the Island
Palmaria, p. 472. sect. 13. Synods: what makes them lawful, p. 282. and what
unlawful, p. 306. sect. 20.
T.
THeodorus not condemned in his life time, p. 47. sect. 2. Theodorus died not
in the peace of the Church p. 59. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. and p. 66. Theodorus
condemned by Cyrill and Proclus, p. 68. sec. 2, 3. and p. 73. sec. 11. etc. by
the Ephesine Council, p. 69. sec. 4. etc. by the Armenian Council, p. 72.
sec. 10. by the Emperors Edict, sec. 13, 14, etc. by the Catholic Church, p.
76. sec. 19. Theodoret writ against Cyrill and the true faith, p. 62. sec. 4,
5. Theodoret very resolute for Nestorianisme, p. 93. sec. 6. Theodoret his
writings condemned by the Council of Chalcedon, p. 96. sec. 12, 13. and p.
101. sec. 23. and by Cyrill, p. 98. sec. 16, 17. Theodoret was not injured,
though his writings were condemned, p. 102. sec. 24, 26. Theodoret a man of
rate worth and learning, p. 104. sec. 29, 30. Taciturnity: the decree of
taciturnity, and what effect it took, p. 225. sec. 2, 3, 4. a mere fiction,
p. 228. sec. 5, 6, etc. Trent Bishops were the Popes creatures, pa. 319. sec.
37. The Trent Council conspired against Protestants, p. 314. sec. 32. Theodora
unjustly reviled by Baronius, page 355. sec. 1. Theodora favored Anthimus as
being orthodoxall, p. 358. sec. 5. Theodora not excommunicated by Vigilius, p.
359. sec. 6. Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea no heretic, p. 368. sec. 9, 10.
Theodorus of Caesarea no Origenist, pa. 374. sec. 17. he maimed not the Acts of
the 5. Synod, p. 697. sec. 7. Theodosius law in the Code not corrupted, p. 411.
sec. 4. Theodoret wrote that Epistle mentioned in the fifth Synod, p. 413. sec.
1. he wrote it after the union, p. 416. sec. 6, 7. and p. 420. sec. 12.
Theodora writ not to Vigilius to restore Anthimus, p. 449. sec. 16, 17.
Theodora sent not Anthimus Scribe to Rome for Vigilius, p. 452. sec. 18.
Theodoret sets forth his own orthodoxy, p. 417. sec. 7. Theodoret condemned by
the Council at Ephesus, p. 419. sec. 10. Theodoret writ an epistle to John of
Antioch, p. 422. sec. 1. Theodoret rejoices over Cyrill being dead, p. 427.
sec. 5. A Treachery intended in Queen Elizabeth's time by a deep dissembler, p
488. in medio.
V.
VIgilius alleges counterfeit writings in stead of Fathers, p. 78. sec. 23,
24. etc. Vigilius denies the known writings of Theodorus, p. 82. sec. 31.
Vigilius imputes an heresy to the Council of Ephesus, p. 84 sec. 34.
Vigilius untruly pretends the Council of Chalcedon, p. 84. sec. 35, 36.
Vigilius falsely pretends Justinian for Theodorus, p. 86. sec. 38. Vigilius
durst not himself condemn Theodorus, p. 88. sec. 41, 42. Vigilius would not
permit any other to condemn Theodorus, pa. 89. sec. 45. and page 99. sec. 18.
Vigilius anathematizeth those that condemn Theodorus, p. 90. sec. 46. Vigilius
accuses the Council of Chalcedon as dissemblers, p. 94. sec. 8. Vigilius
condemns Nestorianisme only in show, p. 100. sec. 20, 21. Vigilius and
Baronius appear in their lively colors for Nestorianisme, p. 112. sec. 1. and
p. 27. sec. 2. Union made between John and Cyrill, p. 116 sec. 5. and how
concluded, p, 133. sec. 30, 31. Vigilius from the Union labors to prove Ibas a
Catholic, p. 117. sec. 7. Vigilius approves the whole epistle of Ibas p. 118.
sec. 9. Union in Nestorianisme, was that union which Ibas embraced, p. 127.
sec. 14. That Vigilius decreed this union in Nestorianisme with a settled
affection, is probable, pa. 129. sec. 23. Vigilius approves the confession
made by Ibas, p. 141. sec. 3, 4, 5. Vigilius his reasons to prove Ibas
profession to be Catholic, p. 151. sec. 29, etc. Vigilius with Ibas approves
two persons in Christ, p. 164. sec. 48, 49, etc. Vigilius his pretense to
defend the Council at Chalcedon, p. 200 sec. 1, 2. Vigilius heretical,
notwithstanding his profession of Councels, p. 208. sec. 17. Vigilius is said
to have approved the fifth Council, p. 213. sec. 1. Vigilius his carriage in
this cause, and his 4. several judgments or changings, ibid. sect. 2. and in
sequentibus. Vigilius for his decree of silence is to be judged an heretic,
p. 229. sec. 6. Vigilius after exile made no decree to approve the fifth
Council, p. 241. sec. 2, 3. the western Church approved it not,. 4. the
Council of Aquileia doubted to approve it, sec. 5. Vigilius not so much as by
a private consent did approve it, ibid. pa. 245. sect. 7. in fine. and sect. 8.
Vigilius consented to the Synod, but not to the synodall decree, p. 245. sec.
8. Vigilius was afflicted, and what his afflictions were, p. 264. sec. 37, 38.
Vitiges yielded himself to Bellisarius, p. 447. sec. 16. Vigilius lost not by
his going to Constantinople, p. 463. sec, 3, 4, 5, etc. and p. 466. sec. 6, and
7, 8. Vigilius his entrance into the Popedom, and the manner of it, p. 468.
sec. 10. Vigilius his promise to the Empress to restore Anthimus, p. 469. sec.
11. Vigilius keeps not promise with the Empress, ibid. sec. 12. Vigilius
resignes the Popedom, and is anew elected into it, p. 472. sec. 14, 15.
Vigilius exactly described by Baronius, page 474. sec. 16. Vigilius writ unto
Anthimus, and other Eutycheans, as unto Catholics, p. 475. in fine. Vigilius
labored to undermine the Council of Chalcedon, p. 476. Vigilius accursed not
Dioscorus, but Nestorius, p. 482. sec. 26. Vigilius writ this Epistle to
Anthimus, after the death of Silverius, p. 486. Vigilius in some things alike,
in others unlike to K. Saul. p. 487. in fine. sect. 30, 31. Vigilius was
heretical, and a dissembler, pa. 488. sec. 32. a dissembler in the faith, in
heart heretical, p. 490. sec. 33. and in sequent. Vigilius as Pope defined
against the faith, p: 497. sec. 3, etc. Vigilius his death, and the manner of
it, pa. 504. sect. 52, etc.
FINIS.

