THE MOTHER AND the Child. A short Catechism or brief sum of Religion,
gathered out of Mr. Cragges Catechism, for the fitting of little Children, for
the public Ministry. With short, very comfortable and fruitful Meditations
on the Lords Prayer. Together with other brief and profitable Meditations on
the seven penitential Psalms.

London printed by H. L. for T. M. and Jonas Man, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot in Paternoster Row. 1611.

A Short Catechism.
Mother. WHo made you?


Child. God.


M. Why did God make you?


C. To serve him.


M. How will God be served?


C. According to his word.


M. Where is that word written?


C. In the old and new Testament.


M. What is the old Testament?


C. The Law of God.


M. What is the Law of God?


C. To love God and my neighbor.


M. What does the Law show us?


C. Condemnation.


M. Whether does the law lead us?


C. To Jesus Christ our Savior:


M. What is the new Testament?


C. The Gospel of Christ.


M. What is the Gospel of Christ?


C. The power of God to salvation.


M. To whom?


C. To them that do believe.


M. In whom do you believe?


C. I believe in God the Father, etc.


M. Why do you say, I believe, and not we believe?


C. Every one must be saved by his own faith.


M. Why do you call God Father?


C. He is so to us in Christ Jesus.


M. Why do you call God Almighty?


C. Because he rules all things.


M. Why is this added; maker of heaven and earth?


C. Because we should seek God in his creatures.


M. Why should we seek God in his creatures?


C. We cannot comprehend his divine Majesty otherwise.


M. Why do you believe in Jesus Christ?


C. Because he is God.


M. Why is he called Jesus?


C. Because he saves us from our sins.


M. Why is he called Christ?


C. Because he is our King, Priest, and Prophet.


M. Why is he our King?


C. Because he rules us.


M. Why our Priest?

Because he prays for us.


M. Why our Prophet?


C. Because he teaches us.


M. What gather ye of this?


C. Whom he does not rule and teach, he will not pray for them.


M. Why is he called Gods only Son?


C. He is so by nature, and we by grace.


M. Why was he conceived by the holy Ghost?


C. Because he should be without sin, and so sanctify us.


M. Why was he borne of the Virgin Mary?


C. To show that he was a very man.


M. Why did he suffer death?


C. To deliver us from death.


M. What was Pontius Pilate?


C. A wicked Judge.


M. Why was he crucified on the Cross?


C. Because that death was accursed of God.


M Why was he buried in a new grave?


C. To show that he rose again by his own power.


M. Why did he rise again?


C. For our Justification.


M Why did he descend into hell in his soul, to the place of the damned?


C. To deliver us from thence.


M. Why did he ascend into heaven?


C. To take possession for us, and to make intercession for us.


M. What is meant by sitting at the right hand of God?


C. That all power is given him in heaven and earth.


M. Has God a right hand?


C. No: but its spoken for our capacity.


M. What is it to us, that Christ shall come to judge?


C. Great comfort.


M. Why?


C. Because our Savior shall be our Judge.


M. What mean you by the quick and the dead?


C. Them that be alive then, and them that be dead before.


M. Why do you believe in the holy Ghost?


C. Because he is God.


M. Be there three Gods?


C. No: one God, and three persons.


M. Which be they?


C. The Father, Son, and holy Ghost.


M. What is the Church?


C. A company of elect people appointed of God to be saved.


M. How many marks has it?


C Three: preaching of the word, ministering of the Sacraments and discipline.


M. What is preaching?


C. A solemn declaration, and true interpretation of the word of GOD by
doctrine to beget faith, and increase it.


M. What is a Sacrament?


C. A public action, ordained of God, being a visible sign signifying
Christ: to be used of his Church, for the strengthening of faith, till Christ
come again.


M. How many Sacraments be there?


C. Two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


M. What is Baptism?


C. The first Sacrament of the new Testament, that seals unto us by the
washing of water, the forgiveness of sins by the blood of Christ.


M. What is the Lords Supper?


C The second Sacrament of the new Testament, that seals unto us by
receiving bread and wine, the partaking with Christ and his benefits.


M. Who must receive this Sacrament?


C. They that can examine themselves.


M. Who must deliver the Sacraments?


C. They that have authority to preach the word.


M. Which of the Sacraments have ye received?


C. Baptism.


M. Why receive ye not the Lords Supper?


C. Because we be children, and ignorant, and cannot discern the Lords body.


M. What is discipline?


C. Orders in the Church, agreeable with the word.


M. How long must these Orders continue?


C. Till Jesus Christ come again.


M. What if any be not of the Church?


C. They that be not of the communion of Saints, cannot have the forgiveness
of sins.


M. What is the forgiveness of sins?


C. Justification, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, and deliverance
from the wrath to come.


M. Do ye believe that your bodies shall rise again?


C. Yea, but of another quality.


M. What reason have ye for it?


C. It is a matter of faith, and not of reason.


M. What have ye to strengthen your faith?


C. The almightinesse of God: and the likeness of Christ.


M. What learn you by this?


C. That God being Almighty can do things impossible.


M. What more?


C. That Christ died and rose again: and so shall we.


M. Shall not the wicked also rise again?


C. Yes: but to everlasting pain, as the godly to everlasting joy.


M. Do ye believe all these articles of our Creed?


C. Yea: and the Lord strengthen my weak belief. Those that will see further
of this, look his Majesty's Catechism, made by Mr Craige.



Commandments.
M. What is the Law of God?


C. To love God and my neighbor.


M. Of how many commandments does the law consist?


C. Of ten.


M. How be they divided.


C. Into two tables.


M. How many are in the first table?


C. Four: which show our duty to God.


M How many in the ^^cond table?


C. Six: which show our duty to our neighbor.


M. Which is the first commandment?


C. Thou shall have no other Gods, etc.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. Atheism, Papisme, Ignorance, and Infidelity.


M. What is the second commandment?


C. Thou shall not make to thy self etc.


M. What is the breach (...)?


C. To worship God according to men's inventions.


M. What is the third commandment?


C. Thou shall not take the name etc.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. Vain swearing, and a wicked conversation.


M. What is the fourth commandment?


C. Remember that thou keep holy etc.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. In doing any thing of our own, for profit or pleasure.


M. What is the fifth commandment?


C. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. Disobedience to our Superiors: or want of duty to our Inferiors.


M. What is the sixth commandment?


C. Thou shall not kill.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. Unlawful smiting of the hand, or malice of the heart.


M. What is the seventh commandment?


C. Thou shall not commit adultery.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. All uncleanness of body and mind.


M. What is the eight commandment?


C. Thou shall not steal.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. The taking away of my neighbors goods, by fraud or violence.


M. What is the ninth commandment?


C. Thou shall not bear false witness.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. All lying and backbiting.


M. What is the tenth commandment?


C. Thou shall not covet etc.


M. What is the breach of this commandment?


C. All evil desires and motions of the heart.

They that will see this more at large, let them read Mr. Dod on the
commandments.


M. To whom do thou pray?


C. To God alone.


M. In whose name?


C. In the name of Jesus Christ.


M. After what manner?


C. As Christ taught his disciples.


M. What be the words?


C. Our Father, etc.


M. How many Petitions be there in this Prayer?


C. Six.


M. How be they divided?


C. The first three, for the glory of God: the second, for our commodity of
body and soul.


M. What be the first words?


C. Our Father which art in heaven.


M. What is meant by this?


C. It is a Preface, to breed reverence before prayer.


M. Why is this title our, and not my?


C. I pray for my brethren, as for my self.


M. Why do you call God father?


C. He is so to us in Christ Jesus.


M. Why do you place him in Heaven?


C. It is the seat of his Majesty.


M. What is the first Petition?


C. Hallowed be thy name.


M. How is his name hallowed?


C. When we know him in understanding and in practice.


M. What is the second petition?


C. Thy Kingdom come.


M. What is meant by this?


C. The kingdom of grace and of glory?


M. What is the third petition?


C. Thy will be done in earth, etc.


M. What do you pray for, here?


C. VVilling obedience and contentation.


M. What is the fourth petition?


C. Give us this day our daily bread.


M. What do you ask in this Petition?


C. All things necessary for this present life.


M. What is the fifth Petition?


C. Forgive us our trespasses.


M. What is the forgiveness of sin?


C. Justification by Christ.


M. What means, as we forgive etc?


C. It is our comfort, if we feel our readiness to forgive others.


M. What is the sixth Petition?


C. Lead us not into temptation.


M. What do you desire in this?


C. To be kept from those that lead to sin.


M. Why is it added, for thine is thy kingdom, power etc?


C. To show us that all praise is to be given to God at all times.

Amen. We trust it shall be so.


FINIS.
COMFORTAble and fruitful Meditations on the Lords Prayer.

LONDON Printed by H. L. for T. M. and Jonas Man: and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot, in Pater noster Row. 1611.

Meditations upon the Lords Prayer.
O My God, Our Father.
I come unto thee, as to the common Father of all the world; even unto thee do
I make my supplication, who in the creation and preservation of all thy works,
have manifested thy more then fatherly love and affection. I come to thee, as
to my true and gracious Father, which have not only given me my being, life,
and motion, as thou did to other creatures; but powered out thy spirit upon
me, and lightened my soul with the heavenly rays of thy divinity. I come unto
thee, my God, being regenerate and incorporated into thy family, by thy free
grace and boundless bounty. I come, having appeased the anger of my Father, by
the satisfaction of my Redeemer? I come, because it has pleased thee to call
me, and to spread out thy gracious arms, ready to receive me. Receive me
then, not in the austeritie of a just Judge, but in the tender compassion of a
merciful Father. And accept this my humble prayer, which my heart has
conceived, my lips disclose, and my voice does send up to the favorable
ears of my heavenly Father. And since it is thy good pleasure, O Lord, that I
thus call upon thee, Grant, Which art in Heaven.
O grant I beseech thee gracious God, that it may reach even unto thee which
art in heaven. I know assuredly that thy throne is in the highest heavens; that
the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, are under thy feet, that the earth is but
a point, to thee, and I the least part of the earth, yea, less then nothing.
Who then has made me so hardy as to dare to lift up mine eyes to thy most
glorious Majesty? It is even thou my God; who have set thy self so high, to
behold all the works of thine hands, to supply all our wants, and daily to
distill down thy grace into our hearts, as a most sweet morning deaw. It is
thou, who have said, Ask and ye shall receive: Call upon me, and I will
hear thee. But how can I call upon thee, unless I put my confidence in thee,
and take fast hold of thy promises by a firm and fast faith? O then infuse it
into my soul, and engraft it in my heart; (for it is a gift that comes from
the storehouse of thy grace.) And as sometimes thou did cause the mouths of
babes and sucklings to resound thy praise, so at this time govern the Infancy,
and strengthen the weakness of my heart, that it may send out that prayer which
is acceptable in thy sight. And that it may appear that the prayer of my lips
proceeds from the meditation of my heart: and that notwithstanding the heavy
mass of my sinful flesh does oppress my spirit; yet, under that burden, it
does breath fotth thy honor and praise. Hallowed be thy name
The first request which I make unto thee, is, that thy name may be sanctified;
or rather that thy Name may so sanctify me, as that I may be able to bless
and magnify it. But, which of thy names shall I bless. That wherewith thou
have destroyed, and confounded all the enemies of thy people; or that wherewith
thou have blessed all the Nations of the earth? Will thou be praised, as Lord
of Hosts, the God of power; or as the Savior and Redeemer of the world? Shall
I declare how thou have made all things of nothing, how thou have spangled the
heavens with stars, adorned the earth with fruits and flowers, watered it
with rivers, and filled it with living creatures; yea, and above all, have
created man, and formed him after thine own Image? Or shall I speak only of
this incredible love, whereby thou have giuen-ouer unto death thine only Son,
that we might be restored to everlasting life? My spirits, O Lord, are too
faint for so great an enterprise, and my breath would fail before I could
recount the least part of them. Let it therefore suffice, that I sanctify thy
name in an humble and chaste thought, and that my mind may ever be fast fixed
in the meditation of thy goodness: forasmuch as it has pleased thee at all
times to be so good and gracious to me. So that I and all those whom thou
have placed in this world, as in the midst of a rich and glorious Temple to
behold, and admire thy divine Majesty; may wholly apply all our faculties and
understanding, to the apprehending of thy will. Thy Kingdom come.
That so being all of us reunited and linked in one and the selfsame desire
to serve thee, thy Kingdom may come: that we having cast off the yoke of
sin, which has so long held us in thraldom, thy love alone may rule in our
consciences full of happiness and true felicity. For to obey thee, is to
command our disordinate affections: to command them, is to be Masters of our
selves; and to be Masters of our selves, is more then sovereign
principality. A sweet thing it is, to serve thee, O my God: thy yoke is
easy: and all the tribute thou exactest of us, is only that we will be
willing to be made happy. Confirm and strengthen in us this will; and
graciously assist the zeal of thy servants, to the beating down and
repressing of their insolence who blaspheame thy sacred Majesty: to the end
that thy Law and truth may reign over all the world. O thou King of Kings, who
rulest in our hearts, and in our humility and obedience do establish thine
Empire; subdue our wills unto thy law: that so whilst all of us, with one
accord, shall aim at the same mark, and aspire to the advancement of thy
glory; our good works may testify the discipline of our heavenly King: to
whom (as his devoted subjects) we render homage and fealty, for those
manifold and great gifts and graces which we hold of his bounty. But what
obeisance can we render thee? How can we attain to that height of perfection
as is due unto thee? who is able to sound the depth of thy thoughts? or who is
able to fulfill thy will? All we can do, Thy will be done.
is but to pray unto thee that thy will may be done. For seeing that thou art
even goodness it self, and therefore wilt nothing but what is good, and that
with thee to will and to do, is all one; we do in this Prayer wholly commit
our selves to thy will, who art never wanting to will us well, and to do
whatsoever thou in thy goodness know to be expedient for us. Whatsoever thou
have willed, O Lord, has been done: and from this thy good will and pleasure,
as from an euer-flowing fountain, are derived so many good things, as the
whole Globe of the earth is filled, and the immense circle of the heavens is
beautified therewith. Continue then this thy goodness unto us: and forasmuch as
thy love is as fire, (which augmenteth where it meets with combustible
matter) and that it increases in well-doing to us, even to us poor miserable
wretches, in whose misery and infirmity, it may find matter enough to work
upon) when I pray to thee, my God, that thy will may be done, the intent of my
prayer is, that it may please thee to root out of mine heart all worldly will,
which springing from the corruption of the flesh, is no ways compatible with
the law of the spirit: That thou will never give me the raines to live at mine
own pleasure: and seeing that thou have vouchsafed to honor me with so high a
title as to be styled thy son, thou will not emancipate or give me over to
mine affections; but keep me under the rod of thy law, under the tutelage
of thy Commandments. So shall I, In earth as it is in heaven.
together with all those that have vowed allegiance, and are thy faithful
servants, readily and cheerfully betake our selves to thy service; and during
our abode in this life, strive to set forth thy glory here on earth: which is
sounded without ceasing by that heavenly quire of blessed Saints and Angels,
in thy holy and heavenly habitation.

But such is the frailetie of our mortal bodies, daily fading and falling
away, that without daily repairing and sustenance, they make us unapt to serve
thee; Give us this day our daily bread.
we therefore make our daily recourse unto thee, for such things as are
necessary to the maintenance of our life; beseeching thee to give us our daily
bread. But give us withal, O God, grace so to use it and all other good gifts;
that in nourishing our bodies, we starve not our souls, and make them unable
to attain to the knowledge of thy truth. That together with thy bounty,
receiving also thy benediction, we settle not our affections upon worldly, and
transitory things; so passing through things temporal that we finally lose
not the eternal. Let not the taste of this earthly bread make us to forget
that heavenly Manna, that bread of life, which nourishes and cherishes our
feeble souls, fills our mouths with heavenly plenty, and makes us the
living Temples of our God, by receiving him into our bodies through a steadfast
and lively faith. Grant unto us, my God, that by receiving this bread, our
hearts and consciences may be fully assured that we are incorporate with our
Redeemer, and become fellow members of our head Christ Jesus: and that as he
taking upon him our flesh did undergo our death; so we clad and invested with
his, may be made partakers of his immortality. And since it has pleased thee
to make us the vessels and receptacles of thy divinity, purify and cleanse
our hearts, and renew and rectify all our affections, that there may be
nothing to cause thee retire, and leave us destitute of thy grace and our
salvation. Forgive us our trespasses,
But we cannot be cleansed, unless thou forgive us our trespasses, and wipe
away our iniquities. For we have been slaves unto sin and death: and
whatsoever we can call ours, belongs unto them. Neither have we so much as
one mite toward the paying of our ransom or acquiting our debt. Of thee
therefore must we expect forgiveness, who have once redeemed us by thy precious
blood, and made us free from Satan our arch enemy: but we daily fall again
into the hands of our enemies by committing millions of sins which bring into
slavery, and make us liable to grievous punishment. Yet let not this O my God,
cause thee to shut up that treasure from us, whence we may take the price of
our liberty. Let not, O Lord, our obstinacy in backsliding, take away thy
constancy in pardoning: but let thy merciful hand be ever ready to reform us.
For sin ever since the fall of our first father Adam, is as it were
incorporated into our sinful flesh, and daily increases and grows with us:
so that the older we grow, the fowler and filthier we appear, unless it
please thee to apply daily unto our maladies the merits of thy Passion: that as
we by our inbred corruption do wound and exulcerate our conscience, so thou will graciously refresh it, by curing our wounds, and suppling them with thine
oil of mercy. Otherwise, well might we fear, O Lord, least casting down
thine eyes daily upon us, it would as it were grieve thy holy spirit so often to
return unto us, by reason of our manifold sins and offenses. O then pardon our
offenses, that is to say, our whole life: and so pardon us O heavenly Father, As
we forgive them that trespass against us.
as we forgive them that have offended us. Make us evermore to set before our
eyes that love wherewith thou have loved us, in undertaking the payment of our
debts, and the punishment of our sins. That we may duly consider, how
unreasonable it were for us to expect that grace of thee which we can not
afford our neighbor; since there is no comparison betwixt the offenses they
commit against us, and those wherewith we offend thy divine Majesty. Root out of
our hearts all malice, fiercenes, and bitterness: give us a calm and peaceable
spirit, which may foster and maintain in us unity and brotherly love, teaching
us to support with gentleness one another infirmities. For we can not but
acknowledge, O Lord, how easily we slip, yea stumble, and tumble, in the
slippery paths of this refractorie life. Too too slender is our own force and
ability to hold us on foot, and uphold us against those whirle-windes which
are ever ready to drive us headlong into Iniquity. And therefore most
earnestly do we beseech thee, Lead us not into temptation.
not to forsake us in our temptations; but to remove far from us all
occasions of offending thee; and to arm us against all objects, with thy
Spirit: without which we shall be ever vanquished; and by who^ we be sure to
vanquish. For the price and crown of victory is reserved for those and those
alone who follow thee their Captain. Grant us then this grace, that
whenever any inordinate desire of worldly wealth shall assail us; we may
oppose as a rampire, against it the desire of heavenly gifts and graces,
generously scorning and contemning the pelf and transitory trash of this
world, as justly suspecting their deceitfulnes and fragility. That we may call
to mind that they are but as a cloud, which for a while fleeteth from one
country to another, and suddenly vanishes away and appears no more; and that
many times that gold and silver which we heap up with much sweat and
travel, does serve but to the procuring of our own damnation. And if it shall
please thee to bestow upon us riches in greater abundance; grant unto us
likewise the grace to use them well, and lovingly and charitably to communicate
them to such as have want. For the whole earth is thine, and we are but the
tillers and tenants thereof: our goods belong unto thee, and we are but thy
depositaries and vassals. So that if we refuse to impart them to such as
demand them in thy name, thou may not only put us out of possession, but
make us pay the usury of our ingratitude and unfaithfulness.

Furthermore, we beg of thee, that the false luster of the honors of this
world may not deceive our dazeled sight, nor draw us on to desire more then is
expedient for us. Let it always be imprinted in our hearts and thoughts, that
there is no true honor in this wotld, but to serve thee aright; and that in
thy service, the seat of honor is lowliness, and the greatness thereof
consists in humility.

Furthermore, that this same deceitful lure, which we so much admire (after
which we run our selves out of breath, and all but to our ruin) is but like
an Ignis fatuus, about the rivers, that shines not but in the dark, and
draws them into mischief that unwarily follow it. Our worldly pomp and
secular dignities appear not but in the obscurity of this world. If once we
close our eyes against the heavenly light, they seem to us as bright as fire,
and their luster appears as burnisht gold: but when we come to follow them,
we fall into swift torrents and dangerous whirl-pooles, where we are plunged,
floting in uncertainty betwixt the wills of Princes, and the unsteadfast
opinions of the wavering vulgar, until we meet with some rock of offense:
and there we are crushed.

Give me therefore, O my God, constancy, to withdraw mine affections, and
withhold my sight from such vanities; make me only ambitious of thy glory;
let my spirit be so addressed to immortality, that she make no repose in the
choking smoke of this world. Let me never envy them that enjoy all these
fickle goods, and fading honors: but let all my aemulation be to come as
near as possible to that only example and perfect pattern of good life which
most lively appears in that absolute tabliture of thy most innocent life.
That so all the violent passions of anger, rancour, and disdain, may be
banished out of my soul, my heart enflamed with desire to do good to all,
hurt to none, and both body and soul may be always watchful, and daily
employed about good and laudable works, never languishing in slothful
stupiditie. That this base and infamous gourmondizing (which abuses thy good
gifts, being drowned in wine, and buried in dainty dishes) may ever be far
from me. Extinguish also, O heavenly Father, all unchaste prouocations of the
flesh, which allure us to violate the chastity of our bodies, and the purity
of the soul. And remove far from us all those objects which may stir up any
slippery and unchaste affections.

To conclude, But deliver us from evil.
deliver us from all evil, even from the hands of wicked Angels, not suffering
them to have any power over us. And when we of our selves shall be running
headlong into mischief; prevent us with speed, draw us back, and stretch out
thy fatherly hand over us, ever readier to show thy mercy then to execute thy
justice. Save us, even maugre our own selves; and let not our backsliding and
obstinacy alienate thee from us, or cause thee to forget, to be both our
merciful GOD, and also our loving Father.

FINIS.
BRIEF AND profitable Meditations on the 7. penitential Psalms.

London printed by H. L. for T. M. and Jonas Man: and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot in Paternoster Row. 1611.

Meditationes in 7. Psalm. poenitentiales.
Domine ne in furore. Psalm 6.
1 LEt not the arm of thy heavy displeasure be lifted up against me, O
Lord. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure!
For that would be as a torrent and violent stream, to carry me headlong into
death and eternal damnation. It would be as a fire to eat up my flesh, and
turn my carcass into ashes. What eye is able to look up, and not to consume
at the very fight of thy wrathful countenance? when casting thine eye upon us,
thou shall pierce the bottom of our hearts, and discover all the secrets of our
impure consciences. Our abominable sins will draw down upon our heads thy just
indignation: and thine anger once kindled against us, will violently cast and
plunge us into that horrid and griefly gulf of hopeless torments, and
endless misery. O then let the sorrowful sobs of a trembling heart, prevent
thy fury and indignanation; and before thy sin-reuenging hand be stretched out
for my ruin and destruction, give ear unto my feeble and fainting voice,
which with woeful laments, cries unto thee,

Have mercy, O Lord, 2 Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal
me, for my bones are vexed.
have mercy upon me. Alas, my God, what will thou do? Will thou prove the
strength of thy forces, upon mine infirmities? and will thy matchless might
wrestle with my weakness? Is it to contend with thy puissance, that I present my
self before thee? Oh no: it is thy clemency, O Lord, to which I fly for
succor: she it is under whose wings I shrowde my self, as the only shield
and Sanctuary, which can preserve me from the rigor of that just doom, which
I have most justly deserved. Lord, vouchsafe me, a calm and merciful aspect.
And since I have made haste to fly unto thy Mercy-seate, make no long
tarrying, O my God, but send me succor and deliver me, from so many evils,
which have compassed and hemmed me in on every side: and wherewith I have been
so sore assailed, that my bones are bruised and broken, and my feeble body
languisheth. But well were it, if my body alone were oppressed by these cruel
encounters: my very soul is even ouerlayed, with anguish and heauiness.

This soul, O Lord, 3 My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me!
which has sometime been enflamed with the zeal of thy glory, and has sung
of thy praise, in the great Congregation, is now become desolate and dejected,
destitute of comfort, and deprived of all courage: and as the fearful dove at
the voice of thy thunder, hastes to hide her self in her hole; so is she
ready to fly into the most obscure darkness, from the terror of thy fearful
indignation.

4 Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies sake.
But how long shall thine anger continue, O Lord? Come, O come my God, and cast
down thine eye of pity and compassion upon me, which is sufficient to deface
and abolish not my sins alone, but even the sins of the whole world. My
soul is plunged in the filth and foul puddle of iniquity, she sticks fast
in the bottom, the floods run over her: unto thee O Lord, does she stretch out
her hand; O pluck her out, and bring her again into the ways of thy saving
health. Save her O Lord, even for thy boundless bounty, and thy matchless
mercies sake. True it is, that merit she has none; and how should she
expect succor from him, whom she has so shamefully forsaken, and against
whose honor she has so treacherously conspired? The price of such a forfeit,
is not grace and favor, but hell and neuer-dying death.

5 For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?
But who shall praise thee O Lord in the pit, or who shall sing of thy name
amongst the dead? There is the house of mourning, weeping, and howling. Who
has there any feeling save only of unsupportable torments, and hopeless
miseries? whereas on the contrary, thy praise consists in the publishing of
thy infinite loving kindness, bounty, and clemency.

6 I am weary of my grouing; every night wash I my bed, and water my couch
with my tears.
6 And now behold, on the one side, true Repentance intercedeth, on the other
side humble Prayer importuneth, for me; both of them having sworn never to
depart from me, until they have procured a reco^ciliation for me. Thou have
seen my tears O Lord, and heard my sighs: every day wash I my cheeks with
tears, at the remembrance of my sins, and water my couch every night with
the streams of of water that gush out of mine eyes. Yea, what is it, that
Repentance commands and I observe not?

7 Mine eyes are cast down, 7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away
because of all mine enemies.
as trembling at the terror of thine angry countenance. I do not answer to
the reproach of mine enemies, and their contumelious taunts I patiently put up,
as a just punishment for my faults. Even in their sight do I walk with
sackcloth and ashes upon mine head, and confession in my mouth: I lie
prostrate at the foot of thine altar: I macerate and fight against the flesh,
which has betrayed my soul to sin; and all my grief is but a sport unto
mine enemies: they come about me, but to laugh at me: and the drunkards make
songs on me.

8 Away from me all ye that work vanity* for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.
But, now, since it has pleased thee to have mercy on me, I will say unto them,
Away, away, from me all ye children of iniquity, and cease henceforth to
rejoice at my misery: the Lord has heard my prayer, my tears have quenched
his anger; and lo, now has he restored me joy and peace, with the full
fruition of his bounty: the glorious splendor of his grace has shined upon
me; and lo, the dark clouds and threatening tempests which hanged over my
head, are, in a trice, all dispearsed and gone.

No sooner had I opened my lips to call upon him for succor; yea, 9 The Lord
has heard my petition: the Lord shall receive my prayer.
no sooner had my heart resolved to cry to him for mercy, but straight I
perceived his grace spread over me, to comfort and refresh my languishing
soul; no less then the benumd members of a wearied pilgrim, are suppled and
refresht by a warm bath after his toilsome travel. O incredible clemency!
how ready art thou O Lord to forgive? I run to offend thee, and thou flyest
to bestow thy grace on me. I have employed all the days of my life, to find
out by sea and by land, matter for my ambition, covetousness, lusts, and
inconstancy: and when I had plunged and ruined my self in my pleasures, thou
in a moment camst down, and did deliver me. So that now behold how I
triumph over my sins, which base and abject, do follow the trophies of my
repentance, since it has found favor in thy fight. And now also my hope,
which before was as it were strangled with my many misdeedes, being revived,
and his spirits quickened, does promise and assure unto me more then all the
Empires of the world, opening unto me the highest heavens, where after the
blessed end of an hopeful life in this world, I shall enjoy the full fruition,
of divine immortality.

10 All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.
What will then become of mine enemies, when they shall see my felicity? Their
meed shall be confusion of face, and disquietnes of soul; they shall fly with
distraction and amazement, to see him so highly exalted, whom they had sought
to lay so low. These are they that made a mock at mine ashes, that derided my
fastings, that rejoiced at my tears, and (whilst I through abstinence did
fight against the flesh, the bitter enemy of my soul) did even swim in the
delights of this bewitching world: but lo, the arm of the Lord is stretched
out to beat down their insolency. O my God give them a feeling of their
offenses, and cause them to know and acknowledge the extreme danger wherein
they are; that so they may call upon thee the only remedy for all their
mischief. And as for me, since thou have cleansed my soul from that filth
wherewith it was stained, and enflamed my spirit with the fire of thy love;
teach my lips that they may sound forth thy praise: address my voice to
resound thy mercy: and so conduct and guide mine affection, that I may love
thee sincerely, and account it my greatest happiness and sovereign felicity,
to know thee, and thy sacred truth.

Beati quorum. Psalm 32.
O My God; Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.
how happy are they whose offenses thou have pardoned; and whose sins thou
have buried in oblivion. For alas; what can befall unto him, upon whom thou
shall lay the just punishment of his iniquity? Whole legions of evil besiege
him, poverty assaults him, maladies afflict him, famine presses him, and
death it self (which he wishes for, as the haven of rest after all these
tempestuous nauigations) proves but a gulf to swallow him down, unto eternal
torments.

2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose heart
there is no guile.
O then thrice happy and blessed are those, of whose actions God does not take
account, but is content that they humble themselves before him, acknowledging
their infirmity, and laying open before him the very secrets of their hearts.
For by true and unfeigned confession, and in sincerity of conscience, must we
call upon his mercy; and before him must we humble our selves, if we will
have him to hear us. [ And] as he that goes for water of the fountain, does
put down the mouth of his vessel to take in the water: so must he humble
himself before his creator, that means to draw and taste of the water of
this sacred source, from whence distill those streams which (and they only)
can purify our stained consciences.

I have thought sometime O my GOD, 3 For while I held my tongue, my bones
consumed away through my daily co^plaining.
to hide my faults from thee; and have said within my self, and how knows
he, whether I have done it or no? and so my sin took root within my bones. And
as the ulcers of a shamefast Patient, which dares not show his malady to the
Surgeon, do fester and rankle and increase even to the destruction of the
whole body: so these very vices which I hid from thee, wholly infected me.

4 For thy hand is heavy upon me, day and night: and my moisture is as the
drought in summer.
But when thy hand had been heavy upon me day and night, and when thou had
laid such sore trouble upon my loins, and so many misfortunes upon my soul,
that my spirit could take no rest, and that I was broken with the stinging of
my conscience, which did pierce my very heart; then did I acknowledge my
faults, and that thy hand had done: this. Look upon me, O Lord, but not in
thine anger: and let those tears, whose gushing streams have dimd my sight,
quench the heat of thy just indignation, since I am not only the work of thy
hands; but which is more, the living image of thy Divinity. Who will be so
far led with anger, as to bruise and break in pieces, that work which he
has had so great delight to polish, and bring to perfection, because he sees
it filthy and polluted? I confess (O Lord) this image of thine is full of
pollution and uncleanness: yet better will it be to cleanse and scour it, then
to break it and tread it under foot.

5 I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.
O teach me, then my God, what thou will require for my satisfaction: for lo,
now have I disclosed and acknowledged all my faults, which before I concealed.
The fear which had seized on me, when I hid my self from thee, is now since
I humbled my self before thee, turned into hope of grace and pardon. And now
do I cast my self into thine arms, as my most assured succor, with the
humble demeanor of a poor patient, who presenting his wounds unto the
surgeon, looks on him attentively, and suffers courageously, both the searcher
and the knife, for the desire and hope that he has to be cured of them. But
that which puts me in greatest hope of health, is, that those vices, wherein
heretofore I took greatest pleasure, are now no less odious in my sight, then
are those meats whereof a man did eat to the full, being in health, when he is
sick of their surfeit: that which had made me haughty and insolent, does now
breed in me shame and remorse, when I consider the hazard of death, whereunto
my pride has exposed my poor wretched soul. Blessed be the day, wherein I
acknowledged my fault: now have I received a singular testimony of thy bounty
toward me, O my God. Grant therefore that this pleasure which I have taken by
being displeased with my self, may be as durable, as that which before I
took, to continue in my sins. For if I may have as much contentment in my
repentance, as I have taken in my sin; my happiness shall be even equal to
that of the Angels; and I shall find, that through my humiliation, before
thee, I have mounted to the height of thy grace.

Who can doubt O Lord, 6 I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so
thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin.
but that thou have received me unto mercy? thou whose clemency and mercy is
not only unspeakable, but also incomprehensible. No sooner had I thought to
return unto thee, but thou preuentedst me: no sooner had I said, I will
confess my misdeedes, but thy grace was granted me: no sooner had I known the
punishment due to my sin, but thou did pardon me: no sooner had I taken
the rods in mine hands to chastise my flesh, but thou did take them from me:
in a word, I looked when thou would denounce war against me, and lo thou
offeredst a loving reconciliation. O how much more willing art thou O Lord, to
pardon then to punish! Can a loving father more tenderly receive his child,
when he cries him mercy, then thou receiuedst me, when I cast my self down
at thy feet? Therefore my heart danceth for joy, and boileth with a fervent
desire to praise thy Name: it reioiceth in thy grace, and accuses none for
what is done amiss, but it self; crying, it is I that willed and consented to
do it: it is I that did it: it is I that pleased my self with it: but my God
has been merciful unto me. And how could he withhold his mercy from me, when
his holy one made intercession for me?

And needful it was, alas, that he should intercede for me, 7 For this shall
every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be
found; but in the great water floods they shall not come nigh him.
when the impiety of my heart had so blinded my understanding by my wicked
thoughts, that my soul was not able any longer to lift her hands unto heaven.
What then remained for me, but that he whom thou denyest nothing, should
mediate for me? even for me, who being become my own enemy, had now no
knowledge nor will to pray for my self. But now am I comforted, since it has
pleased thee to open mine eyes, that I might see the deformity of mine own
conscience, and that thou have mollified my stony heart, that I might
entertain contrition in my soul. Which though I have not performed so soon as
I ought to have done: yet not so late, but thou have vouchsafed to receive me,
as thy custom is, to them that do not let pass all time and occasion of
repentance. For those that run unto sin, and do voluntarily neglect to
repent, when they know their fault, and have time to repent, deferring to cry
for mercy (or to make a deluge flow from their eyes) until the end of their
lives; it is greatly to be feared, that they deceive themselves; and that true
repentance will hardly after so long time, enter into their hardened hearts:
that their tears and weeping, will be but the wayling of men in desperation,
and that thy mercy will lend but a deaf ear to their too late repentance.

8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.
But as for me, I come unto thee, in an acceptable time as to my refuge, and
the mark whereat my hope aimed, and my only comfort in my tribulation which
had environed me, even as the fear seiseth upon him, who is condemned to a
shameful end. O then let me taste of that joy, which he has in his heart,
who is freed from his chains, enlarged out of prison, and healed of his pain,
wherein his enemy had long time held him captive. And on the contrary, let the
enemy of my soul be confounded with shame, when he shall see me so devoutly
calling upon my God for aid: who in the very turning of his eye, can free me
from that voluntary servitude, which I had vowed unto wicked pleasure. When I
was on me. He has not only exalted me above other creatures, giving me the
use of divine reason, but also amongst men has he exalted me, into the throne
of honor and magnificence; so that nothing was remaining, for the
accomplishing of my felicity, but only to know my own felicity: and after I
had forgotten mine own estate, he did enlighten me by his holy light, and
gave me both time and will to lament my life passed, and to amend it for the
time to come.

Be warned then by me, O my friends, and whilst it is time run unto him for
grace; Be not like Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: whose mouths
must be holden with bit and bridle least they fall upon thee.
for he himself does call you, into the way of salvation: and be not like
the selfe-wilde Mule, which has no understanding or judgment, but kicketh
against him that pricketh her, to make her go right: whose mouth must be held
with bit, and bridle, and whose sides must feel the sharp remembrance of the
spur. And so if at the first summons, which the Lord shall send to cause you
return into his ways, you will not be obedient to his will, he shall rain
upon you such a hail of miseries, as shall make you more miserable then
misery it self.

2 Great plagues remain for the ungodly but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.
You see the stars that glitter in the heavens, and the sand stretched upon
the shore: but neither has the heavens so many stars, nor the sea so much
sand, as are the plagues and punishments, which remain for the obstinate
sinners. Their own wickedness hangs over their heads, mischief attends at
their heels, until they fall headlong into that gulf, the very remembrance
whereof is full of horror; the sweetest retraites whereof, are but plaints,
cries, shreekes, and sorrowful sobbes: where is pain without end, grief
without remedy, repentance without mercy: where they are always dying, and
never dead; where the body lives only to die, and the soul only to suffer
torments: where the soul feels nothing but sin, and the body nothing but
pain. On the contrary, they who fly unto the Lord, and the covert of his
grace, who shield themselves under his mercy, and put their trust in his
bounty, who follow his commandment, and are zealous to do his will; unto
what height of happiness do they aspire? What thing is there so precious in
heaven that shall be hid from them? they shall sit by their God, and all
environed with glory, shall be invested with greater happiness, then the
spirit of man is able to conceive the least part thereof, much less my
faultring tongue able to express.

12 Be glad O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be ioifull all ye that
are true of heart.
I will be glad therefore and rejoice, O my God, to think how great good thou
have laid up in the heavens, wherewith to crown the just. And I inuit you all
to rejoice with me, who have sworn unto the words of our Savior, and love the
straight path of his justice. Here must you attend the recompense of your
travel: here shall you be placed in honor and glory: here shall you change
your rude thorns of the world, for the beautiful flowre-delice of heaven. O
how gracious and sweet repose, shall you then find after the sweat of your
afflictions. The gold is not more pure and glorious, after it has been
refined in the furnace, and made ready to receive the stamp and image of a
great Prince or serve for an ornament to some rich cabinet, then the heart of
him who loves his God, when it comes pure out of the furnace of the worlds
miseries, to be decked with splendour and glory. What is there that can
content me in this world? What shall stay or hinder me from entering into the
house of the Lord, to live for his service. How shall I forget to deplore, all
the days of my life, my sins which had put his grace so far from me?
Reconcile then in me, O my God, these two Passions; of repentance, and
consolation: that as the wandering Pilgrim having lost his way in the
wilderderness, rejoices when he sees the day to dawne, and yet forgets not
the obscure darkness, whence he is yet scarce freed, and can not as yet wholly
cast off the fear, which he had of so tedious a night: so I may ever retain
some horror of my faults passed, and yet have a certain and joyful hope of
eternal happiness, which thou have purchased for me, with the precious price
of the blood of thy most dear son. Oh how great is this love, when the Mr.
spares not the life of his only Son, to redeem his slave? And now since I
have been formed and fashioned by thy hands, purchased and redeemed with thy
blood, and purified and cleansed by thy mercy; I will offer up my self before
thee, as a sacrifice of obedience: cast me not away, O my God.

Domine ne in furore. Psalm 38.
IT is high time for me, Put me not to rebuke O Lord in thine anger: neither
chasten me in thy heavy displeasure.
O Lord, to turn again unto thee; and again as an humble suppliant to implore
thy mercy. For I feel thine anger to wax hot, against me. Alas my God will thou chastise me in thine anger, and make me to feel the violence of thy
just indignation, which my sins have provoked against me? The flame has
even consumed me, and the fire of thy fury, has eaten me up, and I am ready
to vanish away into smoke.

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.
For I feel O my God, the arrows of thy vengeance stick fast in me, and and I
am pressed down under thy heavy hand. The remorse and terrors of my
conscience, do astonish me, and bruise me like flashes of lightning and
thunderbolts: evil comes upon me as a snare, and one mischief ouer-taketh
another. No sooner is war ended, but Pestilence assaults me: and in the end
Death has taken from me my dearest pledge, which I have in this world. Wherein
then shall I receive comfort, O my God? In my self?

Alas, there is no health in any part of my body, 3 There is no health in my
flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bones by
reason of my sin.
the marrowe is consumed in my bones; there is no rest in my body: every part
reproacheth me with my sin, and suffers the pain thereof. I pine away
with grief and heaviness, and no man comfort me; my eyes serve me only to
see my misery: and my soul has no understanding or knowledge, but only of my
wretchedness.

4 For my wickedness are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear.
I cast mine eyes on every side, and I see my sins begirt me round about, and
I am ready to faint and sink down under the burden of mine iniquities: they are
mounted aloft upon my head, and are heavier then I can bear.

5 Mo wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishnes.
How shall I resist them? What strength have I to defend my self? seeing all my
bones are out of joint. The filth of my sores runs, the stench and
corruption of my wounds, and ulcers is grievous: and if my body be ill, is my
soul any better? Is not she also full of confusion, fearfulnes and trembling?
6 I am brought into so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the day
long.
Malady has worn away my body, and brought it to the door of death, and
heauiness has oppressed my soul: and disrobed her of her Virtue: And as the
young and tender budde of the Vine is congealed into sheer-wool, by the sharp
cold, and fades away: so the finger of the Lord which has touched my soul,
makes her to languish, faint, and lose her courage.

But alas (O my God) what courage can I expect to have, 7 For my loins are
filled with a sore disease, and there is no whole part in my body*
when I see my self so full of sores, and no part of my body is exempt from
pain? and which is far beyond this misery, the memory of my deceitful
Pleasures, represents it self unto me, and casts me in the teeth with my
vices, and mocketh me for my vanity. I say unto my self, did I therefore
prolong my days in the honny of so many delights, that I might after wash away
all with the gall of bitter anguish? Where art thou now O deceitful pleasure,
which have made my soul drunk with the sweet liquor of thy delights? how have
thou now forsaken me?

Have I not yet suffered enough O Lord, 8 I am feeble and sore smitten: I have
rored for the very disquietnes of my heart.
has not my humility yet sufficiently chastened mine arrogance? I have sinned
through sottish corruption; alas, since that I have cast my self down upon
the earth, I have covered my head with ashes; I have cloven my heart with
cries; I have dimmd my eyes with tears, and yet thine anger cease not. Is it
possible, O Lord, that thou have not seen my tears? Thou who with the very
turn of thine eye do trauerse heaven and earth; Thou whose sight pierces
the very bottom of our hearts;

9 O Lord thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.
Thou Lord know my thoughts, and understand my cogitations. What is it
that I desire, but thy mercy? In what do I hope, but in thy bounty?
Wherefore, have I mourned, and made open profession of my repentance, but to
condemn my self? And if my tongue has not sufficiently expressed my mind,
and is not able to utter what I desire; Thou O Lord, know what we would
before we can think it. It is enough that we lift up our heart unto thee, and
thou will presently grant what we desire.

But wherefore delayest thou O Lord, 10 My heart pants, my strength fails
me: and the sight of my eyes is gone from me.
to give thy blessed consolation, which thou have promised me? Alas, I am not
able to hold out any longer: my heart fails me, my senses are troubled, my
sight is waxed dim, my flitting soul is even ready to leave my body.

All my friends about me do bewail my death: 11 My lovers and my neighbors did
stand looking upon my trouble: and my kinsmen stood a far off.
they have given over all hope of my health, all their care is for my exequies,
and say amongst themselves, where is the help that he expected from his God;
where is that favor whereof he made himself so sure? They that privily have
laid wait for my life, are come about me: they have thought of parting my
spoil among them, so hateful am I become to the world, since thou have
dejected me.

12 They also that sought after my life laid snares for me, and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness and imagiced deceit all the day long.
They whispered among themselves, and have imagined a thousand ways to do me
mischief: they have daily laid snares to entrappe me. He is (said they upon
his deathbed, he shall never rise up again; wherefore should we fear him, who
is now but as the shadow of a man?

As for me I was as deaf as a man that hears not, 13 As for me I was like a
deaf man and heard not, and as one that is dumb, that does not open his mouth.
and as one that is dumb I answered them not: my patience was my buckler, and
constancy my bulwark. Every one that saw my patience in adversity, said that
I was dumb; because when they reproached, 14 And I am as a man that hears
not: and in whose mouth are found no reproofs
I answered not: he has (said they) put up all indignities: if there remained
in him any sense of honor, how could he show such little courage? we may well
judge him to be guilty: for innocence is always hardy and resolute in her
own defense: but notwithstanding all this I held my peace.

15 For in thee O Lord have I put my trust: Thou shall answer for for me, O
Lord my God.
For why? my hope is in God: and I am verily persuaded, that he will assist me.
Though all the world band themselves against me, though heaven and earth
conspire my ruin, yet through the help of my God, I shall still be the
vanquisher. With the breath of his mouth has he created all things: and with
the same breath he can destroy whatsoever it pleases him. I will fight under
his banner, and so I shall be certain of victory.

16 I have required that they even mine enemies should not triumph over me: for
when my feet slipped, they reioiced greatly against me.
I have often said unto them, Rejoice not at my harm, and insult not over me,
when I am afflicted and tormented; for the hand of the Lord is not so short,
but it may stretch unto you also, and presume not too much upon his long
suffering; for as his feet are of wool, so his arm is of iron: if he once
stretch it over your heads, O ye impenitent souls, he will break you in
pieces like a potters vessel, and the very remembrance of you shall be rooted
out.

As for me, I have taken the rod in mine hand, and have made the print of my
condemnation for my sin on my shoulders: I have appeared in thy presence O
Lord, 17 And surely I am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my
sight.
with tears, in mine eyes, repentance in my mouth, and war in my heart. I
have beaten down my self, for fear least mine enemy should triumph over me.

18 For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.
I have openly confessed my fault, I have acknowledged my sin in an acceptable
time: I have bin careful to run unto thee for mercy, whilst thou wast to be
found.

19 But my enemies live and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully are
many in number.
But the more I humble my self before thee, to taste of the living water of
this fountain of grace, which distilleth from thy bounty, the more mine
enemies increase: and they that would devour me guiltless, are mighty. They
gather themselves on every side, little foreseeing the tempest that will
scatter and disperse them. They kindle through their pride, the coals of thine
ire: they despite thy power, which they shall too too soon prove to their
utter ruin and destruction. In a word, caring for nothing in heaven or earth,
they wallow in their filthy pleasures, and as much as in them lies, deface
that stamp of divinity, which thou have imprinted printed in their soul; and
shut their eyes against the hope of salvation, which shines unto them out of
thy word.

20 They also that reward evil for good are against me, because I follow the
thing that is good.
I cease not my God to warn them: but they render me evil for good, and make
a mock of whatsoever I do to please thee, and be an example to them: they
traduce and slander me in the open streets, and impose upon me a thousand
wrongful imputations.

21 Forsake me not O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.
I confess O Lord, I now begin to lose patitience. But O my God repair mine
infirmity, and forsake me not: for else I shall stumble as a little child at
the first precipice that shall lie in my way. Increase in me O Lord, strength
and courage to ouercom my affliction, and keep me under the shadow of thy
wings, giving me evermore constancy and perseverance: and be unto me as a
tenderhearted mother, which can not but tender him her dugges, as often as her
babe cries for it.

Nourish me then, 22 Have thee to help me: O Lord God of my salvation.
O Lord, with the milk of thy sacred love: that so increasing from strength,
to strength I may be able to walk night and day in thy paths which lead
unto that salvation, the hope whereof shines in thy promises; that if my sin
present it self to stop me in my way, I may open the floudgates of mine
eyes, and never shut them until I have drowned and sunk it with my tears.

Psalm 51. Miserere mei Deus.
Have mercy upon me my God, 1 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after thy great
goodness: according to the multitude of thy mercy do away my offenses.
according to thy great clemency, and for thy boundless mercies sake forgive
me the punishment which I have justly deserved. For if thou expect until my
fastings, watchings and prayers shall satisfy for my sin; alas Lord, when can
this be? My trespass reaches from earth unto heaven, and surpasses in
immensitie of greatness. Who then is able to compass it, or bring it down, save
only thy sacred mercy? which as far surpasses the measure of our sins, as
the greatness of thy justice is beyond ours. It is thy mercy O Lord, which
compasses this universe, which holds together the whole frame of this world,
which otherwise is ready to dissolve and fall upon our heads, to bury through
his ruin the memory of our sins: to destroy, from before thy face, our
ingrate, disloyal, and felonious race; which disclaimeth her birth, creation
and preservation, all which it holds of thy bounty. O then let this
merciful bounty, which shines in thy Divinity, now extend it self unto me,
not sparingly, or niggardly, but fully and plentifully. As thou did once
cause the waters to pass their bounds, and cover the tops of the highest
mountains, to extirpate and sweep away the wicked inhabitans of the earth: so
now cast out the torrent of thy mercy upon me, O Lord, not to swallow me up,
but to bathe me and cleanse me from my wickedness.

2 Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness and cleanse me from my sin.
But let it not content thee O Lord, once to have made me clean, and to say
how thou have regenerated and washed me in the blood of thy chaste and innocent
lamb: for thou did not make me so white, and pure, but thou may now
find me as foul and unclean. I have plunged my self into the depth of
filth: I am so besmeared, and so disfigured, that thou will not acknowledge me
for thine. Yea, it makes me demand sometimes of my self, whether I be he
whom thy hands have created: and my heart is so full of shame and confusion,
that it dares not resolve me. O my God, thou have created me of dirt and clay:
and behold, I am become such as I was before thou spreddest thine hand over me.
I have despoyled me of my strength and my beauty, to reuest my self in mire
and filth. But wherefore O Lord, do thou not form and fashion me anew? Is
thy hand shortened? is thy willingness, to show mercy to thy creature, fallen
away? Oh thou that art Almighty! Oh, thou that art even goodness it self,
wherefore art thou so slack? O Lord, thine own work is become obstinate against
thee, and takes pleasure in disfiguring, and disforming it self: be thou as
obstinate against thy work, to make it fair and perfect in despite of it.

3 For I acknowledge my fault: and my sin is ever before me.
But O my God, I will no longer stand out in mine own conceit against thee:
hold and take me to thee: turn me as thou will, put a new print upon this
clay, renew it, put a new stamp upon it, for lo it is pressed to follow thy
will. But when thou have fashioned me anew, do not then leave me to my self, O
Lord: Put thy bridle within my mouth, that it may through abstinence, allay
that gourmandizing, which fouleth it: through chastity it may cool the
shameless heates of lusts, which inflame it: through humility, it may beat
down that pride and arrogance, which biting envy has bred in it, that
co^passionate charity, may drive from it hateful and greedy couetize: that a
care to serve and worship thee, my be as a spur always in the sides of
lazy and fetarde negligence. For otherwise O my God, too much have I proved,
how I shall be handled by these troops of vices which enuiron me. They will
deface, and throw down in such sort thy handie work, that when thou shall
come, thou shall find only the shells and shiuers all broken and bruised. I
have known them too well: these are they that have brought me to that state,
wherein I now stand: and lo they stand in array round about me, reproaching me,
and vpbrayding me with these blottes, wherewith they themselves have defiled
me, and making me guilty of those injuries which they have done me.

I have sinned, I confess O my God, I have sinned: 4 Against thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou might be justified in
thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.
lo I offer unto thee the bottom of my heart, take a view of my whole life. I
have sinned in the fight of heaven and earth, and all the world is witness of
my fault. But if I had not sinned, how could thy mercy be showed? how would
thou acquit thee of thy promises of grace, which thou have so long before
proclaimed, by the mouth of thy holy Prophets? When thou shall come to sit
upon thy eternal throne of justice, who would fear thee, if we were all just?
But that men may know and acknowledge thy greatness, it is meet that when we
shall appear before thee, we cast down our selves humbly upon our face, and
cry, O sweet Lord, we will not stand in our own defense before thee, our fault
is too manifest, but behold our pardon is in our hand: thou thy self have
given it us, lo it is signed with thy blood, sealed with thy image, which for
our redemption has been printed in the infirmity of our flesh.

Think thou my GOD that when I shall appear before thee, 5 Behold I was
shapen in wickedness: and in sin my mother conceived me.
I will put any confidence in mine own innocence, or dare to justify my
self in thy presence? Alas, I know Lord I was no sooner borne, but I sinned:
my mother looked to be delivered of a child; and lo a lump of sin? How
much better had it been, if such fruit had proved abortiue, which shameth the
tree that bare it, the earth that nourished it, and the air that breathed
upon it. I did nourish my self with sin, when I was yet in my mothers
womb, I sucked it in with her milk, and lo it is so grown up with me, that
it ouer-shadoweth my head, and casts a miste before mine eyes.

6 But lo thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me
understand wisdom secretly.
But when I see the eyes of my body, so seeled with sin, which compasses me: I
open the eyes of my soul, and begin to discern a far off the rays of thine
infallible truth, and acknowledge the marvelous secrets of wisdom, which
thou have manifested to me. Then my soul, abandoning the impuritie of my
body, lifts it self to heaven, and vieweth the circuit thereof; and
casting her eye upon the book of life, there does she peruse the treaty of the
new Covenant, which thou have made with men: and after, returning into her
miserable body, does fill it with hope of joy, promising it assured victory
over sin.

For she has learned in heaven, 7 Thou shall purge me with hysop, and I shall
be clean: thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.
that thou will take a branch of odoriferous hysope in thine hand, and wilt
sprinkle upon me the water of purification: thou will wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow: there shall no more sportes of sins appear in me. What pure
lee shall this be O Lord, which made of the cinders of my sins, consumed by
the fire of thy love, with the water of those tears which my repentance has
distilled from my heart, and in the sun of thy grace, shall wash away our
weeping, and shall breed in us spiritual joy: and in the end shall whiten in
the purity and candor of justice, 8 Thou shall make me hear of joy and
gladness: that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.
to make us hereafter shine as the stars in the firmament.

Then shall no sound enter into our ears, but of that ioifull trumpet of
salvation, which shall proclaim grace and mercy to all that will receive
them. Then shall we see our carcasses which were consumed with rottenness,
rise up out of their beds, to be partakers of this universal joy, whereunto
thou have invited the whole world.

But that I may appear before thee, 9 Turn thy face from my sins, and
blotte out all my misdeedes.
in such honorable attire, as is befitting such honorable magnificence;
tread down, O my God, all my faults under foot, bury them in the center of
the earth, that no eye may be able to see them, make an everlasting separation
betwixt me, and mine iniquity, which at this present I forsake, and from whom
I vow an irrevocable divorce.

10 Make me a clean heart O God: and renew a right spirit within me.
Receive my soul which I offer unto thee: make it pure and clean: renew in my
heart such a spirit, as shall conceive nothing but truth and holiness. Make
it, O Lord God, a temple for thy holy spirit to dwell in; that henceforth all
my thoughts may breath out nothing, but the praises of my God: that thy will
be always imprinted in my breast, and thy glory written in my lips.

When thou have so reuested and adorned me, 11 Cast me not away from thy
presence: and take not thy holy spirit from me.
with piety, and integrity, then shall I be assured that nothing can
separate me from thy presence: and then as the true eagle looks right upon
the sun, so will I fix my eyes upon the face of thine eternity, and shall
behold in thy marvelous and glorious countenance, all the perfections which I
am not able now to conceive. O let thy sacred spirit never more dislodge from
my heart: for he it is which upon the wings of zealous love, shall carry me
into thy bosom, there to make me partaker of thine heavenly joys.

12 O give me the comfort of thy help again, and establish me with thy free
spirit.
Make me then evermore to taste the sweetness of this immortal life: save me
speedily, from the rocks of this world, which on every side threaten
shippewracke. And as the Mariner now comne unto the haven, crowns the maste
of his ship with garlands in sign of safety: so crown me my God with the
precious gifts of thine holy spirit, for pledges of everlasting blessedness,
which thou have promised me. I say, of thy spirit which reigns among thy
faithful, which gives faith to thine elect, love to thy beloved, and hope to
them, whom thou have predestined.

And so whilst my soul shall abide in this exile, 13 Then shall I teach thy
ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
waiting when thou shall call him home, I will teach thy ways unto the wicked,
by following which, they may please thee; and will direct them how to pass
through the darkness of this world, without stumbling at such offenses, as
daily offer themselves: they shall believe me, and so be converted unto thee,
O father of light: they shall receive thy faith into their hearts, and shall
walk in thine obedience.

14 Deliver me from bloud-thirstiness O God, thou that art the God of my
health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.
I know O Lord, that some will against my voice stop their ears, and
obstinately persist in their vices; they will conspire my death, and seek to
drench their barbarous cruelty, with my blood. Deliver me from their hands O
God, and preserve me, that I may declare thy justice, and pronounce their
condemnation. I will foretell their wretchedness, and they shall feel it: yea,
as soon as I have made an end of speaking it, thy hand shall smite them: and
no sooner shall thy hands have smitten them, but they shall be broken like a
Potters vessel, and come to sudden destruction.

Then shall thou open my lips, 15 Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, and declare thy victory: the air
shall be calm, the wind shall cease, the rivers shall stay their course to
hearken to my voice, whilst it shall chaunt and resound the marvelous acts of
the eternal God. For thy praise shall ever be the sacrifice which I will offer
unto thee, and which shall be ever acceptable in thy sight.

16 For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.
I would ere this have filled thine aultars with the blood of beasts: I would
have slain a thousand oxen and a thousand sheep to thine honor: but blood
does stink in thy nostrils, thou art not pleased with flesh: the smoke of such
offerings does but vanish in the air, and can not ascend up unto thee: it is
the voice alone of a righteous man, which finds passage into heaven, and
therein is presented unto thee.

17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, and a contrite heart O Lord,
shall thou not despise.
Oh how acceptable, a sacrifice before thee is a heart pierced with repentance!
an heart humbled and dejected in the knowledge of its sins! never shall such a
one be rejected. For the way to ascend unto thee, is to desce^d in our selves:
to touch the heavens, we must fall down grouelling upon the earth: to be heard
of thee, we must be silent: and to be crowned in thy kingdom, we must
suffer pain and affliction in this world. These are the sacrifices by which
we must make an atonement to thee, and enter into that covenant which thou
have appointed.

And if thou will O Lord, 18 O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou
the walls of Jerusalem.
that we offer oxen and bulls, that we make thine altar fat with the blood
of beasts; if thou will that by the death of the innocent holocaust, we shall
represent the death and innocence of him whom thou have destinied for the
redemption of our souls; if the figuring of that which is to come, in the
person of that immaculate lamb, be acceptable, in killing of Sheep and
Rams: O then look down with thy eye of pity upon thy poor people, comfort
thy distressed Sion, give courage to her poor inhabitants, that they may
repair the decayed walls of thy holy city, and build up thy temple, though
not with that glory which thou deseruest, yet with as great as the riches of
this world will retch unto.

Thither then shall all thy faithful flock come from all parts to sacrifice
unto thee: 19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness,
with the burnt offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullockes
upon thy altar.
and there shall thou accept the propitiation for their sins. But O my God, it
is neither the blood nor death of beasts, which can wash away their offenses:
the expiation of their disobedience and stubbornness is prepared from all
eternity.

This is that inestimable sacrifice, that immaculate holocaust, which shall
take away the veil, dispell the darkness, break the partition wall; to make
us see face to face, the truth of our salvation; to make the bright beams of
mercy shine upon us, and to resume us unto the communion of that eternal
happiness, from which we of our selves had fallen. O most merciful God,
which have opened the eyes of mine understanding, to see the mystery of my
salvation; make me O Lord, by a lively faith, to taste of that fruit, which
flourished upon the tree of the Cross, and shall quicken with his juice
mortified souls: preserve and heal us for ever from that misery and
calamity, which has so miserably fallen upon the race of man, and has been
derived from the first to the last through their disobedience.

Psalm 102. Domine exaudi.
1 Hear my prayer O Lord: and let my crying come unto thee.
O Lord, I have long cried unto thee for mercy, and am still to attend on thee
for succor. The air is filled with my cries: the winds have carried the
voice of my complaint to the end of the earth; and thine ear which hears
me from the depth of hell, does not hearken unto my prayer, which pierces
unto the very heavens. Will thou then O Lord, be only deaf to me? and shall
all the world hear my moan before thee? No, no my God thou have been absent
from me too long to reject me, now when I come unto thee for succor.

Turn not away thy face from me* O Lord, 2 Hide not thy face from me in the
time of trouble: Incline thine ears unto me when I call, O hear me, and that
right soon.
now when so many thousands of griefs lay hold on me, and so many mischiefs
assault me. Alas, I have placed all my hope of rising, in the mild look of
thy countenance. I have forsaken the world, to draw near unto thee. I have
abandoned the children of the earth, to ioin my self to the Master of heaven:
and will thou now forsake me? O do not so good Lord: but assist and
strengthen my weakness all the days of my life; that as soon as I shall lift
my voice unto thee, so soon I may feel the comfort of thy presence: and let
thy grace speedily descend upon me, as an Eagle hastes to succor her young.
For unless thou assist me, how shall I be able to fight against the enemies of
my soul?

3 For my days are consumed away like a smoke, and my bones are burnt up as
it were with a firebrand.
My strength fails me, and my life daily consumes as a smoke that vanishes
away into naught: the same eye that sees it rise out of the fire, sees it
also dispersed, and in the same moment sees both its beginning and its end:
man may look after it; and lo, not so much as the trace thereof it self. He
that has noted the small branches cut off the trees, and laid in the sun,
how soon they lose both sap and verdeur; may suppose he sees my bones
which are dried up, and fallen away, and fit for nothing but a Tomb. A Tomb
no doubt might make me happy, if a small grave could stay the course of my most
extreme misery.

He that has seen the grass cut down in the meadows, 4 My heart is smitten
down, and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread.
how it fades, changes his lively hew, and withers, let him look upon my
face, so wan and pale, that I look like death it self. My heart is scorched
in the midst of my entralls, and my blood is dried up within my veins, because
I remember not to put bread within my mouth, and forget to take my daily repast.

5 For the voice of my groaning my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.
My mouth serves me but to lament and cry: and the voice of my daily
complaints is so strong that it spends all the rest of my vigor, so that my
body, consuming with heauiness, falls away by little and little, and now my
bones appear most woefully through my skin. Why then do I care to remain any
longer in this body, the subject of my misery? Why do I watch to preserve
this life, which wrestleth against so many miseries? which is clean spent with
so many afflictions? Were it not much better for me, with the end of my life,
to end my miseries?

The Pellicane that in the solitary deserts of Egypt, 6 I am become like a
Pellicane in the wilderness: and like an Owl, that is in the desert.
tormenteth her self with grief, to have slain her young ones, besprinkles
them with her own blood, to restore them that life which she had taken from
them; is not more sorrowful the^ I, nor makes more grievous moan then I. Has
not my sin procured the death of my dearest child, which I loved more then my
self? And now that I have already spent all my tears, the blood is ready to
spring forth of my eyes, least my plaints should fail in so woeful a case.
But the Pelican redeemeth her young, by the price of her blood: and I miserable
wretch shall be utterly deprived of the child, which I so tenderly affect. I
forsake the day and the light, and confine my self in the obscure darkness, as
a doleful Owl, which goes not out of her hole, until the night with his
sable mantle have covered the earth.

I watch continually and take no rest, 7 I have watched, and am even as it were
a sparrow that sits* alone upon the house top.
I seek to hide me from mischief, which comes upon me as an armed man. I
am quite discomfited, my courage fails me: I do nothing but search for a
corner to hide me in: even as a solitary sparrow, which beaten with wind and
rain, does seek some couerture, where she may shrowde her self from the
rain, and also receive some heat from the sun.

8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long, and they that are mad upon me are
sworn together against me.
Mine enemies seeing me thus dejected, revile me, and make a mock of my
misery: they that were wont to make much of me, in stead of condoling with me
in mine affliction, have conspired against me. What shall we then account of
the goods of this world, when the greatest riches, a man can attain unto, is
to have many friends; and yet friends are so double, that they make small
reckoning of violating their faith.

Behold, 9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread and mingled my drink with
weeping.
my glory is decayed, the flower of my beauty is fallen away, and withered;
for I have cast ashes upon my bread, and mingled my drink with tears. But
shall I for this, be still a laughing stock to this wicked race of infidels?

I am come indeed before thy face, 10 And that because of thine indignation,
and wrath: for thou have taken me up and cast me down.
in the day of thy displeasure: thou have laid upon me the arm of vengeance,
and it has beaten me down, and laid me in the dust. I had magnified my self
among men, and lo now am I brought low. O vain presumption! to what height
have thou made me mount, to give me the greater fall? Alas, what could I
find in my self, which could breed in my heart so high a self-conceit?

11 My days are gone like a shadow, and I am withered like grass.
As the shadow of a body decreaseth by little and little, according as the sun
rises higher and higher over it, until it appear but as a point: so as soon
as thine anger was risen over me, O Lord, my life, my goods, and my greatness
did by little vanish and turn to naught: so that now, behold I am but as the
hay spread upon the ground, without grace, and without color: they bind it up
in bottles to feed their sheep: and al those glorious flowers which before
were so sweet and fragrant, are now bound up together with the thistle and
hemlocke.

But what? shall I therefore give over all hope? 12 But thou O Lord shall endure
for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all generations.
Not so my God: for thy might is immense, and shall never decay: Thy mercy is
infinite, and shall extend over all those that trust in thee. One age
succeeds another: but the memorial of thy loving kindness, shall endure for
ever. One generation goes, and another generation succeeds, and all shall
recount thy praise, and magnify thy goodness.

13 Thou shall arise and have pity upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea the time is come.
Thou shall at length arise O Lord, and be merciful unto Sion, for the time
approaches. Behold, I see it at hand. The Rivers do not se^d so much water
into the wide bosom of the Ocean, as thy bounty will shower bounty and graces
upon the face of this land. Open your hearts, O ye people, open your hearts
wide: for the liberal hand of my God will fill you, with a holy zeal, which
shall purify you, and make you as fair beaten gold.

For the edifice of Sion, 14 And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and
it pitieth them to see her in the dust.
O Lord, is the refuge for thy servants: this is it they love so well, this is
it they desire so ardently: this is it where they wait for thy mercy: this is
the temple O Lord, which thou will destroy in three days, and in three days
build again, to be the mansion of life eternal, the seat of salvation, the
storehouse of grace, the temple of eternity.

Then my God, 15 The Heathen shall fear thy name O Lord: and all the kings of
the earth thy majesty.
shall the nations stand amazed: and the kings of the earth shall tremble at
the brightness of thy glory. What corner of the earth shall be so secret, but
that thither also shall spread the fruit of thy blessed coming? What people
shall there be so remote from the sun, so confined in darkness, which shall
not open their eyes to behold the glorious luster of salvation, which shall
shine unto them? The heaven shall increase the number of his lamps, to give
light at thy glorious entrance into the world: and kings shall come from far,
to do homage to the King of Kings, and Lord of heaven and earth.

For he has exalted his throane in Sion, with great and magnificent
preparation: there shall men see him environed with glory, and obscuring the
Sun and Moon with the brightness of his countenance. But wherefore have thou O
Lord, so highly exalted the throne of thy glory?

Is it to this end that thou might contemn the humble prayers of thy faith
full servants, 16 When the Lord shall build up Sion, and when his glory shall
appear.
and to neglect all the world, which is nothing in comparison to thy greatness?
Ah, nay, my Lord. Thou have therefore set thy self in a place so eminent, to
the end that all the inhabitants of the earth might see and acknowledge thee to
be their God: and to run to thee for grace and mercy: for thou art ever ready
pressed, to incline to the humble call of thy servants, and never disdainest
their pitiful request. Look now upon them al arraignd like poor prisoners
condemned to the chain, who attend the view of some King, to be by him
delivered at the day of his coronation. Even so deliver these O Lord, who are
sold under the slavery of sin: and at the turn of thine eye, all their irons
shall fall from them.

Then shall they be heard to chaunt out the song of glory, 18 This shall be
written for them that come after: and the people which shall be borne shall
praise the Lord.
to the victorious king: their voice shall be heard throughout all the parts
of the earth: and the memorial of thy singular bounty, and infinite mercy
shall be engraven in men's hearts, to remain from generation to generation to
all posterity. The Earth shall melt away, the waters shall be dried up, the
air shall vanish, the heavens shall pass away, and be no more: but the
memorial of thine abundant kindness, O eternal God, shall endure for ever.

Thou art the everlasting God, 19 For he has looked down from his sancturie;
out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth.
who have daind to cast down thine eyes from heaven, to behold the neathermost
parts of the Earth, to take notice of their torments, who lie fast bound in the
depth, who have heard their groanings, and immediately run to their succor,
to unbind and set at liberty these poor prisoners, and their whole
posterity. Death has vanquished them by the strength of sin* and had shut
them up in dark dungeons: but the Lord of life, has conquered death, and has
given full deliverance.

That so they might declare thy praise O Lord in Sion, 20 That he might hear
the mournings of such as be in captivity: and deliver the children appointed
unto death.
and proclaim thy clemency in Jerusalem. But though every one of them had an
hundred tongues, and though their voice were as strong as thunder, yet would
they not be able to reach unto the greatness of thy glory: 21 That they may
declare the name of the Lord in Sion, and his worship at Jerusalem.
though all the parts of the world conspire in one, to represent in their
motions some part of thy might and infinite bounty, yet can they reach no
further: for these are depths, and the depths of depths, which have no bottom
nor bound, and which we are not able to see, but a far off.

22 When the people are gathered together and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.
Let it then suffice, O my God, that thy people assembled and reunited both in
body and mind, do with humble devotion offer up unto thee, the will they have
to honor thee: for the effect is not able to approach to that, which to thee
is due. Let it be acceptable in thy sight O Lord, that the kings of the earth
do prostrate themselves at thy feet; and do tender that homage and service,
which is due to thee, as to their sovereign Lord. They shall lay down their
scepters on the earth, and their crowns at their feet, and shall present an
innocent conscience, as a sacrifice of an humble devotion. I will be the
first, O my God, that will prostrate my self before thee, to worship and serve
thee with my whole heart: On thee only will I fix my thoughts: to thee will I
consecrate my spirit. Quicken it O Lord; that being purified with the sacred
ardour of thy love, it may (as a most pure mirror) receive in it the image of
thy incomprehensible beauty and perfection, and may feel in it self the
reflection of thy sincere amity, until thy infinite beauty shall associate it
unto the number of thine elect, to be with them coheir of everlasting life.

23 He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.
Now my God, do I feel that thou have enlightened my soul with thy grace, and
have first felt the favor which thou will bestow upon the sons of men. My
spirit has already seen a far off how thou will come to redeem the world; but
it fears it shall dye before thy coming; and this is the cause, why it has
cried unto thee, saying; Tell me O Lord, what shall be thee course of mine age,
and when thou will end my days?

Cut not off the thread of my life O Lord, 24 But I said, O my God take me not
away in the midst of my age: as for thy years they endure throughout all
generations.
at the first or second turn of the spindle, and take me not away in the
middle of my course. Let me live O my God until the time come, wherein thou
shall open the treasures of thy graces, to bestow among men the largess of
salvation: or at least if thou have so determined of mine end, that my life
may not continue till then; remember my posterity, and let him spring of my
race, that by his coming shall redeem and sanctify the earth.

I know O Lord, that thou have from the beginning fashioned the heaven and the
earth, 25 Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth:
and the heavens are the works of thy hands.
and whatsoever is good, and excellent in the world, is the work of thine
hands.

But all the universal shall wax old as does a garment: they vanish away, and
shall be no more to be found: it has been created, 26 They shall perish but
thou shall endure, they shall all wax old as does a garment; And as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed,
and it shall be dissolved: it has had a beginning, and must have an end.

But thou O Lord, art from everlasting, and thou shall continue the same for
ever. Time and continuance, which consume all things, do only serve to
confirm thy being, and to publish thy divinity: 27 But thou art the same and
thy years shall not fail.
and men do live upon the earth that they may contemplate on the one side,
thine incomprehensible greatness, and on the other side, their own
infirmity. Man goes from place to place, and the same land does change her
inhabitants: one drives out another, and all is renewed in a moment: but thou
my GOD art yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Every province of the
earth can reckon up great numbers of Kings, which have reigned one after
another: but the the heaven and the earth do continually sing, that thou have
ever been God alone, always admirable alone: and that thy goings out and thy
commings in, have ever been without change.

28 The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.
Now O Lord, when I shall depart hence, I do verily believe, that I shall taste
of that sweet fruit, which shall heal us of this contagious malady (which
has been derived from our first Parents, for eating the forbidden fruit) of
death, and sin. For our children shall come after us, and thou O Lord, shall
continue our posterity, until we shall come to appear together before thy
face: not to receive a rigorous doom; but by the merit and intercession of thy
beloved Son, to enter into that inheritance of everlasting blessedness, which
shall be given to all thy faithful, by the adoption of the sons, in the
family of thy servant David.

Psalm 130. De profundis.
1 Out of the deep have I called unto thee O Lord: Lord hear my voice.
OVt of the deep bottom of the depth, I cried unto thee my God: lost and
covered in the fearful cauernes of the earth, I called upon thy name.
Hearken unto my voice, give ear unto my prayer. For all hope of succor was
gone; I looked about me, and behold nothing but horror and fearfulness: yet
have I not lost courage, but waited for that which thou have promised to all
those who live in fear of thy name, and are obedient to thy commandments.

Bow down then O Lord, 2 O let thine ears consider well the voice of my
complaint.
a favorable ear to my complaint. If sin have interposed it self between
thee and me, to exasperate thee against mine offenses, and to move thee
against my prayer, which I make unto thee; drive it out of the sight of thine
eye of mercy: or rather O Lord, close for a while thine eye of justice, until
the ear of thy clemency have received my confession, and the humble request
which I make unto thee. For I come not to stand upon mine own justification;
but upon thy gentleness and bounty.

3 If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is don amiss; Oh Lord who may
abide it?
If thou should keep a register of our faults, and call us to a strict account
for them, who could endure O Lord the rigor of thy judgment? What day is
there of my whole life, that deserves not a whole age of torments? Thou
might bring upon me all the punishments of hell, and yet the greater part
of my sins remain unpunished.

But thou art ready to receive to mercy the sinner that comes to thee with
confession in the mouth, 4 For the^^ mercy wi^^ thee: therefore shall thou be
feared.
and contrition in the heart. No sooner has he looked toward thy mercy; but
he feels it work in him, breaking and dissoluing sin, which had frozen his
heart with fear and amazement. The punishment which hangs over his head,
departs far from him; carrying away with it, this miserable carefulnes,
which is a hell to the consciences contaminated with iniquity. For this cause O
Lord, would I never utterly forsake thy law: but have always attended, when
it would please thee to be gracious unto me. For he that is ill advised, and
desperate in his sin, and abandoneth his soul, as past recovery, does like to
the abominable usurer, who because he has suffered some loss of goods, goes
and hangs himself.

5 I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him, in his word is my trust.
My soul has not done so: for even then when she felt thine hand heavy upon
me* exacting part of the punishment, which my faults had merited; yet did she
still hold fast the hope in thy promises.

6 My soul flies unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say before the
morning watch.
When the stripes were multiplied upon my back, I cried unto thee, O Lord, Thy
will be done: only give me as much strength as affliction. Measure my pain
according to my vigor: and if thou increase my ^orment, augment my cou^age:
and so have thou dealt with me O Lord.

Let all true Israelites therefore both day and night, 7 O Israel trust in the
Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him there is plentious
redemption.
but their confidence in God, ^ook upon him, and to him ^lone for all their
succor: ^or his succor is ready, and never fails those that with
integrity of conscience, and purity of will call upon him. Though their
trouble be great and terrible, as soon as the Lord does incline his ear to
their cry, so soon shall they find themselves delivered. For he abounds
with mercy, and never fails to succor those who make their recourse to him.
Insomuch, that his bounty takes away all the sorrow, that we had for being
sinners; and makes us as it were rejoice that we had fallen; as at the cause,
for which we have had such trial of his mercy: for if our faults surmount
measure, his grace exceeds all imagination. We have deserved a long and hard
captivity; but lo, he has delivered us, and set us at most sweet liberty:
we have blinded the eyes of our understanding; and lo, ^ee comes to
illighten ^s. O Israel, ye have sinned against the Lord: ye have made a mock
at his law, and sported your selves in ^he breach of his commandments, and
forgotten his ^ounty so plentifully pow^ed upon you.

He has freed thee from miserable bondage: 8 And he shall redeem Israel: from
all his sins.
he has ^ed thee with bread from ^eauen: he has made ^^reames to gush out of
the ^ard rock, to give thee drink: he has given thee the most delicious
garden of the earth for thine habitation: he has made a covenant with thee,
and made thee know his will. But ye have conspired against his honor, gone a
whoring after strange Gods, and trodden his law under your feet: in a word, ye
have merited all the punishments of hell: and yet still does he offer himself
most graciously unto thee: he will redeem thee with the price of his blood,
from the slavery of sin, to which thou had of thine own accord bound thy
self. Behold him, who himself pays the ransom, for those that have
betrayed him; who takes upon himself the punishment of our backsliding, and
the payment of our forfeit. With what words shall we render him thanks? Open
my lips, my God, my Creator, my Redeemer, that my voice may be lifted up in
that measure, as mine heart is enflamed with a boiling affection to give thee
praise and thanks, and to abase my self in the knowledge of my self; that I
may rouse up my spirits in the knowledge of that sacred mystery, whereby we
are reincorporated with thee, and admitted again to thy covenant, to enter
into this blessed participation of glory; wherein all those shall triumph, who
shallbe partakers of the merit of the passion of thy well-beloved Son, the
true and only Savior of the world.

Psalm 143. Domine exaudi.
O Lord, 1 Hear my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for
thy truth and righteousness sake.
man is weary in the end of all things: the continuance of his course puts
him out of breath: too much seeing, dimmeth and dazeleth his eyes: the
clatering sound deafeth his ears: but the more I cry unto thee, the stronger
is my voice, my courage increases, and my prayer is the more pleasing to me:
and all because I begin my daily petitions, with Lord hear my prayer, and give
ear to my supplication: for in praying to thee my God, consists al my
comfort. This is my prayer, O Lord, which does conjure thy clemency, to
expiate my sins; not by the rigor of thy punishment, but by the effect of
thy grace, whereby thou have abolished and cast away from thy sovereign and
powerful might and majesty, the memory of mine offenses.

2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified*
Deal not then in justice, with thy servant, neither give him over to the
rigor of thy law: for of all men ^^uing, that shall appear before the seat
of thy judgment, no man shall be justified, no man shall escape this
fearful condemnation; the punishment whereof is horrible, and the horror
immortal. Alas, O Lord, who can justify himself before thee? It is thou that
art offended; it is thou that shall accuse us; it is thou that have seen our
faults, and wilt bear witness; it is thou that wilt judge us. When the
accuser shall be witness, and the witness judge, what shall then become of the
guilty? what cause shall serve to clear him? But I will not stand out O Lord,
to come to this issue. I will arm me with thy grace, and oppose that as a
buckler to thy justice. Thy grace is procured by the acknowledgement of our
faults, and humbling of our spirit. Lo, I lie prostrate before thy feet,
confessing my sin; O Lord have mercy upon me.

3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul: he has smitten my life down to
the ground, he has laid me in the darkness, as one that had been long dead.
My sin O my God, the capital enemy of my soul, has so discomfited and
beaten me down, that I go groueling upon the earth, not daring to lift up
mine eyes unto heaven. For as soon as I lift up mine eyes; lo, the light
shines upon me, to bring unto light, all my manifold offenses, which accuse
my conscience. And I feel withal shame to cover my face; a face unworthy to
look up unto heaven; the king whereof it has so grievously offended; a face
too cowardly to cast up his eyes to those places, where are so many thunders
and lightning prepared, for the destruction of guilty sinners.

My spirit then has led me into the darkness, 4 Therefore is my spirit vexed
within me, and my heart within me is desolate.
and has buried me in the grave, as one that is dead. My soul within me is
heavy, and my heart is troubled: even like him, who walking lofty with hye
bent looks, falls unawares into the bottom of some pit, presently his
soul is troubled; he loses his understanding; he vexes and tormenteth
himself; he knows, neither what to will, or what to do; until his spirits
returning unto him, he begins to consider his estate, and the place wherein
he is, and the manner of his fall: then he begins by little and little to
regaine the top, and with great pain and labor to wind himself out of the
place, into which he so easily fell: so I having called to mind, as much as is
possible, things past, 5 Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon al thy
works: yea I exercise my self in the works of thy hands.
and having entered into a profound meditation of the works of thine hands; and
having exactly considered the perfection of all things, which thou have
created; then calling to mind the estate wherein thou have created me; and
then proposing to my self, that wherein now I find my self, as it were
overwhelmed under the ruin of sin; I curse to my self the hour wherein my
mother conceived me, and the day that first opened my eyeliddes to make me see
heaven and earth, the witnesses of mine infirmity: and in the end finding
nothing in this world that could comfort me, in this distress, I address my
self yet further unto thee.

6 I stretch forth my hand unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land.
I fall down on my knees before thee, and stretch out my hands and arms to
thee: and my soul thirsting after thy grace, does attend with as great desire,
as the thirsty and scorched earth, does expect a gracious rain in the heat of
summer.

Help me then, and that soon, O my GOD: 7 Hear me O Lord: and that soon: for
my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy face from me, least I be like them that
go down into the pit.
for I am already clean out of breath; my heart fails: lo, how I fall into
a swoun. Will thou, Lord delay, till death has seized on me? I am even
already at Deaths door, if thou make not have: for my senses decay by little
and little; my soul is as it were in a trance, and my body without motion. If
thou O Lord, be far from me, if thou hide thy face from me, I shall be
like unto those that go down into the depth of Hell: Pale death will sit upon
my face, and seize on my senses: and which is worst, spiritual death will slay
my soul, fill it with fright and horror, and utterly deprive it of the
knowledge of thy singular bounty, and the hope of grace, which shines in thy
miracles, as a glittering star, in the obscure darkness of the night.

8 O let me hear of thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust: show me then the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.
Cause me then to understand and feel the effects of thy mercy betimes: and in
the morning when the sun begins to rise upon the earth, let thy mercy
also rise upon me to enlighten mine ignorance, and conduct me in the ways of
thy commandments. Yet let it not, O Lord, be wholly like the sun, which at
the end of his course goes to plunge himself in the sea, hiding for a time
his light from silly men: but let it assist me perpetually, and be as
indiuidual a guide unto my soul, as is my soul unto my body: for the life of
my soul, does more strictly depend upon thy mercy, then the life of my body
does upon my soul. O then let her never forsake me: but let her light always
direct my goings in thy ways, that I never wander out of that path through
which alone I must come unto thee. For otherwise my spirit which is entangled
amongst the briers and brambles of this world, and wandereth in the thickets,
were never able to find out the right way; but posting along at adventure,
might lose both labor and travel, never near that place where she desires
to arrive. But my hope is always in thine aid, and I look for succor from
above.

9 Deliver me O Lord, from my enemies: for I fly unto thee to hide me.
I am held captive of those that cruelly thirst after my life: hasten thee O
Lord, to my deliverance: to thee I fly for succor: O receive me into thy
protection; teach me what I shall do: for to thee alone my God, do I tender
my service.

Away, away from me, 10 Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for
thou art my God: let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of
righteousness.
thou deceitful* pleasure, which heretofore have bewitched my soul, and
poisoned my spirit: thou have fed me with thy too too pleasing delicates, to
make me with a little honey swallow down a deadly poison of hemlocke; which
distilling into all my members, has made them half dead and void of sense: so
that now I am little better then a dead man. But which is worse; not my body
alone, but even my soul also, the fountain of my life present and to come is
benumbed.

11 Quicken me O Lord for thy name sake: and for thy righteousness sake bring my
soul out of trouble.
It is time the^ that thy spirit come to rouse up my dying soul, to take her by
the hand, and lead her into a place of safety, to quicken her and imprint in
her the image of thy justice; that, that may be her shield against all
temptations, which besiege her on every side, and threaten her final ruin.
Thou shall come then, and by thy coming draw my soul out of tribulation,
receive me unto to mercy, and destroy all those that have conspired against
me.

Then shall my war be at an end, 12 And of thy goodness slay mine enemies,
and destroy all them that vex my soul, for I am thy servant.
and theirs begin: yea, with such a beginning as shall continue in endless
grief: and as the rivers running from their fountain still enlarge themselves
until they come into the sea; so shall their misery increase from day to day,
and in the end plunge them into extreme languor and hopeless distress. And
this shall be the end of all those that vex my soul: for I am thy faithful
servant O Lord, and thou will not cast me out of thy remembrance; but wilt call
those to account, who in reproach of my GOD, have so shamefully handled me.
They laughed at my harm; but lo, the time is at hand, when they shall
bewail their own. Thy vengeance begins to flame against them, and men shall
see them fall away, as leaves from the trees at the approaching of vvinter. How
shall I glorify thy name O GOD? And where shall I begin to set forth thy
praise? Shall I declare thy bounty in the creation of so many admirable
works as are under the Sun? and thy wisdom in preserving them?

Shall I proclaim thy justice in condemning and taking vengeance of the pride
of Angels, and disobedience of men?

Shall I sing of thy mercy in redeeming of those, who by forsaking of thy law
fell headlong into the slavery of eternal death?

To what part of thy praises is the base tune of my voice able to stretch? or
were my voice sufficient, what ears were able to receive it?

All things fail me O Lord, in this enterprise, save only courage, and will:
which, filled with a vehement and fervent affection, cry out unto thee as
loud as they can.

Assist their vveake essays with thy grace: and since the tears of my
repentance have vvashed away the foulness of my sins, wherewith my spirit
was ouercharged, dejected and pressed down; give me henceforth the wings of
faith and hope, whose swift flight may carry me into thy bosom, to be
reunited to his first original: that I may never hereafter entertain any
other thought, then what may tend to the furtherance of thy service, and the
advancement of thy glory.

FINIS.

