THE YOVNG-MANS Warning-peece: OR, A Sermon preached at the burial of WILLIAM
ROGERS Apothecary.

With an History of his sinful Life, and woeful Death.

Together with a Postscript of the use of Examples.

Dedicated to the Young Men of the Parish, especially to his Companions.

By Robert Abbot, Vicar of Cranebrooke in KENT.

Prove. 7.23. The young Fool, as a Bird, hasteneth to the snare, and knows
not that it is for his life.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for P. Stephens and C Meredith, and are to be sold at
their Shop at the sign of the Golden Lion in Paul's Church Yard. 1639

To all the Young Men of my Parish, especially to late Companions of William
Rogers, Apothecary, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dearly beloved Young Men, that this Sermon (in effect) was preached by me,
among you, you know, and the occasion you know too When I preachd it, it came to
your ears, and it wrought something in some of your eyes, but I little thought
to have presented it to your eyes again. Importunities from abroad, and at
home, have pressed me to make this adventure. And now it is come, to whom
should it come, but unto you? It is true, my love to that dead Young Man, made
me willing to satisfy his desire: and your desires to have it, have not made
me willing thus to send it unto you. Yet your courses being the occasion of
it, and your welfare being the end of it; you may justly challenge it, and shall
not by me be robbed of your right. Who knows whether God may leave a
blessing behind? I cannot be assured, that, for the word of God handled in it,
or for me the poor instrument that is used in it, ye will make much use of it
for your good; because (I fear) ye so often prefer an alehouse before the
house of God. It may be, ye had rather be without it, than have it; because the
sight of it, to you, will be a sting; the sight of it, to others, will be but
a remembrancer to them, to call upon you still to forsake those courses which
ye love. Yet herein have I hope, that you will love to see the picture of him
being dead, whom ye loved and followed as your Doctor while he lived. If it be
not drawn to life, my eyes, ears, and understanding much fail me, besides,
many witnesses will not fail to say, that all is true. I am sure, it is so for
substance: and if it be colored otherwise, even at the first it was rudely
drawn, it is for your sakes, that you may still see him the more perfectly,
and know your own estate.

You have had (in your days) many examples, teaching, that there is no
bargain to be had in a wicked way; it is folly to lay out your silver, and not
for bread. But to have two in one year, lays the axe to the root of the trees
of the Wood, and preaches, that except ye amend, ye shall likewise perish.
Not only as they but worse.
Ye have seen two Apothecaries different in their course. The one so many
ways looking home-ward, So he was accounted of all about us some years before
he dyed.
that he died miserably rich; the other so lashing outward, that he dyed
miserably poor. Both of sweet and mild natures, and of different ways in
life: So may a good man have, by some distemper or over-powring temptation, to
lash some sin for the example of others.
yet both of uncomfortable passages out of the world. The one having first the
devil presenting himself unto him to be his Physician: and next CHRIST
sitting on the Throne, condemning his unprofitable life, and bidding him shift
for himself, for he would have nothing to do with him. The other, as if he
would prevent Christ, condemning himself to hell for ever, and ever. The one
(being very rich, and having no children) was pressed by me, while he was in
peace, and before his last Will was settled, of his thousands to give but one
hundred pounds, for the repairing of the Church, or other pious works. But if
he were worth ten thousand (as he said) he would not give a penny, beside what
he had given by will; that is, twenty Marks to the poor, ten pounds to me, and
some other petty Legacies. I mean an uncomfortable death, not judging his
eternal estate.
If I were rich, I should be loath to pay so dear for such a denial, as he did
in the end, full of horror to the last. The other (being very poor) was
pressed by me again and again, but to believe in Christ for salvation. But I
could not (for ought I saw) prevail neither. The one had lived well, except
his misery: the other had lived ill, and so in misery worse. I know you fear
not the danger of ^he first example: for you are out of the way of being too
rich. If you have enough to go like gallant Blades, it is all you desire: yet
if you have not, your credit must be good till the quarter day, or the good
market comes. But may you not fear the danger of the second? Him ye loved
enough, his courses ye love too well. The Alehouse must be your Chapel,
Kitchen, Workhouse: the first draught is your prayer, the next your breakfast,
and the last your work. Yet if ye had but a Priest that would prophecy of Wine
and strong drink, and say, Come let us fill our selves with Wine and strong
drink, to morrow shall be as this d^y, and much more abundant, he were the
only man, and you the only people of the world I know you think yourselv's very
familiar with Christ, as if he would pass by these slips of youth, and
embrace you in the arms of his mercy upon the least call. But you forget that
Christ has now taken state upon him. He was an Infant crying in the Cratch,
and then he was circumcised by wicked Priests, carried by an Ass into
Jerusalem, He was a Preacher in Israel, and then he was pressed upon by all,
and sought to be entangled by his enemies. He was a worker of miracles here,
and then sick souls and bodies troubled him* He was under arrests and
executions* and then Judas did kiss, Soldiers buffeted and spit upon him, and
Jews and Gentiles killed him. But now the case is altered, his present state
admits no such near approach. Will you say he is my sweet Savior still? Go
then and tell him so: say; Lord, I am idle, unprofitable, and luxurio^s, but
thou art my sweet Savior still. Say ye to your fathers and mothers, I am
drunken, idle, warton, rebellious, but ye are my father and mother still, and I
expect your blessing, and your p^rse. Surely such proud and dissolute carriage
shall a thousand times sooner please men on earth, than it shall please Christ
in heaven. He has redeemd you that ye might serve him in righteousness and
holiness all the days of your life. He has bought you with a price, that ye
might glorify God in body and soul, and (by the grace of God) save your
selves from the midst of this wicked generation wherein ye live. Perhaps you
may think your sins not to be so great, but that you may keep your fellowship
in the salvation of Christ too. But they are not worthy of pity who wilfully
deceive their own souls: For in four cases your least sins prove damnable in
the issue. If they committed with pleasure and delight; there is no sin so
small, which smells not unsavorily if it pleases. It pleased the man to gather
Lots Wife to look back, and she was turned into a pillar of Salt. Next, if
small sins dispose you to greater. For he that has avoided the great Rocks,
may be swallowed up in the sand: and he that can keep out great Thieves, may
have his house opened by a little Boy who creeps in at that you sin not when
conscience checks, and says, Do it not? Or that you have not taken pleasure
in what you have done? Or that you have not bin disposed by your hours of
error, to scandalize others, and neglect God and his worship? Or that your
little sins have not multiplied so long, as that they may (for any thing you
are sure to the contrary) become an Ocean to drown your souls in eternal
horror? What now is to be done, but that you see your wickedness, and amend
all? I am sure it would bring comfort to your friends, to see you in the way to
Heaven. I am more sure it would bring glory to God, and honor to the Gospel,
to have his creatures and the professors of it from your youth, to live in the
obedience of faith. And I know assuredly too, that it shall add to my crown
of rejoicing, to see all, Christ's Lambs, Babes, and Children to walk in that
truth which is according to godliness. Up and be doing, and the God of Heaven
be with you. There is no delay must have place now. It is enough (yea ^oo much)
that ye have spent the time past after the course of the wicked world. God
has held his peace, and not unsheathed his sword, and you have lived as if God
were a favourer of sin. But has he not now begun to strik? Has he not let
you see that there is no peace to the wicked? If ye yet go on, ye kick
against the pricks. If ye come in with bleeding souls: behold your blessed
Savior hanged on the cross; he bowed his head, as if he meant to kiss you;
he stretched out his arms, as if he meant to embrace you; and his blessed
side was broached, as if he meant that even you should drink his blood, to
pacify your souls against conscience of wrath, and his water to purify your
bodies and souls from the dominion of all uncleanness. Will you yet neglect
so great salvation? My soul shall weep for you in secret. Yet that there may
not be a cause, I hope that you will read this that I p^esent unto you, and so
make a stand. I hope you will pray to God that the cause may have access unto
your hearts, and so make an entrance into the good way. And I hope that being
entered, you will continue to the end; and then as Saint Paul of his
Thessalonians, so I of you; Now I live if ye stand fast in the Lord. Even I,
who have bin often grieved by you, and have often prayed for you with groans
and sighs, but now hope to be comforted in my bowels over you, upon your
amendment; and ever after to continue.

Your Pastor rejoicing in the conversion of such sinners, Robert Abbot.

THE YOVNG-MANS Warning-peece. OR, A SERMON Preached at the Buryall of William
Rogers, upon Pro. 4.19.
The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they stumble.
YE know my use. As Laban said to Jacob in case of marriage, It must not be so
done in our place: Genesis 29.26
so say I; It is not my custom on funeral occasions, to wear out the time
upon the dead. Though I grudge not David's mournful Ditty at the death of Saul;
2 Samuel 1.19, 20, etc.
nor Ieremies Lamentations over Jerusalem, for the untimely death of Josiah;
nor the showing of Dorcas her Coats, Act. 9.39.
given to the poor Saints at her buryall, ( for ordinarily, those that deserve
no praise themselves, love to give none to others: Magis vi vorum sola tia quam
mortuorum subfidia.
) yet Saint Augustine has said it, that these solemnities are rather the
comfort of the living, than the help of the dead; and I have been willing to
follow this rule, in ordinary cases. Yet now the case is altered. I have
something to say to the person, before I speak to the Text. I am entreated,
earnestly entreated, by the miserable young man who lies dead at our feet, to
Preach to all the Young men of the Parish, especially to his wicked companions
( as he called them) something at his buryall, to warn them, by his example,
to take a better course, that they be not burned in hell with him for ever and
ever.

This I cannot do, except I first tell you his example. Hear; therefore, that
first, and GOD open your eyes to see the danger. This young man is called
miserable.
I call him a miserable Young man, not in respect of the devouring judgment of
GOD upon him for ever* for we have nothing to say to that. What are we that we
should sit in GOD's chair? He did rise and fall to his own Master, Not in
respect of Gods judgment final.
whose judgments are always just, often secret: and to Him we leave him, with
fear and trembling, though not without some hope. For from him are many
arguments of hope.
For as he was in his general course a man of a sweet and pleasing temper, it
beginning to grow proverbiall, That the Devil never abused a better nature;
And as he was observed (so far as I know or have heard) never to swear or
curse, in all his life, till one curse dropped from him in a distempered fit
the night before he died: and always to carry himself in words inoffensively
to all; except only once to my self, and another who had strugled with him
from time to time, to pull him out of the snares of Satan; 2 Timothy 2.16.
for which yet he was wounded in soul in his sickness, and asked
forgiveness: So, for his worst part, how freely did he confess his sins?
how earnest were his desires, that he might live but a Year, or a Month,
that he might manifest to the world the Truth of his heart, in his promises to
GOD, for amendment of Life? How careful was he to warn his companions, or at
least, to wish that they were by him, that he might warn them, that they
might not be burned in the furnace of Hell, whither he (said he) was going:
These things in him, give advantage in us, to some charitable hope, that it may
be better with him in the issue, than God would let us see. Though God would
not let us see one drop of peace to fall down upon him to his last gasp, was
it not rather to bridle our presumption, and to make us to run from the
stinking dens of sin, than to settle our judgments about his final estate,
which is far out of our reach* Though we could not see that he apprehended
CHRIST, Phil. 3.12.
might he not be apprehended of CHRIST JESUS? Though we could not perceive
that he knew, GOD (to comfort) might he not be known of God? Gal. 3.9.
Therefore have nothing to do with Gods final judgment upon him; it must be
put over to the highest tribunal, to declare him miserable before the GOD of
Heaven.

Neither do I call him miserable in respect of his repute amongst men. He was
loved of all that knew him, hated of none, and desired of all that stood in
need of his skill or practice. Ye know that he was an Apothecary, and practiced
both Ch^^urgery and Physic. How successful he was, where he would show
care and diligence, you know too. As he had put himself to it to gain some
skill by his own industry, and by conference and complying with the learned in
that Science, and with all famous practitioners where he came* so was he
mounted to the height of same, sought to far and nigh was he. The sober
sought unto him, because of his sweet temper seasoned with successful skill.
The loose sought to him, because of his prodigal and bibbing course. The
thriftie sought to him, because of his gentle rates upon his care and cures. He
would not suffer them to spend all they had upon Physicians. Mar. 5.26.
And the covetous sought to him, because of something pleased them not, he would
(for the most part) take nothing for what he did. He would confess, that he
could by his practice get an hundred pounds a year, and spend an hundred
pounds a year: yet he sold his own inheritance, and spent it; and did so
exceed in lavishing, that he scarce left enough to defray the charges of his
own burial. Some sought to him for one cause, some for another; so that as
one was called for grace, he might be so called for place and practice, Luke
the beloved Physician. Col. 4.14.
Therefore he was not miserable in the eyes of men.

But in respect of his own feeling.
Yet I call him a miserable young man in respect of his own feeling and
apprehension. To present this I shall show you the ground, and his opening of
it. The ground of it was thus laid; He had bin religiously trained in his
childhood. Few youths with me would have given a better reason of the hope that
is in them. 1 Pet. 3 15. This had a deep ground.
He had also lived in a civil way, till he began to look out into the World
for himself. When he had some few months been seasoned with the flatteries
of his followers, and, (always leading a batchelours life) being used to make
up some of his confections at an Alehouse fire: the fire of the High Priests
Hall was not more banefull to Peter (save in the height of Peter's present
sin) than this was to this poor Young man's soul. First, delight in vain
company crept upon him, next drunkenness, next neglect of Prayer, Word and
Sacraments; and lastly a settled obstinacy in these sinful and bewitching
courses. I, willing to perform the duty of a Shepherd, and friend, timely
fastened my eyes and heart upon it. I went to him, and warned him again and
again. I told him what fearful work he made, in suffering the Wild Boar
to come in, to lay waste his former Conscience. He would still answer mildely,
Indeed I will do otherwise. I had so often pressed him to amendment with so
little success, that he grew weary of it, and me. He utterly avoided my
company: if I had come in at one door, he would have gone out at another. He
has many times professed, that he could not abide to see me, or be in my
compan^: not because he hated me (for he would do any thing for me with all
his heart) but because I still told him of his bad life, and he could not
amend yet.

In this state he stood one, or two years, or more. At last, as one clothed
with the scales of a Leviathan, he kicked against the pricks, and contrary to
all admonitions (against which custom in sin had now armed him) he wilfully
forsook the Church, together with Prayers, Word, Sacraments. Thus he
continued about a year and three quarters. In this space (as I could slide
into his company, or as he fell into mine) I admonished him still, wished him
to beware lest the just sentence of GOD went not out against him, that he
should never see GODS face in the congregation more: I told him that he trusted
his flatterers and drunken companions, more than me, who loved his soul: and
yet withal, that I would proceed against him by Articles and Presentiments,
which would end in excommunication, which was a forerunner of GODS shutting him
out of Heaven, without his willing and hearty Repentance. He answered mildly
still, that he would come to the Church, receive the Sacrament, and change his
course. He gave me day, and day, and day, and yet his place was empty. Upon
some of the promised days of appearance, I sent secretly to his house, to call
upon him to be as good as his word: he would make some idle excuse or other,
and so still persisted. At the length, the Church Officers presented him for
his neglect of the Church, and Sacrament, an whole year. Half a year after
they presented him again, for his neglect a year and a half. In this time I
still told him what was done, which yet (said I) shall easily be taken off with
an admonition, if you will reform. He still mildly promised amendment. At
last, ascited he was to answer; and he knew that I had personally appeared
against him to the Judge of the spiritual Court: for I told him so, (as I
remember;) and that it would not be so easy for him to get off without me.
Hereupon he was more hearty (as I thought) to come to the house of GOD again,
and he set his utmost day, Christmasseday. 1635.
and yet he failed. At my instance, and fearing the dreadful sentence of
excommunication, which now (after his many shifts) was thundering out upon him,
he peremptorily set another day, which was the Lord's Day seven-night after,
and a Communion Day. Then he resolved to come to the Church, and to receive the
Sacrament, to give satisfaction to the Parish and Court, and in the mean time
to prepare himself.

The Lord's Day before this, in the morning, when (as he said) he was ready to
come to the Church, he was taken sick, and betook himself to his bed. It
was but as the fit of an Ague, which being over he was the next morning in his
old course again. About the middle of the week after the messenger of death
came, and I heard of it. I forthwith addressed my self to him, came up into
his chamber unawares, and said, Oh, how often have you deceived God, your own
soul, and me! what is now to be done? I fear you will die, and then what
will become of you? I expect your excommunication, and then you will be cut
off from the Church of GOD by Justice, which you have cut your self from by
wantonness. He answered, he had but a surfeit of cold: and, if I would be
pleased but to write to the Court, to suspend the sending forth of his
excommunication till the Court day following, he would the next Lord's Day come
to the Church, and receive the Sacrament, and then go up with my Certificate,
and satisfy the Court. I did it, and prevailed: but his sickness prevailed
that Thursday, Friday, and Saturday upon him. It had emptied him of hope of
life: and no hope of life had filled him with thoughts of this present guilt,
and future judgment before that great God who is a consuming fire.

Now therefore, you, And next his own apprehension upon it.
having the ground of the apprehension of his own misery, shall see how he
opened it, and made it known both to me and others. There was too great a fire
within to be smothered: it burned in his own soul, and lightened from his
heart and lips, into the ears, and hearts, of those friends that were about
him.

One while he cries out of his sins, Manifested by many fearful speeches.
I have been a fearful drunkard, pouring in one draught after another, till
one draught could not keep down another: and now I would be glad if I could
take the least of GODS Creatures which I have abused. I have neglected my
Patients, who have put their lives into my hands, and how many souls have I
thus murdered? I have wilfully neglected Gods House, service, and worship, and
now though I have purposed, God strikes me thus, before the day of my promise
comes; because I am unworthy to come among Gods people again.

Another while he falls to wishing, O that I might burn along time in that
fire, (pointing to the fire before him,) so I might not burn in Hell! Oh that
GOD would grant me to live but one year, or but a month, that the world might
see with what an heart I have promised to GOD my amendment! Oh that GOD would
try me a little! but I am unworthy.

Another while he plyes his companions, praying that all may be warned by him
to forsake their wicked ways, lest they go to hell as he must do. He forgot
not his servant who was young: He calls him to him, tells him that he had bin a
wicked master to him: but be warned by me. You have a friend that has an Iron
furnace which burns hot, a long time: but if you give your self to my sins,
you shall be burned in the furnace of Hell, an hotter furnace, millions of
millions of ages. Therefore look to your self, and be warned by my (your
Masters) example, who must be burned in hell for ever.

Lastly, all his cries against sin (to his see^ing) would not sufficiently
set forth his estate, nor all his wishes, nor all his warning of others: but he
comes to a plain judgment, And plain judgments against himself.
and condemnation, and leaves nothing for after times, but execution. Hence
again and again he doubles it; I have had a little pleasure, and now I must
go to the torments of Hell for ever. And having sometimes (being pressed by
others) prayed to God that he would forgive his sins, and have mercy upon
him: he would add, but I know GOD will not do it, I must go to Hell for
evermore Whatsoever came between whiles, this was the close, I must be burned
in Hell, I must to the furnace of Hell, millions of millions of ages.

Thus he fearfully wearyed out the most part of Saturday, both day and night.
Early on the Lord's Day (that day appointed) I went to him again. I found him
deeply mudded in horror and perplexity. I asked him then whether some great
sin (not yet thought of) did not lie behind, to hinder the beams of Gods
sweet grace from shining upon him? And because he was suspected of whoredom,
and using cruel means for the covering of it, I laid it before him, and asked
him in the sight of GOD, and his own Conscience now, whether he were not
guilty? He constantly denied it both to me, and three godly friends before,
severally: and therefore I heartily believe him to be not guilty: especially
he constantly professing it when his Conscience was most active and nimble. I
then began again to offer unto him the comforts of the Gospel. I opened to
him the promises of the largest size. I showed him that GOD was delighted to
save souls, and not to destroy them: and that his sweet promises were without
exception of time, place, person, or sin, except that against the Holy Ghost,
which I assured him, was not committed by him.

All this could not fasten (so far as I saw) I could hear nothing but that
it is too late, I must be burned in Hell. Yet then was he willing that I
should pray for him, (and therefore he was not without hope,) and I did. In
which he was careful to go along with me many times with sighs. After this
he was something quieter for a time, and I went to my Office in the Church,
where I forgot not him, that GOD would respit him the days of repentance, that
he might perform the days of promise.

When Evening Prayer was done, I went to him again: and when I had secluded
the company, I pressed him with tears; not to cast away that soul for which
CHRIST dyed: showing him that CHRIST rejected none that did not reject him. He
answered, He had cast off CHRIST, and therefore he must go to hell. But yet
(said I) pray with me that Christ would come again: there is yet an hour in
the day; and if Christ (God and Man) comes, he can an will assist you to do a
great deal of work on a sudden. He would not hear of that; he turned away,
and said, he was unfit to pray. He often complained that former counsels and
Prayers might have done him good, but now it was too late; as if that fearful
saying had stuck in his soul, Because I have called, Prove. 1.24* 25, 26, 27.
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I also will laugh
at your calami^y, I will mock when your fear comes, as desolation and
destruction as a whirle wind.

By this time he began to discover some idle distemper in his brain, for want
of sleep: for this was now the fourth day and night (as I remember) that he
had taken no rest. And had not his reason been so vigorous, and his discourse
so piercing, I should have thought want of sleep a great cause of the whole
combat. But when I consider his reason, discourse, and life, contrary to
knowledge and Conscience: doubtless (whatsoever GOD has done with ^is soul,
(and we are bound to hope the best) this example is a warning-piece shot out
by the GOD of Heaven, to warn all Young Men with us, to signify that it is
high time for them to leave off their riotous courses, lest a worse thing come
unto them.

It is not bad enough to have these horrors and perplexities for sins and
punishments? He was no swearer, no whoremonger, no thief, no scoffer at
Religion, no perjured wretch, no wilful liar, no proud and s^rley resister of
good counsel and reproof, like too many other youngmen now a days: yet when
conscience is awaked, and sits as a Judge on him, Only for drunkenness,
neglect of men's bodies, and neglect of Prayer, Word, and Sacrament, he passes
this heavy doom upon himself, I must be burned in the furnace of Hell
millions of millions of ages; and at the last, in idleness of thoughts and
talk he ends his miserable life.

This is your example which he entreated me to lay before you, that ye may be
warned by it to keep you from Hell. The living God present it as a powerful
example to your Consciences that it may work that good which this miserable
young man wished. And that it may the more prevail, ye shall have a rule now,
as well as an example, showing the misery and horror of a wicked life from
this proverb.

The Text Pro. 4.19. 1. Connected v.1. and 10.
The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they stumble.

Solomon had pressed in many words, (because all words were not enough) all
Young Men, in his son, to avoid the needless and vain society of wicked
men; Verse 14.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not into the way of evil men.
Verse. 15.
Art thou allured? Avoid it. Is the way delightful? Pass not by it. Does thy
way lie that way? Turn from it. Art thou called in whithersoever thou go?
Pass away.

This exhortation, being thus pressed with words, is further urged by reasons.
First, from the persons and states of wicked men; Verse. 16.
They sleep not except they have done mischief themselves, or made others to
do it: for how can they, when they eat the iron bread of wickedness, Verse.
17.
and the Sodom Wine of violence? This breeds no sweet phlegm to bind up the
senses. Secondly, he urges it from the course of wicked men, which he sets
down comparatively with the godly; Verse 18.
The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more to
the perfect day. The descent of grace is from heaven, as the light shines: the
degrees of grace are not all attained unto at the first, but more, and more:
but the prosperity of grace, where it is nourished by a godly life, is not to
go out to the perfect day. Therefore it is excellent to be in society with the
godly. But for the course of wicked men: Verse 9.


2. Divided.
1. It is as darkness, there is the danger of it.

2. They know not at what they stumble, there is the sign of it.

In this course of wicked men there are two propositions, 3. Expounded.
which I shall labor to open, and apply unto you.

Propos. 1.
First, That the way of the wicked is darkness.

That ye may conceive this, I shall open unto you (through GODS help) four
points.

1. What is the way of the wicked? 2. How is it darkness? 3. How it comes to
be so? and, 4. Why it is darkness?
1. 1. What the way of the wicked is. Psalm. 1. ult.
The way of the wicked is the whole course of a wicked man, to death, and Hell
David says, The way of the wicked shall perish: that is, his thoughts, words,
deeds wherein he pleases himself, till at last he sees and feels the empty
vanity of them, when the comfort of them leaves him, and he fall into hell.

2. 2. How it is darkness. Negatio lucis primitivae.
This way of the wicked is darkness, by an absence of that first light which
GOD gave to sinlesse, and obedient man. Before man had sinned, he had the
light of knowledge, the light of grace, and the light of comfort. He could
fully and fairly see what was fit for a creature, to keep him in perpetual
communion and fellowship with GOD. He had the beams of GODS grace in him and
about him, keeping out the darkness of sin. He had sweet comfort in the
enjoyment of GOD, and himself, and in the best possession and use of all the
Creatures. But when he fell from the Principles of Life, the Lord and his Law,
he quickly was overwhelmed with the darkness of ignorance, the darkness of
sin, and the darkness of misery. Luke 1.19.
Our blessed Savior came to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of Peace: the light of
knowledge, Ioh. 9.39.
That they that see not; might see: the light of grace, that they that follow
him, Ioh. 8.12.
might not walk in darkness, but have the light of life* And the light of
comfort, that he might give beauty for ashes, Esa. 61 3.
the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness. All wicked men that miss this, that are in hunting with Esau,
while this blessing is given, following the luxurious courses of the world in
wickedness, 2 Timothy 1.10.
while CHRIST brings life and immortality to light by the Gospel, do fall
into darkness, Ioh. 3.19.
darkness, darkness: Ephesians. 4.19.
Because they loved darkness rather than light: therefore their cogitations
are darkened through ignorance, Romans 1.31.
their foolish hearts are full of darkness: they look to the earth, and
behold darkness and sorrow: Ephesians. 5.30.
they fall to the darkness of horror (for there is no peace to the wicked,
says my GOD, Esa. 57.21. Mat. 8.12. Psalm. 69.
) they go down to the place of darkness and the horrible pit shuts her
mouth upon them. O woe unto them, they have rewarded evil unto their souls.

3. But how does the wicked man's way become to be darkness? As outward
darkness does grow upon men three ways, so does this, First naturally, by
some defect in natural generation. So there being a natural defect now in
man's propagation, through sin he brings forth blind Whelps. Though more or
less, for natural excellency man be not borne blind: yet for morrall
rectitude to improve his understanding to the best advantage for his happiness
in Gods way, Ephesians. 5.8
he is darkness. Secondly actually, by too much gazing on the excelling
sensibles of the world, or by too much heat or cold, which check or chill the
spirits. So when wicked men do too much gaze upon the deceitful glories and
pleasures of the World, when they are cold in Religion or religious duties, and
do hotly pursue the pleasing vanities of this life, they become clouded in the
thick smoke of darkness. This blinded that rich fool from securing his
soul: Luke 12. Luk 19.2.
and Zaccheus before his conversion from going the right way to heaven. For
they that will be rich fall into temptations, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and snares, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in
perdition and destruction. Thirdly, penally, when it is inflicted as a
punishment: as when Zedechias his eyes were pulled out as a just punishment
upon his wicked life; so when GOD sees the courses of men to be foul and
detestable, contrary to the light of the word, and check of Conscience, which
he has given them; then GOD justly, shuts their eyes, Ephesians. 6 10.
stoppes their ears, and takes away the key of knowledge: 1 Ioh. 2.11.
and so they are in darkness, walk in darkness, and know not whither they
go, because that darkness has blinded their eyes.

4. Why the ways of the wicked are darkness. Venebrae a tenendo.
Now if you would know why the ways of the wicked are thus said to be as
darkness? The grounds of that speech may be such as these: First, their sights
are hindered from seeing the right way to Heaven. They grope at noon day,
running headlong in their own courses all the life long day, and at what time
the night of death, or the sun set of sickness comes, and they begin to
recollect them, saying, where am I now? Is this the way to heaven? Then they
see what they did not see, and the whirlewind and tempest takes them, and they
are carried whither they would not. Secondly, their Exodus 10.
As the Egyptians choked* in their palpable darkness, saw not what they did,
or what to do: so when this darkness is come upon the wicked man, Ioh. 12.35.
He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. Here he goes and
meets with a block, there he turns and meets with a bush: and after a
thousand calls of GOD to do this, that, and the other duty of Repentance,
faith and holiness, Vivant aliud agendo, nibil agendo, aliter ^gendo.
he is so inwrapped in darkness, that many things are gone about, and few
things are done: those few that are done, are not done as they ought. 3. 3.
(...), a (...). Nox a nocendo.
They are drawn on to many a fall, even to the ruin of bodies and souls. As
men in darkness (if they will be doing) stumble and fall: so wicked men in
this estate stumble into a thousand pitfals. Here they fall into pride and
niggardize, there into pride and luxury, on this hand into covetousness, on
that hand into prodigality, here lies the drunkard, there the liar; here lies
the worldly old man, there the regardlesse young man. Lord, how do they fall
in darkness, till they are turned back into perpetual rebellions, Ier. 8.4,
5.
till they fall and rise no more? Fourthly, they are smitten with fears and
terrors when they will give leisure to Conscience to work. They are taken
with fear where no fear is. Psalm. 14.
As men in a dark night being a waked by fearful melancholy, sight of sin,
or lash of Conscience, do think every bush a Thief, every gale of wind, the
moving of Satan, or the wagging of every leaf a summons to the Devils
approach: so is it with wicked men in this darkness. Fifthly, their shame is
taken from them. They are foole-hardy and confident in the dark, because no
eye sees them. It is said of the Ass, that being pursued by the Wolf, he puts
his head into a bush, that he may not see the Wolf; as if, because he sees not
the Wolf, the Wolf therefore sees not him* So is it with wicked men; they put
their heads into a dark corner of sin and ignorance, and then, as if he that
pierced through the dark cloud could not see, they go on without fear, wit,
or shame. Lamen. 1. Esa. 3.9.
They lay their iniquities on their skirts, and declare their sins as Sodom,
they hide them not: as if they hurted not them, nor would bring shame at the
latter end, Appli.


Thus have I plained the way in opening this part of the Proverb: 1 Ioh. 2.13.
and now I write unto you young men, that you may overcome that evil one.
Suffer therefore first a word of conviction, and next a word of exhortation.

1. Hence wicked men are convinced of their miserable estate.
Ye may be convinced hence of two things:

1. First, concerning a wicked man's estate, that he is in a miserable case,
whatsoever he thinks of himself. If thou were shut up in a dark prison, where
thou could not have any fellowship with light, would thou not think thy
self in a woeful plight? Much more art thou thus, if thou be in the darkness
of ignorance, sin and misery.

Ob. Though they see it not. Sol.
You will say, I see no such matter. If I am in misery, I see it not. It may be
so, and yet your misery is not the less. As Christ said, because ye say ye
see, Ioh. 5 41.
therefore your sin remains: so say I, because you say you see not,
therefore your danger is the greater. If in a desperate disease a man say he is
well, its a certain sign death is coming on a pace: so is it a sign that
misery lies at the door (though you have shut it out a while) because ye say
ye see it not.

Put case it be so (say you) yet you feel no hurt by it for the present. Ob.
And though they feel it not.
Ye go on in sin, and thrive, and are merry, and what evil can come? Take
heed; while a man is lusty and strong, Sol.
a man can endure hot and cold, night and day, and never shrink; but when he
is down, by age, sickness, surfeit, or the like, then every blast pierces
through: so while you are in health and prosperity, you are like a Church
Wardens Bill, which answers all is well, when too many things are amiss: but
when sickness, and death comes, down you sink with shame and horror, like
the fishes of Jordan which fall into the dead-Sea, and are no more alive.

Object.
Yea, but you are not in this dark state; you hear the Word and understand it,
and have a power to understand more: therefore certainly you shall not be
darkness for ever; Potentia est dispositio rei ad actu^.
for a power does dispose you to the act and exercise which shall follow. Be
not deceived. For though it be true of a natural power, Potentia naturalis, vi
principii interni.
which comes into act by the power of some inward principle, that if you have
such a power, it shall be brought into act, more or less, according to the
power, as when Grapes have a power to drop Wine, and Apples Cydar; and so, if
as men, you have a power to reason, it is more or less showed by discourse,
either by inward conceptions, or outward expressions: 2. Potentia
obedientialis, vi principij externi.
yet is it not true of an obedientiall power, which is drawn out by a power
from without; as when the waters of Egypt are turned into blood, and the water
at the marriage of Cana was turned into wine: Ioh. 2.
and so, though you have a natural power to know (according to your measure)
and so to be acquit of humane darkness, yet amidst your hearing and
understanding; Act. 26.18.
you must be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that you may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them
that are sanctified by faith in CHRIST. If therefore you would be freed from
this darkness, you must depend upon God (whom you cannot command at pleasure)
to give the increase, and to acquit you from this misery.

2. Therefore think it not strange to see the wicked do, shameful things.
Secondly, ye may be convinced hence, not to think it strange to see poor
sinners to do that, of which they are afterward ashamed. The adulterer
watches for his twilight: the drunkard seeks his cl^s scorners to cousen his
soul and pursue in: the liar desires his say-nothing: and all luxuriants hunt
out their coverts and thickets: and when they are rowzed by the Justice of GOD
and man, they cannot endure the light, having such evil deeds; for they are
ashamed and confounded. Ob. Though they do think their darkness not the
cause of their shame because they know much.
Do not wonder at all this, and much more in this kind; because what they
wrought, was done in darkness, and now it is brought to light.

But why should I think darkness to be the cause of their shame, seeing
many of them have a great deal of knowledge? It is true in truth, Sol.
ungodly men may gain a great measure of knowing knowledge: Surgunt indocti,
and rapiunt coelum, and nos doctores trucimur in innum.
Judas preached for Christ, and Julian writ for him yea, unlearned men, whose
cure is to feel divinity beating in the pulse of their hearts and lives, above
the flowing of it in their brains, may take Heaven by violence, while the more
learned (careful to know and careless to do) may be thrust into Hell. But
let them gain what knowledge they can the understanding singly taken is not
that which God most delights in, to keep them from shame by it, Esaias 66.2.
but he dwells in a contrite and broken heart, to keep them from the power of
sin, 2. Therefore be exhorted to avoid the ways of wicked men.
and horor of shame

Secondly, be now exhorted to avoid the ways of wicked men, which will bring
you to such sins as darkness breeds, and darkness feeds. Ye shall one day
find that this darkness breeds carlesnesse, sinful delight, fear, and
doubting. though ye walk naked (without the garments of faith in Christ, Apoc.
16.15
and the obedience of faith and your shame lies open. In darkness sinful
delights are most welcome: when drunkards were more modest, and ashamed of the
noonday, the Apostle says, 1 These. 5.
they that are drunk are drunk in the night: And Job says, that the
Adulterer hunteth for the twilight, and flattereth himself, that GOD cannot
pierce through the dark cloud. So, while ye are in this black way, ye freely
drink of this Cup of the pleasures of sin, even to the dreggs. In darkness,
they especially that are apprehensive are full of feats, whether they shall
receive hurt, full of doubting whether they are, and do, right or wrong. So
while ye are in this pitchy way, in the midst of laughter your heart is heavy:
ye sometimes fear the hurt ye may suffer, what if I be sick? what if I
die? what if divine Justice seize upon me? what shall become of me then? Ye
sometimes doubt whether that be the way to Heaven or Hell, wherein ye walk.
If it be the way to Heaven, which of the Saints of GOD have gone before me in
it thither? If the way to Hell, why do I walk in it still? Besides, ye shall
one day find that this darkness feeds and nourishes sin. For as men in
darkness, being set upon a course, will be resolute to do it still: So while
ye are in this way, ye will be fatted in obstinacy against God, and in
resolution to do what ye list. This Christ lamented in Jerusalem, Luk 19.41,
42.
Oh if thou had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace!
but now they are hid from thine eyes. This also may you lament in your selves
(if you could) with tears of blood.

Ob. Sol. To your hurt, though you think it will do you little or no hurt.
Perhaps you may think that all this will do you little hurt. But GOD open your
eyes in time that you may see to your amendment, that it will bring you to the
darkness of Hell, where ye shall find horror without the least comfort, and
torment without the least ease. None of the plagues of Egypt were so
afflictive to Pharaoh, as darkness was. This extorted from him this speech,
which was not heard before, Go you and your children, and serve the LORD. Exo.
10.24.
How much more will ye be pressed with the darkness of Hell, which is the
proper place of torment! This makes these poor dark creatures, before they
come there, to cry out, I shall be burned in Hell for ever and ever, what
shall I do, what shall I do?

If therefore there be any fear of God before your eyes, if any bowels of
compassion to your miserable body, and souls, avoid these hellish ways of
wicked men while ye are young Suppose that Jesus Christ, and Satan stood before
GOD to plead for you. Christ could say, Behold blessed Father, I have taken
their nature upon me, I have done, and dyed for them, I have presented thee
with a full satisfaction, and have offered to them this great grace to hear my
Gospel, and believe it: yea, I have been assistant to the ministry of the
Church to convince them of their wicked courses, to move them to come to me, to
assure them, that I and mine are all theirs, if they repent and believe the
Gospel, yet have they not honored me by faith and love. But Satan plead^,
Behold thou great God of Heaven and Earth, I never took their nature upon me,
yet they love me and my courses better than themselves. I never did any thing
for their good, but for their snare and ruin, yet they cleave to me and my
works of darkness, my pleasures deceitful pleasures of sin for a season, more
than to thee and thy Word. I never died for them, yet they live and die in my
cause and quarrel: drinking, dicing, drabbing, night and day: revelling with
thy good creatures, reviling of thy virtuous servants, and resolving still to
do as they have done. I never offered them grace, but sin, and they have
resisted and spurned at that, and accepted this with greediness. All this and
more, may truly be said by that Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and that roaring
Lion that seeks whom he may devour. Set your selves to present such a plea
to your souls, and think whether the devil has not powerful reasons to
move that GOD, who is a consuming fire, to deliver you up to his hands, so long
as you are in darkness. What an hell will this be to you before you come to
hell, if you repent not? What an hell will it be to you to sail by, before you
come to hell, if ye repent not, and forsake not your sins? Will ye not think
of to day, while it is called to day? Will ye still go on in the ways of
sin, though ye cannot prosper? GOD forbid, the safety of your souls forbids
it; your Covenant in Baptism forbids it, and all the mercies wherewith the
Lord has renewed you from your youth up hitherto.

Ye may think your selves safe enough, and that all your dark and riotous
courses shall end in a sunshine of glory and happiness: but (alas) in your
way there lie many things at which ye may stumble, and so tumble into the pit
of hell unawares, which is the next considerable proportion in this Proverb,
to wit,

Propos.
That wicked men know not at what they stumble.

Do ye desire to gain to your souls from this?

Then weigh with me these three particulars:

1 What it is to stumble?

2 Whereat they stumble? and,

3 That they stumble, because they know not at what. To stumble is to take an
argument of offense at something, 1. What it is to stumble.
to make them fall still into the ways of wickedness. As when the Jews took
these arguments against Christ to conclude against faith in him, Mat. 11.19.
He is a man gluttonous, Ioh. 8.48.
a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners: We say well that thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil. Acts 6.11.13.
And when the Jews took these arguments against Stephen, We have heard him
speak blasphemous words against Moses, against God, against this holy place,
and the Law. And when the Corinthians raised this foundation against Saint
Paul, Acts 18.13.
This fellow persuades men to worship GOD contrary to the Law: and Tertullus
in a slanting speech before Foelix, Acts 24.5.
we have found this man a very pestilence, a mover of sedition among all the
Jews in all the World. These are arguments of offense, to make them that do
receive them still to fall into sin, new sins, old sins, all sins.

Ignorance; or, presumption; or, despair; or, the World; or, scandal; or, the
peaceable end of sinners, and the contrary of those that have lived more
strictly.

Josiah knew not sin, his sweet nature stumbled with the times: but when he
heard the Law of God read, he rent his clothes, and melted to the very heart.
When Saul lived a Pharisee, the death of Stephen was nothing, it could be
swallowed up upon a full stomach: but when the Law came and showed him what
sin was, Romans 7.
when he saw sin revive, to pricks, wound, and kill, then he mourned under
his captivity. Sometimes they stumble at the ignorance of Repentance: John 3.
They are like Nicodemus, who cannot hear of a new life, but he dreams of
entering his mothers womb again: and like Peter's hearers, who when they sinned
knew not what they did; and when they were pricked at the heart for sin, knew
not what to do, Acts 2.
Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved?

They stumble at presumption, accept of them upon any terms. Therefore, at what
time soever, says one: GOD desires not the death of a sinner, says another:
Christ says, Come unto me, says a third: God will that all men should be
saved, says a fourth. Every presumptuous wretch lays some sure foundation
(which might be sound and sweet to a true penitent) which yet will not serve
his turn when he is to try the strength of it, no more than Sampsons* green
Cords could bind him, or a rope of sand can pull down an impregnable Castle.

3. At despair of their own strength.
They stumble at despair, and at that on both sides too. Sometimes they
despair of their own strength. Alas, all the ways of virtue, grace, and
glory are too hard for me. I must lie down in shame, confusion, sin, and
sorrow, but not move a foot to Heaven. When Christ preached that no man could
come to him, Ioh. 6.65, 66, 67.
except it were given him of his Father; many of his Disciples went back, and
walked no more with him: in so much as CHRIST complained to the twelve, Will
ye also forsake me? If Christ be such a manner of person, that access to
him is so hard, so much above our power, that we must be beholding to a Father
whom we are not acquainted with, then farewell Christ, welcome world who are
more familiar. 2. Of Gods strength.
Sometimes again they despair of GODS strength and mercy for them. Christ
cannot save them, GOD will not save them. Let strength and mercy be what it
will on high, it is too high for them. What is that to me? I am the worst of
unworthy sinners. This cast out Cain, hanged Judas, damned both, and any other
that delight in such a downfall.

4. At the world.
They stumble at the world of honor, pleasure, profit. The stony hearers
stumbled at the care-cloth, the thorns of cares for worldly pelf. Matthew. ^3.
The unworthy Guests stumbled at the new bought purchases of Farms, and Oxen;
and so much as at the new married Wife, Matthew 22.
I cannot come. The rich worldling at the new Barnes, and store for many days.
His soul did so always live in them, that he thought he should always live
with them. Thus they stumbled and fell. The huge block of the World was too
great for them to leap over into heaven, and therefore down they fall, and
break their necks into the ways of sin.

5. A^ scandal
They stumble at scandal, and at that they trip dangerously on both hands.
Being loath to offend their wicked companions.
Sometimes they are loath to offend their wicked companions; what? shall I
forsake them, scandalize them, go without them, (though) in a better way, make
them that are my friends my foes, to neglect and scoff at me? This made
Nicodemus come to Christ by night. Ioh 3.1.
This made many of the chief Rulers believe in him, but they confessed him
not, Ioh. 12.42, 43.
lest they should be put out of the Synagogue: for they loved the praise of
men more than the praise of God. And being offended at the lives of professors.
Sometimes again they take offense at the lives of those that seem to be
more godly than themselves, and are so (at least) by profession. Indeed, these
should be very careful to adorn the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ: Tit.
^.
and therefore many excellent exhortations are spent upon them, in the most
sure Word of GOD. Sometimes they are called upon to behave themselves wisely to
them that are without: Sometimes to walk honestly toward them that are
without: 1 These. 4.12. 1 Cor. 10.32.
sometimes, to give no offense neither to Jew, C^^ia^, nor Church of GOD: yet
are they not so careful in the works of holiness righteousness, and
sobriety, as they ought. This is soon espied by wicked men, and so made an
argument to stumble at.

which they easily espy though they are in darkness.
You will say, They are in darkness, how then can they spy such a hole in the
coat of him that is better than themselves? I Will tell you: when men see a thing
that may further them in the way to Heaven, they do receive it inward by the
means of the spirit, and the sweet beams of grace which shine about them;
James 1.
For every good giving comes from the Father of lights: From a light not from
without but from within.
but when they see any thing that helps them onward to Hell, they have a power
of seeing from within. As a Cat sees in a dark night by fyring the air to her
self, and for her own uses: so wicked men being set on fire of Hell, James 3.
can in their darkest state easily kindle a light for their own uses to find
fodder for their souls in their way to Hell-ward.

They stumble, Lastly, 6. At the peaceable end of sinners. Psalm. 73.
at the peaceable end of sinners. Truly, they dyed like Lambs, There are no
hands in their death: just like the good thief upon the Cross, which with
quiet and sweet reaches after grace and glory, breathed out his soul to GOD;
notwithstanding all the wickedness of his fore-past life: And the troubled
deaths of the Godly.
whereas many of those who have lived better, have died with little rest, and
no comfort. Hence they stumble thick and threefold, and make no question to die
no worse than they, though they do as bad.

3. They stumble because they know not at what
Thus they stumble and stumble; and the cause or the sign of all, is this in
the Proverb, They know not at what they stumble. 1. They know not who they are
that sin.
As for sin, they do not know who they themselves are that sin. They are the
creatures of GOD who has blessed them a thousand ways, and therefore they
should live to the honor of him, and not as if the Devil had made them. 2.
Whom they sin against.
They do not know whom they sin against. It is against an infinite GOD, who is
an infinite good, and therefore the least guilt will not so easily be taken
off as they dream. Can much Niter and much Soap do it? Micah 6.
Can thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Sin against a
private man, and it is a trespass or battery; sin against a King, it is
sedition or treason; but sin against God, and no name can express it, 1 Ioh.
1. Romans 3. 2 Cor. 5.
nothing can cleanse it but the blood of the Lamb, which brings to us the
righteousness of GOD, which is of infinite worth. 3. What sin will work.
They do not know what sin will work. It is the wild Bore of the Wood that
lays waste the Vine of our souls: it wounds the Conscience, defaceth the
Image of GOD, and writes upon us Satan's Image and superscription: it brings
fear, pit, and snare upon the inhabitants of the earth and at the last the
vengeance of eternal fire. All this and much more, about sin, these poor
wretches do not know, and hence they stumble upon sin, 2. They know not
and ruin.

As for Repentance they know neither the necessity, work, 1. The necessity of
repentance. Luke 13.
or worth of it. Do they present this to their souls, that except they
repent, they shall perish? Yes that they do, and therefore they will repent
hereafter. Yea, but are they not deceived in the work of it? 2. Nor the work
of it.
Do they not think it to be the work of an hour, when the whole life of a
man were but enough for us to walk in that way? Do they not think it to be
nothing but a conviction for sin, a sorrow for sin, and a crying God mercy?
Do they know that it implies sorrow for sin seen, purpose to forsake sin
sorrowed for, and to return unto God? Or know they that it is accompanied (if
it be saving) with an holy course in godliness and righteousness? No such
matter. 3. Nor the worth of it.
It is so slenderly looked after: and so poorly prized by them, that they take
it up as old shoes, when they have none else to wear: when they have not a
day to live, and an hour to spend in sin, then they will repent, what ever
come of it. Thus these miserable wretches, when they have built a Castle of
their own Repentance, not Gods, do stumble at they know not what.

Now, 3. They know not the power of GODS wrath. Psalm. 91.
for presumption (woe is them) whatsoever they dream of Mountains of mercy,
They know not the power of GODS wrath. They think him to be made up of
nothing but mercy, and that he should do them wrong, if they should not have
it. They see the light of his countenance so long in their health and
prosperity, that they presume he cannot bend his brows, In the works of this
justice.
and turn his back in after days. Do they remember that after God had made
the world, his first act was an act of justice upon lapsed Angels, who, though
they were in Heaven, were cast down into Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4.
and delivered into the chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment?
Have they forgotten that his next work was a work of justice upon Adam in
Paradise; and the third that we read, of a work of justice upon Cain for
committing murder but once? Genesis 4.
Have they not read that GOD drowned the first world, Genesis 6.5. Gen, 8.21.
first for imaginations? Or that he burned with fire and brimstone Sodom and
her wicked sisters, Genesis 19* Ezekiel. 16.
for pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, which hatched plenty of
lust? Is the justice of GOD upon the world clean gone out of mind, when his
Church was in a Corner, and but a little flock? Or will they not see the
justice of God upon Christ, Hebr. 9 Romans 8 3. 2 Cor. 5.21
Our surety, in the similitude of sinful flesh; that he did not escape it,
being made sin for us (that is, by being a sacrifice for sin) that we might be
the righteousness of GOD in him? They have forgotten all prints of Justice,
that they may put far from them the evil day, and sin without fear. But
that God that is a God of mercy, for the vessels of mercy, Romans 11.
is for those who by wilful sins make themselves the vessels of wrath, a
consuming fire: yea, and when his hand takes hold of judgment, Deuteronomy. 22.41,
42. 2 Pet. 3.
he will make his sword drunk with blood. Then shall they know what now they
willingly know not, that he that blesses himself in his heart, saying, Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20.
I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not be merciful unto him.

4. They know not what they can do in good because they try not.
Do they stumble at despair of their own strength: It is at they know not
what still. For do they not show great strength in sin? Why then will they
not try what they can do in virtue? Has not CHRIST promised his assistance in
the Word of GOD, Esa. 59.29. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 6. Phil. 4.13. 5.
They know not what is the power of Gods m^^^y.

Si peccantibus, multo magis poeni^atibus. Esa. 66.


and Sacraments? Why will they neglect CHRIST'S hand, which is put under to
help? Why will they not be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,
that they may be able to do all things through him that helps them?

Will they more impotently stumble at the despair of Gods mercy? Surely they
stumble at they know not what. For God is good unto wicked men, much more to
those that truly repent. Does not his Sun and rain bless obdurate sinners?
much more has he the blessing of peace for those that tremble at his Word,
Matthew. 11.
and are weary and heavy laden with their sins. To embrace penitents. Esaias 1.
For will they forget how willingly GOD reasons with the rebellious Jews,
and promises that upon Repentance he will make their twice dipped scarlet sins
as white as wool? Mic. 7.18. Esa. 7.20.
Or do they not regard that GOD tells them that mercy pleases him. If he come
in a work of justice, he shaves with a Raser that is hired (as if he had no
instrument of his own to execute wrath: Esa. 28.21. Opus justitiae est opus
alienum.
) but if he comes in a work of mercy, it is his own work, his proper work.
But they forget this, as if Christ's blood did not triumph over all the sins of
penitents, Acts (...).
even to the bathing of them that turn to him, who shed it by murder: this
they forget, and so do stumble at headlong despair.

Do they stumble at the world? They know not how weak all the world is if it
were on their side. 1 Cor. 7.
Alas, they know not at what. What is all the world if we could graspe it into
an handful? It flattereth while it smileth, and the glory of it passes away.
Have we the confluence of all worlds goods? They cannot keep off a thousand
miseries; Gowts, Consumption, Fevers, Stone, Strangury, death are the portions
of this worlds wantons. And when that goes from us, or we from that, it gives a
bitter farewell to the lovers of it. Eccl. 11.
Though a man live many days, ^^t let him remember the days of darkness,
which will come first or last, and then farewell profit, farewell pleasure,
farewell honor: the white stick must be broken, worldly comforts must vanish,
and if ye have not built your nest in the Rock Christ, Esa. 41.16.
the wind will take you, the world will spew you out, and whither then?

Do they stumble at the offense of their companions? 7. They know not how
little their companions can do for them.
It is at they know not what still. Call for them all, whom you are loath now to
offend in pleasing GOD, and what can they do? As the Winter brooks they pass
away, faith Job. Are they touched for sin? They will be glad to be rid of
them: Psalm. 119.
away from me ye wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my GOD. Does the
wrath of GOD come? They can say, alas my brother, alas his glory; James 1.
but as the wrath of man cannot accomplish the righteousness of GOD; Psalm 6.
so nor the power of man can stand (with comfort) against the wrath of GOD.
Does poverty come as an armed man? Prove. 6.
A worldly friend will help once, a godly friend will help twice, but daily
to hang upon the pockets, and purse-strings of others, is like a cursed wife, a
continual dropping; away with such a like fellow from off the earth, the land
is not able to bear such a loathsome guest. Does death come with this Iron
Law, You must go and make your bed in darkness, where they must say to
corruption, thou art my mother; to the Worm thou art my brother and sister?
Where are their companions now? One stands by and weeps, but cannot help:
another would come, but fears the flashes of reproof for godless courses:
but let them all come, can they deliver their bodies from the grave, and their
souls from the hand of Hell? Psalm. 49.
The Redemption of a soul cost more than so: they must let that alone for
ever. What matters it then to offend such, so they may please God?

Do they now stumble at the lapses and falls of those that seem better than
themselves? 8. They know not that the falls of Christians is, because they are
not Christians enough.
Is it not still at they know not what? If a Christian sin, it is not because
he is a Christian, but because he is a Christian no more: it is not the
profession, but the person that is in all the fault. He that is a good
Christian, should answer like that blessed Martyr, who when he was asked what
was his name? he answered. Christian: what was his Country, answered,
Christian: what were his hopes, thoughts words, and deeds? He answered
Christian. He was a Christian all over: and if it be otherwise, Christianity
must not be blamed, but sin in him, and Satan out of him, that put on that
fair hood to cover their deformity. Besides, sin shall condemn them, not
justify the wicked stumbler. They shall go to hell for that without
Repentance: the wicked shall not go to Heaven for being wors^, because they
are bad.

9. They know not that sinners end is not always peaceable.
And what do they stumble at now? Is it at the peaceable end of sinners? It is
still at they know not what. For it is not ever true that wicked men find such
a calm when death approaches: sometimes Hell fire flasheth upon them then: And
when it is.
sometimes they miserably cry out, I am damned, I am damned, Durities hominis
peccatum ob duratio judicii Dei. it yields no comfort.
I must to Hell: and when it is true, GOD, Satan, and themselves, have an hand
in it, God justly seals them up to hardness of heart, and then like the
Leviathan, they laugh at the Spear. Satan covers their sins, and locks in
their thoughts to dream of golden Mountains. He labors to make their life
and death to be an heaven here, that he may the more cunningly bring them to
hell hereafter. Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati 1 Samuel 25.
Themselves have accustomed themselves to sin, and custom in sin takes
away the sense of sinning, and so like Nabal, their heart dies like a stone.
And put case that Gods good people be disquieted when death appears; They
draw near to GOD, And yet the unquiet end of the godly may. Esaias 6.
and see themselves abominable as Esau. They have a circumcised heart, and so
are tender at the least touch: which Satan perceiving, he drives home with all
his rage, and skill, to slander his godly course, because his time is but short.

Thus now ye have the whole Proverb, which sets forth a rule to your miserable
example to show the miserable estate of those that are, and walk, and stand,
and sit, in the dark ways of sin and wickedness.

Appli. Therefore let this proverb sink into your hearts.
What shall I say to you Young men? O that I could speak to your hearts so
powerfully, that ye may be rowzed from lying under the dominion of sin any
longer! Oh that my Doctrine might drop as the rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
and my speech might distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender
herb, and as the showers upon the grass! Ye have heard the woe, woe, woe, to
wicked men. Sometimes this keeps them off from virtue and grace, and sometimes
that. Here they stumble, and there they stumble, before, behind, on this side,
and on that, and at last tumble into despair, and Hell for evermore. Many have
thus stumbled.
Francis Spyra stumbled thus, when he cried out, I would feign be in Hell, to
try the worst that God can do. And that outlandish wretch thus, who would have
given all to his soul, not to forsake him: but when nothing would serve the
turn, but he must die, he commended his soul to the devil to be carried into
everlasting torments. And that English wretch thus, I give my goods to the King
whom I have cozened, my body to the earth, and my soul to the Devil. And that
other wretch (not worthy of a name) thus, My soul I bequeath to the devil who
ownes it; my Wife to the Devil who drew me to my ungodly life; and my
Chaplain to the Devil who flattered me in it. But do not you young men
stumble thus.
But (dear young men) do not ye so Lay hold of eternal life; and pull your
selves (by the mighty power of GOD) into that way. Use no arguments to pull
your selves into, or keep your selves in the way of sin. Quit your selves
like men, and the God of Heaven stand by you for your help and succor. Now is
the accepted time, now is the hour of salvation. 2 Cor. 6.
God has shot a warning piece from Heaven, stand not out; but veil to him,
before he shoot the vollies of his vengeance against you irrecoverably.

Consider your motives to look about you.

Your age is most unsettled.


Ye have many motives to make you look about you now for grace and glory.
First, your age is a most unsettled age, pestered with many lusts of youth,
which drop by drop may fall upon you, till you are suddenly over head and ears
That which has been formerly fained of Hercules, that he stood in two ways,
ready to take either, is true of you. For as a strait tree which is loose at
the root stands trembling, and being unsettled, with a little strength is
pulled this way, or that way: so is it with you who are ready to be swayed
with wind and tide every way.

Secondly, 2. You will easily savor ever of your first liquor.
you will easily savor ever of that first liquor which is put into you.
Receive the distilled dewes of grace from the Spirit of God, and what a sweet
savor shall ye be in the nostrils of God, and man? Receive the bloody showers
of devilish and worldly temptations, and how will ye stink like Sodom and
her Sisters? If a man, by his own, and others disorders, have his body made
crooked when young, he will be crooked in bud, blossom, leaf, fruit, and age;
but if he be strait the (he by the grace of GOD) continues strait still. So
will it be with you: Eccl. 1.15.
that which is crooked cannot be made strait, and that which is wanting cannot
be numbered.

3. Ye are now subject to the horriblest sins,
Thirdly, ye are now subject to the horriblest sins. That natural corruption
which is rooted in all mankind, has in your age more instruments to bring it
to outward appearance, as flour^shing wit to invent, and dexterity in other
members to put in execution. As therefore, they that are sick of burning
fevers have need of cooling things, and stomackefull Colts have need of
stronger bits: so the fury of your age must be held in, as with a bit and
bridle, lest it run upon you, and lay your honor in the dust.

4. Your sins will cry loudest. Psalm. 25.7.
Fourthly, your sins being committed will cry loudest. These made David cry
out, remember not the sins of my youth, when my service would have been most
acceptable. These made Job complain, Job 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities
of my youth. These made Paul ply Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.22.
to flee the lusts of youth. And these will make you pitifully cry out too
late, We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness, when our paths
were spread with butter. When we were strong, lusty, and able to do God
service, we served the Devil: Job 21.17. Job 20.11.
and now when God distributeth sorrows in his anger, our bones are full of the
sins of our youth, which shall lie down with us in the dust.

5. Lastly, you think that you have a privilege by your age: 5. Your age has
no privilege to sin.
youth must have its course, they must sow their wild Oats. But the counsel
of the Spirit is otherwise, Eccl. 11.6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand, for
thou know not whether shall prosper. Therefore Solomon thinks such more
worthy to be laughed at, then to be anred, Rejoice O young man in thy youth,
Eccl. 11.5.
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for all
these things GOD will bring thee to judgment. And David does tie up your
untamed age to the horns of the Altar, saying, that even you must cleanse your
ways, Psalm. 119.5.
by taking heed thereto according to his word.

If therefore there be any fear of GOD before your eyes, Therefore stumble
not at any of these blocks.
if ye have any bowels of compassion to your poor souls, walk not in the
dark ways of the wicked. Open your eyes to see all the stumbling blocks of
wicked men, and stumble not into their paths. O think what may come hereafter;
Think how soon ye may dye. Job 21.23.24, 25.
how soon you may die, go hence, and be no more seen. One dies in full
strength, being wholly at ease and quiet. His breasts are full of milk, and his
bones are full of marrow: and another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and
never eats with pleasure: And then what danger will follow.
and then without the grace of Repentance, the mercy of pardon, I must to Hell,
to millions of millions of torments. Farewell companions, farewell time,
farewell pleasure; With fearful complaints in vain. Mic. 6.7.
farewell friends, farewell all your persuasions, etc. and shall I say welcome
Hell? O no: I would give thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil;
yea, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul: Luke 13.7. Mat. 7.25. and
25, 12.
but the just Judge will not accept it, cut it down, why cumbreth it the
ground: depart from me, I know thee not.

Thus you have had your example and your rule, both showing the misery of a
wicked life: you have had my charge and discharge. Shall it fall like rain
upon the barren Rocks and Mountains without fruit? Shall it not move one
soul to go from the dens of sin to GOD? If not, as noble Terentius, when
he had petitioned for the Christians, and saw it torn in pieces before his
face, gathered up the pieces, and said, I have my reward: I have not sued for
gold, silver, honor, or pleasure, but a Church. So say I, in the midst of
your neglect, I have not sued for your gold or silver, for your houses and
lands, for your drinks, dice, or drabs, but for your souls, your precious
souls. If I cannot or shall not woo them to come to Christ, God raise up some
child of the Bride-chamber which may do it better. If neither I nor others can
prevail, fear that speech of Elies sons, I Sam. 2.25.
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD would slay
them. Ier. 9.1.
In such a case, Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I may weep day and night for the miserable young men of my
people. But GOD grant I may have no such cause: God grant you may not be in
such a state: God grant you may be now wise to salvation. For it is your
salvation God would have, it is your salvation I would have: and woe unto you
if you be enemies to desires so good, and no less useful than for your
salvation, your salvation for ever and ever.

GOD guide your hearts to the love of God, and to the waiting for of Christ.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER of this Warning-peece, of the use of examples.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. 1639.

A Postscript to the Reader of this Warning piece, of the use of Examples.
GOod Reader stay a while: thou have not yet done. I have for thy good, set
before thee an old Rule, and new examples: and of the abuse of examples I am
not ignorant. Some look upon them so as to imitate them, be they never so bad.
As Augustus a learned Prince, filled his Empire with Scholars: so Tiberius, a
dissembling Prince, with dissemblers: Julian, an Apostate Prince, with
Apostates: and Jeroboham a Calvish Prince, with Idolaters. Others look upon
them so, as to hate the persons as well as the sins. Every fearful accident,
either in the life or death of men, speaks to them the language of damnation.

Howsoever they be abused, I am sure it is most fit, yea excellent, to have the
white book of Gods mercies, and the black Book of judgments, always before
our eyes. The abuse does not take away the use no more than the Spartans showed
themselves wise in rooting out their Vines, because their people abused their
Wine to drunkenness.

I am sure we have the example of GOD Himself, who would not silence the
patterns both of sin, and judgment, of those he dearly loved. And if we
be versed in his Book, we may observe, that he has been pleased to make
many uses of such examples. Sometimes by them he does threaten, Uses of
examples. 1. To threaten* Deuteronomy. 24 9. Josh. 22.20. 1 Samuel 6.6.
Remember what the Lord did unto Myriam. Did not Acham the son of Zerah
commit a trespass in the accursed thing? Wherefore do you harden your hearts
as the Egyptians and Pharaoh? If ye do as they have done, ye shall be
punished as they have been. 2. To reproach Judge. 10.17.
Sometimes by them he does reproach unthankefull people. Did not I deliver you
from the Egyptians and from the Amorites, from the children of Amon, and from
the Philistims? O my people, remember what Balack King of Moab consulted, Mic.
6*5.
and what Balaam the son of Beor answered from Shittim to Gilgal. Are ye not
ashamed to offend such a GOD as I, who have neither been a barren Wilderness,
nor a dry Land? 3. To comfort.
Sometimes by them he comfort and strengthens the hands of the weak, Thine
eyes have seen all that the Lord your God has done unto these two Kings.
Deuteronomy. 3.21.
This your trouble is as the waters of Noah to me: Esa. 54.9.
as I have said, they shall no more go over the Earth: so, nor your
afflictions shall overwhelme you. Will you be dismayed in any trouble, or cast
off your confidence, as if Gods hand were tied up now more than in those days?
Sometimes by them he does maintain great points of godliness. 4. To
maintain truth. Iam. 2.21. Rom.4.2, 3.
Was not Abraham our Father justified by works? Not to glory in before God:
for Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: but to
make him stand out against the blasphemies of the world, the accusations of
Conscience, and the upbraidings of a dead faith. And will not ye who must be
the children of Abraham, or perish, walk in the way of so worthy a Father? 5.
To dissuade from vice. 1 Cor. 10.7, 8, 9, etc. Exo. 32.6. Number. 25.9. Number. 21 6.
Numb. 14.37.
Sometimes by them he does dissuade from vice. Be not Idolaters as were some
of them. Let us not commit fornication as some of them did, and fell in one day
three and twenty thousand. Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. Neither murmr as some of them
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. if ye go on in such a way, and
will not be dissuaded, ye will meet with the same plagues which they have
found, or worse. 6. To forewarne. 2 Cor. 11.3.
Sometimes by them he gives promonition and caution. I fear least by any
means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Will ye not take heed
lest less policy make you to fall, as Eve fell, which was full of bitterness
to her and hers?

Why examples are of such use. (...). Iam. 1.2 3.
All this use and more has our good God made of examples, not only because
like leaking Vessels we are apt daily to run out, and to forget our fashion
which we saw in the Glass, if it be not still represented to us: but also
because of the singular profit of examples. For as they profit a world of
people, they being like a burning Beacon giving light before men; and being
like fire whereat we may give light to thousands of Candles: so do they last
long and hold out to the worlds end, as the poor Widows mites, and Lots Wifes
transmutation.

Neither is it in vain that GOD has taken such a course as this. A threefold
benefit by examples.
It is all for our good, that we may know how to use examples according to
their several natures. But among the rest you may reap a threefold benefit by
them. 1. Observation.
First, an Observation of the customs and usages of the Church and enemies of
it. This will be an adjument to wisdom, which is ordinarily attaineable by
experience of our own days, and memory of others. Next an Illustration of the
faith, 2. Illustration
and manners of others, what ever they be. For examples do not make faith and
manners, but give patterns of Gods rules, for the more Expedite practice of
them. And lastly, 3. Declaration of providence.

The world does not make this benefit.


a declaration of Gods ordinary providence in his acts of wisdom, goodness,
mercy, justice, and the like.

From these two uses the world does, mostly, too far wander. For want of the
first, the Church is many times filled with Schisms, and disorders. For want
of the second, faith and manners are not so cleared, and examples are taken up
as necessary Laws, which only show a lawfulness where the rule of Scripture
does not oppose. For want of the third, God passes by, and we know it not.
Let him be never so wise, by the neglect of the example, we admire it not. Let
him be never so good, by the neglect of the example, we love it not. Let him be
never so merciful, by the neglect of the example, we embrace it not. Let him
be never so just, by the neglect of the example, we do not fear and tremble,
and avoid the rocks of sin: and hence it is that I have been induced to
propound these examples unto you also.

How men do make use of examples of Justice.
It may be that sometimes men do observe the way of GOD in the whirewind of
justice: but either they are willing to think it not so great as it is; or to
judge it to reach further than our good God intends it. If men do think the
first, it is because they would flatter themselves in like sins. Loath they
are to think that God should punish that which they love; or that danger
should happen to them who have done as they mean to do still. If men judge
the second, it is because they want charity, and judgment in the ways of God.

Sometimes GOD gives an example of his justice which begins here, And how they
should from the several ways of Gods showing Justice.
and continues for ever and ever: as in many of the drowned first world, and
roasted Sodomites. God never made me so skillful in his Throne business, as
to define peremptorily, that every suckling and infant of those miserable ones
were cast into the bottomless hell. He only says that the flood did sweep
them away, and they were burned with fire and brimstone, and there leaves us to
leave the rest to GOD. They were not in the Arc indeed, nor was Job in the
visible Church, as Isaac and the rest of the Patriarchs were, yet might the
All-eye look upon them as he pleased, and judge, or spare.

Sometimes God gives an example of his justice which dies here, and (for ought
we know) may end in glory. Thus we are said to be judged that we might not
be condemned by the world. 1 Cor. 11.32.
No man will judge Josiah or Jonathan for their untimely deaths. They died in
peace, though they died in war; in peace with God, in war with men. Nor
will they resolvedly reprobate the souls of Er, and Onan, Nadab, and Abihu,
Ananias, and Saphira, or their likes. Their sins were great, and grievous, yea
damnable, and therefore GOD brought fearful judgments upon them: and as he
has said, so has he done, Psalm. 55.23.
bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. But for their
souls, and how far his justice extended to them, is among the secrets of his
government, and past our cognizance. It is an old lesson never to be
forgotten, Deuteronomy. 29.29
That secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those things that are
revealed, to us, and to our children for ever.

But what is all this to our examples in this Warning-peece? The Application of
the use of examples to this Warning-peece.
If you apply it aright you shall know how to use them to your good. Be sure
therefore to see Gods hand in both, and his anger against sin in both; without
that, such judgings could not ordinarily come into the world. Be sure also not
to extend GODS justice further than what you see or hear. Thus far God has
gone, go you no further. Cannot GOD take up his people and whippe them soundly
for sin, but presently the rash world must cry out, They are bastards, and
not f^r GODS rest?

Indeed you see or hear that one of them had a debauched and wicked life. God
saw it, and thrust him down to the gates of hell, and so he did fearfully
judge him in this world. Yet withal he had such remorse, confession, self
condemnation, desire of others good, and of his own ( though with despair,)
that God has given us reasons of charity to his soul, and kept the rule of
certainty to himself only. Notwithstanding, let no man of such a course
presume; God comes as a swift witness against such, and will make his sword
drunk with their blood. Psalm. 68 21.
For he will wound the hairy scalpe of every one that goes on still in
wickedness.

You see also, or hear, that the other of them had a great deal better life.
It is true also, that (thus much being confessed) he closed too long and too
much with the world, as all that knew him well, complained. He was also
unthankful to a parish who had been loving to a poor father of his (in a
free gift of a good maintenance from them,) when he would not be persuaded (
both before the settling of any Will, and before the settling of his last) to give
a poor pittance out of his great estate to that loving Parish for pious uses,
he having no children of his own. God saw this too, and whipped him to the
purpose, before he went hence and was no more seen.

Would not GOD have an irreligious world see how nenecessary it is to break
off a wicked life by Repentance, Dan. 4.27.
and how useful to honor GOD with our riches? Prove. 3.9.
It would make a good man's heart to bleed, that the world should have a second
flood of sin by some, and that, by others, pious and public works should
be neglected, opposed and grumbled at, as if men's riches were their own, and
they might do with them what they list, as if they were gods. Shall private
persons and affairs ( not worth a dunghill to the businesses of GOD) be the
only object of bounty and munificence? If in such a case GOD withdraw his
countenance and frown, is it not worthy our notice? Let God be GOD, and do
his own work, in sparing their souls for ever as he pleases: yet let him
show us examples too of what we ought to do, or what we shall suffer. For if
we do not amend (for ought I know) he may, and will do according to our
patterns, take away our comforts here, and our comforts for ever and ever,
which is infinitely more:

I shut up all in a word. Look upon your examples and fear and tremble. If
they have found GOD thus angry who have been overtaken by indulged, and over
pouring infirmities, how will he look upon you if ye neglect, and scorn, after
such warnings? Yet look upon them so, as you leave not Charity behind. Ye
may have hope to conceive well of them ( who were judged in this world,)
because ye knew not their hearts. Ye can have no hope to conceive well of
your selves in so doing, because ye know your own hearts better. You are apt
in excusing some to flatter your selves, and in accusing others to justify
your selves too far. Neither of these can do well in the day of your
account, which I desire may be comfortable unto you in the day of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST.

1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are
written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come.

FINIS.
Imprimater.
Thomas Weeks, Cap, Domest. Epis. Land.


