A SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON before the right honorable the Lord LAVVARRE, Lord
Governor and Captain General of VIRGINEA, and others of his Majesty's
Counsel for that Kingdom, and the rest of the Adventurers in that Plantation.

AT THE SAID LORD GENERAL HIS leave taking of ENGLAND his Native Country, and
departure for VIRGINEA, FEBR. 21. 1609.

By W. CRASHAW Bachelar of Divinity, and Preacher at the Temple.

Wherein both the lawfulness of that Action is maintained, and the necessity
thereof is also demonstrated, not so much out of the grounds of POLICY, as of
HUMANITY, EQUITY, and CHRISTIANITY.

Taken from his mouth, and published by direction.

Daniel 12. 3.

They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever.

LONDON, Printed for William Welby, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Swan. 1610.

TO THE THRICE HONORABLE, GRAVE, RELIGIOUS, THE LORDS, KNIGHTS, BVRGESSES, now
happily assembled in PARLIAMENT: L. D. HVMBLY CONSIDEring the union of their
interest in all endeauours for the common good, together with the zealous,
costly, care of many of them, to advance the propagation of the GOSPEL; Does
CONSECRATE THIS SERMON, spoken and published for encouragement of Planters in
VIRGINEA.

TO THE PRINTER.
MYearnest desire to further the Plantation in Virginea makes me perhaps too
bold with Mr. Crashaw, thus without his leave to publish his Sermon: But the
great good I assure my self it will do, shall merit your pains and my pardon.

You may give it what Title you will: only let this enclosed Dedication to the
Parliament be fairly prefixed, and the Book for your credit truly printed: to
the care whereof I leave, you.

Your friend L. D.

A 4 Page 1. line 6. for flood read floods. C 1 Page 2. line 1. for was read
were. C 3 Page 2. line 9. for the knowledge read that knowledge. E 4 Page 2.
line 6. for istuc read istud. G 2 Page 1. line 1. and 2. for it be certain
read if it be certain. H 2 Page 2. line 28. sor hold it read bold of it. H 3
Page 2. line 5. put out with. K 1 Line 14. for many in England read many
thousands in England.
A SERMON PREACHED in London before the right honorable the Lord Lawarre, Lord
Governor and Captain General of VIRGINEA, and others of his Majesty's
Counsel for that Kingdom, and the rest of the adventurers in that plantation.
LVK. 22. 32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy says sail not: therefore
when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren.

Four places of Scripture are abused by the Papists above the rest. First,
those words of Christ, Upon this Rock I will build my Matthew. 26.
Church: Secondly, his words at his last supper, This is my body: Thirdly, his
speech to Peter after his resurrection, Mat. 16.
Feed my sheep: Lastly, these to Peter before his passion, John. 21.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. These last Bellarmine likes
so well, that ten times he allegeth them in one of his Tomes, and makes them
serve, not for one, but many purposes. Hence he can prove, that the Pope is
the supreme Bellar. tom. 1. lib. de verbo Dei 3. cap. 5. page 178.
and infallible Judge of all controversies: Why? Because Christ says to Peter,
I have praicd for thee, that thy faith fail not. Hence he can prove, that
Peter is the head and prince of his brethren: Why? Because Idem de Romans Pont.
lib. 1. cap. 20.
he is bid to strengthen his brethren. Hence he can prove that the Pope
cannot err in matter of faith, Idem ibid. lib. 4. cap. 3.
because Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not fail. Hence he will prove
that Peter has more and greater Idem ibid.
privileges then the whole Church: nay this serves his turn to prove that
Councels cannot err if they Idem tom. 2. lib. de Council. 2. cap. 2.
be confirmed by the Pope. Lastly, he can prove from this, that it is
probable, the Pope, as he is a private Idem tom 1. de Romans Pont. lib. 4 cap. 6.
person, cannot be an heretic. Such plentiful use can Bellarmine make of any
piece of Scripture, if he think it do but sound for him. But I dare say the
Scripture that the devil brought against Matthew. 4.
Christ was as fitly and properly alleged as some of these are by Bellarmine,
as may be evidently showed in another place and time.

But seeing the primitive fathers have made no such Vide Ambros. in hoc capus,
and alios.
conclusions from this place, therefore out of their and the latter Fathers
exposition we have gathered another kind of divinity from these words. To
which end I first lay down this general ground: Christ is our true and
spiritual physician, from whom and the virtue of whose merits we must receive
all the spiritual physic that can cure and save our sinful souls.

Particularly, as the body, so the soul stands in need of three sorts of
physic. First, it is necessary that it be purged from the corruption of
sin, which else will kill the soul: then, being purged, it is to be restored
to life and strength: lastly, being so restored, it is requisite that it be
preserved in that state unto the end. Answerable unto these there is a
threefold kind of physic we receive from Christ: viz. purgative,
restoratiue, and preservative.

First, purgative, to purge our souls from the corrupt humors and the
infectious stain of sin: and this powerful potion is confected of the
precious merits of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, who died,
that we might die to sin, and our sins die in us: and was crucified, that
our sins might be nailed on his cross: and buried, that our sins might so
die, that they may never live again in us.

But when a sick man is purged of all his evil humors, it helps not if he
be not also restored to strength. Therefore secondly, we receive also from
Christ restoratiue physic, such as whereby we are restored to the life of
grace, and favor of God. And this comfortable restoratiue balm distills from
the glorious merits of the resurrection of Christ: who, as he died for our
sins, so he rose Romans 5. vlt.
again for our justification: and who therefore rose from death to life, that
he might merit grace for us whereby we may rise up from the death of our
sins to newness and holiness of life.

But because it is not sufficient to be restored, unless a man be kept in
health, for that a relapse is more dangerous then the former sickness;
therefore to keep us from deadly relapses (into which without Christ we were
sure to fall) we do finally receive from Christ preservative physic, by the
virtue whereof we are preserved in the state of grace, and favor of God; and
these blessed and sovereign antidotes are confected of the glorious merits of
Christ his ascension and intercession, who therefore is entered into heaven to
appear now in Hcb. 9. 24.
the sight of God for us.

Now for the words in hand, they speak of the sweet and comfortable
Preservatives we receive from Christ his powerful intercession: as though
Christ had said, I confess ( Peter) thou art a great professor and protester,
but little know thou how mighty thy enemy is, and how weak thy self; thou
rellest me thou will die for me, but know that thy enemy Satan will sift thee
to the full, and not cease till he have tried the utmost of his power against
thee: But I who redeemed thee will not leave to love thee; I will therefore by
the power of my intercession, purchase thee such grace, as shall uphold thee
and raise thee up again, and will so make thee a comfortable example to all my
elect: Thou therefore in remembrance of what I have done for thee, when thou
feel the sweetness of this my mercy to thy self, teach others by thy
example, and endeavor seriously the conversion and confirmation of thy
brethren. All this the Lord Jesus piles up in a few words: But I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not, therefore when thou art converted strengthen
thy brethren. The parts are two: Christ's mercy, and Peter's duty. Two parts of
the text.
First an evident declaration of Christ's love to the souls of his servants: I
have prayed for thee, etc. Secondly the duty of all men who taste of that love;
when they are converted they must labor the conversion of others: When thou
art converted, etc. Both are directed first and personally to Peter, but from
him derived to all Gods children in the world, for that which then was Peter's
case, falls out to be the case of all men: so that the words are not spoken to
Peter as he was an Apostle, but as he was an ordinary Christian and a child of
God. And as in the first part Christ did no favor to Peter which he does not
to every christian in like case; namely to pray for them that their faith fail
not: so the duty here laid upon Peter, in him is laid upon all men, to labor
to bring others to Christ after they be brought themselves. The meaning being
thus explaned, let us open the points in order.

But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. First part, Christ's
mercis.


This time and occasion will not give leave to unfold the questions that might
be moved touching Christ's prayer and intercession for his Church; much less
may we spend any of the short time we have in discovering or disproouing the
Popish abuse of these words. I wish no congregation did need it more then this:
for then the names of Pope and Popery might be buried as they long ago
deserved. Let us therefore come to such necessary instructions as arise
directly out of that meaning which has been laid down.

And first of all, we may here see out of the Doct. 1.
dependence of these words with the former, the greatness of Gods mercy and
Christ's love to a sinful soul. Satan (faith Christ) has desired to sift
thee, but I have prayed for thee. See, Satan cannot be so ready to hurt as
Christ to help us: Satan not so malicious to conspire our fall, as Christ is
merciful to sustain and preserve us: and if the Devil devise any new way to
hurt us, Christ is present with new means, and new supply of grace to relieve
us. A comfortable doctrine and has comfortable use to all that are any way
distressed. For if it be satisfaction to a man in matters of this life where
he has a potent enemy, that is able many ways, and much to hurt him, to be
assured that he has a friend that most deerly loves him, and is wiser,
stronger, wealthier and every way mightier then his adversary: then doubtless
it cannot but minister strong consolation to a distressed soul and terrified
conscience to remember that they have a Savior more mighty in his mercy, then
the devil can be in his malice, and more willing to save then the devil can
be to destroy.

And no less unto the penitent sinner, who may hereupon be assured that though
he have to grapple with many and mighty corruptions, yet Christ will be ready
with continual supply of grace, that so where sin abounds grace may abound
Romans 5. 20.
much more. The man also that is oppressed in this world with the might and
multitude of his enemies may here receive comfort to consider, that there are
still more with him, then against him: And lastly, the poor man, whom the
flood of outward misery do beat upon, may here see for his comfort that the
love and providence of his Savior shall ever be as ready to relieve him, as
the worlds occasions can fall out to pinch him.

And to make application: It may yield us much satisfaction who are engaged in
this present action, to consider that though satan seek to make us desist, and
because he cannot, therefore will hurt us, by all his power; (as who can marvel
seeing we touch his freehold so near?) yet we have Christ Jesus on our side,
whose kingdom we go to enlarge: whose love to his children is such, that even
then when satan sifts them most narrowly, he with his prayers is most near
them for their assistance: And therefore we doubt not, but that seeing satan is
now so busy to sift us by all discouragements, and by slanders, false reports,
backwardness of some, baseness of others, by raising objections and devising
doubts, endeauours to dant us, and so to betray the business that God himself
has put into our hands: the more I say are we assured that Christ will the
more mightily oppose this malice of the devil, and by his glorious
intercession, obtain from his father so much the greater blessing both on us
and it.

Furthermore, in as much as Christ himself Doct. 2.
prays for his children, that their faith shall not sail, no not in the
greatest temptations, and when satan sifts them most narrowly, we learn, that
therefore a christian truly converted and called to the state of grace, cannot
fall away totally nor finally. The adversaries of the grace of God the Papists,
hold he may fall both finally and totally: others much nearer us then they, say
totally, but not finally. Both are confuted by these words of our Savior; for
if a man should fall totally from faith and the favor of God, though it were
but for a day, and the next day should be restored again, yet for that time,
be it more or less, his faith has failed: But says Christ, I have prayed
that it shall not. Hereupon we argue; That which Christ prays for God will
grant: But Christ prays (not that we may not be tempted or sifted, but) that
our faith fail not, and this not for Peter alone, but as himself says, I
pray not for these alone, but for all that shall believe in me through their
word: therefore no true Ioh. 17. 30.
christians faith shall or can fail either finally or totally. A doctrine of
unspeakable comfort to the christian soul, But not a fit doctrine (say some)
to be diuulged to the people. And why? because say they, If we be sure we
cannot fall from Gods favor, then what needs a man care how he lives? But I
answer; no man can justly take occasion thus to abuse this doctrine; for the
ungodly and unsanctified man was never yet in the state of grace, therefore to
him this doctrine pertaines not: and for him that is sanctified and in Gods
favor this resolution cannot befall him: which appears most evident, both in
reason and religion.

In reason, we know a graceless child will neither be feared from evil by the
anger, nor won to his duty by the love of his father: but contrary is it with
the good and gracious child (I mean if he have no more but the grace of a
civil nature and good education:) if his father so love him that though he
often offend him, yet he will not disinherit him, will he therefore be
imboldned to offend him the more carelessly? Nay, he will say to himself, Have
I so good a father as will not deal with me according to my deseruings, but so
often and so mercifully has forgiven my offenses? surely I will endeavor by all
the means I can to please him and to be worthy of such a father. Much more is
it true in religion, for when a man is converted, he is cast in a new mould,
flesh and blood no longer bear rule in him, and he bids battle and stands in
opposition and defiance with all such carnal resolutions as this is. I say
not, but such thoughts may come into his mind, and he may be tempted to such
cogitations, but that he should entertain such resolutions it is impossible:
Believe not me herein; but let God himself be Judge: to which end read and
mark well a notable place: I. Ioh. 3. 3. We shall be like unto him, and shall
see him even as he is. And every man that has this hope in him, does he
therefore sin the more, or take more scope to himself? No, but contrariwise,
purges himself even as Christ is pure. He therefore that sins the rather,
it is certain he has not this hope in him; and he that has this hope in him
is so far from that, that he endeuoreth and strives every day, how he may
overcome his sins and walk more worthy of so loving and merciful a father. So
then the true use of this doctrine is, that it serves to be an excellent
incitement to stir up and provoke a man unto holiness, unless he purpose to
proclaim to the world that he has no hope in him, and that he is not in the
state of grace.

In the third place we may here learn, what is Doct. 3.
the true cause of a christian man's standing in the state of grace: namely, not
the excellency of our strength, nor the perfection of our faith, or of any
thing in us, but the true cause is out of us, even in God: It is the stablenes
of his purpose, the immutability of his election, the truth of his covenant,
the infallibility of his word, and the certainty of his love wheresoever he
bestows it: and the excellency and all sufficiency of Christ's merits, in whom
we are loved and elected: therefore says the Romans 11. 29.
Apostle, the gifts and callings of God are without repentance: and whom he
loves, he loves unto the end: John 13. 1.
and the Prophet says of God: I will put my fear into their hearts, and they
shall not (mark, he says not, they cannot or will not, but they shall not)
depart from Ierem. 32. 40.
me: So here Christ tells Peter, satan desires to sist thee as wheat; and
such a sister is he as who can stand by his own strength? but I who so loved
thee as I died to save thee, have also prayed for thee that thy faith shall not
sail. So then had it not been for the intercession of Christ, Peter had feign
and failde in that temptation. This truth may fitly be illustrated by this
comparison. A strong man visits his sick friend, and wills him to walk; the
sick man would, but cannot; the strong man lifts him up, he walks, in the
hand of the strong man, each having hold of other: by and by the sick man
faints and lets his hold go, but the strong man holds fast, and keeps him from
falling, and so he stands not by his own, but the strong man's strength: So is
it in this case, A christian converted has hold of God by his faith and love:
God has hold of him by his eternal election and covenant of grace and by the
love he bears him in Christ: now we walk with God in the course of our
obedience, but if temptation come, we shrink and fall away, our faith and
love, like a sick man's strength are soon spent. But then, though we let go
the hold we have of God, God will never let go the hold he has of us; but in
that love he bears us, he still vpholds us: and so we stand not by our own
strength but by the grace and mercy of God, who like the stronger man holds us
so, as we shall not depart from him.

Then for the use of this doctrine we may here learn: first that the Romish
Synagogue in denying this, and affirming that a man may fall utterly from the
state of grace, does no wrong at all to us, but the wrong is to God himself,
the certainty of whose covenant and truth of whose purpose is hereby called
into question, as though God should choose a man he will forsake, and love him
to day, whom he will hate the next: whereas contrariwise, as he loved us when
we loved not him, so he will keep fast hold on us, when we in our weakness
would let go the hold we have of him.

And for our selves, let this teach us to ascribe the cause where it is due,
even to the Lords mercy and Christ's mediation. If we slip or fall, we may
thank our selves: but if we stand and persevere, we must thank the Lord: Let
us therefore cry to God with the Prophet: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
to thy name give the praise. And why Psalm. 115. 1.
to him? for thy loving mercics and for thy truths sake: for it is his mercy
and truth that vpholds us from falling and perishing eternally. Lastly, in as
Doct. 4.
much as Christ says he prayed for him that his faith failed not, and so
vpheld him by the virtue and merit of his holy prayer; we learn here the
excellency of prayer, namely, that it is the best and pourfullest means,
whereby we may do good one to another: when Christ would do the greatest
favor to Peter next to dying for him, he prays August. ser. 122 de tempore.
Tom.
for him. Prayer and preaching are the two comforts of the Church. If thou pray
(says Augustine) thou speak with God: If thou hear or-read, God Cum oramus
ipsi cum Deo loquimur: cum legimus scripturas ipsi cum Deo loquimur.
speaks with thee. Both are commended to us by the continual practice of
Christ, who spent much time in preaching, and much time in prayer. Let us
therefore religiously embrace both these sacred ordinances, as the special
means of our spiritual comfort.

And by this practice of our Savior let us all be stirred up to this holy
duty: Shall Christ pray, and not thou? Is he tied, and will thou be free? Be
ashamed of thy profaneness, thou that never praiest: and say not that thou
go to the Church, and praiest with the congregation, for therein thou do
but that the Law requires thee: the Church is to be commended for that, and not
thou. But remember that Christ besides his daily presence in the Temple, did
go aside to his private prayers. And let us further here learn one to pray
for another. Shall Christ pray for us, and not we for our selves? he for us
all, and not we one for an other? And the better to stir us up to this duty,
let us consider that prayer has three excellencies above other duties which
we perform to our brethren.

First, it is the cheapest and easiest for the giver (I mean to a sanctified
man) for he who for want of ability cannot give alms, nor lend to his poor
brother; nor for want of wisdom can give counsel, nor instruction for want of
knowledge, yet he has a mouth, at least if his tongue were cut out, he has a
heart to pray for his brother; and he that can do nothing else can do this:
and this the poor may do for the rich, as well as the rich for the poor.

Secondly, it is the most powerful and profitable for the receiver. An alms
we see how much it is: Counsel we see how good it is; and what good they will
do us is easily perceived: but what good a good man's prayer does for thee is
past knowledge, and beyond all measure. Giving and lending may help thee
before men: prayer preuailes with God, and pulls down blessings of all sorts;
and those good things we often imagine to come other ways, are sent us from
God upon the prayers of Gods children.

Thirdly, it has this peculiar honor more then any other duty, that it is
profitable both to the giver and receiver. As it procures those good things
upon thy friend thou praiest for, so it returns also into thine own bosom,
and brings down the same or greater blessings upon thy self.

Therefore (for a conclusion of the first part) let us above all duties not
forget to pray for our absent friends. When they are present we do such
duties as may let them see we love them: and when they are absent, let us pray
for them; that does testify to God that we love them. And no better duty can
we perform to this noble voyage now in hand, then earnestly to commend it to
the Lord. Men may furnish it, but God must bless it, and prayer must procure
that blessing. Money may win, and profit may allure men to assist it: but
prayer alone can prevail with God to bless it. Some engage their persons, and
more their purses; but our petitions shall do more good then our persons, and
our prayers then our purses. Thou therefore that can do nothing else, yet
pray for us: thou that can do more, yet pray besides: for though thou
should venture thy person, and engage thy money, yet let us have thy prayers
also: which (if thou be as thou ought) will do more good then all the
rest. Remember the end of this voyage is the destruction of the devils
kingdom, and propagation of the Gospel. Are not these ends worthy of thy
prayers? Remember thy brethren who have engaged their persons, and adventured
their lives to lay the first foundation, and do now live in want of many
comforts and pleasures, which thou at home enioiest. Are not these men's souls
worthy of thy prayers? Can thou open thy mouth in public or in private, and
not remember them? Oh let their lives be precious, and their enterprise
honorable in thine eyes: and if thou can do nothing else, send up thy
prayers to heaven for them.

And thus much for the first general part, Christ's merciful promise to his
Church.

The second is the duty he inioines Peter and all others that shall be
partakers of this promise.

Therefore when thou art converted strengthen thy Second part, Peter's duty.
brethren.

As the promise, so also the commandment upon the occasion then offered was
personally directed to Peter, but from him derived to the whole Church, and
every particular Christian: so that this commandment is laid upon him, not as
an Apostle, but as a Christian man and a member of Christ's body: and as his
case then may be the case of any man, so every man is bound to this duty: And
as there is no Christian but may challenge this interest in the intercession of
Christ, that by the virtue of it his faith shall not fail: so there is no man,
but in his measure he is tied to the performance of this duty. For the sense
of the words they are not difficult: Satan has taken vantage of thy
infirmity, and hopes to give thee such a fall, as thou shall never recover:
but I will bear thee up with my own strength: I will make thy faith to hold
out, and overcome him in the end. Thou therefore when thou have tasted of my
mercy, and art raised up again from that fall, (which was so dangerous and
fearful, that thy restoration is as it were another conversion) then be
mindful of thy brethren, as I have been of thee, and by thy example and all
other good means help forward the conversion and confirmation of them that
need. The meaning is plain: let us come to the doctrines.

And first of all, whereas Christ says, When thou Doct. 1.
art converted, etc. we learn, that a man is not borne in the state of grace,
and favor of God, but there is a certain appointed time of every man's
conversion: When thou art: therefore there is a time when a man is not. Now the
time of a man's conversion is first especially in Gods hand, but partly also in
our own. For the first, David says, My times (O Lord) are in thy hand. If all
the times Psalm. 31. 15.
and changes of his life, then especially the time of his conversion. Now it is
in Gods hand, not only because he gives the grace, and opens, softens, and
prepares the heart; but further because he gives the means of a man's
conversion. He sent out Psalm. 107. 20.
his word and healed them, says the Prophet. It is also in a man's hand when
God vouchsafes to give a man the means of vocation and conversion (as to us at
this day:) this time is therefore called the acceptable time and day of
salvation. Now then it 2. Cor. 6. 2.
concerns every one of us to look to our selves. Art thou changed and renewed
since thou wast borne? Know thou the time and the means? And do thou
discern the fruits and effects of thy conversion? Thou art a happy creature.
If not, and thou die so, it had been good for thee thou had never been. And
say not, thou wast converted, but thou have forgotten it: for can thou forget
the time when thou wast married? when thy eldest son was borne? when thy ships
came home? when a great and unexpected inheritance fell unto thee? Much less
possible is it for the soul that is truly turned to God, to forget the time
and circumstances of his conversion. We may be sure Peter never forgot all
his life long how Christ looked at him: for that was the blessed Luke 22. 61.
hour of his conversion: so the hour and time of our conversion is when
Christ will vouchsafe to look upon us. Now though his corporal presence be
removed, he is present in his spirit, in his power and his grace, and looks
mercifully upon us every day in his holy word. Oh then remember Peter, who at
the first look of Christ went out and Luke 22. 62.
wept for his sin, and be ashamed that thou have had Christ look so many
hundred times upon thee, and all in vain.

In the next place, whereas Christ bids Peter when Doct. 2.
he is converted, strengthen his brethren, as though then a man was fitted to
do good to others, when he is himself converted, and not till then: we may
here learn the true cause why men are so negligent in performance of duties
to others, even because themselves are unsanctified men: for true love begins
at home: and how can he love another, that loves not himself? or care for
another good, that neglects his own? See thou therefore a Magistrate that
gouernes not his people carefully, but lets all run as it will, and himself
takes his ease, follows his pleasure, or fills his purse? The cause is, he is a
carnal man, and unsanctified. See thou a Minister that receives the fleece,
but feeds not the flock? The cause is, he is an unsanctified man. See thou a
Merchant or tradesman that deceiues, a master, a father, a husband, a wife,
child, or servant, that are negligent or unfaithful? The cause is, they are
unsanctified: for if a man were converted himself, his next care will be to
do all good he can to others.

More particularly, we here see the cause why no more come in to assist this
present purpose of plantation in Virginea, even because the greater part of men
are unconverted and unsanctified men, and seek merely the world and
themselves, and no further. They make many excuses, and devise objections; but
the fountain of all is, because they may not have present profit. If other
voiages be set afoot, wherein is certain and present profit, they run, and
make means to get in: but this, which is of a more noble and excellent nature,
and of higher and worthier ends, because it yields not present profit, it must
seek them, and with much difficulty are some brought in, and many will not at
all. Tell them of getting XX. in the C. oh how they bite at it, oh how it
stirs them! But tell them of planting a Church, of converting 10000. souls
to God, they are senseless as stones: they stir no more then if men spoke of
toies and trifles: nay they smile at the simplicities, and laugh in their
sleeves at the silliness of such as engage themselves in such matters. But
these men proclaim to the world what they be, even Sowes that still wallow in
the mire of their profit and pleasure, and being themselves unconverted, have
therefore no care to convert others. And in deed no marvel, if having cast all
care of their own salvation behind their backs, they be insensible of others
miseries.

Thirdly, inasmuch as here Christ commands him that is converted to strengthen
another, it appears Doct. 3.
(by a necessary implication) of what an excellent nature godliness and
holiness is; namely, of a large, a liberal, a communicating and diffusiue
nature, and such as will even compel him that has it to seek to make others
as good as himself. It is not so in wealth, honor, learning, wisdom,
authority, estimation. You shall not hear a carnal man say, Oh that every
one were as wealthy as I, as wise as I, as high as I, as learned as I, as
highly in the Kings favor as I, as well esteemed, and as much followed as I:
no, for these are of a base and retractiue nature, and do imprison and close
up the heart of man: but grace is of a high and royal nature, and inlargeth
his heart that possesses it: Oh (says Mises) that all Gods people did
prophecy as well as I. And Paul he cricth, I wish Number. 11. 29.
that all beer present were as I am, except these bonds. Act. 26. 29.
We would rather have said, I would you had my bonds: I wish you were in prison
in my room. But he contrariwife wishes not any man in his bonds; but that
they were as holy, and patient, and learned, and zealous, and as highly in Gods
favor as himself. And so assuredly as many as are induced with true saving
and sanctifying grace, will say with their tongues, pray in their hearts, and
endeavor with their best assistance, that the poor Savages in Virginea were as
good Christians as we our selves.

Lastly, out of this commandment of Christ we Doct. 4.
may further learn a doctrine specially pertinent to the present occasion, and
the business now in hand: namely, that it is not voluntary or left indifferent
to a man's choice, but (plainly) a necessary duty, for every christian to
labor the conversion and confirmation of others that are not: and this
necessity arises not only from the excellent nature of religion, which
desires ever to propagate Bonum est sui diffusiuum.
and diffuse it self, as we heard before: But especially from the power of
Christ's commandment, which being unrestrained does absolutely bind all
christians to obedience: But here the commandment is general and unlimited to
every one that is converted to confirmt his brethren, therefore it lies upon
all men by an unavoidable necessity to perform it: it being no way in the
power of man to dispense with the general commandment of Christ.

Out of which ground appears euideutly, not only the lawfulness, but even;
the excellency and The excellency and necessity of this action for Virginea.
goodness, and indeed the plain necessity (as the case now stands) of this
present action: the principal ends thereof being the plantation of a Church of
English christians there, and consequently the conversion of the heathen from
the devil to God: which ground being so laid, it then follows that either we
are not converted, or they are not our brethren, or else that we being converted
must labor their conversion: But we by the blessing of God are converted
lately from Popery, and formerly from paganism: Nor can it be denied that they
(in this case) are our brethren: for the same God made them as well as us, of
as good matter as he made us, gave them as perfect and good souls and bodies
as to us, and the same Messiah and savior is sent to them as to us, for if a
Virginian having our language had learned our religion, professed our faith;
craved baptism, and challenged salvation by Christ: could either man deny him
baptism, or would God deny him salvation? Surely God would not the one, and
man may not the other: so then they are our brethren, wanting not title to
Christ, but the knowledge of Christ: Oh thrice happy then are they that shall
carry the knowledge to them: and we by the mercy of God are the men to whom God
has offered the means and opportunity to do it: first granting us the means
to discover the land more fully then those that attempted it before us: then,
to find out a fair, easy, and short passage, as though he had seated us here
and them there for such an intercourse: then, giving us favor in the eyes of
the savages, who rather inuit us then resist us: then, directing us to a land
where is want of inhabitants, and consequently room both for them and us; and
to a people inclinable (as we see by some experience already) first to
ciuility, and so to religion: and to such a land and such a people as (more
then any other people or land we know of) have the commodities which we want,
and want that which we have for them. These means and opportunities, I say,
being offered by Gods providence unto us, it not only shows us the
possibility, but lays upon us a necessity of seeking their conuersions, and
consequently of setting forward this plantation, without which the former
cannot be: And do not think that this duty lies more upon him or him then
upon thee, for what ever thou art, if thou be converted, this duty belongs unto
thee to teach others: Kings themselves are not privileged from the obedience
of this duty, which Dauia knowing full well, does publicly acknowledge to God
and to his Church, saying: Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish
mec with thy free spirit. Then sha'l I teach thy way unto the Psalm. 51 12. 13.
wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee: and in another place, Come
(says he) ye children, hear ken to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord:
as though he Psalm. 34. 11.
had said (as in another place) I will tell you what God has done for my
soul: thus Kings are tied, Psalm. 66. 16.
and shall you be free? and our most gracious and christian King has showed
himself conscionablie obedient to this commandment, setting forward this
blessed business by his princely privileges and gracious grants under his
great seal to all the undertakers: recording it also unto all ensuing
posterities, that he greatly affects the effectual prosecution and happy
success of the said plantation, and commends The words of the second Patent,
dated 1609.
the good desires of the undertakers, and grants these privileges for their
encouragement in accomplishing so excellent a work that is so much pleasing to
God and profitable to these kingdoms. And in a former grant, that his Majesty
greatly commends and graciously accepts the undertakers desires for so noble a
work, which The words of the former Patent of anno 1606.
by Gods blessing is like to tend to the great glory of his divine Majesty, in
propagating of christian religion to such people as yet live in darkness and
miserable ignorance of the true knowledge and worship of God. If then his
Majesty out of his duty to God, love of his religion, and care of their souls
have thus put to his royal hand for the furtherance of this blessed and worthy
work, who art thou that wilt be free from the bonds of this duty?

But besides this necessity of duty: another necessity in nature and reason
lies upon us: for the Another necessity, we must do as we have been done
unto.
time was when we were savage and uncivil, and worshipped the devil, as now
they do, then God sent some to make us civil, others to make us christians. If
such had not been sent us we had yet continued wild and uncivil, and
worshippers of the devil: for our civility we were beholden to the Romans,
for our religion to the Apostles and their disciples. Did we receive this
blessing by others, and shall we not be sensible of those that are still as we
were then?

In what a case had we been if God had not sent some to ciuilize and convert
us! And shall not we now labor to procure the same good to others? Otherwise
surely we are most unworthy of the favors we have received. Nay that is not
all, but it appears that we are not truly and effectually converted: for if
we be, then assuredly as by virtue of Gods commandment We must, so out of
our own conscience and fellow-feeling of our brethrens miseries, We will be
most willing and ioifull to procure them salvation, where of we by Gods mercy
and the same means are already partakers.

Out of these grounds I conclude, that for my part (without prejudice to others
opinions) it is not only a lawful, but a most excellent and holy Assistance
of this voyage co^sists in four things: Countenance, Person, Purse, Prayer.
action, and, as the case now stands, so necessary, that I hold every man
bound to assist, either with his Countenance, Power, and Authority (as do our
gracious Sovereign and noble Prince) or with their persons, as some; or with
their purses, as others of the Honorable and godly undertakers: or with their
prayers and best wishes, as al, I hope, do, that love the Lord. But because
the first part of this assistance belongs only to our Sovereign, none can
therefore, nay none need take part in that: and as for the last, which is by
prayer, seeing that the poor may do as well as the rich, I hope I may spare my
labor to exhort to that, none being so profane to neglect that duty for us,
unless they neglect it for themselves also. But for the middle, of purse and
person; as I will press none to go in person: so those whose consciences and
resolutions do press themselves, I doubt not to affirm that they adventure
their lives in the most worthy action that was attempted in the Christian
world these many years. But for assistance by the purse, I will here discharge
my own conscience; which is, that upon the premises before proved, and
grounds formerly laid down, I hold every one that knows the true ends of this
enterprise, and is able, is bound to assist it according to that ability of
his. But lest any man mistaking or abusing my words, should here cavil and
say; Belike then this man holds all damned that are not adventurers to
Virginea, and it is a sure sign of a profane man, if he be not an undertaker
in that action, or the like: Take notice that my assertion is qualified with
these two limitations: First, that a man must know the true state of this
business, and true grounds and ends both of his Majesty's gracious grants, and
of the undertakers adventure: which as they be ignorantly mistaken by many, so
most malignantly and maliciously misreported by Papists, who mislike all things
done by Protestants, and others of base mind, covetous, or otherways
maleuolent spirits, who condemn all things that serve not their profit or
their pleasure. But it is most certain that there be thousands in this city
and kingdom, who if they knew the truth, would be more willing to assist it,
then hitherto they have kept out: such therefore we are far from condemning,
but leave them till they be satisfied of the truth, and then if they change not
their opinion, their own consciences will condemn them, if none else would.

Secondly, though a man know it never so well, he must be of ability to
contribute, or else this ties him not: for a man is bound first to maintain
himself and his family, and to bear his part of the needful burdens of the
Church and State where he lives: then out of that which remains, such actions
as this do challenge a part. Now whether a man be able or no, he must be left
to his own conscience to give judgment. But herein let a man take heed he
flatter not himself: it is easy for men to decciue themselves, and the devil
delights to make men betray their own souls: thou therefore that pleadest
thou art not able, consider how much thou have abroad at Interest, how much
thou have in other adventures, into which nothing but hope of present profit
did allure thee: consider how much thou spendest in sports and other vanities,
(besides necessary recreation) how much in plain superfluities of apparel,
furniture, building or diet, all which it may be, or much of it, were better
spared then spent: if thou and thy conscience do but cast up this account,
thou will never say hereafter, thou art unable, for thou know how small a
part of those vain expenses would have sufficed this: and that that has done
thee hurt, being vainly spent, would have done much good to this godly
business: and take heed, thou that art of this mind, the time come not that
thy soul wishes a great part of that thou have voluntarily and wilfully cast
away otherways, were all bestowed in this or some such action.

Thus with these two cautions I make my conclusion, that the assistance of this
business is a duty that lies on all men: and that whosoever is of ability,
and knows the true grounds and ends of this voyage, if he assist it not,
discouers himself to be an unsanctified, unmortified, and unconverted man,
negligent of his own and other men's saluations: or else Peter might have
replied on Christ and said: Nay sir, I may be converted, and yet be not bound
to strengthen my brethren. And this may suffice for the true meaning and right
use of this text.

But now (right Honorable and beloved) seeing A particular consideration of the
true state of the Virginean voyage, upon occasion of this text.
we are assembled peculiarly for this business, even to consecrate this
enterprise to the Lord of heaven: and to send away our honorable Governor and
his associates and attendants in the name of the Lord; give me leave (not as
calling once into question the lawfulness of so noble an action, but) for the
further clearing of the truth to them that know it not, for the justification
of our course against the adversaries of all excellent exploits, for the
stopping of the mouths of the malignant, and for the better satisfaction and
encouragement of our selves, who either in purse or person, or both, are
engaged in the action, to descend a little more particularly into consideration
of the true state hereof. All I have to say I will reduce to two heads, namely,
to lay down truly The encouragements. The discouragements in this business.
For in this or any other action to be undertaken, if the encouragements to it,
and discouragements from it, be both of them truly and justly laid down, and
then weighed in the balance of wisdom, it will easily appear to men of
understanding, whether the business be fitter to be undertaken, or
relinquished: Answerably let us deal in the present action, and so proceed
accordingly.

And first let us truly and impartially propound First, the discouragements in
this action laid down, and removed.
the discouragements that seem to attend this present intendment of plantation
of an English Colonie in Virginea.

The first and fundamental is the doubt of lawfulnes The first discouragement:
qu^stion of the lawfulnes.
of the action, the question being moved by many, and some not out of
curiosity, nor other sinister, but conscionable and Christian respects: and
this keeps many from assisting it; for how may they put their helping hands to
that which they are not resolved in conscience, to be lawful and warrantable
in it self? For these men's sakes, and not for such as make it but a shelter of
their covetous and carnal respects, we will give passage to this objection.

And for answer hereunto; first, we freely confess an action cannot be good,
excellent or honorable, and much less can it be necessary, unless it first
of all appear to be lawful: secondly, for the present action, we also
confess and yield to this as to a principle of Justice. A Christian may take
nothing from a Heathen against his A Christian may not do wrong to a Heathen.
will, but in fair and lawful bargain: Abraham wanted a place to bury in,
and liked a piece of land: and being a great man, and therefore feared, a just
and meek man, and therefore loved of the heathen, they bad him choose where he
would, Genes. 23.
and take it: No, says Abraham, but I will buie it, and so he paid the price
of it: so must all the children of Abraham do. Thirdly, it is most lawful to
exchange with other Nations, for that which they may spare, and it is lawful
for a Christian to Christians may traffic with the heathen.
have commerce in civil things even with the heathen: unless they be such of
whom God has given a plain and personal charge to the contrary, as he did
to the Israelites of the cursed Canaanites, whom they were commanded to kill,
and have nothing to do withal: But we have no such commandment touching the
Virginians.

Upon these grounds, which I hope are undeniable, I answer more particularly
to the present occasion: that first we will take nothing from the Savages by
power nor pillage, by craft nor violence, neither goods, lands nor liberty,
much less life (as some of other Christian nations have done, to the dishonor
of reiigion.) We will offer them no wrong, but rather defend them from it: and
this is not my bare speech, but order is so taken both in our Pattents and
Instructions, and such is the resolution of our Governors.

Secondly, we will exchange with them for that We will take from them only that
they may spare us. First, their superfluous land. Secondly, their superfluous
commodities.
which they may spare, and we do need; and they shall have that which we may
spare, and they do much more need. But what may they spare? first, land and
room for us to plant in, their country being not replenished by many degrees:
in so much as a great part of it lies wild and inhabited of none but the
beasts of the field, and the trees that have grown there it may be 1000.
years (whose ancient possession to disturb, we hold no great offense:) and
who knows not, but as the present state of England stands, we want room, and
are likely enough to want more?

Again, they may spare us Timber, Masts, Crystal The commodities certainly
known to be in Virginia, Timber, Crystal, Masts, Wine, Copper, Iron, Pitch,
Tar, Sope-ashes, Sassafras.
(if not better stones) Wine, Copper, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Sassasras, Sopeashes,
(for all these and more, we are sure the Country yeeldes in great abundance)
and who knows not we want these, and are beholden to some for them, with whom
it were better for us if we had less to do?

These things they have, these they may spare, these we need, these we will
take of them. But what will we give them? first, we will give them such things
as they greatly desire, and do hold a sufficient recompense for any of the
foresaid commodities we take of them: but we hold it not so; and therefore
out of our humanity and conscience, we will give them more, namely such things
as they want and need, and are infinitely more excellent then all we take
from them:and that is 1. Civility for their bodies, 2. Christianity for their
souls: We give to them what they most need, as 1. Civility and skill in
trades, and tools for trades, and government.
The first to make the^ men: the second happy men; the first to cover their
bodies from the shame of the world: the second, to cover their souls from the
wrath of God: the less of these two (being that for the body) will make them
richer then we find them. For he that has 1000. acres, and being a civil and
sociable man knows how to use it, is richer then he that has 20000. and being
a savage, cannot plow, till, plant nor set, and so receives no more profit then
what the earth of it self will yield by nature: so that we are so far from
disinheriting them of their possessions, or taking any thing from them, that
contrariwise we will make them much richer, even for matter of this life, then
now they are, as they themselves will hereafter confess. Whereby appears the
vanity of this objection, for when they are ciuilized, and see what they have
received from us, I dare say they will never make this objection against 2.
Religion, and the knowledge of the true God.
us that these men now do. And now if the smaller and baser part of our
payment be better worth then all we take from them, then it seems the second,
which is the chief of all, namely, religion, they have from us for nothing:
and surely so it is, they shall have it freely for Gods sake, and for their
souls sake: and yet we know the holy ghost has told us, that if we
communicate unto them our spiritual things, it is but a 1. Cor. 9. 11.
a small thing if they impart unto us their temporal: then how much smaller is
it if they impart unto us their temporal, when we communicate unto them both
spiritual and better temporal then we receive from them. And this may suffice
for the lawfulness of the action, especially seeing whosoever would be
satisfied more particularly, M. Simonds his Sermon.
may have recourse to a lcarned and godly Sermon, and to a short, but a
judicious and sincere declaration, well pend, both set out by authority for
that end, and the truth whereof will be justified both by the Authors, and the
whole body of the Counsel for that kingdom.

This discouragement troubled the conscience, the rest are rather grounded on
politic and humane reasons, wherein therefore I will be the shorter, and
commit them to those whose element it is to consider and determine of such
matters.

The second discouragement, is the difficulty of The second discouragement:
difficulty of Plantation.
Plantation, for that the country is far off, and the passage long and
dangerous, the climate hot and disagrecing with the state and temper of our
bodies. For answer, if these objections proceed from malice, they are to be
rejected, if from ignorance, as we rather suppose, let them then know for
satisfaction, that first for the distance, it is nothing 1. By distance.
to speak of: a two months voyage, and we hope we shall shortly be able to
say a months: How near Virginia is to England.
compare it with other voyages that are of name, and it is the nearest of all.
Secondly, for the 2. For hard passage.
passage, it is the easiest, fairest and safest that has been discovered to
any place: we come not near the Sun, nor under the AEquinoctiall line, to
distemper our bodies: we have no straits to pass through, we come near no
enemies country; no How fair, safe and easy, the passage to Virginea is.
rocks, shelues, sands, nor unknown Islands lie in our way: we are not in
danger of the Turks galleys, nor other enemies of Christian religion (who
never yet did peep out of the straits of Gibraltar:) we fear no congealed
seas nor mountains of Ice, to immure us: But after we are out of our own
doors (the narrow Seas) we keep a fair course, betwixt the Sun in the
South on the left hand, and the Ice in the North on the right, upon the maine
Ocean, where we have sea room enough: And it is hard to name any other great
voyage from this land, but the passage is subject either to the intemperate
heat of the Sun on the one side, or the danger of the Ice on the other side;
witness the voyages to the East Indies, and others into the south, and to
Moscouie, Danske, and others into the North and East: only this passage into
Virginea, being into the West South-west, or thereabouts, is in that true
temper so fair, so safe, so secure, so easy, as though God himself had built
a bridge for men to pass from England to Virginea.

And let no wise man object that our last fleet was dispersed and sore shaken
by a storm; for he cannot but know that such as sail by sea must as well
expect tempests of wind, as travelers on the land shewers of rain, and as he
on the land is but a simple swain, as the proverb is, that lets his business
for a shewer of rain, no less is he that fears to sail on the sea for a
tempest of wind: but our comfort is, that as the heavens cannot give rain of
Ierem. 14. 22.
themselves, but it is the Lord: nor the winds can rise of themselves, but at
Gods word the stormy Psalm. 107. 25.
wind arises, and lifts up the waves of the Ocean: So neither Sea nor wind
are in the hand or power of the devil nor the Pope, for if they were, we
should never plant nor land at Virginea.

As to the third, which is the Climate, let us not 3. The Climate.
abuse our selves by ignorance or vain reports, but examine the truth, look
into the Mappes and Cards, or, if thou have not skill in them, look into our
Patents, or if thou can not read, or have them not, ask and inquire of
travelers by sea or land, if the land that lies between the 34. and 45.
degrees of Northerly latitude from the The Climate in Virginea temperate.
AEquinoctiall line, be not far enough from the Torrida Zona, and from the
distempering heat of the Sun: and though the middle of Virginea seem to be
in the same position with the heart and middle of Spain, as Toledo, or
thereaboutes: The true position of Virginea.
yet it falls out (for reasons not yet fully discerned) it is not so hot as
Spain, but rather of the same temper with the South of France, which is so
temperate and indifferent, as if our own were something nearer unto it, we
would be well content with it. And a further evidence that all this is true, we
have from the experience of a Virginean, Their skins not black.
that was with us here in England, whose skin (though he had gone naked all
his life, till our men persuaded him to be clothed) was so far from a Moors
or East or West Indians, that it was little more black or tawnie, then one of
ours would be if he should go naked in the South of England. And to that
experience add a better, Our men there complainc not of the Climate.
namely of our brethren in Virginea, who some of them have been there many
years, and do not complain of any alteration, caused by distemper of the
Climate.

The third discouragement is, that it has so The third discouragement:
smalenes of our beginnings, and poverty of our Proceedings.
poor and small a beginning, and is thereupon subject to the mockes and
floutes of many, who say it is but the action of a few private persons, and
they send but poor supplies, but handfuls of men at a time, and one good ship
would beat them all.

For answer, I say, many greater States (then Many greater matters have had
smaller beginnings.
this is like to prove) had as little or less beginnings then this has: The
Israelites went down into Egypt, being but seventy souls, and were there but
about two hundred years, or little Compare Deuteronomy. 10. 22. with Exodus 12. 37.
more, and most of that time under miserable, bondage, yet did they grow to six
hundred thousand men, beside children, and soon after to one of the greatest
kingdoms of the earth: look at the beginning of Rome, how poor, how mean,
how despised it was; and yet on that base beginning grew to be the Mistress of
the world.

Oh but those that go in person are rakte up out of the refuse, and are a
number of disordred men, unfit to bring to pass any good action: So indeed say
those that lie and slander. But I answer: for the generality of them that
go, they be such as offer themselves voluntarily, for none are pressed, none
compelled: and they be like (for ought that I see) to those are left behind,
even of all sorts better and worse. But for many that go in person, let these
obiecters know, they be as good as themselves, and it may be, many degrees
better. But as A story for the mockers of this plantation to read and observe.
for mockers of this business, they are worthy no answer: yet I could tell
them a sale, not unfitting them, but I will spare this place and audience, not
them. But I will repeat them a true story, and leave it to themselves to make
application. When God had moved the heart of Artaxerxes to send Nehemiah, and a
few with him, to restore Jerusalem Nehem. 1. 7, 8.
and build the walls, the text tells us that as that poor people were at their
work, presently certain, who thought themselves no mean men, namely,
Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah an Ammonite, Chap. 4. 1, 2.
were not a little stirred, and mocked the Jews, and spoke in the hearing of
their companions, What do these weak Jews? will they fortify? will they
sacrifice? will they finish it in a day? they build, says another; but if a
fox go up he will breakdowne Ibid verse. 3.
their stony wall: and are not the like scornful words muttered against us
and this present voyage? But what were these mockers? even Horonites Chap. 2.
10.
and Ammonites, and such as had no portion, nor right, nor memorial in
Jerusalem: I wish better to our mockers, though they wish so evil to us: but
let them take heed, though they care not for having portions with us in this
adventure, that yet they have their right and portion and memorial in
Jerusalem, or else they will prove mockers of us in jest, and of themselves in
earnest. But what says Nehemiah and the Jews that thus were flouted? Hear O
our God, for we are despised, and turn their Chap. 4. 4, 5.
shame upon their own head, give them unto a prey in the land of their
captivity, cover not their iniquity, nor let their sin be put out in thy
presence, for they have provoked us before the builders. Far be it from me
and us all thus to say of ours: but contrariwise I pray God this curse be far
from our mockers, but I also pray they may be as far from deserving it.

But if any with no mocking spirit nor ill mind, do only for his own
satisfaction further object that we send men that cannot live here, men that
are in debt, men of base fashion: Indeed thus said Nabal the churl, of David
and his company reprochfully, terming them, a rout of unruly servants that
run away from their masters, and base fellows of whom I know not whence they
are, 1. Sam. 25. 10, 11. But hoping that these do object out of better minds,
I answer, first, this is true for some, not all, and so it is in every town
in England. Secondly, we do and must send such as we can, not such as we
would. Thirdly, if they were all, or the most, such as is objected, it is no
more then we have observed to be the beginners of great and noble actions:
Remember who and what they were that came to Romulus and Remus, and were the
founders of the Roman City and State, even such as no man can without
impudency compare ours with them. If any man say, this is a profane example,
and a base president: let him look into Gods book, and see who kept with
David, and were the beginners of the kingdom of Judah: There gathered unto
David all men that 1. Sam. 22. 2.
were in trouble, and all that were in debt, and all that were vexed in mind:
and David was their Prince, and they were about four hundred men. See for
their number but four hundred: and for their quality, who were they? three
sorts: first, me that had done some trespasses against the law, and therefore
were in trouble: secondly, such as were in debt, and could not pay: thirdly,
such as were malecontent at the proceedings of the State in the times of Saul,
and discontented at his government: A strange kind of people, and a poor
number (a man would think) to be the founders and reformers of such a
kingdom. But thus has God used to set on foot, and lay the beginnings of
greatest God brings to pass great matters on small beginnings.
matters, that his power might be seen in weakness, and that it might appear
to be the work of God and not men's: and that therefore the glory might be his.
Thus deals he in things natural, humane, politic and spiritual. For the
first, we see he made 1. In matters natural. Genes. 1.
this goodly world out of a rude and confused chaos, and the beautiful Sun
and stars out of a deformed heap. For the second, we see the mightiest 2.
In matters humane.
Emperors of the earth that have made the Nations tremble, were at the first
crying infants, kept and carried in the arms of silly women. And thirdly,
forthings spiritual, the glorious Church of the 3. In matters spiritual.
New Testament, which now has Kings to be her Esaias 49. 13.
nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers, and Princes to lick the
dust of her feet; was it not begun by twelve poor men, not worthy to be
looktat, and taken most of them from base, and some from bad occupations: No
marvel then though it be so also in the politic body. Did not God found the
first world on the only two sons 4. In matters politic.
of Adam, and the second on the three sons of Noah; and were not one of Adams
two, and one of Noah's three apparently wicked? Were not here two strange
beginnings both for number and for condition? But thus God can and will do,
that men may see it, and seeing may have cause to say: A Domino factum est
istuc; This is not man's power nor wit, but, this is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous Psalm. 118.
in our eyes.

If any do yet further reply and say: But it Object. We send base and
disordered me.
can never do well to send such fellows, such loose, leaud, licentious,
riotous, and disordered men, they that cannot be kept in compass at home, how
can they be ordered there? I answer, this objection is much in show, but the
least of all in substance: for to say nothing that there is not that means nor
occasions, to offend in many kinds that be here in abundance, we are further
to know that as long as we have wise, courageous, and discreet Governors,
together with the preaching of Gods word, we much care not what the generality
is of them that go in person; considering we find that the most disordered
men that can be raked up out of the superfluity, or if you will, the The
basest and worst men trained up in severe discipline, sharp laws, a hard
life, and much labor, do prove good members of a Commonwealth.
very excrements, of a full and swelling State, if they be removed out of the
fat and feeding ground of their native country, and from the licentiousness
and too much liberty of the States where they have lived, into a more bare and
barren soil, as every country is at the first, and to a harder course of
life, wanting pleasures, and subject to some pinching miseries, and to a strict
form of government, and severe discipline, do often become new men, even as
it were cast in a new mould, and prove good and worthy instruments and members
of a Commonwealth: Witness the companions of Romulus and Remus, that were the
founders of the Roman State. And if you will have a more infallible
testimony, look into the Scriptures, call to mind the men that came to
David, qualified as you heard before, men in danger of law, men in debt, and
discontented persons. Our base churles would roundly answer like Nabal, Are
these David's companions? are these his partakers? such fellows as these, that
be the scumme and skouring of the streets, and raked up out of the kennels,
are like to be the founders of a worthy state. But see the shallownes of these
men's conceits: for when those men had lived a while in David's fashion, and been
trained up under his discipline, they were so altered and refined, that many of
them (all being some four hundred (no more then a Virginean fleet) became
worthy to be of the honorable order of David's Worthies, or Mighty men, and
proved great statesinen in the Commonwealth, and all of 1. Chron. 11. 11 and
chap. 12. 1. etc.
them did David hold so well to have deserved, that when God gave him peaceable
possession of his own, he brought up all those men every man with his
household, and they dwelt in the Cittes of Hebron, 2. Sam. 2. 3.
where they proved good members, nay rather governors of the Commonwealth,
and raised their families to greater honor then ever they had before. Now if
those men so basely given, and ill qualified (as we heard before)
notwithstanding by sharp and godly discipline proved so well; how much rather
may we hope the same, of our brethren gone and going to Virginea? many of whom
are of good descent, of noble and generous spirits, virtuous, and valorous, and
fearing God, and many ways as worthy as many of their rank that are left
behind them. And to conclude, it is well enough known to them that Better
government and discipline in small then in great States, and in those that are
newly settled.
know any thing, that there are good reasons, whereupon it comes to pass that
such as live licentiously in a State of long continuance, which is ripe and
rotten for want of reformation, will easily be brought into order in a new
government: and no less good reasons are there why there is and will be better
government, and better execution of laws in a little territory, then in a
great and populous kingdom, and in a new begun rather then in an old and
settled State: the truth whereof many of you (right Honorable and beloved) do
better conceive then I can express.

As to the small number of our adventurers, besides that which was said before,
let us further consider how David's kingdom began with poor four hundred men.
But what says the text? His I. Sam. 22. 2.
cause being good, and so known to be, there came more day by day to David to
help him, until it was a I. Chron. 12. 22.
great host like the host of God. Even so we doubt not, but as God has
already augmented our numbers far above the expectation of many in the
beginning: so he will also stir up the minds of worthy and generous men to
assist this blessed business in purse and person, until it be grown as
David's four hundred, to be as as an host of God: and I doubt not to see the
day that men shall speak of this plantation as is spoken in another case;
though thy beginning be small, yet thy latter and shall greatly increase.

The next discouragement is, that the Countric The fourth discouragement: ill
reports of the country, by them that come from thence.
is ill reported of by them that have been there. I answer, it is not true, in
all, nor in the greater or better part; for many there be and men of worth who
have been there, and report so well of it, that they will not be kept from
going thither again, but hold it and call it, their home, and habitation, nor
can all the pleasures, ease, delights and vanities of England allure them from
it. But that some, and it may be many of the vulgar and viler sort, who went
thither only for ease and idleness, for profit and pleasure, and some such
carnal causes, and found contrariwise but cold entertainment, and that they
must labor or else not eat, and be tied within the bounds of sharp laws, and
severe discipline; if such base people as these, do from thence write, and
here report, all evil that can be of that country, we do not marvel, for
they do but like themselves, and we have ever found that all noble exploites
have been so maligned and misreported by the greater part (which generally is
the worse part) of men: let us take but one testimony, but that shall be
beyond exception.

God with his own voice gave the Israelites the land of Canaan, and in the
word of his truth told them it was a good land, and they should overcome the
heathen, and enjoy it. Would a man think that after this any durst have
affirmed the plain contrary? Yet mark what followed. A little before they
came to take possession, God bad them send men to search it: and such were sent
as Numb. 13. 3.
were rulers and heads of the people, of each tribe one: a man would also have
thought that such men would have spoke truth. But see the corruption of man's
nature, how it is given to maligning and deprauing of Gods blessings,
especially if they be commended and advanced by some who^ they affect not: for
of those twelve men so sent by Gods commandment, ten did directly deny what
God had said. It is a good land, says God: No, say they, it is a land not
worth dwelling in, for it eats up the inhabitants thereof. You shall overcome
them, Numb. 13. 32. and 33.
says God: No, say these, we are not able to go up against this people. Thus
you (right Honorable and Worshipful) that speak well of Virginea, and cannot
be believed, be content, God himself, you see, was thus used, and can you look
for better? But though these men (like men, or more like monsters) durst thus
(as the holy Ghost says) bring up an evil report of the land, which they
Ibid. verse. 32.
had searched: yet two of the twelve stand up for the truth, (and therefore the
devil got not a verdict for him) and spoke boldly, The land which we walked
through is a very good land; if the Lord love us Chap. 14. 7, 8, 9.
he will bring us unto it; and fear not the people of the land, for the Lord
is with us. And see the vile nature of the multitude, when they gave place to
their furious passions, they rather believed those ten that spoke evil, out of
their own base fear, then these two that spoke the truth, and no more then
God had spoke before them; nay they would not endure to hear it well spoken
of, and therefore cut them off in the midst of their relation, and outragiously
cried, stone them with stones; dare they Chap. 14. 10.
speak well of Canaan? stone them. But the God of heaven took the cause of
his own truth into his hands, and delivering his servants, pronounced just
sentence on all three parties: first, on the false reporters that had so
slandered that good land; Those men shall die by the plague before the Lord.
Chap. 14. 37.
Secondly, on the base believers of this false report; You shall never see it,
your carcases shall fall in the wilderness: Ibid. 29.
but your children, which you said should be a prey to the heathen, they shall
go in and possess the land which you have refused. Thirdly, on those two that
spoke for the truth, and stood to it with danger of their lives: Joshua and
Caleb shall live, and I will bring Ibid. 14 and 30.
them into the land, and their seed shall inherit it. This was the just
sentence of the righteous God, which accordingly was executed upon them all.
Now how fitly this story resembles the present business we have in hand, I
leave it to others to make application of the particulars. I only say thus
much:

The Israelites had a commandment from God to dwell in Canaan, we have leave
to dwell in Virginea: A comparison of searching of Canaan and Virginea, and of
the report thereof made.
they were commanded to kill the heathen, we are forbidden to kill them, but
are commanded to convert them: they were mighty people, ours are ordinary:
they armed, ours naked: they had walled towns, ours have scarce houels to
cover them: that land flowed with milk and honey, our abounds with as good or
better: they sent men to search that, so we to search this: they brought of the
commodities, so have we: many slandered that country, so they do ours: more
believed the slander then the truth, and so they do of ours: yet some stood
boldly for the truth, and so there do in ours, and better then those that do
deprave it. And as two of the twelve resisted the slander, whereby the devil
had not a full Jury: So though many slanderers open their mouths against us
and our land, For how can they speak Matthew. 12. 34.
good things when themselves are evil? yet I hope it is hard to find that
ever twelve good men and true (as a Jury must be) did agree together to speak
evil of it, and so I doubt not, the devil shall never get a verdict against
us. But God whose cause we undertake, will ever and in all companies have a
Caleb or Joshua ready to speak the truth, and put the slanderers to silence.
There remains the application of the judgments and executions, but that
belongs not to me; It is the Lords to inflict: the Romans 13. 19.
slanderers die a sudden death, the believers a lingering death; far be both
these curses from you all. But far be you also from deserving them.

The next discouragement, is the hard and miserable conditions of them that go
and stay there, The fifth discouragement: miseries of them that go in person.
their fare, their diet, their drink, their apparel, their houses, their
bedding, their lodging, are all so poor so pitiful, that no English men are
able to endure it.

I answer, first, do we purpose to attempt and Answer 1. No great thing
achieved without enduring miseries.
atchieue, to begin and to perfect any noble exploite, in such fashion of life
as we live in England? Let us not deceive our selves. Stately houses, costly
apparel, rich furniture, soft beds, dainty fare, dalliance and pleasures,
huntings and horse-races, sports and pastimes, feasts and banquets are not the
means whereby our forefathers conquered kingdoms, subdued their enemies,
converted heathen, ciuilized the Barbarians, and fetled their commonwealths:
nay they exposed themselves to frost and cold, snow and heat, rain and
tempests, hunger and thirst, and cared not what hardness, what extremity,
what pinching miseries they endured, so they might atchieue the ends they aimed
at: and shall we think to bring to pass a matter of this honor and
excellency, which the ages to come shall stand amazed to behold, and not to
endure much corporal hardness? What was there ever excellent in the world
that was not difficult? Nay Difficilia qua pulchra.
even therefore more excellent and more esteemed because difficult: they
therefore were misaduised that went to Virginea with purpose to live for the
present, as they lived in England, and unworthy are they to be counted Fathers
and Founders of a new Church and Commonwealth, that resolved not to undergo
and endure all difficulties, miseries and hardness that flesh and blood is
able to bear.

Secondly I answer, this objection yeeldes no Answer 2. This objection rises
from balenesse and cowardice of spirit.
cause of mislike of this action more then others (seeing there never was noble
action that was not subject to these miseries:) but it discouers the
pusillanimitie, the baseness, the tenderness and effeminatenesse of our
English people: into which our nation is now degenerate, from a strong,
valiant, hardy, patient and enduring people, as our forefathers were: which
comes to pass not by our peace and plenty (as some causelessly cavil) but by
the abuse of the^, that is, by want of exercise of arms and actiuitie, want of
trades and labor, by our idleness, laziness and lasciviousness, wherein
Cities have labored to match the Court, and the Country enuies the Cities,
and so now at last all turn after state and pomp and pleasures: and if any
occasion fall out that men should be put to any hardness, in cold or heat, by
land or sea, for diet or lodging, not one of 100. is found that can endure it:
but when other people can endure winter and summer, wind and weather, sun
and showers, frost and snow, hunger and thirst, in camp or garrison, by land
or sea, and march on foot through snow or waters, then our men for the most
part are consumed and dead, or else got home again to the fire side in
England. But it was another kind of life that made our forefathers fearful
to other nations, The ancient valor and hardness of our people.
and terrible to their enemies: had they been such mecocks and milksops, as we
are now, they had never expulsed the Danes, nor overcome the French; we had
never quartered the arms of France, nor crowned our kings in Paris: we had
never taken so many foreign Kings in the field, and sometimes on their own
ground: we had never made the mightiest Emperors seek alliance and marriages
with us, and some of them to come in person into our land, and fight under the
banners and pay of our Kings. Thus they with labor won, what we with idleness
have lost: for what is there that industry, labor, pains and patience will
not win, and yet all those cannot win so much, as idleness, dainties, and
effeminatenesse will easily lose: witness for proof hereof, our selves and
our neighbors of the low countries: who can but wonder that will observe,
what the Hollanders were an hundred years ago, how How the low-countrie men
are altered within these 100. years.
dull, how base, how poor and servile? But since they shaked often that dull and
lazy humor, put themselves to pains and labor, to endure all hardness, and
undergo any extremities, are they not become for their valor, their
government, their wealth, their power and their policy, even the wonder of
nations? Let some ascribe this to a fortunate Constellation, others to other
causes, but all wise men may casily perceive that this grew only from these two
roots, of Industry and Unity: both of them being perfected with a valor and
resolution of heart to endure any thing, so they might attain the honorable
ends they proposed to themselves: (which whether they have not now attained,
and that in so brave a fashion as is to the worlds admiration, I can say but
little, but let wise men judge.) The premises considered, were it not good for
us if our people were inured A good thing in a state for people to be inured to
hardness.
to more hardness, and brought up under obedience of sharper discipline, and
accustomed to less daintiness and tenderness then heretofore? And are not
those to be commended, which show by their resolute undertaking of an action so
honorable in the ends of it, and yet accompanied with so many difficulties,
that the ancient valor of English blood is not yet extinguished? And can not
thou, who, like a Churl or an Epicure, sitst at home by the warm fire, and
say, it is good sleeping in a whole skin; and that drinkest thy wine in
boles, and stretchest thy self upon the bed of laziness, and followest
nothing but pleasure after pleasure; can not thou, I say, be content to see
others take in hand noble enterprises, but thou must deprive them of their due
praises, and bring them under the compass of thy base censure? If the action
be honorable and excellent, then either do thou attempt it, not withstanding
the difficulties; or if thou dare not, at least honor them that dare. This
should be my answer if the voyage were attended with as many difficulties and
miseries as these men do, or any can imagine.

But now I answer more particularly, that if our Answ. 3. The miseries and
wa^ts that have been sustained, came accidentally by the absence of our
governors.
men there have been at any exigents in this kind, it grew not from any
necessity that must needs accompany that plantation, or that country: but
proceeded plainly from the want of government, and absence of our Governors,
which was caused by the hand of God, and force of tempest, which neither humane
wit could foresee, nor strength withstand. Or suppose something was miscarried
by negligence, haste, or other humane infirmity; shall one stain blemish the
beauty of so fair a business? shall one particular miscariage, ouerturne the
frame, or condemn the substance of the whole action? Surely wisdom and good
reason will not admit it. And to conclude, seeing it is known to all, that
know any thing in this matter, that the principal (if not the only) wound in
this business has been the want of government, there is now care taken, that
(by the blessing of God) there never shall be want of that again: which being
once settled, we do very well know that there will nothing else be wanting (in
a short time after) needful for the comfort of man's life: In the mean time
we care not (I speak in their names who go in person, of whom out of my own
heart I could wish to be one my self) I say we care not what we endure, as
long as we go forward in coming nearer to those high and excellent ends, which
in the beginning we proposed to our selves.

The next discouragement is, the uncertainty of profit, and the long time that
it must be expected, The sixth discouragement: uncertainty of profit, and the
long stay for it.
it be certain. But I will not wrong you nor my self, in seeking to say much
to so base an objection. If there be any that came in only or principally for
profit, or any that would so come in, I wish the latter may never be in, and
the former out again. If the planting of an English Colonie, in a good and
fruitful soil, and of an English Church in a heathen country; if the
conversion of the Heathen, if the propagating of the Gospel, and enlarging
Ans. 1. Profit is the least and last end aimed at in this voyage.
of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, be not inducements strong enough to bring
them into this business, it is pity they be in at all. I will discharge my
conscience in this matter: If any that are gone, or purpose to go in person, do
it only that they might live at ease and get wealth; if others that adventure
their money have respected the same ends, I wish for my part the one in England
again, and the other had his money in his purse; nay it were better that every
one gave something to make up his adventure, then that such Nabals should
thrust in their foul feet, and trouble so worthy a business. And I could
wish (for my part) that the proclamation which God enjoined to be made before
the Israelites went to battle, were also made in this case: namely, that
whosoever is fainthearted, let him return home again, lest his Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
brethrens heart faint like his: for the Coward not only betraieth himself, but
daunts and discourageth others. Private ends have been the bane of many
excellent exploits, and private plots for the gain of a few, have given
hindrance to many good and great matters. Let us take heed of it in this
present business, and all jointly with one heart aim at the general and
public ends, lest we find hereafter to our shame and grief, that this one
fly has Prou.
corrupted the whole box of ointment, though never so precious. Let us
therefore cast aside all cogitation of profit, let us look at better things:
and then I dare say unto you as Christ has taught me, that if in this action
we seek first the kingdom of God, all Mat. 6. 33.
other things shall be added unto us: that is (applying it to the case in hand)
if we first and principally seek the propagation of the Gospel and
conversion of souls, God will undoubtedly make the voyage Ans. 2. The voyage
will be assuredly profitable in short time.
very profitable to all the adventurers and their posterities even for matter
of this life: for the soil is good, the commodities many, and necessary for
England, the distance not far off, the passage fair and easy, so that there
wants only Gods blessing to make it gainful: now the high way to obtain that,
is to forget our own affections, and to neglect our own private profit in
respect of Gods glory; and he that is zealous of Gods glory, God will be
mindful of his profit: and he that seeks only or principally spiritual
things, God will reward him both with those spiritual and temporal things. And
as, though we may not do well to be well spoken of, yet if we do well, God will
make us well thought of, and spoken of, of all good men: so though we do not
intend our profit in this action, yet, if we intend Gods honor, and the
conversion of souls, God will assuredly send us great profit, which we may
take lawfully and thankfully as his blessing.

But if it be urged further: Why is there not The cause why the profit can not
be presently expected, is, because that continual supplies are still to be
sent.
then present profit, at least after so many voyages and supplies sent? I
answer, that profit is not the principal end of this action; if it were, what
should so many of the Nobility, of the Gentry, and especially of the Clergy,
have their hands in it? It is not fit for them to be Merchants: But the high
and principal end being plantation, of an English Church and Commonwealth,
and consequently the conversion of heathen, hence it is therefore that profit
cannot be presently expected, because we are still to send more supplies of
men, munition, instruments and tools for all trades: but when there be sent so
many that they are able to defend themselves, when they have emptied a
sufficient quantity of the land from trees, and made it fit for corn, (which
is the only want in that place) and when they have built their Church and
Town, and have the government settled, (all which are at this day (blessed be
God) in a comfortable forwardness) then it is time to expect, and then we are
sure to receive such quantity of gain, as will give full contentment to every
man for his moneys adventured: and then for a short time of disbursements,
begins a long time of profit, even so long, as (for ought that man can foresee)
it will continue whilst there are men to go betwixt the two kingdoms.

The seventh and last discouragement is, That we have many enemies and mighty,
and that therefore The seventh discouragement: multitude and might of our
enemies.
it cannot proceed to any perfection. I answer, if it had not many enemies it
should not have so many friends, and it is therefore better liked of some
because it is misliked of others: for there never was noble action that had not
many enemies.

But what enemies have we, or are like to have? Answ. 1. The Spaniards are not
our enemies, for he is in league with us.
They answer, first, the Spaniard. I answer, deceive not your selves, we have
him not our enemy: for first, he is in league with us, and we doubt not but
either he holds us no Heretics; or if he do, yet he hates that piece of
popish doctrine, that covenants with Heretics are not to be kept: we hope they
be too wise and worthy a nation to break their Uide Annals Silesy, per
Curaeu^, page 139. and deinceps.
league and falsify the oath of God which they have made: they know the story,
that when the Christians had taken truce with the Turks for a time, and within
that time spying a vantage contrary to their oath, fell upon them; God, whose
name was dishonored, so disposed the matter, that when in all humane reason
the Turks would have been slain up like sheep, and not a man left:
contrariwise they had such advantage offered them, by Gods own providence,
that they were the conquerours and gave the Christians one of the foulest
Clades Varnensis.
overthrows that was since the beginning of their Empire, and that Cardinal
that was the Author Cardinali, Iulianus.
of this periurious breach of league, was miserably, but justly massacred in a
ditch, and that noble King of Hungary being of incredible valor and virtue,
who gave way to this wicked counsel of the Cardinal, died there on the field
in his young and flourishing age. They write that Amurathes the great Turk
being thus provoked to battle, and seeing the picture of Christ on the Cross
in the Christians banner, cast up his eyes and hands to heaven, and cried out
as loud as he could; Oh, thou that diedst on the cross, if thou be a
Crucifixe crucifixe, si Deus es, effunde iram tuam in populum tuum, qui
iuramentum sub tuo nomine factum scelerate riolant.
God, power out thy wrath and show thy justice on this vile people that have so
horribly dishonored thee, violating the oath they took in thy name, which I
that swear by the name of Mahomet dare not do.

If thus it fell out to them that brake oath with the Turks, we hope no
Christian Prince will offer it to us: if they should, we doubt not but God
himself will be our shield and buckler, and make us strong enough against such
enemies.

Again, the title that Spain may pretend, must Alexander the sixth to
Ferdinando King of Castile, Anno 1493.
either be Possession or the Popes gift: as for the Pope, we know indeed that
a Spanish Pope gave America to a Spanish King; but the question is what right
he had to give it, for Nemo dat quod non habet, and they who remember that long
ago he gave away This bull of Pope Alexander the sixth, is extant verbatim
amongst the Constitutions of the Popes, let out by Peter Matthew at Lions 1588.
and is to be found at page 150.
England also, cannot but know how vain and idle his gifts be: and yet if we
examine the very words of his gift, they run thus, that he gives him all
America, which is not actually possessed before by any other Christian Prince:
so that if the grant were good, yet it seems to follow, that whosoever is
possessed before him, has right before him. But of this part called Virginea,
he never was, and we for many years have been possessed: and whereas his
grant is conditional, that he shall send Preachers of the Christian faith into
those parts. If we do not so into ours, let all Nations rise against us, and
give it to them that better shall deserve it. The grant of America by
Alexander the 6. unto Ferdinando, is restrained by Cardinal Bellarm. lib. 5.
de Roma. pont. cap. 2. in fine cap. and by the Jesuit Valent. tom. 3. disput.
1. 9. 10. punct. 7. where (although he were a Spaniard) he doubts whether
Alexander the 6. erred in this particular fact. Upon these grounds, we are
persuaded that they will never offer us that indignity and injustice: but if
they should, we hope then to give another answer.

What Enemies then have we? the French? Nay they are rather inclined to follow
our example, and to plant in another country not far from ours: the same also
might I speak of other Christian Nations. The savages? Nay, they inuit us,
and use us well: and if they were, a small matter, as long as they are their
own enemies. But when they are converted and love their own souls, then they
will love us also, and eternize their names who brought the Gospel to them.
Thus no enemies are yet found.

But I will save their labor: We confess this This enterprise has only 3.
enemies.
action has three great enemies: but who be they? even the Devil, Papists,
and Players.

But first, let no man think much that I join them together, for I would
gladly separate them, but they will not: for who but the Devil, and Papists,
and Players do mock at religion, and abuse the holy Scriptures? that the
Devil does, who doubts? that the Papists do, their many books do witness,
especially their damnable and hellish Prurit-anus: that Players do, too many
eyes and ears can witness, some to their content, and many to their hearts
grief. Seeing then they will not be separated, let them go together: the
rather seeing they be all enemies to this noble action.

1 The Devil: and who can blame him? for we 1. The Devil.
go to disherit him of his ancient freehold, and to deliver from out of his
bondage the souls, which he has kept so many years in thraldom: we
therefore expect that he will move all the infernal powers against us, and
that we shall want no hurt nor hindrance that he is able to effect. But let him
and all his partakers know, we have him on our side, who was promised in the
beginning to be the breaker of his head, and who accordingly Genes. 3.
trampled him under his feet, triumphed over him Coloss 2. 15.
on the cross, and overcame him in the grave (his own den): we go to
preach the faith, against which all the gates of hell shall not prevail. And
for Matthew. 16. 18.
his pleading of possession, we care not: the possession is his, but the right
is Christ's, and we are for him, and therefore doubt not but to bring from
heaven such an Iniunction out of the highest Court of Equity, as shall remove
him out of possession, maugre his malice. We know his force, his fury, his
malice, his wit and subtletie: and, as the Apostle says, we are not ignorant
of his practices. 2. Cor. 2. 11.
But when we remember that he cannot enter into a hog, but by Gods
permission: when we remember Matthew. 8. 31. 32.
that the winds and seas are not his, nor do obey him, but him that we serve:
when we remember Mark. 3. 41.
how the Apostles overthrew him, even by the preaching of the Gospel, which
we carry to Virginea; these and such like considerations make us that we
fear not him, and all his angels so much, as he fears the prayers of the
poorest Christian in the world. And yet we will not countermine against him by
charmings and enchantments, we will not cast out devils by the prince of
devils, Matthew. 12. 24.
but we will only assault him with the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God: for we know Ephesians. 6. 17.
that when the Apostles were to give him the great overthrow, and his deadly
wound, by recovering the whole world from heathenisme to Christ, this was that
only weapon with which they overcame him: and though we be not so skillful
fencers, nor can handle this weapon so well as they, yet we know it has not
lost his force, but is the sharp two edged sword, in whose hand soever it is
Heb. 4. 12.
used. And as long as our end is to plant and preach the Gospel, he may for
our sins, and sinful carriage, hurt and hinder, but he can never overthrow
the work, but contratiwise it shall be his overthrow, and the ruin of his
kingdom in that country.

2 For the Papists, we know they approve nothing 2. The Papists.
that Protestants undertake; but we undertook not this to be approved by the^:
they would have all the glory to themselves of converting the Heathen; and if
they did convert them indeed, we would commend and imitate them: but let them
not envy us, for doing that which they extol in themselves. If they seek the
Popes and their own glory, why should not we seek Gods? If they seek Gods
glory, we have cause to seek it more then they: in such works as these we
will never break from them, we will never forsake them: we would join with
them to convert the Heathen, we would join with them to vanquish the Turk.
But their blind guides the Jesuits tell them that we are cursed, and all
that partake with us, and that they had better suffer Heathen and Turks then
join with us. And The evil and base reports that have been seattered of this
enterprise came originally from some Papists.
hence is it that they malign and deprave this voyage, and we are well
assured that they have filled all corners of this kingdom, with all base
reports and slanders of this action, that man's wit can devise. But let them go
on, we little regard it, the more they hate it, the more we love it; the more
basely they speak of it, the more honorably do we hold it. Oh but the Pope
will curse us. Let him do so, when he would have God the more to bless us:
for what Protestant or any other did he ever curse, but God blessed them the
more? Leo the 10. cursed Luther, and all men expected when he should have died
Lutherus de seipso: Pestis eram uiuens, moriens ero mors sua Papa.
some horrible death: but he lived to die in his bed, and proved the
confounder of the Pope in his life and death. Paul the 3. cursed Henry the 8.
but after that he rooted the Pope out of England. Impious Pius the 5. cursed
noble Elizabeth of England, and all the poor Papists of the world looked when
some terrible confusion should have fallen on her and her kingdom: but she
lived to see the death of that Pope, and six or seven more; and more then
thirty years after lived in that glory, as never Queen on the earth in
more, so as all ages to come will speak of her and of her times, and of the
blessings of this Church and State received by her. Sixtus the 5. cursed the
French King that is: but his successor was feign to absolve him on his own
conditions. Pope Paul that now is, cursed the Venetians: but was Popes have
ever lost by their curses and excommunications.
glad to receive them again, on such terms, as his best friends wish he had
never begun it, and confess he has lost more by it, then ever he can gain.
He and his predecessors in that chair of pestilence, have cursed all makers
and Merchants of Allom, that belong not to himself, and all others that shall
any ways invade any of his revenues or Patrimony: but we see they prosper
better for it; and all Princes and States go forward as they can, each one to
pluck away their feathers from him, with which that proud peacock of Rome did
adorn himself: and so the time will come shortly that the holy Ghost
foretold, namely, that she shall be left desolate and naked. And thus as all
Apoc. 17. 16.
her curses which she has cast out on them that shall impair or invade S.
Peter's Patrimony, (for so he calls his own revenues) have not prevailed,
but that her glory and wealth is decayed by many degrees: so all his other
causeless curses do now appear (even to many of his own) to be but flashes,
and to be such thunderclaps as terrify, but strike not, and hurt no where, but
where they are feared. Let him then curse us, when he would do us good, for
we know his curse shall fall on his own head, and when he has cursed us, the
Lord will bless us in more abundance. And to conclude, we know well, that as
soon as this intent and enterprise of our Nation is known at Rome, forthwith
there will be a Consistory called, and consideration will be had (with wit
and policy enough) what course may be taken to cross us and ouerturne the
business. But we are prepared for it, and look for no less then all they can
do: but if they have never a Gamaliel left to tell it them, let me tell them,
that if this work be only of men, it will come to naught of it self without
their help: but if it be of God, they cannot destroy it, but shall be found
even fighters against God.

3 As for Plaiers: (pardon me right Honorable and beloved, for wronging this
place and your patience with so base a subject,) they play with Princes and
Potentates, Magistrates and Ministers, nay with God and Religion, and all holy
things: nothing that is good, excellent or holy can escape them: how then can
this action? But The 3. enemy, the Players.
this may suffice, that they are Players: they abuse Virginea, but they are but
Players: they disgrace it: true, but they are but Players, and they have played
with better things, and such as for which, if they speedily repent not, I dare
say, vengeance waits for them. But let them play on: they make men laugh on
earth, but he that sits in heaven laughes them to scorn; because like the
fly they so long play with the candle, till first it singe their wings, and at
last burns the^ altogether. But why are the Players enemies to this Plantation
and Two causes why the Players malign this action.
do abuse it? I will tell you the causes: First, for that they are so
multiplied here, that one cannot live by another, and they see that we send of
all trades to Virginea, but will send no Players, which if we would do, they
that remain would gain the more at home. Secondly, as the devil hates us,
because we purpose not to suffer Heathens, and the Pope because we have vowed
to tolerate no Papists: so do the Players, because we resolve to suffer no
Idle persons in Virginea, which course if it were taken in England, they know
they might turn to new occupations.

Thus the Devil, Papists, and Players, (the enemies of this action) single
them asunder, or let them join their forces, we care not for their malice,
we seek not their favor: nay we had rather have them all three against us
then with us: and against them all, and all other that shall malign us
whosoever, we say no more but this: he has set us on work that will maintain
us: and for our selves no more but this; If God be on our Romans 8. 31.
side, who can be against us?

And thus with an indifferent impartial eye we have observed, and laid down
all the discouragements that seem to be incident to this business: and all,
which I ever heard, either friend to fear, or enemy to object, and have
answered them all out of the grounds of truth.

Now let us accordingly consider of the encouragements which God has given us,
to proceed in the prosecution of this enterprise.

The first encouragement is, the consideration of 2. The encouragements in this
business are three.
the excellency of the action in it self: this excellency consists of these
three degrees: It is a most lawful, an honorable, and a holy action.

1 The lawfulness of this enterprise has been, I 1. Encouragement, the
excellency of the design, in it self, being 1. A lawful action.
hope, sufficiently declared already, and more may be said, if any thing be
further objected against it.

Secondly, the honor of this action is extraordinary, 2. An honorable action,
both in regard of the ends and undertakers.
1. in regard of the Ends, being of a more high and excellent nature then are
in other voiages, which for the most part be profit and pleasure. 2. It is
more honorable in regard of the undertakers. Where was there ever voyage that
had such a King and such a Prince to be the Patrons and protectors of it? the
one to begin, the other to second it. What voyage ever was there which had so
many honorable undertakers, and of so many sorts and callings, both of the
Clergy and Laity, Nobility, Gentry, and Commonaltie, City and Country,
Merchants and Tradesmen, Private persons and Corporations? as though every
kind and calling of men desired to have their hands in so happy a work. All
which considered, give me leave to affirm (with due respect to other, and
without disparagement to any) that of all voiages ever attempted in this
Nation, The Virginean voyage is the most honor able.

Thirdly, this is also a holy action, in regard of the ends and purposes of it:
for this action is not 3. A holy action.
only lawful, so that a man in doing it may be assured he sins not, but it
is moreover a holy action, even such a one as in the performance whereof a man
may be assured that he pleases God, and shall have a bountiful reward from
the mercy of God: and this is peculiar to this voyage above other. By others
we may show our selves good common-wealths-men: by this good Christians. By
others we may enrich our purses: but by this our consciences. Others may help
us to live the more wealthily, but only this can help us to die the more
comfortably. Other voiages may purchase us some praise before men, but none
like this can procure us reward from God: for they that enter into voiages of
certain profit for profits sake, these have their reward. But they that
undertake a voyage of uncertain and future profit, and certain and present
difficulties, and not for profit, but for the Gospels sake, let them know, that
if he that gives a cup of cold water in Christ's name, and he that Math. 10.
42.
gives one penny to him whose body wants relief, cannot want his reward: then
how liberally and bountifully shall he be rewarded from the Lord his God, who
disburseth so great portions of his estate, for the relief of distressed and
miserable souls. And of all the voiages and actions that men meddle with in
this world, none can yield this satisfaction and comfort to the conscience that
this can: So that this is an enterprise of that worth and excellency, as no
other, seeing it is not only lawful in it self, and therefore acceptable to
God, but honorable before men, and comfortable to the conscience of the doer:
and therefore every wise and moral man may be allured, especially every
christian man may be encouraged to assist it.

The second encouragement is, the consideration 2. Encouragement: the friends
of this action.
of the friends and assistants which this business has: which are such and so
great, so many and so mighty, that whosoever compares them with the enemies
before spoke of, will presently find cause to say with the Prophet, there are
more with us then 2. Kings 6. 16
against us.

Our principal friend and defender is the Lord 1 Friend, God himself.
our God, the God of heaven and earth, whose king dome we go to enlarge, and
to accomplish the number of his elect: and Christ Jesus, whose banner we go to
display, and to bear up his standart, and erect his throne, even there where
Satan's throne is: and the holy Ghost for whom we go to erect Temples, that is,
to prepare the souls of men for him to dwell in, who has told us that Prou. 8.
his delight is with the sons of men: even this God blessed for ever, whose
cause it is we go to maintain: whom therefore we may hope to have on our side:
Nay we know we have him, and he has vouchsafed Testimonies that God is our
friend.
us no small tokens and testimonies thereof.

1 By inclining the hearts of our mighty King and noble Prince, to make
themselves fathers and founders In our King and Prince.
of this plantation and protectors of this royal enterprise, thereby showing
themselves new Constantines or Charles the great: for by the attempting and
atchieuing of this great work of the heathens conversion, let their highnesses
be assured, the ages to come will style them by the glorious names of James
the great, and Great Henry: the one for setting on foot, the other for
seconding, and both for protecting so great, so gracious, and so glorious a
work: This is doubtless in them, the blessed work of that mighty God, in In
the undertakers.
whose hand are the hearts of Kings.

2 Inclining the hearts of so many persons of honor and high place (who cannot
go in person) not only to grace the action with their presence, countenance,
and commendation, but to part with so fair a portion of their estates unto it,
without any assurance of present profit for the same.

3 Persuading so many of our nation (and many 3. In them that go in person.
of them of noble blood and honorable descent) to engage not only a great
part of their estates: but even their very lives and persons, for the good of
this business, though it be attended with never so many dangers and
difficulties, and though in the vulgar conceit (which commonly carries most
men) so many corporal miseries are threatened on them that be the first
adventurers in this plantation. And this I say was done by Gods persuasion; It
is God that moves men to go thit her
for what man can be persuaded by a man to undertake a matter of such a nature
as this is? nay we dare say, that all who are go ne thither, unless they were
misled by some sinister persuasions of their own apprehensions, have gone
only upon the powerful persuasion of Gods spirit to their consciences: for
who should persuade hereunto, but either God or the devil, or men, or a man's
own reason? But the devil we all know is against it, with might and maine he
seeks to keep men from it, by raising slanders and putting lies into the
mouths of men, to disgrace it: by these and such like means he will dissuade
all he can, but persuade none. Again, we who are interessed in the action,
have persuaded none, have allured none, much less compelled any; but of all
that have voluntarily offered themselves, or been offered by their friends, have
made choice of the best (to our best skils): It remains then, that either they
persuaded themselves upon some carnal hopes, (which we in charity will judge
of none) or rather (which we know of some, and vvish in all) that God who
persuaded laphet to dwell in the tents of Gene. 9. 27.
Shem, has persuaded the minds of many honorable and worthy gentlemen to
venture their lives in the prosequution of this noble action.

Fourthly; by inclining the hearts of the Savages, Fourthly in the Savages
who live in that country, lovingly to call and inuit us, and to use our men
well, (when they themselves are well used): and by this means to make a way to
their own conuersions.

Fifthly, stirring up the minds of so many hundreds of good protestants and
professors of true Fifthly in the multitude of contributors.
religion, to assist it with large contributions (it being a work which cannot
be effected without much money, as al discreet men do see and acknowledge):
insomuch as, when those worthy men and ever to be honored, that were the first
undertakers of it, did even shrink to consider, what masses of money it needs
must cost, and yet knew not how nor whence it would arise: the God of heaven
bad them rest contented, go on with what they had in hand, and leave that care
to him, who accordingly has so wrought upon the hearts of men, that hitherto
it has been both manned and monied without all rating, taxing, or compelling,
but only and wholly by voluntary contributions and continual supplies: And
though the work grow so great and glorious that it seems already too heavy for
the shoulders of us that hitherto have borne it: yet it pleases God himself
so to commend it to men's hearts that we see hope enough of sufficient supply
from more persons of honor and other men of all sorts and degrees: and surely
we were unworthy of such a blessing, if we did not willingly acknowledge it to
be as it is, even the Lords doing and very marvelous in our eyes.

Sixthly by exciting so many thousand souls, Sixthly in moving all good men to
pray for it.
(whose want of ability keeps them from assisting it with money) to wish well
unto this action, to commend it to God, and with their continual and earnest
prayers to give it all the furtherance they can: and surely where I observe how
many millions of christian souls do power out their earnest prayers to God
daily for the conversion of those poor Virginians, it makes me say of them, as
holy old Ambrose said of young Angustine, for whom Filius tantaram precum and
lachrimarum perire non potest August. confess.
(whilst he lived, in the errors and vanities of his youth) his mother poured
out continual prayers and tears: Sure (says he) a soul that cost his mother
so many prayers and so many tears cannot perish: So may we say populus
tantarum precum perire non potest: a people that has so many a good prayer
possibly cannot perish.

And these six public evidences we have (which all the world may take
notice of) that God is on our side, and does favorably accept the enterprise
of ours of carrying the Gospel to this people: Many more private favors and
encouragements does this business and the undertakers of it daily receive from
God, which are all so many testimonies of his loving favor, to us and this
action. And thus we have not only cause to hope, but do find and feel it in
our experience that the God of heaven is a friend to this enterprise.

Our next friend and assistant is the glorious and innumerable multitude of the
holy Angels: Second friend Gods Angels.
for if the Angels rejoice when one soul is converted, (which because it
might seem strange, that so many great ones should joy in the salvation of One
poor creature, therefore Christ has affirmed it with Luke 15. 10.
his own mouth) then judge what joy is amongst that blessed fellowship,
when this news comes to heaven that England has enterprized the conversion
of Virginia: whereby so many thousand souls shall be brought to heaven: oh
happy man that shall help forward this work, the very Angels themselves will
do him honor and service: Again if they be sent out by God for the good of
all the elect, and are commanded and are willing to Heb. I. vlt. Psalm. 34. 7.
pitch their tents about every one that fears God, then how much more willing
will they be to assist, defend, succor and protect us in this voyage, who go
about a work which pleases and delights them above any one thing in the
world: for it is not said of any thing that man can do, that it makes the
Angels in heaven rejoice, but this only one the conversion of souls. Lastly
if it be true that they have charge over every child of God to keep him in all
Psalm. 91. 11.
his ways; then let us be assured that this action being one of the worthiest
ways that ever a christian nation walked in since the Apostles times, we shall
therefore be sure of the presence and protection of Gods holy Angels, to be
with us and all our partakers, and namely with you (our right honorable
General) and all your company, to preserve you by land and sea, at home and
abroad, from the devil and all other enemies: and though our sins or yours
may procure the contrary from Gods justice, (which his mercy auert) yet this I
dare affirm, as an undoubted truth, that it is the delight and joy of those
glorious creatures to do you service for your service in this action.

Another and a comfortable friend which we Third friend the prayers of Gods
Church.
have, is, the prayers and hearty vvelvvishings of all Gods children in the
world, whereof as many as know it do particularly, and all do in general
terms and inclusiuely commend us and it to the Lord: a mighty comfort is this
to all you that go in person, if ever you should be in want or misery,
danger, or any distress by sea or land, to remember that every day in the
world there is a sacrifice offered to God, and a strong cry sent up to heaven
from millions of souls for you. It is very memorable how when our noble
Henry the fifth See the English Chronicle in Henry the fifth.
was to give the French battle at Agincourt, where were scarce 10000.
English men, vveake and sickly, against 60000. French (in which army was the
principal Chivalry of France) that valorous King rising up from his private
prayers, and having purposely put off the battle till nine of the clock, at
that hour he went in person about all the host, and cheering up his people
with princely words, he bad them stand to him and fight valiantly, and fear
not (says he) but be valiant and assured of the victory: for at this hour
they are praying for us at every Church in England. Semblably may you (right
Honorable and beloved brethren) cheer up your spirits against all doubts and
dangers whatsoever, seeing you may assure your selves there is scarce an hour
can pass, wherein you have not the prayers of many in England for you.

Thus you see our enemies, the devil, Papists and Players: and you see our
friends, God, good Angels, A comparison of the friends and enemies of this
enterprise.
and holy prayers: against the devil we have God: against the wicked Papists
holy Angels: against plaiers, Prayers. Now if the power of the whole army of
Angels be unto God, but as a drop of water to the sea: and the might of all
men be inferior to the power of one Angel, and yet the prayers of one good
man is able to shake hell, and make the devil tremble (which is the ringleader
and chief of all our enemies) then it is apparent enough that our enemies are
less then nothing to the friends that this action has.

The third encouragement to this business, 3. Encouragement, the ends of this
action.
is the due consideration of the true ends of this action: for the end of any
attempt, though it be the last in execution, yet is it the first in intention,
and it is the end that crowns the work, and if the end and final purpose of
any action be evil, that action cannot be good: and accordingly in all lawful
actions the more excellent the end, the more excellent is the work: Let us
therefore consider 1. Accidental ends.
the true ends of this business, and herein I will deal truly and sincerely:
We will not deny but as we are me^, we may be induced in the beginning with
hope of great profit, of winning a goodly country for English men to live in,
which now by multitudes are thrust out at home, and of living a more free and
pleasant and contented life: And some that go in person, as they are corrupt
men may dream of greater ease and licentiousness, and therefore put
themselves into the business. But as we are Christian men, as we are
sanctified men the principal and predominant ends are of a far more high and
excellent nature: and they be of two sorts.

First, respecting the Savages of that country: that is, the conversion of
their souls (after they 2. True ends principal, in regard of the Savages
their conversion.
first be made civil men) a work so excellent as he that does it but to one
soul, has done that which shall yield him more comfort in this life, and
gain him more glory in heaven, then any one work in the world besides: and
more then that, the poor souls when they are made happy by their conuersions
will sing for ever of them that did it: Oh how beautiful are the feet of them
that Esaias 52. 7.
brought us these glad tidings!

Secondly, respecting our God, our selves, and our religion: in which respect
our ends are in this business to appease and pacify the wrath of our 2. In
regard of God.
offended Father, for sacrifices are offered to appease 1. To appease him,
because justly offended. Romans 15. 16.
and propitiate. Now of all the sacrifices of the new Testament this is not the
least, to offer up a sacrifice of converted Gentiles to the Lord: To me (says
Paul) is this grace given of God, that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ
to the Gentiles, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost. Now the sins of this our nation have been
horrible, our unthankfulness for the blessings of this last age has been
intolerable: what can we offer to the Lord better, though not for
satisfaction, yet for gratification, then to offer up a sacrifice of converted
Gentiles?

Secondly, to honor the name of our God 2. To honor him, being by us
dishonored.
which by our sins has been horribly profaned, and to advance his kingdom,
which by us and our sins has been too much hindered. Thirdly, to honor our
religion, which by the politic 3. In regard of our religion.
Papists has been in this respect disgraced. For we must confess that they in
these last C. years, (such is their government, and such their obedience to
their superiors: wherein we may worthily learn of them) have sent many men
into the West and East Indies to preach Christ; which if they had done without
other abominable Idolatry and superstition, their fact had been most honorable.
But howsoever it is to be granted, that it is held of many no small stain to
our religion that we have sent none into heathen countries to convert the
Savages: which accusation how true and just it is, as I will not now dispute,
so this confidently I dare auow, that this enterprise taking effect will
discharge us and our religion for ever of that imputation: In which respect, if
there were no other in the world, it is worthy to have the prayers and the
purses, yea the persons and lives of the best of us all.

Fourthly, to give testimony to the world that some sparks of that spirit,
which was so plentiful 4. In regard of our selves.
in the Apostles do yet remain in us: which as it made them most willing to
convert the heathen world, though it cost them their lives: So the same spirit
of God prouokes us to help forward the conversion of that remainder of the
heathen, which by them could not be finished.

These be the high and sovereign ends of this action: Now these being first
laid, there follovv others Ends subordinate.
not to be neglected, nay the least whereof is worthy to make us vvilling
undertakers of this business, for hereby we shall honor our selves and
strengthen our selves by propagating our own religion: hereby we shall
mightily advance thehonorable name of the English nation, the honor whereof we
ought every one to seek: hereby we shall mightily enrich our nation,
strengthen our navy, fortify our kingdom, and be less beholding to other
nations for their commodities: and to conclude, hereby we shall rectify and
reform many disorders which in this mighty and populous state are scarce
possibly to be reformed without euacuation: and consequently when we have
achieved all these ends, we shall eternize our own names to all ensuing
posterity, as being the first beginners of one of the brauest and most
excellent exploits that was attempted since the Primitive times of the Church.

And to add one word more, (but it is of much moment, we shall hereby wipe
off the stain that sticks upon our nation since, (either for idleness or
some other base fears, or foolish conceits) we refused the offer of the west
Indies, made unto us by that famous Christopher Columbus, who upon Englands
refusal, tendered it to the Prince that In the time of Henry the seventh.
now enioieth them. And thus I have given you a taste of the royal
Encouragements which naturally and infallibly do attend this blessed
business: you see the discouragements how base and idle and imaginary they
be; contrariwise, the encouragements how real, solid and substantial: Now
The conclusion.
therefore let us all be exhorted and encouraged to the effectual prosecution
of this enterprise unto the end.

And you first of all, right honorable and worshipful of the Counsel, and
the rest of the undertakers 1. To the honorabls Counsel and undertakers.
that live here, by whose wisdom the action is to be directed, and by whose
purses maintained, consider what you have entered into, even upon an action of
that nature and consequence, as not only all nations stand gazing at, but even
heaven and hell have taken notice of it, the holy Angels hoping, and the devils
fearing what will be the issue. Therefore let all Nations see, to their
amazement, the devils to their terror, the Angels to their joy, and especially
our God to his glory and the honor of his truth, that the English Christians
will not undertake a public action which they will not prosecute to
perfection. Let us then believe no tales, regard no slanders (raised or spread
by Papists or Epicures) fear no shadows, care for no oppositions, respect no
losses that may befall, nor be daunted with any discouragements whatsoever;
but go forward to assist this noble action with countenance and counsel, with
men and money, and with continual supplies, till we have made our plantation
and colonie able to subsist of it self, and till there be a Church of God
established in Virginea, even there where Satan's throne is. Thus shall we
honor our God, our religion, our nation, and leave that honor on our names,
which shall make them flourish till the worlds end, and (which is all in all.)
lay up that comfort to our souls which shall stand by us at our deaths, and
speak for us to the great Judge at the last and great day.

And to you (right honorable and beloved) 2. To them that go in person.
who engage your lives, and therefore are deepliest interessed in this
business, who make the greatest ventures, and bear the greatest burdens; who
leave your ease and pleasures at home, and commit your selves to the seas and
winds for the good of this enterprise; you that desire to advance the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, though it be with the hazard of your lives, go forward in
the name of the God of heaven and earth, the God that keeps cauenant and
mercy for thousands; go on with the blessing Exodus 34. 7.
of God, Gods Angels and Gods Church; cast away fear, and let nothing daunt
your spirits, remembering whom you go unto, even to English men your brethren,
who have broke the ice before you, and suffered that which with Gods blessing
you never shall; remembering what you go to do, even to display the banner of
Christ Jesus, to fight with the devil and the old dragon, having Michael and
his Angels on your side: to eternize your own names both here at home and
amongst the Virgineans (whose Apostles you are) and to make your selves most
happy men whether you live or die: if you live, by effecting so glorious a
work; if you die, by dying as Martyrs or Confessors of Gods religion: and
remembering lastly whom you leave behind you, even us your brethren, of whom
many would go with you that yet may not, many will follow you in convenient
time, and who will now go with you in our hearts and prayers, and who will
second you with new and fresh supplies, and who are resolved (by the grace of
that God in whose name they have undertaken it) never to relinquish this
action; but though all the wealth already put in were lost, will again and
again renew and continue their supplies, until the Lord give the hoped
harvest of our endeavors.

And thou most noble Lord, whom God has Particular to the honorable General.
stirred up to neglect the pleasures of England, and with Abraham to go from
thy country, and for sake thy kindred and thy fathers house, to go to a Land
which God will show thee, give me leave to speak the truth: Genes. 12. 1.
Thy Ancestor many hundred years ago gained At the battle with the black
Prince
great honor to thy house; but by this action thou augmentst it. He took a
King prisoner in the field in his own Land: but by the godly managing of this
business, thou shall take the Devil prisoner in open field, and in his own
kingdom: nay the Gospel which thou carriest with thee shall bind him in
chains, and his Angels in stronger fetters then Psalm. 149. 8. 9.
iron, and execute upon them the judgment that is written: yea it shall lead
captivity captive, and redeem the souls of men from bondage. And thus thy
glory and honor of thy house is more at the last then at the first.

Go on therefore, and prosper with this thy honor, Admonititions and aduices
to our General and his company.
which indeed is greater then cuery eye discernes, even such as the present
ages shortly will enjoy, and the future admire: Go forward in the strength of
the Lord thy God, and make mention of his righteousness only. Look not at the
gain, the wealth, the honor, the advancement of thy house that may follow and
fall upon thee: but look at those high and better ends that concern the
kingdom of God. Remember thou art a General of English men, nay a General of
Christian men: therefore principally look to religion. You go to commend it
to the heathen; then practice it your selves: make the name of Christ
honorable, not hateful unto them. Suffer no Papists; let them not nestle
there; nay let the name of the Pope for Popery be never heard of in Virginea.
Take heed of Atheists the Devils champions: and if thou discover any, make them
exemplarie. And (if I may be so bold as to advise) make Atheism and other
blasphemy capital, and let that be the first law made in Virginea. Suffer no
Brownists, nor factious Separatists: let them keep their conuenticles
elsewhere: let them go and convert some other Heathen, and let us see if they
can constitute such Churches really, the Idaeaes whereof they have fancied in
their brains: and when they have given us any such example, we may then have
some cause to follow them. Till then we will take our pattern from their
betters. Especially suffer no sinful, no leaud, no licentious men, none that
live not under the obedience of good laws: and let your laws be strict,
especially against swearing and other profaneness. And though vain swearing
by Gods name be the common and crying sin of England, and no mortal, but a
venial sin in Popish doctrine, Molanus comp. pract. theol. tract. 2. cap. 7.
concl. 2. Nic. a Grana de poenit. and confess. quaest. 40.
yet know that it is a sin under which the earth mournes: Icr. 23. 10.
and your land will flourish if this Iac. de Graff. decis. aur. to. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 14. art. 9. and almost all their Casuists do teach this doctrine.
be repressed. Let the Sabbath be wholly and holily observed, public prayers
daily frequented, idleness eschewed, and mutinies carefully prevented. Be well
advised in making laws; but being made, let them be obeyed, and let none
stand for scarre-crowes; for that is the way to make all at last to be
contemned. This course take, and you shall see those who were to blame at home,
will prove praiseworthy in Virginea. And you will teach us in England to know
(who almost have forgot it) what an excellent thing execution of laws is in a
commonwealth. But if you should aim at nothing but your private ends, and
neglect religion and Gods service, look for no blessing, nay look for a
curse, though not on the whole action, yet on our attempt; and never think
that we shall have the honor to effect it. Yet think not that our sin
shall hinder the purpose of God: for when this sinful generation is consumed,
God will stir up our children after us, who will learn by our example to
follow it in more holy manner, and so bring it to that perfection which we for
our sins and profaneness could not do. But you (right honorable) have
otherwise learned Christ, and (we hope) will otherwise practice him, and will
declare by your managing of this action the power of that true religion you
have learned in England. Thus shall heaven and earth bless you, and for this
heroical adventure of thy person and state in such a godly cause, the God of
heaven will make thy name to be remembered thorowout all generations: and
thousands of people shall honor thy memory, and give thanks to God for thee
while the world endures.

And thou Virginea, whom though mine eyes see A salutation of Virginea.
not, my heart shall love; how has God honored thee! Thou have thy name from
the worthiest Queen that ever the world had: thou have thy matter from the
greatest King on earth: and thou shall now have thy form from one of the most
glorious Nations under the Sun, and under the conduct of a General of as
great and ancient Nobility as ever was engaged in action of this nature. But
this is but a little portion of thy honor: for thy God is coming toward
thee, and in the mean time sends to thee, and salutes thee with the best
blessing heaven has, enen his blessed Gospel. Look up therefore, and lift up
thy head, for thy redemption draws nie: and he that was the God of Israel,
and is still the God of England, will shortly I doubt not bring it to pass,
that men shall say, Blessed be the Lord God of Virginea; and let all Christian
people say, Amen.

And this salutation does my soul send thee, O Virginea, even this poor
New-yeeres Gift, who though I be not worthy to be thine Apostle, yet do vow
and deuote my self to be in England thy faithful factor and solicitor, and
most desirous to do thee any service in the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior and
thine: whom we beseech for his precious bloodshedding to advance his standard
amongst you, and that you may once cry for your selves as we do now for you,
Even so come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
GOD to EVROPE. THE Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Too true: for the
greater part is overrun either with Turcisme or Popery.
and given to a Nation that shall bring forth the fruits there of.


GOD to ENGLAND. But I have praicd for thee that thy faith fail not: therefore
when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. Luke 22. 32.


ENGLAND to GOD. Lord here I am: Send me. Esaias 6. 7.


GOD to VIRGINEA. He that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Esaias 50. 10.


VIRGINEA to GOD. God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause the light of
thy countenance shine upon us: let thy ways be known upon earth, and thy
saving health among all Nations. Psalm. 67. 1. 2.


ENGLAND to VIRGINEA. Behold, I bring you glad tidings: Unto you is borne a
Savior, even Christ the Lord. Luke 1.


VIRGINEA to ENGLAND. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad
tidings, and publish salvation! Es. 52. 7.


ENGLAND to VIRGINEA. Come children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. Psalm. 34. 11.


VIRGINEA to ENGLAND. Blessed be he that comes to us in the name of the
Lord. Psalm. 118.



