THE COPY OF THE Sermon preached on good Friday last before the Kings
Majesty, By D. ANDREWS Deane of Westminster. 6. April 1604.

LONDON Printed by R. Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. An.
1604.

Lament. Ierem.
CAP. 1. 12. Have ye no Regard, o all ye that pass by the way? Consider, and
behold, If ever there were sorrow like my Sorrow, which was done unto me,
wherewith the Lord did afflict me in the day of the fierceness of his wrath.
AT the very reading or hearing of which verse, there is none but will presently
conceive, it is the voice of a party in great extremity. In great extremity
two ways: A complaint.
First, In such distress, as never was any, If ever there were sorrow like my
sorrow? And then, in that distress having none to regard him: Have ye no
regard all ye?

To be afflicted, and so afflicted, as none ever was, is very much: In that
affliction to find none to respect him or care for him, what can be more? In
all our sufferings it is a comfort to us that we have a Sicut: that 1. Cor.
10.13.
nothing has befallen us, but such as others have felt the like: But here, Si
fuerit sicut? If ever the like were (that is) never the like was.

Again, in our greatest pains, it is a kind of ease, even to find some
regard. Naturally we desire it, if we cannot be delivered, if we cannot be
relieved, yet to be pitied: It shows Job 19. 21.
there be yet some, that are touched with the sense of our misery, that wish
us well, and would give us ease if they could: But this afflicted here, finds
not so much, neither the one nor the other: but is even as he were an outcast
both of Heaven and Earth. Now verily a heavy case, and worthy to be put in
this book of Lamentations.

I demand then, Of whom speaks the Christ's complaint.
Prophet this? of himself, or of some other? This I find, there is not any of
the ancient writers, but do apply, yea, in a manner appropriate this speech to
our Savior Christ, And that this very day, the day of his Passion, (truly
termed here the day of Gods wrath:) And wheresoever they treat of the Passion,
ever this verse comes in: And (to say the truth) to take the words strictly
as they lie, they cannot agree, or be verified of any, but of him, and him
only. For though some other, not unfitly, may be allowed to say the same
words: it must be in a qualified sense: for, in full and perfect propriety of
speech, He, and none but he: None can say, (neither Jeremy nor any other) Si
fuerit dolor, sicut dolor meus, as Christ can: No day of wrath, like to his
day: no sorrow to be compared to his, (all are short of it,) nor his to any, it
exceeds them all.

And yet, according to the letter, it can not be denied, but they be set down
by Jeremy, in the person of his own people, being then come to great misery,
and of the holy City, then laid waste, and desolate by the Chaldaees. What
then? Ex Aegypto vocaui Hos. 11. 1.
Filium meum. Out of Egypt have I called my Son, was literally spoken of
this peopeople too: yet is by the Evangelist applied Mat. 2. 15. Psalm. 22. 1.
to our Savior Christ. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? at the
first uttered by David, yet the same words our Savior takes to himself, and
that more truly and Mat. 27. 46.
properly, then ever David could: and of those of David's, and of these of
Ieremies, there is one and the same reason.

Of all which the ground is; that correspondence which is between Christ and
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and People before Christ, of whom the Apostles rule
is, Omnia 1. Cor. 10.11.
in figura contingebant illis: That they were themselves Types: and their
sufferings, forerunning figures of the great suffering of the Son of God; which
makes Isaaks offering and Joseph's selling, and Isreal's calling from Egypt,
and that complaint of David's, and this of Ieremies, appliable to him; That he
may take them to himself, and the Church ascribe them to him, and that in more
fitness of terms, and more fullness of truth, then they were at the first
spoken by David, or Jeremy, or any of them all.

And this rule, and the steps of the Fathers proceeding by this rule, are to me
a warrant, to expound and apply this verse (as they have done before,) to the
present occasion of this time; which requires some such Scripture to be
considered by us, as does belong to his Passion, who this Day powered out his
most precious Blood, as the only sufficient Price, of the dear purchase of
all our Redemptions.

Be it then to us, (as to them it was, and as most properly it is) The speech
of the Son of God, as this Day hanging on the Cross, to a sort of careless
people, that go up and down without any manner of Regard of these his Sorrows
and sufferings, so worthy of all Regard. Have ye no regard? o all ye that pass
by the way, Consider and behold, if ever there were sorrow, like to my Sorrow,
which was done unto me, wherewith the Lord afflicted me in the day of the
fierceness of his wrath. Here is a Complaint, and here is a Request. The parts.
A complaint, that we have not: A Request, that we would have the Pains and
Passions of our Savior Christ in some Regard. For first he co^plaineth (and
not without cause) Have ye no regard? And then (as willing to forget their
former neglect, so they will yet do it) he falls to entreat, o consider and
behold!

And what is that we should Consider? The Sorrow which he suffers: and in
it, two things: The Quality, and the Cause. 1. The Quality, Si fuerit sicut:
If ever the like were; And that either in respect of Dolor, or Dolor meus. The
Sorrow suffered, or the Person suffering. 2. The Cause: that is God, that in
his wrath, in his fierce wrath, does all this to Him, which cause will not
leave us, till it have led us to another cause in our selves, and to another
yet in him; All which serve to ripen us to Regard.

These two then specially we are moved to Regard. 1. Regard is the maine
point. But, because therefore we Regard but faintly, because either we Consider
not, or not aright; we are called to consider seriously of them. As if he
should say, Regard you not? If you did Consider, you would: if you Considered
as you should, you would Regard as you ought. Certainly the Passion, if it
were thoroughly Considered, would be duly Regarded. Consider then.

So the points are two: The Quality, and the Cause of his suffering: and the
duties two: To Consider, and Regard. So to Consider, that we Regard them, and
him for them.

Have ye no Regard? etc.
TO cease this Complaint, and to grant this Request: we are to Regard: and
that we may Regard, we are to Consider the pains of his Passion. Which, that
we may reckon no easy common The parties to whom.
matter of light moment, to do, or not do, as we list: First, a general stay
is made O all ye that pass by the way, Consider.
of all passengers, this day. For (as it were from his Cross) does our Savior
address this his speech to them that go to and fro, the day of his Passion,
without so much as entertaining a thought, or vouchsafing a look that way. O
vos qui transitis! o you that pass by the way, stay and Consider. To them
frames he this speech, that pass by: To them, and to them all. O vos omnes,
qui transitis, o all ye that pass by the way, stay and Consider.

Which very stay of his, shows it to be some important matter, in that it
is, of all. For, as for some to be stayed, and those the greater some, there
may be reason; the most part of those that go thus to and fro, may well intend
it, they have little else to do. But to except none, not some special Persons,
is hard. What know we their haste? Their occasions may be such, and so urgent,
as they cannot stay. Well, what haste, what business soever, pass not by,
stay though. As much to say, as, Be they never so great, your occasions; they
are not, they cannot be so great as this: How urgent soever, this is more, and
more to be intended. The Regard of this, is worthy the staying of a journey. It
is worth the Considering of those, that have never so great affairs in hand.
So material is this sight in his account; which serves to show the exigence
of this duty. But as for this point it needs not to be stood upon to us
here at this time: we are not going by, we need not to be stayed; we have
stayed all other our affairs, to come hither, and here we are all present
before God, to have it set before us, that we may consider it. Thither then
let us come.

That which we are called to behold and Sorrow.
consider, is his Sorrow: And Sorrow is a thing, which of it self Nature
enclineth us to behold, as being our selves in the body which Herb. 13. 3.
may be one day in the like sorrowful case. Therefore will every good eye turn
it self, and look upon them that lie in distress. 1. Behold.
Those two in the Gospel, that passed by the Luke 10. 32.
wounded man, before they passed by him, (though they helped him not as the
Samaritane did) yet they looked upon him as he lay. But this party here,
lies not, he is lift up, as the Serpent in the wilderness, that unless Ioh. 3.
14
we turn our eyes away purposely, we can neither will nor choose, but behold
him.

But because to Behold, and not to Consider, Acts 1. 11.
is but to gaze; And gazing the Angel blames in the Apostles themselves, we
must do both: both Behold, and Consider: 2. Consider.
look upon, with the eye of the Body, that is, Behold; and look into with
the eye of the Mind, that is, Consider. So says the Prophet here. And the very
same does the Apostle Hebr. 12. 23.
advise us to do, First, (...), to look upon him, (that is, to Behold) and
then (...), to think upon him, that is, to Consider his Sorrow: Sorrow sure
would be considered.

Now then, because as the quality of the The quality, If ever the like.
Sorrow is, accordingly it would be considered, (for if it be but a common
Sorrow, the less will serve, but if it be some special, some very heavy case,
the more would be allowed it: for proportionably with the suffering, the
consideration is to arise:) To raise our consideration to the full, and to
eleuate it to the highest point, there is upon this Sorrow set a Si fuerit
sicut, a note of highest eminency: for Si fuerit sicut, are words that have
life in them, and are able to quicken our consideration, if it be not quite
dead: For, by them we are provoked, as it were, to Consider, and considering,
to see whether ever any Sicut may be found, to set by it, whether ever any like
it.

For if never any, Our nature is, to regard things exceeding rare and strange;
and such as the like whereof is not else to be seen. Upon this point then,
there is a Case made, As if he should say, If ever the like, Regard not this;
But if never any, Be like your selves in other things, and vouchsafe this, (if
not your chiefest,) yet some Regard.

To enter then this Comparison, and to In the three parts of his Sorrow.
show it for such. That, are we to do, three sundry ways: For three sundry
ways, in three sundry words, are these Sufferings of his here expressed: all
three within the compass of the Verse.

The first is (...) Mac-ob (which we read 1.
Sorrow,) taken from a wound or stripe, as all do agree.

The second is (...) Gholel we read Done 2.
to me, taken from a word that signifies Melting in a furnace; as S. Hierom
notes out of the Chaldaee (who so translateth it.)

The third is (...) Hoga where we read 3.
Afflicted, from a word which imports Renting off, or bereauing. The old
Latin turns it, Vindemiauit me, As a Vine whose fruit is all plucked off.
The Greek with Theodoret, (...) as a Vine or tree, whose leaves are all beaten
off, and it left naked and bare.

In these three are comprised his Sufferings, Wounded, Melted, and Bereft,
leaf and fruit, (that is) all manner of comfort.

Of all that is poenal, or can be suffered, the 1. Of the quality.
common division is, Sensus, and Damni, Grief for that we feel, or, for that
we forgo. For that we feel, in the two former, Wounded in First of the
quality of his Passion.
body, Melted in Soul: For that we forgo, in the last; Bereft all, left
neither fruit, nor so much as a leaf to hang on him.

According to these three, To consider 1. Poena sensus in the Body.
his Sufferings, and to begin first with the first. The pains of his Body, his
wounds and his stripes.

Our very eye will soon tell us, No place was left in his Body, where he might
be smitten, and was not. His Skin and flesh rent with the whips and scourges,
His hands and feet wounded with the nails, His head with the thorns, His very
Heart with the spear point; All his senses, all his parts laden with
whatsoever wit or malice could invent. His blessed Body given as an Anuile to
be beaten upon, with the violent hands of those barbarous miscreants, til
they brought him into this case, of Si fuerit sicut. For, Pilates John 19. 5.
( Ecce Homo!) His showing him with an Ecce, as if he should say, Behold, look
if ever you saw the like ruefull spectacle. This very showing of his, shows
plainly, he was then come into a woeful plight; So woeful, as Pilate verily
believed, his very sight so pitiful, as, it would have moved the hardest heart
of them all to have relented, and said, This is enough, we desire no more. And
this for the wounds of his Body, (for on this we stand not.)

In this one peradventure some Sicut may 2. Poena sensus in the Soul.
be found, in the Pains of the Body: but in the second, the Sorrow of the
Soul, I am sure, none. And indeed, the Pain of the Body is but the Body of
Pain: the very soul of Sorrow and Pain, is the souls Sorrow and Pain. Give
me any grief, save the Syra. 15. 57.
grief of the mind, says the Wiseman. For (says Solomon) the spirit of a
man wilsustain Prou. 18. 14.
all his other infirmities, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? And of this,
this of his Soul, I dare make a Case, Si fuerit sicut.

He began to be troubled in Soul, says S. John 12. 27.
John: To be in an agony, says S. Luke: To be Luke 22. 44.
in anguish of mind and deep distress, says S. Mark. To have his Soul
round about on Mark. 14. 35.
every side environed with Sorrow, and that, Sorrow to the death, Here is
trouble, anguish, Matt. 26. 38.
agony, sorrow and deadly sorrow: but it must be such, as never the like; So it
was too.

The aestimate whereof we may take from the second word, of Melting, that is,
from his sweat in the Garden; strange and the Luke 22. 44.
like whereof was never heard or seen.

No manner violence offered him in Body; no man touching him, or being near him,
in a cold night (for they were feign to have a fire within doors) lying
abroad in the air, and upon the cold earth, to be all of a sweat, and that
Sweat to be Blood; and not as they call it, Diaphoreticus, a thin faint
Sweat; but Grumosus, of great Drops, and those, so many, so plenteous, as they
went through his apparel and all; and through all, streamed to the ground, and
that in great abundance; Read, Enquire, and Consider, Si fuerit sudor sicut
sudor iste. If ever there were Sweat like this Sweat of his? Never the like
Sweat certainly, and therefore never the like Sorrow. Our translation is, Done
unto me: but we said, the word properly signifies (and so S. Hierome and the
Chaldey Paraphrast read it) Melted me. And truly it should seem by this
fearful Sweat of his, he was near some furnace, the feeling whereof, was
able to cast him into that Sweat, and to turn his Sweat into drops of Blood.
And sure it was so: For see, even in the very next words of all to this verse,
he Verse 13.
complains of it, Ignem misit in ossibus me is, That a fire was sent into his
bones which melted him, and made that bloody Sweat to distill from him. That
hour, what his feelings were, it is dangerous to define: we know them not, we
may be too bold to determine of them. To very good purpose it was, that the
ancient Fathers of the Greek Church in their Liturgy, after they have
recounted all the particular Pains as they are set down in his Passion, and
by all, and by every one of them, called for mercy; do, after all, shut up all
with his, (...), By thine unknown Sorrows and Sufferings felt by thee, but not
distinctly known by us, have mercy upon us and save us.

Now, though this suffice not, nothing near; yet let it suffice, (the time
being short) for his pains of Body and Soul: for those of the Body, it may be
some may have endured the like: but the sorrows of his Soul are unknown
sorrows: and for them, none ever have, ever have, or ever shall suffer the
like; the like, or near the like in any degree.

And now to the third. It was said before, 3 Poena Damni.
To be in distress, such distress as this was, and to find none to comfort,
nay not so much as to regard him, is all that can be said, to make his sorrow a
Non sicut. Comfort is it, by which in the midst of all our sorrows, we are
Confortati, that is, strengthened and made the better able to bear them all
out. And who is there, even the poorest creature among us, but in some degree
finds some comfort, or some regard at some bodies hands? For if that be not
left, the state of that party is here in the third word said to be like the
tree, whose leaves and whose sruit are all beaten off quite, and it self left
bare and naked both or the one and of the other.

And such was our Saviors case in these 1 Leaves.
his Sorrows this day, and that so, as what is left the meanest of the sons of
men, was not left him: Not a leaf. Not a leaf! Leaves I 1 Withered leaves.
may well call all humane Comforts and Regards, where of he was then left clean
desolate. 1. His own, they among whom he had gone about all his life long,
healing them, teaching them, feeding them, doing them all the good he could, it
is they that cry, Not him, no, but Barabbas rather; Away John 18. 40 and 19.15.
Mat. 27. 25. Mar. 15. 29.36.
with him, his blood be upon us and our children. It is they that in the
midst of his sorrows, shake their head at him and cry, Ah thou wretch: they
that in his most disconsolate estate and cry, Eli, Eli, in most barbarous manner
deride him, and say, Stay, and you shall see Elias come presently and take him
down. And this was their Regard.

But these were but withered leaves. They 2 Green leaves.
then that on earth were nearest him of all, the greenest leaves and likest to
hang on, and to give him some shade: even of them, some bought and sold him,
others denied and forswore him, but all fell away and forsook him. (...) (says
Theodoret) not a leaf left.

But, leaves are but leaves, and so are all 2 Fruit.
earthly stays. The fruit then, the true fruit of the Vine indeed, the true
comfort in all heaviness, is Desuper, from above, is divine consolation. But
Vindemiauit me, (says the Latin text) even that was in this his Sorrow, this
day, bereft him too. And that was his most sorrowful complaint of all others:
not that his friends upon earth, but that his Father from heaven had forsaken
him, that neither heaven nor earth yielded him any regard; but that between
the passioned powers of his soul, and whatsoever might any ways refresh him,
there was a Trauerse drawn, and he left in the estate of a weatherbeaten tree,
all desolate and forlorn. Evident, too evident, by that his most dreadful
cry, which at once moved all the powers in heaven and earth, My God, my God,
why have Mat. 27. 46.
thou forsaken me? Weigh well that cry, consider it well, and tell me,
Sifuerit clamor sicut clamor iste, If ever there were cry, like to that of
his: Never the like cry, and therefore never the like sorrow.

It is strange, very strange, that of none of the Martyrs the like can be read;
who yet endured most exquisite pains in their Martyrdomes; yet we see with
what courage, with what chearefulnes, how even singing they are reported to
have passed through their torments. Will ye know the reason? S Augustine
sets it down, Martyrs non eripuit, sed nunquid deseruit? He delivered not
his Martyrs, but did he forsake them? He delivered not their bodies, but he
forsook not their souls, but distilled into the^ the dew of his heavenly
comfort; an abundant supply for all they could endure. Not so here, Vindemiauit
me (says the Prophet) Dereliquisti me (says he himself:) No comfort, no
supply at all.

Leo it is that first said it, (and all antiquity allow of it,) Non soluit
Vnionem, sed subtraxit visione^. The Union was not dissolved; True, but the
beams, the influence was restrained, and for any comfort from thence, his
Soul was, even as a scorched heath ground, without so much as any drop of dew
of Divine comfort: as a naked tree, no fruit to refresh him within, no lease to
give him shadow without: The power of darkness let loose to afflict him: the
influence of comfort, restrained to relieve him. It is a Non sicut this, It
cannot be expressed as it should, and as other things may; In silence we may
admire it, but all our words will not reach it. And though to draw it so far
as some do, is little better then blasphemy; Yet on the other side, to
shrink it so short, as other some do, cannot be but with derogation to his
love, who to kindle our love and loving Regard, would come to a Non sicut in
his suffering: For, so it was, and so we must allow it to be. This in respect
of his Passion. Dolor.

Now in respect of his Person, Dolor meus. Secondly of the quality of his
Person.
Whereof, if it please you to take a view, even of the Person thus wounded, thus
afflicted and forsaken, you shall then have a perfect Non sicut. And in deed,
the Person is here a weighty circumstance, it is thrice repeated, Meus, Mihi,
Me. And we may not leave it out. For, as is the Person, so is the Passion; and
any one, even the very least degree of wrong or disgrace, offered to a Person
of excellency, is more then a hundredth times more, to one of mean condition:
So weighty is the circumstance of the Person. Consider then, how great the
Person was; And I rest fully assured, here may we boldly challenge, and say, Si
fuerit sicut.

Ecce Homo, says Pilate first, A man he 1. Ioh. 19. 5
is, as we are: and were he but a man, Nay, were he not a man, but some poor
dumb creature, it were great ruth to see him so handled, as he was.

A man, says Pilate, and a Just man, says 2. Matt. 27. 19.
Pilates wife. Have thou nothing to do with that Just man. And that is one
degree further. For though we pity the punishment even of male factours
themselves: yet ever, most compassion we have of them that suffer, and be
innocent. And he was Innocent: Luke 23. 14. and 15. John 14. 30.
Pilate, and Herod, and the Prince of this world, his very enemies, being his
Judges.

Now, among the Innocent, the more 3
Noble the Person, the more heavy the spectacle: and never do our bowels
earne so much, as over such. Alas, alas for that noble Iere. 22. 18.
Prince, (says this Prophet,) (the style of mourning for the death of a great
Personage.) And, he that suffers here, is such, even a principal Person
among the sons of men, of the race Royal, descended from Kings; Pilate
styled him so in his Title, and Ioh. 19. 22.
he would not alter it.

Three degrees. But, yet we are not at 4.
our true Quantus. For he is yet more: More, then the highest of the sons of
men: for he is THE SON OF THE MOST HIGH GOD. Pilate saw no further, but Ioh.
19.5 Mar. 15. 39.
Ecce Homo; The Centurion did, Vere Filius Dei erat hic. Now truly this was
the Son of God. And here, all words forsake us, and every tongue becomes
speechless.

We have no way to express it, but a Minore ad Maius. (Thus,) Of this book,
the book of Lamentations, one special occasion was, the death of King Josias;
But behold, a greater then Josias is here.

Of King Josias (as a special reason of C.4.20.
mourning) the Prophet says, Spiritus oris nostri, Christus Domini, The very
breath of our nosethrils, The Lords Anointed; (for so are all good Kings in
their Subjects accounts) He is gone. But behold, here is not Christus Domini,
but Christus Dominus, The Lords Christ, but the Lord Christ himself: And that,
not coming to an Honorable death in battle, as Josias did, But, to a most
vile reproachful death, the death of malefactors in the highest degree. And not
slain outright, as Josias was: but mangled and massacred in most pitiful
strange manner; wounded in body, wounded in Spirit, left utterly desolate. O
consider this well, and confess the Case is truly put, Si fuerit Dolor sicut
Dolor meus. Never, never the like Person: And if, as the Person is, the Passion
be, Never the like Passion to his.

It is truly affirmed, that any one, even the least drop of Blood, even the
least pain, yea of the body only, of this so great a Person; any Dolor with
this Meus, had been enough to make a Non sicut of it. That is enough, but that
is not all: for add now the three other degrees; Add to this Person, those
Wounds, that Sweat, and that Cry, and put all together: And, I make no manner
question, the like was not, shall not, cannot ever be. It is far above all
that ever were, or can be. Abyssus est: Men may drowsily hear it, and coldly
affect it: But Principalities and Powers, stand abashed at it. And for the
Quality, both of the Passion and of the Person, That Never the like; thus much.

NOw to proceed to the Cause, and 2. Of the cause.
to consider it: for without it, we shall have but half a Regard, and scarce
that. In deed, set the Cause aside, and the Passion (as rare as it is,) is yet
but a dull and heavy sight: we list not much look upon spectacles of that kind,
though never so strange: they fill us full of pensive thoughts, and make us
Melancholique; and so does this, till upon examination of the Cause, we find
it touches us near; And so near so many ways, as we cannot choose, but have
some Regard of it.

What was done to Him we see. Let there 1. GOD.
now be a Quaest of Inquiry, to find who was the doer of it. Who? who, but
the Power of darkness, wicked Pilate, bloody Caiaphas, the envious Priests,
the barbarous Soldiers? None of these are returned here. We are too low, by a
great deal, if we think to find it among men. Quae fecit mihi Deus. It was
God that did it. An hour of that day was the hour of the Luke 22. 53.
Power of darkness: but the whole day it self, is said here plainly, was
the day of the wrath of God. God was a doer in it; Wherewith God has afflicted
me.

God afflicts some in Mercy: and others Gods wrath.
in wrath. This was in his wrath. In his wrath God is not alike to all; Some he
afflicts in his more gentle and mild: others in his fierce wrath. This was
in the very fierceness of his wrath. His Sufferings, his Sweat, and Cry, show
as much; They could not come, but from a wrath, Si fuerit sicut, (For we are
not past Non sicut, no not here in this part: it follows us still, and will
not leave us in any point, not to the end.)

The Cause then in God, was wrath. 2. Sin.
What caused this wrath? God is not wroth, but with sin; Nor grievously
wroth, but with grievous sin. And in CHRIST there was no grievous sin, Nay,
no sin Not his.
at all. God did it, (the text is plain.) And in his fierce wrath he did it.
For what cause? For, God forbid God should do as did Ioh. 18. 22.
Annas the high Priest, cause him to be smitten without cause. God forbid
(says Abraham) the Judge of the world should do Genesis 18. 25.
wrong to any. To any, but specially to his own Son: That his Son, of whom
with thundering voice from Heaven, he testifies all his joy and delight were in
Him, in him only he was well pleased. And how then could his wrath wax hot, to
do all this unto him?

There is no way to preserve Gods Justice, and Christ's Innocence both, but to
say as the Angel said of him to the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9. 26.
The Messiah shall be slain, (...) ve-en lo, shall be slain, but not for
himself. Not for himself? for whom then? for some others. Other men's
He took upon him the person of others; and so doing, Justice may have her
course and proceed.

Pity it is to see a man pay that he never took: but if he will become a
Surety, if he will take on him the person of the Debtor, so he must. Pity to
see a silly poor Lamb lie bleeding to death; but if it must be a Sacrifice,
(such is the nature of a sacrifice) so it must. And so Christ, though without
sin in himself, yet as a Surety, as a Sacrifice, may justly suffer for
others, if he will take upon him their persons; and so, God may justly give way
to his wrath against him.

And who be those others? The Prophet Ours.
Esaias tells us, and tells it us seven times over for failing, He took upon
him our infirmities, Esa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
and bare our maladies: He was wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our
transgressions. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes were we healed. All we as sheep were gone astray, and turned every
man to his own way: and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all.
All, all, even those, that pass to and fro, and for all this, Regard neither
him nor his Passion.

The short is: It was we, that for our sins, our many, great, and grievous
sins, ( Si fuerint sicut, the like whereof never were) should have swet this
Sweat, and have cried this Cry; should have been smitten with these sorrows by
the fierce wrath of God, had not he stepped between the blow and us, and
latched it in his own body and soul, even the dint of the fierceness of the
wrath of God. O the Non sicut of our sins, that could not otherwise be answered!

To return then a true verdict. It is we, (we wretched sinners that we are)
that are to be found the principals in this act; and those on whom we seek
to shift it, to derive it from our selves, Pilate and Caiaphas and the rest,
but isntrumental causes only. And it is not the executioner that kills the
man properly, (that is, They:) No, nor the Judge, (which is God in this case:)
only sin, Solum peccatum homicida est, Sin only is the murderer, (to say
the truth;) and our sins the murderers of the Son of God: and the Non
sicut of them, the true cause of the Non sicut both of Gods wrath, and of his
sorrowful sufferings.

Which brings home this our text to us, even into our own bosoms; and
applies it most effectually, to me that speak, and to you that hear, to
every one of us; and that with the Prophet Nathans application, Tu es homo,
Thou art the Man, even 2. Sam. 12.7.
thou, for whom God in his fierce wrath thus afflicted him. Sin then was the
cause on our part, why we, or some other for us.

But yet, what was the cause why He on 3 Love of us.
his part? what was that that moved him thus to become our Surety, and to
take upon him our debt and danger? that moved him thus to lay down his Soul,
a sacrifice for our sin? Sure, Oblatus est quia voluit, faith Esaias again,
Offered he was for no other Esa. 53.7.
cause, but because he would: For unless he would, he needed not: Needed not,
for any necessity of Justice; for no Lamb was ever more innocent: Nor for any
necessity of constraint; For twelve legions of Angels were ready at his
command: But, because he would.

And why would he? No reason can be given, but, because he Regarded us:
(Mark that reason.) And what were we? Verily, utterly unworthy even his least
regard; not worth the taking up, not worth Romans 5. 8
the looking after: Cum inimici essemus, (says the Apostle) we were his
enemies when he did it; without all desert before, and without all regard after
he had done and suffered all this for us: and yet he would Regard us, that so
little regard him. For when he saw us (a sort of forlorn sinners) Non prius
natos, quam damnatos, Damned as fast as borne, as being by nature children Ephesians.
2. 3.
of wrath, and yet still heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, by the
errors of Romans 2. 5
our life, till the time of our passing hence: and then the fierce wrath of
God, ready to ouerwhelme us, and to make us endure the terror and torments of
a never dying death, (another Non sicut yet) When (I say) he saw us in this
case, he was moved with compassion over us, and undertook all this for us.
Even then, in his love he regarded us, and so regarded us, that he regarded not
himself, to regard us.

Bernard says most truly, Dilexistime Domine, magis qudm te, quando mori
voluisti prome: In suffering all this for us, thou shewedst (Lord) that we were
more dear to thee, that thou regardest us more, then thine own self: And
shall this Regard find no regard at our hands?

It was Sin then, and the heinousness of Sin in us, that provoked wrath
and the fierceness of his wrath in God: It was love, and the greatness of his
love in Christ, that caused him to suffer these Sorrows, and the grieuousnes
of these Sorrows, and all for our sakes.

And indeed, but only to testify the Non sicut of this his Love, all this
needed not, that was done to him. One, any one, even the very least of all the
pains he endured, had been enough; enough, in respect of the Meus: enough, in
respect of the Non sicut of his Person. For that which sets the high price
on this Sacrifice, is this; That he which offers it unto God, is God. But, if
little had been suffered, little would the Love have been thought, that
suffered so little; and as little Regard would have been had of it. To awake
our Regard then, or to leave us excuselesse, if we continue regardlesse; all
this he bare for us: that he might as truly make a Case of Si fuerit Amor,
sicut Amormeus, as he did before, of Si fuerit Dolor, sicut Dolormeus. We say
we will Regard Love; if we will, here it is to Regard.

So have we the Causes all three: Wrath in God: Sin in our selves: Love in
Him.

Yet have we not all we should. For, what Our benefit by it. Perteines it not
to us?
of all this? What good? Cuibono? That, that is it indeed that we will Regard,
if any thing: as being matter of Benefit, the only thing in a manner the world
regards, which brings us about to the very first words again. For, the
very first words which we read, Have ye no regard? are in the Original, (...)
lo alechem, which the Seventy turn (word for word) (...); and the Latin
likewise, Nonne ad vos pertinet? Perteines it not to you, that you Regard it no
better? For these two, Perteining, and Regarding, are folded one in another,
and go together so commonly, as one is taken often for the other. Then to be
sure to bring us to Regard, he urges this, Perteines not all this to you? Is
it not for your good? Is not the benefit yours? Matters of benefit, they
perteine to you, and without them, Love, and all the rest, may pertain to whom
they will.

Consider then, the inestimable benefit that grows unto you, from this
incomparable Love. It is not impertinent this; Even this; That to us hereby,
all is turned about clean contrary: That by his Stripes, we are healed: by his
Sweat, we refreshed: By his forsaking, we received to Grace: That this day, to
Him the day of the fierceness of Gods wrath: is to us the Day of the fullness
of Gods favor, (as the Apostle 2. Cor. 6. 2.
colleth it) A day of Salvation. In respect of that he suffered, (I deny not)
an evil day: a day of heaviness: But, in respect of that, which He, by it
has obtained for us: It is, (as we truly call it,) A good Day, a Day of Joy
and Iubilee. For it does not only rid us of that wrath, which pertained to
us for our Sins: but, further it makes that pertain to us, whereto we had
no manner of right at all.

For, not only by his death, as by the death of our sacrifice; by the blood of
his Cross, as by the blood of the Paschal Lamb, the Destroyer passes over
us, and Exodus 12. 15.
we shall not perish: But also by his death, as by the death of our High Priest
(for he Number. 15. 28.
is Priest and Sacrifice both) we are restored from our exile, even to our
former forfeited estate in the land of Promise. Or rather (as the Apostle
says) Non sicut delictum, sic donum: Not to the same estate, Romans 8. 15.
but to one nothing like it: (that is) One far better, then the estate our
sins berest us: For they deprived us of Paradise, a place on earth: but by
the purchase of his Blood, we are entitled to a far higher, even the kingdom
of Heaven: and his blood, not only the blood of Remission to acquit us of
Matt. 26. 28.
our sins; but the blood of the Testament too, to bequeath us, and give us
estate, in that heavenly inheritance.

Now whatsoever else, this (I am sure) is a Non sicut: as that which the eye,
by all it can see; the ear, by all it can hear; the heart, by all it can
conceive, cannot pattern it, or set the like by it. Pertaines not this unto us
neither? Is not this worth the regard? Sure if any thing be worthy the regard,
this is most worthy of our very worthiest and best Regard.

Thus have we considered and seen, not The recapitulation of all.
so much as in this sight we might or should, but as much as the time will give
us leave. And now, lay all these before you, (every one of them a Non sicut of
it self) the pains of his Body, esteemed by Pilates Ecce; the sorrows of his
Soul, by his sweat in the Garden; the comfortless estate of his Sorrows, by
his cry on the Cross: And with these, his Person, as being the Son of the
great and eternal God. Then join to these, the Cause: In God, his fierce
wrath: In us, our heinous sins deserving it: In him, his exceeding great
Love, both suffering that for us which we had deserved; and procuring for us,
that we could never deserve: making that to appertain to himself, which of
right pertained to us; and making that pertain to us, which pertained to him
only, and not to us at all, but by his means alone. And after their view in
several, lay them all together, so many Non sicuts into one, and tell me, if
his Complaint be not Just, and his Request most Reasonable.

Yes sure, his Complaint is Just, Have ye 1. The Complaint. The matter Just.
no Regard? None? and yet never the like? None? and it pertaines unto you? No
Regard? As if it were some common ordinary matter, and the like never was? No
Regard? As if it concerned you not a whit, and it touches you so near? As if
he should say: Rare things you regard, yea though they no ways pertain to
you; this is exceeding rare, and will you not regard it? Again, things that
nearly touch you, you regard, though they be not rare at all; this touches
you exceeding near, even as near as your soul touches you, and will you not
yet regard it? will neither of these by it self, move you? will not both
these together move you? what will move you? will Pity? Here is Distress,
Never the like: will Duty? here is a Person, never the like: will Fear?
here is wrath, never the like: will Remorse? here are sins, never the like:
will Kindness? here is Love, never the like: will Bounty? here are
Benefits, never the like: will all these? here they be all, all above any
Sicut, all in the highest degree.

Truly the Complaint is Just, it may The manner earnest.
move us: it wants no reason, it may move: and it wants no affection in
the delivery of it to us, on his part to move us. Sure it moved him
exceeding much: for among all the deadly sorrows of his most bitter Passion,
This, even this seems to be his greatest of all, and that which did most
affect him, even the grief of the slender reckoning most men have it in; as
little respecting him, as if he had done, or suffered nothing at all for them.
For lo, of all the sharp pains he endures, he complains not: but of this
he complains, of No Regard: That, which grieueth him most, that, which most
he moaneth, is this. It is strange, he should be in pains, such pains as
never any was, and not complain himself of them, But, of want of Regard
only. Strange, he should not make request, o Deliver me, or Relieve me: But
only, o Consider and Regard me. In effect, as if he said, None, no
deliverance, no relief do I seek: Regard I seek. And all that I suffer, I am
content with it,: I regard it not: I suffer most willingly, if this I may find
at your hands, Regard.

Truly, This so passionate a Complaint The regard of the Creatures of it.
may move us; it moved all but us: For most strange of all it is, that all
the Creatures in heaven and earth, seemed to hear this his mournful
Complaint, and in their kind, to show their Regard of it: The Sun in heaven
shrinking in his light; the earth trembling under it; the very stones cleaving
in sunder, as if they had sense and Sympathy of it: and sinful men only, not
moved with it. And yet it was not for the Creatures, this was done to Him, to
them it pertains not: But for us it was, and to us it does; And shall we
not yet Regard it? Shall the Creature, and not we? Shall we not?

If we do not, it may pertain to us, but The benefit, if.
we pertain not to it: It pertaines to all, but all pertain not to it. None
pertain to it, but they that take benefit by it; and none take benefit by
it, no more then by the brazen Serpent, but they that fix their eye on it.
Behold, Consider, and Regard it: the profit, the benefit is lost without
Regard.

If we do not, as this was a day of Gods The peril, if not.
fierce wrath against him, only for regarding us; so there is another day
coming, and it will quickly be here, a day of like fierce wrath against us,
for not regarding Psalm. 90. 11.
him. And who regards the power of this wrath? He that does, will surely
Regard this.

In that day, there is not the most careless of us all, but shall cry as they
did in the Gospel, Domine, non ad te pertinet, si perimus? Mark. 4. 38.
Pertaines it not to thee, Carest thou not that we perish? Then would we be
glad to pertain to him, and his Passion. Pertaines it to us then, and
pertaines it not now? Sure now it must, if then it shall.

Then, to give end to his Complaint, let 2 The Request. Have some Regard.
us grant him his Request, and Regard his Passion. Let the Rareness of it:
The Neerenesse to us: Let Pity, or Duty: Fear, or Remorse: Love, or Bounty.
Any of them, or all of them. Let the Justness of his Complaint: Let his
affectionate manner of Complaining of this, and only this. Let the shame of the
Creatures Regard: Let our Profit, or our Peril. Let some thing prevail with
us, to have it in some Regard.

Some Regard! Verily, as his sufferings, I Our best Regard.
his Love, our good by them are: so should our Regard be, a Non sicut too,
That is, a Regard of these, and of nothing in comparison of these. It should be
so: For with the benefit, ever the Regard should arise.

But God help us poor sinners, and be merciful unto us. Our Regard is a Non
sicut, indeed: but it is backward, and in a contrary sense; That is, no where
so shallow, so short, or so soon done. It should be otherwise, it should have
our deepest consideration, this; and our highest Regard.

But if that cannot be had, (our nature is 2. At least, some Regard.
so heavy, and flesh and blood so dull of apprehension in Spiritual things,)
yet at leastwise some Regard. Some, I say: The more the better; But in any wise
some. And not as here, no Regard, none at all: Some ways to show, we make
account of it, to withdraw our selves, to void our minds of other matters, to
set this before us, to think upon it, to thank him for it; to Regard him, and
stay and see, whether he will regard us, or no. Sure he will, and we shall feel
our hearts pricked with sorrow, by consideration of the Act. 2. 37
cause in us, our Sin: And again, warm within us, by consideration of the
cause in him, his Love; till by some motion of Grace Luke 24. 32.
he answer us, and show, that our Regard is accepted of him. And this, as at
all other times, (for no day is amiss, but at all times, 3 This day specially.
some time to be taken for this duty) so specially on this day; this Day which
we hold holy to the memory of his Passion, this Day to do it; to make this
Day, the Day of Gods wrath and Christ's Suffering, a Day to us of serious
consideration and Regard of them both.

It is kindly to consider Opus diei, in die suo, The work of the Day, in the
Day it was wrought: and this day it was wrought. This Day therefore, whatsoever
our business be, to lay them aside a little; whatsoever our haste, yet to stay
a little, and to spend a few thoughts in calling to mind and taking to Regard,
what this Day the Son of God did and suffered for us: and all for this end,
that what he was then, we might not be; and what he is now, we might be for
ever.

Which, Almighty God grant we may all do, more or less, even every one of
us, according to the several measures of his grace in us, etc.


