A MITTIMVS TO THE IVBILE AT ROME: OR, THE RATES OF THE Popes CVSTOME-HOVSE.
Sent To the POPE, as a New-yeeres-gift from ENGLAND, this Year of IVBILE,
1625. And faithfully published out of the old Latin Copy, with Observations
upon the Romish Text, By WILLIAM CRASHAVV, Bachelor of Divinity, and Pastor at
White-Chappell.

LONDON: Printed by G. P. for John White, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Sign of the Holy-Lambe, in Little-Brittaine, near Aldersgate Street,
MDCXXV.

TO THE ENGLISH READER, whether Protestant, or Papist, be he a true Catholic,
or a Roman. An Advertisement to help his Understanding in the reading of this
strange Book.
I Hope, the learned will give me leave to inform the less skillful Readers,
(such especially as have been unacquainted in the Popes proceedings and Romish
Markets) in some particulars, wherein otherwise they can hardly satisfy
themselves. Paris more then an hundredth years ago, being first made, and
printed at Rome, in the days of Pope Leo the Tenth, and the Book it self
remains in a public Library ready ever to be showed for the justification
of our sincere dealing herein, and the satisfaction of all such as shall make
doubt thereof.

This evidence is true, and dare abide the Test; yet for further clearing of
the truth, take one more, against which the very enemies shall not except. Know
therefore (good Reader) that howsoever this ungodly Book past current, and
relisht well enough in Rome and Italy; yet, when it came into France, it tasted
not so well, but contrariwise, was so harsh, and unpleasant, nay, so loathsome
and odious to them who had any sense of sin, or sparks of Gods fear in them,
as (though they were otherwise Papists) yet they cried, shame upon this Book
and upon the Makers, and Patrons of it: Amongst whom, Claudius Espencaeus, a
Doctor of Sorbone, one of the most learned of that time, noble by his blood,
but more by his Learning and good life, a Bishop before he dyed, and designed
also to be a Cardinal, (but as one writes, he was too good, as John de la
Casa was too bad, Thnanus Hist. Lib. 16. ad An. 1555.
and so both of them mist the red Hat) Espencaeus. I say, was both so honest,
and so hardy, as not only publicly in the Pulpit, but even in private, to
reprove this shameless Strumpet, by laying open to the worlds view, the
vileness, and villainy of this Book: whose very words, because they speak
home to the Point, and contain a most excellent and irrefragable evidence for
the truth and the true Church, and worthy to be kept as a neuer-dying witness
against the Whore of Babylon, and her spiritual abominations, I hold well
worthy to be here inserted; the rather, seeing since the Jesuits prevailed
to abuse the World, those worthy Commentaries of Espencaeus, that formerly were
so frequent in learned men's hands, are now so sought and snatched up every where
and burnt, by those wily Inquisitors, as they are now very hard to come by.
Thus then speaks this Popish, yet honest Bishop in his learned Commentaries
upon Titus, having cried out upon the horrible abuses reigning in the Court of
Rome, especially, the setting to sale of all sorts of Sins; he proceeds, and
says:

Ipsa Verba Espencaei.
FIcta sint haec, Ci. Espenc. Commentan Lit. Cap 1. Digress. 1.
and in odium Romanae sedis ab haereticis iactata, si non quod ait and
conqueritur ille velut prostat, and in quaestu pro Meretrice sedet, liber palam
ac public hic impressus hodieque vt olim venalis, Taxa Camerae, seu
Cancellariae Apostolicae inscriptus, in quo plus scelerum discas licet, quam in
omnibus omnium vitiorum Su^mistis, and Summarijs; Et plurimis quidem licentia,
omnibus autem Absolutio ompturientibus proposita: parco nominibus, nam quod
ait, nescio quis, Nomina sunt ipso pene timenda sono. Mirum hoc tempore, hoc
Schismate, non suppressum, tot tamque foedorum, tamque horrendorum scelerum,
velut Iudicem, adeo infamem, vt non putem in Germania, Heluetia, and vbicunque
a Romana sede defectum est, opus prostare maiore huius scandalo, and adeo tamen
non supprimitur ab Ecclesiae Romanae fauissoribus, vt tantorum ac talium
facinorum licentiae ac impunitates, in facultatibus Legatorum illine tunc
venientium bona ex part innouentur atque confirmentur, aduersus (si Deo
placet) quaecunque fatalia restituendo, ac etiam quoscunque Spurios, Manseres,
Bastardos, ex quocunque illicito coitu, etc. Cum his qui se per adulterium
polluerint vt connubere possint, Periuros, Simoniacos, Falsarios, item Raptores
Vsurarios, Schismoticos, Hereticos, sed ad cor reuersos, non absoluendi tantum,
sed ad ordines, honores, dignitates and beneficia quaecunque, quotcu^que
qualicunque dispensandi homicidasquoque (sed casuales seu inuoluntarios, nam
nec voluntarios quidem excepit Taxa superior) Presbytericidas, Patricidas,
Matricidas, Fratriecidas, Sororicidas, Vxoricidas, Infanticidas, Venisicas,
Jneantatrices, Concubinarios, Adulteros, Incestos cum Affimbus, aut
Consanguineis, denique contra naturam cum Brutis, etc. Habeat iam Roma pudorem,
and tam nullius frontis criminum omne genus Catalogum prostituere desinat, etc.

The Words of Espencaeus in English. or, the same in effect.
LEet all this be held feigned, and falsely charged upon us by the Lutherans,
were it not that the Book it self being come from Rome, is openly set to
sale, and as the Poet says, even like a Strumpet offers it self to all that
will but pay the price, being here publicly imprinted, and every where
vendible, as well at this day as in former times, and bears this shameless
Title, The Tax, or the Rates of the Chamber, and Chancerie Apostolical. A
Book, wherein (if thou could not) thou might learn to sin; and he
that is so minded, may come to the knowledge of more wickedness, then was yet
ever discovered in all the Summists, and Summaries of Vices that be in the
World: And for all those sins, there is offered, to all that will pay for it,
Absolution for what they have done; and to many License for what they shall
do. I spare to name them, for, the very names of some of them are enough to
make an honest heart to tremble. It Is more then marvel, that in the time of
this dangerous Scisme, when so many fall daily from the Church, so shameful a
Book should not be suppressed, which is no better then a very Index pointing
men the way to the most foul and hateful sins: so as, I am persuaded there
was never set out in Germany, Switzerland, nor among any of our enemies that
be fallen from us, any Book that ever bred more scandal, or did more hurt to
the Roman Church.

And yet so far is it from being suppressed at Rome, by our great Statesmen
there, as contrariwise the Licenses, and impunities for these abominations, are
for the most part daily renewed, and confirmed in the Commissions, and
faculties of those Nuncious, or Legates that be sent from thence to us, who have
power not only to legitimate all kind of Bastards, of never so damnable
copulations, and to give leave even for Adulterers to marry, but to dispense
even with Forgery, Symony, Perjury, Robbery, Schism, Heresy, and not only to
absolve them from the Sin, but to enable them to be capable of benefices,
dignities, and honors: nay, to absolve Murderers, (and one book excepts not so
much as the villain that shall wilfully kill his own Father or Mother, Wife
or Child) nay keepers of Whores, violaters of Virgins, Adulterers, Incestuous
even in the nearest blood, nay sins against Nature, and not to be named, even
with beasts, etc. O Rome, blush at these abominations, and cease for shame to
prostitute thy self thus in the sight of friends, and enemies, etc.

And thus writes not Luther, nor Calvin those Archheretiques, nor
male-contented Erasmus, (for so they style them) nor any of ours, but
Espencaeus a Sorbonist, a Papist, and every way their own, save only for his
honesty: Of whom, not only Thuanus Bechellius, and other indifferent, and
moderate: But even Posseuine the Jesuit, and Genebrard that rough and bitter
Papist, gives most honorable testimony. And lest it might be objected that
this Espencaeus, being a Frenchman, spoke partially, as one infected with the
old jealousy, or emulation that has bin betwixt France, and Rome: That
therefore the indifferent Reader, who desires to sway on no side, but to be
informed in the truth, may see our fair dealing, and sincere intention to do
right; take another testimony touching this book, out of Guicciardine an
Jtalian, nay a Florentine, even the Countryman of that Pope in whose time this
Book was written: A learned and judicious Writer, and one held on all sides as
indifferent, and free from passion, or partiality, as any Writer of these later
ages, whose words are as follows:

Guicciard. hist. lib. 14.
LEo Papa x. a natura, ocio and voluptatibus deditus, tunc vero etiam ob nimiam
Licentiam, potentiamque supra modum, a negotijs alienus, musicis, ac scurris
totum diem, audiendis immersus, and praeter decoru^ voluptatibus deditus a
bellis, penitus alienus esse debere videbatur: huc accedebat quod, cum in eius
animo tanta magnificentia and splendour inesset, vt vel in quonis qui longissima
successione, a potentissimis Regibus oriundus esset summa admiratione digna
fuisset: Neque in sumptibus muneribusue dandis modum delectumue seruaret, non
modo breuissimo temporis spatio, gazam ab Iulio cumulatam, incredibili
profusione exhauserat, verum etiam cum ex ijs quae in curia expediuntur,
multisque nouis and ad pecuniam emungendam excogitatis, ingentem auri copiam
cumulasset, adeo profuisse sumptus fecerat, vt subinde nouas rations quibus
immanes illos sumptus, quos non modo continenter faciebat, verum etiam augebat,
sustinere posset, excogitare cogeretur, etc.

The same in English.
POpe Leo the x. being given by nature to ease and pleasure, and much more by
the great licentiousness that bears sway in the Papacy, would trouble
himself with no business, but spend the whole day in music, mirth, sports
and pastimes, amongst witty fellows, and ieasters, and beyond all decorum was
drencht and drowned in voluptuousness: And moreover, was of so stately a mind
and carriage, and so magnificent in all things, as though he had descended by
many degrees, from the greatest and most illustrious Kings of Europe: Neither
kept he any measure, nor practiced any discretion in his gifts and bounties:
so as in short time he had not only foolishly exhausted, and shamefully
wasted the great treasures his Predecessor Julius left him, but also gathered
great sums, by all the businesses expedited in the Court of Rome. Nor
contented with the old, he had them who daily deuized him new tricks, and
ways to bring in money. Insomuch, as in his time an incredible mass of Gold
was gathered, or rather scraped up, yet was all this too little, for money came
not in so fast as he found vents and means to spend it, so as, to maintain
his charge (and satisfy his new pleasures and occasions of expense which he
also daily devised) he was even forced still to excogitate, and by fit
instruments to find out new ways and means to bring in money into his
always filling, and yet always empty Coffers.

Now consider (good Reader) who these two witnesses were, consider their
Nations, and Reliligion, consider their places and professions, and weigh well
their words, and then we dare put this issue to trial, to a Jury of any
indifferent men in the World, whether this Book be counterfeit by us, or
rather the Popes own brood, even the true and undoubted child if not of the
Church, yet of the Court of Rome. And if either travelers may be trusted, or
books believed that speak and write of the Pope and Court of Rome, it so
kindly shows the House it came of, as they cannot for shame deny it, or so
much as doubt it to be their own: for never was Bastard more like the father,
than this resembles the manners, disposition, custom, and complexion of the
Court of Rome. And this (good Reader) is the first thing I desire to clear to
thy understanding, before thou take in hand the reading of this Book.

Another matter whereof I would inform the Reader, is touching the meaning of
those offices or Courts at Rome, which are so often mentioned in this Book:
Namely, the Chauncery, the Chamber, the Penitentiary, and the Datary. The
Chauncery, is the highest office in the Popes Court, The Popes Vice Chancellor.
and his Vice Chancellor is the first, and immediate officer next himself, and
is called Vice Chancellor, not Cha^cellor, because by the Popes presumptuous
Law, God and he, have but one, and the same Consistory, or Chancery, whereof
(say they) only the Pope himself is Chancellor; And because they make him Gods
Chancellor, therefore the other is but his Vice Chancellor. This office, as it
is of supreme authority, so it is of mighty revenues, but was of much more,
when England, and other Nations, were under the Popes command, for his Writ
(for matters Ecclesiastical) went as familiarly into every Nation as our
Chancery of England sends into every Shire. Under him are many great officers,
and under them an incredible number of inferior officers, who are all fed, and
maintained by the multitude of suites, and Suitors from all parts of the Popish
world, who come thither like foolish wandering Sheep, and leave their fleeces
behind them there.

The Popes Chamberlain.
The next Officer in the Romish Court, is his Chamberlain, whose proper duty
is, to look to the Popes Reuenew, both for his constant Rents, and his casual
commings in: and is called Chamberlain of the Apostolical Chamber, or a
Chamber in the Popes Palace, where that Court is kept, and in our English, it
may not unfitly be called, the Popes Chequer, or his Chequer Chamber: This is
also daily filled with suitors, for as their Writs, or Letters, are dispatched
in the Chancery, so their sines, and other Rates, or payments they be taxed at,
are paid into this Chamber; and there be also many things expedited in this
Court, which come not in the Chancery; for they have at Rome mill nocendi
arts: unsearchable devices to bring in money, and ways past finding out.
Under him, first, the Popes Procurator general, then the Receiver general,
the Auditor of the Chamber, the College of Apostolical Secretaries, who
dispatch the affairs of Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, free Atates Cities,
Cardinals that be absent, and Bishops: Here be also the Summists, the
Protonotaries, called of old time, Regionaries of the seven Regions, or ancient
Parishes of Rome, whereunto they were assigned, but now they be without number.
These go in habit little differing from Cardinals. Then follow the Auditors
of the Wheel, so called, for that they sit round, and of old time had power to
hear, and examine only, but now have to determine also: All these being under
the Chamberlain, are mighty Offices, and have infinite number of other
subordinate to them; for from this Court, or some branches of it, proceed all
those writs that are called the Popes Brenes, which past of old time under
Lead, but now of late sub annulo piscatoris: Hereto also belong Faculties,
Pardons, Dispensations, Licenses, Confirmations, Jndulgences, Conseruations,
Exemptions, Donations, ^^f^dations, P^cutsions to benefices, and a million
more, all hooks and crooks to work in money.

The next great office is the Penitentiary so called because it is the Court of
the Penitents, and properly this is, or should be the Court of Conscience (if
there be any such thing as Conscience left in Rome: For the Chancery there, is
properly their Court of Justice, but cases of Conscience belong to the
Penitentiary, where sinners and offenders, of tender troubled Consciences,
should, upon their Confession, and discovery of their hearts, receive direction
and consolation. This was certainly of old an excellent Institution, and of
most necessary use in the Church, had it been preserved in the ancient
integrity: but the old, holy, and spiritual use thereof, as all other parts,
and points of true holiness, was long ago lost at Rome, and for many ages
has been wholly perverted to the ensnaring, and seducing of simple souls, to
the distracting and troubling of tender Consciences, to the discovering of the
secret intentions of Kings, Princes, and great Persons, and to the raking in of
millions of money into the Popes coffers: so as indeed this that should be the
best, is now the worst; and that Office which was originally erected for the
increase of piety, devotion and true holiness, is now turned into one of the
chief Stratagems, and one of the principal pieces of profane and carnal
policy that was yet ever practiced in any State of the world. The Grand
Penitentiary is the Pope himself, and so indeed he ought to be, if he knew
himself, and so he was of old time, whilst any goodness and honesty remained
amongst them: But of later times, since they grew to be so great in the world,
and so poor in grace, he has designed that office unto some Cardinal, whom
they call the Mayor Penitentiarius, unto whom, and whose Court, there is resort
of all sorts of people, to whom lie Appeals from all places, in all cases of
Conscience, and from whom there is none: And no marvel though he ever confer
this place upon a prime Cardinal, and one of his own kindred, and chief
Minions, for it is of mighty power, and profit.

Under this great Penitentiary, are many subordinate, as first, his Vicar
general, that sits in St. Peter's Church in the Vaticane: The next in St. John's
Church in the Laterane: Another in St. Mary's, and so in all the 7. great
Churches of Rome, and under them they have their Vicars and Deputies in all the
Churches of Rome, and all the Confessors that be in every Parish over all the
Popish world. The Office or Court of the grand Penitentiary, has beside many
other great Officers, no fewer than four and twenty Proctors for the
expediting of causes, and bringing in of money the more artificially, which is
now the high and Sovereign end of all the policies, practices, and Religion at
Rome.

These three great Officers be always Cardinals.

The fourth and last of the Offices mentioned in this Book, is the Datary,
touching which I confess I cannot give the Reader so good light as in the
former, there being but rare mention made thereof among the Writers of these
things; so as it seems this is one of the secret mysteries of their State. Its
probably thought he is as it were the Popes Almoner, as the word Datarie may
seem to import. Others think that the Actiuo signification of giving to the
Pope, which happily it bore of old, is of late times turned into the Passive,
and signifies now the bearer of his privy Purse. But by that that is often
mentioned in this book, if this Officer be his Almoner, it were more credit
for him to give his Alms out of better gotten goods; and if he be the bearer
of his privy Purse, it is a shame for him to fill it by such means: for, of
the foulest and most exorbitant Dispensations, it is said, that besides the
other Fees, he must in such or such a case compound also with the Datary.

For the Conclusion, thus much for thy satisfaction (good Reader) who neither
have been, nor intendest to go to Rome, nor can inform thy self by
Reading: For the learned, they may, as cheap as I, know this and more, out of
the Authors that have written hereof, as namely:

Syntag. Juris Petri Gregorij. Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 42. Gomerius in Prooem. ad
reg. Cancel. Octau. Vostrius de Aula Romans lib. 1. Cassanci. Catall. gloriae
mundi. part. 4. consid. 29. Gomerius de officialibus Romans Curiae. Moscouius de
May. militantis Ecclesiae. Rebuffus. Praxis beneficiorum. Nauarri Consil.
Tom. 1. lib. 3. de praeb. and alibi.
A Caution or direction to all Readers, touching these Roman COINS.
I Confess (good Reader) that neither of my self, nor by reading, nor
hitherto by any help of conference, can I sufficiently inform thee in the true
and certain value of these Roman Coins, the Gross, the Carlen, the Iulio,
the Quatrine, the Ducate, and the Floren: yet thus far I dare assure thee for
truth, partly out of this book and others of theirs, and partly by relation of
Merchants, that a Gross and a Carlen is of the same value, and so be also the
Ducate and the Floren: That the Iulio is of the value of our vi. d. and the
Ducate being ten Iulioes, is v. s. of our money. Again, ten Quadrins go to
make one Iulio, and thirty to one Carlen or Gross: so as a Gross appears to
be no more but xviij. d. of our money. By thus much light, thou may clearly
see, that whereas (for example) he that lies with his Mother, must pay for his
Absolution 5. Grosses, that amounts in our money to vij. s. vj. d. And for the
keeping of a Concubine, being 7. Grosses, the English price must neeeds be x.
s. vj. d. And so of all the rest. In this, and what-euer else I have written
touching this business, and this Book, I say no more, but shall heartily
thank him that can inform me better.

-- Tu qui nouisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, qui non His vtere mecum.
The Authors alleged, or otherwise made use of in the Notes, or Observations
upon this Book.
CL. Espencaei Comment. in Titum Paris. 1567. Laur. Bochelli Decret. Eccles.
Gallic. Par. 1613. Aug. Thuani Historia Pet. Gregorij Syntagma Iuris vtriusque
Anton. Posseuini, apparatus sacer Index Librorum prohib. and expurgat.
Hispanicus Madriti, in Folio 1612. Index Belgicus Index Romanus Magistri sacri
Palatij Genebrardi Chronologia fol. De vita Espencaei 8. Pet. Mathaei
Constitutiones, Romans Pontif. Creswells Philopatris Bellarminus Mart. Delrio.
Disquisitiones Magicae Fr. Petrarchi Opera Aenei Siluij Opera Hier. ab
Oleastro, in Pentateuchum Concilium delectorum Cardinalium de emendanda
Ecclesia Gersonis Opera Rebuffi praxis Beneficiorum fol. Nauarri Consilia,
Romae Pet. Andreas Gambarus, de Officio and authoritate Legati a latere
Ad Authorem huius Translationis, et Commentarij in eandem.
MVlti (...) duro de Marmore linquunt,
Constituunt Tabulas Ille, vel ille sibi:
Ille procul Tecti fundamina ponit in Imis,
Quae referant vultus, era notata suos.
Scilicet haec olim multos victura per annos,
Post obitum, vitam reddere posse putant.
Tempore sed Tabulae intereunt, and tempore Marmor,
Rubigo in Cineres vertit and Era leaves.
Attamen vt maneant, nil quam sine mente figuram,
Et certe nil quam corpus inane dabunt.
Vir Clare en quanto haec melius post fata relinques,
Testentur mentem quae monumenta tuam:
Nomen inextinctum ad seros, famamque Nepotes,
Vsque sub extremos non peritura dies.
Nempe Vrbes donec congestum cespite culmen,
Donec erunt ripae, flumina donec erunt:
Donec suprema moriens testetur in hora,
Scribet and in tabulis Iussa tremente manu,
Vsque tuum in toto nomen celebrabitur Orb,
Longaque durabit saecula fama recens:
Macte Vir ingenio, quem nil nisi viuida virtus
Tangit and ex vero gloria vera bono.
Sit tibi vita diu, necte, Vir docte, malignis,
Inuolat tenebris illa, nec illa dies.
Inuiolata tuos extrudat fama labores,
Ad Coeli donec fidera serus eas.
Det Deus opto tibi, Pastor lectissime, longum
Viuere, and insulsos, sternere Romulid as.
Amoris ergo posuit. G. F.

Ad Librum.
IN Liber, Europae per singula Regna, per Vrbes:
Lumen and in terris vndique sparge tuum.
Lis tibi perpetua est, and Bella perennia tractas,
Cumque Dracone tibi pugna cruenta manet.
Ast caput abscissum est, elisaque guttura Monstri,
Romaque iam fato concidit ipsa suo.
Salve, optate Liber, salve, instructissime Codex,
Hic tibi conueniens cella locusque datur.
Huc ades, and praecede loco: tibi plurima debent,
Villa, Domus, Campi, Pascua, Rura, Nemus.
A Table of the Romish Merchandises, set to sale in the Popes Court at Rome,
and the Prizes as they are rated at in this BOOK.
1. ABsolutions, For Sins against the Law of God, namely, for Sacrilege.
Chap. 1. 2. For revealing of Confession. Chap. 2. 3. For polluting and
profaning of Churches: as for lying with a Woman in the Church, or committing
other enormious things. Chap. 3, 4. For Perjury. Chap. 4. 5. For Usury. Chap.
5. 6. For Simonie. Chap. 6. and 7, 7. For Murder, namely, for killing a
Clergyman. Chapter 8. 8. For him that kills his Father, Mother, or any other
Lay-person. Chap. 9. 9. For striking or wounding of a Clergyman. Chap. 10. 10.
For Ouer-laying of an Infant. Chap. 11. 11. For destroying of Infants in the
Mothers Womb. C. 12. 12. For Whoredom, or keeping of Concubines. Chapter 13. 13.
For deflowring of Virgins. Chap. 14. 14. For Incest; namely, 1. for him that
lies with his Sister, 2. for him that lies With his Mother, or any other of his
carnal Kindred. Chap. 15. 15. For Robberies, or burning of Houses. Chap. 16.
16. For Forgerie. Chap. 17. 17. For False Witnesse-bearing. Chap 18. 18. For
Commutation of Vows. Chap. 19. 19. An Absolution and Dispensation for a man
that has, or desires to have two Wives at once. Chap. 20.
THE RATES OF THE POPES CVSTOME-HOVSE. The first Part. 1. Absolutions from
sins, against Gods Law.
CHAP. I. For Sacrilege.
The Romish Text: being the very words of the Book, as it was printed by
themselves, with the Popes authority, more then 100. years ago. An Absolution
for a Layman that stole holy or consecrated things out of a holy place, is
rated or prized at 7. Grosses.

An Absolution for a Priest, who restores not to the Church the holy things he
took away, is rated in like manner at 7. Grosses.


English Observations upon this Romish Text.
SACRILEGE, (say the Schoolmen and the Canonists) is either against holy
persons, or places, or things that be sacred. This is properly intended of the
last, which is described to be. The stealing or taking away of sacred things
out of a sacred place. And it is a very soul sin, and punishable in the
highest degree, not only by Gods Law, but even by the light of nature, and the
ancient Canon Laws: By one Law he is deprived of his living; by another, made
incapable to take any more; by another, made infamous; by another, given over
to the secular power, and so to death. But all these are nothing if they stand
in the Popes way, especially either of his prerogative, or his purse: for his
power must never be limited, and his purse must ever be filled, and all Laws
must be laid flat, and trodden in the dust, to maintain his power, pomp, and
pride. Judge here (good Reader) what cause Espencaeus the Frenchman, and
Guicciardine the Italian had to cry out upon him as they did for this Book.

Again: These be the men that hold us Protestants no better than Heretics,
Hogs, and Dogs, and say we have no Religion, no devotion, no holiness,
nor respect of holy things amongst us. But GOD knows, yea the world it self
will testify for us, that Sacrilege with us, is not only held a mortal and
capital sin in the Court of Conscience before God, Anno 1. E. 6. cap. 12.
but also punished with no less than death in our exterior Courts of Justice:
And that with so great severity, as some helps of life allowed by our Laws to
other Fellons, are utterly denied to the Church-robber. In Saint Andrews in
Holborne, the common Prayer-booke was stolen; and the Fellon was condemned for
it.
And some have dyed in our times for things of small value, only because it
was Sacrilege. Therefore how great wrong they do us, thus to censure us, and
how unjustly they challenge to themselves to be the only holy Church, let God
and his Angels, and all good men judge betwixt us; seeing with them, 7. Grosses
will suffice for Sacrilege, which among us is ever punished with no less than
death. And if a Priest may steal the goods of the Church, and then be absolved
for 7. Grosses, when happily he has sacrilegiously stolen more near to 700. we
must needs say with Espencaeus, that a tolerable man may by this book learn
to be naught; and an ill man, to be much worse.

CHAP. II. For revealing of Confession.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that reueales another man's Confession,
is taxed at 7. Grosses.


English Observations.
TOuching Confession to Man, howsoever Gods Church knows no reason to enjoin
it to be practiced by all Christians, as is the Popish Auricular Confession,
because its simply necessary to salvation, to confess to God, but to man not
so: Yet our Church, and Doctrine not only allow, but advise, and exhort all
men to use it even to man for their consolation, or direction when they find
cause. And we deny not but it may be of great use, and has ever been
practiced in Gods true Church by such as tendered the quiet state of their own
souls. And we doubt not but many do grievously burden their consciences, and
carry sore troubled and full heavy hearts about them, because they do not open
their minds, and discover the spiritual state of their souls unto their
godly Pastors whose duty by our Doctrine, is not only readily, lovingly, and
patiently to hear them, but with all his power and best skill, to direct,
advise, and comfort them, and most faithfully to keep secret whatsoever is thus
in confession made known to them as Ministers of God, especially if it be a
blemish to the party confessing: unless either the penitent give him leave to
discover it, or that it be a matter of blood, or some enormious evil to be
committed: for prevention whereof it may and ought: yet with great caution, and
discretion be discovered to the Magistrate. Now the Romish Church makes use of
this, as one of her principal stratagems whereby to know the hearts, and
dispositions of all men and women, especially the Princes, and great Ones of
this world: And howsoever to bring them on the better to confess freely, and
fully, they make a show that the Seal of Confession is not to be violated, but
most strictly and sacredly to be observed, yet this strictness they keep in
their own power (like St. Wilfrids Needle) to enlarge or restrain at their
pleasure, or as shall make for the good of the Catholic cause. Therefore on
the one side, when it makes for them, the Popes, and Popish Princes have by the
Conduit of confession been made privy to the purposes of such great Princes,
as walking in their simplicity, did freely impart their minds to their
Confessors, who like good souls little feared any false measures in so holy a
business as Confession: And on the other side, when it makes against them to
open it, then the Seal is sacred, and then all the world must perish rather
than it be violated. And thereupon Delrio disquis mag. (...). 3. ^i^. C^a^ 1.
Sect. 2.
Delrio the Spanish Jesuit concludes, that Garnet having knowledge of the
Powder Treason in Confession long before the execution, was bound to conceal
it, and so suffer it to come to pass, not careing though it concerned the
Kings life, and all his Issue, and thousands with them, and the safety of the
whole Kingdom. Thus can they fight on both sides: And by these means no
marvel if their Kingdom have stood so long, and if they do such strange
things as they do daily. And here let the world consider and wisely observe,
what is it in all the Popish world, that the Pope, or Spanish King may not know
at their pleasure, seeing to that end they have many apt Instruments especially
the Jesuits and Capuchins, and so many fit Engines, with this two-handed sword
of Auricular Confession?

And to show how little they care for the keeping safe of this Seal when they
list to break it; it appears, in that the Jesuits (who be the refined
Papists) are in many places almost the sole Confessors: So as it was complained
of in France that the Confessionall places of Parishes were left desert, and
those of the Jesuits so thronged, as one could hardly have a room there. And
what use they make of it, and how safely they keep it, is manifest by the
Register found at Venice upon their late expulsion, wherein they carefully
recorded the secret Confessions of all great persons, and so most wickedly made
use of such things to their wicked ends, as in all honesty ought to have been
either buried in oblivion, or at least suppressed in silence. And if there were
no record in the world to this purpose, there needs no more evidence than this
which is their own, even the price of his absolution, who either by
drunkenness, or carelessness, or corruption, or upon any other knauish ground
haps to reveal it: which seeing it is so far their own, as they little thought
we should ever have known it, it concerns us the more to make much of it. For
it may give us, and the world good cause to wonder at their wickedness, and
hateful hypocrisy, so seriously to commend to the people, as a sacred, and
holy matter, that Confession which themselves account of so lightly and so
slightly, as that the Absolution for the breach of it, shall cost the Villain
but 7. Grosses, who rather deserved 7. Halters. And howsoever these Censorious
Pharisees disgrace, and disparage us; yet I dare say, that Minister amongst us,
who should so far forget himself, and the honor of his Calling, as to
discover the secret Confession of any Penitent, who powered out his soul into
his bosom, should be so far from passing with the lean punishment of 7
Grosses, as he would rather be judged unworthy of his place, and held
hateful amongst his fellows, and unfit for the society not only of
Christians, but even of civil men.

CHAP. III. For polluting and profaning of Churches.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him who lies with a Woman in the Church,
and there commits other enormities, is rated at the price of 6. Grosses


English Observations.
ALl Christians; nay, most of the Heathen, know how sacred places the Churches
and Temples be: for, as it is imprinted in Nature, to worship God; so Reason,
as well as Religion, affords, that the places for that worship are therefore to
be severed and separated from ordinary uses, and much more from filthy and
profane employments. Therefore, howsoever our Religion knows, that Churches
are not inherently holy in themselves; nor Typically, as was the Temple at
Jerusalem; nor have the appropriated promises that it had; nor practice the
many cumbersome idle Superstitions of Popery at their Consecrations: yet does
it solemnly and decently dedicate them to God, and uses them not for Gods
worship till they be so set apart by solemn Consecration: And being so
consecrated, commands to keep them clean, and in comely manner and measure to
adorn them, and allows them not to be employed to any other uses at other
times, even when God is not actually worshipped in them. Therefore, it forbids
not only the keeping of Markets, Sessions, Courts, Feasts, and much more of
Plays in the Churches, which was usual in the times of Popery; but even of
Schools, and Parish-meetings, except in some outside, or with certain
limitations: And the least abuse or profaning of our Churches is severely
punished amongst us, not only by our Ecclesiastical Censures, but our
Temporal Laws.

We therefore wonder at the Romish Church, who punish so slightly such great
and enormious prophanations as be here named, and it is sorrow, and shame that
they should be named amongst Christians to be done in Churches; and the more,
seeing they impute and ascribe more local inherent holiness to Churches then
we do. But hereby, as in many other things, appears their palpable Hypocrisy;
for, if they be so holy, or they in their Consciences hold them so holy, as
they pretend; why then make they no more account to have them so filthily
abused, and punish it less then we do? Indeed, I know no express Law we
have, nor no punishment specified for him that shall be so bold and beastly as
lie with a Woman in the Church; for to that we shall answer, as did the famous
Lawgiver, Who can commit so foul a sin; seeing, as Saint Paul says, Have
ye not Houses to eat and drink in, 1. Cor. 11.22.
etc? So, much more may we say in this case, Have ye not Houses, etc. How
therefore can a man be so monstrous to do that in Gods House, which a civil man
would be ashamed to offer in his Neighbors house? But if any should be found
amongst us, that should dare to do so bold and beastly a part, I dare say, he
should either dye without pity, or live with such shame and hatred, as he had
better have dyed. And, as for our own parts, we suppose we may truly say;
that since the reformation of Religion, such a Sinner has not been heard of
in our Nation. So we are both much sorry, and more ashamed, that so foul and
vile a thing should be so common and ordinary amongst the Papists, seeing they
pass under the name of Christians: for, if it were not ordinary, then were
there no need of this Law, nor Penalty amongst them, no more then is amongst
us. But we are much ashamed, that if it be so common, then, that they who
profess Christ and his holy Religion, should set so slight a punishment upon
so foul a sin, even such a one, as may rather inuit wicked men to it, then
fear them from it.

And here we confess, it may seem very strange at the first sight, how it
can come to pass (though they have amongst them men so beastly-minded) that
they should have opportunity to commit this wickedness in Churches: But it
will not seem so to them that are acquainted with the Doctrines and practices
of Popery; for, they have many Church-meetings on certain Saints days and
Eues, that we have not, and at certain seasons of the year: Besides also,
their Regulars do all rise at midnight both Men and Women, and go to their
Service in their Churches (the devotion whereof should be honorable in our
eyes, if it were not tainted with such gross Superstition, and accompanied
with so many miserable and monstrous inconveniences.) And such men, and women
of the Laity as will, may come thither also, and those that do, are held most
holy and devout. Now, if the ancient Vigils of the Saints and Martyrs, were
found to minister the occasion of so great impurities, even in those pure times
of the Primitive Church, as that by public order they were put down: no
marvel if in those licentious times, wherein the Popish Clergy have no Law so
strong as their lust, and no bridle upon their affections, but which they
please to put upon themselves, if most foul and enormious things, even so
foul as Whoredom, and other execrable pollutions be perpetrated in their
very Churches.

Moreover, their great Masterpiece of Policy, their Stratagem of Auricular
Confession, is for the most part exercised in their Churches, where their
Confessor sits in a place severed for the purpose, or at least, in a corner
where none can hear, and the Penitent kneels before him: By the abuse whereof,
how great enormities have been committed, or at least the bargains made in
Churches, by the daily opportunities of meeting betwixt men and women their own
Histories and the continual experience these many years, do afford so many
lamentable Relations, as grieve our hearts to think on: and the honor of
Religion requires, and modesty commands, rather to be suppressed in silence,
and unknown of some, then repeated and diuulged to the scandal of all.

Furthermore, here appear the fearful fruits of their rigorous Law, by which
they tie their Clergy from lawful marriage: For howsoever many among them, as
also amongst us, are able to contain; yet, as the wiser sort of themselves
confess, to many it is so difficult, and to some others so impossible; as,
rather then they will want a woman, they will eat of the forbidden fruit, and
take such as they can any way win to their wicked purpose; and rather then they
will want time, place, and opportunity, they will, as it is here manifest, not
spare the Church it self. Therefore, how much more holily and wisely has our
Church ordered, that according to the Law of God and Nature, every man that
finds himself not fit to want that society, shall take that course, and use
that holy means of Marriage, which the Holy Ghost approves to be honorable
in all, and which that learned Aeneas Syluius, afterward Pope Pius Secundus,
tells us, was upon great reasons, once forbidden to the Clergy, but now upon
far greater, and better reasons, ought to be restored.

It is here also manifest, how unequal, and unreasonable Judges they be
betwixt themselves and us: They will be the holy Church, and we must pass
for profane, and be driven out as dogs. Nay, in foreign Nations they fear
not to make their people believe, that we live not like Christians; we serve
not God, keep no Sabboths, care for no Churches, have no Wives but community
of Women, and in a word, live in all licentiousnes, more like Heathens then
Christians. We confess indeed with S. Paul, we are all sinners in Gods sight,
and the best of us all have cause to cry out with him, O miserable man that I
am, etc. And there be many great sinners, and sins amongst us, which as we
confess to be blemishes in the face of our Profession, stains to our
Religion, and occasions of grief to all the godly; so we dare justify it,
they are none of them allowed, no nor tolerated, much less maintained, either
by the Laws of our Land or rules of Religion; yet among all the evils that are
among us, and the enormities, which by the abuse of our long peace and plenty,
are too commonly practiced among ungodly, and unregenerate men, we challenge
even the most malicious enemies to prove if they can, that ever any in these
Kingdoms, even of the prophanest refuse (of our Religion) were found to be so
extremely, and shamefully impious, as to lie with women in the Churches, which
it seems by these words of their own, is (alas) too common among the Papists;
for, if it were not frequent, the price for the Absolution would not here be
rated among the rest: for our parts, our hearts trembled, our minds were
amazed, our souls sighed, and sorrowed when we read it; and had it not come
from themselves, such is our equity, and charity toward them, we should not
have believed it: But seeing it is so manifest, even by their own confession,
and was never charged upon them by us, till thus they discovered it of
themselves; we appeal to all the World of reasonable men, whether they deal
not unreasonably with us, to appropriate all holiness, as only being their
own, and to exclude us, amongst whom, blessed be God no such foul evils are
found at all, as hereby appear to be frequent among themselves.

As for those other enormious, and shameful things intimated in these words, to
be perpetrated amongst them in their Churches: Forasmuch as it seems they are
so foul, as they be ashamed to name them, we for our parts are content to be
as ignorant of them, as their people be of that which is taught in our Pulpits,
or contained in the Bibles that lie in our Churches: And for our neighbors the
English Papists, if they long to know the secret of this Pope-holy Mystery,
they may easily send and be certified by some of their zealous Brethren, who
are now preparing to go to Rome, to the jolly Iubile now at hand, who
doubtless will be carefully Catechized by the English Jesuits there, and
sufficiently instructed in this, and many other points of Romish Catholic
Divinity: But, if their stomachs be so sharp set, and their devotions so
earnest, and their souls so sick of filthy love toward this spiritual
Strumpet, as they cannot endure to stay so long without it, they may do well
to trusse up their fardels and go themselves, that so they may receive the
speedier, fuller, and surer satisfaction. And therefore, O yes, you that are so
minded among our English Papists, get you gone, we pray you, what should
hinder your Voyage, seeing it is hard to say, whether our King will more
willingly let them go as long as they bear such minds, or the Pope more
heartily bid them welcome, as long as their English Gold sounds merrily in
their pockets?

The while, till they put the matter to trial, let the diligent and discreet
Reader observe with me this one thing, for a Conclusion of this unsavory
Subject: We here have heard of Romish Catholics how they use their
Churches, some do lie with Women in them, others commit such foul things
there, as they are ashamed to name, and yet these shameful enormities found
nowhere in the world but among themselves are esteemed and punished as poor,
idle, and triuiall matters; whereas, if one should be found reading the holy
Bible in the vulgar Tongue in one of their Churches; or, if two men, two women,
or a man and a woman should be taken reading and conferring upon some Chapter
of the blessed Gospel in their Mother Tongue, it is not 7, nor 700. Grosses
would serve their turns to procure their Absolution. A fearful thing and not
to be believed, if it came not from themselves, that a man and a woman had
better lie together in the Church, and commit any wickedness possible to be
done, then to be found reading the New Testament in the Church.

CHAP. IIII. 4. PERIVRIE.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that has committed Perjury, or has
wilfully, and falsely forsworn himself, is rated at 6. Grosses


English Observations.
Perjury is one of the great Sins condemned in the Moral Law, under the
heauiest penalties; and it is so foul a sin, as all well-formed
Commonwealths, even amongst Turks and Heathens do detest it, and deeply
punish it. What an holy Catholic Church then is this, which makes so small
account of so great a sin? And how unworthily do they wrong us, and other
reformed Churches, in whose Courts both Civil and Ecclesiastical, Perjury is
so sharply censured? And how good cause have all Christians to take heed how
they trust or have any thing to do with this Generation, where Perjury is
bought, and sold at so easy a rate?

CHAP. V. 5. VSVRIE.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that secretly practices Usury, is
rated at 7. Grosses.

An Absolution for him that burieth an open, and notorious Usurer in Christian
man's burial, is rated at 8. Grosses.


English Observations.
Usury is worthily condemned by the common Law, and it is a commendable thing
in the Popes Law, that it forbids and punishes all Usury. If the Popes Canon
Law were as good in other things, we should sooner, and easier come to a good
agreement. But see how even their best Laws are made but Spiders webs; for
here Usury is bought at an easy rate: For if the Usurer can gain Hundreds
in a year, he will little care for paying for his Absolution once a year;
nay, if he paid for it once a week, he would not lose by the bargain. And
whereas by the Greg. Decret. Lib. 5. Cap. 2. Tit. de Vsuris,
Ecclesiastical Laws, no Priest may bury the body of a known Usurer in
Christian burial, under a very great penalty, you may be sure a rich Usurer
will not care (at least, when he dies, and can keep his money no longer) to
pay the Priest soundly, that will adventure to bury him in the Church: because,
though they live like dogs, devouring their poor Neighbors, yet dying, they
would not be buried amongst dogs, but amongst men, and Christian men: For
they be of Balaams Religion, that howsoever they live the life of the wicked,
Numb. 23.10.
yet they would be glad to dye the death of the Righteous, and to have their
carcases rest with the bodies of the best, whose minds they would never let
rest, but vexed them with their viperous Usury, whilst they lived. Now mark
the mockery of the Roman Church: for, what Priest will not adventure upon it,
for a great sum of money to bury him in the Church, or Churchyard, when he
can have his Absolution for so doing, at so cheap a rate as 8. Grosses, that
is; for 12. shillings sterling?

CHAP. VI. 6. SIMONIE.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for a Layman, for the vice of Simonie, is
rated at 6. Grosses.

But if he be a Priest 7. Grosses.

But if a Monk be guilty of that vice, then his Absolution is rated at 8.
Grosses.


English Observations.
THe better sort of Papisticall Writers, have ever complained of the enormities
abounding in the Roman Church, by reason of this reigning and swelling sin of
Simony. And they have continually cried for reformation, lest it bring a
deformation of all.

And herein again the ancient Canon Law is very comme^dable, for inflicting so
great Penalties both spiritual, and corporal upon that sin. But see here to
what little purpose any good Laws or Canons be made amongst them, seeing not
only Laymen, and secular Priests, but even their Regulars or Religious men,
for all their holy Vows to the contrary, may be absolved from it on so easy
conditions; which are set by the Popes, who for the most part creep into the
Chair by Simonie, and other indirect means: yet see (withal) how they
cannot, what ever they be doing, but still they fail not; they forget not to
keep their grounds, and to make good, and maintain the Principles of their
Policy; whereof, this is one: That their Clergy is above their Laity, and
their Regular Clergy above their Secular. Again, That those who be greater
in place, and honor, if they do well, are also to be deeper in punishment if
they offend; accordingly here the Laity offending in this kind, pays 6.
Grosses, the Secular Clergy, 7; the Regulars 8. Herein, for my part, I commend
their care, and the wisdom of their Government; and do wish that the Children
of Light were as wise in their Generation for the government of Gods true
Church, as be these children of this World in the upholding of their Synagogue.

CHAP. VII. 7. SIMONIE.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that Symoniacally enters into holy
Orders, is rated at 4. Duc. and 4. Carlens.

And his Letters of Absolution from the Simonie, at 16. Grosses.


English Observations.
IT is well, that this which is most properly and truly Simonie, and indeed,
the foulest Simonie of all, is rated a little higher then the rest; yet, it is
horrible, that so shameful and scandalous a thing, as to enter into holy
Orders by Simonie, should be past over with any Pecuniary punishment at all;
whereas, such a one rather deserves to be deprived of his unholy Orders, and to
be exposed as unsavory salt to be trodden under the foot of all contempt.

But the while, where is the punishment of the ungodly Bishop, that thus
wickedly gives holy Orders for money? whose fault must needs be far the
greater, seeing he is in the higher place, and by his learning, wisdom and
Authority should teach and guide the Inferiors, who never can Simoniacally
enter into holy Orders, if he were not as ready so to give them, as they to
get them. But these greater Flies, or bumble Bees, (the Romish Bishops) must
not be caught in the Spiders webbes of the Popes Laws, but must in all
loosenes and liberty, fly abroad, to bring home good store of honey to the
Popes Hiue. Now we nothing doubt but this their partiality to themselves, will
hasten the hand of Heaven the sooner upon them, and the more heavily when it
comes. For, as no base fellow could enter into holy Orders for money, if there
were not mercinary Ordainers, ready to give them (seeing no man can ordain
himself) so no Popish Bishop durst attempt so unlawful a thing, knew he not
that the Pope, their Bishop of Bishops, will be as ready to absolve him, as
was the Fox in the old Fable to absolve the Wolf.

CHAP. VIII. 8. MVRDER.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for a Layman, who kills any Clergyman, or
Priest, Regular, or Secular, Abbot or Pryer, or any under a Bishop, is taxed at
the price of 7. 8. or 9, Grosses.

This is if the Offender be present; for if he be absent, it is not so easily
granted: For, such must visit the Sea Apostolic, that is, they must
personally appear at Rome, unless he have an unconquerable impediment: But if
that impediment be at any time removed, then he must go thither where ever he
dwells; yea, though he be a Monk. Nay, the same Law holds for women: But, if
the impediment be perpetual, then the rate is allowed, even for the absent.


English Observations.
But why, will some say, must the absent go to Rome? why do they not rather
take the money, and spare them their Iourneyes? The Pope and his Factors are
cunning Merchants, and know how to make the best of their Merchandise: No
Pilgrim, no Penitent, no Offender, no Suter comes at Rome, but he goes away
well fleeced. There be many Churches to visit, many Relics to look at, and
adore, many goodly Images to worship, many Offices to pass through, and every
one of these like a Bush of thorns, will have a piece of this sleece, before
he can come to kiss the Popes holy, holy foot, or get out his Letters of
Absolution. So, although the price thereof be very small; yet the Tole will
cost more then the Griest, and so a large amends is made for that defect, in
the monstrous charge and expenses, which otherwise his iourny costs him: All
which, either falls into the Popes or his Officers Purses, or at least helps
to maintain the state of the City, which if by these weekly Markets, and by
certain yearly Faires, and by secular Jubilees, and such like devices were
not maintained, this new Rome would be externally as base, as old Rome was
glorious.

But by this means, and these spiritual Markets, they draw thousands, and in
time millions of men to Rome, and make them trudge many a weary mile, and spend
many a penny, to come for that which is of as much value at home, and the
Sellers well know is not worth a farthing. And as thus they will improve their
commodities to such as are able to come, so on the other side, for such as
cannot come to Rome, (like wise Gamesters that had rather play small play then
sit out; and like wise Merchants that know, Light gains make a heavy Purse)
rather then they will lose good customers, they will lovingly send them their
Absolutions at the same rates. See what a careful, tender loving Mother you
have of your Roman Church. O that this her love would inuit you all to leave
this cursed Heretical earth of England, and go to the holy hands and sweet
embracements of your Romish Mother. But surely, either you think that she
wants truth in these her offers, and protestations, or you want faith to
believe her; or else that love, that good Children should bear their Mother.

CHAP. IX. Murder, or the killing of ones Father, or Mother, or any other
Lay-person.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for a Layman for murdering of a Layman, is
rated at 5. Grosses.

But if he be a Clergyman in any the lowest Orders that is slain 7. Grosses.

And if he be a Priest, that is, one that is promoted to all the holy Orders,
then he must pay 8. Grosses.

Also, an Absolution for him that has killed his Father, Mother, Wife, Sister,
or any other Kinsman, or Kins-woman, so they be of the Laity, is rated at no
more but 5. or 7. Grosses.

And his Letters of Absolution will cost him 1. Duc. and 5. Carlens

But if the party so slain, be a Clerk, a Priest, or Clergyman, then the
Murderer is bound by the Law, to go to Rome, or to visit the Sea Apostolic.


English Observations.
SOlon, an ancient Lawgiver, made no Law against such as should kill their
Fathers, for said he in his honest simplicity; Doubtless there be none such.
But the Officers of the Roman Custom House be wiser in their Generation, and
know well, they live in such times as there will be such Monsters, Murderers
even of their Parents: At least, if there were, or would be none; yet they
hope to make some, and to work or win them so to be, by the baseness of
the price they set on him that shall murder his Father. Let the World wonder at
this wickedness; Exodus, 21.14.
for Gods Law allows no Sanctuary for a wilful Murderer of any man, and
values not all the Gold a Nabal has, a sufficient price or ransom for a
Murderer: Yet this Babylonish Strumpet dare set a price of a few Grosses, even
upon him that kills his own Father. Oh, what gross impiety and hellish
abomination is this! And yet this is she, forsooth, that will be the Mother
Church and only Spouse of Christ: But it appears here, that she is no
Mother, but the cruel Step-dame that cares so little for the lives of her
Children: And not the Spouse, but the spiritual Harlot, that dare undertake to
be wiser then her Husband, and to make Laws contrary to his; and to
discharge, for a little money, those, whom her Husbands Justice had condemned
to death.

CHAP. X. Striking, or wounding of a Clergyman.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for laying violent hands upon a Clergyman, or
a Religious man, if it be with effusion of blood, is rated at the price of 9.
Grosses.

But if it be without blood, then it costs but 7. Grosses.

But note here, that if many have their hands in this striking, laming,
maiming or killing; then (if the Letters of Absolution be for particulars) for
every Offender, there must be added 2. Grosses a piece.


English Observations.
TOuch not mine Anointed, 1 Chro. 18.22.
and do my Prophets no harm, says God. He will not have his so much as
touched to their hurt. It is therefore likely, that the Popes Clergy are none
of Gods, whose blood may be sold at so cheap a rate; or else, that the Pope
is not the Vicar of Christ, who sells the blood of his Brethren, to enrich
himself with the price thereof, whose Persons God will have not so much as
touched. But here let all reasonable men consider, how unreasonable and
partial the Roman Church is, betwixt their Clergy and Laity, and how impious
in their estimation of Gods Laws, and their own, who dare make the price and
penalty for killing a man's Father, being a Layman, less then the bare
striking of a Clergyman. Arise, O Lord, and maintain thine own Laws against
such insolent enemies of thy Crown, and deliver thy Church from those evil
and, unreasonable men.

But will some say, Amongst all those many kinds of Murders, and Absolutions
for the same, how chance we hear not of any Absolution for him that kills a
King? Courteous Catholics of England, ask the gentle Jesuits your kind
Confessors, and they will resolve you, that those Absolutions are for sins,
and foul offenses, not for such Heroical feats, and meritorious acts, as to
kill any Heretic King. And to prove it to be most meritorious in Heaven, and
therefore most commendable upon earth, they will do it by no less authority
then the Pope himself, who, though he make but few Orations, and fewer
Sermons; yet his joy compelled him to put himself to the trouble to make an
Oration in the Consistory of Cardinals, in praise of the Friar that stabbed
Henry the third of France, though he were no Heretic himself, but only a
suspected favorer of them. Now, if he be praised by the Pope, who kills a
King, that is but a favorer of Heretics; no marueil if he be held no
Offender, but rather one of an Heroical spirit, that kills that King his
Holiness shall pronounce an Heretic.

CHAP. XI. Ouerlaying of an Infant.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for the Husband and Wife, who find in the
Morning, or when they awake, the Infant lying by them to be dead, is rated for
either of them at 6. Grosses.


English Observations.
ONe exception against the Romish Religion, is, that the grounds, and practice
of it, are not only against Religion, and Holiness, but also against the rules
of Reason, and grounds of Justice: for example; set aside all Religion, and
Gods Word, does not Nature it self, and natural Reason, even amongst the
Heathen, make wilful Murder a greater sin, then accidental, and unwilling?
How shameful, and unreasonable then is the Romish Church, to make the
punishment more, nay, twice as much, for the casual death of an Infant, then
for the wilful Murder of ones Father, or Mother? Yet withal, mark good
Reader, how this so unreasonable Romish Stepdame, never wants a private reason
tending to her own ends; for she knows well, that where one Villain is
found so wicked as to kill his Father, 20. nay, 100. the whole world over, may
be taken tardy in this unwilling mischief of ouer-laying a Child, the greater
part of the World being so poor, that their Children lie with them in the same
beds: It had therefore been (thought she) but a silly piece of policy, to
impose a large and high rate upon a fault that is seldom committed, but rather
on such as fall out daily: indeed, that is the way to work in wealth, and so
she may fill her Purse with money, the World may see she little cares though
she empty her head of all wit, and her heart of all honesty. What shall the
Christian World say to her, but as Simon Peter said to his ancient friend Simon
Magus: Act. 8.20.
Thy money perish with thee?

CHAP. XII. Destroying of Infants in the Mothers Womb.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for the Husband who beats or strikes his Wife
being with Child, so as that thereupon she comes before her time, and loses
her Child, is rated at 6. Grosses.

An Absolution for a Woman, who being with Child, took medicinal drink to
destroy her Birth, or does any other Act, whereby the Child, being alive in
her Womb, is destroyed, is taxed at the rate of 5. Grosses.


English Observations.
IF the slavery of Women, and Jealousy of Husbands in Italy, be so common as
Travelers tell; and the violent beating of Wives so ordinary as this Particle
implies; then certainly, our English Women may justly thank God for that
comfortable freedom that they enjoy, which is such, as made Erasmus, and other
strangers coming hither, say; That no Women in the World lived so fair lives
as ours in England: And our Catholic Women may here see, how little they are
beholding to the Pope, who cares so little for them, more then for serving the
filthy lust of him, and his lustful law-lesse Clergy, that all the base
Iealousies, unworthy usage, and cruel blows of their imperious Husbands move
not him at all; nor holds he it worthy so much as a poor Purse-punishment,
unless it cause the death of the Child. Have not our Catholic Dames great
cause to run after Romish Religion as they do? If they love it so well; Oh
that they would even run to Rome, and enjoy it there, where they may have the
Popes daily blessing to make amends, if their Husbands should pay them with
daily, and sometimes deadly blows.

It is also fit for the Readers observation, what little account is made in
Rome of killing Infants; and his Shauelings, and unholy Cloyster-brethren show
themselves children not unlike their Father; amongst whom and their carnal
Sisters the Nuns, their Chronicles, and all Travelers, and the Visitations
of their Abbeyes, do all declare how wickedly hundreds, and thousands of
Infants do perish amongst them, some newly borne and baptized in their blood,
and either cast into Ponds, or buried in their Gardens, Celles, Cellers,
Vaults, hollow Walls, and sometimes in baser places; some slain, and
strangled in the Birth, many destroyed, and never suffered to see the light of
this Life, and those be held of tender, and honest hearts among them, who
fear to destroy these harmless Babes, and do therefore save them, sending
them out to be nursed, and live: And yet, these are the men that condemn holy
Marriage as unclean, and unholy; nay, as a foul, sinful, and punishable
fault, above Whoredom, and all Fornication.

CHAP. XIII. Whoredom, or keeping of Concubines.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for a Priest, or Clergieman that keeps a
Concubine, as also his Dispensation to save him from being Irregular, which by
the general, and Provincial Constitutions he incurres, all this together, is
rated at the price of 7. Grosses.

And if a Layman will keep a Concubine, his Absolution also will cost him the
same price, even 7. Grosses


English Observations.
SEe the horrible impudency of this shameless Generation, they confess, that
even their own, both General, and Provincial Councels do condemn the
keeping of Concubines, under pain of Irregularity; and yet the Pope is not
ashamed, against them all, to set to sale this filthy sin, and to put down so
base a price as seven Grosses: But speak (you monstrous Whore-maintayners) Is
not the keeping of Concubines, or Whores (for what is she better then a Whore,
whom a man keeps as a wife, and is no wife?) Is it not (I say) as well against
the express Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, as against Canons of Councels,
and Constitutions of the Church? If it be, as every Child knows it to be so,
why do you then conceal it? The reason is plain enough to them that be
acquainted with your policies, even because it little moves you what is
commanded, or forbidden by God in the Law, or in the Gospel. But all that you
care for, is what is forbidden in your own Constitutions: And lest that should
breed some scruple of conscience, that keeping a Concubine is forbidden in your
general, and provincial Constitutions, you take a course to quench that also,
even that little spark of conscience, and fear of sin, and tell the
offender, that besides his Absolution from the sin, he shall also have a
dispensation to deliver him from the danger of Irregularity, that most severe,
and most just punishment, which the Canons of the former, and better times
inflict upon that sin.

See, all good Christians, mark, I beseech you, you potent Princes, and Kings
of Christendom, you godly Bishops, and faithful Divines, who all in your
several places wish the welfare of Sion, and seek to settle true peace in the
Church. See to what little purpose it is to have any general Council, or to
make any wholesome Canons, and Constitutions, as long as this Man of sin is
suffered to sit in the Chair of Pestilence, seeing all the good, and careful
Canons the Councels have made against that filthy, and reigning sin of
whoredom, in six, and six hundred years, are all cast off, cashierd, and
nullified for the bringing in of scuruie six, or seven Grosses into the Popes
Coffers. See what all your labors tend unto, Kings, and Princes, in calling
learned Bishops, and Divines, in managing the proceedings of General,
National, or Provincial Councels, as long as he is suffered in his
exorbitant pride, and insatiable covetousness, and unmeasurable
lasciviousness, thus to tyrannize over the World. And you that be learned,
mark here what good cause had Erasmus the Low-Germane, Espencaeus the
Frenchman, Ferus the Dutchman, Caranza, Oleaster, Stella, and Viues, the
Spaniards; Sauanarola, Mirandula, Mantuan, and other Italians, to cry out upon
the Romish abominations, and to call so earnestly for reformation, as they did
both in Pulpit, and Print.

And because they set so easy a penalty even for a Layman also that shall
keep his Concubine, it puts me in mind of a memorable example in that kind,
whereof I can make report upon my own certain knowledge; wherein it is
manifest, that this villainy, though hatched at Rome, yet reached even as far as
England.

Mr. William Strickland of Bointon, near Bridlington, in the Eastriding of
Yorkshire, whose son Mr. Water Strickland, or else his son, lives there at
this day, Lord of that Town, and diverse others in that Country can witness
the same.
An ancient Gentleman in Yorkshire told me himself near thirty years ago,
that living at York in Queen Mary's time, (where he was one of the Council
of State, or else the Queens Secretary to her Council there) and fearing to
be questioned for not coming to the Church to Mass, which he resolved never
to do, whatsoever it cost him; and hearing that Cardinal Poole was come from
Rome to reconcile England, being Legate a latere, and came furnished with these
faculties, and power of giving the Dispensations, and Licenses (mentioned in
this book, and complained on by Espencaeus) sent to his Solicitor at London,
to get him a Dispensation (out of the Lord Legates the Cardinals Court) not to
go to Church, but that he might exercise his Devotions at home. The
Solicitor going about it, found it somewhat difficult, because they suspected,
that he who sued for such a Dispensation, was likely to be a Lutheran, or a
Caluinist Heretic: notwithstanding (other pretenses being made) he compast
it for money. Which being granted, and the Dispensation drawing up, an Italian
Officer of that Court asked him (merrily and not secretly) But how old is your
Master? would he not also have a License to keep a Concubine? The Solicitor
blushed, knowing his Master to be another man, and of a better Religion than to
keep a Whore: yet considering his Master had the wit to make a good use of an
ill thing, and would be glad to have such an advantage against them, closed
with him, and asked him the price, which was not unreasonable, for, for a
French Crown more, he had it past: and so sent down his Master a double
Dispensation, that is, not only to forbear the Church, but to keep a
Concubine: At which, he was much amazed, till having read his Sollicitors
Letters, and then he laughed full heartily at it, and many a time he and the
good Gentlewoman his wife, This Gentleman, and his Wife, lived together Man,
and Wife sixty years, and dyed both in one year.
made themselves merry with it, together with some private friends whom they
durst trust.

I asked him what became of his Dispensation? He said, he kept it safe till
the last year of Queen Mary, when the Inquisition began to be so hot at
York, that even such men as he, were questioned for Religion: And he being
called before the Commissioners, and charged with not coming to Mass at the
Church: He pleaded the Popes Dispensation for his absence. But, being told,
he must exhibit it in Court, he spoke to the chief of them, being an ancient
Doctor of Law, (whose name he told me, but I have forgot it) that if he might
have his Dispensation again, he would produce it, else not. And taking his
word, for security of restoring it, he brought it into the Court: Where all
looking at it, one after another; one chafed, another blushed, another rownded
in his fellows ear, but all were ashamed of the business: such Marchandizes
having been rare in England, especially so far from Court. But (says he) I
demanding my Dispensation, the chief Commissioner bade me come home to him for
it, and said, The Court dismissed me. Afterward, going to him for it, he
curiously inquired of me, how I had it, and what it cost. Which when he
heard, it wonderfully perplexed him: for being a man of moral honesty, and but
an English Papist, being little acquainted with these Italian tricks, he was
amazed, and much ashamed of it: and not having any thing to say, in denial of
a thing so manifest, nor in excuse of so foul a matter, he prayed me to
conceal it, and utterly to forget it, but would by no means give it me
again; and said, he had burnt it. And thus (says he) I lost my Dispensation,
yet lost nothing by the loss of it, but only the benefit of an evidence
against themselves.

CHAP. XIV. WHOREDOM, or deflouring of Virgins.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that has defiled, and defloured a
Virgin, is rated at 6. Grosses.


English Observations.
ARe these the great extollers of Virginity? Surely it is but a false flourish,
they do not so esteem it as they make show; for, if they did, then they would
prize it at a higher value: for, whatsoever is held precious, is always sold
at a dear rate. Seeing therefore the violation of Virginity is so poor a
matter in the Popes Court, and passes at so base a price; it may let all see
that be not blind, it is but a counterfeit color they cast upon the matter: And
see moreover, how by consequent, they accuse of cruelty and injustice the Law
enacted by God; He that violates a Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22, 21, 28, 29.
is to dye for it, or else be fined to her Father, and take her to his Wife:
but here 6. Grosses will suffice for his discharge. They say the Pope is the
Vicar of Christ, and some of them call him the Vicar of God: But, is not he a
strange Vicar, that dare alter the Laws of his Lord and Master?

CHAP. XV. INCEST.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that lies with his God-mother, or with
any woman that is of his blood, or carnal kindred, and for him that lies with
his Sister, or with his own Mother, is taxed at 5. Grosses.


English Observations.
WHat is this we hear? Is it usual in the Popish world for men to lie with
their Sisters, nay, with their Mothers? Alas, that we should hear it of any
that profess Jesus Christ: But, seeing it is so, and even common, it seems,
amongst them, who despise us as dogs in respect of themselves, we have cause
to bless God that we know it, especially, that we have it from their own
mouths, for now we know the better how to esteem of them, and we hope the
world of reasonable men will think nothing the worse of us, seeing we are
condemned by such as these. But if these be the manners of the Italians, we
shall the better believe hereafter, that which Petrarch, Boccas, and many more
do write touching the Religion of Rome, and lives of the Italians. Much more
should here be spoken; but as the old saying is, Curae leaves loquuntur,
ingentes stupent. For truth is, words must needs want, where no words can
suffice to express the horror, and hideousnes which lies not hid, but openly
expresses it self in this Absolution, which in our Consciences we believe
would pass on no conditions in any Civil Heathen Country in the World; and
yet is granted for 5. Grosses in the Court of Rome.

CHAP. XVI. ROBBERIES.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that spoils or robs another, or burns
his Neighbors Houses, is rated at 7. or 8. Grosses.


English Observations.
RObberies, or burning of Houses, are foul Capital Fellonies in England; but
in Rome, the Pope an indulgent Father, deals more mildly with his Children.
Be gone therefore, you zealous English Catholics, get you out of this rigid
Government, get you under the wings of his Protection, where you may burn,
spoil, rob, revenge, and not pass the Pikes of our sharp and severe Laws:
But when you come at the holy City of Rome, you may do well to ask your holy
Father, how he will answer the Law of God, who ordaines, Exodus 22.^^
that if fire break out and damnifie the Neighbors, the kindler of it shall
make restitution? If this be just against him by whose negligence it broke
out, without any mind to do hurt; how unjust then is it, to absolve him for 7.
or 8. Grosses, who wickedly and wilfully sets it on fire?

CHAP. XVII. FORGERIE.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that forgeth false Letters
testimonial, and for such as be the Witnesses to such forged Letters, is
rated at 7. Grosses

And for him that forgeth any Writs of the Office of the Penitentiary, at 8.
Grosses.

And for him that forgeth Letters of Privilege, at 16. Grosses.

And for him that forgeth the Popes hand, or Letters Apostolical, at 18.
Grosses


English Observations.
Anno 5. Eliz. Chap. 14.
ANd for Forgery, though it be not flat Felony, yet finds it such censures in
our Courts of England, as for this World, some Offenders would rather wish to
be hanged then undergo them: yet in this merciful Mother Church of Rome, it
is so ordinary a matter, as the highest Penalty, even for forging the Popes
hand, is under 30. shillings; yet I must needs herein commend the Pope for his
courteous dealing in measuring other men by himself: for knowing himself to
be the great Forger of the World, thrusting upon the Church continually
counterfeit Books, and sometime whole Authors counterfeit, he deals the more
favorably with them, who take to themselves the boldness to counterfeit
hands; for he judges (and Oh that none of his judgments were more unjust)
that a name is nothing to a whole Book, and a hand but little to a whole Man.

But withal, observe (good Reader) how hitherto you have heard of the Penalty
of 6. or 7. and never above 8. Grosses; how then come we so suddenly to a
double price or Penalty of 16. and 18? Oh, the case is altered: the former
faults were against God, the breach of whose Laws, and neglect of whose
Commandments are but Peccadils, at most, but petty Treasons at Rome: But these
are such as trench upon the Power, and Prerogative of the Pope, these touch his
Freehold, therefore now the prizes are higher, and the Penalty heavier. Thus
are they blinded with self-love, misled with mis-conceits of themselves, and
carried away wholly with care of that which concerns themselves: And God
himself little better then forgotten amongst them.

CHAP. XVIII. False VVitnesse-bearing.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him who in a criminal cause takes a false
Oath, is rated at 6. Grosses.


English Observations.
But the just God, who knows that a false Oath in Judgment, may lose a man's
Credit, State or Life, allows neither six, nor six score, nor six hundred
Grosses, as a competent recompense to the party wronged, nor a proportionable
punishment to the Offender, Leuit. 6.5.
but ordaines, that he shall satisfy fully the party wronged, and receive
other punishment for his breach of Gods Law. What shall we then say to this
fellow that makes thus base account of a false witness, nay, of a false Oath,
wherein, besides all the confusion that thereby may breed amongst men, God
himself, and his glorious Majesty is immediately assaulted, and most impiously
abused.

CHAP. XIX. Commutation of Vows, or Absolutions for the same.
The Romish Text. For a man to have leave to change his Vow, will cost him 10
Grosses

For a Layman to change his Vow of going to Rome, to visit the Apostolical
Churches, 12. Grosses

For a Prince who vowed to visit the Sepulcher, 20. Grosses


English Observations.
ALl men know how sacred a matter they make of their Vows; they fill the World
with the noise of them: Such a man (say they) he is cursed if he marry, for he
has vowed the contrary; such a one is damned, if he, or she enter not such
an Order; for, he has vowed to do it: Luther must needs be damned in Hell,
because he married a Wife; for he broke his Vow: and a Hundredth like. Quanto
conatu, quantas nugas? What ado here is about nothing, or little better then
nothing, when a matter of 10. Grosses (that is, fifteen shillings) will
purchase him a Pardon, or a Faculty to change his Vow into something else?

But such is their Religion, and such be their tricks, as Vows are the
strongest bonds, when the urging of them makes for their own ends: But, if to
break them be for their turns, then they be of no force, their Sampson of
Rome, can break them in pieces like a thread.

Oh shameful, and yet shameless Hypocrisy, to make so great a show, where is
so little substance! for why, the tender consciences of poor men be so
terribly entangled and burdened about their Vows, which sometime negligently,
sometimes merrily, nay (in drink) sometimes hastily, sometimes impiously,
oft-times rashly, and always ignorantly do fall from them. If the Pope can so
easily, as for a matter of 15. shillings take the burden from them; surely,
they are simple that trouble themselves, when they may so easily be
discharged. It seems the High Priest in the Old Testament, took no such power
to himself; Judge. 6:
for then good Ieptha and his Daughter needed not to have mourned so much, for
his unadvised Vow, who (I warrant you) would have given 10000. Grosses to have
been discharged from his Vow: But he held as we do, that if a Vow be
unlawful, it binds not at all, but breaks in pieces of it self; so if it be
lawful, it binds so firmly, as, no man, no money, no price, no power on earth
can dispense with it. And here we challenge that grand Hypocrite of Rome, and
all his College Consistory to answer us but this one Question: If it be an
unlawful Vow, how dare he for want of money bind where God loses? if lawful
how dare he for money lose where God binds? And if he will not answer us, we
bind him over to the great and general Sessions, in the bonds of an evil
Conscience, which will hold him fast and sure enough to answer it before God,
for thus abusing the World, and turning Religion vpside down, to serve his
own carnal, and lawless lusts.

For the particulars; Will it cost a man but 20. shillings to change his Vow,
who vowed to visit the Churches in Rome, then sure your own consciences know
it to be a lie, when you write, that such great Indulgences for thousands of
years, and forgiveness of sins, and releasing of souls out of Purgatory,
belong to them that visit the 7. Churches in Rome; for if that were true, you
could not be such Villains as suffer men for a little money to miss so great
a blessing as indeed is worth all the World. And, if a Prince that vowed to
visit the Sepulcher, would be discharged of it, and change his Vow, it must
cost him 30. shillings: Verily, the price is easy enough.

But how came it to pass you trench thus upon the sacred Prerogative of
Princes; elsewhere he might not go without License, if he do, he must pay
you? Now, if he say he will go, and after change his mind, he must pay you
for that also. How dare you thus play with edge-tooles, and dally with your
betters, and prey upon them that are able to make a prey of you at their
pleasures? Again, is this it for him that calls himself the Servant of
Servants? But herein appears your Hypocrisy in words to mask under the
veil of Humility, and in deeds to declare your self the Commander of Kings.
Let the rest of the Kings, and Princes of Christendom open their eyes, and
learn at last to tread the paths, wherein our King, and Prince have broke the
Ice before them, even to know their own power, keep their own places, and
stand upon their own feet, and in whatsoever they undertake, or resolve, under
God, to go on without his leave, who has much more cause to ask leave of
them.

CHAP. XX. An Absolution, together with a Dispensation, that a Man may have two
Wives at once.
The Romish Text. An Absolution, and Dispensation for him who having one Wife
absent, or that went from him, and hearing her to be dead, marries another:
but she proving to be alive, he notwithstanding desires to keep, and live
with the latter, and to have his Children made Legitimate, his Dispensation
will cost him 10. Grosses.

And the Clarke, or Writer must have 7. Grosses.


English Observations.
OH most shameful Dispensation! Shall he have leave to live with a second
Wife, the first being yet alive? For, howsoever that word, She proving to be
alive, is not in the Romish Text; yet must it needs be implied, that he knows
her to be alive, else the other cannot in this case be called a second, if the
first be not; nor needs he a Dispensation to live with the latter, if the
former were dead; nor needs he Letters of reabilitation to make his Children by
her Legitimate. Gentle Gerson, we now see how great cause thou had to call
the Romish Dispensations, Dissipations. Again, are these the men that make the
World believe they honor Marriage more the^ we, seeing they make it a Sacrament
properly called, which we do not? But it appears to be but a false flourish,
and an idle brag, seeing hereby they make it rather a base Recrement, then a
holy Sacrament: For if he may marry and keep a second, the first yet alive,
and her Children also be legitimate, what is become of the love, league, and
bond betwixt the first and him? If this be not to cross the wisdom of God, to
dishonor his holy Ordinance, to fill the world with Bastards, and breed an
universal confusion, I appeal even to the learned, and civil men amongst the
Heathen.

And all this is the fouler, in regard of the baseness of the price: wherein
appears their wicked Policy, hereby as it were inuiting, or, as Espencaeus
complains, even teaching men to do evil: for, few there be which marry so
contentedly, or at least, are so continent, as they will not be ready at so
easy rates to take the benefit of this Indulgence (I mean, of those that be
Romish Catholics, and consequently believe, that all is well done that's done
at Rome, and all lawful, safe, and holy which the Pope allows:) And verily if
this Law be alike for Wives, as well as for Husbands, as no reason but it
should, then I marvel not, the Romish Factors here grieve so much they cannot
bring the East India, Virginia, Turkey, and Moscouia Companies to their
Religion; for if they could, here would be much good matter for their Markets,
seeing many Husbands are yearly suspected to be dead, and sometimes the Wives
married when the Husbands prove to be alive. They slander us, that our
Religion is a Doctrine of liberty, and loosnesse; but let all our enemies show
when once any Husband, or Wife with us, has been upon any condition dispensed
withal in this case, after the first is found to be alive; but contrariwise,
we are sure that many, who after information, and more then probability of the
death of the former, had married another; yet after notice of his being alive,
were presently directed to leave the latter, and when it proved so indeed,
returned unto him, as unto the true Husband, and such as wanted either love, or
Conscience so to do, our Religion, and Laws have compelled him thereunto,
although some (I speak upon knowledge) would have given a hundred times ten
Grosses for a Dispensation in this case. Judge now, good Reader, of what
Profession soever thou be, whether is the Religion of Liberty, and loosnes,
Ours, or Theirs.

FINIS.
THE RATES OF THE POPES CVSTOME-HOVSE. THE SECOND PART. WHICH IS, OF
TRANSGRESSIONS AGAINST LAWS PARTLY Divine; but for the most part
ECCLESIASTICAL.

printer's device of George Purslowe, featuring an old man standing by an olive
tree (McKerrow 311) NOLI ALTVM SAPERE


LONDON: Printed by George Purslow, for John White, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Little-Brittaine, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb, near St. Buttolphs
Church. 1625.

CHAP. I. Absolutions for Transgressions against Laws, partly Divine; but for
the most part Ecclesiastical.
The Romish Text. An Absolution for him that takes two holy Orders in one day,
is rated at 27. Grosses

2. For him who celebrateth the service of any order which he has not taken
27. Gross.

3. For him that procures himself to be promoted to a fained title, that is,
to such or such a benefice, when indeed he has none; if he confirm it with a
false oath, or by false witness, will cost him 33. Gross.

And Pope Julius the Second would over and above have a good composition of
them that were thus ordained.

4. For him that is ordained without Letters dismissory from his own Ordinary,
is rated at 19. Gross.

5. But if he have any benefices, and would hold them, it will then cost him no
less then 38. Gross.

An Absolution for a King, for going to the holy Sepulcher without a License
100. Gross.


English Observations.
HItherto have we seen how the Laws of God are regarded at Rome, and their
transgressions punished: Now follow the Offenses, which for the most part are
against the Laws of the Church, Touching which, there is one most strange, and
remarkable Circumstance, sufficient to make all Christians ashamed, and even
all reasonable men to marvel: namely, that the penalties for the breach of
them are far heavier, then for the greatest sins against the ten
Commandments: For howsoever they well deserve heavier punishments then be
here inflicted; yet that their Penalties being transgressed, should so far
exceed the Laws of God, may seem more then wonderful to such as be not well
acquainted with the bold presumptions, and presumptuous impieties of this
wicked Strumpet. Let the Earth tremble, and the Heavens blush at this
boldness, that the Absolution of him that kills his Father, passes for no more
then 7. Grosses, and his who lies with his Mother, is but at 5. being two of
the great Laws of God: but the taking of two Orders in one day, or to be
ordained without Letters dismissory, being but breaches of Constitutions of
their own, must cost him 27. Oleaster in Pentat.
and 38. See what a good cause Oleaster, Ferus, and other reasonable, and
honest hearted Papists had to cry out as they did, that the Laws of God are
neglected in Popery much more then their own, and the breach of their own
much more severely punished. And this may give evidence to the consciences of
Gods children, that the destruction of this Antichrist is not far off, and
his damnation sleeps not.

Now touching the particulars: as to the second of them; It lets us see, that
it is no unusual thing amongst them, for such to say Mass, as be not full,
and lawful Priests, the danger whereof by their own confession, is no less
then horrible Idolatry; for by their own rules if it be not consecrated, it is
Idolatry to worship it, and if he be no Priest, he cannot consecrate. I do
not believe they thought to have opened us this door, not indeed did they
think we should ever have seen this Book; But thus it pleases God to make
them vent, and foame out their own shame.

And touching the third; is it not strange and fearful, that some of their
Clergy dare, not only procure themselves to be promoted with places, and
Benefices, which indeed are not, but be merely forged, and counterfeit? But
moreover, dare her ignorant, and profane people to forswear themselves, and
damn their souls, by lending them a false Oath to confirm it. Howsoever this
may affect them; we, for our parts profess, it makes our hearts to tremble,
and our souls to mourn, that such Atheistical impiety should be so frequent
among them, even in their Clergy, and Court of Rome. And that it is no
extraordinary, but a frequent case, appears by the words following, in that
the Pope so wisely takes hold of it. For, Aquila non capit Muscas, the lofty
Eagle will not stoop at little Flies: and, if it were a poor bait, they would
nor bite. Seeing therefore the Pope drew a good composition out of these, its
manifest to be too common a case amongst the Popish Clergy. And in as much as
Julius the 2. was willing to gain out of so ungodly a ground; it shows him
out of his own Romish Records, to be no better a man then the Histories make
him.

But for the last; it is more then strange, that if he be so proud to offer, yet
that Kings will so far forget themselves, as thus to be befooled, and to
suffer an usurping Prelate to domineere over them: For who should hinder a King
from going to the place of Christ's Sepulcher at his pleasure? Or, if another
may command him or forbid him, how is he then a King? If it be a part of the
power, or Prerogative of a King to set impositions; then certainly, those are
but pieces of Kings, who submit themselves to the penalties, and impositions
the Pope shall set upon them: those that will thus be trodden, and trampled
upon by this base companion, and yet proud Antichrist, it is pity but they
should pay, in stead of this hundred, for their Absolution, a hundred thousand
Grosses, for such their gross folly, and unkingly debasing of themselves.

CHAP. II. DISPENSATIONS. First, for Bastardie.
The Romish Text. A Dispensation for a Bastard to enter all holy Orders, and to
take a Benefice with Cure, will cost 12. Grosses

And to have two Benefices compatible, will cost him 2. Ducats 4. Carlens.

But if he will have three Benefices, then he must pay 4. Duc. 4. Carl.


English Observations.
HEeere follow some of the faculties, which Espencaeus, as we heard before,
bitterly complained of, for that not only they daily past at Rome, for money,
but were also granted unto the Legates or Nuncio's that came from Rome to
France, who being Legati a latere, coming (forsooth) even from his own sweet
side, and bringing such blessings as these with them, Extra Io: 22. cap. cum.
inter. in Gloss.
they show us what a blessed breast their Lord God the Pope bears about him,
out of which they suck such hateful Henbane, even such pieces of filthy
poison, which spiritually infected all the World for a time, and diverse Nations
yet to this day.

The reason why he is here so beneficial, and bountiful to Bastards, is,
because they are so near, and dear in likeness unto himself, both in his
spiritual and carnal Kindred: For first, it is he, which for diverse Ages
past, had almost destroyed the true spiritual, Child, the Religion of God,
and filled the world with a false, base, and bastardly Religion.

Moreover, it is he and his Instruments the Jesuits, and other his shameless
Censors who have by their Indices Librorum Prohibitorij, and Expurgatorij,
partly, as it were killed the true children, by utterly suppressing the true
undoubted books, and writings of learned men, and partly put base bastards in
their room, by chopping, and changing, purging, and painting them; as if the
Fathers were alive again, they would not now be able to know their own: and
certainly, many of them would absolutely refuse, Ioh: Ferus his Comment upon S.
John's Gospel, is, since the Author died, reprinted at Rome, and the Author is
forbidden; and it is altered in no less then 1000. places.
and with great indignity disclaim these that pass under their names as being
none of theirs. And thus the World by this bold wickedness of theirs, is filled
with a base bastardly brood of false, forged, fained, and counterfeit Books,
to the intolerable injury of the truth, partly in perverting, and principally
in suppressing it, and to the irrepairable loss of learning, if it be not by
the true Christian Church both timely, and wisely prevented.

Besides, where ever that bastardly Religion of his reigns, it fills the world
with carnal Bastards, by denying, and dishonouring holy Marriage, by public
toleration of Whoredom, and by making it a less sin for their Clergy to lie
with many wives of other men, then to have one of their own: By this means
not only their Towns, and Cities, but their Colleges, and Cloisters are filled
with a doubtful, uncertain, and Bastardly Generation: their own Records, and
Histories were enough to make them blush on this behalf; if they were not past
shame. Nay, so far are they forsaken in this point, and given over of God, as
it is hard to tell (not how many Whores, and Women have been Popes; for
doubtless there was but one but) how many Bastards have sitten even in the
Popes own Chair: so deep was the wisdom, and so just the judgment of the
high God, by joining the spiritual, and carnal Bastardie together, so to
punish the one with the other. There was an Age, Geneb. in Chron. Bellar. de
To. Pont. l. 4. c. 12.
even almost in the height of Popery, which Genebrard calls, and Bellarmine
acknowledges, indoctum, infaustum, and infoelix saeculum. Diverse of the Popes
of that Age, were by their own Books Bastards at the best, if not worse: Sure
we are that one, a Monks Bastard of Saint Albanes in England, Hadrianus quartus.
and driven by shame from the gates there, proved at last a Pope at Rome, and
one of the proudest that ever sat there. No marvel therefore, if he be so
loving, and tender over Bastards; for therein he is but kind to his own
Kindred: And indeed, if he did not dispense, and make use of such, he would not
have a Clergy sufficient to supply their places.

And touching the other instance in this Article of Dispensations, by which
these Bastards are enabled by this Romish power, non obstantibus, all Laws,
and Canons to the contrary, not only to enter all holy Orders, and to take a
Benefice with Cure: But (which those that be borne in holy Wedlock cannot have
by their Law) to enjoy two, nay three Benefices: Here I appeal to all
indifferent Readers, of what Religion soever, if in this point the Romish
Church transgress not all bounds of modesty, and moderation; yea, to all,
even reasonable Papists themselves, if herein they be not ashamed of their
Mother, who is more indulgent, and favorable to the Bastards, then her own
Laws be to true Children, who without a special Dispensation cannot enjoy
two livings with Cure.

CHAP. III. Dispensations in Cases Matrimonial, or matters of Marriage. As
first, for Marriage within forbidden DEGREES.
The Romish Text. A Dispensation for one to marry in the 4. Degree of
Consanguinity, comes to 17. Grosses.

And in the third degree, to 27. Grosses.

But he must always in this case compound with the Datary (that is, with one
of the high Officers of the Apostolical Chamber; or at least, with the Keeper
of the Popes privy Purse) which generally comes to 4. Duc. 1. Gr.

A Dispensation for the second degree of Affinity, comes to 7. Du. 5. Gr

But another Book of Rates, called the Rates of the Chancerie, says that it
will cost ordinarily 60. Grosses.

And that moreover there must be a Composition with the Datary, which rises
oft-times to 300. Grosses, and sometimes to 4. 5. and 600. according to the
quality of the persons.


English Observations.
SEe what a pleasing Religion is this of Rome: Neerenesse of blood or Kindred
shall not hinder any devout Romish Catholic from having her to his Wife whom
he desires. For what though the Law of God be plain, and peremptory; no man,
no not Moses shall come near to any that is near of Kin to him? The Pope,
that is, they say, Gods Deputy, is a more indulgent Father to his devout
Children, and gives the^ leave to come almost as near as they will or can,
even to the second Degree: And left they should be discouraged, fearing so
great favors would cost them too dear he here tells the^ fairly and friendly
what they must pay for such Dispensation. And if it fall out that some
unhappily leap beyond these limits, even to the first degree, or to the very
stock it self, and lie with his Sister, or the very Mother that bare him,
howsoever he will not ordinarily grant him a Dispensation to do so; yet he
will lovingly measure him by himself, and kindly give him an absolution for
it, when it is done at very easy rates. What more respect, what greater favor
can the best deserving Catholics crave at the hands of their holy Father?
Judge, good Reader, is it any wonder if so many of the great and delicate ones
of the World affect that Religion? And if any of them, (which alas many do
not) make any scruple of conscience, in that the Law of God commands them not
to come near the Kindred of their flesh. The Jesuits have an Answer ready;
Did not God (say they) dispense with his own Law, when he bade Abraham kill
his Son? And, did not Christ dispense with the moral Law, when he changed
the Sabbath from the Saturday to the Sunday? And is not (say they) the holy
Father of Rome, the Vicar of Christ; nay the Vicar of God upon earth? Away
therefore with this niceness of Conscience, and trouble not your selves so
much to know what God in the Scriptures, in the Law or Gospel commands, or
forbids, as what the Pope, who is now in the room of God, and Christ,
commands, forbids, or allows, for that you may safely and securely rest upon.

Here is Catholic Council indeed and no marvel if such Councellers be so
well fee'd, and followed as they are. And I appeal to all that know them
indeed, if this be not in the plain truth, the Doctrine they teach, and the
Counsel they give to all such of their disciples as they dare trust. I will
not charge them with the very words, but with the matter; and dare say, that
they do daily instill it into such as be Idonei auditores Iesuiticae.
Philosophiae: For Nouices, I know they have another learning who are not yet
capable of their mysteries and secrets of State, not sensible of what beseemes
the Majesty of their Monarchy: Such wise workmen are they, they have always
at hand, both their milk for Babes, and their meat for men.

CHAP. IIII. DISPENSATIONS.
The Romish Text. Also the holy Penitentiary Apostolical, has power to
dispense in the Court of Conscience, for one to marry in the first degree of
Affinity, but then the Dispensation will cost 9. Du. 6. Gr.

And a Dispensation to marry her with whom one has special Kindred, will cost
60. Grosses

And let Proctors, and Sollicitors observe, that these favors, and
Dispensations, in matters Matrimonial, use not to be granted to the poorer
sort, because they want wherewith to pay for them


English Observations.
Lo here the power the Pope takes to himself, even to dispense in the first
degree of Affinity, that is to marry even his Fathers or his Brothers Wife. See
(you Kings) what a Sovereignty the Pope has: you are all but shadows to him:
And see (you foolish Heretics of England) what a brave freedom it is to be a
Romish Catholic; you are all but slaves to them: For they may marry as they
list: And what though the Law of God be so strait laced, as expressly to
forbid these copulations, Mar. 6.18.
and John Baptist was so strict a Puritan, that he told Herod that he might
not have his Brothers wife, no matter? as long as the Popes transcendent power
can thus reach beyond both Law, and Gospel.

By virtue of this his power, he gave leave to Henry of England to marry his
Brothers Wife; nay, to Philip of Spain to marry his Sisters Daughter. And if
their own Books say true (as in this case we have no cause to suspect them)
Reperitur tamen Martin. V. (vt refert Archiep.) dispensasse cum eo qui cum sua
Gerinana contraxerat and consummauerat, habito consilio cum peritis Theologis
et Canonistis, propter mala and scandala alias inde ventura: licet aliqui
dicerent cum hoc non posse. Syluest. in verbo Papa. Bar. Fumus in verbo
dispensat. Angelus de Clauasio in verbo Papa in Anton. Notwithstanding it is
found, that Pope Martin the V. (as Antonius the Archbishop of Florence writes)
dispensed with him who had contracted and consummated, taking just counsel
with learned Divines and Canon Lawyers for the avoiding of certain
inconveniences and scandals which otherwise would have followed thereupon:
Though they affirmed that the Pope could not do it.
one of them, namely, Martin the V. gave leave to a man to marry his own
Sister, for avoiding of certain great inconveniences. Now verily, if that be a
cause sufficient, then be sure this passion is so powerful, especially in
great Ones (who stand not in fear of any creature to control them, and
seldom have any great measure of fear of God before their face) as they will
easily pretend such inconveniences, or else will make them, if they be not,
rather than want their will in that kind.

Now, if such men may be dispensed withal, to take their Brothers wife,
sisters daughter, nay the sister her self, we marvel not if so many of the
great Ones of the world affect so much to have the Pope their Father, and their
god, seeing he goes so far beyond God, in pleasing his Children: for God
withholds no good thing from his Children: But the Pope denies nothing at all
to his dear Children, no not that which is most foul, and abominable in the
Law of God, and nature: And if any be so scrupulous to think it evil, or
fear it to be foul, he can make it good, and fair by his Dispensation,
provided that it be well paid for, and my Lord the Datary foundly satisfied
with a round composition: for, as gross as these be, yet be they no Gross
matters, but Ducats must drop fast, and Angels must fly apace, to purchase
these Dispensations. Be assured, it cost Henry the Seventh the setting on, and
Philip paid well for it, in one kind or other. And no marvel if Kings be
rated high, when inferiors pay sometime six hundred Grosses, that is, forty
five pounds, which, in those days, was no small matter.

In the conclusion, mark how plainly this wicked Antichrist shows himself,
and how boldly he blusters out his own shame. These Dispensations (says he)
are not for poor men, because they cannot reach the price. Thou may be sure
(good Reader) the Jesuits were not bred when this book of Rates was set out,
for they would have been ashamed of such shallowness, thus to lay their
intentions open to their captious enemies: For they, though they deal much
less honestly, yet much more closely: But now their close conueyances will do
no good, seeing already the Pope has here, and elsewhere, in those elder, and
plainer times discovered those plots of policies, which are the pillars of
their Kingdoms, so as now, though the Jesuits, with their refined wits, do
never so cunningly carry their business, and couch their secret intentions
under counterfeit vayles, yet the iniquity of that Romish Religion is now
manifest to all that will open their eyes to see it: For, let them now cast
twenty colors upon the matter, why the poorer sort are not as well partakers
of these privileges as the great Ones, we know by this book, the true cause
is only, for that they want wherewith to pay: Nay, the greatest have them not,
unless they pay full sweetly for them. Henry the Seventh was willing to have
canonized Henry the Sixth for a Saint: but the Dispensation for his sons
marriage cost him so dear, as he had no stomach to rise so high for his
Predecessors Canonization, as he must do if he had got it: and so honest holy
Henry, though happily a Saint in heaven, wanted his Romish Saintship, and came
short of being a Saint in the Popes Calendar.

To conclude, we have heard our Fathers say, it was a common phrase in their
days; No money, no Mass; No Penny, no Paternoster. Now, we marvel not the
Romish Clergy held that rule, seeing they here learned it of their holy Father,
who openly professes, he grants no Dispensations at all to them that are not
able to pay for them: nor any of this nature, but at an high, and exorbitant
price. And see how lovingly he gives the Proctors, and Sollicitors warning of
it, who bring him in his Reuenew, and bids them take heed, lest they being
Amici Curiae, should damnifie themselves by such fruitless undertakings. And
mark how this merciless man, the Pope, will not suffer the poor to be
partaker of his favors: they have no money for him, therefore has he no
mercy for them; Hereby declaring himself no friend nor follower of that God
with whom is no respect of persons, and of whom the Scripture says: The rich
and the poor meet together, Prou. 22.2.
the Lord is the maker of them both.

Nor is it (lastly) to be omitted, how profanely the Pope here abuses the
phrase of holy Scripture: for these words, Non sunt, ideo non possunt
consolari, are the words of the Holy Ghost both in the Old and New Testament,
speaking literally of Rachel mourning for her Children, and would not be
comforted, because they were not: and are here profanely perverted to their
covetous and carnal intention. Neither is this an unusual thing with them:
for like hereunto is that in their Canon Law, where, affirming the difference,
and distinction betwixt two Metropolitanes, they say, the one shall not
intermeddle within the others Province, quia Iudaei non conuersantum cum
Samaritanis. And too many more like examples their Schoolmen, and Canonists
do afford: all which declare the base conceit they hold of Gods holy Word, in
that they dare thus turn, and toss it up and down, as children do a ball,
or a shuttle-cocke from hand to hand. But let these fools play with this
Candle, till it burn them: for when they have done all that man, or devil can
do to uphold Popery, it is This Word of God, This breath of the Almighty, This
Spirit of his mouth, that shall consume, and confound it.

CHAP. V. Dispensations.
The Romish Text. A Dispensation, that one excommunicate, or that is a
Murderer; or for a man, or woman that are found hanged, that they may be
buried in Christian burial, comes to 1. Duc. 9. Carl. 6. Grosses.


English Observations.
THe ancient Laws, and Canons, not only Ecclesiastical, but Civil, forbid
Christian burial to all these three sorts of malefactors; and Christian
Religion well allows such prohibition, though not to hurt their souls, yet to
fear men from these foul offenses: But see to what little purpose: for here
the great Bumble-Bee, or rather the Romish Hornet, breaks through them all, as
through a Spiders web, to increase his revenue, and fill his coffers. And this
is much the fouler, in respect that in Jtaly there be so many murders, where
the least quarrel, suspicion, or jealousy, will cost a man his life. Again,
will not this make the perverse the longer to persist excommunicate: the
malicious care less for murder: and desperate fellons, less for their own
lives, when notwithstanding these great offenses, they may for money be buried
with the best? We appeal to God, and his holy Angels: if this be not a full
evidence of a most unholy Church, an unsound religion, and a loose licentious
graceless government.

CHAP. VI.
The Romish Text. A Dispensation for one that entered into his Benefice by
Simony, that he may notwithstanding still retain the same: his Dispensation
will cost him 6. Ducats.

But if he have received any profits of the living, he must for them compound
with the Datarie.


English Observations.
SImony has been the perpetual shame of the Roman Church these diverse
hundred years: Concilium delectorum Cardinalium. etc.
Their own nine Committees in the Council of Trent, cried out upon it to Paul
the third, as being utterly ashamed of it: But so far is the Romish Strumpet
from shaming with it, as here she cherishes the Simonists in her bosom, as
her white Sons; and for thirty, or forty shillings, dispenses with him to
keep that Benefice, which by the Laws of us English Heretics, is totally
taken from him, that so unlawfully came by it: and yet must we be filthy
Heretics, and profane Dogs, and She the only holy, and Catholic Church.

CHAP. VII. DISPENSATIONS for Nonage.
The Romish Text. A Dispensation for one under age to enter all holy Orders,
yea to be made Priest, will amount to 33. Grosses.

Also that he may be ordained of any Bishop, will cost him 33. Grosses more.

And to be ordained at any time of the year, will be no less then 54.
Grosses.


English Observations.
Mark (Christian Reader) of what Religion soever thou be, these three are all
Constitutions of their own, and though they be commendable, and needful in
the Church, yet amongst them, and by their Divinity, they stand by the
authority of Ecclesiastical Constitution: and yet see here the penalty of the
breach of them, how far it exceeds the breach of any of Gods holy
Commandments. Would it not be held incredible, if Calvin, or Luther had
reported it, that the deflowring of a Virgin, lying with Sister, Murder,
Perjury, Sacrilege, Simony, Revealing Confession, keeping a Concubine, and
lying with a woman in the Church, that all these nine hideous sins against
Gods express Law, should have no grearer a punishment (all put together) then
the breach of one of these Orders of their own? Or that to break this humane
Law of theirs, which commands ordination of Ministers to be at certain set
times, should more then ten times exceed the punishment of that villain that
lies with his own Mother? Verily, if their own words did not declare it, all
the world should not make us believe it of them, though they believe, and daily
diuulge of us, the foulest things that the idlest head, or lewdest liar of a
thousand will but devise of us.

Now for the breach of almost all the ten Commandments to be more easily past
over, than the breach of one of their own Orders, we appeal to the world of
indifferent men, if this proclaim them not true Pharisees, Hypocrites, who
vilific the Commandments of God, to magnify their own. Their sin testifies
to their face, that they esteem their own glory ten times more than the
glory of God. How just therefore is the judgment of the Highest upon this
cursed Synagogue, which is pronounced from heaven upon her in the Revelation!
How much she has glorified her self, Reu. 18.7.
and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.

Now, touching this particular, that the Reader may know the better how to
judge of the Religion and Church of Rome, in this point of dispensation for
Nonage, I will first set down what their Laws be in this case, and then
show how the Pope dispenses against their Laws. Their Canon Law stands thus:
1. FOr wills, or making ones will, it is required a man have 14. Years. A
Woman 12. Years.
2. For marriage, the same, or less, in case where malitia supplet aetatem. 3.
For a Contract, 7. Years. 4. For Dignities: A Bishop ought to be of 30.
Years. An Abbot, 25. Years. An Abbess, 30. Years. A Prior, with Covent or
Cure, 25. Years. But without, 20. Years. A Prebendary in a Collegiat Church,
10. Years. In a Cathedral Church, 14. Years.
5. For livings, or Benefices, for the taking of one, it suffices one be of
14. Years. For Chapels, 7. Years.
6. For holy Orders, first, A Priest must be of 25. Years. A Deacon, 20.
Years. A Subdeacon, 18. Years. For the other four inferior Orders, or
prima tonsura, it suffices one be of 7. Years.
7. For places of Judicature, An Inquisitor must be of 40. Years. A Judge, 18.
or 20. Years. A Proctor, 17. Years.



For these, and more, see Gambarus de off. and author. Legati a latere, lib. 7.
art. 417. Et Rebuff. praxi benef. lib. 1.

These be the ages required by their Laws, whereof some be reasonable, as for
a Priest to be 25. years old, and some few others. But many of these be
shamefully unreasonable, as namely, for one to be a Governor, a Prebendary, at
14, nay at ten years old: especially, for one to be made a Clergy man, or
rather a Clergy child, at seven years old, and consequently to be capable of
a Benefice, is it not a shame such a thing should be heard of in a Christian
State?

And yet, alas, as loose as these Laws be, and as unreasonable as those ages
be, that are allowed by Popish laws, yet comes the Pope, and will dispense
even against these Laws. If then these Laws be unreasonable, though they were
strictly observed, how abominable then be the Dispensations? Now that the Pope
does so, and that ordinarily and usually, harken what a French Papist both
confesses, and complains of in bitter terms: For, Rebuff. in prax. benef.
l. 1. p. 382. etc. Sciendum est circa Minorem multipliciter dispensari. Primo,
Minor ante 7. annos tonsuram accipere non potest, and sic nec beneficia habere,
and sic opus est Dispensatione: Et in huc vide la^ardae sunt iuris habenae, nam
hoc est contra ius Diunum, and quodammodo contra ius naturare, vt qu^^ qui
nescit, alios doc. al. At vae tibi qui cum istis dispensas, and qui datus es in
ruinam e^ a^ ^^^ct^onem multorum. Item Minorante 10. annos, est inhabilis vt
sit Canonicus (...) Et (...) Collegiatis and in Cathedr^tibus vel
Metrapolitanis, ante 14. quamobrem in hic casisus req. (...) Pop^ Dispensatis.
Dignitatem vero aut beneficia Curata, ante annos 25. Minor obtinere non potese
sine Dispensatione.
First, says he, One cannot by Law receive primam tonsura^ and take a
Benefice, till he be seven years old, unless he have a Dispensation: but
herein the Law must be shamefully strained; for this is both against Gods Law,
and the law of Nature, that he who cannot speak, should teach others. But
(says he to the Pope: for Frenchmen have been bold with him) woe be to
thee that thus dispensest: for thou art ordained for the ruin and destruction
of many. Again, that one under ten years should take a Prebendary in a
Collegiate Church, and under fourteen in a Cathedral, cannot be without the
Popes Dispensation: no more can any man have an Ecclesiastical Dignity or a
Benefice with Cure, under five and twenty.

Gambarus de offic. Legati. lib. 7. art. 451.
And, says an Jtalian Lawier, A Legate a latere cannot dispense with a
Prebendary under age, that he may be a Commissioner in great causes, for this
is a privilege of the Popes own: that is, says Rebuffus, he has a power to
send men to hell, more then any other, and himelfe with them.

Now for the real practice of this enormous abuse, he that reads the Canon
Law, and lives of the Popes and Cardinals, can tell, that Pope Leo was made a
Cardinal at 14. years old; and many Cardinals, and some Popes, at the same
age, or younger: and Rebuffus cites the whole Bull granted to one in his time,
Reb. Prax. benef. lib. 1. See the whole Bull in the end of the Book.
as a President for them that should seek the like: wherein Pope Julius grants
to a Noble man's son (who therefore you know was well able to pay soundly for
it) one Benefice before he was 15. years old, and leave to take another so
soon as he should be twenty. See, good Reader, what a Clergy the Romish
Church affoords, and marvel not if they be such feeders, and their sheep so
starued as they be, and as we read it bitterly complained of in some of their
own books: for if it be true in civil government, Eccles. 10.16.
Woe be to thee, O Land, where thy King is a child; then much more may we say in
the spiritual government of the Church, Woe to that Church where their Clergy
are children, and where boys of 15, 14, nay 10. yea 7. years, may for money
be made capable of holy Orders, and of the best Benefices in the Land.

CHAP. VIII. LICENSES.
The Romish Text. A License to eat flesh, butter, eggs and white meats in
Lent, and other fasting days or prohibited times, is rated at 7. Grosses.


English Observations.
WHo knows not, that knows what Popery is, how highly the Popish Fasts are
magnified, their virtue and merit extolled, and how it is held a mortal sin
to break those Fasts in the least degree; and what horrible Heretics we must
be, because we hold not with them herein? And is now all this turned into
smoke? And is it all no more but a matter of 7. Grosses? Parturiunt Montes: How
is the world abused with their Gulleries? How is the supposed glory of the
Carthusians for men and women, the Order of Saint Clare eclipsed? We, silly
fools, simply believed they meant as they spoke, and performed as they
professed, namely, that they never tasted flesh: But now we see our error: for
seeing ten shillings and sixepence will procure them a License, we dare say,
many of them will not want it. Again, the worlds ears are filled with their
lewd and loud noyses against us, of our carnality, looseness and
licentiousness in this kind: But if Books and Trauellours say true, more
meals are fasted in England in a year, then in the Jesuits Colleges in two:
And I believe, they who try do find, that a License here to eat flesh for
one year, is not so easily had, as at Rome for ones whole life, if they pay
the new Rates in the Exchequer.

CHAP. IX. Licenses for the Laity, and first for Kings and Princes.
The Romish Text. A License or Faculty, that a King or a Queen shall enjoy such
Indulgences, as if they went to Rome, will cost 200. Gross.

A License for a Queen to adopt a Child, is rated at 4000. Gross.

That a King or a Prince may exact Contributions of the Clergy, will cost 50.
Gross.

If the Contribution arise to 100000. Florens, then for the first 1000. 5.
Gross.

And for every other Floren, 1. Gross.

That a King, upon Christmas day morning, may cause a naked sword to be borne
before him, as it is before the Pope, 150. Gross.

That he who preaches before a King, may give an Indulgence to all that hear
him 12. Grosses.

That a Nobleman may go into a Monastery with a certain number of followers
12. Grosses.

That he may receive the Sacraments, or be buried in a Church interdicted 30.
Grosses.


English Observations.
COnsidering the Romish State stands more by policy than by holiness, it would
be a wonder to the wise, how they durst thus encroach upon the places and
prerogatives of Kings, were it not that the Holy Ghost has prevented it, by
telling us that she should make the Kings of the Earth drunk, Revel. 18.3.
and infatuated with her fornications. But seeing she is blinded, and so shall
be to her destruction, for my part I much more wonder, and hold it a deeper,
and more secret judgment of God, that some of the great Kings of the Earth
should lie so long in their Lethargy, and in this spiritual drunken slumber,
and do not rather rowze up themselves, as ours of England have done before
them, and say to themselves:

WHere are we? What do we? Where have we been? What has bewitched, and
blinded us so long? What makes us sit still, and suffer our selves to be of
their number, of whom it is said, Revel. 17.17.
The Kings of the earth have given their Kingdom to the Beast? which we would
never have done, had not we been turned, and transformed into beasts, by the
poisoned Cup of her abominatio^s? Let us at last see our selves, and know our
own, and for fear, and shame challenge and reassume to our selves that
Kingdom and power which God has given us, and we most basely have given from
us to this Beast, (or at least suffered him closely and by degrees to usurp
upon us, and steal it away) lest God, who gave it us, be justly angry with us,
for so little esteeming, and so basely bestowing that power which he so
bountifully bestowed on us: and holding us unworthy, as well of that we have,
as that we gave up to the Beast of Rome, do justly take it all from us, and
having confounded us together with him, do justly give it to such of his
friends as will use it to his glory, and not bestow it upon his enemies.

Thus, me-thinkes, I should hear the Kings of France, and Spain, and some
other Princes of Europe, speak to themselves, especially when they read the
seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth Chapters of the Revelation: Or, if he
will not let them look upon the Scriptures, yet, when they read that royal,
and friendly warning given them by the great KING of our Great-Brittaine, in
his learned, and Princely Premonition: At least when they do but look upon
this book of the Popes, which he purposely wrote for their sakes, and to
ensnare them, and prey upon them as well as others: How can they read it, but
wonder at themselves, that they should sit still, and suffer such base bondage
to be laid upon their necks. For, what a shame is it that a King should not
cause a naked sword to be borne before him at his pleasure, but he must ask
the Popes leave, and pay for it also, what his Popeship shall set down? Or
that a childelesse King, or Queen should not adopt one to themselves, (as
they, the Princes of their Blood, and States of their Kingdom shall think
good) without paying to the Pope so great a matter for the license? As though
he were their Sovereign Lord Peramount, of whom they held not only their
Crowns but even their succession, and continuance of their posterity;
especially how foul an absurdity is it, that a King, or Sovereign Prince,
may not upon his just occasions take Subsidies, and Contributions from his own
Clergy, but both by leave from the Pope, and also upon such conditions as his
pride, and covetousness shall impose upon him? What is this? Is this to be a
King? or rather but a piece of a King? and a shadow of a Sovereign? yet all
these, and many more such base encroachments, does this proud Antichrist here
impose upon them. And great pity is it but they should bear them, and far
more, and more base burdens than these, if they can be thus content to debase
themselves from that dignity God has invested in their Persons, and make
themselves underlings to him, over whom God has made them Commanders, and
Defenders, if they knew themselves. But as we see a weak Child ride, and
command a strong Horse, because he knows not his own strength, which if he
did, he would never endure his rider: So the Pope, and his wily Jesuits,
deal wisely for themselves, to keep these great Kings in ignorance, and
blind obedience, that so they may not see how basely they are ridden upon by
this grand encroacher, the Romish Tyrant, lest knowing their own strengths,
they cast the Rider into the dyrt, as he has long ago deserved.

Moreover, in as much as a great man may be buried when he dies, and whilst
he lives may receive the Sacraments in a Church interdicted, if he pay so
much money for it, here two things result that are obseruable. First, see how
unlike the Pope is to GOD, with whom there is no respect of persons in
spiritual things, and verily no more would there be in Popery, if they were
the true Church. Wherein, though great men, for civil order sake, have higher
places in the Church, yet have they not in Heaven, nor on Earth any better
title to the Word, or Sacraments, but every one fares according to his faith.
But in their Church, it is not according to thy faith, but, according to thy
money be it unto thee. Again, for to what little purpose their Laws be: By
Law, no Service, nor Sacraments may be in a Church interdicted, and its a just
Law, and a wholesome Constitution: But to what purpose serves this, when a great
Man for a piece of money can presently have a License to the contrary? It
seems the Romish Laws are but traynes, and devices to hook in money and
snares laid to catch men, wherein indeed poor men stuck fast, but the rich
with their money do easily break through.

CHAP. X. Licenses for others of the LAIC'S.
The Romish Text. A License to found an Hospital, is taxed at 16. Gr.

To found a Chapel, at 16. Gr.

To erect a Church Parochial 20. Gr.

A Church Collegiate 40. Gr.

A Cathedral Church 50. Gr.

To found a Deanery in the same 20. Gr.

A Conouray, or a Prebend 16. Gr.

To erect an University, is rated at 150. Gr.

To have leave to translate it from one place to another, will cost 60. Gr.

To make a City of a Town, and therein to erect a Bishops Sea, will cost
1000. Gr.

That a Town may have a School kept in the Parish Church, will cost 30. Gr.

That a City may coin Money 500. Gr.

That a Town which has used green Wax in their Seal, may use red 50. Gr.

A License for a Layman to choose his Confessor, will cost 10. Gr.

To marry in times prohibited 10. Gr.

To eat flesh in times forbidden 16. Gr.

Not to be tied to Fasting-dayes 16. Gr.

To have a portable Altar 10. Gr.

To have Mass in a place interdicted 10. Gr.

Leave to go into a Nunnery alone 12. Gr.

To have leave to divide a dead body into two, to be buried in two places, will
cost 12. Gr.

That during the interdict of a Town, the Officers may have Mass, and Service
in a Chapel, will cost 50. Gr.

That a Town may have power to take out of the Church them that take
Sanctuary therein 60. Gr.


English Observations.
WHat is this? cannot good devout Laymen found Hospitalls, Churches, Chapels,
Schools, Universities, etc. but, besides License from their lawful Princes,
must they also send to Rome for another? And not only ask the Pope leave to
do so good a deed, but also pay so dear for it? Christ tells us of the
Pharisees, how they impose great burdens on other men, but themselves will not
touch them with one of their fingers. Are not these their true Successors, who
care not what they lay load upon the Laity, whilst themselves live in ease and
liberty, upon the swhat of their labors? When I first read this, and seriously
considered of this Subject, it put me in mind of an ancient Book, venerable
for antiquity, but much more memorable for the good conceit, and wise intention
of it, called Ponitentiarius Asini; wherein the Authors invention supposes
that the Ass, the Wolf, and the Fox, come all together to Confession;
understanding by the wily Fox, and ravenous Wolf, the two sorts of the Romish
Clergy, the Secular, and the Regular, and by the silly Ass, the Laity: All
these agree to go to Shrift together: The Ass at first, though he liked
Confession well enough, yet had he no great stomach to go with such
Companions: Which they perceiving, craftily laid down their pride, power, and
policy, and fell upon him with fair words: Come brother Ass (say they) we
are going to a holy business, even to Confession, and we shall be glad to
have your company, which we desire not for our selves, but only for your own
good: We know there be many Heretics abroad, but we presume you are a good
Catholic, and will readily, and roundly come to Confession: Come therefore
with us, and be sure you can take no hurt in our company. The honest silly Ass
was soon seduced with there golden words, and therefore being thus kindly
invited, he trusted himself unto them, and so together they went to Confession.

The Fox confesses to the Wolf, what store of Geese and Pullaine: The Wolf
to the Fox, what number of Lambs, and Sheep they had devoured: but one of
them patiently hears, and kindly excuses the other. Alas, brother, says one
to the other, there was (I know) some great necessity, or some other good
reason why thou did it, for either those villains did abuse thee, some way
troubled and molested thee, or some other ways provoked thy patience, or else
happily thou wast sore hunger-bitten, and then why should not they serve thy
necessity: for, what were they made for, but for their betters, and being
hungry, what service can they do for us, rather than feed us? And why has God
given one of us wit, and the other strength, but to make use of it for our own
behoof? Therefore when it came to the point of Penance, as in the Confession,
and examination they had one clawed the other, so you may be sure they laid
full light, and easy penance one upon another. For example, the Fox must fast
with one Goose a day, and the Wolf with one Lamb: This and other such like
pitiful penance enjoined they one another, and then the one gives the other
absolution: and thus all was well.

The good Ass standing by, who all this while was in great fear, began now to
take heart to himself, for when he had observed so much rapine, and bloodshed
confessed on both sides, and, absolution given upon such easy penance, he then
plucked up his heart, and presumed all should go well with him, knowing
himself guilty of no such crimes: for the plain honest Ass, that lived by
his hard labor, bare his burdens safely, and did his work faithfully, though
but slowly; and took much, but did little wrong, had no great matters to
confess, yet he dealt plainly, and said, Sometime he trespassed his
Neighbors, by reaching over the low hedge, and cropping some of the Thistles
that grew in the next pasture: Sometimes he did more, eating a mouthfull of
grass by the highway side: Sometime, when a load of Hay went through the
Streets, and he very hungry, he had been so bold to pluck a mouthfull out
of the Cart. O, say his Ghostly Fathers, what foul faults, and grievous
trespasses have we heard? The first is against thy Neighbor; and the second
against the Lord of the soil; but the third is against the public peace, and
no less then plain Robbery on the highway side: Thou must therefore look for
bitter penance for so grievous crimes. But, Brother Ass, say they, if thou
look for comfort, and absolution at our hands, deal truly with thy own
soul, and do as we did, confess all.

The Ass, hoping to find and fare the better for his freeness: Indeed, says
he, my good Fathers, there is one thing much troubles my conscience, and lies
full heavy upon my heart; On a time, a certain Pilgrim in going to Rome,
chanced to lie in our Stable, upon the Straw; and I being pitifully pincht
with hunger, presumed to eat two or three mouthfuls of the Litter, that lay
under his feet, as he was asleep; and alas, says he, my soul is sorry for
it: I therefore beseech you deal well with me, and grant me absolution. The
wily Fox, and wicked Wolf, suddenly seeming much amazed, blessed themselves,
and hypocritically compassing their Countenances to gravity, and sorrow, held
up their hands and eyes, and cried out Immensum scelus: O the most horrible,
and foulest fact that has been heard of in an age. Alas brother, how sorry
are we for thee? we would be glad to give thee absolution; but alas, alas, we
fear thy fault is so foul, that it is beyond our power far to absolve thee:
for thou have not only robbed and assaulted a man, asleep; but which is far
more, a holy Pilgrim, and which is most of all, one that went a Pilgrimage to
the holy, and Apostolical See; so as this trespass, and transgression of
thine trencheth, we fear, even upon the Sea Apostolic, and touches even the
prerogative of his Holiness, who therefore only in this case has power to
absolve thee. The poor Ass put into this perplexity, not knowing what to
do, committed himself unto them as his Ghostly Fathers; who taking the
advantage of his tenderness of Conscience, consulted together how to prey upon
him by degrees, until at last they quite devoured him.

The Moral of this Tale is manifest, declaring how even diverse hundredth years
ago, wise men did well observe, how the wicked carnal Clergy of Rome, both
Regular, and Secular, did shave the poor plain Laity at their pleasures, and
at last shared him betwixt them; And how the greatest crimes in themselves were
nothing, but the smallest Molehils in the Laity were Mountains: And that they
will easily, and lightly absolve one another, for cruelties, Murders,
Coozenages, Robberies, Whoredoms, Adulteries, and Villainies of all sorts;
because as ready as they are to sin, so are they also one to confess, and
absolve another: But when the honest, and well-meaning Layman comes under their
clutches, then one of them laughes and winkes upon another, one gives warnings,
and watch words to another (as here did the Fox and the Wolf together) that
now they have some good fat Ass under hand, who may well part with a good
collup, and yet still be fat enough: Therefore all his faults must be foul and
horrible, his errors must be aggrauated and enlarged, and twenty devices, and
difficulties must be found out, why the poor penitent Ass must have no
absolution, till he have past all the pikes of penance, and paiments, which
those cruel Wolves and wily Foxes shall impose upon him.

This Chapter gives us another full evidence, little differing from the former,
wherein the Pope, and his Clergy show themselves no table shauers of the
Laity, seeing they can do nothing without leave, nor can they have leave, but
must pay well for it. They may not so much as have a School kept in their
Parish Church, but must pay soundly for it. If it be not fitting to keep a
School in a Church, why may they do it for Silver? if it be, why should they
pay any thing for it at all? Nay, a Town that has used to seal with green
Wax, must not, under a great price, have leave to use red Wax: who ever, till
now, dreamed of any such difference betwixt the colors of Wax: Yet this is a
color good enough to work out a sound deal of Silver out of the purse of a
poor Town, though we know well, that as great a King as the World has, uses
always in his greatest Seal, neither red nor green, but yellow Wax.

Nay, moreover, they may not do good works, even of the best, and highest
nature: they may not found a Hospital, a Chapel, a Parish Church, a Church
Collegiate, a Cathedral Church, but they must pay dearly for their license,
and still the better, and greater the work is, they must pay the dearer for
it, as though it were a fault amongst them to do well. And if any great man
be so bravely minded, as to erect an University, which is not only a public
work, for the general good, but one of the most excellent, and honorable that
ever was attempted, and performed by man, yet must he not have leave to do it,
but the Pope will have one hundred, and fifty Grosses, which rather then he
will want, a whole Country shall want so great a blessing for them, their
children, and posterity. And if after the License be obtained, and paid for, it
appear upon better consideration, more for the general good of the Country,
to be in some other City, or Town; yet may not the Founder remove it, unless
he also pay a new fine for that, as though it were not lawful to do the World
a pleasure.

Now if the case stand thus, that in those good, and holy works, and which are
of a public, and universal goodness, one cannot have power to do them, but
must pay for it; we then marvel not, if they pay for their liberty in private,
and personal things; as to choose his Confessor, to marry in forbidden times,
to eat flesh in Lent, to be freed from fasting days, and the like: Yet it may
seem a hard and strange case, that when a man may freely choose his Lawyer for
his business, and his Physicion for his body, who he will, yet he may not
choose his Confessor for his soul, without a round Composition.

But one question rises here, of so strange a nature, that if our
Quodlibeticall Masters of Cullen, and Louane will not determine it, I then wish
that some of our devout Catholics, who intend to trudge to Rome to the holy,
holy, joyful Iubilee (to gain the glorious Indulgences of that happy year)
would carry this question with them, and propou^d it either to the Auditors of
the Wheel, or to the Fathers of the holy Society, or if they will, to the
College of Cardinals, to know what holy Roman mystery may be in the matter,
that a man cannot build a Church, a Hospital, a University, but pay so dear
for his License, but may build a Stewe freely, or twenty, if he will: We
should be glad to know how his Holiness will resolve this question.

But it is yet more strange to us, that he dare impose so huge a fine, as a
thousand Grosses, for making a City of a Town, and therein erecting a Bishops
See: for Bishoprics are never barely erected, but endowed also with fair
Lands, and large Possessions, and those Lands come generally from the Laity:
but the Bishopric, which receives those Lands, belongs ever to the Clergy,
and yet must the Laity, be it Prince, Lord, City, or Town, that will thus
fleece themselves to feed, and fat the Popes Clergy, give a thousand Grosses
to have leave to do it; so cunningly can the Pope play his game: or rather
into such a blind obedience, and sottish obsequiousness, had they captiuated
the World, that he can make them glad to pay dear for weakening themselves, and
strengthening him to impouerish themselves, and enriching him: But we hope that
England, and Germany have taught the world to be a little wiser hereafter.

Another point seems also strange, namely, that he is content to grant a City
License to coin their own money, seeing that is always Insigne Maiestatis, a
sign of Sovereignty, and a prerogative which we have seldom seen any King in
the World would part withal on any terms; yet five hundred Grosses will
compass it at Rome: By which it appears, most of the Popes, though they be
advanced to royal dignity, and advance themselves even above the greatest
Kings; yet as they were born, and bred basely, so that baseness will not
easily be worn, or wrought out; for otherwise they would shame to part with
so fair a piece of their Prerogative Royal for a little money.

As for those other two particulars, that during the Interdict of a Town,
certain great men, or Officers may have Service, and Sacraments in a Chapel,
for 50. Grosses; and that a Town may have power to take out of the Churches,
such as take Sanctuary therein for 60. Both which are absolutely against two
ancient and fundamental Rules of their own Religion: these afford us an ample
evidence, how truly and justly, not only the Pasquils, and Poets, but even the
grauest sort of men complained and cried out of her, that Omnia venalia Romae:
All Laws divine, and humane, Gods and their own, are daily bought and sold,
made and unmade for money.

But here is one particular plungeth us plain people, and puts us all to
School; namely, that for money one may have leave to divide a dead body in
two, to be buried in two places. What meaning or Mystery may be in this, we
confess, will not enter into our gross conceits, seeing it is lawful for
every man to dispose his body in burial to one or more places at his pleasure:
But thus it pleases the Pope, even thus unreasonably to load the Laity, that
loving Ass; which like old Isachar has many years crouched and groned betwixt
the 2. burdens of the Secular, and Regular Romish Clergy.

But let no man trouble himself to inquire what Henry the 4. of France paid for
dividing his heart to the Jesuits, and leaving his heartlesse carcass to lie
amongst the former French Kings: for I dare say, the Jesuits so loved both his
head, and his heart, that to have one of them off, and the other out of his
body, they would not spare both to pay the price themselves, and to bestow
great cost upon the burial.

CHAP. XI. Licenses for the Clergy.
The Romish Text. A License for a Priest to say Mass in any place, is rated at
27. Grosses.

A License for a Bishop to visit, 40. Grosses.

To take to himself a years proffits of every vacant Benefice for 3. years.
50. Gross.

To exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction out of his Diocese, 30. or 40. Grosses.

To have leave to exact a Subsidy, or a Benevolence of his Clergy, 20. Gross.

A Faculty to absolve all Delinquents, and to dispense for Irregularity. 40.
Gross.


English Observations.
ANd here (good Reader) upon consideration of the general nature of all
these, appears more plainly the truth of that, the observation upon the former
Chapter does affirm, if thou will but observe and compare these Rates the
Clergy pays for these extraordinary favors, with the price the Laity pays
for those ordinary, and common commodities, of which also some do serve the
Clergies turn more then the Laities. For (to instance in a particular or two)
for a Bishop to have a License to take a years profit of every vacant Benefice
in his Diocese, or to have leave to exact a Subsidy, or a benevolence of all
his Clergy; how much the less of these may amount unto, I will not take upon
me to set down, and if I would, I cannot: yet the License for the better of
these, arises but to 50. Grosses, which is but some 4. pounds; whereas, for a
Queen to have License to adopt a Child, must cost her 4000. which comes to 300
pound; and when she has it, she thereby does good to others, but none to her
self. And for any of the Laity to have leave to erect an University, which is
as much for the benefit of the Clergy as of the Laity, must cost him 150.
which is triple as much: And to erect a Bishopric, which must be a huge
charge to the Laity, but the benefit redounds only to the Clergy, must cost
1000. Grosses, that is, almost fourscore pounds; such unequal Judges are they
betwixt themselves, and the poor Laity. And is it not strange presumption to
make a King both ask leave, and pay dear for a License, that he may take a
Contribution of his Clergy that be his own Subjects, and so lightly to give
leave to the Bishops to exact it of the Clergy, who be but their Brethren?
Thus these men do boldly show themselves the true Successors of the Jewish
Clergy; for, as we see here, they corporally, as well as spiritually, lay
heavy burdens upon others; but make them most light, and easy to themselves.

Now touching these particulars, that a Priest may have a power, or a License
to say Masses in all places, for 27. Grosses, is even cheap enough: and yet it
had not been so much, but that they well know he is able to bring that in
again in a week, nay in a day, and happly in half an hour.

But will some say, What may it cost him to have a License to preach in all
places? The Answer is easy; There Is no such License at all to be obtained on
any conditions: for preaching of Gods Word is no pillar of the Popes Kingdom;
but contrariwise for diverse hundredth years has been either persecuted, or
prohibited, or at least so limited, altered and ordered, that the Jesuits, and
some few such have a Monopoly of it to themselves, so as not one Priest of a
thousand gets any License at all, and they that do, have their times, their
matter, their Method, and order, and almost all other circumstances prescribed
unto them, and they are all directed to sing this one song, that howsoever
preaching may be of some use in Lent, and now and then upon occasions; yet it is
nothing so excellent in it self, nor so profitable to the people, though it be
never so plain, and powerful, as is the hearing of a Mass, though in an
unknown tongue: and if any be so bold as to make comparison, and to say
otherwise, as Father Lobo did once before Pope Gregory the 13. Vide
Recantationem Martini (...).
he is sure to be silenced for his labor all the days of his life, as was the
foresaid Friar.

As to the next point, that a Bishop should pay 40. Grosses for a License to
visit, is nothing so strange to us, as that he should pay any thing at all: for
what is a Bishop, if he have not power of himself to visit, even by his
Consecration, and admission to be Bishop? But this shows that to be true we
have often heard, and read, even that the Bishops in Popery, are indeed, and
truth no better then slaves to the Pope, who, as at the first, they have by
Romish Rules, their very being from him, as his Creatures, and the work of his
hands; so he expects that they should serve him and his turns in all things, to
which end he will not so much as have them to move, or stir, no not to keep
their Visitation, which is their own proper motion, and in their own Orb,
until first they have their license, and authority from him: It seems this
wicked Antichrist, who dare call himself a Vice-God upon earth, does labor
herein to be like unto God, of whom Religion teaches, that, In him we l ue,
and move, and have our being. Act. 17.28.


But for the third Branch, wherein he gives them leave for money to take a
years profit of every vacant Benefice, therein he shows his shameful
injustice, and partiality, not caring (it seems) how; so he may enrich
himself, and his Clergy: for, not to stand upon the quantity, how great a
matter this must needs amount unto, that which most amazeth us is, the
foulness of the means, and manner by which it is gotten; for, to keep a
Benefice vacant for a year, and take the profits to himself, as it first must
needs be a piece of personal injustice to the next Incumbent, to whom of
right they do belong; so can it not but be a far fouler, and more general
injustice, to make the people, for his base lucre sake, to want a Pastor for so
long a time. Is this to be a Bishop, a feeder, a Pastor of Souls; yea, a
Pastor of them that are the Pastors of Souls? Alas for that miserable people
who are fed with such Pastors? And here we may observe 1. good reason of that
bitter word of learned Espencaeus, who, speaking of this Book, affirms, that
it will teach a man to be naught, though he were not, or would not be of
himself: for verily, not one Bishop of ten could be so basely covetous, or so
presumptuously wicked of himself, as once to dream of taking to himself a
years profit of every vacant Benefice in his Diocese. But lest he should
want either wickedness, or wit to entertain so base a thought, his spiritual
Master, Extra Io. 22. cap. came ^^^^^m g^^
his Lord god the Pope here takes order to instruct him in it, not only
telling him that he may have a License to do it for money; but also, lest he
should be discouraged by the greatness of the price, for so great a favor, he
tells him aforehand it shall cost him but 50. Grosses, though happly he may get
by it 50000. in some one year. Alas, what a lamentable case it is, to see the
Christian World blinded, and misled by such wicked ravenous Wolves, under the
name, and fair title of Pastors of the Church! for if this trick and practice
of the Pope, and his Clergy, be not an evident sign of men given over to
their own lusts and slaves to filthy lucre, and such as care not to sell the
very souls of men, to feed themselves, and fill their own purses; we
appeal to the judgment of all reasonable men; yea, even of all honest Papists
in the world: and so we leave them to the judgment of the high, and just God;
and were it not that we hold them to be the public enemies of God, our souls
would grieve to think of the confusion, which we are sure, and the surer by
this one practice of theirs, does infallibly wait for them.

And for the next Branch, that for a Bishop to exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction
out of his Diocese, must cost him 30. or 40. Grosses, we also say, the quality
of the favor considered, its cheap enough; nor do we marvel, if the Pope
deal so tenderly, and kindly with them, whom he holds members of his own
body: But that which would trouble any honest heart, is to consider, how he
that pretends to be, and makes the poor Papist believe he is the Vicar of
Christ, the Father of the Church, and the great Shepherd of Souls, and
consequently under God, the great establisher of all good Order, and the keeper
of all men in compass and good order, should thus, in stead of Order, make way
to all confusion, by confounding of Jurisdictions, and giving leave for one to
encroach upon another; which appears by this that is to be done every day at
Rome for money, though in all well governed Churches it is never done at all,
but upon very special consideration, and never at all for money.

But for the last, that a Bishop may have a faculty to absolve all Delinquents,
yea and to dispense in the case of irregularity, for 40. Grosses, is most
gross, and foul, if it be meant of such Irregularity as is duly and
deservedly incurred by moral crimes, Irregularity, take it either as malam
culpae, or poenae: for sometimes it may be legally incurred, and yet sine
crimene.
and infamous actions, which by the Laws of God, and man do disable the
delinquent from decent and profitable use of his holy Calling. But all is one,
if it were ten times greater, we see it is all nothing as long as the Pope is
thus permitted to encroach upon the World; for so long, all Canons, and
Councels shall be but Spider-webs; through which all Offenders (who like great
Flies, do fly with golden wings) shall easily break.

See here how little wonder it is, that there is so great an inundation of
sins more venail then venial in the Popish Churches: seeing not only the
Pope himself and his Legates, but even every Bishop that will, may have power
to absolve all Delinquents; yea, even to dispense with that which they account
the highest crime, or disabilitie even Jrregularity.

And lastly, judge by this, how justly Guicciardine complained, and how true a
report he made of the miserable means and shameful, tricks Pope Leo used to
gather in gold, for his most unreasonable, and many of them dishonorable and
dishonest occasions of expense. But if Guicciardine had staid his Pen, and
Luther, and Calvin had held their tongues; or if Espencaeus his books were all
burnt; this Book alone were evidence enough to prove all this: And therefore,
as we marvel not, that she made this Book, knowing her as we do, so we
cannot but marvel with Espencaeus, they should be so besotted as to diuulge
it, had not God from heaven told us, Esaias 57.20.
that the wicked is like the raging Sea, which foameth out his own shame.

CHAP. XII. INDVLGENCES.
The Romish Text. An Indulgence, for an Hospital or Chapel, which Indulgence
is to last for one year, will cost 16. Gr.

For two years, 20. Gr.

For three years, 24. Gr.

For four years, 30. Gr.

For five years, 40. Gr.

For seven years. 50. Gr.

An Indulgence for remission of the third, part of ones sins, 100. Gross.


English Observations.
THe practice and use of Indulgences is one of the great props, and Policies of
the Romish State. The Doctrine of them is so dangerous, and tender a piece, as
Bellarmine himself made dainty to touch it, fearing on the one side to trench
upon one of the Popes highest Prerogatives, on the other, to betray the truth,
and set his own Conscience upon the Tenters: He therefore wisely omitted it in
the course of those his readings, which he afterward printed, and it seems
would very willingly have been totally spared in that business; therefore he
not only not handled it in his proper place, and time, but shifted it off from
year to year, till at last the great Secular Iubilee of 1600. hasting on, he
was then enjoined (the better to make ready for the market) to write of that
Subject, which he durst no longer deny, especially at that time, unless he
would have discovered himself too far, and incurred a dangerous suspicion:
Most of all, this he confesses, and implies in his Preface to that Book,
and wittily puts it off, but how cleanly and truly: let the Reader judge.

Moreover, it may be good sport to a judicious Reader, to observe in his
Books how the Romish Proctors that write of Indulgences, cannot agree in many
maine things: As touching the ground of them, namely, the treasure of the
Church, whether there be any such treasure at all: Then, if there be such a
treasure, whether to the making of it up, there need, beside Christ's, the
merits, and satisfactions of Saints also, and if they do concur, then how
they can be pieced, or mixed together. Then for the nature of an Indulgence,
whether it be Solutio, or Absolutio, a payment of a debt, or a discharge from
the payment, or both. And for the extent of it, whether it discharge a man
only from punishment, and penance, or from the guilt also; and whether only
before the Church, or before God also, and whether it discharge a man of all
penances enjoined only, or from all such also as might, or ought to have been
enjoined. And whether Jndulgences help only the living, or can do some good
to the dead also that be in Purgatory: And if they do; then, whether by
Absolution, and discharge, or only by way of suffrage. Also, whether by way of
Justice and desert, or only out of Gods mere mercy and favor: And whether
they help all that be in Purgatory, or those only for whom they are intended:
And whether they help any who do not all they can to help themselves: And
whether an Indulgence of so many days, or years will answerably deliver one
for as many years, or days in Purgatory: And whether any shall, or ought
abide in Purgatory more then twenty years at the utmost: And if an Jndulgence
be granted to take place at the point of death, and the taker be in danger of
death, but do recover; whether then the same Indulgence shall be effectual
again when he comes to dye indeed.

Moreover, for the kinds, and varieties of Jndulgences, how many they be, and
what is the true difference of one kind from another: And for the conditions
required in the receiver, to make them effectual: what, and how many they be:
And lastly, for the authority of granting them, whether only the Pope; or,
whether also a general Council may not grant them as well, or rather then the
Pope: And if the Pope can give any true Jndulgences indeed; then, whether
Bishops can not as well give them within their Jurisdictions.

These, and many more, no marvel if we either deny or make doubt of, when
they cannot yet accord them among themselves; but their very principal
Champions are divided: And Bellarmine himself is upon consideration hereof so
amazed, as he seems in some measure even besides himself, and not the same
man in this Book, Bellarmin. de Indulgenntiis, lib. 1. cap. 13.
he shows himself in others. Take a taste or two: This opinion (says he)
is profitable, good and godly, and yet peradventure is not true. See what a
Paradoxe is here: if it be true; what is it but false? and if false; how can
it be good and godly? Can any opinion in Religion be called profitable, or
held wholesome and godly, that is not true? Can Piety, and Falsity stand
together? And in another place, having largely laid down the diversity of
opinions, Lib. 1, cap. 12. 1.
in a point of Jndulgences, at last coming to resolve it, and set down the
truth, he says, These two opinions may happly in some sort be reconciled.
See, peradventure they may be reconciled: and, if they be; how? but in some
sort: a poor reconcilement! and yet, even that also is upon a peradventure:
Such reconcilements of their differences we envy them not.

Again, in that greatest point of Indulgences, which is, Whether they profit
the Souls in Purgatory? he raises six Questions; of which the fourth (says
he) is the most difficult of all, namely, Whether (if they do releive them)
is it of Justice, or only of Gods mercy? Wherein (he says) there be two
opinions, one just contrary to another, and produces great Authors for them
both: and having argued them at large; at last, coming to determine the
Question, and satisfy the Reader; here is his resolution in these very
words: Bellarm. lib. ^. cap. 14.
Of these two opinions J dare reprove neither: for, the former seems very
godly; the latter, very reasonable. Is not here a learned determination and
well beseeming a Doctor of the Chair? and a resolution of a most difficult
Question, fit to proceed from a Reader of Romish Divinity?

Mark (good Reader) these three passages; and judge whether the good man was
not confounded, and amazed, when he wrote this Book, and dined so deep into
this troubled Ocean of Indulgences: In a word, when a judicious Reader has
advisedly gone over that Book, and observed how the Romish Doctors disagree in
every point of Doctrine touching Indulgences, he will then be of his mind
that said, Bellarmine in that Book had raised up more Spirits then he, and
many Jesuits to help him, shall ever be able to conjure down again.

But, leaving them wandering in the wilderness, and wallowing in the Sea of
their miserable uncertainties; I will go forward something further to inform
my Contrymen in the vanity, inualidity, and impiety, of Romish. Indulgences.
And first observe (good Reader) that they make five sorts of Indulgences.

The first is, when certain days, or years of Indulgences are granted.

The second is the Jndulgence of a Lent, which they sometime call a Quarantaine.

The third is, when a man has an Indulgence for a half, or a third, or a
fourth part of his sins.

The fourth is called a Plenary.

The fifth, is called a plenary, a more plenary, and a most plenary, in form
of a Iubilee.

To shape out, and describe the true natures of these five, and to set down
true and real differences betwixt them, it is both sport and pity to see how
Bellarmine sweats and struggles; and yet, when he has done, he is so far
from satisfying the Reader, as he may see he satisfies not himself.

Observe again, how strangely Indulgences are granted; for upon the very same
cause (says he) sometime larger, and sometime lesser, Jndulgences are given:
and sometime the largest, even a Plenary, upon a most slight and little
occasion, as for example, When the Pope gives a Plenary to all persons present
at the doors of Saint Peter's in the Vatican; when he gives his solemn Blessing
upon Easter day: Now doubtless, here is a great reward, for a little service;
or else Indulgences are toys, not worth taking up.

Moreover, the Jesuit cannot deny, but that Soto, a late learned Spaniard, and
famous Gerson before him, to cover the Popes shame, were content to believe
that the huge Indulgences of 10. and 20000. years, were never indeed granted
by the Pope, but forged by those base fellows that follow those Suits, called
his Quaestores, or Quaestuarii: and in his own conscience (it seems) he
could be of the same opinion; yet that he also may cry with the greater
company, Great is Diana of the Romans, he will not give way to these two more
honest then himself; but refusing them, strains his wit, to prove that the
Popes themselves not only do, but with good reason may grant Jndulgences, for
10. and 20000. years: Nay, so far is he besotted with the love, or inated
with fear of offending this Romish Strumpet, as he will needs defend these
foul exorbitances, although he cannot but confess, that the eldest, and
holiest Popes of all gave no Indulgences at all, Veteres parcissimos fuisse in
Indulgentiis conferendis notissimum est. Bellar. l b. 1. cap. 12.
and those of the after-Ages, and middle time since Christ, granted them very
rarely, and for very little time, as Paschalis the second gave but one
Indulgence, and that was but for forty days; and Sergius the second was held
very bountiful, who granted one for three years: And in the more corrupt and
audacious days of Innocent the third, he himself confesses, that his
Predecessors did not extend their Jndulgences above the space of forty days,
or one year at most; therefore he himself, as bold and busy as he was,
would reach no further. And after him, Nicolas the fourth, though he gave
diverse to the new Church of Saint Praxede in Rome, yet exceeded he not in any
of them the foresaid compass of one year, or 40. days. What means this man
to make known these things, and yet to defend them that do the contrary? for
what is it to approve these, but to reprove the other?

And seeing the Jesuit defends the granting of Indulgences for 10. 15. and
20000. years, we now desire some of those zealous Romish Catholics, whose
either devotion, or curiosity carries them to the Jubilee; that, seeing
Bellarmine is dead, The Book is entitled, Horoe beat^ssimae Virginis Mariae
ad legitimum Sarisburiensis Ecclesiae ritam, cum 15. orationibus beatae
Brigittae, ac multis alias orationibus pulcherri^is and Indulgentiis, etc.
Parisiis. 1529.
they would inquire of their holy Fathers, and Confessors, whether they may not
as well believe that they shall as well enjoy the Jndulgence of 32000. years
for creeping up the 32. steps of Pilats stairs, which they say are now in
Rome, and are the same by which Christ was carried to his trial? and farther;
whether they may not as well believe that Prayer-Booke, which a little before
the reformation of Religion was printed for them by the Popes authority in
Latin, and English, wherein it is affirmed of a little short Prayer there set
down, that, Our holy Father Sixtus the fourth, Pope, has granted to all them
that devoutly say this Prayer before the Image of our Lady, the sum of eleven
thousand years of Pardon.

Then follows the Prayer, which is scarce half eleven lines in length, and
therefore doubtless is very well worth saying, seeing every half line is paid
with 1000. years of pardon.

And the same Book affirms of another Prayer, thus, Our holy Father Pope John
the 22. has granted to all them that devoutly say this Prayer after the
elevation, 3000. days of Pardon for deadly sins.

This Pope, though more sparing for the time, yet is he more bountiful for
the matter, seeing his Pardon extends even to deadly sins.

And of another Prayer, Our holy Father Pope Boniface the 6. has granted to
all them that say devoutly this Prayer at large, between the elevation of our
Lord, and the three Agnus Dei's, ten thousand years of pardon.

And touching an Image of Christ on the Cross, that Book says; To all them
that before this Image of pity devoutly say 5. Pater nosters, 5. Aues, and one
Credo, pitteously beholding these arms of Christ's passion, are granted 32755.
years of pardon. And (lest any should think this too little, seeing there be
many prayers put in one, it is said) Pope Sixtus the fourth has doubled this
aforesaid Pardon, which amounts to 65410.

And of another Prayer, the Book says, that Pope John, at the request of the
Queen of England, granted to all them that devoutly say this Prayer before the
Image of our Lord crucified, as many days of pardon, as there were wounds in
the body of our Lord in the time of his bitter Passion, which were, 5465.

And in another place thus of the Aue Maria; Our holy Father Pope Sixtus the
fourth, at the instance of Queen Elizabeth, wife to Henry the 7. granted out
of the spiritual treasure of holy Church, that who so shall say at the 3.
tollings of the Aue-Bell, 3. Aue Maria's; that is, at six a clock in the
morning three, and at noone three, and at six a clock at night three, shall
have for every Aue, 860. days of pardon, which amounts in one day to about
8000. days, and in a year, to diverse hundreths of thousands of years.

And the Book says, That this grant of the Popes was strengthened and
augmented by the two Metropolitans of England, and nine Bishops with them. At
which we marvel not; for certainly our Bishops might as well confirm it, as
he grant it, and to as good purpose add more, as he gave so much. And of
another Prayer the Book says, This Prayer ye shall say in the worship of all
the blessed members of Christ devoutly, and ye shall have 300. days of pardon
for every Salve, Now there be 13. Salue's in that Prayer.

And of another Prayer containing 5. short petitions, the Book says, These 5.
Petitions, and Prayers made Saint Gregory, and has granted unto all them that
devoutly say these 5. Prayers with 5. Pater nosters, 5. Aue Maria's, and a
Credo, 500. years of pardon.

And of another Prayer the same Book says, This Prayer is made by our holy
Father Pope John the 22. and he has granted to all them that devoutly say it,
beholding the glorious visage of our Lord, 10000. days of pardon: and they
that cannot say this Prayer (for it is in Latin) let them say 5. Pater
nosters, 5. Aue's, and 5. Credo's.

And of another short Prayer little longer then an Aue: Thus Alexander the 6.
Pope of Rome has granted to all them that say this Prayer devoutly, in the
worship of Saint Anna, and our Lady and her Son Jesus, 10000. years of
pardon for deadly sins, and 20. for venial, totiens, quotiens.

And of another Prayer to be said, as one goes through a Churchyard, the same
Book says,

Johannes Papa 12. concessit omnibus dicentibus orationem sequentem transeundo
per Cemilerium, to^ antes Indulgentiarum; quot fuerunt ibi corpora inhumata a
constitutione ipsius Cemiterij.
Pope John the 12. granted to all that shall say the Prayer following as they
pass by any Churchyard, as many years of Indulgences as there have been
bodies there buried since the Consecration of the said Churchyard.

And no matter though this John the 12. was a most wicked and monstrous man, as
all Stories testify; for no doubt he had for all that as good power to grant
these Indulgences, as any other of his fellows. And to draw to an end of these
endless Indulgences, take one more, good Reader, which is an endless one
indeed, namely, one that holds hundreds, and thousands of years nothing, but
gives a whole million at once: for my part, I should not hold my self worthy
of belief in so transcendent a relation, if the Book it self, and the very
words were not extant to all the worlds view: for I am sure the Book was once
as common amongst the Papists, as is now the office of our Lady; and if their
later policies have suppressed it, it will but redound the more to their shame,
for it is yet fair, and perfect to be seen. Ibid. fol. 73. Sacellum sanctae
Crucis septem Romanorum.
The very words are these:

These 3. Prayers be written in the Chapel of the holy Cross in Rome,
otherwise called the Chapel of the holy Cross of the 7. Romans: who that
devoutly say them, they shall obtain X.C.M. years of pardon for deadly
sins: (Mark good Reader, ten hundred thousand years) granted by our holy
Father John 22. Pope of Rome.

See, you Romish Children, the bounty of your great Father: you that believe
this, we marvel not that many go so fast, but that any of you can be kept
from going to Rome, to enjoy the embracements of so bountiful, and tender a
Father, that has his hundreds, and thousand, nay a million of years ready at
hand for them that follow him, and whose Exchequer is not like other Kings,
sometime open, and sometime shut, sometime full, and sometime empty; but ever
open, and never empty, being Treasurer of such a treasure as is never spent.

Neither stays his bounty here; but because he knows that some are not
only unlettered, and cannot read, but dull of understanding, and unfit to
learn; therefore out of his tender compassion to his Children, he has devised
means to help their infirmities, and supply their defects: to which end he
has devised, and appointed certain holy Pictures, to the very sight, and
contemplation whereof, he has granted as much grace, as to the saying of the
forenamed Prayer. As namely, to one Picture of the Crucifixe in that Book, and
to the beholding of the same, are annexed no fewer then many thousand years of
Pardon: the words themselves are these:

Who that devoutly beholds this Arms of the Lord Jesus Christ, Ibid. fol. 75.
shall obtain six thousand years of pardon of our holy Father Saint Peter's
first Pope of Rome, and of 30. other Popes of the Church of Rome, successors
after him: And our holy Father Pope John the 22. has granted unto all them
very contrite, and truly confessed, that say these devout Prayers following in
commemoration of the bitter Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, three thousand
years of pardon for deadly sins; and other three thousand, for venial
sins, and say first a Pater noster, and Aue Maria.

Surely here is an Indulgence cheap enough, 6000. years, only beholding
devoutly the Picture of a Crucifixe. Verily, all the Heretics, and Huguenots
in the world, cannot brag of such bounties in their Churches. Nor are these
Jndulgences only given, which as they say, free them only from Penance
enjoined; but they have others, which free them also from their sins, and
purchase them pardon, and remission of them. For example, the same Book tells
us, that to the saying of 3. Prayers there specified, the Pope granted
remission of all sin: the words are these:

Fol. 70.
Our holy Father Pope Jnnocentius the 3. has granted to all them that say these
3. Prayers following devoutly, remission of all their sins confessed, and
contrite.

Fol. 69.
And of another Prayer, the Book says; Our holy Father Sixtus the fourth has
granted to all them that be in the state of grace, saying this Prayer
immediately after the elevation, clean remission of all their sins
perpetually enduring.

Nor do these Indulgences only deliver those that purchase them, but also
others, even the soul of the deceased, out of Purgatory: for thus says the
same Book of certain Prayers called Saint Bridgets Oo's:

Ibid. fol. 59.
There be the 15. Oo's, the which the holy Virgin Saint Bridget was wont to say
daily before the holy Rood in Saint Paul's Church at Rome: who so say this a
whole year, he shall deliver 15. souls out of Purgatory of his next Kindred;
and convert other 15 sinners to good life; and other 15. fifteen righteous men
of his kind, shall persevere in good life. And whatsoever ye desire of God, ye
shall have it, if it be to the salvation of your soul.

Nor is this all; but they have Indulgences annexed to certain Prayers, which
shall deliver them also from bodily dangers; for thus says the Book of
another Prayer.

Ibid. fol. 69.
This Prayer was showed to Saint Augustine, by revelation of the holy Ghost, and
who that devoutly say this Prayer, or hear, read, or bears about them, shall
not perish in fire, nor water, neither in battle, nor in judgment, and he
shall not die of sudden death; and no venim shall poison him that day.

Nor is this yet all; but they have other Prayers whereunto are annexed such
powerful Indulgences, as he that says them, cannot be damned, nor go to
Purgatory; but must needs go to Heaven immediately, when he dies: let the
Reader judge; for these be the words.

This Prayer made Saint Augustine; affirming, Ibid. fol. 65.
who that say it daily kneeling, shall not dye in sin, and after this life
shall go to the everlasting joy, and bliss.

And the Conclusion of the former Prayer, is this; Whatsoever, he who says
this Prayer, asks of God, Fol. 69.
he shall obtain, if it be to the salvation of his soul: and when thy soul
shall depart thy body, it shall not enter to Hell.

Nay, they have one Prayer which shall do more then all these; witness the
words: for says the Book,

This Prayer is written in a Table that hanged at Rome, in Saint Peter's Church,
near to the high Altar, Ibid. fol. 78.
there, as our holy father the Pope is wont to say Mass; and who that devoutly
with a contrite heart daily say this Orizon, if he be that day in the state
of eternal damnation, then this eternal pain shall be changed him into
temporal pain of Purgatory: and if he have deserved the pain of Purgatory,
it shall be forgotten, and forgiven, through the infinite mercy of God. Of the
infiniteness of Gods mercy we are well assured, and doubt not but by that
mercy, all sin may be forgiven, and this we know to be good Divinity: but
that God forgiues sins by that means, as by the saying of that Prayer, is
new Divinity coynd in Rome, but shall never be current in Gods Church.

And yet this is not all, but as the former Prayer makes a man happy when he
dies; so they have also a Prayer that shall make a man happy all his life long,
and prosper in what he goes about: for thus says the Book.

The Prayer of Lot, Jacob, and Moses, Ibid. fol. 10^.
for them that have taken any new great thing upon them, that the would have
brought to good end.

We never knew till now, that Lot, Jacob and Moses did use the same Prayer:
but when they made this Book, they might say any thing; for they knew not one
of a thousand had a Bible: and so there was none that but either would not, or
could not control them.

And that our English Papists may know the better what a Jewel they have of
this Book, and for that there be diverse (if I mistake not) which bear this
same title; therefore, that they may the better know it when they have it, and
make account of it as it deserves; I will let them know, that there be other
precious Romish Jewels in this Cabinet: there is a Prayer bearing this title:

Ibid. fol. 101. Ista nomina Regum, videlicet, Jasper, Melchior, Balthazar, and
12. Apostoli, quorum nomina sunt haec, Petrus, Paulus, etc. Mihi assistant in
omnibus necessitatibus meis, ac me defendent and liberent ab omnibus periculis,
tentationibus, and angustijs corporis and animae, and ab vniuersis malis
praesentibus, praeteritis, and futuris me custodiant nunc and in aeternum.
Amen. Ibid. fo. 101. Prou. 18.10.
A devout Invocation, and Prayer of all the blessed names of our Lord Jesu
Christ, as we find them written in holy Scripture: then follows a Prayer
beginning thus, and thus adorned:

OMNIPOTENS DOMINVS, CHRIST US, MESSIAH, SOTHER, EMANVEL, etc. And so it goes
on with 43. names, and as many red Crosses, and betwixt every name a Cross;
after all which, the Prayer is, that those names may defend, and bless him
that says it. Nay, not only these names of Christ; but, even the same Prayer
is made of the Wise Men that came from the East to worship Christ, whom they
call Kings; and the Prayer is this:

These names of the three Kings, Jasper, Melchior, and Balthazar, and the 12.
Apostles, whose names are Peter. Paul, etc. Assist me in all my necessities,
defend me, and free me from all dangers, temptations and extremities of soul
and body; and keep me from all evil, past, present, and to come, now and for
evermore. Amen.

Solomon told us, that The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, and the
Righteous flying to it, are helped. But it seems, Solomon was short in his
Divinity; for here be names of men, not one, but many that can do it as
well. Moreover, you Romish Catholics know, to your special edification, This
is the Book, wherein you have that rare piece of Devotion, which I dare say
Gods Church never had; namely, a Prayer which the Devil taught Saint Bernard;
for says the Book:

When Saint Bernard was at his Prayers, Ibid. fol. 125.
the Devil said to him, I know certain Verses in the Psalter, who that say
them daily, shall not perish, and shall have knowledge of the day that he
shall die; but the Fiend would not show them to him; who then said: I shall say
daily the whole Psalter, and so I shall be sure to say those verses: but rather
then he should do so, the Fiend showed him those Verses.

And so follow 12. Verses of the Psalms, taken for the most part our of the
119. Psalms, and there is a Title over them in these words, Precor te (...)
Princeps egregi^ Gabriel fortissime, agonista certantium, exurge mihi in
adiutoriu^ aduersus malignantes. Esto mecum contra aduersarios meos, and omnes
operantes iniquitatem: deleg^ versuros busies, and ^^^na violentes, and omnes
aduersantes mihi, tue epitilatu victi fugentur, fauente Domino nostro Jesus
Christo. Ibid. fol. 96.
Versus Sancti Bernardi; but sure they might better call them, Versus Diaboli:
for howsoever to us they be of the holy Ghosts inspiring, and David's penning;
yet to them they be of the Devils choosing, and commending. Well, let them thus
learn both their Doctrines, and devotions from the Devil; we, for our parts,
envy them not; it suffices us to be of the number of those the Prophet
speaks of, They shall be all taught of God.

Moreover, this is that Book, wherein Saints, and Angels are not entreated to
pray for them to God; but there are Prayers directed to them with these Titles:
A Prayer to Saint Gabriel, a Prayer to S. Raphael, etc. and the same things are
therein called for of them which Christians do of God: take one Example:

I beseech thee, thou excellent Prince Gabriel, thou valiant Champion, rise up
in my defense against the wicked; be on my side against my enemies, and all
that work iniquity; discover their crafty plots, confound their power, that
all who oppose me, may be put to slight by thy assistance, with the favor of
our Lord Jesu Christ.

There is also a Prayer to thy proper Angel, and another to the 1000. Virgins,
another to all both Hee-Saints, and Shee-Saints: and there is also a Prayer, or
else two that are far more excellent then the Lords Prayer. I am not willing
to be trusted in so strange a report; let the Reader Judge by the words
themselves.

Ibid. fol. 55.
This Prayer was showed to Saint Bernard, by the messenger of God, saying; that
as gold is the most precious of all other mettle, so exceeds this Prayer all
other Prayers: and who that devoutly says it, shall have a singular reward of
our blessed Lady, and her sweet Son Jesus.

Then follows a Prayer to the Virgin Mary, which thus begins: Aue Maria,
Ancilla Trinitatis, etc. and though it be a long Prayer; yet is it all to that
blessed creature the holy Virgin, and not one word to God. Lo, here is a
Prayer to a Creature more excellent, then any to God; and a Prayer made by a
man, as far more precious then the Lords Prayer, as gold is then lead. You
may do well to tell your Confessors, or if you will, the grand Penitentiary at
Rome, that we poor condemned Heretics of England, ask them upon their
consciences, what kind of Divinity, and devotion this is; for our parts, we
would account him a Blasphemer, that should say so amongst us.

There is also another Prayer, of which this strange report is made in that
Book.

Ibid fol. 50.
This Prayer showed our Lady to a devout person, saying that this golden Prayer
is the most sweetest and acceptablest to me: and in her appearing, she had
this salutation, and Prayer, written with Letters of gold in her breast.

Then follows a Prayer to the same holy Virgin, beginning thus: Aue Rosa, sieve
Spinis, etc. Here is another piece of rare Divinity, and Devotion, that the
holy Virgin should recommend a Prayer made by a man, and to her self alone, as
more excellent in it self, and acceptable to her then the Psalms, that were
dictated by the holy Ghost, and all the Prayers made to God himself.

Lastly, in this Book there is a Prayer where God is made Mediator to a
Creature; nay, to a silly Woman S. Sith, even such a one as we are not sure
whether she ever was or no: The words are so strange, as it is pity but they
should be known. For, first they pray to her to prepare the glory of Heaven
for them which she has merited. Aue Sitha famula Sancta Jesus Christi, para
nobis gloriam quam tu meruis^i.
Our Bibles teach us that God the Father prepared the glory of Heaven, and
Christ Jesus purchased it for us: But here is Romish Catholic Divinity, which
teaches us we may have them both another way; for S. Sith both prepares it
and pays for it. Then follows such a Prayer, as all the Lutherans and
Caluinists cannot show the like; for thus go the words:

O God, who did honor the blessed Virgin Sith, Deus qui beatam Sitham
Virginem famulam tuam in ipsius vita multis miraculis decorasti: te suppliciter
exoramus, vt omnes qui in tuo nomine ab ea postulant auxilium, eius obtentu
apud te sibi sentiant opportunum, per Christum Dominum, Taeter noster. Jbid.
fol. 26.
thy servant with many miracles in her life; we humbly beseech thee that all
those who in thy name do seek help of her, may by her means find it
seasonably to themselves from thee, by Christ.

Christian Religion teaches us to pray to God in the name of Christ; but here
is a Religion teaches to pray to Saint Sith, in the name of God. Judge (good
Reader) if here God be not made a Mediator to a Creature.

Thus have I given you (ye Romish Catholics) a full taste of the dainties
laid up for you in this Book. If these be all lies, falsehoods, and fooleries,
then see with what food your forefathers were fed, and learn what to judge of
those Popes, Pastors, Teachers, and Confessors, that thus gave them Scorpions
in stead of Bread; and see how foulely the Roman Church erred, which for many
ages allowed this Book by public authority: But if these be true; then see
what a brave thing it is to be a Papist, who upon such easy condition, can
purchase such Pardons, and procure such Jndulgences to himself and to others,
both for body and soul, both for this life, and for Purgatory, both for the
penalty and for sin it self, nay, for deliverance, not only from Purgatory,
but from Hell: No marvel verily if so many believing this, do become Papists,
and certainly we were worse then Heretics, and worthy to be damned deeper
in Hell then Julian, and Judas, if we believing this, did not presently turn
Roman Catholics.

And all this thus presupposed, we must needs confess these prices for these
Indulgences very cheap, if they were much dearer, for suppose they have the
power of giving these Indulgences but a few years; nay, but one, and pay 20.
40. if it were 100. Grosses for the same, no great matter, nay, a very good
Bargain and a quick Market, seeing it is likely enough so much and more may be
gathered in again in one week, as will pay for the whole years rent. And
whereas many amongst us, out of ignorance of these Romish secrets, and some,
out of charitable construction believed not, they ever allowed such Indulgences
for so many thousands of years, and for remission of all, or half, or a part
of a man's sins: now comes the Pope in this Book, and satisfies us to the
full, that such Merchandises are common in the Romish Market, and that the
Popes Exchange is never empty of them. And so indulgent, and favorable a
Father is the Pope, as he will not ingrosse this power of granting Jndulgences
to himself alone; but as the Law has imparted it in some measure to
Metropolitans, and Bishops: So he, for reasonable consideration, will, out of
his love and bounty, afford the same even to Parish Priests, the Rectors of
Churches, and Curates of Chapels, and will not appropriate them only to his
Churches in Rome, but at very indifferent rates confer them, and annexe them
for a time to any other Churches, and Chapels, the whole World over. And
lastly, observe (good Reader) how just the Pope is, and how thankfully he
recompenceth any favors done him, or any thing he takes from any body: for
example, if Kings, or Princes pay well their Peter Pence; and suffer their
subjects to pay good prices for their Palls, and other preferments, and to send
in roundly their Annats, Tenthes, Contributions, and such other payments,
whereby they empty their own, and fill his Coffers; then in recompense for
this base trash, he will send one King a pair of hallowed beads, which
forsooth have touched Saint Peter's Sepulcher, another a golden Rose, or a
hallowed Sword, blessed with his own most holy hand; or else an Agnus dei, made
up only by himself, whose virtues no tongue can tell: or else a most precious
Relic, as happly a tooth of some great Saint; or two, or three hayres of the
tail of the Ass whereon Christ rode into Jerusalem; or, if he be a great
King, then that inestimable Jewel, a bit of wood, which must be held a piece
of the cross whereon Christ dyed. So excellent an Alchymist is he, as in stead
of turning base metals into gold, and silver; he can teach Kings, and Princes
thus to turn their gold, and silver, into lead, and iron, paper, and
parchment, wood, and wax; and in like manner having robbed many thousand of the
Churches in the World of their Tithes, and Livings; as namely, of our not
10000. Parishes, he has devoured almost 4000. Now in recompense of their
Tithes so taken from them, he here sells them for silver these glorious
Jndulgences, being fine painted Babies to please Children; but known to the
wise not worth taking up. But thus this wily Fox preyes upon the world, and
having stolen the Goose, sticks down a Feather.

But the honest Reader may justly here demand what they mean by an Jndulgence
for the Remission of the 3. part of a man's sins; for it seems strange
Divinity, that any part of a man's sins should be remitted, and the rest
remain unpardoned: especially if here by sins, they understand the guilt of
sin; seeing the grounds of our Religion teach them, that sin is either
altogether, or not at all pardoned: for whereas in the Creed, our Religion
teaches our people to believe the forgiveness of sins, as an Article of
their Christian faith, and the prime prerogative belonging to the true holy
Catholic Church, whereof they believe, and profess themselves to be
members; it would sound as new, and unsound Divinity in their ears, to be
taught that they may safely believe the remission of a third part, and not of
all their sins. And whereas Christ in that holy Prayer, and Pattern of all
Prayers, the Lords Prayer, not only gives good leave, but even warrants, and
commands every believing Christian to pray for the forgiveness of his sins:
Luke 11.4.
they would doubtless hold him, no better then a piece of the Great
Antichrist, that should tell them, their Savior meant it not of all, but a
part of their sins. And therefore they do boldly believe, that when he told
some of his followers, their Sins were forgiven them, he meant plainly as he
spoke, and gave them leave to take it in the best sense: And, as the gifts,
favors, and pardons of Princes to their Subjects use to be extended, enlarged,
and construed to the best behoof of the Receiver; so much more this Prince of
Peace enlarges his love, and is well content his believing Subjects improve
his pardon to their best benefit, and as it may be most favorable, and
comfortable to themselves, and therefore fear not to believe, that when he
pardons, he pardons all, and reserues not a third part, or a half to be paid
for afterward: and they dare maintain it, against any Co^fessor in Rome, or
Jesuit in the world, that when Nathan pronounced to David, that God had
pardoned his sin, 2 Samuel 12.13.
neither Nathan intended, nor David did suspect any exception, or reservation
of some part of his sin, that was not pardoned. So that if here they mean
of sin it self, they will find few Customers for this Commodity amongst us:
And therefore seeing it is Divinity of a new stamp, they had best keep this
new refined Romish ware at home. We doubt not but during all this merry year
of Jubilee, such curious commodities as this will be of great price amongst
them, and that there will be more fools ready to buy them, then there be
wise, and crafty fellows ready to vent, and sell them: nor do we doubt but
that many things daily refused for counterfeits here, pass well enough for
good, and current amongst them. Let therefore the Romish Pilgrims, and
Penitents pay what they please, or make their Market as cheap as they can for
pardon of a third part of their sins, we dare say, our people will not give
a penny for the pardon of never so many, as long as there lies remaining but
one sin unpardoned: for they believe the Text that tells them, Psalm. 32.1:
That man is blessed whose sins are remitted; but their Bibles afford them no
Charter of peace, nor blessedness to him that has but a third part remitted:
And our Country people would soon tell them, that sins in the soul, are
like thorns in the heel, and so hinder their way to Heaven and happiness,
and will therefore never be at cost, and pain to pluck out some, and leave
more behind; seeing one alone will suffice to hinder his upright, and
cheerful walking.

But if by sin, they here understand the Penance or punishment due to sin;
then why do they not explane it, whether they mean the punishment justly
inflicted by God, or the penance craftily imposed by themselves? If the former,
then we desire to see their authority, and to show their Commission how they
came to be Stewards, and dispensers of Gods Justice: And we must then also let
loose upon them one of their own Friars, Bernardinus de Bustis in suo Ma^i^^^.
who about the time that this Book was made in Rome, preached in the Popes own
presence, that God had divided his kingdom with the blessed Virgin, committing
mercy to her, but reserving Justice to himself. Which blasphemy, though it
looked so black, as Cassander confesses, Cassander in Consultat.
it was hideous in the eyes, and ears of many Romish Catholics; yet we must
needs say he dealt reasonably, in regard of the Authors of this Book, and
broachers of this Doctrine; for he, though he took away mercy, yet left he God
his Justice entire. But these men incroach upon his Justice also: and so
amongst them they have made a god, who has neither Justice, nor mercy. But
what care they? They have a Lord god at Rome, and all their care is, to keep
his Crown safe, his Prerogative entire, and his power unbounded; for so long,
they are sure their Freehold shall never be touched.

But if they mean no more by sin in this place, but the penance which
themselves do politiquely impose upon their Penitents, then what a noise is
here about nothing, and how grossly is the good honest Reader gul'd, and
abused with a shadow for a substance? For 1. the plaine-meaning man is made to
believe, that in such a Church, or Chapel, on such, and such (not
unreasonable) conditions, he may gain remission of the third part of his
sin. And presently both his Religion and reason tell him, that there is no
doubt but in another place as good as that, he may purchase another third, and
in another, the third remaining, and so consequently be fully discharged of all
his sins: (for he knows well, the Temple of Jerusalem is abolished, and
since then, no Church, nor Chapel has any holiness, blessing, Indulgence,
or power given it by God, or man, which another may not have:) He therefore
reading this, is filled with hope, and surprised with joy, as knowing now the
place where, the means whereby, and conditions whereupon he can readily
purchase pardon of all his sins. But alas, when the matter comes to due
trial, see how the good soul is deluded, when in stead of the forgiveness of
his sin, he must be contented with an abatement of a Portion of that Penance
which his crafty Confessor imposed upon him; which if it were justly,
moderately, and orderly laid on him, then as a wholesome medicine, it is better
all taken, then any part forborne; but if unworthily, and unjustly, why then
should he pay any thing for having it abated?

But thus we see here, as in many cases more, how the Romish Strumpet mocks,
and deceiues her poor Children. She calls them to her, as to the true Church;
but they find her a Synagogue: She professes to be their loving Mother; but
proves a cruel Step-dame: She promises them the pure Manna of Gods Word, but
feeds them with Legends, lies, tales, and traditions: She flourishes with no
fewer then seven Sacraments, and yet they cannot have one as Christ ordained
it: She tells them of General Councels governed by the holy Ghost; and they
prove private Conuenticles complotted, called, concluded, and wholly carried,
and guided by her self. And here (good Souls) she makes them believe they
shall have forgiveness of their sins, and it proves no more but remission of
a piece of the Penance her Priests had laid upon them. O what pity is it, that
so good Children should not have a better Mother! and what shame is it she
should thus play fast and loose with them who trust their souls into her
hands, and that she dare thus dally in cases of Conscience?

But leaving these seduced souls to better advised thoughts, and wiser ways,
unless they have resolved to run into their own ruin: for our parts that
are but bystanders, and lookers on, as we can but pity, and pray for them; so
can we not but laugh at her, to see how craftily she lays about her on both
sides: for first she keeps it in her power to inioyne them, and lay upon them
what penance she pleases: on the other side she takes upon her to dispense,
commute, lessen, or abate as she sees cause, and as her Penitents shall please
her in the payment. Now verily, if she can first lay it on as she list, and
then take it off again when she is pleased, we marvel not she has made her
self so strong, and gained so great a power over the blind, and ignorant World
of Romish Papists.

CHAP. XIII. EXEMPTIONS.
The Romish Text. An Exemption of a Monastery of Friars Minors, from the
Jurisdiction of their Provincial, will cost 30. Gross.

To be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop during his time, will cost
50. Gross.

And if the Abbot will have withal, a License to wear a Miter, it must cost
him, says John the 22, 100. Gross.

Of a Bishop, from the Jurisdiction of his Metropolitan during his life, is
rated at 50. Gross.

Of a Parochial Church from the Bishops Jurisdiction, 20. Gross.

Of the Parson of a Parish, from the power of his Ordinary, during a suite, is
rated at 20. Gross.

Of an Hospital, from payment of Subsidy, 20. Gross.

Of a Town from the payment of any Impositions, 60. Gross.

Of a private person for the same 30. Gross.

Also in the Rate-booke of Pope John the 22. there is found an exemption of a
Monastery, and the Covent, taxed at 300. Gross.


English Observations.
ALl good Law-giuers, and wise Statesmen, Christian, or Heathen, ever held it
as a rule, that good Order is the life of a Commonwealth, and that
subordination is the very life of all good order, insomuch, as where there is
no subordination, that is, some to command, and some to obey, there all good
ordet is decayed, and disorder, and confusion crept in, and consequently
disipation, and destruction.

Thence it is that both all worthy Commanders in war, and all wise Governors
in peace, were such strict obseruers of all, not only politic Constitutions,
but even Martial Discipline, that tended to maintain the authority of
Superiors, and to nourish obedience in the Inferiors, that no money, nor
reward, nay no neerenesse in nature nor bond of blood could procure Exemption,
or Privilege in this case.

How famous are the ancient Roman, and Grecian Generals for executing their
martial Laws, not only upon their most valiant Soldiers, but even their
worthiest commanders, and Leaders, nay their own sons, if they transgressed
the rules, and orders of the Army, or went beyond the bounds, and limits of
their places,? Nay, their wisdom would not allow them to do a piece of good
service, if it were done out of order, or contrary to any public command; and
if any did so, he were sure first to be rewarded for his good service, and
valorous exploit; but as sure to be punished for his presumption, and
transgression, though in some cases the Penalty were no less then death it
self.

The wel-aduised Readers know, that the Histories afford us plenty of examples
in this kind: One of Alexander the Great is most remarkable, (howsoever held by
some to be a hard piece of Justice) who sailing on a time in Tygris with
diverse Princes, and great Lords, it chanced, his Royal Diadem fell from his
head into the River, where being in danger to be lost a Sailer that could
swim, cast himself into the water, and notwithstanding the fierceness of
that stream, adventured his life, to save his Sovereigns Diadem: and having
recovered it, and not being able to bring it in his hand, being of necessity to
use both hands to save his life, he held it in his teeth: but being to work,
and strive against the stream, he put it upon his head; and so, with much
peril of life, recovered the Ship, and presented the Emperor with his Diadem.
This loyal, and brave adventure of his, was most bountifully and Princely
rewarded; and moreover, he had leave, and time given him, to dispose, and
bestow his reward to whom he would; but was judged to forfait that head, upon
which he had presumed to put the Ensign of Majesty. And surely, much may be
said on both sides. Yet this conclusion seems to many wise Statesmen
vnbattered, That the justice of the Sentence is agreeable to the grounds of
true Policy, which in no case can admit a Subject to make himself a
Sovereign, no not for an hour.

And so necessary is Subordination in all estates, and so comely, and precious
a thing is Order, as even God proclaims himself The God of Order; and
himself has constituted Sovereignty, and Subordination, both in the Old
Testament, and the New, both in the Law, and Gospel, both in Church and
Commonwealth, both in public, and private Societies, nay, both in heaven, and
in earth: There are degrees of glory, even among the heavenly bodies; 1 Cor.
15.41.
for one Star differs from another in glory: and if one of any Orb, or
Sphere, should not be content with his place, but strive to be in the room of
the higher, would it not breed a destruction of all? The glorious Angels have
also their Orders, and Subordination; and we know, 2 Pet. 2.4.
those that kept not their first estate, were cast down into darkness, that so
they might hurt no more but themselves: And as soon as there begun to be a
world upon earth, the God of Power, that made it, showed himself also a God of
Order, for the establishing, and governing of it; subiecting, even from the
beginning, the Child to the Father, and Mother, the younger to the elder, the
Female to the Male; and (in some degree) the Wife to the Husband: and Abel,
with all his virtue and holiness, Genesis 4.7.
must yet be subordinate to Caine, his elder Brother, though an ungodly, and
graceless man. And as these combinations; and Relations were from the
beginning as fundamental to the very being of the world, so afterward, for
the better being of it (when the world had need of them, because men grew into
multitudes) the same God subjected the servant to his Master, Ephesians. 6.
the Subject to his Sovereign, the Soldier to his Commander, the borrower to
the Lender, the Learner to the Teacher, the simple to the wise, the poor to
the rich, the weak to the strong, the Captive to the Conqueror, and every
kind of Inferior to the Superior. And without this Subordination, neither
Heaven, nor Earth can subsist. By due observation herereof, the Church, the
Commonwealth, States, and Kingdoms, Provinces, and Countries, Cities, and
Towns, Castles, and Forts, Societies, and Corporations, Houses, and Families,
Armies of men in the Field, in Camp, or in Garrison, nay, the very Ships upon
the Seas, are maintained, and preserved; and without this would all perish, and
come to a Chaos of confusion.

And so strictly has the most wise Creator established these Subordinations,
as he would never give any way to the least violation of any one of them. Where
do we ever read, that God exempred the Child from the Authority of the
Father, or the Subject from obedience to his lawful Prince, or the Leuite from
the power of the High Priest? What shall we say then to this Romish confusion,
where not only Monestaries may for money Be exempted from the power of their
Prouincials, but Bishops from their Metropolitanes; yea, Parish Churches from
their Ordinaries? If this may be granted for money to one Cloister, or Bishop,
or one Parish Church, then may it also to two; if to two, to twenty, nay, to
two hundred; for the same reason, and Justice will either grant it to none, or
allow it to all. Who that knows, and considers this, can marvel any more at
the deluge of disorders, and that universal defection, and corruption reigning
in the Romish Church? For what else can follow, where every Inferior may
purchase exemption, and liberty from the power of that Superior, to whom,
before GOD, and man, they be subjected, and to whom it belongs to see them do
their duties? Again, see here how true it is, that one said and sung of Rome.

Heu Romae nunc solae pecunia regnat. For behold, here is no respect of
virtue, or extraordinary desert; but pay the 20. 50. or 100. Grosses, and they
shall be exempted, whatsoever they be. Now let any man judge in reason,
whether in cases of this kind, the worst will not pay best, and the most
licentious delinquent give most, and pay dearest, to be exempted from that
lawful Authoriry, which may control them and keep them in order.

More over, they charge us with liberty and slander our Religion as a Doctrine
of Licenciousnesse, and giving way to Carnal Liberty: But here the indifferent
Reader may be soon satisfied; at whose door, theirs, or ours, this base
Bastard, Carnal Liberty, is to be laid, and left. Now, who ever heard among
us, that either our Religion gave way, or our supreme Magistrates leave, for
Inferiors to be exempted from the lawful power, and authority of their
Superiors. But this (you see) is common, and ordinary in the Romish Church, and
not done by the devises, or crafty corruption of some great Officers to enrich
themselves; but even by the Pope himself, and that Sovereign, and
uncontrollable power of his, which is all one (say they) as if Christ himself
did it; to whom therefore no man may say so much, as, Domine, cur ita facis?

But, may some say, to what end does the Pope devise, and afford so many
Exemptions from Archbishops, Bishops, etc? Is it only the gain of the present
fine, or fee, which is paid for the Bull of exemption? Surely no: There is a
further benefit, and power which accrueth to the holy Father hereby: for by
such exempting of Monasteries, and vpstart Orders, Ecclesiastical Ordinary
Jurisdiction is abated, and abased, and the Popes omnipotency augmented, in
that those Exempts depend either immediately on the Pope, or on some such
Superior, who merely holds in Capite of the Papacy, What more odious
eyesore to the Pope, then that Episcopal power should remain entire in the
Bishops, without detruncation? And where has the Pope gained more ground, then
where he has clipped the wings of Episcopal Jurisdiction, by Reseruations,
Exemptions, Appeals, etc.

FINIS.

