TWO SERMONS PREACHED IN Scotland before the Kings MAJESTY: The one, in his
Chapel Royal of Holy-Roode-house at his Highness coming in: The other, in
the Church of Drumfreis at his Highness going out:

By W. COWPER, Bishop of Galloway, and Deane of his Majesty's Chapel Royal.

NOLI ALTVM SAPERE
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the green Dragon. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, James, Lord Bishop of Winton, Deane of
his Majesty's Chappell-Royall, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel.
MY LORD:
SHortly after his Majesty's departure from Drumfreis, to Carleel, I posted
away these two little Sermons, under hope they might serve for witnesses of my
willing affection to have attended his Majesty in the rest of the journey, if
the condition, either of my person, which is infirm, or of the place, which
was no longer pertinent to me, could so have permitted. How they were
miscarried, I know not, belike they have taken in the Western way, wherein
their father and fellows had not been accustomed to walk before them: always,
after long wandering, they returned back again unto me, but not without good
tidings; for the one of them told me, he was certainly informed, to find favor
with my Lord Duke of Lennox his Grace, who still kept in mind that Welcome,
given to his Majesty in the Royal Chapel of the Palace of Holy-roode-house,
at his Majesty's coming in. The other seemed to me no less confident that he
would be countenanced by my Lord Marquis of Buckingham, who did likewise
remember the admonition given to the worthy Nobles of England; as also, that
hearty Acclamation of the people, who seemed to power out their hearts with
their voices, and cries, for his Majesty's preservation in the Church of
Drumfreis, at his Majesty's going out.

Both these I easily believed, when I called to mind the continual, and
constant kindness, which through long experience I had found of the one, and
that rare humanity of the other, evident toward all, and whereof it pleased his
Lordship when he was here, to give me a special proof. Yet could I not
presume to present such base, and vnapparelled Pilgrims to so Noble, and high
Personages.

Sure I am, if they could have overtaken that Reverend, Grave, and most Learned
Prelate, my Lord Bishop of Ely, they had not wanted a Patron; for I knew from
himself, that nothing coming from the B. of Candida Casa, would be v^welcome
to his Lordship for Amphibalus sake, harbored in Mona, by Crathlint King of
Scots, and protected there, with the Christians that fled with him from the
bloody persecution of Dioclesian. But when I had considered all, I thought it
most kindly, since they come from the Deane of his Majesty's Chapel here,
they should take their course directly to your Lordship, Deane of his Highness
Royal Chapel there. My Lord, they are Strangers; I trust your Lordship will
use them kindly; all the favor I crave, is, that your Lordship would once
bring them under his Majesty's eye, there to receive their sentence, whether
they shall be committed to the Press, that they wander no more; or then
returned home again, until they gather further strength, to do for
themselves. So rests,

Your Lordships own in Jesus Christ, W. B. of Galloway.

HIS MAJESTY'S COMING IN.
PSALM. 121. VERSE. 8. The Lord shall preserve they going out, and thy coming
in, from henceforth, and for ever.

My help is in the Name of the Lord.


THis verse contains an Oracle or heavenly answer given from the great King
IEHOVA, Sum of this Verse.
to David his Deputie-King in Canaan, and it comes this Day to another King,
the Successor of David, and Deputy also of IEHOVA in Britain, bringing with
it a hearty welcome, and a most sure promise of a safe conduct to our
Sovereign in His coming in, and going out.

Euthymius said of the one, David was the heart, the tongue, and pen of the
great King.
to wit, of David, that he was Primi Regis, and cor, and lingua, calamus, the
heart, the tongue, and the pen of the first King. And who can deny this in the
own sort competent to our Sovereign. A King whose heart has proved
indiuertible from God, How this is also competent to our Sovereign.
qui ^ec minis, nec muneribus a vera fide flectiposset: a King, whose tongue
does plead the cause of God, that they who stand about him to minister unto
him, may daily hear, and see Regem Philosophantem, and Philosephum regnantem:
a King, whose pen, though it has not penned Canonical Scripture, and (that
Canon was co^pleted by S. John) yet has it explained Canonical Scripture, and
propagated to many Kings and Nations the knowledge of God his Eternal Truth,
unknown to the^ before. The present Ageadmires it, the subsequent shall be
forced to acknowledge it, there reigns this day in Britain, and long may he
reign in it, a King, who in his own degree is also primi Regis and cor, and
lingua, and calamus, 1. Tim. 1.17.
and unto whom that supreme Majesty, who is (...), comes this comfortable
promise of protection, The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming
in, and.

This verse is to be resolved in a promise.
This verse, by some of the Divines, is resolved in a Prayer, by others in a
Promise, both agreeable to the analogy of Faith, but the second most consonant
to the course of this Psalm: for in the first two verses, David sends up his
Prayer to the Lord, in the remanent six, the Lord sends down his answer to
David, full of comfortable promises, whereof this is the last, and has in it
these circumstances to be considered.

Four circumstances to be con^^dered in this verse.
First, who is it that makes the promise, the Lord. Next, to whom is the promise
made, it lurkes in this word, thy. He who in the beginning of the Psalm lifted
up his eyes to the Lord, protesting that his help came from him, who made the
heaven, and the earth, receives this answer, The Lord shall preserve thy
coming, and thy going. Thirdly, the benefit promised, is preservation. Last,
the qualities of this preservation; these are twofold; First, it is total, He
shall preserve thee in all thy ways both coming and going. Next, it is
perpetual, From henceforth, and for ever shall the Lord preserve thee. Thus
have we the little body of this Text shortly anatomized, both the method and
matter thereof explained.

The first circumstance then is carried in the first word, First circumstance
is, who makes the promise, to wit, the Lord. 1. Sam. 2.9. Mat. 10.30.
The Lord. This praise belongs to the Lord, that He, and none but He
preserves such as are his: The Lord keeps the feet of his Saints, said Anna
the Mother of Samuel. He numbreth the hairs of our head, said our Savior. O
what a care! O what a vigilance is this! from the sole of our foot, to the
hair of our head, does the protection of the Lord ouershaddow us. Aug.
Et si sic custodiuntur superflua tua, in quant a securitate est anima tua? And
seeing the Lord has such care of thy superfluities, that a hair of thy head
falls not to the ground, but by his providence; what great care has he of thy
soul?

And as this is the Lords praise, All the godly reserve to the Lord the praise
of their preservation. Psalm. 91.11.
that he preserves his Saints, so they reserve it unto him, and will not give
it to any other, they know he has given his Angels charge over them, to keep
them in all their ways, not for any need he has of them, but for our
comfort. Cyrill. Alexand. Con^. Julian.
Deus Angel^s vtitur, non quod ipse ad saluandum sit infirmus; he uses them,
not as if he were weak himself without them, but to help our weakness, that
we may know howsoever our enemies be many 2. King 6. Though they have all
secondarie helps, yet do they not trust in them. Adrichom. descrip. Hierus.
(yet as Elisha said to his servant) Fear not, for they that be with us, are
more, then they that be with them. David had the strong City of Jerusalem, the
glory of the earth, as the Psalmist calls it, Inter vrbes totius orbis
miraculum, ideoque silentio magis, quam infirmo sermon honoranda, a City
among all the Cities of the world a wonder, and therefore to be praised rather
with silence then infirm eloquence. There David had his residence. In the
highest part of it he had the strong sort of Sion, but the Tower wherein he
trusted, was higher then it. He had a guard of Cherethites, and Pelethites, 2.
Sam. 23.39.
with seven and thirty valiant Worthies to attend his Royal person; these he
used to serve him, but abused them not to trust in them. Psalm. 44.6.
I trusted not in my bow, nor my sword. Thou, Lord, sauest me from my
adversaries. Many a time all secondary helps failed him: his son Absalom
rose against him; his Counselor Achitophel betrayed him; his Subjects
forsook him; the Ziphims discovered him; in his need Nabal refused him; yea,
his own heart fainted in him: Psalm. 73. Psalm. 27.10.
but (says he) God, the portion of my soul, fails me never: though my Father
and my Mother should forsake me, the Lord will gather me up. Nothing can
secure that soul, Prou. 18. Ambros. They can never be secured, to whom the
Lord is not a ^uretie.
which runs not to the Name of the Lord, as unto a strong Tower. Omnia timet,
qui Vnum non timet: he fears al things, who fears not One. Among many, let
the Roman Monarch Tiberius, stand for an example: he wanted no worldly pillar
that might underprop him; yet because he made not the Lord his refuge, he was
never in surety, timeo incustoditos aditus, timco ipsos custodes: I fear, said
he, the passages, which are not kept, yea, I fear them who are set to be
keepers of me. But the soul which trusts in the Lord, finds rest in him,
and reioyces with David, Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is the strength of my soul, of whom shall l be afraid?

But let us stand a little here, What a great Majesty the Lord, Ichoua is.
and for our greater comfort consider what a Lord this is, who makes the
promise: he is called in the Text, IEHOVA. This name the Jews called nomen
ineffabile. No marvel, the word it self is easily pronounced, the Majesty
named by it, is more than can be manifested, or perceived, it imports Him to
be that only true subsisting Lord, who has his Being of himself, and gives
Being to all things which are. Mystery of the Trinity to be reverenced.
Some presumptuous Spirits, out of their idle speculations, are bold to talk
of the Trinity, as they do of their A.B.C. As if nothing were in the Divine
Majesty, which their narrow brain could not comprehend, or the Lord were no
more, then they conceive him to be, Pisul^ (...).
but the Lord (...) he has a supereminence invtterable; they who will search
his glory, Dangerous to search in the divine Maiestly more then is revealed.
shall be oppressed with it: if the eye content not with the light which the
Sun sends down, but will needs look up to the Sun it self, it is dazeled
incontinent, and loses the sight which it had before; and the mind which
mounts up to search the secret of the Divine Majesty, many a time in Gods
righteous judgments becomes witless (...) he sends great darkness on such
as curiously dare enquire of his Essence. Pisida in (...)
We should be in such sort thankful for that which God has revealed to us of
himself, that we be also fearful to search out, that which is secret.

The name of Ieho^a sometime shortly set down in Scripture. 1. Cor. 4.
This name IEHOVA we find it in holy Scripture sometime contracted, sometime
enlarged: the Lord himself gives this to Moses for his name, I AM has sent
thee. Neither man nor Angel can in truth speak so; for man is a mutable
creature, his life is but momentanie, and he lives, so long as he lives, in
a passing moment only, one goes away to give place unto another, the moments
which are past since his first moving, return not again unto him, and those
which are to come, he cannot be said to live in them. In this name I AM there
are but two syllables; before a man can pronounce the second, he is changed
from that which he was, when he pronounced the first: how then can he say B^rn
in Cant. Ser. 31.
( I am?) Quomodo enim est, quod in eodem statu nunquam permanet? for how can
that be said to be, which never abides in one estate? And as to Angels, albeit
they be now (...), Noz^an. Orat. 2. de Theol^g.
immutable, propter gratiam (...), quae iam illis ab Jesus tributa est, for that
grace of unchangeableness, which by Jesus is now given unto them, yet are they
of their own nature (...), changeable by will, or of their own accord, and as
is to be seen by them, who fell: for if the nature of Angels had been
unchangeable of it self, then none of them had fallen from their first estate.

Sometime again this name IEHOVA: The same name sometime enlarged by
circumloquution. Zaac^, de diuinis attribu^^^ l.^ ^3
we find it in holy Scripture enlarged by this Periphrasis frequently used in
the Revelation, (...). The learned Doctor Zanchius has observed, that this
name IEHOVA notes the Being of this true subsisting Lord, in respect of all
times, Camets being a note of the time past, Holem of the time present, and Iod
of the time to come; but we have this same Doctrine better warranted by this
circumloquution of the holy Ghost; IEHOVA is the Lord, who was, who is, and who
will be: Bern. in Cantica Ser. 31.
Solus vere est qui non praeciditur a ( fuit) nec expungitur ab ( erit) fuit
non tollit illi esse in aeternum, nec ( crit) esse ab aeterno; None can be said
to be, but he of whom, when I say that he was, it takes not away that he is,
and will be; and when I say that he will be, it takes not away that he was, and he
is. No Angel, no man, no creature can claim this; it is a glory proper to the
Lord. Ec^l^s. 1.4.
One generation passes, and another generation succeeds, but the earth
remains for ever. Much more does he remain, Heb. 1.11 12.
who has laid the foundation, and established the pillars thereof: The heavens
shall wax old, as does a garment, but thou, O Lord, art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. What a great comfort we have in this, that our God, was,
is, and will be. Math. 22.32.
O what a great Lord is our God, and what a comfort have we in this, that he
was, and he is, and he will be! Can that people be destroyed by death, whose
God is the Lord? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. In the
mystical body all the life is in the head: so long as the head keeps life,
the body, yea, no member of the body can perish. Therefore said our Savior,
Job. 14.
Because I live, ye shall live also. Only let our care be to be found in Him:
so shall we be sure of a happy being for ever and ever.

The second circumstance: to whom is this promise made.
The second circumstance points at the person to whom the promise is made, and
it lurkes, as I said, in this word ( thy.) In the beginning of the Psalm David
prayed unto the Lord; and here the Lord answers him with a promise of
preservation. The Prayer of Saints is not powered out in vain: Iam. 5.16.
it avails much, if it be fervent. It is a sweet gradation which our Savior
uses to that woman of Samaria, John. 4.10.
If thou knewst, thou would ask, if thou askedst, I would give. Aug. de
temp. Ser. 226.
Therefore said Augustine, Oration clauis est ^oeli, That Prayer was the key of
heaven: ascendit oration, and discendit Dei miseratio. Prayer of Saints is never
powered out in vain.
Prayer goes up, and mercy comes down. Neither can it be otherwise, for he to
whom we pray as to our King prays in us, as our Prophet, teaching us to pray,
and prays for us, as our Priest: Orat in nobis, vt Propheta, orat pro nobis,
vt sacerdos, oratur a nobis, vt Rex. And hereof comes this efficacy of Prayer,
that it is Deo sacrificium, Daemonibus flagellum, oranti subsidium: a sacrifice
to God, a scourge to the Devil, a subsidy and help to him that uses it.

Prayer compared to the Elephants snowt, and why? Pier. H^erogl. de Eleph.
The Elephants snowt serves him for all offices, and all armor: Elephantus, cum
aquas ingreditur, attollit promuscidem in altum, ac ea respirat: when the huge
beast the Elephant enters the water, and the body thereof is depressed by the
weight of it self, he lifts up his snowt on high, and thereby draws in breath
to conserve his life. It fares even so with a Christian, when he is
overwhelmed with the waters of many tribulations, then he stretches out his
Prayer on high, and draws down grace; which vpholds him that he lie not down
under temptation, quod corpori est respiratio, id animae est oration; C^rysest.
in Mat. ^om. 23.
what breathing is to the body, that same is Prayer to the soul. No life in
the body without breath: no life to the soul without Prayer: no time unmeet
for breathing, and no time unmeet for praying.

Prayer is a marvelous kind of husbandry, Prayer a marvelous kind of
husbandry.
it sows seed in the heaven, and reapeth fruit in the earth and heaven also.
It is a common thing to see the earth watered by the heavens, but a rare thing
to see heaven watered by the earth. 1. Sam. 7.6.
When lsrael fasted at Mizpeh, they drew water, to wit, out of the cisterne of
their heart, and powered it out before the Lord. There is a shower that ascends
and goes upward. When thou from a contrite, and melting heart, sendst up
tears to the Lord, as witnesses of they unfeigned repentance, they fall not to
the ground, Psalm. 56.8.
for the Lord gathers them in his bottell, then does the earth water the
heaven. A notable encouragement to Prayer.
If thou were ( said Chrysostom) to labor a fruitful land, would thou
spare seed upon it? what then should we do (...) who are called to be
Laborers of the heaven, a fruitful Canaan, not flowing with milk and honey,
but ouerflowing with peace, joy, and glory? Seeing the earth renders to us
with manifold increase such as we give unto it, will the heavens fail? Psalm.
126.5.
No: be sure, they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: and otherwise, Qui
parce s^minat, parce metet: 2. Cor. 9.6.
he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. And in this we have all
need to rebuke our own hearts, that we spare seed upon so fruitful a
husbandry, and defraud our selves of so great and glorious things promised,
only because we do not more frequently and fervently ask them.

David his Prayer is in two verses. God his answer is in six.
Again, David his Prayer is absolved in the two first verses: the Lords Answer
is in the subsequent six. There is no equality between that which we seek,
and that which the Lord will give: for his praise is, Ephesians. 3.20.
that he is able to do abundantly above all that we can ask or think. Aug.
de Temp.
Semper maiora tribuit, quam promittit? Seeing he gives always more then
himself promises, what marvel he gives more, then we can ask? Born. in Cant.
Sermon. 83.
Non pari vbertate, fluunt amans and amor, Creator and creatura: the love of
the Creator, who is love it self, and the love of the creature flow not alike
plentifully, no more than the strand and the great Ocean. The Lord always
gives more then we can crave.
Out of our love toward him, we may seek him, but it is nothing in respect of
his love toward us, wherewith he will comfort, and replenish us. Our Prayer to
him is like the flowing of a little strand, but his answer to us is like the
flowing of the Ocean. 1. King. 3.11.
Solomon prayed, and the Lord gave him more then he sought. Genesis 18.23, 24. etc.
At six Petitions Abraham brought down the Lord from fifty to ten. Every
Petition returned with a vantage: at last he ceased to pray, or the Lord
ceased to answer, and, which is the point, gave him more, then he craved, at
least, expressed in his Prayer, to wit, deliverance to Lot.

The third circumstance presents unto us the benefit promised, The third
Circumstance is of the benefit promised, to wit, Preservation.
to wit, preservation: The Lord shall preserve. The word Shamar imports a most
tender preservation: from it comes Shemuroth, signifying the eyelids, Psalm.
77.4.
because they are the keepers of the eye, as the Lord is called in the verse
preceding, Shomer Itshrael, Psalm. 121.4.
the keeper of Israel. If the lids of the eye open, it is to let the eye see:
if they close, it is to let it rest, at least to defend it, all their motion is
for the good of the eye. O what a comfort is here! The Lord calls his Church,
The apple of his eye. Qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam oculi mei: Zach. 2.8.
The word imports, that as the lid of the eye couers the eye, so the Lord
preserues his own.
he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye: so dear and tender is his
church unto him, that he feels the least offense done unto it. The Church is
the apple of the Lords eye, and the Lord is the covering of it. O how well are
they kept, whom the Keeper of Israel keeps! The Lord was a buckler to
Abraham, Genesis 15.1.
none of his enemies could harm him; for his buckler covered him thoroughly.
Job. 1.10.
The Lord was a hedge unto Job, Satan himself confessed he could not get
through it, howsoever many a time he assayed it, to have done evil unto Job. I
need not multiply foreign examples. The power of divine preservation most
evident in our King.
What the power of divine preservation is, never King, since the days of
David, can witness better the^ our Sovereign; the Lord has made his Majesty
glorious by deliverances, Psalm. 144.10.
he has rescued his Servant from the hurtful sword, yea, these wretched
Instruments of Satan, who by Sorcerie laid snares for his Sacred life, being
confounded in themselves, that nothing could succeed with them, got this
answer from their most miserable master, that He was The man of God. Yet being
loath to discover his own weakness, spoke it in such a language as for the
present they understood not. Let therefore Romish Rabsache rail, Romish
Rabsache, and his Tulipantic Frogs not to be feared.
as he has done, against the Lords Anointed, whom he has set over us; let his
Emissaries spue out their venomous and blasphemous boastings, Leo ^aruis non
terretur, the Lion is not terrified with Bugs. Psalm. 21.7.
Because the King trusts in the mercy of the most High, therefore he shall
not fall. His enemies are forced to lament in secret, that none of their
attempts have prospered. The Tulipantic Frogs have plotted in powder, and laid
subtle subterranean snares to accomplish the malice of their heart, but all in
vain, blessed be the Lord for it; for he has preserved, and will preserve the
coming, and the going of his own Anointed.

The promise of preservation is of^^n rep^at^d.
But seeing this same promise of preservation was made before (for from the
third verse to the end of the Psalm, six sundry times is this word of keeping
or preserving repeated;) why is it now made over again? not without cause: for
this doubling and For remedy of our ignorance.
if they be in any good estate, are ready to sacrifice to their own net, or to
cause their mouth to kiss their own hand, A^a ^.16.
as if their own hand had helped them, (...) 3^.27.
this is to impute their deliverance to their Calfe, and therefore often is
this resounded, The Lord, the Lord. Is thy estate advanced? ^he Lord has done
it. Have thou been preserved from desperate dangers? Look up to the Lord, thy
help is from on high, and to him let the praise be returned.

Secondly, For a remedy of our diffidence.
it is for a remedy of our natural diffidence: declare to the heirs of
promise this stability of his counsel. Heb. 6. Genesis 21.32.
As Joseph spoke of Pharao his vision, It was doubled, because the thing is
established by God, and God hastes to perform it; so is it with every Word of
the Lord, when it is repeated, it is because it is established, and GOD hastens
to perform it.

The fourth and last circumstance shows to us the qualities of this
preservation, The fourth circumstance is, of the qualities of this
preservation: first, it is total, secondly, it is perpetual. Psalm. 121.^.7.
Arnobius in Psalm.
and they are two: first, it is total, not in one, but in all thy ways shall
the Lord preserve thee, in thy coming in, and thy going out, from all evil
shall the Lord preserve thee. Next, it is perpetual, from henceforth and for
ever. Hilarious, and Arnobius expound this too strictly: Arnobius takes it this
way: Custodit introitum tuum ad poenitentiam, and exitum tuum de corpore: He
preserues thy coming into repentance, and thy going out of the body: Hilarious
expound^ this place too strictly.
Hilarious, again, Non est huins saeculi custodia haec, this preservation
(says he) pertaines not to this life, but is to be understood of our going out
of this life, and of our entry to the life to come; he seems to have
forgotten that place of the Apostle, Godliness has the promise both of this
life, 1. Tim. 4.5. Basile. Chr^s^st. Euthim. expound it more iudiciously. Man
his l^fe is a coming and going.
and of the life to come. Basile, Chrysostom, and Euthymius, take it better
up: by coming and going out they understand the whole course of the life of
man.

And so in holy Scripture our life is called in two respects; first, in respect
of the natural and universal course thereof; so patient Job makes a short
abridgement Naked came I, and naked shall I return. The like after him has
Saint Paul, In respect of the natural course of it. Job. 1 21. 1. Tim. 6.7.
Act. 1.21. Eccles. 6.4. Heb. 13.14.
We brought nothing into the World, and it is certain nothing we can carry
out. The whole life of our Lord is comprised by Saint Luke, in these two (...),
The like short description has Solomon of our life; Man comes into vanity,
and goes into darkness. In them all ye see, there is a coming and a going,
no standing nor abiding. There is no continuing City, yea, which is not
observed to make us wise as we should; even in our coming we begin to go
away. Nazian. de ^ominis vililale.
Ex quo nascimur, incipimus mori: so soon as we are borne, we begin to die:
for our life is rapidissimus cursus a tumulo ad tumulum: a most speedy course
from one grave to another; from the belly of our mother, to the bosom of our
great Mother. Gregor. moral. lib. 25.
Vita haec crescendo decr^scit: this life in growing wears away: as the
turning of a wheel draws a thread from the wool, till all be gone: so every
revolution of the Sun in the Firmament, Seneca.
twineth from us a day, till at length all be consumed: quotidie pars aliqua
vitae demitur, every day some part

Next, In respect of the personal actions of men in their life.
our life is called a coming in, and a going out, in respect of the personal
actions of men in their life: so is it comprised in the Law; Blessed sh^lt thou
be when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out; De^t. 28.6.
that is, in all thy actions, and in all thy ways thou shall be blessed. Our
life is (...), a turning about from one thing to another, and from that, back
again to the former: What now we crave for a recreation, incontinent becomes
a weariness* for the most desired pleasures in the world, if they were
perpetual, should become painful; and what now we reject for weariness, in a
short time we return to it for recreation; from resting, For our life is a
turning in a circular motion.
we rise to walk; from walking, again we sit down to rest; and so forth of
all the actions of our life. Sola vicissitudine releuamur: we are only eased
by an interchange of them.

So Herodot brings in Croesus speaking to Cyrus: Herodot. l^b. 1.
Humanarum rerum circulus semper eodem rotatus, fortunatos esse homines non
sinit: The circle of humane things tumbled, and turned about continually unto
the same, lets not men be happy in this life.

The like has Nazianzen, Nazian.
Inmorem rotae volubili vertigine voluuntur sur sum, deor sum omnia: After the
form of a Wheel, by a most speedy motion are all things turned vpside down,
(...); now these flourishing, now these fading and falling away, vt auris
potius sit fidere, aut scriptis in aqua l^teris, quam hominum foelicitati: So
that it is better to trust unto the winds, which change continually, or to
letters drawn in the water whereof no mark, or similitude remains, then to
trust unto the felicity of man upon earth. Let all men learn to be sober, in
that estate wherein they stand, persuading themselves, or it be long, they must
be changed into another.

Beside that which is common to all men, the office of a King is called A going
in and out before the people.
But to come nearer, beside both these, which are common unto all men, here is
a promise of protection to godly Kings in the doing of their office: for this
coming in, and going out, is a Periphrasis familiarly used by the Spirit of
God, to express the Royal function. I am now (said Moses) an hundredth and
twenty year old, and can no more go out and in before you: Deuteronomy. 31.2.
that is, I can no more do the Office of a Governor unto you. And again,
when he prayed for Joshua, Numb. 27.17.
The Lord God of the Spirits of all flesh appoint a man to go in and out before
the Congregation, that they be not as sheep without a Shepherd. This same is
more clear out of that Prayer of Solomon: 1. King. 3.7.
I am but young, and know not how to go in and out. Now what he means by
this, he expounds himself: Give to thy servant an understanding heart, that I
may discern between good and bad, and may judge thy people. So that to go
out and in before the people, is to judge the people rightly, and to discern
between the good and the evil.

A godly and religious Ruler is a great blessing to a people.
Of this first may appear, what a great blessing of God a religious Ruler is,
walking himself in the way of righteousness, and leading his people both by
Law, and example to follow him: when he so rules his Subjects, as only caring
how to make them subjects unto God. Ex. Aenca Sil^^o.
Such was the Princely and most Christian disposition of Frederic the Emperor,
who being demanded, whom of his subjects he loved best, answered, Them who so
please me, that in no case they will displease God. As the King leads, so
commonly the people follow. (...) de^ad. 1. (...) 1.
Ipsi se homines in Regis velut vnici exempli mores formant: men fashion
themselves to the manners of the King, as their only pattern, and example.
Fulg^m^^d T^e^do^. S^n^torem E^^^. 6.
Q^^ in saeculi cubn^ne constituti sunt, aut plurimos secum perdunt, aut ad
salutem ducunt: they who are placed into the top of honor, either they save,
or destroy many with themselves; if they be evil, they are evil to others,
and to themselves, if they be good, they can not but do good unto others. 2.
Kin. 13.6.
Also a wicked Jeroboam will cause Israel to sin; 2. C^ro^. 30 9.
but a good Ezekiah will turn them again unto the Lord. Eccl. 10 17.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, that is, noble
for virtue, wisdom and godliness. When the Ruler of the Land dare cast the
first stone at Adulterers, Job. 8.7.
being innocent himself: Nehom. 5.13.
When he dare with Nehemiah shake his lap against Oppressors, being free of
Oppression himself: Such a one with a good conscience may pray as he did,
Nehom. 5.19.
O my God, remember me in goodness, according to all that I have done for this
people.

Again, The office of a King is full of labor, and care.
we see here, that the Office of a King is full of labor, it is a coming in,
and a going out; the end of one business, is the beginning of another. The
Egyptians were wont to figure vigilance, by the Lions head. Pier. ^^^og. lib.
1. cap. 4.
Manethon the Egyptian, in his writs to Herodotus, gives out, that the Lion
sleeps not at all, though Aristotle with better reason affirm, Nullum animal
perpetua vti vigilia: that no creature can watch continually: yet two things
moved them to that opinion, the one was, that when the Lion rests, he
stirs his tail continually: the other is, quod Leo magnos habeat oculos,
and palp^bras as adeoparu^s, vt non possint oculum penitus obtegere: He is like
the Lion, who sleeping looks up, and is always moving, even when he rests.
that the Lion has great eyes, and so little eyelids, as are not able to
cover the eye fully, therefore is it that even in sleeping, the Lion looks as
if he were waking. Howeuer it be, hereby properly is figured the restless
care of conscientious Kings. They may lie (as one says) in beds of Iuory,
trimmed with carpets of Egypt, but ouer-hanged with curtains of care: their
minds are in a continual motion day and night, how to go in, and out before
their people. Neither is it possible that any man could be sufficient for so
laborious and hard a charge: The Royal Office can not be borne out, without
the Royal unction.
for it is ars artium regere hominem, were not as the calling is singular, so
it has a singular unction accompanying it. Presumptuous men, out of their
ignorant minds, may think themselves fit enough for the highest places. But
let men beware to usurp; for a Royal office without the Royal unction, is a
burden that will bear down and oppress the stoutest, the strongest, and the
wisest. A warning to usurpers of the Royal calling.
Damocles may stand for an example, who being set in the Chair of King
Dionysius, when he looked up to the sword hanging above his head, loathed all
the honor and pleasure offered to him by such as were appointed to serve him,
and was well content quickly to quit his place; and no marvel: for it was not
his calling, and therefore had he not that unction, that only makes men
strong, able and meet for the calling.

But to return, Sardanapalus and Dom^^^^n, loitering and idle Empero^^s.
a conscientious King (for so are they who have the calling, and the unction)
is full of cares, he is not like that womanly Emperor of Assyria,
Sardanapalus, of whose base behavior it is shame to speak among men, nor yet
like that Roman Emperor Domitian, Plat.
quitantae fuit desidiae vt in cubiculo solus acuto stilo muscas configeret:
who was so given to idle loytering, that he would sit alone all day in his
chamber, pricking at Flies with a sharp bodkin. Good Ichosaphat a
conscientious and laborious King.
But a good King is like that good Iehosaphat, of whom it is written, that he
went and returned through the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, setting
Judges in the Land, City by City, and bringing home again to the Lord God of
their Fathers, such as had fallen from him, 2. Chron. 19.4.
from one Province, one City, one house to another, he trauaileth continually,
exercising his Royal function.

Blessed be the Lord, Such a King has God in mercy set over us, travailing
from one end of the Kingdom to the other, for discharge of his Office.
who has set such a Iehosaphat over us, who takes the pains, and counts it
his pleasure to travel from one end of the I Will to the other, for the good of
his people. In respect of them from whom he comes, his Majesty his journey is
a going out, they look after him, not without sorrow, as unto the Sun
descending, comforted only with assured hope, that it will shortly rise again
unto them. In respect of us it is a coming in, yea, a coming home, and his
Majesty's subjects here of all estates look unto him with joy, as a Sun
rising, which long had been absent from them. We wish, that as in the days of
Joshua the Sun stayed in Gib^ah, I^sh. 10.12.
and the Moon in the valley of Aialen: A wish, that his Majesty might bide
with us, but limited.
so this Land might for ever enjoy the presence of our Sovereign; but in this
the will of our God, and the will of our Sovereign must be the limits of our
desires.

At least the tokens of his presence, in reformation of our evils, may be left
behind him.
Yet as the Sun rolling in his Sphere, benefits every place, whereupon he
shines, and leaves tokens of remembrance till he come again: so is it
expected, that his Majesty's coming into this Land, shall be like the rain
upon grass new mowne, where the sythes of the Sons of A^ak have cut down
the meadows to the very roote^: we are in hope that his coming shall be like
the showers that water the earth, Psalm. 72.6, 7.
to make it grow and reuert again, that in his days the righteous may
flourish, and abundance of peace may be. Praised be the Lord, we do already
enjoy the fruits of his Highness happy government: for now the mountains and
the hills bring peace to his people by justice, P^^l. 72.3.
and the voice of wonted Oppressors is not heard in our borders.

Yet remains there one evil in the heart of the Land, Sa^r^ledge, an evil in
the h^a^t of this K^ngdome, hurtful to all the es^ates thereof.
which I may call the Kings evil, not that the King is either author or
allower of it, but because the evil so desperate as cannot be cured, but by a
touch of the Kings hand; this is Sacrilege, a Pestilence that dissolueth the
Pillars of the earth, a Canker that corrupts the whole body, and hurts all,
Great men, Church men, and Commons. Many Zeba and Zalmunna for a blessing, To
Nobles and Great men. Psalm. 83.11* 12.
they will inherit Gods mansions as their own: they so appropriate al to
themselves, that nothing is spared to the Lord for the maintenance of his
Gospel: they will not see that it is abomination to devour that which is
sanctified, No word here of deiection of e^ection^. Ge^. 41* 21.
till it have devoured the^, and their whole estate: they are like Pharaos
lean kine that devoured the fat, and were never a whit the fatter themselves:
for this sin among other, many houses in the Land spew out their To the Gentry
and Common^.
The Gentry and Commons are heavily endamaged by it. A common thing to see the
Tithes eat up the stock, and abused Law being made the forcible mean of
lawless oppression. But which is worst of all, a most famous, and ancient Most
of all to an ancient Church, like to perish through poverty.
is like to languish and decay, the Children cry for bread, and in many parts
of the Land there is none to give it, nothing being left in sundry Parishes,
not so much as the small teinds of the Vicarage for maintenance of a Pastor.

I do prejudice to none, Antiquity of the Church of Scotland shortly touched,
and by the way.
when I call this Church both famous and ancient. It is now about three
thousand and six hundred years, since the Lord promised to give the ends of
the earth in a possession to his Christ, Psalm. 2.8.
and it is now sixteen hundred years since the Lord began to perform it: for
in the sixscore and four year of our Lord, Donald King of Scots, and Lucius
King of South Britain embraced the Christian faith; The Churches of Scotland
and England received not the Christian faith from Rome.
None of the Churches of this I Will, neither that in the South, nor that in the
North, received the Faith from the Church of Rome. It is true indeed, at the
desire of King Lucius, there was sent to him from the Bishop of Rome, Damianus
and Fugatianus to confirm him in the faith; but Baronius the Romish Cardinal
is forced to confess, Baron. a^ales.
quod diu ante Euangeliam Christi illuc perlatum erat: that long before their
coming, For the meaning o^ this place, See Baron. a^al^s, a^no Ch^i^^. 183.
T^r^^ll. aduersus Iud. ^os. ca. 78.
the Gospel of Christ was brought thither, that is, to this I Will. And for us,
that place of Tertullian, without all exception, proves the antiquity of this
Church: Brittannorum loca Romany inaccessa, Euangelio Christi subdita sunt:
that two hundred years after Christ, this Church was famous through the world
for her Christianity: and shall she now in her old age perish and decay
through poverty? shall Iulians persequution undo her? shall the rents of her
Schools, Colleges and Churches be rest from her, and nothing or little left
to maintain Learning and Religion? O! what an ingratitude is here? The Lord
comes to us with the abundance of the blessing of his Gospel, offering to
us the riches of his mercy, and grace, and we think him not worthy
entertainment. 1. C^r. 9.11.
If we have (said the Apostle) sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
matter that we reap your carnal things?

The conclusion, wherein the remedy of ^^c^ledge, before, called the Kings
E^^l, is referred to a touch of the Kings hand. G. il 2^.12.
But contenting me to have pointed at this evil, I leave the remedy thereof to
that rare wisdom, wherewith God has endued your Sacred Majesty, and
conclude as I began. Jacob in his journey to Padan Aram, was comforted with a
vision; he saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon it, assuring him that the Lord would be with him
both in his going and his coming: the like this day comes from the Lord to
our Jacob, in his journey. The Lord shall preserve thy goingout, and thy
coming in, from henceforth and for ever.

We lift our hearts, And the King committed to the blessing of God.
and our hands to the God of heaven, and beseech him graciously to perform it,
for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father, and holy Ghost, be all
praise, and honor. Amen.

A form of Grace, used ordinarily at his Majesty's Table, after meat, in
Scotland, by the Deane of his Chapel.
PRaised be the Lord, who daily ladeth us with his benefits. The Lord is our
Sun and Shield, he gives grace, and will give glory, and no good thing
shall be withholden from them, who love him.

Lord, Save thy Church universal.

O God, Preserve thy Servant our gracious Sovereign: Grant him long to reign
over us a happy King of many blessings to thy people.

Bless his Noble Queen, with the hopeful Prince Charles, the Prince, and
Princess Palatine, and their children.

Lord, let us never want one of his Highness Royal Race to sit upon his
Throne.

God give us all mercy for our sins, with grace, and peace in lesus Christ.
Amen.

HIS MAJESTY'S GOING OVT.
Psalm. 80. verse 17. Let thy hand be with the Man of thy right hand and the
Son of man, whom thou have made strong for thy self.

My help is in the Name of the LORD.


AS your Majesty's Coming into this Kingdom to visit the one of your
Twins, His Majesty's coming in, was welcomed with a promise. The two
Kingdoms, his Majesty called his two Twins, in his Parliament speech at
Edenberough. Now his going out is accompanied with a Prayer.
was welcomed with a promise of divine protection, The Lord shall preserve thy
coming in, and thy going out, which (praised be the Lord) he has hitherto
graciously performed: So now your Returning to visit the other, is accompanied
with a Prayer, which all the Estates of this your Highness Kingdom, Nobles,
Churchmen, and Commons (...), with one heart and voice send up to the Lord, to
go with your Sacred Majesty, wheresoever ye go: Let thy hand, O Lord, be with
the Man of thy right hand. Seeing our hands cannot always be with your
Majesty to attend, and serve your Highness as our bounden duty requires, our
hearts shall not cease to cry unto heaven, that the hand of the Lord may be
with you.

This Psalm has two Prayers.
In this Psalm are two Prayers; one for the Church, that the Shepherd of
Israel, who sits between would mercifully look on her misery, For the Church.
and bring again her captivity. The other For the instruments of her
diliuerance, and these are of two sorts.
either spiritual, or temporal. Principally it is a Prayer for the coming of
the MESSIAH, the true, and Iero^e expounds this place, The true and Spiritual
Redeemer of the Church. Hieron. in hunc Psalm.
Fiat manus tua super filium hominis, quem confirmasti tibi, id est, ipsum
Mediatorem, and Saluatorem nostrum. Secondarily, it is a Prayer for all
Typical and Temporal redeemers, whom The typical and temporal Redeemers
thereof, Cyrus, Zerubb^^el, etc.
as Cyrus. Nehemiah, Zerubbabel, and such like: we will then first see how this
is a Prayer for the coming of Christ, and next, for his Deputie-Powers here
upon earth, raised up for the comfort of his Church.

These two agree well together.
The one of these is not repugnant to the other, nay, they agree very well
together, as the Type, and the Truth. Such as were spiritual and truly
religious among that people, rested not in the temporal promises, which were
made unto them, but by them ascended up, and laid hold on the spiritual.
Abraham contented not with earthly Canaan, Heb. 11 9.10.
he dwelt in it, as in a strange country: for he looked for a better. And
here (no doubt) the godly Jews do in such sort pray for their deliverance
from Babel, that their desire looks up with an higher eye, for their
redemption from sin and Satan by Jesus Christ.

In all ages the Saints have greatly longed for their Savior. First then here
we h^u^ a pr^ier ^or the M^^s^^h.
In the Revelation the Church is figured by a Woman, traveling of child: for,
Ecclesia semper and ^^lier est, and virgo: the Church is always a Virgin,
^^^^^nt a^ Probam.
and always a traveling Woman. It is true, one member of the Church, to wit,
the blessed Virgin Marie brought him out a very man, like us in all things,
except sin; yet all his Saints, both before and after the Incarnation, The
Church in all ages longed for him.
have their own conception, and traveling, whereby they bring him out, for
still Saints are in traveling, till Christ be formed in them: yea, Galat. 4 19.
they shall not rest, nor be delivered, till by his second appearance he perfect
them; and as to them who were before the Incarnation, sure it is, so soon as
the Messia was promised, the Church by faith conceived him, she traveled,
crying for him by prayer, as earnestly desirous to see him, as a woman desires
in due time to see the birth of her womb, and at length by patience in the
fulness of time she brought him out Abraham saw his day a far off, and rejoiced
that a child was to be borne unto him, in whom all Nations of the earth should
be blessed. And (which is the point) the godly in this verse long for him, But
the nearer the time of his exhibition came, the more his Saints looked for him.
and pray for his Coming, and the nearer the time drew, wherein he was
promised to be exhibited, the more desirous were they to see him. All the
faithful of that age looked for Redemption in Israel. Of that number was
Joseph of Arimathea, he waited for the Kingdom of God, Luke 2.38.
also Anna and Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel, then was Simcon
content to die, when he got in his arms the promised seed of the woman, and
saw with his eyes the salvation of the Lord. And thus have we the first and
principal meaning of this prayer, which the Church makes for the Messia.

The Messiah is here three ways described.
He is here shortly three ways described, first he is called the Son of
Gods right hand. Secondly, he is called the son of man. And these two
especially He is called the Son of God his right hand, and that in three
respects.
Thirdly, he is called, One whom God has made strong for himself. And this
touches his office. As to the first he is called the Son of God his right
hand for three causes: first, in In respect of his maru^^^ous generat^on in
hoth his natu^es. Na^^an. ^r^t. 4. de silio His unspeakable gen^ration, as God.
Heb. 1.
Illin^ patris expers, hinc matris: in the one, without a father, in the other
without a mother, Natus quidem est, he was borne indeed of a woman, but in
respect of his mother, he was (...) without a father. Idem etiam genitus est:
he was also begotten of his father, but in respect of his father, he was
(...), without a mother, thus every way was he The son of Gods right hand.
As God, he is (...), the brightness of his fathers glory, and the engraven
Image of his person. As he is man, he was conceived, and formed by the right
hand of God, Luke 1.34.
so the Angel told Marie, the power of the most high shall over shadow thee,
His maru^llous generation as man noted in these three names given him. 1 C^r.
15. Cant 4. Dan. 2.
therefore in respect of his marvelous humane generation, Irenaeus observes
these three styles to be given him. First, he is called, The second Adam, a
very man as the first Adam was, yet not begotten by a man, as the first Adam
was not begotten by a man. Secondly, he is called Flos campi: a flower of the
field, not a flower of the garden, not set or planted by a Gardner, Iren. lib.
3. co^t. Val^nt.
but springing up of the own accord, without the labor or industry of man.
Thirdly, he is called, A Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, he came
of the same mass, whereof all mankind is, but no man helped his generation.

(...), he is called The Son of God his right (...) singular love and favor,
The Messiah is called the Son of Gods right hand, in respect of God his
special love toward him. Exodus 15.
which the father carrie^ toward him: for the right hand of God in holy
scripture ^^he^ signifies his power, as in the song of ^^jes and M^iam at the
red sea, thy right hand is (...) ^ower, thy right hand has bruized thine
enemies. Or then it signifies his favor and his love. Psalm.
At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: both these are taken up by
Nazianzen, Nazian, orat. 7. de compos. disserend. ratione.
Manus symbolum est affectionis and actionis, the hand is a sign of his
working and will, the right hand put for his good will and pleasure, the left
hand by the contrary, for his displeasure. So shall the wicked stand at his
left hand under the reach of his power, Every Christian is a son of Gods
right hand, but not as Jesus is.
but not within the compass of his favor. It is true, every Christian man is
also the son of Gods right hand: by nature his name is Ben-oni, the son of
sorrow: but his father has changed his name with his estate, called him (...)
the son of the right hand. But in a more special sense does this style
belong to the Lord Jesus, for with a note extolling him above all his brethren,
Matthew. 3.17.
he is called (...): that son of mine, that beloved, (...), in whom I am well
pleased, through whom I accept others to be my sons, and for whom I love all
these whom I love.

The Mess^^h is a Son of Gods right hand, in respect of his willingness to
obey his father. Psalm. 40.8.
Thirdly, he is the Son of the fathers right hand in respect of his most
perfect obedience, and ready willingness to do in all things the will of his
father, I desired to do thy good will, o my God: when he told his Disciples
that he had meat to eat, which they knew not, they understood not what he
meaned; but he expounds himself, Job. 4.3^.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

The son of man, The second point of the Messiah his description is, The
Son of man. Zach. 13. I^b 19.
he is in such sort the son of God, that he is also the Son of man, not
begotten by man, as we have said before, yet formed, and conceived of the
seed of man, he is Gnamith Iehoua, the companion of Iehoua, he is also, as
Job calls him, our Goel or our kinsman. Jacob called him Shiloh because he
was sent into the world wrapped in the like tunicle, which others of the sons
of men bring with them when they are borne. He is that incomparable Vnio or
Margarita, Nazian, (...) 23 ad I^lia^.
a precious pearl as Nazianzen calls him, and why? Nicetas and Elias do tell
us, Nicetas S^^l. in Nazian.
quippe qui non nisi summo cum labor, at que a perpaucis inueniatur, because
he is not found but with great labor, Elias in Nazian. ^ra:. 8. de pace.
and few are they who find him Tum etiam (vt ait ille) quia vt margarita ex
concha, and aqua conflatur ita Christus diuinitate and humanitate constat. O
what a matter of unspeakable joy is here, but I must contract my self. What
great comfort have we in this, that the Son of God is become the Son of man.
Man for his transgression received this check from the Lord, Ecce Adam factus
est quasi vnus ex nobis, but now since the reconciliation by Jesus, God
manifested in the flesh, man may rejoice and say, Ecce Deus factus est, quasi
vnus ex nobis. Doubtless this is a strong bulwark of our faith, for since we
see that the son of God is become the son of man, clothed with all the
infirmities of our nature, except sin, since we see the God of glory
humbled to the ignominy of the cross, why shall we doubt that the sons of
men, shall also be made the sons of God, and that these vile bodies of ours
shall be changed and fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ, Philip.
3.21.
especially since for no other end became he the son of man, but to make us
the sons of God.

The last part of the description is here, The third point of the description
of the Messi^s, that God has made him strong for himself, to do the office
of a Redeemer. Esaias 61.1.
whom thou has^ made strong for thy self, this (as I have said) respects his
threefold office, and his unction to them all. A commentary for this place is
that of Esaias, I will put my Spirit in him, that he may bring forth judgment
to the Genti^es. And again, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has
anointed me, he has sent me to preach good tidings unto the poor, and to
bind up the brokenhearted, etc. what the Psalmist here calls strengthening,
the Prophet here calls it annoynting, Io^. 6.27.
and St. John calls it sealing, for him has God the father sealed, and what is
meant by all these, he expounds himself yet more clearly, Job. 1.14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us full of grace and truth, Job. 3.34.
and a little after, God gave him not the spirit by measure, that of his
fullness we might all receive grace for grace.

Christ made strong for his office by annoynting, sealing and pouring of the
Spirit upon him.
Of all these it is plain how the father is said to have made his son strong
for himself, that is, he anointed him, he sealed him, he put his spirit into
him, not in a measure, but communicate the fulness of grace to him, that he
might be ^rengthened to do unto us the office of a King, to deliver us from our
enemies, of a Prophet to teach us the whole counsel of God, and of a Priest,
to offer himself in a propitiatory sacrifice for us. In all these appeared his
wonderful strength, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 107.
passius est vt infirmus, operatus vt fortis, when he suffered like a weak
man, then he wrought like a valiant man, The strength of Christ appeared in his
greatest weakness.
then he darkened the sun, then he rent the veil, then he raised the dead,
in his death vide infirmitatem filij hominis, see the infirmity of the so^^e of
man; in his victory vide fortitudinem (...) Dei, see the mighty strength and
power of the ^o^ne of God, Aug. Ser. de Sanctus.
granum sinapis dum patitur, in his ^uff^ring he is like a grain of mustard
seed; Luke 13.19.
dum resurgit ^^bor est, sub qua aues coeli nidificant, in his resurrection he
is like a tree under which the birds of heaven do build their neasts. Every
way the mighty strength of our strong Redeemer is to be admired, but specially
his conquest by suffering, there did appear the weakness of God stronger then
man; yea, then all these Principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness,
There was never such a work committed to Angel or man, as that which was laid
on Jesus.
that were opposite to him.

It was indeed an exceeding great work, which committed to our Mediator, The
man lesus, and therefore required a special unction to make him strong unto
it. All the Angels of heaven, all the men on earth were not able to have
wrought that work. Such a Law was never imponed to man nor Angel, as was
imponed to lesus, by his his Fathers ordination; and willingly accepted by
himself.

This was the Law of a Redeemer, The Law of a Redeemer was enjoined to him,
which requires more, then the Law moral.
wherewith Christ was charged, and none but he, more many manner of ways,
then the Law moral whereunto all are subject. The moral Law had two tables,
the first commanding the perfect love of God; the next commanding to love our
neighbor as our selves. The Redeemers Law has also two parts, As the Law
moral had two tables, so has the Law of the Redeemer two parts.
both of them commanding much more, then is commanded by the moral, the first
part of the Redeemers law looks up to his Father, the second looks down to
his brethren. In the first this commandment was given him, The first looks up
to his father and binds him to vindicate the glory of his fathers justice and
mercy.
Thou must vindicate the seen since the beginning of the world, but never one
like unto this. And many great mercies in all ages has he showed to his
servants, Noah in the arc, Lot in Zoar, Israel beyond the red sea, may stand
for examples, but never a mercy like this was manifested in the world, that the
Lord gave his only begotten to the death, that such as believe in him might
have eternal life. There was the riches of the glory of his mercy wonderfully
declared. Thus did the Lord fulfill the commandment of the law of a Redeemer,
and preserve the glory both of his fathers justice and mercy.

The second lookes' down to hisbrethren, and binds him to vindicate them from
all their enemies.
The other part of the law respected his brethren, concerning whom, this
commandment was given him, thou must love thy brethren, not as thy self
only, but more then thy self, thou shall purchase them life by thine own
death, thou shall save them who have lost themselves, thou shall redeem their
inheritance which they have sold without a price, and as their nearest
kinsman, and firstborn of thy fathers family (according as thou art bound)
thou shall pursue the murderer that slew him, to wit, the Devil, he is
without all city of refuge, revenge thou their blood upon him; and like
another Abraham, thou must bring home again Lot out of the hands of that
Tyrant Chedarlaomer, all this the Lord Jesus powerfully performed, for the
father fortified him, and made him strong to this work for himself* And thus
have we seen how these words contain a prayer for the coming of Jesus
Christ, the great and true Redeemer of his Church.

Now this same description is also competent in the second room, We have seen
how this pra^er is competent to Christ the true and princip^ll Redeemer of his
Church.
to secondarie instruments, appointed by God to serve under him, for the
comfort, deliverance, and government of his Church. For a King called of God to
rule his people, and set over them, not in wrath as the Kings of Israel,
Jeroboam and his successors were, of whom spoke the Lord by Hosea, Now it is
competent also to secondary instruments raised by God for the good of his
Church.
dedi illis regem in surore meo, but a King set over a people in mercy, as
David and Solomon, because the Lord has loved his people. Such a King no doubt
is a son of the Lords right hand, and for three causes so called; first,
blessed art thou o land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and what greater
Nobility then to be the son of Gods right hand, For good Kings are sons of
Gods right hand, otherwise then common Christians are.
not only in regard of his personal regeneration and adoption, which way all
Christians are the sons of God; but also in regard of that special unction
proper to the royal calling, whereby God separates him, and sets him up as his
Deputy, to rule others. Secondly, a good King is so called for that special
and marvelous care the Lord has of him, to preserve and keep him in most
desperate dangers, Many deliverances gives the Lord to his anointed, and
rescueth his servant David from the hurtful sword. As the Lord has set him up
for himself, so in special manner he preserues him by himself. And thirdly,
a good King is called a son of Gods right hand, And it agrees also to them
that God ha^h made them strong for himself.
because his heart is rightly set to do good in his calling, like David,
Ezechia, and Iosia.

The other part of the description agrees also very well unto him, for the
special and royal unction of such a King as I have spoken of, makes him
strong for the Lord, and here are two things; first, thou have made him
strong, next thou have made him strong for thy self. All strength and dignity
is from the Lord. 1 Samuel 2. Psalm. 144.
All superexcellencie of strength and dignity is from the Lord, the Lord brings
low and exalts (said Anna the mother of Samuel) To come to preferment is
neither from the East, nor from the West, but from the Lord. Yet sure it is,
all whom the Lord makes strong are not made strong for himself. But not always
used for the Lord.
There are many who abuse (against the Lord) the strength, authority, and
honor, which they have received from the Lord. The Princes of Zoan are fools,
and the Princes of Noph are deceived, such was Pharaoh, of whom said the Lord,
I have raised thee up, that I may show my power upon thee; such were the
Apostate Israelites, Ierem.
of whom the Lord complains, My people say they are Lords, they will not come
near me. And again, Hosea 13.6.
as they were filled, their heart was exalted. A vile ingratitude, that man
should become most rebellious against the Lord, when the Lord has been most
beneficial to him.

Men advanced to honor by God, have need to take heed that they be for God.
Nazian. oral. 12. de s^ipso.
Let men take heed how they use the place, whereunto God has exalted them,
either by native or dative nobility; these Nazianzen calls, Nobiles ex
mandatis, aut rescriptis principum; for cursed are they who use against the
Lord, that which they have received from the Lord. Let them be assured, if they
will not do his will out of loving and humble obedience, God shall do his
will upon them out of his justice and power, Otherwise God will do for
himself, but against them.
he shall roll them from their station, and turn their glory into shame, Sic
fiet ex comaedia, Hosea 4.19.
tragedia. The wind shall bind them up in her wings. Hosea 5.7.
A month shall devour them with their portions. Hosea 9.11.
Their glory shall fly away like a bird. They shall be as the morning cloud,
or morning dew that passes away, Hosea 13.3.
as chafe driven with the whirle-winde out of the floor, and as smoke that
goes out of the chimney. But there is the lamentable blindness of men, though
they see that this has held true upon others before them, yet they fancy to
themselves every man a singular privilege, that the like judgment shall not
come near them.

But happy are they, Happy are they who return to the Lord that which they
have received from him.
who cast down their crowns at the feet of the Lord, and return unto him all
that they have received from him, using for the Lord, that strength, honor,
and authority, which they have gotten from the Lord, these are the sons of
his right hand, laboring to honor him who has honored them, Ezech. 34.26.
and these the Lord keeps as a signet on his hand, upon these shall be rain
of blessings. The eye of the Lord shall watch over them for good, to protect
and defend them in all their necessities. As they are for the Lord, so is the
Lord for them, to perform to them that which he promised to DAVID, Psalm. 89
21.22.23.
Mine hand shall be established with him, and mine arm shall strengthen him,
the enemy shall not oppress him, neither shall the wicked hurt him, but I
will destroy his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. What
here is plainly promised, has been particularly performed to your Majesty,
compare the oracle with your own experience, and then the Lord his constant
and loving kindness felt in bygone times, shall animate and encourage your
Highness still to walk before the Lord in the vprightnes of your heart, Psalm.
18.25.
for with the upright man, the Lord will show himself upright. I need to speak
no more of this point to a Prince of such understanding, I am sure out of these
places, God has spoken to your heart, and your royal heart has answered him.

The Church of old, when they prayed for themselves, prayed for their Kings. 1 Timothy 2.1.
Of all this we see, that the Church of old when they prayed for themselves,
they prayed also for their Kings and Governors; yea, in praying for such as
are over us, we pray for our selves, the benefit redounds to us, I will that
prayers be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we
may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, and for this same cause the Israelites
of old were commanded to pray for the King of Babel who captiued them. For the
King his good estate brings good to his people.
It is true which Augustine says, that albeit evil Kings be more hurtful to
themselves then to their subjects, yet bonorum regnum non tam ipsis, Aug. de
Ciuitate De^. lib. 4 cap. 3.
quam illis vtile est quibus pr^positi sunt, yet good Kings are more profitable
to their subjects, then to themselves. The unity and felicity of a people
stands in the good disposition of him, Elias in Nazian. o^at. 7 de compos.
disser. r^t.
who rules over them, Caput est imago Principis in Republica, the head in the
body, is an image of a Prince in the Commonwealth. As an head without a body
is inglorious, for the glory of a King stands in the multitude of his
subjects, said Solomon: so a body without a head is much more ignominious, for
either else it has no life at all, or if it have any, every member beats and
dasheth upon another, none of them can rightly do their office. In these days
there was no King in Israel, and every man did what was good in his own eyes;
yea how dear a good King should be to his people, and how heavy a loss it is
to want him, that one place may teach us, ^am^nt. 4.20.
The breath of our nosthrills, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their
nets, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall be preserved alive among the
heathen.

A happy thing therefore is it, Such swe^t harmony should be between P^^nce
and people, as was between David and his subjects.
when Prince and people go together, as David, and his subjects did, their
love was mutual, their care mutual, their prayer one for the other, mutual;
when the people were stricken with pestilence, David their King prayed for
them, and wished that the punishment might be turned on him, and his house, and
the people spared: 1 Chronicles. 21.17.
O Lord I beseech thee, let thy hand be on me, and my fathers house, and not on
thy people for their destruction. And again, when Absalom rebelled against his
father King David, the people interponed their lives for their King, 2 Samuel
18.3.
they would not let him go out to the battle, they accounted him the light of
Israel, more worthy to be preserved, then many thousands of them.

But now must I contract my self; The conclusion, wherein this prayer is
applied to ^ur Sovereign.
Since all other things requisite for your Majesty's journey, are in
readiness, attending your Highness forth coming, it is also time that our
prayer should betake her to her wings, and let go to her flight, to accompany
your Majesty, wheresoever ye go. As I said in the beginning, so now say I in
the end, in the name of all your Highness subjects of this Kingdom: Since our
hands cannot be with your Highness, to wait on, and serve your Majesty, as
our hearts would, The hand of the Lord be with you. That hand which preserved
you in the womb of your Mother, and brought your Highness safely into this
world. That hand of the Lord which made your arms strong, to wrestle with the
Gowrian traitor, before the hands of your servants came near you. That hand of
the Lord, which delivered your Majesty from that abominable powder treason,
and first revealed to your self the counsel of your enemies. In a word, That
hand of the Lord, which has made your Majesty glorious by many deliverances,
that same hand of the Lord be with your Majesty, in this journey and for ever.

Ancient Israelites used it for their Rulers, and we should use it for our King.
The ancient Israelites used this prayer, for Cyrus, Nehemiah, Zerubabel, and
such others, that were to be the instruments of their comfort, before ever they
received any comfort from them; how much more should we use it for your
Highness, since we do so abundantly enjoy the fruits of your Highness most
happy government. For your Majesty has bin unto us an other Cyrus: when he
came to the Kingdom, then came deliverance to Israel from their seauentie
years bondage in ancient Babel; and with your Majesty's coming into the world
to enjoy these Scepters, whereunto your Highness was borne a lineall and
lawful heir, then came our deliverance from mystical Babell.

Since both his word and works
And your Majesty's most christian care to establish our Church by providing
portions for the Levites, who serve the Lord in his Sanctuary, ^^^nesses that
he is given us, a son of God his right hand.
and to free the common people from oppression in their tithes, has showed
that your Majesty is to us a Nehemiah, and Zerubabel. Yea your Highness words
and works are witnesses, that ye are unto us a King given of God in his
mercy, A son of his right hand; Patriae parens, and populi pastor, a public
father of the country, and pastor of the people.

Among innumerable words, A notable speech uttered by his Majesty in the
Castle of Edenbrugh witness him to be such a one.
and discourses royal, philosophical, and theological, delivered almost
every meal, and most worthy to be remembered, I do only make mention of one
uttered by your Majesty, on your birthday after supper in the Castle of
Edenbrugh: when your servant had said the Grace, and a little more then
customably I used, had prayed for the continuance of many such days, wherein
we might with joy celebrate the remembrance of your Highness most happy
nativity, your Majesty arose from the chair with this speech in public
audience of the whole house; You have said the Grace for me, and now will I
pray for my self, which your Majesty with all reverence and zealous affection
delivered in these words. THE LORD GRANT ME NO LONGER TO LIVE, NOR MY HEART BE
SET TO ADVANCE THE GLORY OF GOD, AND TO PROCVRE THE GOOD OF HIS CHVRCH.

All that heard it were affected, yea ravished with great joy, and seconded it
with their prayers unto God, Psalm. 20.4.
The Lord grant thee according to thine heart. For in this did your Highness
open the integrity, and sincerity of your soul, that your Highness desired
to live, Non vt praeesses, sed prodesses, not for your self, but for the glory
of GOD, and benefit of his Church.

Works witnesses also throughout the Kingdom.
And as to your Majesty's work, all places of this Kingdom, Highland, Inland,
and the borders are stored with several testimonies of your Highness wise,
and happy government; but leaving them all, But most euid^nt in Drumfreis and
the whole South borde^.
this Country, and Town wherein your Majesty now is, rejoices above others
in the sweet fruits, first of religion, and piety, next of singular and
unaccustomed peace, which now by your Highness prudencie and fatherly care
they eni^y. As to the first, the time has been, as your Majesty does well
remember, wherein this Town and For restitution of true Religion.
was like to a field all ouergrowne with the popple of Papistrie, the little
handful that then was of the Religion, were but like to the gleanings, and
after-gatherings of the harvest. But now SIR the case is altered, there is here
a flourishing Church, God has so blessed the labor of the Preacher, Ouerseer
of this people, that there is not to be found three P^ecusants in all this
Town, as I am informed, and the country about it is filled with good wheat in
steed of popple, so that they who are of the Popish sort, are like unto the
grapes, which remain after the vintage, here one, and there one, easy to be
discerned. And for this cause I have heard sundry of their ancient men bless
the Lord, for that he had sent the light of his Gospel among them to
illuminate them, protesting that without it, they had died in most pitiful
ignorance.

The other fruit of singular peace is so apparent For singular peace they enjoy
now being delivered from their oppressors.
that I need not to point at it. Ye who stand here in great multitudes, bear
witness your selves before the Lord his Anointed. Tell as the truth is: Are ye
troubled now with any forayes in the night? Are ye wakened from your rest by
the Alarm, or sound of the drum? Is there crying now for armor to repress
the incursion of robbers? Do ye not sit peaceably every one of you in your
own houses without molestation of the oppressor? May ye not now, as the
proverb is, porrectis dormire pedibus, in respect of security sleep soundly?
Is not that promise made by the Lord, accomplished now, Psalm. 147.4. Plin. lib.
10. cap. 32.
He sets peace in thy borders? Now are (...), wherein every good subject may
peaceably labor in his calling, These benefits were acknowledged with such
public acclamations, as forced the Preacher to stay, till the people had ended.
and that, which beastly men called Man's world is away. What cause have ye
then for this to bless the Lord your God, and this happy King, whom he has
set over us, and who this day sits before you, by whole fatherly care we
enjoy this quiet, and peaceable life.

Now must I in end turn me a little toward you, A speech to the Nobles of
England.
most worthy Nobles of England, not for any doubt we have of your loyal
affection, With an exhortation.
or any need your Honors have to be exhorted to your duty by our weakness;
Plaut, in Pseud.
far be it from me, vt officy sui satis memores, immemores facere videar, yet
remembering that of the Poet, Ovid. 5. trist.
Qui monet vt facias, quod iam facis, ille monendo
Laudat and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
I hope, what I am to say, will not be ungracious, but rather very welcome to
you. Have a care we beseech of that incomparable jewel, ye have received from
Scotland; both ye and we have our mutual interest in him, when the sun
rises to you, it shines to us also; it it decline, and fall down upon any of
us (which I pray God we never see) it brings a dark night upon us both: yea
all Christendom in respect of the good they enjoy by his Majesty, does cry
for a careful conservation of this Jewel.

An admonition.
and as true, his royal Diadem has increased the glory and fame of your
Kingdom through the world; but all these and many more, your Honors, out of
wise, and understanding hearts have pondered better, then I can point them out:
I will therefore content me with this one, which, when I have said, I know
will be less, then I should have said, or your Honors have justly deserved.

The noble and comely behavior ye have A commendation.
did present to him, who could observe it, that which Plato calls putcherrimum
spectaculu^, Plat. lib. 3. de ^ep.
when mannerly minds appear in beautiful bodies. Your kindness, and entire
love among your selves, living together, ac si omnes eiusdem mus ae essetis
aemuli, and voto viueritis vno, Pers. Sai^r. 5.
which the Poet said was rare to be found, for velle suum cuique est. Your
conversation in all things answerable to your place, and station, in ipsa
regia, non sine regula incedentes. Your courtesy, and great humanity toward
us. In a word, all sort of graces pertaining either to learning, or piety most
eminent in you, shall bind our hearts to a loving, and honorable remembrance
of you, by our mental Pyramides and Pi^ars, so long, as we can remember our
selves. Now our bodies in respect of place must be divided, but I hope our
hearts, and affections shall never divide any more, God having so many manner
of ways conjoined us, that in one I Will, with one language, and one religion, we
are now the coniunct subjects of one native King, and Sovereign to us both.

And as to you, A warning to his Majesty's Cubiculars and Domestiques.
who have that hap and honor beyond others, to be his Majesty's Cubiculars
and Domestickes, consider with your selves, what is the weight of your charge,
and how the place, whereunto, above others, otherwise not your inferiors, ye
are promoted, binds you to a daily tribute of daily vigilance, and attention.
Remember that word, which David cried to Abner, for a rebuke to him and the
rest of Saul's servants, because they were sleeping when their master was in
danger of his life by Abishai, if David had not stayed him, ye are all (said
he) worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master the Lords anointed.
If they were thus threatened, and most justly, because they were remiss and
careless in conservation, even of an evil King; what a sin is it to be
negligent in attending such a King as God has given us, it cannot but procure
heavy judgments, both from God and man. But we persuade our selves the best
things of you, that conscience more then commodity, will stir you up to be
faithful in that calling, Coloss. 3.22.
not with eye-seruice, as men pleasers,; but in singleness of heart, fearing
God.

Always since the surest safty of Kings, is the protection of Iehoua, for his
name is a strong tower, and the righteous run unto it; Sir, let him ever be,
as you have found him your rock and refuge. Continue still in that resolution
of King David, Psalm. 101.3.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, I hate the work of them that
fall away, it shall not clean unto me, so shall the word which Amasa (from the
Spirit of the Lord) spoke unto David, be established to your Majesty; 1 Chro.
12.18.
Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy God helps
thee. To this effect, that we may end, we will now again turn us to our
prayers, from which we shall never turn so long as we live, and yet I am still
stayed, or rather forced to stay, I would make an end, but am pierced with the
sorrowful looks of this people, who desire no ending, not so much for delight
of any thing they hear from me, as for that which they see in your Majesty,
they cannot be satiate in looking to your face, the shorter time they have to
behold it, the stronger is their affection. O how hardly comport they to part
with their Sovereign. But dear Sovereign, let it not be offensive to your
Majesty, that you are compassed here with an assembly of mourners, whose faces
are watered with ouerflowing tears of their heart. Can they part with their
Prince without sorrow? Can they want the light of their eyes, and breath of
their nostrils, and not lament for it?

Yet what speak I of wanting? be of comfort, good peole, we shall not want
him, we cannot want him, God having now so enlarged his royal arms, that
they can reach from one end of the Isle to the other, to be at us, to succor
and help us, as we need them. Let us therefore moderate our mourning, let our
passions give place to his royal pleasure, let our hearts with joy and
cheerfulness send up these our prayers. The hand of the Lord be with our most
Gracious Sovereign, the name of the God of Jacob defend him. Psalm. 20.1.
The Lord be to your Majesty, as he was to Abraham, a buckler in this life,
and your exceeding great reward in the life to come. Genes. 15.
God grant it for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

