A MOST COMFORTABLE AND Christian Dialogue, between the Lord, and the Soul.

BY Mr. WILLIAM COVVPER, Minister of Gods Word.

MATTHEW 11. 28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. The seventh Edition.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the great
South-doore of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir DAVID MVRREY, Knight, special Gentleman of the
Prince his Bedchamber.
IT is (right Worshipful) the common condition of all Christians, howsoever
disioyned in place, that they are militant in one warfare against Satan with
his Principalities, Powers and spiritual wickedness, whose stratagems are
innumerable, and the manner of his assaults manifold: he troubles not all Gods
children one manner of way; for so every one might easily epsy wherein his
strength lies, but makes choice of the temptation, as by long experience he
has learned it may be most effectual to work upon our natural disposition.
Like as on the other hand, the Grace by which God strengthens his Children to
resist him, is much more manifold; whereby they are instructed to use the
Armor of God, with such variety of heavenly wisdom, that is a wonder to see,
how by one and the selfsame sentence of Gods word, at sundry hands, sundry
manner of ways, Satan is confounded: and therefore it is very needful that
in the spiritual warfare there should be a mutual intelligence among the
Soldiers of Christ, as well for discovering of Satan's several sleights in
assaulting; for the more his policy is detected, the better may we eschew it;
as also, for the manifestation of GODS rich mercy in assisting.

For this cause have I been induced to communicate unto others, these
Meditations, as it pleased God by experience, to communicate them unto me, for
in the midst of darkness which covered the mind, and restless fear which
disquieted the conscience, the Lord made them suddenly to break out, like
sparkles of light, sent from his own Throne of Grace, bringing with them
light, peace, and joy, which in a moment removed the former fears, and
pacified the perturbations of my troubled soul. As they were unto me, so I
wish they may be means of comfort unto others: but I know that the same
argument of comfort, which has comforted one in temptations, does not always
comfort another: Nay, not in the selfsame temptation; for the Lord will have
his praise reserved to himself, that he only is the God of al comfort. It is
not the word, (says David) but God by the word that did quicken him, Psalm.
119. 9. Yea, the most comfortable promise of the Gospel is most terrible to
the troubled conscience, except the Lord by it work in the heart a sense of
his mercy: and therefore such as want comfort, let the^ seek it from the God
of comfort. Nevertheless, that which we have, we give even as we have received
it; that it may stand as a memorial of my thankfulness to God who showed his
great mercy upon me, when within my self I had received the sentence of death;
and a testimony of my love toward them who are militant against Satan: And
specially of that Christian remembrance I have always of you in the Lord Jesus;
to whose grace I commend you, now, and for ever.

Your Worships in the Lord Jesus, William Cowper, Minister at Perth.

A RIGHT COMFORTABLE DIAlogue, between the Lord and a troubled SOVLE.
The LORD. O My beloved, why fear thou, and art so cast down and disquieted
within thy self? do thou well to be angry with my chastisements? and why
art thou offended, that I should make thee like to my self, causing thee to
walk in that way of inward and outward griefs, which I did tread before thee?
why refusest thou to take up my cross and follow me, and to taste of that cup
which I drank before thee, and for thee?


The SOVLE. O Lord, give me of thy Spirit, and all trouble with thee, or for
thee, shall be sweet unto me: what ever thou did bear (O Lord) it was for me:
and if I were so disposed as I should, then would I be content to bear all
that thou (my God) should please to lay on me. But alas, it is my cursed
corruption that makes me think thy cross my burden. Lord, therefore uphold me
with thy grace, that I may count thy yoke easy, and find joy in these
sufferings with thee.


The LORD. I Know the cause of thy grief and terror to be the consideration
of thy sins: but I pray thee, why look thou so to thy sins, that thou
look not also to my mercies? why would thou so extol thy evil deeds,
that thou should extenuat my rich mercies; or in any way compare the one
with the other? was it for thy good deeds that first I entered into friendship
with thee? and think thou now, that for thy evil deeds I will utterly
forsake thee, seeing it is among my praises, that the work which I begin, I
perfect it? I like it well indeed, to see thee grieved for the sins thou have
done against me; but I would have thee also comforted in the mercies that I
have showed thee. Call to mind my works of old, and what I have done to thee
since thou can remember: how cared I for thee in thy young and tender years?
Look back now and see; did not the Angel of my presence lead thee, when thou
had neither wisdom nor strength to govern thy self? did I not then
begin to acquaint thee with the knowledge and fear of my Name? can thou
deny now, that my mercy preserved thee from many sins, whereunto thy nature
was prone, and ready to have declined? and when thou sinnedst, with what long
patience have I waited thy turning? and how lovingly have I winked at thy
transgressions? and when I had given thee grace to repent of thy sins, and to
seek my favor and mercy for the sins of thy youth, with a melting heart, and
a mourning eye, can thou deny that I have filled thy heart with my joys,
and made thy tongue burst out in glorying speeches? and why the^ will thou not
trust in my mercies to the end?


The SOVLE. I Were, O Lord, most unthankful, if I should not confess, that
many a time in the multitude of my thoughts thy mercies have comforted me: but
alas, I have not answered thy loving kindness: for after many mercies
received, I have sinned against thee, contrary to my light, and my sins are now
before me, witnessing that I am unworthy to taste of the sweetness of thy
mercy any more.


The LORD. IS my mercy only for a day, or for a year? or is it for ever and
ever toward those whom I have made mine in Christ Jesus? will thou restrain my
mercies, and limit them within so narrow bounds, as to think they cannot be
extended over all thy transgressions? will thou measure my mercies with so
narrow a span, as to think I have no more to give, then thou have an heart to
receive? Is it not among my praises, that I am able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that my Children can ask or think of me? Know thou not, that as
the Heavens are above the Earth, so my thoughts are above thine? have thou not
considered that my mercy is above all my works? how much more then is it above
thee, who art nothing in comparison of my works? and if it be above thee, how
much more above all that thou can do? why the^ will thou match thy sins with
my mercies? If require such mercy in my children, that I will have one of them
to forgive another, not only seven times, but seventy times seven times: what
pity and compassion and readiness to forgive is in my self?

Therefore, my beloved, despair not for the multitude of thy sins; but be
comforted with my promises of mercy: I have made them without any exception of
time; For, at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, I have
promised to put away his wickedness out of my remembrance. I have made them
without exception of sins; for, albeit your sins were as skarlet, they shall be
made as white as snow. I have made them without exception of persons; for,
whosoever shall depart from his wicked ways and turn to me, I shall receive
him. Let this threefold universality of my promises sustain thee, that thy
infidelity contract not my mercies into narrower bounds then I have extended
them.


The SOVLE. BE merciful (O Lord) to my infidelity: I believe in part, Lord,
help my unbelief, stablish and confirm my unstable heart with thy good and
holy spirit. My conscience does in such sort condemn me, that I stand in
fear of thy justice; for thou art greater then the conscience, and wilt much
more condemn me, if thou do enter into judgment with me.


The LORD. O My beloved, consider that the cause of thy present unquietness, is,
because with the one eye, thou look to thy sins, and my Fathers justice: and
with the other look not to me; in whom his justice is satisfied, and thy
sins punished already. Tell me (I pray thee) think thou to get in thy self,
and the holiness of thy disposition, that which shall exempt thee from the fear
of his Justice? Or art thou content to seek it in me? If in thy self thou
seek it, remember what thou art doing: will thou have the Lord bound and
obliged to thee? will thou be thine own Savior? or shall it be said* his mercy
saved thee not? if no misery were in thee, whereupon should his mercy be
manifested? and if thy disposition in the earth were such as it should be, then
what remains, but that the prais of his mercy should fall to the ground?
turn thee therefore to me, and seek thy life in me.

If thou will know what is thine: thou art a sinner; let my praise be reserved
to my self, I am thy Savior. Esteemest thou that my wounds are ineffectuall?
or that there is no force in my sufferings? countest thou thy sins so deadly,
that my merit and virtue cannot cure them? Will any Physician power out a rare
ointment, either where no need is; or else, where it cannot profit? and
think thou, that my Father would have my blood to be shed in vain? If his
justice terrify thee, remember his justice was satisfied in me, and that he
pronounces this sentence himself, This is my wel-beloued Son, in whom I am
well pleased. I came into the world, not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Tarry not from me because thou art a sinner, but for that cause
come to me, and I will refresh thee.


The SOVLE. O Lord, I know that there is a clensing and reconciling virtue in
thy blood; that life is in thy death: but still I fear, my sins deserve thou
should neither apply thy virtue nor thy merit to me: for, alas, I find that
yet the old man is strong and lively in me: and that yet the motions of sin
have power in me, to bring forth fruit unto death.


The LORD. BE not, I pray thee, injurious to the work of my Grace in thee;
complain not so of thy corruption, but that thou may give unto me mine own
praise. Can thou deny but that thou have felt my power working in thy Soul?
Have I not sprinkled thy conscience many times with the pacifying blood of
Christ; from which has flowed to thee such a witnessing of good things; such a
sense of mercy, as for the time, has filled thy heart with joy, and thy mouth
with song of praise? Have I not sometime stirred thee up in great feruencie, to
call on the Name of the Lord? Have I not made thee to give Christ's name a
public testimony, with thine own disadvantage? and how often has thine heart
been effectually moved at the hearing of my word, in such sort, that it has
wrought in thee an holy remorse, and an inward contrition for thy sins, which
has broken out into tears? have I not made thee a wrestler against thy
inordinate lusts? have I not given thee strength many a time to stand against
Satan's temptations, whereas if I had left thee to thy self, how often had
thou bin made a prey to thine enemy?

Remembrest thou not that the Tempter has assaulted thee, but I have
with-drawne the occasion of sin? and when the occasion served, did not I
restrain and hold back the Tempter? (...), when both the Tempter and occasion
were present, have I not filled thy heart with the fear and love of my name,
and so kept thee from sinning against me? and whereas many times of thy weakness
thou have offended, did I not with a melting heart and mourning eye, raise thee
again, and renew my former familiarity with thee; so that thou can never
say, from the first hour that I begun to renew thee, that I suffered thee to
lie in thy sin, as I have done others that are strangers from my grace? And
many more notable effects of my working in thee thou can not deny.

Are not these the undoubted tokens of my Grace in thee? will Nature do such
things? may thou not feel by these, that I have begun to apply to thee
Christ's merit for the remission of thy sin, and Christ's virtue for quickening
thee to a new life? Therefore think of thy self as basely as thou will, but
let the work of my grace be esteemed of thee according to the excellency of
it, be humble and cast down when thou look to thine own corruption; I
find no fault with thee, but I rejoice, and am glad at the new Workmanship
which I have begun in thee. Indeed, if there were nothing in thee, but that
which thou have of nature, thy estate were miserable: but seeing thou see a
new workmanship in thee, be comforted: art thou so in darkness, that there is
no light in thee? or does sin so possess thee, that beside it, also there is
not in thee a will to do good, and a love to righteousness? If thou say thou
have no sin in thee, thou art a lier: and if thou say that there is no other
thing in thee but sin, thou art also a lier. And think thou, that seeing I
have begun to translate thee from darkness into my light, and to make thee a
new Creature; think thou that I will leave thee, until I have done my work
in thee? Therefore, my beloved, give not such ear to Satan, or thine own
corruption, as to take their testimony against me, or to make thee think that
my pledges which I have given thee, are not worthy of credit, that by the^ thou
should be assured of mercy.


The SOVLE. I Cannot deny, O Lord, but that many times I have felt the sweetness
of thy heavenly consolations, which have greatly rejoiced my Soul. But alas,
my grief is so much the greater, that by mine own default I should now be
deprived of them: for I have grieved thy holy Spirit: yea, I have done what I
could to quench him: and therefore it is that the Comforter, who was wont to
refresh my soul, is away, nor can I feel his presence with me as before.


The LORD. BEcause I am not changed, therefore is it that ye, O Sons of Jacob,
are not consumed. Many indeed are the changes whereunto ye are subject, but I
remain the same, and there is no shadow of alteration with me, I am. 1. 17.
Be not therefore afraid (O my Wel-beloued) neither esteem thy self to be
rejected of me, albeit that sometime I hide my face from thee; al my ways are
mercy and truth to mine. It is for thee, that sometimes I go from thee; and it
is for thee, that again I return unto thee: for if I come, it is for thy
consolation, that continual heaviness, through thy manifold temptations, should
not oppress thee. How often have thou found this, when thou were sick of love,
I have strengthened thee with the Flagons of my Wine, and comforted thee with
my Apples? My fruit has been sweet in thy mouth, and I have put my left hand
under thy head, and with my right hand I have embraced thee, Ca^. 2.

But lest the greatness of my consolations should exalt thee to disdain thy
brother, and offend me, by imputing that to thine own disposition, which thou
have of my dispensation: I have again withdrawn these glorious feelings from
thee: give me the praise that I know best what is expedient for thee. Had my
Servant St. Paul need to be humbled with the buffets of Satan, lest he should
have been exalted out of measure by the greatness of his revelations, and have
not thou need that by thy inward exercises I should hold thee humble? If my
comforts were always present with thee, thou would think thy heaven and
permanent City were on the earth, and so cease to enquire for a better to come:
thou would take the place of thy banishment for thy home; and the earnest
for the principal sum which I have promised thee. Consider this wisely with
thy self, that albeit I laugh not alike on thee at all times, and fill thee not
always with my joys, yet I always love thee: for whom I love, I love unto the
end. If I close the door of my Chamber upon thee, it is not to hold thee out,
but to learn thee to knock. If I cover my self with many vailes, that thou
can not see a glance of my loving countenance, it is only to stir thee up
to seek me: and if sometime I seem to go from thee, it is to provoke thee to
follow me, that thou may make haste from the earth to heaven, where thou
shall enjoy me without intermission. Was Joseph so wise, as to conceal his
tender affection from his brethren, till he brought the^ to an humble
acknowledging of their sin? and was he again so loving, that when he saw them
humbled, his affection was inflamed, and compelled him to reveal himself unto
them? and think thou that I am less wise and loving in dealing with mine?

I gave at the first, sharp answers to the petitions of that Woman of Canaan*
and so will I sometimes seem to deal roughly with those whom I love, and to
be angry even at their prayers; but in the end I will make my love manifest to
them, and with my endless mercies embrace them.


The SOVLE. SVffer me yet once again (Lord) to speak unto thee, that thou
may answer me, and I shall complain no more. If we saw that such were our
disposition as thy holy word does require in us, then should thy comforts
rejoice us: but alas, how far am I from that which I should be? My strength is
enfeebled, therefore do my inordinate affections oft-times ouercharge me. If I
turn me to pray, I cannot for the hardness of my heart: the contrite spirit,
the melting heart, the mourning eye, is gone from me: If I seek comfort in thy
word, I find it not, I am troubled also with doubtings, armies of fears and
sorrows are against me, and all through weakness of my Faith: for partly for
want of that light that should inform me, my infidelity abuses me, to think
that thy visitations come from thine anger, and causes me to answer the
errors of my conscience, as if they were just accusations, and partly for want
of that apprehending and applying virtue that is in Faith, I am spoiled of the
comfort that thy word has offered unto me: Therefore, O Lord, have pity on
the desolate state of my soul.


The LORD. LEt not (my beloved) the consideration of thy wants, defects, and
imperfections discourage thee: remember that the measure of Grace which I have
given to my Saints upon earth, I have called it an earnest-penny, and the first
fruits of the Spirit, to tell them, that what ever grace they have gotten, it
is nothing in comparison of that which they will get. Seek not therefore that
in the earth, which I have resolved to give thee no ways, till thou do come
to heaven: thy blessedness in this life stands not in a sacietie and full
inioying of that which thou would have, but in an hungring and thirsting for
it. If I had pronounced them blessed that are now satisfied with
righteousness, the^ thy wants might most justly have discouraged thee; but I
called them blessed that hunger. If therefore thou do follow after
sanctification, and art weary of the servitude of thy sin; If thou do seek
comfort in my Word, and can find none of these at the first, as thou
would; yet remember I have promised to fulfill the desires of them that
fear me.

If it grieve thee, that thou can not pray at all times alike, remember that
my Children are ofttimes evil Judges of themselves, and that their estate is
not always to be measured according to their feeling, for many prayers may be
made in them to me by my Spirit, with sighs and sobs, which they themselves are
not able to express, yet are known to me, and are like loud crying voices,
which I cannot but answer.


The SOVLE. O My Soul, content thee with the Lords dispensation, and doubt
not, but all thy wants and holy desires shall once be satisfied: remember how
careful thy Savior was of those people that followed him. I have compassion
(says he) on this people, because they have continued with me already three
days, and have nothing to eat: I will not let them depart fasting, lest they
faint in the way. O most sweet and comfortable speeches! they seek not from
him, and he is careful to give them. If he was so careful to satisfy their
bodily necessities, will he neglect the spiritual necessities of his own?
They followed him three days, and he counts it a long time; they are to go
from him, and he fears lest they faint. O my distrustful Soul, will thou
once learn to trust in the mercy of thy God assuredly? will he not saciate
thee, who seeks him? will he not answer thee, who cries unto him? will he not
care for thee who have waited upon him, not three days, but many years? and
will he let thee faint in following him, who would not let the^ faint, who were
to go from him? O sweet Savior, happy are they who trust in thee. (Lord)
therefore increase my faith in thee, that nothing be able ever to sunder me
from thee.


The LORD. AS for the weakness of thy Faith, which I see is the ground of all
thy trouble, it proceeds either from the want of knowledge, or else from the
want of application. It is indeed a special benefit to have the mind
enlightened with true light. Seek therefore my light to shine unto thee by
continual prayer and searching the Scriptures, that thou be not troubled with
the error of Conscience, as if it were a just accusation. I have set conscience
indeed to be a warner unto thee; but then shall thou take heed to her warnings,
when they are warranted by my word. If the error of thy conscience terrify
thee in any thing, and make thee think that thy crosses and visitations do come
from mine anger, go and inform conscience better by the Word; remember whom I
chastise, I love: and when I chastise thee, I am not seeking a satisfaction to
my justice: what marvel such thoughts disquiet many? Consider, I pray thee,
that notable promise of mine, made to my servant David, and in him to all the
rest of my Saints. If they break my statutes, I will visit their
transgressions with my rods, yet my loving kindness will I not take from them,
neither alter my Covenant.


The SOVLE. O Word full of comfort! my Soul, forget it never, that even when
his rods are laid on thee, yet his loving kindness is not taken from thee; and
though thy transgressions be many, yet will he not alter his Covenant with
thee: remember it (I say) that in thy trouble thou give no more place to these
misconceptions of Gods working with thee. As godly Job thought in his trouble,
that the Lord was pursuing him for his sins, and making him to possess the
iniquity of his youth, which as yet appears by the course of that History,
was not the Lords intention: so have I thought many times, that the heavy hand
of the Lord laid on me, had proceeded from his wrath, as if he had shut up his
tender mercy in displeasure from me for ever but (Lord) let thy light abide
with me, that I sin no more with such distrustful motions against thee: and
now (Lord) speak on yet further to thy Servant, for thy comforts have rejoiced
my Soul


The LORD. NOw concerning the weakness of thy faith in the apprehension and
the application of my promises: remember that I am he who will not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking flax: what smaller thing is there then a
grain of mustardseed? albeit the measure of thy faith were no more, yet have I
not excluded it from the participation of my promises.

A loving Father will delight to be holden by the hand of his tender Child; and
know thou not, that as a father spares his son, so will the Lord spare the^
that fear him? have thou not read, that although the faith of my servant Jacob
was very weak, as thou may perceive by the great fear he conceived of Esau,
yet his weak faith was able to hold me till I blessed him? Be not therefore
discouraged; for albeit thou can not lay hold on me with the hand of strong
faith, if thou can but touch the hem of my garment with thy finger, thou
shall draw virtue out of me. Consider also with thy self, that the Faith of my
children is never greater, then when their feeling is weakest, and least
perceived. It is easy for every one to believe in the midst of glorious
feelings, and unspeakable joys; but when a man can feel no sensible comfort
in me, and yet believes in me, and waits on me for comfort, certainly the
Faith of that man is great: and such was the Faith of my servant, who in his
greatest trouble gave me this answer, Albeit thou would slay me, O Lord,
yet both against sense and feeling will I trust in thee. And did not also that
woman of Canaan with invincible Faith cleave to my mercy, even then, when she
had no feeling of mercy, and I gave her no favorable answer? for which in the
end I called her faith, a great Faith.


The SOVLE. O My Savior, thou art the strength whereby I stand in temptation:
cursed be he that would make my Soul to conceive wrongfully of thee. Be
merciful, O Lord, unto me, and never let the malice of mine enemy prevail
over me. Sweet Jesus, keep the heart, that through thine own Grace would
feign keep thee: and now, my Soul, remember that this is but the time of
fighting; the time of triumphing will come: why then shall the continuance of
these restless assaults disquiet thee? If thou had never been victorious
but ence in all thy lifetime; yet what mercy had it been, that the Lord in
the midst of the battle, should make thee to triumph? but thou can not
deny, that many joyful victories now and before, has the Lord given thee.

Therefore now, my Soul, rejoice and return to thy former rest: For the Lord
has been beneficial to thee, and account thou every one of these temporal
victories a pledge to thee of that full and final victory that once thou
shall enjoy over all thine enemies, when the God of peace shall tread down
Satan under thy feet.

The SOVLE rejoices in the LORD O Lord, if such comfort be in thy cross, what
is in thy Crown? and if thou do give us such joy, when thou take us into
thy hand to correct us with thy rods Lord: what will thou make us to find,
when thou shall embrace us in thy arms, to kiss us with the kisses of thy
mouth? Oh that these feelings might for ever abide with me: what trouble would
not be easy, where thy comforts are present? Surely, O Lord, all trouble
vanishes, so soon as thou do begin to glance upon my soul. Therefore O
my Love, my light, my life, my joy, my crown, my glory, my strength, my help
in the time of need, stand thou on my side, and I will not fear what my enemy
can do to me. O happy time that ever I know thee. Blessed be the name of the
Lord for evermore.

The SOVLE does triumph over Satan. O Enemy Satan, albeit thine enmity be
troublesome unto me: yet I thank my God through Jesus Christ, that thou art
against me, and that he has put me in his warr-fare to fight against thee.

When I consider, that in Paradise the Lord proclaimed irreconciliable emnitie
between thee and my blessed Savior, the seed of the woman, Christ Jesus, I
account my hope happy, that thou art against me: and that grace is given unto
me to fight against thee: for thereby I know that I am none of thine, but that
I do stand on that side, whereof Christ is the Captain, all his Saints are
Soldiers, and the victory is most certain

O deceitful Serpent! if I have found such error arising of those sins,
which foolishly I did by thy intisements: what should I have found, if I had
followed thee in all the rest, from the which, the LORDS preventing mercies did
keep me? I have learned by experience, that thou art a faithless Traitor;
thou do tempt a man to sin, and for the same sins, which he did by thy
instigation, thou art the first that does accuse him.

The Lord confirm this good purpose of my heart, that I never harken any more
to thy lying words, and suffer not my Soul to be circumuented with thy
deceitful snares. And as for the work of my salvation, seeing it is a work
that my GOD will work in despite of thee, wherefore shall I regard thy
testimony? Thou did put it in question to my Savior, whether or no he was
the Son of GOD: and what marvel, if thou dare say to his Children, that
they are none of his? Is there any truth so undoubted, but thou dare deny it
at any time? why therefore shall I enter into disputing with thee any more? My
salvation stands neither in thy questioning, nor in any answering, but upon
the Lords unchangeable decree of Election.

If thou should speak for me, yet should I not be the better; neither if
thou speak against me, am I the worse. When thou did confess that Jesus was
the Son of GOD, he rebuked thee, and thought it no honor to him to have thy
testimony. When thou did cry out, that Paul and Silas were the servants of
the most high GOD, albeit thou spakest the truth, yet did thy not accept of thy
testimony: so although thou would say to me, that I were the elect Child
of GOD, shall I think my self the surer for that? and if on the contra^^ thou
do deny it, a^^ therefore the more unsure of salvation? Speak what thou will; thou art always alike thy self, thou have been a liar from the
beginning. Cursed of the LORD art thou in all thy ways, and with all thy
confederats: Cursed are they that are in friendship with thee: and blessed for
ever be the Lord, who has delivered me from thy deceit and tyranny.


The Conclusion of the Dialogue.
BLessed be thou (O LORD) for that it has pleased thee to visit the base
estate of thy servant, to succor me in my distress, and to comfort me with
thy mercies: LORD, evermore feed me with this Manna, and refresh me with the
Springs of the Water of Life. Show at all times some sign of thy mercy on me,
that mine enemy Satan, who labors to disquiet me, may be ashamed, because
thou art with me to succor me.

A comfortable Meditation.
IF ye will mark and consider, ye shall find that the Children of God, in
all their temptations, are not so much doers with their will, as sufferers
against their will. This Cogitation coming to my mind, suddenly comfort did
spring in the midst of trouble, God giving me Grace to understand, that these
motions wherewith I am troubled, were not so much actions done by me: for in
truth, neither do I like or allow of them, but as spiritual oppressions of mine
enemy, who still warreth against me, sometimes with armies of fears;
sometimes with armies of doubtings; and sometimes with bands of unclean and
wandering motions; and sometimes with troops of worldly cares making invasion
upon my Soul, and laboring to quench that spark of spiritual Life, which
the LORD had begun in me: therefore answer for me (O Lord) for I suffer
violence. My enemy would oppress me, but Lord, my hope for ever is in thee:
succor me with thy strength and I shall live: and Lord, impute not to me any
of those sinful motions, which my enemy raises in me against my Soul.

Consider this wisely, O my Soul, and remember it: GOD that has entered thee
into this warfare, and is thy spectator and helper, will never reckon up to
thee Satan's deeds for thine: and learn thou wisely how to distinguish them,
and faint not for them, but comfort thy self as long as thou art able to stand
to thy protestation, that thou do suffer violence in them, and can say
with the Apostle: This is not I, but sin which dwells, in me. O LORD,
deliver me from the rage of this spiritual tyranny. Many a time have I looked
to have been swallowed; up but thou have sustained me. Blessed be my God for
ever, and the LORD be my strength to the end.

A Prayer.
O Lord, how can it be possible, that my Soul can live here in this absence
from thee? or walk in the midst of these continual snares, or stand against
these raging temptations, except it please thee now and then to show thy face
unto me? Joseph's state in prison was not so heavy as mine; his temptations in
Potiphers house were not so continual as mine are. And Daniels fear in the
midst of Lions, was no greater then mine, who every day tastes of a thousand
deaths. Jeremy in his dark dungeon was not vexed with such horrors as daily
gather themselves against me. The only comfort of my Soul is in thy mercies:
thou were with Joseph, and therefore the prison was more pleasant to him then
Potiphers Palace: thou were with Daniel, and therefore the raging Lions were
peaceable to him. Lord, be with me, and increase thy strength in my soul and
I shall live. Though the time be not yet come, wherein I shall appear in thy
presence and see thee; yet Lord, let me have in this land of my Pilgrimage
those gla^ces of thy sweet and loving countenance, that may sustain me; for
thou Lord art able to let me see as much joy in thy sweet face in one hour,
as may sustain me for ever: and without this sight, how can my Faith but
fail, my Hope but houer, and my Life but languish? therefore O Lord, hide not
thy face from my Soul for ever, but as thou do acquaint me with troubles,
so let me see at all times, that as my sufferings do abound in me, so my
consolations may abound through Christ Jesus. I know, thou always beholdest
me in mercy; but Lord, let me see that thou look upon me, that I may feel
thy mercies sweet unto my soul, Amen.

FINIS,

